March the 14th. 1645.
I Have perused these Learned Animadversions upon the Common Tenets and
Opinions of men in former and in these present times, Entitled Pseudodoxia
Epidemica; and finding them much transcending vulgar conceit, and adorned with
great variety of matter, and multiplicity of reading; I approve them as very
worthy to be Printed and Published.

JOHN DOVV NAME.

Pseudodoxia Epidemica: OR, ENQUIRIES INTO Very many received TENANTS, And
commonly presumed TRUTHS. By THOMAS BROWN Dr. of Physic.

IUL. SCALIG. Ex Libris colligere quae prodiderunt Authors long est
periculosissimum; Rerum ipsarum cognitio vera e rebus ipsis est. LONDON,
Printed by T. H. for Edward Dod, and are to be sold in Ivy Lane. 1646.

TO THE READER.
WOuld Truth dispense, we could be content, with Plato, that knowledge were but
Remembrance; that Intellectual acquisition were but Reminiscentiall evocation,
and new impressions but the colourishing of old stamps which stood pale in the
soul before. For, what is worse knowledge is made by oblivion; and to purchase
a clear and warrantable body of Truth, we must forget and part with much we
know. Our tender Enquiries taking up Learning at large, and together with true
and assured notions, receiving many, wherein our renewing judgments do find
no satisfaction; and therefore in this Encyclopaedie and round of knowledge,
like the great and exemplary wheels of heaven, we must observe two Circles:
that while we are daily carried ab^ut, and whirled on by the swindge and rapt
of the one, we may maintain a natural and proper course, in the slow and
sober wheel of the other. And this we shall more readily perform, if we
timely survey our knowledge; impartially singling out those encroachments,
which junior compliance and popular credulity has admitted. Whereof at present
we have endeavored a long and serious Adviso; proposing not only a large and
copious List, but from experience and reason, attempting their decisions.

And first we crave exceeding pardon in the audacity of the Attempt; humbly
acknowledging a work of such concernment unto truth, and difficulty in it
self, did well deserve the conjunction of many heads: And surely more
advantageous had it been unto Truth, to have fallen into the endeavors of
some cooperating advancers, that might have performed it to the life, and added
authority thereto: which the privacie of our condition, and unequal abilities
cannot expect. Whereby notwithstanding we have not been diverted, nor have
our solitary attempts been so discouraged, as to despair the favorable look
of learning upon our single and unsupported endeavors.

Nor have we let fall our pen, upon discouragement of contradiction,
unbeleefe, and difficulty of disswasion from radicated beliefs, and points of
high prescription; although we are very sensible how hardly teaching years do
learn; what roots old age contracteth into errors, and how such as are but
twigges in younger days, grow Oaks in our elder heads, and become inflexible
unto the powerfullest arm of reason. Although we have also beheld, what cold
requitals others have found in their several redemptions of truth; and how
their ingenuous enquiries have been dismissed with censure, and obloquie of
singularities.

Some consideration we hope from the course of our Profession, which though it
leads us into many truths that pass undiscerned by others, yet does it
disturb their communications, and much interrupteth the office of our pens in
their well intended transmissions: and therefore surely in this wo^ke attempts
will exceed performances: it being composed by snatches of time, as medi^all
vacations, and the fruitless importunity of Vroscopy would permit us.
Inspection of Vrine^.
And therefore also perhaps it has not found that regular and constant style,
those infallible experiments, and those assured determinations, which the
subject sometime requires, and might be expected from others, whose quiet
doors and unmolested hours afford no such distractions. Although who shall
indifferently pe^pend the exceeding difficulty, which either the obscurity of
the subject, or unavoidable paradoxologie must often put upon the Attemptor,
will easily discern, a work of this nature is not to be performed upon one
leg, and should smell of oil if duly and deservedly handled.

Our first intentions considering the common interest of Truth, resolved to
propose it unto the Latin republike and equal judges of Europe; but owing in
the first place this service unto our Country, and therein especially unto its
ingenuous Gentry, we have declared our self in a language best conceived.
Although I confess, the quality of the Subject will sometimes carry us into
expressions beyond mere English apprehensions; and indeed, if elegancie still
proceeds, and English Pens maintain that stream we have of late observed
to flow from many, we shall within few years be feign to learn Latin to
understand English, and a work will prove of equal facility in either. Nor
have we addressed our pen or style unto the people, (whom Books do not
redress, and are this way incapable of reduction) but unto the knowing and
leading part of Learning; as well understanding (at least probably hoping)
except they be watered from higher regions, and fructifying meteors of
knowledge, these weeds must lose their alimentall sap and wither of
themselves; whose conserving influence, could our endeavors prevent, we should
trust the rest unto the sithe of time, and hopeful dominion of truth.

We hope it will not be unconsidered, that we find no open tract, or
constant manuduction in this Labyrinth; but are oft-times feign to wander in
the America and untravelled parts of truth: For though not many years past, Dr.
Primrose has made a learned and full Discourse of vulgar Errors in Physic,
yet have we discussed but two or three thereof. Laurentius ^oubertus, by the
same title led our expectation into thoughts of great releef; whereby
notwithstanding we reaped no advantage; it answering scarce at all the promise
of the inscription. Nor perhaps (if it were yet extant) should we find any
farther Assistance from that ancient piece of Andreas, pretending the same
title. And therefore we are often constrained to stand alone against the
strength of opinion; and to meet the Goliath and Giant of Authority, with
contemptible pibbles, and feeble arguments, drawn from the scrip and slender
stock of our selves. Nor have we indeed scarce named any Author whose name we
do not honor; and if detraction could invite us, discretion surely would
contain us from any derogatory intention, where highest pens and friendiest
eloquence must fail in commendation.

And therefore also we cannot but hope the equitable considerations and
candor of reasonable minds. We cannot expect the frown of Theology herein;
nor can they which behold the present state of things, and controversy of
points so long received in Divinity, condemn our sober enquiries in the
doubtful appertinancies of Arts, and Receptaries of Philosophy. Surely
Philologers and Critical Discoursers, who look beyond the shell and obvious
exteriours of things, will not be angry with our narrower explorations. And we
cannot doubt, our brothers in Physic (whose knowledge in naturals will lead
them into a nearer apprehension of many things delivered) will friendly accept,
if not countenance our endeavors. Nor can we conceive it, may be unwelcome
unto those honored Worthies, who endeavor the advancement of Learning: as
being likely to find a clearer progression, when so many rubbes are levelled,
and many untruths taken off, which passing as principles with common beliefes,
disturb the tranquillity of Axioms, which otherwise might be raised. And wise
men cannot but know, that Arts and Learning want this expurgation: and if the
course of truth be permitted unto its self, like that of Time and uncorrected
computations, it cannot escape many errors, which duration still enlarges.

Lastly, we are not Magisteriall in opinions, nor have we Dictator-like
obtruded our conceptions, but in the humility of Enquiries or disquisitions,
have only proposed them unto more ocular discerners. And therefore opinions are
free, and open it is for any to think or declare the contrary. And we shall
so far encourage contradiction, as to promise no disturbance, or reoppose any
Pen, that shall Elenchically refute us, that shall only lay hold of our
lapses, single out digressions, Corollaries, or ornamentall conceptions, to
evidence his own in as indifferent truths. And shall only take notice of such,
whose experimental and Judicious knowledge shall solemnly look upon it; not
only to destroy of ours, but to establish of his own, not to traduce or
extenuate, but to explain, and dilucidate, to add and ampliate, according to
the laudable custom of the Ancients in their so^er promotions of Learning.
Unto whom notwithstanding, we shall not contentiously rejoyne, or only to
justify our own, but to applaud or confirm his maturer assertions; and shall
confer what is in us unto his name and honor. Ready to be swallowed in any
worthy enlarger: as having acquired our end, if any way, or under any name we
may obtain a work, so much desired, at least, desiderated of truth.

T. B.

A TABLE OF THE CONTENTS.
THE FIRST BOOK. Containing the General part.
OF the first cause of common Errors, the common infirmity of humane nature.
Chapter 1. A farther illustration of the same. chap. 2. Of the second cause of
popular Errors, the erroneous disposition of the people. chap. 3. Of the nearer
causes of common errors both in the wiser and common sort, misapprehension,
fallacy or false deduction, credulity, supinity, adherence unto Antiquity,
Tradition and Authority, contained in the following Chapters. Of mistake,
misapprehension, fallacy or false deduction. chap. 4. Of credulity and
supinity. chap. 5. Of obstinate adherence unto Antiquity. chap. 6. Unto
Authority. chap. 7. Of Authors who have most promoted popular conceits. chap.
8. Of others indirectly effecting the same. chap. 9. Of the last and great
promoter of false opinions, the endeavors of Satan. chap. 10, 11.
THE SECOND BOOK. Beginning the particular part concerning Mineral and
Vegetable bodies.
THe common Tenent, that Crystal is nothing else but Ice strongly congealed.
Chap. 1. Concerning the Loadstone, of things particularly spoken thereof
evidently or probably true: of things generally believed or particularly
delivered evidently or probably false. Of the Magneticall virtue of the earth.
Of the fou^e motions of the stone, that is, its verticity or direction, its
coition or Attraction, its Declination, variation, and also of its Antiquity.
chap. 2. A Rejection of sundry opinions and Relations thereof, Natural,
Medicall, Historical, Magical. chap. 3. Of bodies Electricall in general. Of
let and Amb^r in particular, that they attract all light bodies, (...) B^sil,
and bodies oyled. chap. 4. Compendiously of several other Tenants. That a
Diamond is made soft, or broke by the blood of a Goat. That Glass is poison.
Of the cordial quality of Gold in substance or Decoction. That a pot full of
ashes will contain as much water as it would without them. Of white powder
that kills without report. That Coral is soft under water, but hardens in the
Air. That Porcelliane or China dishes lie under the earth an hundred years in
preparation, with some others. chap. 5. Of sundry Tenants concerning Vegetables.
That the root of Mandrakes resembles the shape of man. That they naturally
grow under Gallows and places of execution. That the root gives a shreeke
upon eradication. That it is fatal or dangerous t^ dig them up. That Cinnamon,
Ginger, Cloves, Mace, are but the parts or fruits of the same tree. That
Misseltoe is bredupon trees, from seeds which birds let fall thereon. Of the
Rose of Ierico that flowreth every ye^re upon Christmas Eve. That Sferra
Caval^o has a power to break or loosen Iron. That Bays preserve from the
mischief of Lightning and Thunder. That bitter Almonds are preservatives
against Eb^iety, with some others. chap. 6.

THE THIRD BOOK. Of popular and received Tenants concerning Animals.
THat an Elephant has no joints. chap. 1. That an horse has no Gall. chap. 2.
That a Pigeon has no Gall. chap. 3. That a Bever to escape the hunter bites
off his Testicles or stones. chap. 4. That a Radger has the legs of one side
shorter then of the other. chap. 5. That a ^eare bring^ forth her cubs
informous or unshaped. chap. 6. Of the Basilisk. chap. 7. That a Wolf first
see^ng a man bege^s a dumbness in him. chap. 8. Of the long life of Dear.
chap. 9. That a Kings fisher hanged by the bill shows where the wind is.
chap. 10. Of Gryphins. chap. 11. Of the Phaenix. chap. 12. Of the pissing of
Toads, of the stone in their head, and of the generation of Frogs. chap. 13.
That a Sala^ander lives in the fire. chap. 14. Of the Amphisbaena or Serpent
with two heads moving either way. chap. 15. That young Vipers force their way
through the bowels of their dam. chap. 16. That Hares are both male and female.
chap. 17. That Moles are blind and have no eyes. chap. 18. That Lampries have
many eyes. chap. 19. That Snayles have two eyes, and at the ends of their
horns. chap. 20. That the Chamaeleon lives only by Air. chap. 21. That the
Ostridge digeste^h Iron. chap. 22. Of the Unicorns horn. chap. 23. That all
Animals in the land are in their kind in the Sea. chap. 24. Compendiously of
some others.
Of the musical note of Swans before their death. That the flesh of Peacocks
corrupt^th not. That Storkes will only live in Republics and free States. Of
the noise of a B^tter^e by putting the bill in a Reed. That Whelps are b^ind
nine dz^^es, and then begins to see. Of the antipathy between a ^oade and a
Spider, a Lion and a Cock. That ^n Ea^^^g has no wings. Of ^^^mes. That (...)
make that humming noise by their mouths or wings. Of the ^ainct or small red
Sp^der Of the Glow^worme. Of the providence of Pismires in biting off the ends
of Corn. chap. 25.

THE FOVRTH BOOK. Of many popular and received Tenants concerning Man.
THat man has only an erect figure and that to look up to Heaven. chap. 1.
That the heart of a man is seated on the left side. chap. 2. That plu^^sies are
only on the left side. chap. 3. Of the fourth finger of the left hand whereon
we wear our Rings. chap. 4. Of the right and left hand. chap. 5. Of swimming,
that some men swim naturally, that men drowned do slo^^ the ninth d^y when
their gall breaks, women (...) upon their b^cks. chap. 6. That men weigh
heavier dead then alive, and before meat then after. chap. 7. That there are
several passages for meat and d^inke. chap. 8. Of the custom of saluting or
blessing upon snee^ing. chap. 9. That Jews stink. chap. 10. Of Pygmies. chap.
11. Of the great Climactericall year that is 63. chap. 12. Of the Canicular or
Dog^ days. chap. 13.
THE FIFTH BOOK. Of many things questionable as they are described in ^ictures.
OF the (...) of the Pelecan. chap. 1. Of the picture of Dolphi^s. chap. 2. Of
the (...) of a Gr^sschopp^r. chap. 3. Of the (...) of the S^^pent tempting Eve.
chap. 4. Of the (...) of (...) and Eve with Nave^s. chap. 5. Of the (...) of
the Jews and Eas^erne Nations at their feas^s, and our Savior (...) the
Passcover. chap. 6. Of the (...) of our Savior with long hair. chap. 7. Of
the picture of Abraham sacrificing Isaac. chap. 8. Of the p^cture of Moses with
horns. chap. 9. Of the (...) of the twelve Tribes of Israel. chap. 10. Of the
pictures of the Sybils. chap. 11. Of the p^cture describing the death of
Cleopatra. chap. 12. (...) pictures of the nine Worthies. chap. 13. (...)
picture of I^ptha sacrificing his daughter. chap. 14. (...) picture of John the
Baptist in a Camels skin. chap. 15. (...) the p^cture of the Christopher. chap.
16. O^ the picture of S. George. chap. 17. Of the (...) of (...). chap. 18.
(...) chap. 19. (...) chap. 20. Comp^nd^^^sly of many popular customs,
opinions, (...), p^^ctises and observa^ions.
Of an ^are cr^ssing the h^gh way. Of the (...) Owls and Raven^, Of the
salling of sa^t. Of bre^king the Egg^shell. Of the true lovers kno^. Of the
cheek burning, or (...). Of speaking under the Rose. Of smo^k following the
fairest. Of sitting crosse-leg'd. Of hair upon Molls. Of the set time of
payring of nails. Of Lions heads upon spouts and cisternes. Of the saying
ungirt unblest. Of the picture of God the Father. Of the picture of Sun, Moon,
and the Winds. Of the Sun dancing on Easter day. Of the silly How or covering
about some childrens heads. Of being drunk once a month. Of the appearing of
the Devil with a cloven hoof. Of Moses his rod in the discovery of Mines. Of
discovering of doubtful matters by hook or staff, chap. 21.

THE SIXTH BOOK. Concerning sundry Tenants Geographicall and Historical.
COncerning the beginning of the world that the time thereof is not precisely
known, as commonly it is presumed. chap. 1. Of men's enquiries in what season
or point of the Zodiac it began, that a^ they are generally made they are in
vain, and as particularly incertaine. chap. 2. Of the divisions of the seasons
and four quarters of the year, according unto Astronomers and Physicians,
that the common compute of the Ancients, and which is still retained by some,
is very questionable. chap. 3. Of some computation of days, and diductions of
one part of the year unto another. chap. 4. A Digression of the wisdom of God
in the site and motion of the Sun. chap. 5. Concerning the vulgar opinion
that the earth was slenderly peopled before the flood. chap. 6. Of East and
West, and properties respectively ascribed unto Countries. chap. 7. Of the
seven heads of Nile. chap. 8. Of the greatness of Nile. Of its Inundation and
certain time thereof. That it never rayneth in Egypt, etc. chap. 8. Of the
Red Sea. chap. 9. Of the blackness of Negroes. chap. 10. Of the same. chap.
11. A digression of Blackness. chap. 12.
THE SEVENTH BOOK. Concerning many historical Tenants generally received, and
some deduced from the history of holy Scripture.
THat the forbidden fruit was an Apple. chap. 1. That a man has one Rib less
then a woman. chap. 2. That Methuselah must needs be the longest liver of all
the posterity of Adam. chap. 3. That there was no Rainebow before the f^oud.
chap. 4. Of Sem, Ham and Iaphet. chap. 5. That the Tower of Babel was erected
against a second deluge. chap. 6. Of the Mandrakes of ^eah. chap. 7. Of the
three Kings of Collein. chap. 8. Of the food of John the Baptist in the
wilderness. chap. 9. Of the conceit that John the Evangelist should not dye.
chap. 10. Of some others more briefly. chap. 11. Of the cessation of Oracles.
chap. 12. Of the death of Aristotle. chap. 13. Of the wish of Philoxenus to
have the neck of a Crane. chap. 14. Of the lake Asphaltites, or the dead Sea.
chap. 15. Of diverse other Relations.
Of the woman that conceived in a Bathe. Of Crassus that never laughed but
once. That our Savior never laughed. Of Surgius the second or B^cca de Porco.
That Tamerlane was a Scythian shepherd. chap. 16.
Of diverse others.
Of the poverty of Belisarius. Of fluctius Decumanus or the tenth wave. Of
Parysatis that poisoned Statyra by one side of a knife. Of the woman fed with
poison that should have poisoned Alexander. Of the wandering Jew. chap. 17.
More briefly.
That the Army of Xerxes drank whole Rivers dry. That Haniball eat through the
Alps with Vinegar. Of the death of Aeschylus. Of the cities of Tarsus and
Anchiale built in one day. Of the great ship Syracusia or Alexandria. Of the
Spartan boys. chap. 18. Of some others. chap. 19. Of some Relations whose
truth we fear. chap. 20.

THE FIRST BOOK: OR, GENERAL PART.
CHAP. I.
Of the Causes of Common Errors.
THE first and father cause of common Error, is the common infirmity of humane
nature; of whose deceptible condition, although perhaps there should not need
any other eviction, then the frequent errors, we shall our selves commit, even
in the express declarement hereof: Yet shall we illustrate the same from more
infallible constitutions, and persons presumed as far from us in condition,
as time, that is our first and ingenerated forefathers, from whom as we derive
our being, and the several wounds of constitution, so may we in some manner
excuse our infirmities in the depravity of those parts, whose traductions were
pure in them, and their originalls but once removed from God. Yet
notwithstanding (if posterity may take leave to judge of the fact, as they are
assured, to suffer in the punishment) were grossly deceived in their
perfection, and so weakly deluded in the clarity of their understanding, that
it has left no small obsecu^ity in ours, how error should gain upon them.

For first, they were deceived by Satan, and that not in an invisible
insinuation, but an open and discoverable apparition; that is, in the form of a
Serpent; whereby although there were many occasions of suspicion, and such as
could not easily escape a weaker circumspection, yet did the unwary
apprehension of Eve take no advantage thereof. It has therefore seemed strange
unto some, she should be deluded by a Serpent, or subject her reason unto a
beast of the field, which God had subjected unto hers. It has empuzzeled the
enquiries of others to apprehend, and enforced them unto strange conceptions*
to make out how without fear or doubt she could discourse with such a
creature, or hear a Serpent speak, without suspicion of imposture. The wits
of others, have been so bold as to accuse her simplicity in receiving his
temptation so coldly, and when such specious effects of the fruit were
promised, as to make them like gods, not to desire, at least not to wonder he
pursued not that benefit himself; and had it been their own case would
perhaps have replied, If the taste of this fruit makes the eaters like gods,
why remainest thou a beast? If it makes us but like gods, we are so already.
If thereby our eyes shall be opened hereafter, they are at present quick
enough to discover thy deceit, and we desire them no opener to behold our own
shame. If to know good and evil be our advantage, although we have free will
unto both, we desire to perform but one, we know it is good to obey the
Commandment of God, but evil if we transgress it.

They were deceived by one another, and in the greatest disadvantage of
delusion, that is the stronger by the weaker: For Eve presented the fruit, and
Adam received it from her. Thus the Serpent was cunning enough to begin the
deceit in the weaker; and the weaker of strength, sufficient to consummate the
fraud in the stronger. Art and fallacy was used unto her, a naked offer proved
sufficient unto him: so his superstruction was his ruin, and the fertility of
his sleep, an issue of death unto him. And although the condition of sex and
posterity of creation might somewhat extenuate the error of the woman: Yet was
it very strange and inexcusable in the man, especially if as some affirm, he
was the wisest of all men since, or if as others have conceived, he was not
ignorant of the fall of the Angels, and had thereby example and punishment to
deter him.

They were deceived from themselves, and their own apprehensions, for Eve
either mistook or traduced the commandment of God. Of every tree of the
garden thou mai^st freely eat, but of the tree of knowledge of good and evil
thou shall not eat, for in the day thou eatest thereof, thou shall surely dye.
Now Eve upon the question of the Serpent returned the precept in different
t^armes, You shall not eat of it, neither shall you touch it lest perhaps you
dye. In which delivery, there were no less then two mistakes, or rather
additionall mendacites; for the commandment forbids not the touch of the
fruit, and positively said ye shall surely dye, but she extenuating replied, ne
forte ^oriamini, lest perhaps ye dye. For so in the vulgar translation it
runs, and so is it expressed in the Thargum or Paraphrase of Jonathan. And
therefore although it be said, and that very truly that the devil was a liar
from the beginning, yet was the woman herein the first express beginner, and
falsified twice before the replye of Satan, and therefore also to speak
strictly, the sin of the fruit was not the first offense, they first
transgressed the rule of their own reason, and after the commandment of God.

They were deceived through the conduct of their senses, and by temptations
from the object it self, whereby although their intellectualls had not failed
in the theori^ of truth, yet did the inservient and brutall faculties control
the suggestion of reason: Pleasure and profit already overswaying the
instructions of honesty, and sensuallity perturbing the reasonable commands of
virtue. For so is it delivered in the text; That when the woman saw that the
tree was good for food, and that it was pleasant unto the eye, and a tree to be
desired to make one wise, she took of the fruit thereof and did eat. Now
hereby it appears, that Eve before the fall, was by the same and beaten way
of allurements inveigled, whereby her posterity has been deluded ever since;
that is those three delivered by S^. John, the lust of the flesh, the lust of
the eye, and the pride of life, wherein indeed they seemed as weakly to fail
as their debilitated posterity, ever after. Whereof notwithstanding some in
their imperfections, have resisted ^ore powerful temptations, and in many
moralities condemned the facility of their seductions.

Again, they might for ought we know, be still deceived in the un^beliefe of
their mortality, even after they had eat of the fruit. For Eve observing no
immediate execution of the curse, she delivered the fruit unto Adam, who after
the taste thereof, perceiving himself still to live, might yet remain in
doubt, whether he had incurred death, which perhaps he did not indubitably
believe, until he was after convicted in the visible example of Abel* for he
that would not believe the menace of God at first, it may be doubted whether
before an ocular example he believed the curse at last, and therefore they are
not without all reason, who have disputed the fact of Cain, that is although he
purposed to mischief, whether he intended to murder his brother, or designed
that, whereof he had not beheld an example in his own kind, there might be
somewhat in it that he would not have done, or desired undone, when he brake
forth as desperately as before he had done unmannerly, My iniquity is greater
then can be forgiven me.

Some nicities I confess there are which extenuate, but many more that
aggravate this delusion, which exceeding the bounds of our Discourse, and
perhaps our satisfaction, we shall at present pass over. And therefore whether
the sin of our first parents were the greatest of any since, whether the
transgression of Eve seducing, did not exceed that of Adam seduced, or whether
the resistibility of his reason did not equivalence the facility of her
seduction, we shall refer it unto the Schoolman Whether there were not in
Eve as great injustice in deceiving her husband, as imprudence in being
deceived her self, we leave it unto the Morallist. Whether the whole relation
be not Allegorical, that is, whether the temptation of the man by the woman,
be not the seduction of the rational, and higher parts by the inferior and
feminine faculties: or whether the tree in the midst of the garden, were not
that part in the center of the body, on which was afterward the appointment of
circumcision in males, we leave it unto the Thalmudist. Whether there were any
policy in the devil to tempt them before conjunction, or whether the issue
before tentation might in justice have suffered with those after, we leave it
unto the Lawyer. Whether Adam foreknew the advent of Christ, or the reparation
of his error by his Savior, how the execution of the curse should have been
ordered, if after Eve had eaten, Adam had yet refused. Whether if they had
tasted the tree of life before that of good and evil, they had yet suffered
the curse of mortality; or whether the e^^icacie of the one had not overpowred
the penalty of the other, we leave it unto God: for he alone can truly
determine these and all things else, who as he has proposed the world unto our
disputation, so has he reserved many things unto his own resolution, whose
determinations we cannot hope from flesh, but must with reverence suspend unto
that great day, whose justice shall either condemn our curiosities, or resolve
our disquisitions.

Lastly, man was not only deceiveable in his integrity, but the Angels of
light in all their clarity. He that said he would be like the highest did err
if in some way he conceived himself not so already; but in attempting so high
an effect from himself, he mis-understood the nature of God, and held a false
apprehension of his own; whereby vainly attempting not only insolences, but
impossibilities, he deceived himself as low as hell. In brief, there is
nothing infallible but God, who cannot possibly err. For things are really
true as they correspond unto his conception, and have so much of verity, as
they hold of conformity unto that intellect, in whose Idea they had their first
determinations: And therefore being the rule he cannot be irregular, nor being
truth it self conceiveably admit the impossible society of error.

CHAP. II.
A further illustration of the same.
BEing thus deluded before the fall, it is no wonder if their conceptions were
deceitful, and could scarce speak without an error after; for what is very
remarkable (and no man I know has yet observed) in the relation of Scripture
before the flood, there is but one speech delivered by man, wherein there is
not an erroneous conception; and strictly examined, most hainously injurious
unto truth. The pen of Moses is brief in the account before the flood, and
the speeches recorded are six.

The first is that of Adam, when upon the expostulation of God, he replied; I
heard thy voice in the garden, and because I was naked, I hid my self: In
which reply, there was included a very gross mistake, and if with pertinacity
maintained, a high and capital error: for thinking by this retirement to
obscure himself from God, he infringed the omnisciency and essential ubiquity
of his Maker; who as he created all things, so is he beyond and in them all,
not only in power, as under his subjection, or in his presence, as being in
his cognition, but in his very Ess^nce, as being the soul of their
cau^alities, and the essential cause of their existences. Certainly his
posterity at this distance and after so perpetuated an impayrement, cannot but
condemn the poverty of his conception, that thought to obscure himself from
his Creator in the shade of the garden, who had beheld him before in the
darkness of his Chaos, and in the obscurity of nothing; that thought to fly
from God, which could not fly himself, or imagined that one tree should
conceal his nakedness from Gods eye, as another had revealed it unto his
own. Those tormented spirits that wish the mountains to cover them, have
fallen upon desires of less absurdity, and chosen ways of less improbable
concealment; though this be also as ridiculous unto reason, as fruitless unto
their desires; for he that laid the foundations of the earth, cannot be
excluded the secrecy of the mountains, nor can there any thing escape the
perspicacity of those eyes which were before light, and unto whose optics
there is no opacity. This is the consolation of all good men, unto whom his
ubiquity affords continual comfort and security: And this is the affliction
of hell, unto whom it affords despair, and remediless calamity. For those
restless spirits that fly the face of the Almighty, being deprived the
fruition of his eye, would also avoid the extent of his hand; which being
impossible, their sufferings are desperate, and their afflictions without
evasion, until they can get out of Trismegistus his circle, that is, to extend
their wings above the universe, and pitch beyond ubiquity it self.

The second is that speech of Adam unto God, the woman whom thou gave me to
be with me, she gave me of the Tree, and I did eat: this indeed was a very
unsatisfactory reply, and therein was involved a very impio^s error, as
implying God the Author of sin, and accusing his Maker of his transgression:
as if he had said, If thou had not given me a woman I had not been deceived:
Thou promisedst to make her a help, but she has proved destruction unto me;
had I remained alone, I had not sinned, but thou gave me a consort, and so I
became seduced. This was a bold and open accusation of God, making the
fountain of good the contriver of evil, and the forbidder of the crime an
abetter of the fact prohibited. Surely, his mercy was great that did not
revenge the impeachment of his Justice; and his goodness to be admired, that
it refuted not his argument in the punishment of his excusation, or only
pursued the first transgression without a penalty of this the second.

The third was that of Eve. The Serpent beguiled me, and I did eat. In which
reply there was not only a very feeble excuse, but an erroneous translating
her own offense upon another. Extenuating her sin from that which was an
aggravation, that is to excuse the fact at all, much more upon the suggestion
of a beast, which was before in the strictest terms prohibited by her God. For
although we now do hope the mercies of God will consider our degenerated
integrities unto some minoration of our offenses, yet had not the sincerity of
our first parents, so colorable expectations, unto whom the commandment was
but single, and their integrities best able to resist the motions of its
transgression: And therefore so heinous conceptions have risen hereof, that
some have seemed more angry therewith then God himself, being so exasperated
with the offense, as to call in question their salvation, and to dispute the
eternal punishment of their Maker. Assuredly with better reason may posterity
accuse them, then they the Serpent, or one another; and the displeasure of the
Pelagians must needs be irreconcilable, who peremptorily maintaining they can
fulfill the whole Law, will insatisfactorily condemn the non-observation of
one.

The fourth was that speech of Cain upon the demand of God, Where is thy
Brother? and he said, I know not. In which negation, beside the open impudence,
there was employed a notable error; for returning a lie unto his Maker, and
presuming in this manner, to put off the Searcher of hearts, he denied the
omnisciency of God, whereunto there is nothing concealable. The answer of Satan
in the case of Job, had more of truth, wisdom and reverence, then this; Whence
come thou Satan? and he said, from compassing of the earth. For though an
enemy of God, and hater of all truth, his wisdom will hardly permit him to
fal^i^ie with the Almighty: for well understanding the omniscience of his
nature, he is not so ready to deceive himself, as to falsify unto him whose
cognition is no way deludable: And therefore when in the tentation of Christ he
played upon the falacy, and thought to deceive the Author of truth, the method
of this proceeding arose from the uncertainty of his divinity, whereof had he
remained assured, he had continued silent, nor would his discretion attempt so
unsucceedable a temptation. And so again at the last day, when our offenses
shall be drawn into account, the subtilty of that Inquisitor shall not present
unto God a bundle of calumnies or confutable accusations, but will discreetly
offer up unto his Omnisciencie, a sure and undeniable list of our
transgressions.

The fifth is another reply of Cain upon the denouncement of his curse, My
iniquity is greater then can be forgiven: For so is it expressed in some
translations. The assertion was not only desperate, but the conceit erroneous,
overthrowing that glorious attribute of God his mercy, and conceiving the sin
of murder unpardonable; which how great soever, is not above the repentance of
man, but far below the mercies of God, and was as some conceive expiated, in
that punishment he suffered temporally for it. There are but two examples of
this error in holy Scripture, and they both for murder, and both as it were of
the same person; for Christ was mystically slain in Abel; and therefore Cain
had some influence on his death, as well as Judas; but the sin had a
different effect on Cain, from that it had on Judas, and most that since have
fallen into it; for they like Judas desire death, and not unfrequently pursue
it: Cain on the contrary grew afraid thereof, and obtained a securement from
it. Assuredly if his despair continued, there was punishment enough in life,
and justice sufficient in the mercy of his protection. For the life of the
desperate equals the anxieties of death, who in uncessant inquietudes but act
the life of the damned, and anticipate the desolations of hell. It Is indeed a
sin in man, but a punishment only in the devils, who offend not God but
afflict themselves, in the appointed despair of his mercies. And as to be
without all hope is the affliction of the damned, so is it the happiness of
the blessed, who having their expectations present, are not distracted with
futurities. So is it also their felicity to have no faith, for enjoying the
beatifical vision there is nothing unto them inevident, and in the fruition of
the object of faith, they have received the full evacuation of it.

The last speech was that of Lamech, I have slain a man to my wound, and a
young man to my hurt: If Cain be avenged seven fold, truly Lamech seventy and
seven fold. Now herein there seems to be a very erroneous illation; from the
indulgence of God unto Cain, concluding an immunity unto himself, that is, a
regular protection from a single example, and an exemption from punishment in a
fact that naturally deserved it. The Error of this offender was contrary to
that of Cain, whom the Rabbis conceive that Lamech at this time killed. He
despaired of Gods mercy in the same fact, where this presumed of it, he by a
decollation of all hope annihilated his mercy, this by an immoderancy thereof
destroyed his justice, though the sin were less, the error was as great; For
as it is untrue that his mercy will not forgive offenders, or his benignity
cooperate to their conversions, So is it also of no less falsity to affirm
his Justice will not exact account of sinners, or punish such as continue in
their transgressions.

And thus may we perceive, how weakly our fathers did err before the flood,
how continually and upon common discourse they fell upon errors after, it is
therefore no wonder we have been erroneous ever since: And being now at
greatest distance from the beginning of er^our, are almost lost in its
dissemination, whose ways are boundless, and confess no circumscription.

CHAP. III.
Of the second cause of Popular Errors; the erroneous disposition of the people.
HAving thus declared the fallible nature of man even from his first
production, we have beheld the general cause of error, but as for popular
errors, they are more nearly founded upon an erroneous inclination of the
people; as being the most deceptible part of mankind, and ready with open arm^s
to receive the encroachments of Error; which condition of theirs although
deduceable from many grounds, yet shall we evidence it, but from a few, and
such as most nearly and undeniably declare their natures.

How unequal discerners of truth they are, and openly exposed unto error,
will first appear from their unqualified intellectuals, unable to umpire the
difficulty of its dissentions. For Error to speak strictly, is a firm assent
unto falsity. Now whether the object whereunto they deliver up their assent be
true or false, they are incompetent ^udges.

For the assured truth of things is derived from the principles of knowledge,
and causes, which determine their verities; whereof their uncultivated
understandings, scarce holding any theory, they are but bad discerners of
verity, and in the numerous tract of error, but casually do hit the point and
unity of truth.

Their understanding is so feeble in the discernement of falsities, and
averting the errors of reason, that it submits unto the fallacies of sense,
and is unable to rectify the error of its sensations. Thus the greater part of
mankind having but one eye of sense and reason, conceive the earth far
bigger then the Sun, the fixed Stars lesser then the Moon, their figures
plain, and their spaces equidistant. For thus their sense enformeth them, and
herein their reason cannot rectify them, and therefore hopelesly continuing in
their mistakes, they live and dye in their absurdities; passing their days in
perverted apprehensions, and conceptions of the world, derogatory unto God, and
the wisdom of his creation.

Again, being so illiterate in point of intellect, and their sense so
incorrected, they are farther indisposed ever to attain unto truth, as
commonly proceeding in those ways, which have most reference unto sense, and
wherein there lies most notable and popular delusion:

For being unable to weild the intellectual arms of reason, they are feign to
betake themselves unto wasters and the blunter weapons of truth; affecting the
gross and sensible ways of doctrine, and such as will not consist with strict
and subtle reason. Thus unto them a piece of Rhetoric is asufficient argument
of Logic, an Apologue of A^sope, beyond a Syllogism in Barbara, parables then
propositions, and proverbs more powerful, then demonstrations. And therefore
are they led rather by example, then precept, receiving persuasions from
visible inducements, before intellectual instructions; and therefore also do
they judge of humane actions by the event; for being incapable of operable
circumstances, or rightly to judge the prudenciality of affairs, they only
gaze upon the visible success, and thereafter condemn or cry up the whole
progression. And so from this ground in the Lecture of holy Scripture, their
apprehensions, are commonly confined unto the literal (...) of the text, from
whence have ensued the gross and duller sort of heresies. For not attaining
the deut^roscopy, and second intention of the words, they are feign to omit
their superconsequencies, coherencies, figures, or tropologies and are not
sometime persuaded by fire beyond their literalities. And therefore also things
invisible, but unto intellectual discernments, to humor the grossness of
their comprehensions, have been degraded from their proper forms, and God
himself dishonored into manual expressions; and so likewise being
unprovided, or unsufficient for higher speculations, they will always betake
themselves, unto sensible representations, and can hardly be restrained the
dullness of Idolatry. A sin or folly not only derogatory unto God, but man,
overthrowing their reason, as well as his divinity. In brief a reciprocation,
or rather an Inversion of the creation, making God one way, as he made us
another; that is, after our Image, as he made us after his own.

Moreover, their understanding thus weak in it self, and perverted by
sensible delusions, is yet farther impaired by the dominion of their appetite,
that is, the irrational and brutall part of the soul, which lording it over
the sovereign faculty, interrupts the actions of that noble part, and choakes
those tender sparks, which Adam has left them of reason: and therefore they
do not only swa^m with errors, but vices depending thereon. Thus they
commonly affect no man any ^^^ther then he deserts his reason, or complies
with their aberrancies. Hence they embrace not virtue for it self, but its
reward, and the argument from pleasure or utilitie is far more powerful,
then that from vertuou^ honesty* which Mahomet and his contrivers well
unde^stood, when he set out the felicity of his heaven, by the contentments
of ^lesh, and the delights of sense: slightly passing over the accomplishment
of the soul, and the beatitude of that part which earth and visibilities too
weakly affect. But the wisdom of our Savior, and the simplicity of his truth
proceeded another way, defying the popular provisions of happiness from
sensible expectations, placing his felicity in things removed from sense, and
the intellectual enjoyment of God. And therefore the doctrine of the one was
never afraid of Universities, or endeavored the banishment of learning like
the other. And though Galen does sometime nibble at Moses, and beside the
Apostate Christian, some Heathens have questioned his Philosophical part or
treaty of the Creation. Yet is there surely no reasonable Pagan, that will not
admire the rational and well grounded precepts of Christ, whose life as it was
conformable unto his doctrine, so was that unto the highest rules of reason;
and must therefore flourish in the advancement of learning, and the perfection
of parts best able to comprehend it.

Again, their individual imperfections being great, they are moreover
enlarged by their aggregation, and being erroneous in their single numbers once
hudled together, they will be error it self; for being a confusion of knaves
and fools, and a farraginous concurrence of all conditions, tempers, sex, and
ages, it is but natural if their determinations be monstrous, and many ways
inconsistent with truth. And therefore wise men have always applauded their
own judgment, in the contradiction of that of the people, and their soberest
adversaries, have ever afforded them the style of fools and mad men; and to
speak impartially, their actions have often made good these Epithites. Had
Orestes been Judge, he would not have acquitted that Lystrian rabble of
madness, who upon a visible miracle, falling into so high a conceit of Paul
and Barnabas, that they termed the one Jupiter, the other Mercurius, that they
brought oxen and garlands, and were hardly restrained, from sacrificing unto
them, did notwithstanding suddenly after fall upon Paul, and having stoned him,
drew him for dead out of the city. It might have hazarded the sides of
Democritus, had he been present at that tumult of Demetrius, when the people
flocking together in great numbers, some cried one thing, and some another, and
the assembly was confused, and the most part knew not wherefore they were come
together; notwithstanding, all with one voice for the space of two hours cried
out, Great is Diana of the Ephesians. It had overcome the patience of Job, as
it did the meekness of Moses, and would surely have mastered any, but the
longanimity and great sufferance of God, Had they beheld the mutiny in the
wilderness, when after ten great miracles in Egypt, and some in the same
place, they melted down their stolen earrings into a calf, and monstrously
cried out, These are thy gods O Israel! that brought thee out of the land of
Egypt. It much accuses the impatiencie of Peter, who could not endure the
^^aves of the multitude, and is the greatest example of lenity in our Savior,
when he desired of God forgivenes unto those, who having one day brought him
into the City in triumph, did presently after, act all dishonor upon him, and
nothing could be heard but Cru^^fige in their courts. Certainly he that
considers these things in Gods peculiar people, will easily discern how
little of truth, there is in the ways of the multitude; and though sometimes
they are flattered with that Aphorism, will hardly believe the voice of the
people to be the voice of God.

Lastly, being thus divided from truth in themselves, they are yet farther
removed by advenient deception. For true it is, (and I hope shall not offend
their vulgarities) if I say they are daily mocked into error by subtler
devisors, and have been expressly deluded, by all professions whatsoever. Thus
the Priests of Elder time, have put upon them many incredible conceits, not
only deluding their apprehensions, with Ariolation, South-saying, and such
oblique Idolatries, but winning their credulities unto the literal and
downright adorement of Cats, L^zards, and Beetles; and thus also in some
Christian Churches, wherein is presumed an irreproveable truth. If all be true
that is suspected, or half what is related, there have not wanted, many
strange deceptions, and some thereof are still confessed by the name of Pious
frauds. Thus Theudas an Imposture was able to lead away four thousand into
the wilderness, and the delusions of Mahomet almost the fourth part of
mankind. Thus all heresies how gross soever, have found a welcome with the
people. For thus, what is scarce imaginable, many of the Jews were wrought into
belief, that Herod was the Messiah, and David George of Leyden and Arden, were
not without a party amongst the people, who maintained the same opinion of
themselves almost in our days. Physicians (many at least that make profession
thereof) beside diverse less discoverable ways of fraud, have made them
believe, there is the book of fate, or the power of Aarons breast plate in
Urines. And therefore hereunto they have recourse as unto the Oracle of life,
the great determinator of virginity, conception, fertility, and the
inscrutable infirmities of the whole body. For as though there were a
^^minalitie in Urine, or that like the seed that carried with it the Idea of
every part, they foolishly conceive we visibly behold therein the Anatomy of
every particle, and can thereby indigitate their affections.

Saltimbancoes, Quacksalvers, and Charlatans, deceive them in lowe^ degrees;
were Aesop alive the Piazza and Ponte Neufe could not but speak their
fallacies, mean while there are too many, whose cries cannot conceal their
mischiefs: for their Impostures are full of cruelty, and worse then any
other, deluding not only unto pecuniary defraudations, but the irreparable
deceit of death.

Astrologers, which pretend to be of Caballa with the stars, such I mean as
abuse that worthy inquiry, have not been wanting in their deceptions, who
having won their belief unto principles whereof they make great doubt
themselves, have made them believe that arbitrary events below, have necessary
causes above; whereupon their credulities assent unto any prognostics, and
daily swallow the predictions of men, which besides the independency of their
causes, and contingency in their events, are only in the prescience of God.

Fortune tellers, Juglers, Geomancers, and the like incantatory impostors,
though commonly men of inferior rank, and from whom without infusion they can
exp^ct no more then from themselves, do daily and professedly delude them:
unto whom (what is deplorable in men and Christians) too many applying
themselves, betw^xt j^st and earnest, betray the cause of truth, and incensibly
make up, the legionarie body of error.

S^atistes and Politicians, unto whom Ragione di Stato, is the first
considerable, as though it were their business to deceive the people, as a
Maxim, do hold, that truth is to be concealed from them, unto whom although
they reveal the visible design, yet do they commonly conceal the capital
intention; and therefore have they always been the instruments of great
designs, yet seldom understood the true intention of any, accomplishing the
drifts of wiser heads as inanimate and ig^^o^ant Agents, the general design
of the world; who though in some la^itude of sense, and in a natural cognition
perform their proper actions, yet do they unknowingly concur unto higher
ends, and blindely advance the great intention of nature. Now how far they
may b^e kept in ignorance, a great example there is in the people of Rome, who
never knew, the true and proper name of their own City. For beside that common
appellation received by the Citizens, it had a proper and secret name concealed
from them: Cujus alterum nomen dicere s^cretis Cer^mo^^arum nefas habetur,
says Pliny. The reason hereof was superstitious, lest the name thereof being
discovered unto their enemies, their Penates and Patronall gods, might be
called forth by cha^ms an^ incanta^io^s. For according unto the tradition of
Magitians, the tu^^la^y sp^rits will not remove at common appellations, but at
the proper names of things whereunto they are protectors.

Thus having been deceived by themselves, and continually deluded by others,
they must needs be stuffed with errors, and even over^^nne with these inferior
falsities, whereunto whosoever shall resign their reasons, either from the
root of deceit in themselves, or inabilitie to resist such trivial
ingannations from others, although their condition and fortunes may place them
many Spheres above the multitude, yet are they still within the line of
vulgaritie, and the Democraticall enemies of truth.

CHAP. IIII.
Of the nearer and more Immediate Causes of popular errors, both in the Wiser,
and common sort, Misapprehension, Fallacy, or false diductio^^, Credulity,
Supinity, adherence unto Antiquity, Tradition, and Authority.
THe first is a mistake, or a conception of things, either in their first
apprehensions, or secondary relations. So Eve mistook the Commandment, either
from the immediate injunction of God, or from the secondary narration of her
husband. So might the Disciples mistake our Savior, in his answer unto Peter,
concerning the death of John, as is delivered, John 21. Peter seeing John,
says unto Jesus, Lord, and what shall this man do? Jesus says, I^ I will,
that he tarry till I come, what is that unto thee? Then went this saying abroad
among the brethren, that that Disciple should not die. Thus began the conceit
and opinion of the Centaures, that is in the mistake of the first beholders, as
is declared by Servius, when some young Thessalians on horseback were beheld a
far off, while their horses watered, that is, while their heads were
depressed, they were conceived by their first spectators, to be but one
animal, and answerable hereunto have their pictures been drawn ever since.

And as simple mistakes commonly beget fallacies, so men rest not in false
apprehensions, without absurd and inconsequent diductions, from fallacious
foundations, and misapprehended m^diums, erecting conclusions no way inferrible
from their premises. Now the fallacies whereby men deceive others, and are
deceived themselves, the Ancients, have divided into Ve^ball and Real. Of the
Verbal, and such as conclude from mistakes of the word, although there be no
less then six, yet are there but two only thereof worthy our notation: and
unto which the rest may be referred: that is the fallacy of Aequivocation and
Amphibologie, which conclude from the ambigui^y of some one word, or the
ambiguous sintaxis of many put together. From this fallacy arose that
calamitous error of the J^wes, misapprehending the Prophesies of their Messiah,
and expounding them always unto literal and temporal expectation. By this
way many errors crept in and perverted the doctrine of Pythagoras, whilst men
received his precepts in a different sense from his intention, converting
Metaphors into proprieties, and receiving as litterall expressions, obscure and
involved truths. Thus when he enjoined his Disciples, an abstinence from
beans, many conceived they were with severity debarred the use of that pulse;
which notwithstanding could not be his meaning for as Aristoxenus who wrote his
life, averreth he delighted much in that kind of food himself; but herein as
Plutarch observes, he had no other intention, then to dissuade men from
Magistracy, or undertaking the public offices of state; for by beans were
the Magistrates elected in some parts of Greece; and after his days, we read
in Thucydides, of the Council of the bean in Athens. The same word also in
Greek does signify a testicle, and has been thought by some an injunction
only of continency, as Aul. Gellius has expounded, and as Empedocles may also
be interpreted, (...), that is, Test^culis miseri dextras subducite. Again his
injunction is, not to harbor Swallows in our houses: Whose advice
notwithstanding we do not contemn, who daily admit and cherish them; for
herein a caution is only implied not to entertain ungrateful and thanklesse
persons, which like the swallow are no way commodious unto us, but having made
use of our habitations, and served their own turns, forsake us. So he
commands to deface the print of a cauldron in the ash^s, after it has boiled.
Which strictly to observe were most conde^nable superstition: For hereby he
covertly advises us not to persevere in anger, but after our choler has
boiled, to retain no impression thereof. In the like sense are to be received,
or they will else be misapprehended, when he advises his Disciples to give the
right hand but to few, to put no viands in a chamberpot, not to pass over a
balance, not to rake up ^ire with a sword, or piss against the Sun, which
enigmatical deliveries comprehended useful verities, but being mistaken by
literal Expositors at the first, they have been understood by most since, and
may be occasion of error to verbal capacities for ever.

This fallacy in the first del^sion Satan did put upon Eve, and his whole
tentation might be this Elench continued; so when he said, Ye shall not dye,
that was in his equivocation, she shall not incur a present death, or a
destruction immediately ensuing your transgression. Your eyes shall be opened,
that is, not to the enlargement of your knowledge, but to the discovery of your
shame and proper confusion. You shall know good and evil, that is you shall
have knowledge of good by its privation, but cognizance of evil by sense and
visible experience. And the same fallacy or way of d^ceit so well succeeding in
Paradise, he continued in his Oracles through all the world. Which had not men
more warily unde^stod, they might have performed many acts inconsistent with
his intention: B^utus might have made haste with Tarquine to have kissed his
own mother. The Athenians might have built them wooden walls, or doubled the
Altar at Delphos.

The circle of this fallacy is very large, and herein may be comprised all
Ironicall mistakes; for intended expressions receiving inverted significations,
all deductions from metaphors, parables, allegories, unto real and rigid
interpretations. Whereby have arisen not only popular errors in Philosophy, but
vulgar and senseless heresies in Divinity, as will be evident unto any that
shall examine their foundations, as they stand related by Epiphanius, Austin,
or Prateolus.

Other ways there are of deceit which consist not, in false apprehension of
words, that is verbal expressions or sententiall significations, but
fraudulent deductions, or inconsequent illations, from a false conception of
things. Of these extradictionary and real fallacies, Aristotle and Logicians
make in number six, but we observe that men are most commonly deceived by four
thereof: those are, Petitio principii. A dicto secundum quid ad dictum
simpliciter. A non causa pro causa. And fallacia consequentis.

The first is petitio principii, which fallacy is committed, when a question
is made a medium, or we assume a medium as granted, whereof we remain as
unsatisfied as of the question. Briefly where that is assumed as a principle,
to prove another thing which is not conceaded as true it self. By this
fallacy was Eve deceived, when she took for granted, the false assertion of
the devil; Ye shall not surely dye, for God does know that in the day she
shall eat thereof, your eyes shall be opened, and you shall be as gods; which
was but a bare affirmation of Satan without any proof or probable inducement,
contrary unto the command of God and former belief of herself; and this was
the Logic of the Jews, when they accused our Savior unto Pilate, who
demanding a reasonable impeachment, or the allegation of some crime worthy of
condemnation; they only replied, if he had not been worthy of death, we would
not have brought him before thee; wherein there was neither accusation of the
person, nor satisfaction of the Judge, who well understood a bare accusation
was no presumption of guilt, and the clamo^s of the people no accusation at
all. The same fallacy is sometime used in the dispute, between Job, and his
friends, they often taking that for granted which afterward he denies and
disproveth.

The second is a dicto secundum quid ad dictum simpliciter, when from that
which is but true in a qualified sense an inconditionall and absolute verity is
inferred, transferring the special consideration of things unto their general
acceptions, or concluding from their strict acception, unto that without all
limitation. This falacie men commit when they argue from a particular to a
general, as when we conclude the vices or qualities of a few upon a whole
Nation, or from a part unto the whole. Thus the devil argued with our Savior,
and by this he would persuade him he might be secure if he cast himself from
the pinnacle: for said he, it is written, he shall give his Angels charge
concerning thee, and in their hands they shall bear thee up, lest at any time
thou dash thy foot against a stone. But this illation was fallacious leaving
out part of the text, Psalm 91. He shall keep thee in all thy ways; that is,
in the ways of righteousness, and not of rash attempts: so he urged a part
for the whole, and inferred more in the conclusion, then was contained in the
premises. By this same fallaci^ we proceed, when we conclude from the sign
unto the thing signified. By this incroachment Idolatry first crept in, men
converting the symbolicall use of Idols into their proper worship, and
receiving the representation of things as the substance and thing it self. So
the statue of Belus at first erected in his memory, was in after times adored
as a Divinity. And so also in the Sacrament of the Eucharist, the bread and
wine which were but the signalls or visible signs, were made the things
signified, and worshipped for the body of Christ. And hereby generally men are
deceived that take things spoken in some la^itude without any at all. Hereby
the Jews were deceived concerning the commandment of the Sabbath, accusing
our Savior for healing the sick, and his disciples for plucking the ears of
corn, upon that day. And by this deplorable mistake they were deceived unto
destruction, upon the assault of Pompey the great made upon that day, by whose
superstitious observation they could not defend themselves, or perform any
labor whatsoever.

The third is a non causa pro causa, when that is pretended for a cause which
is not, or not in that sense which is inferred. Upon this consequence the law
of Mahomet forbids the use of wine, and his successors abolished Universities:
by this also many Christians have condemned li^erature, misunderstanding the
counsel of Saint Paul, who advises no further then to beware of Philosophy.
On this foundation were built the conclusions of Southsayers in their
Auguriall, and Tripudiary divinations, collecting presages from voice or food
of birds, and conjoyning events unto causes of no connection. Hereupon also are
grounded the gross mistakes, in the cure of many diseases, not only from the
last medicine, and sympatheticall receipts, but amulets cha^ms, and all
incantatory applications, deriving effects not only from inconcurring causes,
but things devoid of all efficiencie wha^ever.

The fourth is the fallacy of the consequent, which if strictly taken, may be
a ^allacious illation in reference unto an^ecedencie, or consequencie; as to
conclude from the position of the antecedent, unto the position of the
consequent, or from the ^emotion of the consequent to the remotion of the
antecedent. This is usually committed, when in connexed propositions the terms
adhere contingently. This is frequent in Oratorie illations, and thus the
Pharisees, because he conversed with Publicans and sinne^s* accused the
holiness of Christ. But if this fallacy be largely taken, it is committed in
any virious illation offending the rules of good consequence, and so it may be
very large, and comprehend all false illations against the settled laws of
Logic; but the most usual consequences are from particulars, from ^egatives,
and from affirmative conclusions in the (...), wherein indeed offenses are most
frequent, and their discoveries no^ difficult.

CHAP. V.
Of Credulity and Supinity.
A Third cause of common Errors is the Credulity of men* that is an easy
assent, to what is obtruded, or a believing at first ear what is delivered by
others; this is a weakness in the understanding, without examination assenting
unto things, which from their natures and causes do carry no persuasion;
whereby men often swallow falsities for truths, dubiosities for certainties,
fesibilities for possibilities, and things impossible as possibilities
themselves. Which though a weakness of the Intellect, and most discoverable in
vulgar heads, yet has it sometime fallen upon wiser brains, and great
advancers of truth. Thus many wise Athenians so far forgot their Philosophy,
and the nature of humane production, that they descended unto beliefes, the
original of their Nation was from the Earth, and had no other beginning then
from the seminality and womb of their great Mother. Thus is it not without
wonder, how those learned Arabicks so tamely delivered up their belief unto
the absurdities of the Alcoran. How the noble Geber, Avicenna and Almanzor,
should rest satisfied in the nature and causes of earthquakes, delivered from
the doctrine of their Prophet; that is, from the motion of a great Bull, upon
whose horns all the earth is poised. How their faiths could decline so low, as
to concede their generations in heaven, to be made by the smell of a citron, or
that the felicity of their Paradise should consist in a Jubilee of conjunction,
that is a coition of one act prolonged unto fifty years. Thus is it almost
beyond wonder, how the belief of reasonable creatures, should ever submit unto
Idolatry: and the credulity of those men scarce credible, without presumption
of a second fall, who could believe a Deity in the work of their own hands.
For although in that ancient and diffused adoration of Idols, unto the Priests
and subtiler heads, the worship perhaps might be symbolicall, and as those
Images some way related unto their deities, yet was the Idolatry direct and
downright in the people, whose credulity is illimitable, who may be made
believe that any thing is God, and may be made believe there is no God at all.

And as Credulity is the cause of Error, so incredulity oftentimes of not
enjoying truth, and that not only an obstinate incredulity, whereby we will
not acknowledge assent unto what is reasonably inferred, but any Academicall
reserva^ion in matters of easy truth, or rather scepticall infidelity against
the evidence of reason and sense. For these are conceptions befalling wise men,
as absurd as the apprehensions of fools, and the credulity of the people which
promiscuously swallow any thing. For this is not only derogatory unto the
wisdom of God, who has proposed the world unto our knowledge, and thereby the
notion of himself, but also detractory unto the intellect, and sense of man
expressedly disposed for that inquisition. And therefore hoc tantum scio quod
n^hil sc^o, is not to be received in an absolute sense, but is comparatively
expressed unto the number of things whereof our knowledge is ignorant; nor will
it acquit the insatisfaction of those which quarrel with all things, o^
dispute of matters concerning whose verities we have conviction from reason, or
decision from the inerrable and requisite conditions of sense. And therefore if
any man shall affirm the earth does move, and will not b^lieve with us, it
stands still, because he has probable reasons for it, and I no infallible
sense nor reason against it, I will not quarrel with his assertion: but if
like Zeno he shall walk about, and yet deny there is any motion in nature,
^urely it had been happy he had been born in Anty^era, and is only fit to
converse with their melancholies, who having a conceit that they are dead,
cannot be convicted into the society of the living.

The fourth is a supinity or neglect of enquiry, even in matters whereof we
doubt, rather believing, as we say, then going to see, or do^bting with ease
and gratis, then believing with difficulty or purchase; whereby either by a
temperamentall inactivity we are unready to put in execution the suggestions or
dictates of reason, or by a content and acquiescence in every species of truth
we embrace the shadow thereof, or so much as may palliate its just and
substantial acquirements. Had our forefathers sat down in these resolutions,
or had their curiosities been sedentary, who pursued the knowledge of things
through all the corners of nature, the face of truth had been obscure unto us,
whose luster in some part their industries have revealed.

Certainly the sweat of their labors was not salt unto them, and they took
delight in the dust of their endeavors. F^r questionless in knowledge there
is no sl^nder difficulty, and truth which wise men say does lie in a well, is
not recoverable but by ^x^ntlation. It were some extenuation of the curse, if
in sudore vul^us tul, were confineable unto corporal exercitations, and there
still remained a Paradise or unthorny place of knowledge; but now our
unde^standings being eclipsed, as well as our tempers infirmed, we must betake
our selves to ways of reparation, and depend upon the illumination of our
endeavors; for thus we may in some measure repair our primarie ruins, and
build our selves men again. And though the attempts of some have been
precipitous, and their enquiries so audacious as to come within command of the
flaming swords, and lost themselves in attempts above humanity, yet have the
inquiries of most defected by the way, and tired within the sober circumference
of knowledge.

And this is the reason why some have transcribed any thing, and although they
cannot but doubt thereof, yet neither make experiment by sense or enquiry by
reason, but live in doubts of things whose satisfaction is in their own power,
which is indeed the inexcusable part of our ignorance, and may perhaps fill up
the charge of the last day. For not obeying the dictates of reason, and
neglecting the cries of truth, we fail not only in the trust of our
undertakings, but in the intention of man it self, which although more venial
unto ordinary constitutions, and such as are not framed beyond the capacity of
beaten notions, yet will it inexcusably condemn some men, who having received
excellent endowments, and such as will accuse the omissions of perfection, have
yet sat down by the way, and frustrated the intention of their habilities. For
certainly as some men have sinned, in the principles of humanity, and must
answer, for not being men, so others offend if they be not more; Magis extra
vitia quam cum virtutibus, would commend those, These are not excusable without
an Excellency. For great constitutions, and such as are constellated unto
knowledge, do nothing till they outdoe all; they come short of themselves if
they go not beyond others, and must not sit down under the degree of worthies.
God expects no luster from the minor stars, but if the Sun should not
illuminate all, it were a sin in Nature. Vltimus bonorum, will not excuse every
man, nor is it sufficient for all to hold the common level; Men's names should
not only distinguish them: A man should be something that men are not, and
individual in somewhat beside his proper nature. Thus while it exceeds not the
bounds of reason, and modesty, we cannot condemn singularity. Nos numerus
sumus, is the motto of the multitude, and for that reason are they fools. For
things as they recede from unity, the more they approach to imperfection, and
deformity; for they hold their perfection in their simplicities, and as they
nearest approach unto God.

Now as there are many great wits to be condemned, who have neglected the
increment of Arts, and the sedulous pursuit of knowledge, so are there not a
few very much to be pitied, whose industry being not attended with natural
parts, they have sweat to little purpose, and roled the stone in vain: which
chiefly proceeds from natural incapacity, and geniall indisposition, at
least to those particular ways whereunto they apply their endeavors. And this
is one reason why though Universities be full of men, they are oftentimes
empty of learning. Why as there are some which do much without learning, so
others but little with it, and few that attain to any perfection in it. For
many heads that undertake it, were never squared nor timbred for it. There are
not only particular men, but whole nations indisposed for learning, whereunto
is required not only education, but a pregnant Minerva and teeming
constitution. For the wisdom of God has divided the Genius of men according
to the different affairs of the world, and varied their inclinations according
to the variety of Actions to be performed therein, which they who consider not,
rudely rushing upon professions and ways of life unequal to their natures;
dishonor not only themselves and their functions, but pervert the h^rmony of
the whole world. For if the world went on as God has o^dained it, and were
every one employed in points concordant to their Natures; Professions, Arts and
Commonwealths would rise up of themselves; nor needed we a Lantern to find
a man in Athens.

CHAP. VI.
Of adherence unto Antiquity.
BUt the mortallest enemy unto knowledge, and that which has done the greatest
execution upon truth, has been a peremptory adhesion unto Authority, and more
especially the establishing of our belief upon the dictates of Antiquities.
For (as every capacity may obse^ve) most men of Ages present, so
superstitiously do look on Ages past, that the authorities of the one, exceed
the reasons of the other. Whose persons indeed being far removed from our
times, their works which seldom with us pass uncontrouled, either by
contemporaries or immediate successors, are now become out of the distance of
envies. And the farther removed from present times, are conceived to approach
the nearer unto truth it self. Now hereby me thinks we manifestly delude our
selves, and widely walk out of the tracke of truth.

For first, men hereby impose a thraldom on their times, which the ingenuity
of no age should endure, or indeed the presumption of any did ever yet enjoyne.
Thus Hippocrates about 2000. year ago, conceived it no injustice, either to
examine or refute the doct^ines of his predecessors: Galen the like, and
Aristotle most of any; yet did not any of these conceive themselves infallible,
or set down their dictates as verities irrefragable; but when they either
deliver their own inventions, or rej^cted other men's opinions, they proceed
with Judgment and Ingenuity, establishing their assertion, not only with
great solidity, but submitting them also unto the correction of future
discovery.

Secondly, men that adore times past, consider not that those times were once
present, that is, as our own are at this instant, and we our selves unto
those to come, as they unto us at present; as we rely on them, even so will
those on us, and magnify us hereafter, who at present condemn our selves;
which very absurdity is daily committed amongst us even in the esteem and
censure of our own times. And to speak impartially, old men from whom we
should exp^ct the greatest example of wisdom, do most exceed in this point of
folly; commending the days of their youth, they scarce remember, at least well
understood not; extolling those times their younger years have heard their
fathers condemn, and condemning those times the gray heads of their posterity
shall commend. And thus is it the humor of many heads to extol the days of
their forefathers, and declaime against the wickedness of times present;
which notwithstanding they cannot handsomely do, without the borrowed help
and satyrs of times past, condemning the vices of their times, by the
expressions of vices in times which they commend, which cannot but argue the
community of vice in both; Horace therefore, Juvenall and Perseus were no
prophets, although their lives did seem to indigitate and point at our times.
There is a certain list of vices committed in all ages, and declaimed against
by all Authors, which will last as long as humane nature, or digested into
common places may serve for any theme, and never be out of date until Doomes
day. Thirdly, the testimonies of An^^q^ity and such as pass oraculously
amongst us, were not if we consider them always so ex^ct, as to examine the
doctrine they delivered. For some, and those the acutest of them, have left
unto us many things of falsitie, controulable, not only by critical and
collective reason, but common and country observation. Hereof there want not
many examples in Aristotle, through all his book of animals; we shall instance
only in three of his Problemes, and all contained under one S^ction. The first
enquireth why a Man does cough, but not an Ox or Cow? whereas notwithstanding
the contrary is often observed by husbandmen, and stands confirmed by those who
have expressly treated de re Rustica, and have also delivered diverse remedies
for it. Why Juments (...) he terms them) as Horses, Oxen and Asses, have no
eruct^tion or belching, whereas indeed the contrary is often observed, and also
delivered by Columella. And thirdly, cur solus homo, (...), why man alone has
gray hayres? whereas it cannot escape the eyes, and ordinary observation of all
men, that horses, dogs, and foxes, wax gray with age in our Countries, and in
colder regions many other animals without it.

Other Authors write often dubiously, even in matters wherein is expected a
strict and definitive truth, extenuating their affirmations, with aiunt,
ferunt, fortasse, As Dioscorides, Galen, Aristotle, and many more. Others by
he^^e say, taking upon trust most they have delivered, whose volumes are mere
collections, drawn from the mouths or leaves of other Authors; as may be
observed in Pliny, Aelian, Athe^aeus, and many others. Not a few
transcriptively, subscribing their names unto other men's endeavors, and
merely transcribing almost all they have written. The Latins transcribing the
Greeks, the Greeks and Latins each other. Thus has Justine borrowed all
from Trogus Pompeius, and Julius solinus in a manner transcribed Pliny, thus
have Lucian and Apuleius served Lucius Pratensis, men both living in the same
time, and both transcribing the same Author, in those famous Books, Entitled
Lucius by the one, and Aureus Asinus by the other. In the same measure has
Simocrates in his Tract de Nilo, dealt with Diodorus Siculus, as may be
observed, in that work annexed unto Herodotus, and translated by Jungermannus.
Thus Eratosthenes wholly translated Timotheus de Insulis, not reserving the very
Preface. The very same does Strabo report of Edorus and Ariston in a Treatise
entitled de Milo. Clemens Alexandrinus has also observed many examples hereof
among the Greeks, and Pliny speaks very plainly in his Preface, that
conferring his Authors, and comparing their works together, he generally
found those that went before verbatim transcribed, by those that followed
after, and their originalls never so much as mentioned. Even the magnified
Virgil has borrowed almost all his works: his Eclogues from Theocritus, his
Georgicks from H^siod and Aratus, his Aeneads from Homer, the second Book
thereof containing the exploit of Sinon and the Trojan horses, (as Macrobius
observes) he has verbatim derived from Pisander. Our own profession is not
excusable herein. Thus Oribasius* Aetius and Aegineta have in a manner
transcribed Galen. But Marcellus Empericus who has left a famous work de
medicamentis, has word for word, transcribed all Scriboneus Largus, de
compositione medicamentorum, and not left out his very peroration. And thus may
we perceive the Ancients were but men, even like our selves. The practice of
transcription in our days was no monster in theirs: Plagiarie had not its
nativitie with printing, but began in times when thefts were difficult, and the
paucity of books scarce wanted that invention.

Fourthly, while we so eargerly adhear unto Antiquity, and the accounts of
elder times, we are to consider the fabulous condition thereof; and that we
shall not deny if we call to mind the mendacity of Greece, from whom we have
received most relations, and that a considerable part of Ancient times, was by
the Greeks themselves termed (...), that is made up or stuffed out with fables,
and surely the fabulous inclination of those days, was greater then any since,
which swarmed so with fables, and from such slender grounds, took hyn^es for
fictions, poisoning the world ever after; wherein how far they exceeded, may be
exemplified from Palaephatus, in his book of fabulous narrations. That fable of
Orpheus, who by the melody of his music, made woods and trees to follow him,
was raised upon a slender foundation; for there were a crew of mad women,
retired unto a mountain, from whence being pacifyed by his Music, they
descended with boughs in their hands, which unto the fabulositie of those
times, proved a sufficient ground to celebrate unto all posterity the Magic
of Orpheus harp, and its power to attract the senseless trees about it. That
Medea the famous Sorceresse could renew youth, and make old men young again,
was nothing else but that from the knowledge of simples she had a receipt to
make white hair black, and reduce old heads into the tincture of youth again.
The fable of Gerion and Ce^berus with three heads was this: Gerion was of the
City Tricarinia that is of three heads, and Ce^berus of the same place was one
of his dogs, which running into a cave upon pursuit of his masters oxen,
Hercules perforce drew him out of that place, from whence the conceits of those
days affirmed no less, then that He^cules descended into hell, and brought up
Cerberus into the habitation of the Living. Upon the like grounds was raised
the figment of Briareus, who dwelling in a city called Hecatonchiria, the
fancies of those times assigned him an hundred hands. It Was ground enough to
fancy wings unto Daedasus, in that he stole out of a window from Minos, and
sailed away with his son Icarus, who steering his course wisely, escaped, but
his son carrying too high a sail was drowned. That Niobe weeping over her
children was turned into a stone, was nothing else but that during her life,
she erected over their s^pultures, a marble tomb of her own. When Acteon had
undone himself with dogs, and the prodigal attendance of hunting, they made a
solemn story how he was devoured by his hounds. And upon the like grounds was
raised the Anthropophagie of D^omedes his horses. Upon as slender foundation
was built, the fable of the Minotaure; for one Taurus a servant of Minos begat
his mistress Pasiphae with child, from whence the infant was named
Minotaurus. Now this unto the fabulositie of those times was thought sufficient
to accuse Pasiphae of Beastialitie, or admitting conjunction with a Bull, and
in succeeding ages gave a hynte of depravity unto Domitian to act the fable
into Realitie.

Fifthly, we applaude many things delivered by the Ancients, which are in
themselves but ordinary, and come short of our own conceptions. Thus we
usually extol, and our Orations cannot escape the sayings of the wisemen of
Greece. Nosce teipsum of Thales: Nosce tempus of Pittacus: Nihil nimis of
Cleobulus; which notwithstanding to speak indifferently, are but vulgar
precepts in Morality, carrying with them nothing above the line, or beyond the
extemporall sententiosity of common conceits with us. Thus we magnify the
Apothegmes, or reputed replies of wisdom, whereof many are to be seen in
Laertius, more in Lycosthenes, not a few in the second book of Macrobius, in
the salts of Cicero Augustus, and the Comicall wits of those times: in most
whereof there is not much of admiration, and are me thinks exceeded, not only
in the replies of wise men, but the passages of society and daily urbanities
of our times. And thus we extol their adage^ or proverbs; and Erasmus has
taken great pains to make collections of them, whereof notwithstanding the
greater part will, I believe, unto in^different judges be esteemed no such
rarities, and may be paralelled, if not exceeded, by those of more unlearned
nations, and many of our own.

Sixthly, we urge authorities, in points that need not, and introduce the
testimony of ancient writers, to confirm things evidently believed, and whereto
no reasonble hearer but would assent without them, such as are; Nemo mortalium
omnibus horis sapit. Virtute nil praestantius, nil pulchrius; Omnia vincit
amor. Praeclarum quiddam veritas, All which, although things known and vulgar,
are frequently urged by many men, and though trivial verities in our mouths,
yet noted from Plato, Ovid, or Cicero, they receive immediate additions, and
become reputed elegancies. For many hundred to instance but in one we meet with
while we are writing. Antonius Guevara that elegant Spaniard, in his book
entitled, The Dial of Princes, begins his Epistle thus. Apolonius Thyan^us
disputing with the Scholars of Hiarchas, said, that among all the affections
of nature, nothing was more natural, then the desire all have to preserve
life; which being a confessed truth, and a verity acknowledged by all, it was
a superstuous affectation, to derive its authority from Apolonius, or seek a
confirmation thereof as far as India, and the learned Scholars of Hiarchus;
which whether it be not al one to strengthen common dignities and principles
known by themselves, with the authority of Mathematicians; or think a man
should believe; The whole is greater then its parts, rather upon the authority
of Euclide, then if it were propounded alone, I leave unto the second and wiser
cogitations of all men. It Is sure a practice that savours much of Pedantery, a
Reserve of Puerilitie we have not shaken off from School, where being
seasoned with Minor sentences, by a neglect of higher enquiries, they prescribe
upon our riper cares, and are never worn out but with our memories.

Lastly, while we so devoutly adhere unto Antiquity in some things, we do not
consider we have deserted them in several other; for they indeed have not only
been imperfect, in the conceit of many things, but either ignorant or erroneous
in diverse other. They understood not the motion of the eight sphere from West
to East, and so conceived the longitude of the stars invariable. They
conceived the torrid Zone unhabitable, and so made frustrate the goodliest part
of the earth. But we now know it is very well empeopled, and the habitation
thereof esteemed so happy, that some have made it the proper seat of Paradise,
and been so far from judging it unhabitable that they have made it the first
habitation of all. Many of the Ancients denied the Antipodes, and some unto the
penalty of contrary affirmations; but the experience of our enlarged
navigations, can now assert them beyond all dubitation. Having thus totally
relinquisht them in some things, it may not be presumptuous, to examine them in
others, but surely most unreasonable to adhere to them in all, as though they
were infallible or could not err in any.

CHAP. VII.
Of Authority.
NOr is only a resolved prostration unto Antiquity a powerful enemy unto
knowledge, but also a consident adherence unto any Authority, or resignation of
our judgments upon the testimony of any Age or Author whatsoever. For first,
to speak generally an argument from Authority to wiser examinations, is but a
weaker kind of proof, it being no other but a topicall probation, and as we
term it, an inartificiall argument, depending upon a naked asseveration:
wherein neither declaring the causes, affections or adjuncts of what we
believe. It carries not with it the reasonable inducements of knowledge, and
therefore contr a negantem principia, Ipse dixit, or oportet discentem credere,
although they may be postulates, very accomodable unto Junior indoctrinations,
yet are their authorities but temporary, and not to be embraced beyond the
minority of our intellectuals. For our advanced beliefs are not to be built
upon dictates, but having received the probable inducements of truth, we become
emancipated from testimonial engagements, and are to erect upon the surer base
of reason. Secondly, unto reasonable perpensions it has no place in some
Sciences, small in others, and suffers many restrictions, even where it is
most admitted. It is of no validity in the M^thematicks, especially the mother
part thereof Arithmetic and Geometry: For these Sciences concluding from
dignities and principles known by themselves, they receive not satisfaction
from probable reasons, much less from bare and peremptory asseverations. And
therefore if all Athens should decree, that in every triangle, woe sides which
soever be taken are greater then the side remaining, or that in rectangle
triangles the square which is made of the side that sub^endeth the right angle,
is equal to the squares which are made of the sides containing the right
angle: Although there be a certain truth therein, would Geometritians
notwithstanding, receive a satisfaction without demonstration thereof? It Is
true by the vulgarity of Philosophers, there are many points believed without
probation, and if a man affirm from Ptolomy, that the Sun is bigger then the
Earth, shall he probably meet with any contradiction herein, whereunto
notwithstanding Astronomers will not assent without some convincing argument or
demonstrative proof thereof? And therefore certainly of all men a Philosopher
should be no swearer: for an oath which is the end of controversies in Law
cannot determine any here, nor are the deepest sacraments or desperate
imp^^cations of any force to persuade where reason only, and necessary mediums
must induce.

In natural Philosophy, and which is more generally pursued amongst us, it
carries but slender consideration, for that also proceeding from settled
principles, therein is expected a satisfaction from scientificiall
progressions, and such as beget, a sure and rational belief. For if Authority
might have made out the assertions of Philosophy, we might have held, that
snow was black, that the sea was but the sweat of the earth, and many of the
like absurdities. Then was Aristotle injurious to fall upon Melissus, and to
reject the assertions of Anaxagoras, Anaximander, and Empedocles, and then were
we also ungrateful unto himself, from whom our Junior endeavors embracing
many things by his authority, our mature and secondary enquiries, are forced to
quit those receptions, and to adhere unto the nearest accounts of reason. And
although it be not unusual, even in Philosophical tractates to make
enumeration of Authors, yet are there reasons usually introduced, and to
ingenuous readers do carry the stroke in the persuasion. And surely if we
account it reasonable among our selves, and not injurious unto rational
Authors, no farther to abet their opinions then as they are supported by solid
reason; certainly with more excusable reservation may we shrink at their bare
testimonies, whose argument is but precarious and subsists upon the charity of
our assentments. In Morality, Rhetoric, Law and History, there is I confess a
frequent and allowable use of testimony, and yet herein I perceive, it is not
unlimitable, but admits many restrictions. Thus in Law both Civil and
Divine, that is only esteemed legitimum testimonium, or a legal testimony,
which receives comprobation from the mouths of at least two witnesses; and that
not only for prevention of calumny, but assurance against mistake, whereas
notwithstanding the solid reason of one man, is as sufficient as the clamor of
a whole Nation; and within imprejudicate apprehensions begets as firm a belief
as the authority or aggregated testimony of many hundreds: For reason being
the very root of our natures, and the principles thereof common unto all, what
is against the laws of true reason, or the undeceived understanding of any
one, if rightly apprehended must be disclaimed by all Nations, and rejected
even by mankind.

Again, a testimony is of small validity if deduced from men out of their own
profession; so if Lactantius affirm the figure of the earth is plain, or
Austin himself deny there are Antipodes; though venerable Fathers of the
Church, and ever to be honored, will their authorities prove sufficient to
ground a belief thereon? whereas notwithstanding the solid reason or confirmed
experience of any man, is very approveable in what profession soever. So
Raymund Sebund, a Physician of Tholouze, besides his learned Dialogues, de
natura humana, has written a natural Theology, demonstrating therein the
Attributes of God, and attempting the like in most points of Religion. So Hugo
Grocius a Civilian, did write an excellent Tract in Dutch of the verity of
Christian Religion, and has since contracted the same into six books in
Latin, wherein most rationally delivering themselves, their works will be
embraced by most that understand them, and their reasons enforce belief even
from prejudicate Readers. Neither indeed have the authorities of men bin ever
so awful, but that by some they have been rejected, even in their own
professions. Thus Aristotle affirming the birth of the Infant or time of its
gestation, extends sometimes unto the eleventh month, but Hippocrates
averring that it exceeds not the tenth. Adrian the Emperor in a solemn
process, determined for Aristotle, but Justinian many years after, took in
with Hippocrates and reversed the Decree of the other. Thus have Councels not
only condemned private men, but the Decrees and Acts of one another. So Galen
after all his veneration of Hippocrates, in some things has fallen from him.
Avicen in many from Galen, and others succeeding from him: and although the
singularity of Paracelsus be intolerable, who sparing only Hippocrates, has
reviled not only the Authors, but almost all the learning that went before
him; yet is it not much less injurious unto knowledge obstinately and
inconvincibly to side with any one: Which humor unhappily possessing many men,
they have by prejudice withdrawn themselves into parties, and contemning the
sovereignty of truth, seditiously abetted the private divisions of error.

Moreover a Testimony in points historical, and where it is of unavoydable
use, is of no illation in the negative, nor is it of consequence that Herodo^us
writing nothing of Rome, there was therefore no such city in his time; or
because Dioscorides has made no mention of Unicornes horn, there is therefore
no such thing in Nature. Indeed intending an accurate enumeration of Medicall
materials, the omission hereof affords some probability; it was not used by the
Ancients, but will not conclude the nonexistence thereof. For so may we
annihilate many simples unknown to his enquiries, as Senna, Rhabarbe, B^zoar,
Ambregris, and diverse others. Whereas indeed the reason of man has no such
restraint, concluding not only affirmatively but negatively, not only
affirming there is no magnitude beyond the last heavens, but also denying there
is any vacuity within them: Although it be confessed the affirmative has the
prerogative illation, and Barbara engrosseth the powerful demonstration.

Lastly, the strange and unimaginable relations made by Authors, may
sufficiently discourage our adherence unto Authority, and which if we believe
we must be apt to swallow any thing. Thus Basil will tell us, the Serpent went
erect like man, and that that beast could speak before the fall. Tostatus
would make us believe that Nilus increases every new Moon. Leonardo
^ioravanti an Italian Physician, beside many other secrets assumeth unto
himself the discovery of one concerning Pellitory of the wall; that is, that
it never grows in the sight of the North star. Dove si possa vedere la stella
Tramontana, wherein how wide he is from truth is easily discoverable unto every
one, who has but Astronomy enough to know that star. Franciscus Sanctius in
a laudable Comment of his upon Alciats Emblems, affirms and that from
experience, a Nightingale has no tongue. Avem Philomelam lingua carere pro
certo affirmare possum, nisi me oculi fallunt. Which if any man for while shall
believe upon his experience, he may at his leisure refute it by his own. What
fool almost would believe, at least, what wise man would rely upon that
Antidote delivered by Pierius in his Hieroglyphics against the sting of a
Scorpion? that is, to sit upon an Ass with ones face toward his tail; for so
the pain, from its sting leaves the man, and passes into the beast. It were
me thinks but an uncomfortable receite for a Quartane Ague, and yet as good
perhaps as many others used, to have recourse unto the remedy of Sammonicus,
that is, to lay the fourth book of Homers Iliads under ones head, according to
the precept of that Physician and Poet, Moeoniae Iliados quartum suppone
trementi, There are surely few that have belief to swallow, or hope enough to
experiment the Collyrium of Albe^tus, which promises a strange effect, and
such as Thieves would count inestimable; that is, to make one see in the dark:
yet thus much, according unto his receipt, will the right eye of an Hedgehog
boiled in oil and preserved in a brazen vessel effect. As strange it is, and
unto vicious inclinations were worth a nights lodging with Lais, what is
delivered in Kiranides, that the left stone of a Weesell, wrapped up in the skin
of a she Mule, is able to secure incontinency from conception.

These with swarms of others have men delivered in their writings, whose
verities are only supported by their Authorities: but being neither consonant
unto reason, nor correspondent unto experiment, their affirmations are unto us
no Axioms, we esteem thereof as things unsaid, and account them but in the
list of nothing. I wish herein the Chymistes had been more sparing, who
overmagnifying their preparations, inveigle the curiosity of many, and delude
the security of most. For if their experiments would answer their encomiums,
the Stone and Quartane Agues, were not opprobrious unto Physicians; And we
might contemn that first, and most uncomfortable Aphorism of Hippocrates; Ars
Longa, Vita Brevis, For surely that Art were soon attained, that has so
general remedies, and life could not be short, were there such to prolong it.

CHAP. VIII.
A brief enumeration of Authors.
NOw for as much as we have discoursed of Authority, and there is scarce any
tradition or popular error but stands also delivered by some good Author; we
shall endeavor a short discovery of such as for the major part have given
authority hereto: who although excellent and useful Authors, yet being either
transcriptive, or following the common relations of things, their accounts are
not to be swallowed at large, or entertained without a prudent circumspection.
In whom the ipse dixit, although it be no powerful argument in any, is yet
less au^hentick then in many other, because they deliver not their own
experiences, but others affirmations, and write from others as we our selves
from them.

1. The first in order as also in time, shall be Herodotus of Halicarnassus, an
excellent and very elegant Historian, whose books of history were so well
received in his own days, that at their rehearsal in the Olympic g^mes,
they obtained the names of the nine Muses, and continued in such esteem unto
descending Ages, that Cicero termed him Historiarum parens. And Dionysius his
Countreyman, in an Epistle to Pompey, after an express comparison, affords him
the better of Thucydides; all which notwithstanding, he has received from
some, the style of Mendaciorum pater; his authority was much infringed by
Plutarch, who being offended with him, as Polybius had bin with Philarcus, for
speaking too coldly of his Countrymen, has left a particular Tract, de
Malignitate Herodot^, But in this latter Century, Cam^rarius and Stephanus have
stepped in, and by their witty Apologies, effectually endeavored to frustrate
the arguments of Plutarch, or any other. Now in this Author, as may be observed
in our ensuing* Discourse, and is better discernable in the perusal of
himself, there are many things fabulously delivered, and not to be accepted as
truths: whereby nevertheless if any man be deceived, the Author is not so
culpable as the believer. For he indeed imitating the father Poet, whose life
he has also written, and as Thucydides observes, as well intending the
delight as benefit of his Reader, has besprinkled his work with many
fabulosities, whereby if any man be led into error, he mistaketh the intention
of the Author, who plainly confesses he writes many things by hearesay, and
forgets a very considerable caution of his, that is, Ego quae fando cognovi,
exponere narratione mea debe^ omnia; credere autem esse vera omnia, non debeo,

2. In the second place is Cresias the Cnidian, Physician unto Artaxerxes King
of Persia, his books are often cited by ancient Writers; and by the industry of
Stephanus and Rodomanus, there are extant some fragments thereof in our days;
he wrote the History of Persia, and many narrations of India. In the first as
having a fair opportunity to know the truth: And as Diodorus affirms the
perusal of Persian records, his testimony is acceptable in his Indiary
relations, wherein are contained strange and incredible accounts, he is surely
to be read with suspension; and these were they which weakened his authority
with former ages, and made him contemptible unto most. For as we may observe,
he is seldom mentioned, without a derogatory parenthesis in any Author;
Aristotle besides the frequent undervaluing of his authority, in his books of
Animals gives him the lie no less then twice, concerning the seed of
Elephants. Strabo in his xi book has left a harder censure of him. Equidem
facil^us Hesi^do and Homero, aliquis ^idem adhibuerit, itemque Tragicis Poetis*
quam Ctesiae Herodoto, Hellanico and eorum similibus, But Lucian has spoken
more plainly then any. Scripsit Ctesias de Indorum regione, deque it is quae ^pud
illos sunt, ea quae nec ipse v^dit, neque ex ull^^s sermon audivit, Yet were
his relations taken up by most succeeding Writers, and many thereof revived by
our Countryman, Sir John Mandevell Knight and Doctor in Physic, who after
thirty years peregrination dyed at Liege, and was there honorably interred. He
left behind him a book of his travells, which has been honored with the
translation of many languages, and has now continued above three hundred
years; herein he often attesteth the fabulous relations of Ctesias, and seems
to confirm the refuted accounts of Antiquity: all which may still be received
in some acceptions of morality, and to a pregnant invention, may afforde
commendable mythologie, but in a natural and proper Exposition, it contains
impossibilities and things inconsistent with truth.

3. There is a Book de mirandis auditionibus, ascribed unto Aristotle, another
de mirabilibus narrationibus, written long after by Antigonus, another also of
the same title by Plegon Trallianus translated by Xilander, and with the
Annotations of Meursius; all whereof make good the promise of their titles and
may be read with caution; which if any man shall likewise observe in the
Lecture of Philostratus, concerning the life of Apolonius, or not only in
ancient Writers, but shall carry a wary eye, on Paulus Venetus, Jovius, Olaus
Magnus, Nierembergius, and many other, I think his circumspection is laudable,
and he may thereby decline occasion of Error.

4. Dioscorides Anazarbeus, he wrote many books in Physic, but six thereof
de Materia Medica, have found the greatest esteem; he is an Author of good
Antiquity, and better use, preferred by Galen before Cratevas, Pamphilus, and
all that attempted the like description before him; yet all he delivers
therein is not to be conceived Oraculous: For beside that, following the wars
under Anthony, the course of his life would not permit a punctual examen in
all; There are many things concerning the nature of simples, traditionally
delivered, and to which I believe he gave no assent himself. It had been an
excellent receipt, and in his time when Sadles were scarce in fashion of very
great use, if that were true, which he delivers, that Vitex, or Agnus Castus
held only in the hand, preserves the rider from galling. It were a strange
effect, and whores would forsake the expe^iment of Savine. If that were a truth
which he delivers of Brake or femall fearne, that only treading over it, it
causes a sudden abortion. It were to be wished true, and women would Idolize
him, could that be made out which he records of Phyllon, Mercury, and other
vegetables, that the juice of the masle plant drunk, or the leaves but applied
unto the genitalls, determines their conceptions unto males. In these relations
although he be more sparing, his predecessors were very numerous; and Gallen
hereof most sharply accuses Pamphilus: many of the like nature we meet
sometimes in Oribasius, Acius, Trallianus, Serapion, Evax, and Marcellus,
whereof some containing no color of verity, we may at first sight reject them,
others which seem to carry some face of truth, we may reduce unto experiment.
And herein we shall rather peforme good offices unto truth, then any disservice
unto their relators, who have well deserved of succeeding ages, from whom
having received the conceptions of former times, we have the readier hint of
their conformity with ours, and may accordingly explore their verities.

5. Plinius Secundus of Verona, a man of great eloquence, and industry
indefatigable, as may appear by the number of the writings, especially those
now extant, and which are never like to perish, but even with learning it
self, that is, his natural History comprised in 36. books; he was the
greatest Collector or Rhapsodist of all the Latins, and as Suetonius de viris
Illustribus observes, he collected this piece out of 2000. Latin and Greek
Authors. Now what is very strange, there is scarce a popular error passant in
our days, which is not either directly expressed, or diductively contained in
this work, which being in the hands of most men, has proved a powerful
occasion of their propogation; wherein notwithstanding the credulity of the
Reader, is more condemnable then the curiosity of the Author. For commonly he
names the Authors, from whom he received those accounts, and writes himself
by hear say, as in his Preface unto Vespasian he acknowledges.

6. Claudius Aelianus, who flourished not long after in the reign of Trajan,
unto whom he dedicated his Tacticks, an elegant and miscellaneous Author, he
has left two books which are in the hands of every one, his History of
Animals, and his Varia historia, wherein are contained many things supicious,
not a few false, some impossible; he is much beholding unto Ctesias, and in
many subjects writes more confidently then Pliny.

7. Julius Solinus, who lived also about his time: He left a work entitled
Polyhistor, containing great variety of matter, and is with most in good
request at this day: but to speak freely what cannot be concealed, it is but
Pliny varied, or a transcription of his natural history; nor is it without
all wonder it has continued so long, but is now likely, and deserves indeed to
live for ever; not so much for the elegancy of the text, as the excellency of
the comment, lately performed by Salmasius, under the name of Plinian
exercitations.

8. Athenaeus a d^lectable Author, and very various, and as Causabone in his
Epistle styles him Gr^corum Plinius: There is extant of his, a famous piece
under the name of Deipnosophista, or coena sapientum, containing the discourse
of many learned men, at a feast provided by Laurentius. It is a laborious
collection out of many Authors, and some whereof are mentioned no where ^lse.
It contains strange and singular relations, not without some spice or
sprinckling of all learning. The Author was probably a better Gramarian then
Philosopher, dealing but hardly with Aristotle and Plato, and betrayeth
himself much in his Chapter de curiositate Aristotelis, In brief, he is an
Author of excellent use, and may with discretion, be read unto great advantage:
and has therefore well deserved, the Comments of Causabon and Dalecampius: but
being miscellaneous in many things, he is to be received with suspicion; for
such as amasse all relations, must err in some, and may without offense be
unbeleeved in many.

9. We will not omit the works of Nicander, a Poet of good Antiquity, that
is, his Theriaca, and Alexipharmaca, translated and commented by Gorraeus: for
therein are contained several traditions, and popular conceits, of venemons
beasts, which only deducted, the work is ever to be embraced, as containing
the first description of poisons, and their Antidotes, whereof Dioscorides,
Pliny, and Galen, have made especial use in elder times; and Ardoynus,
Grevinus and others, in times more near our own. We might perhaps let pass
Oppianus, that famous Cilician Poet. There are extant of his in Greek, four
books of Cynegeticks or venation, five of Halieuticks or piscation, commented
and published by Ritterhusius, wherein describing beasts of venerie, and
fishes, he has indeed but sparinlgly inserted the vulgar conceptions thereof:
so that abating only the annual mutation of Sexes in the Hyaena, the single
Sex of the Rhinoceros, the antipathy between two drums, of a Lamb and a
Wolfes skin, the informity of Cubbes, the venation of Centaures, the
copulation of the Murena and the Viper, with some few others, he may be read
with great delight and profit. It is not without some wonder, his elegant lines
are so neglected. Surely hereby we reject one of the best Epick Poets, and
much condemn the judgment of Antoninus, whose apprehensions so honored his
Poems, that as some report, for every verse, he assigned him a Stater of gold.

10. More warily are we to receive the relations of Philes, who in Gr^cke
Iambicks delivered the proprieties of Animals, for herein he has amassed the
vulgar accounts recorded by the Ancients, and has therein especially followed
Aelian, and likewise Johannes Tzetzes, a Gramarian, who besides a Comment upon
Hesiod and Homer, has left us Chiliads de varia Historia, wherein delivering
the accounts of C^esias, Herodotus, and most of the Ancients, he is to be
embraced with caution, and as a transcriptive relator.

11. We cannot without partiality omit all caution even of holy Writers, and
such whose names are venerable unto all posterity, not to meddle at all with
miraculous Authors, or any Legendary relators: We are not without
circumspection to receive some books even of Authentic and renowned Fathers.
So are we to read the leaves of Basil and Ambrose in their books, entitled
Hexameron, or The description of the Creation; Wherein delivering particular
accounts of all the Creatures, they have left us relations suitable to those of
Aelian, Pliny and other natural Writers; whose authorities herein they
followed, and from whom most probably, they desumed their Narrations. And the
like has been committed by Epiphanius, in his Phisiologie, that is, a book he
has left concerning the nature of Animals. With no less caution must we look
on Isidor, Bishop of Sevill, who having left in 25. books, an accurate work
de originihus, has to the Etymology of words, superadded their received
natures; wherein most generally he consents with common opinions and Authors
which have delivered them.

12. Albertus Bishop of Ratisbone, for his great learning and latitude of
knowledge firnamed Magnus, besides divinity, he has written many Tracts in
Philosophy; what we are chiefly to receive with caution, are his natural
Tractates, more especially those of Mineralls, Vegetables, and Animals, which
are indeed chiefly Collections out of Aristotle, Aelian, and Pliny, and
respectively contain many of our popular errors. A man who has much advanced
these opinions by the authority of his name, and delivered most conceits, with
strickt inquiry into few. In the same classis, may well be placed Vincentius
Belluacensis, or rather he from whom he collected his Speculum natural, that
is, Gulielmus de Conchis, as also Hortus Sanitatis, and Bartholomeus Glanvill,
firnamed Anglicus, who writ de Proprietatibus rerum, Hither also may be
referred Kiranides, which is a collection of Harpocration the Greek, and sundry
Arabic writers; delivering not only the Natural but Magical propriety of
things, a work as full of vanitie^ as variety, containing many relations,
whose invention is as difficult as their beliefes, and their experiments
sometime as hard as either.

13. We had almost forgot Ieronymus Cardanus that famous Physician of Milan a
great enquirer of truth, but too greedy a receiver of it, he has left many
excellent discourses, Medicall, Natural, and Astrologicall; the most
suspicious are those two he wrote by admonition in a dream, that is, de
subtilitate and varietate rerum, Assuredly this learned man has taken many
things upon trust, and although examined some, has let slip many others. He is
of singular use unto a prudent Reader, but unto him that desires Hoties, or to
replenish his head with varieties, like many others before related, either in
the original or confirmation, he may become no small occasion of error.

14. Lastly, those Authors are also suspicious, nor greedily to be swallowed,
who pretend to write of secrets, to deliver Antipathies, Sympathies, and the
occult abstrucities of things, in the list whereof may be accounted, Alexis
Pedimont: Antonius Mizaldus, Trinum Magicum, and many others; not omitting that
famous Philosopher of Naples, Baptista Porta, in whose works, although there
be contained many excellent things, and verified upon his own experience; yet
are there many also receptary, and such as will not endure the test: who
although he have delivered many strange relations in other pieces, as his
Phylognomy, and his Villa; yet has he more remarkeably expressed himself in
his Natural Magic, and the miraculous effects of Nature: which containing a
various and delectable subject, with all promising wondrous and easy effects,
they are etertained by Readers at all hands, whereof the major part sit down
in his authority, and thereby omit not only the certainty of truth, but the
pleasure of its experiment.

And thus have we made a brief enumeration of these learned men, not willing
any to decline their Works, (without which it is not easy to attain any
measure of general knowledge) but to apply themselves with caution thereunto.
And seeing the lapses of these worthy pens, we are to cast a wary eye on those
diminutive, and pamphlet Treaties daily published amongst us, pieces
maintaining rather Typography then verity. Authors presumably writing by common
places, wherein for many years promiscuously amassing all that makes for their
subject, they break forth at last in trite and fruitless Rhapsodies, doing
thereby not only open injury unto learning, but committing a secret treachery
upon truth. For their relations falling generally upon credulous Readers, they
meet with prepared beliefes, whose supinities had rather assent unto all, then
adventure the trial of any.

Thus, I say, must these Authors be read, and thus must we be read our selves,
for discoursing of matters dubious, and many controvertible truths, we cannot
without arrogance entreat a credulity, or implore any farther assent, then the
probability of our reasons, and verity of experiments induce.

CHAP. IX.
Of the same.
THere are beside these Authors and such as have positively promoted errors,
diverse other which are in some way accessory, whose verities although they do
not directly assert, yet do they obliquely concur unto their beliefes. In
which account are many holy Writers, Preachers, Moralists, Rhetoricians,
Orators and Poets; for they depending upon invention deduce their mediums from
all things whatsoever, and playing much upon the smile, or illustrative
argumentation, induce their Enthymemes unto the people, they take up popular
conceits, and from traditions unjustifiable or really false, illustrate
matters, though not of consequence, yet undeniable truths. Wherein although
their intention be sincere, and that course not much condemnable, yet are the
effects thereof unwarrantable, in as much as they strengthen common errors, and
confirm as veritable those conceits, which verity cannot allow.

Thus have some Divines drawn into argument the fable of the Phaenix, made use
of that of the Salamander, Pelican, Basilisk, and diverse relations of Pliny,
deducing from thence most worthy morals, and even upon our Savior. Now
although this be not prejudicial unto wiser judgments, who are indeed but
weakly moved with such kind of argument, yet is it oftentimes occasion of error
unto vulgar heads, who expect in the fable as equal a truth as in the mo^^ll,
and conceive that infallible Philosophy, which is in any sense delivered by
Divinity. But wiser discerners do well understand, that every Art has its own
circle, that the effects of things are best examined, by sciences wherein are
delivered their causes, that strict and definitive expressions, are always
required in Philosophy, but a loose and popular delivery will serve oftentimes
in Divinity; as may be observed even in holy Scripture, which often omitteth
the exact account of things, describing them rather to our apprehensions, then
leaving doubts in vulgar minds, upon their unknown and Philosophical
descriptions. Thus it terms the Sun and the Moon, the two great lights of
heaven. Now if any man shall from hence conclude, the Moon is second in
magnitude unto the Sun, he must excuse my belief; and I think it cannot be
taken for heresy, if I herein rather adhere unto the demonstration of Ptolomy,
then the popular description of Moses. Thus is it said, Chron. 2. 4. That
Solomon made a molten sea often cubits, from bim to brim round in compass, and
five cubits the height thereof, and a line of thirty cubits did compass it
round about. Now in this description, the circumference is made just treble
unto the diameter, that is, 10. to 30. or 7. to 21. But Archimedes demonstrates
in his Cyclometro that the proportion of the diameter, unto the circumference,
is as 7 unto almost 22, which will occasion a sensible difference that is
almost a cubit. Now if herein I adhere unto Archimedes who speaks exactly
rather then the sacred Text which speaks largely, I hope I shall not offend
Divinity. I am sure I shall have reason and experience of every circle to
support me.

Thus Moral Writers, Rhetoricians and Orators make use of several relations
which will not consist with verity. Aristotle in his Ethics takes up the
conceit of the Bever, and the divulsion of his Testicles. The tradition of the
Bear, the Viper, and diverse others are frequent amongst Orators. All which
although unto the illiterate, and undiscerning hearers may seem a confirmation
of their reallities; yet is this no reasonable establishment unto others, who
will not depend hereon otherwise then common Apologues, which being of
impossible falsities do notwithstanding include wholesome moralities, and such
as do expiate the trespass of their absurdities.

The Hieroglyphicall doctrine of the Egyptians (which in their four hundred
years cohabitation, some conjecture they learned from the Hebrews) has much
advanced many popular conceits, for using an Alphabet of things, and not of
words, through the Image and pictures thereof, they endeavored to speak their
hidden conceits, in the letters and language of nature; in pursuit whereof,
although in many things, they exceeded not their true, and real apprehensions,
yet in some other they either framing the story, or taking up the tradition,
conduceable unto their intentions, obliquely confirmed many falsities, which as
authentic and conceded truths did after pass unto the Greeks, from them unto
other Nations, are still retained by symbolicall writers, Emblematistes,
Heraldes and others, whereof some are strictly maintained for truths, as
naturally making good their artificial representations; others symbolically
intended are literally received, and swallowed in the first sense, without all
gust of the second. Famous in this doctrine in former ages were Heraiscus,
Cheremon, and Epius, especially Orus, Apollo, Niliacus, who lived in the reign
of Theodosius and in Egyptian language left two books of Hieroglyphics,
translated into Greek by Philippus, in Latin published by Hoschelius, and a
full collection of all made lately by Pierius.

Painters who are the visible representers of things, and such as by the
learned sense of the eye endeavor to inform the understanding, are not
inculpable herein, who either describing naturalls as they are, or actions as
they have been, have oftentimes erred in their delineations, which being the
books that all can read, are fruitful advancers of these conceptions,
especially in common and popular appr^hensions, who being unable for farther
enquiry must rest in the text, and letter of their descriptions.

Lastly, Poets and Poetical Writers have in this point exceeded others,
leaving unto us the notions of Harpes, Centaurs, Gryphins, and diverse others.
Now how ever to make use of fictions, Apologues and fables be not
unwarrantable, and the intent of these inventions might point at laudable ends:
Yet do they afford to our junior capacities a frequent occasion of error,
settling impressions in our tender memories, which our advanced judgments, do
generally neglect to expunge. This way the vain and idle fictions of the
Gentiles, did first insinuate into the heads of Christians, and thus are they
continued even unto our days: Our first and literary apprehensions being
commonly instructed in Authors which handle nothing else; wherewith our
memories being stuffed, our inventions become Pedantick, and cannot avoid their
allusions, driving at these as at the highest elegancies, which are but the
frigidities of wit, and become not the genius of our more manly ingenuities. It
were therefore no loss like that of Galens study; if these had found the same
fate, and would in some way requite the neglect of solid Authors, if they were
less pursued. For surely were a pregnant wit educated in ignorance hereof,
receiving only impressions from realities, from such solid foundations, it must
needs raise more substantial superstructions, and fall upon very many
excellent straynes, which have been jusled off by their intrusions.

CHAP. X.
Of the last and common promoter of false Opinions, the endeavors of Satan.
BUt beside the infirmities of humane nature, the seed of error within our
selves, and the several ways of delusion from each other, there is an
invisible Agent, and secret promoter without us, whose activity is undiscerned,
and plays in the dark upon us, and that is the first contriver of Error, and
professed opposer of Truth, the Devil. For though permitted unto his proper
principles, Adam perhaps would have sinned, without the suggestion of Satan,
and from the transgressive infirmities of himself might have erred alone, as
well as the Angels before him. And although also there were no devil at all,
yet is there now in our natures a confessed sufficiency unto corruption; and
the frailty of our own O^conomie, were able to betray us out of truth; yet
wants there not another Agent, who taking advantage hereof, proceeds to
obscure the diviner part, and essace all tract of its traduction, to attempt a
particular of all his wiles, is too bold an Arithmetic for man, what most
considerably concerns his popular, and practiced ways of delusion, he first
deceives mankind infive maine points concerning God and himself.

And first his endeavors have ever been, and they cease not yet to instill a
belief in the mind of man, There is no God at all; and this he specially
labors to establish in a direct and literal apprehension, that is, that there
is no such reallity existent, that the necessity of his entity depends upon
ours, and is but a political Chymera; That the natural truth of God is an
artificial erection of man, and the Creator himself but a subtle invention
of the creature. Where he succeeds not thus high, he labors to introduce a
secendary and deductive Atheism, that although they concede there is a God,
yet should they deny his providence, and therefore assertions have flown about,
that he intends only the care of the species or common natures, but lets
loose the guard of individualls, and single essences therein: That he looks
not below the Moon, but has designed the regiment of sublunary affairs unto
inferior deputations; to promote which apprehensions or empuzzell their due
conceptions, he casts in the notions of fate, destiny, fortune, chance and
necessity; terms commonly misconceived by vulgar heads, and their propriety
sometime perverted by the wisest. Whereby extinguishing in minds the
compensation of virtue and vice, the hope and fear of heaven or hell, they
comply in their actions unto the drift of his delusions, and live like
creatures below the capacity of either.

Now hereby he not only undermineth the Base of religion, and destroys the
principle preambulous unto all belief, but puts upon us the remotest error
from truth. For Atheism is the greatest falsity, and to affirm there is no
God the highest lie in Nature: and therefore strictly taken, some men will say
his labor is in vain; For many there are, who cannot concive there was ever
any absolute Atheist, or such as could determine there was no God, without all
check from himself, or contradiction from his own opinions; and therefore
those few so called by elder times, might be the best of Pagans, suffering that
name rather, in relation to the gods of the Gentiles, then the true Creator of
all. A conceit that cannot befall his greatest enemy, or him that would induce
the same in us, who has a sensible apprehension hereof, for he believes with
trembling. To speak yet more strictly and conformably unto some opinions, no
creature can wish thus much, nor can the will which has a power to run into
velleities, and wishes of impossibilities, have any utinam of this. For to
desire there were no God, were plainly to unwish their own being, which must
needs be anihilated in the substraction of that essence, which substantially
supporteth them, and restraines them from regression into nothing. And if as
some contend, no creature can desire his own anihilation, that nothing is not
appetible, and not to be at all, is worse then to be in the miserable
condition of something; the devil him self could not embrace that motion, nor
would the enemy of God be freed by such a Redemption.

But coldly thriving in this design, as being repulsed by the principles of
humanity, and the Dictates of that production, which cannot deny its original,
he fetches a wider cirle, and when he cannot make men conceive there is no God
at all, he endeavors to make them believe, there is not one but many; wherein
he has been so successful with common heads, that he has lead their
belief through all the works of Nature.

Now in this latter attempt, the subtilty of his circumvension, has indirectly
obtained the former. For although to opinion there be many gods, may seem an
excess in Religon, and such as cannot at all consist with Atheism, yet does
it diductively and upon inference include the same: for unity is the
inseparable and essential attribute of Deity; And if there be more then one
God, it is no Atheism to say there is no God at all. And herein though
Socrates only suffered, yet were Plato and Aristotle guilty of the same truth,
who demonstratively understanding the simplicity of perfection, and the
indivisible condition of the first causator, it was not in the power of earth,
or Areopagy of hell to work them from it. Areopagus the severe Court of Athens,
For holding an Apodicticall knowledge, and assured science of its verity, to
persuade their apprehensions unto a plurality of gods in the world, were to
make Euclide believe there were more then one Center in a Circle, or one right
Angle in a Triangle; which were indeed a fruitless attempt, and infers
absurdities beyond the evasion of hell. For though Mechanicke and vulgar heads
ascend not unto such comprehensions, who live not commonly unto half the
advantage of their principles, yet did they not escape the eye of wiser
Mine^vacs, and such as made good the genealogy of Jupiters brains, who
although they had diverse styles for God, yet under many appellations
acknowledged one divinity: rather conceiving thereby the evidence or acts of
his power in several ways and places, then a multiplication of Essence, or
real distraction of unity in any one.

Again, to render our errors more monstrous, (and what unto miracle sets forth
the patience of God) he has endeavored to make the world believe, that he was
God himself, and failing of his first attempt to be but like the highest in
heaven, he has obtained with men to be the same on earth, and has accordingly
assumed the annexes of divinity, and the prerogatives of the Creator, drawing
into practice the operation of miracles, and the prescience of things to come.
Thus has he in a specious way wrought cures upon the sick: played over the
wondrous acts of Prophets, and counterfeited many miracles of Christ and his
Apostles. Thus has he openly contended with God; And to this effect his
insolency was not ashamed to play a solemn prize with Moses, wherein although
his performance was very specious, and beyond the common apprehension of any
power below a Dietie, yet was it not such as could make good his Omnipotency.
For he was wholly confounded in the conversion of dust into lice. An act
Philosophy can scarce deny to be above the power of Nature, nor upon a
requ^site pred^sposi^ion beyond the efficacy of the Sun. Wherein
notwithstanding the head of the old Serpent was confessedly too weak for Moses
hand and the a^m of his Magicians too short for the finger of God.

Thus has he also made men believe that he can raise the dead, that he has
the key of life and death, and a prerogative above that p^inciple which makes
no regression from privations. The Stoics that opinioned the souls of wise
men, dwelt about the Moon, and those of fools wandered about the earth,
advantaged the conceit of this effect, wherein the Epicureans, who held that
death was nothing, nor nothing after death, must contradict their principles to
be deceived. Nor could the Pythagorian or such as maintained the transmigration
of souls give easy admittance hereto: for holding that separated soule^,
successively supplied other bodies, they could hardly allow the raising of
souls from other worlds, which at the same time, they conc^ived conjoined unto
bodies in this. More inconsistent with these opinions, is the error of
Christians, who holding the dead do rest in the Lord, do yet believe they are
at the lure of the devil; that he who is in bonds himself commands the
fetters of the dead, and dwelling in the bottomless lake, the blessed from
Abraham's bosom. That can believe the resurrection of Samuel, or that there is
any thing but delusion, in the practice of N^cromancy and popular conception of
Ghosts.

He has moreover endeavored the opinion of Deity, by the delusion of
Dreams, and the discovery of things to come, in sleep above the prescience of
our waked senses. In this expectation he persuaded the credulity of elder times
to take up their lodging before his temple, in skins of their own
sacrifices, till his reservednesse had contrived answers, whose accomplishments
were in his power, or not beyond his presagement. Which way although it has
pleased Almighty God, sometimes to reveal himself, yet was their proceeding
very different. For the revelations of heaven are conveied by new impressions,
and the immediate illumination of the soul; whereas the d^ceaving spirit, by
concitation of humors, produces his conceited phantasmes, or by compounding
the species already residing, does make up words which mentally speak his
intentions.

But above all other he most advanced his Deity in the solemn practice of
Oracles, wherein in several parts of the world, he publicly professed his
divinity; but how short they slew, of that spirit, whose omniscience they would
resemble, their weakness sufficiently declared. What juggling there was
therein, the Orator plainly confessed, who being good at the same game
himself, could say that Pythia Phillippised: who can but laugh at the carriage
of Ammon unto Alexander, who addressing unto him as God, was made to believe,
he was a god himself? How openly did he betray his Indivinity unto Craesus,
who being ruined by his Amphibologie, and expostulating with him for so
ungrateful a dec^it, received no higher answer, then the excuse of his
impotency upon the contradiction of fate, and the settled law of powers beyond
his power to control what more then sublunary directions, or such as might
proceed from the oracle of humane reason, was in his advice unto the Spartans
in the time of a great plague; when for the cessation thereof, he wished them to
have recourse unto a Fawn, that is in open terms unto one Nebrus, Nebros in
Greek, a Fawn.
a good Physician of those days. From no diviner a spirit came his reply unto
Caracalla, who requiring a remedy for his gout, received no other counsel then
to refrain cold drink, which was but a dieteticall caution, and such as
without a journey unto A^sculapius cul^nary prescription and kitchen
Aphorisms, might have afforded at home. Nor surely if any truth there were
therein of more then natural activity was his counsel unto Democritus, when
for the falling sickness he commended the Maggot in a Goats head; for many
things secret are very true, sympathyes and antipathyes are safely authenticke
unto us, who ignorant of their causes may yet acknowledge their effects. Beside
being a natural Magician he may perform many acts in ways above our
knowledge, though not transcending our natural power, when our knowledge shall
direct it; part hereof has been discovered by himself, and some by humane
indagation which though magnified as fresh inventions unto us, are stale unto
his cognition: I hardly believe, he has from elder times unknown the
verticity of the loadstone; surely his perspicacity discerned it to respect the
North, when ours beheld it indeterminately. Many secrets there are in nature of
difficult discovery unto man, of natural knowledge unto Satan, whereof some
his vainglory cannot conceal, others his envy will never discover.

Again, such is the mystery of his delusion, that although he labor to make
us believe that he is God, and supremest nature whatsoever, yet would he also
persuade our beleefes that he is less then Angels or men, and his condition
not only subjected unto rational powers, but the action of things which have
no efficacy on our selves; thus has he inveigled no small part of the world
into a credulity of artificial Magic. That there is an Art, which without
compact commande^h the powers of hell, whence some have delivered the policy of
spirits, and left an account even to their Provincial dominions, that they
stand in awe of charms, spells and conjurations, that he is afraid of letters
and characters of notes and dashes, which set together do signify nothing;
and not only in the dictionary of man, but the subtiler vocabulary of Satan.
That there is any power in Bitumen, pitch or brimstone, to purify the air
from his uncleanness, that any virtue there is in Hipericon to make good the
name of fuga Demonis, any such magic as is ascribed unto the root Baaras by
Josephus or Cynospastus by Aelianus, it is not easy to believe, nor is it
naturally made out what is delivered of Tobias, that by the fume of a fishes
liver, he put to flight Asmodeus. That they are afraid of the pentangle of
Solomon, though so set forth with the body of man, as to touch and point out
the five places wherein our Savior was wounded. I know not how to assent if
perhaps he has fled from holy water, if he cares not to hear the sound of
Tetragrammaton, if his eye delight not in the sign of the Cross, and that
sometimes he will seem to be charmed with words of holy Scripture, and to fly
from the letter and dead verbality, who must only start at the life and
animated interiors thereof. It may be feared they are but Parthian flights,
Ambuscado retreats, and elusory tergiversations, whereby to confirm our
credulities, he will comply with the opinion of such powers which in themselves
have no activities, whereof having once begot in our minds an assured
dependence, he makes us rely on powers which he but precariously obeyes, and
to desert those true and only charms which hell cannot withstand.

Lastly, to lead us farther into darkness, and quite to lose us in this maze
of error, he would make men believe there is no such creature as himself, and
that he is not only subject unto inferior creatures but in the rank of
nothing: Insinuating into men's minds there is no devil at all and contriveth
accordingly, many ways to conceal or indubitate his existency: wherein beside
that he anihilates the blessed Angels and spirits in the rank of his
creation, he begets a security of himself and a careless eye unto the last
remunerations. And therefore hereto he inveigleth, not only the Sadduces and
such as retain unto the Church of God, but is also content that Epicurus
Democritus or any of the heathen should hold the same. And to this effect he
makes men believe that apparitions, and such as confirm his existence are
either deceptions of sight, or melancholy depravements of fancy: Thus when he
had not only appeared but spoke unto Brutus, Cassius, the Epicurian was ready
at hand to persuade him it was but a mistake in his weary imagination, and that
indeed there were no such realities in nature. Thus he endeavors to propagate
the unbelief of witches, whose concession infers his coexistency, and by this
means also he advances the opinion of total death, and staggereth the
immortality of the soul: for those which deny there are spirits subsistent
without bodies, will with more difficulty affirm the separated existence of
their own.

Now to induce and bring about these falsities he has labored to destroy the
evidence of truth, that is the revealed verity and written word of God. To
which intent he has obtained with some to repudiate the books of Moses, others
those of the Prophets, and some both to deny the Gospel and authentic
histories of Christ, to reject that of John, and receive that of Judas, to
disallow all and erect another of Thomas. And when neither their corruption by
Valentinus and Arrian, their mutilation by Marcion, Manes and Ebion could
satisfy his design, he attempted the ruin and total destruction thereof, as
he sedulously endeavored, by the power and subtilty of Julian, Maximinus and
Dioclesian.

But the longevity of that piece, which has so long escaped the common fate,
and the providence of that Spirit which ever waketh over it, may at last
discourage such attempts; and if not, make doubtful its mortality, at least
indubitably declare, this is a stone too big for Saturnes mouth, and a bit
indeed Oblivion cannot swallow.

And thus how strangely he possesses us with errors may clearly be observed,
deluding us into contradictory and inconsistent falsities, whilst he would
make us believe: That there is no God. That there are many. That he himself is
God. That he is less then Angels or Men. That he is nothing at all. Nor has
he only by these wiles depraved the conception of the Creator, but with such
riddles has also entangled the Nature of our Redeemer. Some denying his
humanity, and that he was one of the Angels, as Ebion; that the Father and
Son were but one person, as Sabellius. That his body was fantastical, as
Manes, Basilides, Priscillian, Jovinianus; that he only passed through Mary,
as Eutichus and Valentinus. Some deny his Divinity, that he was begotten of
human^ principles, and the seminall son of Joseph, as Carpocras, Symmachus,
Photinus. That he was Seth the son of Abraham, as the Sethians. That he was
less then Angels, as Cherinthus. That he was inferior unto Melchisedech, as
Theodotus. That he was not God, but God dwelt in him, as Nicolaus. And some
embroyled them both. So did they which converted the Trinity into a quaternity,
and affirmed two persons in Christ, as Paulus Samosatenus; that held he was man
without a soul, and that the word performed that office in him, as Apollinaris.
That he was both Son and Father, as Montanus. That Jesus suffered, but Christ
remained impatible, as Cherinthus. And thus he endeavors to entangle truths:
And when he cannot possibly destroy its substance he cunningly confounds its
apprehensions, that from the inconsistent and contrary determinations thereof,
collective impieties, and hopeful conclusion may arise, there is no such thing
at all.

CHAP. XI.
A further Illustration.
NOw although these ways of delusions, most Christians have escaped, yet are
there many other whereunto we are daily betrayed* and these we meet with in
visible and obvious occurrents of the world, wherein he induces us, to ascribe
effects unto causes of no cognation, and distorting the order and theorie of
causes perpendicular to their effects, he draws them aside unto things whereto
they run parallel, and in their proper motions would never meet together.

Thus does he sometime delude us in the conceits of Stars and Meteors, beside
their allowable actions ascribing effects thereunto of independent causations.
Thus has he also made the ignorant sort believe that natural effects
immediately and commonly proceed from supernatural powers, and these he usually
derives from heaven; and his own principality the air, and meteors therein,
which being of themselves, the effects of natural and created causes, and such
as upon a due conjunction of actives and passives, without a miracle must arise
unto what they appear, are always looked on by the ignorant spectators as
supernatural spectacles, and made the causes or signs of most succeeding
contingencies. To behold a Rainbow in the night, is no prodigy unto a
Philosopher. Then eclipses of Sun or Moon, nothing is more natural. Yet with
what superstition they have been beheld since the Tragedy of Niceas, and his
Army, many examples declare.

True it is, and we will not deny it, that although these being natural
productions from second and settled causes, we need not always look upon them as
the immediate hands of God, or of his ministering Spirits, yet do they
sometimes admit a respect therein, and even in their naturalls, the
indifferency of their existences contemporised unto our actions, admits a
farther consideration.

That two or three Suns or Moons appear in any man's life or reign, it is not
worth the wonder, but that the same should fall out at a remarkable time, or
point of some decisive action, that the contingencie of its appearance should
be confined unto that time. That those two should make but one line in the
book of fa^e, and stand together in the great Ephemerides of God, beside the
Philosophical assignment of the cause, it may admit a Christian apprehension in
the signality.

But above all he deceives us when we ascribe the effects of things unto
evident and seeming causalities which arise from the secret and undiscerned
action of himself. Thus has he deluded many Nations in his Auguriall and
Extispicious inventions, from casual and uncontrived contingences divining
events succeeding. Which Fuscan superstition first ceasing upon Rome has since
possessed all Europe. When Augustus found two galls in his sacrifice, the
credulity of the City concluded a hope of peace with Anthony, and the
conjunctions of persons in choler with each other. Because Brutus and Cassius
met a Blackmore, and Pompey had on a dark or sad colored garment at
Pharsalia; these were presages of their overthrow, which notwithstanding are
scarce Rhetorical sequells, concluding metaphors from realities, and from
conceptions metaphorical inferring realities again.

Now these divinations concerning events being in his power, to force,
contrive, prevent or further, they must generally fall out conformably unto his
predictions. When Graceus was slain, the same day the Chickens refused to come
out of the coope. And Claudius Pulcher underwent the like success, when he
contemned the Tripudiary Augurations. They dyed not because the Pullets would
not feed, but because the devil foresaw their death, he contrived that
abstinence in them. So was there no natural dependence of the event upon the
sign, but an artificall contrivance of the sign unto the event. An unexpected
way of delusion, and whereby he more easily led away the incercumspection of
their belief. Which fallacy he might excellently have acted, before the death
of Saul, which being in his power to foretell, was not beyond his ability to
foreshew, and might have contrived signs thereof through all the creatures,
which visibly confirmed by the event, had proved authentic unto those times,
and advanced the Art ever after.

He deludeth us also by Philters, Ligatures, Charms, ungrounded Amulets,
Characters, and many superstitious ways in the cure of common diseases,
seconding herein the expectation of men with events of his own contriving:
which while some unwilling to fall directly upon Magic, impute unto the power
of imagination, or the ^fficacy of hidden causes, he obtaines a bloody
advantage; for thereby he begets not only a false opinion, but such as leads
the open way of destruction; In maladies admitting natural reliefes, making
men rely on remedies, neither of real operation in themselves, nor more then
seeming efficacy in his concurrence, which whenever he pleases to withdraw,
they stand naked unto the mischief of their diseases, and revenge the contempt
of the medicines of the earth which God has created for them. And therefore
when neither miracle is expected, nor connection of cause unto effect from
natural grounds concluded; however it be sometime successful* it cannot be
safe to rely on such practices, and desert the known and authentic provisions
of God. In which rank of remedies, if nothing in our knowledge or their proper
power be able to relieve us, we must with patience submit unto that restraint,
and expect the will of the Restrainer.

Now in these effects although he seem often times to imitate, yet does he
concur unto their productions in a different way from that spirit which
sometime in natural means produces effects above Nature; For whether he
works by causes which have relation or none unto the effect, he makes it out
by secret and undiscerned ways of Nature. So when Caius the blind, in the
reign of Antonius, was commanded to pass from the right side of the Altar
unto the left, to lay five fingers of one hand thereon, and ^ive of the other
upon his eyes, although the cure succeeded and all the people wondered, there
was not any thing in the action which did produce it, nor any thing in his
power that could enable it thereunto. So for the same infirmity, when Aper was
counseled by him to make a collyrium or ocular medicine with the blood of a
white Cock, and honey, and apply it to his eyes for three days. When Julian
for his haemoptysis or spitting of blood, was cured by honey and pine Nuts taken
from his Altar. When Lucius for the pain in his side, applied thereto the
ashes from his Altar with wine, although the remedies were somewhat rational,
and not without a natural virtue unto such intentions, can we believe that by
their proper faculties they produced these effects?

But the effects of powers Divine flow from another operation, who either
proceeding by visible means, or not unto visible effects, is able to conjoyne
them by his cooperation. And therefore those sensible ways which seem of
indifferent natures, are not idle ceremonies, but may be causes by his command,
and arise unto productions beyond their regular activities. If Nahaman the
Syrian had washed in Jordan without the command of the Prophet, I believe he
had been cleansed by them no more then by the waters of Damascus. I doubt if
any beside Elisha had cast in salt, the waters of Jericho had not bin made
wholesome thereby. I know that a decoction of wild gourd or Colocynthis,
though somewhat qualified, will not from every hand be dulcified unto aliment
by an addition of flower or meal. There was some natural virtue in the
plaster of figs applied unto Ezechias; we find that gall is very
mundificative, and was a proper medicine to clear the eyes of Tobit; which
carrying in themselves some action of their own, they were additionally
promoted by that power which can extend their natures unto the production of
effects beyond their created efficiencies. And thus may he operate also from
causes of no power unto their visible effects; for he that has determined
their actions unto certain effects, has not so emptied his own but that he
can make them effectual unto any other.

Again, although his delusions run highest in points of practice, whose errors
draw on offensive or penal enormities, yet does he also deal in points of
speculation, and things whose knowledge terminates in themselves, whose
cognition although it seems independent, and therefore its aberration directly
to condemn no man; Yet does he hereby preparatively dispose us unto errors,
and deductively deject us into destructive conclusions.

That the Sun, Moon and Stars are living creatures, endued with soul and
life, seems an innocent error, and a harmless digression from truth; yet
hereby he confirmed their Idolatry, and made it more plausibly embraced. For
wisely mistrusting that reasonable spirits would never firmly be lost in the
adorement of things inanimate, and in the lowest form of Nature, he begat an
opinion that they were living creatures, and could not decay for ever.

That spirits are corporeal, seems at first view a conceit derogative unto
himself, and such as he should rather labor to overthrow; yet hereby he
establishes the doctrine of Lustrations, Amulets and Charms, as we have
declared before.

That there are two principles of all things, one good, and another evil; from
the one proceeding virtue, love, light, and unity; from the other division,
discord, da^knesse and deformity, was the speculation of Pythagoras,
Empedocles, and many ancient Philosophers, and was no more then Oromasdes and
Arimanius of Zoroaster; yet hereby he obtained the advantage of Adoration, and
as the terrible principle became more dreadful then his Maker, and therefore
not willing to let it fall, he furthered the conceit in succeeding Ages, and
raised the faction of Ma^es to maintain it.

That the feminine sex have no generative emission, affording rather place then
principles of conception, was Aristotle's opinion of old, maintained still by
some, and will be countenanced by him for ever. For hereby he disparageth the
fruit of the Virgin, and frustrateth the fundamental^ Prophecy, nor can the
seed of the woman then break the head of the Serpent.

Nor does he only sport in speculative errors, which are of consequent
impieties, but the unquietness of his malice hunts after simple lapses* and
such whose falsities do only condemn our understandings. Thus if Xenophanes
will say there is an other world in the Moon; If Heraclitus with his adherents
will hold the Sun is no bigger then it appears; If Anaxagoras affirm that
Snow is black; If any other opinion there are no Antipodes, or that the Stars
do fall, shall he want herein the applause or advocacy of Satan. For maligning
the tranquillity of truth, he delights to trouble its streams, and being a
professed enemy unto God, (who is truth it self) he promoteth any error as
derogatory to his nature, and revengeth himself in every deformity from truth.
If therefore at any time he speak or practice truth it is upon design, and a
subtle inversion of the precept of God, to do good that evil may come of it.
And therefore sometimes we meet with wholesome doctrines from hell,
Nossete^psum: The Motto of Delphos was a good precept in morality, That a just
man is beloved of the gods, an uncontrollable verity. It Was a good deed, though
not well done, which he wrought by Vespasian, when by the touch of his foot he
restored a lame man, and by the stroke of his hand another that was blind;
but the intention hereof drived at his own advantage, for hereby he not only
confi^med the opinion of his power with the people, but his integrity with
Princes, in whose power he knew it lay to overthrow his Oracles, and silence
the practice of his delusions.

But indeed of such a diffused nature, and so large is the Empire of truth,
that it has place within the walls of hell, and the devils themselves are
daily forced to practice it; not only as being true themselves in a
Metaphysicall verity, that is, as having their essence conformable unto the
Intellect of their maker, but making use of Moral and Logical verities, that
is, whether in the conformity of words unto things, or things unto their own
conceptions, they practice truth in common among themselves. For although
without speech they intuitively conceive each other, yet do their
apprehensions proceed through realities, and they conceive each other by
species, which carry the true and proper notions of things conceived. And so
also in Moral verities, although they deceive us, they lie not unto each
other; as well understanding that all community is continued by truth, and that
of hell cannot consist without it.

To come yet nearer to the point and draw into a sharper angle; They do not
only speak and practice truth, but may be said well-wisher thereunto, and in
some sense do really desire its enlargement. For many things which in
themselves are false, they do desire were true; He cannot but wish he were
as he professes, that he had the knowledge of future events, were it in his
power, the Jews should be in the right, and the Messiah yet to come. Could his
desires effect it, the opinion of Aristotle should be true, the world should
have no end, but be as Immortal as himself. For thereby he might evade the
accomplishment of those afflictions, he now but gradually endures, for
comparatively unto those flames he is but yet in Balneo, then begins his Ignis
Rotae, and terrible ^ire, which will determine his disputed subtlety, and
hazard his immortality.

But to speak strictly, he is in these wishes no promoter of verity, but if
considered some ways injurious unto truth, for (besides that if things were
true, which now are false, it were but an exchange of their natures, and things
must then be false, which now are true) the settled and determined order of the
world would be perverted, and that course of things disturbed, which seemed
best unto the wise contriver. For whilst they murmr against the present
disposure of things, regulating their determined realityes unto their private
optations, they rest not in their established natures, but unwishing their
unalterable verities, do tacitly desire in them a difformitie from the
primitive rule, and the Idea of that mind that formed all things best. And
thus he offended truth even in his first attempt; For not content with his
created nature, and thinking it too low, to be the highest creature of God, he
offended the ordainer thereof, not only in the attempt, but in the wish and
simple volition thereof.

THE SECOND BOOK:
Of sundry popular Tenants concerning Mineral, and vegetable bodies, generally
held for truth, which examined, prove either false, or dubio^^.
CHAP. I.
Of Crystal.
HEreof the common opinion has been, and still rem^ineth amongst us, that
Crystal is nothing else, but Ice or Snow concreted, and by duration of time,
congealed beyond liquation. Of which assertion, if the prescription of time,
and numerositie of Assert^rs, were a sufficient demonstration, we might sit
down herein, as an unquestionable truth; nor should there need vlterior
disquisition. For indeed, few opinions there are, which have ^ound so many
friends, or been so popularly received, through all professions and ages. And
first, Pliny is positive in this opinion: Crystallus sit gelu vehem^ntius
concr^to: the same is followed by Seneca, and Elegantly described by Claudian,
not denied by Scaliger, and some way affirmed by Albertus, Brasavolus, and
directly by many others. The venerable Fathers of the Church have also assented
hereto; As Basil in his Hexameron, Isidore in his Etymologies, and not only
Austin a Latin Father, but Gregory the great, and Jerome upon occasion of that
term, expressed in the first of Ezekiel.

All which notwithstanding upon a strict enquiry, we find the matter
controve^^ible, and with much more reason denied then is as yet affirmed. For
first, though many have passed it over with easy affirmatives* yet are there
also many Authors that deny it, and the exactest Mineralogists have rejected
it. Diodorus in his eleventh book denies it, If Crystal be there taken in
its proper acception, as Rhodiginus has used it, and not for a Diamond, as
Salmatius has expounded it; for in that place he affirms. Crystallum esse
lapidem ex aqua pura concr^tum* non tamen frigore sed divini caloris v^.
Solinus who transcribed Pliny, and therefore in almost all subscribed unto
him, has in this point dissented from him. Putant quidam glaciem coire, and in
Crystallum corporari sed frustra. Mathiolus in his Comment upon Dioscorides,
has with confidence and not without reason rejected it. The same has been
performed by Agricola de Natura foss^lium; by Cardan, Boe^ius de Boot, Caesius
Bernardus, Senuertus, and many more.

Now besides authority against it, there may be many reasons deduced from
their several differences which seem to overthrow it. And first, a difference
is probable in their concretion. For if Crystal be a stone, (as in the number
thereof it is confessedly received) it is not immediately concreted by the
^fficacy of cold, but rather by a Mineral spirit, and lapid^ficall principles
of its own, and therefore while it lay in solutis principiis, and remained in
a fluid body, it was a subject very unapt for proper conglaceation; for
Mineral spirits, do generally resist and scarce submit thereto. So we
observe that many waters and springs will never freez, and many parts in rivers
and lakes, where there a^e Mineral eruptions, will still persist without
congelation; as we also visibly observe, in Aqua fortis, or any Mineral
solution, either of Vitrioll, Alum, Salpeter, Ammoniac, or Tartar; which
although to some degree exhaled and placed in cold conservatories, will
Crystallise and shoot into white and glacious bodies; yet is not this a
congelation primarily effected by cold, but an intrinsecall induration from
themselves, and a retreat into their proper solidityes, which were absorbed by
the licour, and lost in a full imbibition thereof before. And so also when wood
and many other bodies do petrifie, either by the sea, other waters, or earths
abounding in such spirits, do we usually ascribe their induration to cold,
but rather unto salinous spirits, concretive juyces, and causes circumj^cent,
which do assimilate all bodies not indisposed for their impressions.

But Ice is only water congealed by the frigidity of the air, whereby it
acquireth no new form, but rather a consistence or determination of its
diffluency, and amitteth not its essence, but its condition of fluidity;
neither does there any thing properly conglaciate but water, or watery
humidity; for the determination of quicksilver is properly fixation, that of
milk coagulation, and that of oil and unctious bodies only incrassation; And
therefore Aristotle makes a trial of the fertility of humane seed, from the
experiment of congelation, for that says he, which is not watery and
improlificall will not conglaciate, which perhaps must not be taken strictly,
but in the germe and spirited particles: for eggs I observe will freeze, in
the generative and albuginous part thereof. And upon this ground Paracelsus in
his Archidoxis, extracteth the magistery of wine, after four months digestion
in horsedunge, exposing it unto the extremity of cold, whereby the aqueous
parts will freeze, but the Spirit retire and be found uncongealed in the center.

Again, the difference of their concretion is not without reason, collectible
from their dissolution, which being many ways performable in Ice, is not in
the same manner effected in Crystal. Now the causes of liquation are contrary
to those of concretion, and as the atoms and indivisible parcels are united, so
are they in an opposite way disjoined. That which is concreted by exsiccation
or expression of humidity, will be resolved by humectation, as earth, dirt, and
clayi; that which is coagulated by a fiery siccity, will suffer colliquation
from an aqueous humidity, as salt and sugar, which are easily dissoluble in
water, but not without difficulty in oil, and well rectified spirits of wine.
That which is concreated by cold, will dissolve by a moist heat, if it consist
of watery parts, as Gums, Arabic, Tragacanth, Ammoniac, and others, in an
ayrie heat or oil, as all resinous bodies, Turpentine, Pitch, and
Frankincense; in both as gummy resinous bodies, Masticke, Camphire, and Storax;
in neither, as neutralls and bodies anomalous hereto, as Bdellium, Myrrh and
others. Some by a violent dry heat, as mettalls, which although corrodible by
waters, yet will they not suffer a liquation from the powerfullest heat,
communicable unto that element. Some will dissolve by this heat although their
ingredients be earthy, as glass, whose materials are fine sand, and the ashes
of Chali or Fearne; and so will salt run with fire, although it be
concreated by heat, and this way alone may be effected a liquation in
Crystal, but not without some difficulty; that is, calcination or reducing it
by Art, into a subtle powder, by which way and a vitreous commixture, glasses
are sometime made hereof, and it becomes the chiefe^t ground for artificial
and factitious gemmes; but the same way of solution is common also unto many
stones, and not only Berylls and Cornelians, but flints and pebbles, are
subject unto fusion, and will run like glass in fire.

But Ice will dissolve in any way of heat, for it will dissolve with ^ire, it
will colliquate in water, or warm oil; nor does it only submit to an actual
heat, but not endure the potentiall calidity of many waters; for it will
presently dissolve in Aqua fortis, sp. of vitrioll, salt or tartar, nor will it
long continue its fixation in spirits of wine, as may be observed in Ice
injected therein.

Again, the concretion of Ice will not endure a dry attrition without
liquation; for if it be rubbed long with a cloth it melts, but Crystal will
calefy unto electricity, that is a power to attract strawes or light bodies,
and convert the needle freely placed; which is a declarement of very different
parts, wherein we shall not at present enlarge, as having discoursed at full
concerning such bodies in the Chap of Electricks.

They are differenced by supernatation or floating upon water, for Crystal
will sink in water as carrying in its own bulk a greater ponderosity, then
the space in any water it does occupy, and will therefore only swim in molten
metal, and Quicksilver. But Ice will swim in water of what thinness soever;
and though it sink in oil, will float in spirits of wine or Aqua vitae. And
therefore it may swim in water, not only as being water it self, and in its
proper place, but perhaps as weighing no more then the water it possesses. And
therefore as it will not sink unto the bottom, so will it neither float above
like lighter bodies, but being near, or inequality of weight, lie
superficially or almost horizontally unto it. And therefore also an Ice or
congelation of salt or sugar, although it descend not unto the bottom, yet
will it abate, and decline below the surface in thin water, but very sensibly
in spirits of wine. For Ice although it seems as transparent and compact as
Crystal, yet is it short in either, for its atoms are not concreted into
continuity, which does diminish its translucency; it is also full of spumes and
bubbles, which may abate its gravity. And therefore waters frozen in pans, and
open glasses, after their dissolution do commonly leave a froth, and spume upon
them.

They are distinguished into substance of parts and the accidents thereof, that
is in color and figure; for Ice is a similary body* and homogeneous
concretion, whose material is properly water, and but accidentally exceeding
the simplicity of that element; but the body of Crystal is mixed, its
ingredients many, and sensibly contains those principles into which mixed
bodies ar^ reduced; for beside the spirit and mercuriall principle, it
contains a sulphur or inflamable part, and that in no small quantity; for
upon collision with steel, it will actually send forth its sparks* not much
inferior unto a flint. Now such bodies only strike fire as have a sulphur or
ignitible parts within them. For as we elsewhere declare, these scintillations
are not the accension of the air, upon the collision of two hard bodies, but
rather the inflamable effluencies discharged from the bodies collided. For
diamonds, marbles, heliotropes, and agaths, though hard bodies, will not strike
fire, nor one steel easily with another, nor a flint easily with a steel, if
they both be wet, for then the sparks are quenched in their eruption.

It contains also a salt, and that in some plenty which may occasion its
fragility, as is also observable in coral. This by the art of Chemistry is
separable unto the operations whereof it is liable, with other concretions, as
calcination, reverberation, sublimation, distillation: And in the preparation
of Crystal, Paracelsus has made a rule for that of Gemms, as he declares in
his first de praeparationibu^. Briefly, it consists of such parts so far from
an Ici^ dissolution that powerful menstruums are made for its emolition,
whereby it may receive the tincture of minerals, and so resemble Gemms, as
Boethius has declared in the distillation of Urine, spirits of wine, and
turpentine, and is not only triturable, and reduceable into powder, by
contrition, but will subsist in a violent ^ire, and endure a vitrification:
Whereby are testified its earthy and fixed parts. For vitrification is the last
work of fire, and when that arriveth, humidity is exhaled, for powdered glass
emits no fume or exhalation although it be laid upon a red hot iron. And
therefore when some commend the powder of burnt glass against the stone, they
fall not under my comprehension, who cannot conceive how a body should be
farther burned, which has already passed the extr^amest test of fire.

As for color although crystal in his pellucide body seems to have none at
all, yet in its reduction into powder, it has a veil and shadow of blew, and
in its courser pieces, is of a sadder hue, then the powder of Venice glass,
which complexion it will maintain although it long endure the fire; which
notwithstanding needs not move us unto wonder, for vitrified and pellucide
bodies, are of a clearer complexion in their continuities, then in their
powders and Atomicall divisions. So Stibium or glass of Antimony, appears
somewhat red in glass, but in its powder yellow; so painted glass of a
sanguine red will not ascend in powder above a murrey.

As for the figure of crystal (which is very strange, and forced Pliny to the
despair of resolution) it is for the most part hexagonall or six cornerd,
being built upon a confused matter from whence as it were from a root angular
figures arise, as in the Amethists and Basaltes, which regular figuration has
made some opinion, it has not its determination from circumscription or as
conforming unto contiguities, but rather from a seminall root, and formative
principle of its own, even as we observe in several other concretions. So the
stones which are sometime found in the gall of a man, are most triangular, and
pyramidall, although the figure of that part seems not to cooperate thereto. So
the Aster^a or Lapis Stellaris, has on it the figure of a Star, and so Lapis
Iuda^cu^, that famous remedy for the stone, has circular lines in length all
down its body, and equidistant, as though they had been turned by Art. So that
we call a Fayrie stone, and is often found in gravel pits amongst us, being of
an hemisphericall figure, has five double lines arising from the center of its
basis, which if no accretion distract them do commonly concur and meet in the
pole thereof. The figures are regular in many other stones, as in the
Belemnites, Lapis anguinus, Cornu Amn^onis, and diverse beside, as by those
which have not the experience hereof may be observed in their figures expressed
by Mineralogistes. But Ice receives its figure according unto the surface,
wherein it concreteth or the circumamb^^ncy which conformeth it. So is it
plain upon the surface of water, but round in hayle, (which is also a
glaciacion) and figured in its guttulous descent from the air. And therefore
Aristotle in his Meteors concludes that hail which is not round is congealed
nearer the earth, for that which falls from an high, is by the length of its
journey corraded, and descends therefore in a lesser magnitude, but greater
rotundity unto us.

They are also differenced in the places of their generation; for though
Crystal be found in cold countries, and where Ice remains long, and the air
exceeds in cold, yet is it also found in regions, where Ice is seldom seen
or soon dissolved, as Pliny and Agricola relate of Cyprus, Caramania and an
Island in the Red Sea; it is also found in the veins of Mineralls, in rocks,
and sometime in common earth. But as for Ice it will not concrete but in the
approachment of the air, as we have made trial in glasses of water, covered
half an inche with oil, which will not easily freeze in the hardest frosts of
our climate; for water concreteth first in its surface, and so conglaciates
downward, and so will it do although it be exposed in the coldest metal of
lead; which well accords with that expression of God, Job 38. The waters are
hid as with a stone, and the face of the deep is frozen.

They have contrary qualities elementall, and uses medicinal; for Ice is cold
and moist, of the quality of water: But Crystal is cold and dry, according to
the condition of earth, the use of Ice is condemned by most Physicians; that of
Crystal commended by many. For although Dioscorides and Galen, have left no
mention thereof; yet has Mathiolus, Agricola, and many other commended it in
disenteries and fluxes; all for the increase of milk, most Chymistes for the
stone, and some as Brassavolus and Boethius, as an antidote against p^oyson:
Which occult and specificall operations, are not expectible from Ice; for being
but water congealed, it can never make good such qualities, nor will it
reasonably admit of secret proprieties, which are the affections of forms, and
compositions at distance from their elements.

Having thus declared what Crystal is not, it may afford some satisfaction to
manifest what it is. To deliver therefore what with the judgment of approved
Authors, and best reason consists, It is a mineral body in the difference of
stones, and reduced by some unto that subdivision, which comprehends gemmes;
transparent and resembling glass or Ice, made of a lentous colament of earth,
drawn from the most pure and limpid juice thereof, owing unto the coldness of
the earth some concurrence or coadjuva^cy, but not its immediate determination
and efficiency, which are wrought by the hand of its concretive spirit, the
seeds of petrification and Gorgon within it self; as we may conceive in stones
and gems, as Diamonds, Beryls, Saphires and the like, whose generation we
cannot with satisfaction confine unto the remote activity of the Sun, or the
common operation of coldness in the earth, but may more safely refer it unto
a lapidificall ^uccity, and congelitive principle which determines prepared
materials unto specificall concretions. And therefore I fear we commonly
consider subterranities not in contemplations sufficiently respective unto the
creation. For though Moses have left no mention of minerals, nor made any other
description then suits unto the apparent and visible creation; yet is there
unquestionably, a very large Classis of creatures in the earth far above the
condition of elementarity: And although not in a distinct and indisputable way
of vivency, or answering in all points the properties or affections of plants,
yet in inferior and descending constitutions, they do like these contain
specificall distinctions, and are determined by seminalities; that is created,
and defined seeds committed unto the earth from the beginning. Wherein although
they attain not the indubitable requisites of Animation, yet have they a near
affinity thereto. And though we want a proper name and expressive appellation,
yet are they not to be closed up in the general name of concretions, or
lightly passed over as only Elementary, and Subterraneous m^xtions.

The principle and most gemmary affection is its Tralucency; as for irradiancy
or sparkling which is found in many gems it is not discoverable in this, for it
comes short of their compactnesse and durity: and therefore it requires not
the Eme^ry, as Diamonds or Topaze, but will receive impression from steel,
more easily then the Turchois. As for its diaphanity or perspicuity, it
enjoys that most eminently, and the reason thereof is its continuity, as
having its earthly and salinous parts so exactly resolved, that its body is
left imporous and not discreted by atomicall terminations. For, that continuity
of parts, is the cause of perspicuity, is made perspicuous by two ways of
^xperiment, that is either in effecting transparency in those bodies which were
not so before, or at least far short of the additionall degree. So snow becomes
transparent upon liquation, so horns and bodies resolveable into continued
parts or gelly. The like is observable in oyled paper, wherein the interstitial
divisions being continuated by the accession of oil, it becomes more
transparent, and admits the visible rays with less umbrosity. Or else by
rendering those bodies opacus which were before pellucide and perspicuous. So
glass which was before diaphanous, being by powder reduced into multiplicity
of superficies, becomes an opacus body, and will not transmit the light: and so
it is in crystal ^owdered, and so it is also evident before; for if it be made
hot in a c^usible, and presently projected upon water, it will grow dim, and
abate its diaphanity, for the water entering, the body begets a division of
parts, and a termination of Atoms united before unto continuity.

The ground of this opinion might be, first the conclusions of some men from
experience, for as much as Crystal is found sometimes in rocks, and in some
places not much unlike the stirious or stillicidious dependencies of Ice; which
notwithstanding may happen either in places which havee been forsaken or left
bare by the earth, or may be petrifications, or Mineral indurations, like
other gemmes proceeding from percolations of the earth disposed unto such
concretions.

The second and most common ground is from the name Crystallus, whereby in
Greek, both Ice and Crystal are expressed, which many not duly considering,
have from their community of name, conceived a community of nature, and what
was ascribed unto the one, not unsitly appliable unto the other. But this is a
fallacy of Aequivocation, from a society in name inferring an Identity in
nature. By this fallacy was he deceived that drank Aqua fortis for strong
water: By this are they deluded, who conceive sperma Coeti (which is a
bituminous superfluitance on the Sea) to be the spawne of the Whale; Or take
sanguis draconis, (which is the gum of a tree) to be the blood of a Dragon.
By the same Logic we may infer, the Crystalline humor of the eye, or rather
the Crystalline heaven above, to be of the substance of Crystal below; Or that
Almighty God sends down Crystal, because it is delivered in the vulgar
translation, Psalm. 47. Mittit Crystallum suum sicut Buccellas: which
translation although it literally express the Septuagint, yet is there no more
meant thereby, then what our translation in plain English expresses; that is,
he casts forth his Ice like morsels, or what Tremellius and Junius as
clearly deliver, De^icit gelu suum sicut frusta coram frigore eius quis
consistet? which proper and Latin expressions, had they been observed in
ancient translations, elder Expositers had not been misguided by the Synonomy,
nor had they afforded occasion unto Austen, the Gloss, Lyranus, and many
others, to have taken up the common conceit, and spoke of this text conformably
unto the opinion rejected.

CHAP. II.
Concerning the Loadstone.
Of things particularly spoken thereof evidently or probably true. Of things
generally believed, or particularly delivered, manifestly or probably false. In
the first of the Magneticall virtue of the earth, of the four motions of the
stone, that is, its Verticity or direction, its Attraction or Coition, its
declination, its Variation, and also of its Antiquity. In the second a
rejection of sundry opinions and relations thereof, Natural, Medicall,
Historical, Magical.
ANd first we conceive the earth to be a Magneticall body. A Magnetical body,
we term not only that which has a power attractive, but that which seated in a
convenient medium naturally disposes it self to one invariable and fixed
situation. And such a Magnetical virtue we conceive to be in the Globe of the
earth; whereby as unto its natural points and proper terms it disposes it
self unto the poles, being so framed, constituted and ordered unto these
points, that those parts which are now at the poles, would not naturally abide
under the Equator, nor Green-land remain in the place of Magellanica; and if
the whole earth were violently removed, yet would it not fo^goe its primi^ive
points, nor pitch in the East or West, but return unto its polary position
again. For though by compactnesse or gravi^y it may acquire the lowest place,
and become the center of the universe, yet that it makes good that point, not
varying at all by the accession of bodies upon, or secession thereof, from its
surface pertu^bing the equilibration of either Hemi^pheare (whereby the
altitude of the stars might vary) or that it strictly maintains the north
and southern points, that neither upon the moti^ns of the heavens, air and
winds without, large eruptions and d^v^sion of parts within, its polar pa^ts
should never incline or veere unto the Equator (whereby the latitude of places
should also vary) it cannot so well be salved from gravity as a magneticall
verticity. This is probably that foundation the wisdom of the Creator h^th
laid unto the earth, and in this sense we may more nearly apprehend, and
sensibly make out the expressions of holy Scripture, as that of Ps. 93. 1.
Firma vit orbem terrae qui non commovebitur, he has made the round world so
sure that it cannot be moved: as when it is said by J^b, Extendit Aquilonem
super vacuo, etc. He stretches forth the North upon the empty place, and
hangs the earth upon nothing. And this is the most probable answer unto that
great question, Job ^8. whereupon are the foundations of the earth fastened, or
who laid the corner stone thereof? Had they been acquainted with this
principle, Anaxagoras, Socrates and Democritus had better made out the ground
of this stabili^y: Xen^phanes had not been feign to say it had no bottom, and
^h^les Milesius to make it swim in water. Now whether the earth stand still, or
moves circularly, we may concede this Magneticall stability: For although it
move, in that conversion the poles and center may still remain the same, as is
conceived in the Magneticall bodies of heaven, especially J^piter and the
Sun; which according to Galileus, Kepler, and Fabr^cius, are observed to have
Dineticall motions and certain revolutions about their proper centers; and
though the one in about the space of ten days, the other in less then one,
accomplish this revolution, yet do they observe a constant habitude unto their
poles and firm themselves thereon in their gyration.

Nor is the vigor of this great body included only in is self, or
circumferenced by its surface* but diffused at indeterminate distances through
the air, water and bodies circumjacent; exciting and impregnating magneticall
bodies within it surface or without it, and performing in a secret and
invisible way what we evidently behold effected by the Loadstone. For these
effluxions penetrate all bodies, and like the species of visible objects are
ever ready in the medium, and lay hold on all bodies proportionate or capable
of their action; those bodies likewise being of a congenerous nature do
readily receive the impressions of their motor; and if not fettered by their
gravity, conform themselves to situations, wherein they best unite unto their
Animator. And this will sufficiently appear from the observations that are to
follow, which can no better way be made out then this we speak of the
magneticall vigor of the earth. Now whether these effluvi^ms do fly by
streated Atoms and winding particles as Renatus des Carts conceaveth, or
glide by streams attracted from either pole and hemispheare of the earth unto
the Equator, as Sir Kenelme Digby excellently declares, it takes not away
this virtue of the earth, but more distinctly sets down the gests and
progress thereof, and are conceits of eminent use to salve magneticall
phenomena's. And as in Astronomy those hypotheses though never so strange are
best esteemed which best do salve apparencies, so surely in Philosophy those
principles (though seeming monstrous) may with advantage be embraced, which
best confirm experiment, and afford the readiest reason of observation. And
truly the doctrine of effluxions, their penetrating natures, their invisible
paths, and insuspected effects, are very considerable; for besides this
magneticall one of the earth, several effusions there may be from diverse other
bodies, which invisibly act their parts at any time, and perhaps through any
medium, a part of Philosophy but yet in discovery, and will I fear prove the
last leaf to be turned over in the book of Nature.

First, therefore it is evidently true and confirmable by every experiment,
that steel and good Iron never excited by the Loadstone, discover in
themselves a verticity; that is, a directive or polary faculty, whereby
conveniently they do septentrionate at one extreme, and Australize at another;
and this is manifestible in long and thin plates of steel perforated in the
middle and equilibrated, or by an easier way in long wires equiponderate with
untwisted silk and soft wax; for in this manner pendulous they will conform
themselves Meridionally, directing one extreme unto the North, another to the
South. The same is also manifest in steel wires thrust through little spheres
or globes of Cork and floated on the water, or in naked needles gently let
fall thereon, for so disposed they will not rest until they have ^ound out the
Meridian, and as near as they can lie parallel unto the axis of the earth:
Sometimes the eye, sometimes the point Northward in diverse Needles, but the
same point always in most, conforming themselves unto the whol^ earth, in the
same manner as they do unto every Loadstone; For if a needle untoucht be
hanged above a Loadstone, it will convert into a parallel position thereto; for
in this situation it can best receive its verticity and be excited
proportionably at both extremes: now this direction proceeds not primitively
from themselves, but is derivative and contracted from the magneticall
effluxions of the earth, which they have winded in their hammering and
formation, or else by long continuance in one position, as we shall declare
hereafter.

It is likewise true what is delivered of Irons heated in the fire, that they
contract a verticity in their refrigeration; for heated red hot and cooled in
the meridian from North to South, they presently contract a polary power, and
being poysed in air or water convert that part unto the North which respected
that point in its refrigeration; so that if they had no sensible verticity
before it may be acquired by this way, or if they had any, it might be
exchanged by contrary position in the cooling: for by the fire they omit not
only many drossie and scorious parts, but whatsoever they had received either
from the earth or loadstone, and so being naked and despoiled of all verticity,
the magneticall Atoms invade their bodies with more effect and agility.

Neither is it only true what Gilbertus first observed, that Irons
refrigerated North and South acquire a Directive faculty, but if they be cooled
upright and perpendicularly they will also obtain the same; that part which is
cooled toward the North on this side the Equator, converting it self unto the
North, and attracting the South point of the Needle: the other and highest
extreme respecting the South, and attracting the Northern according unto the
Laws Magneticall: for (what must be observed) contrary poles or faces attract
each other, as the North the South, and the like decline each other, as the
North the North. Now on this side of the Equator, that extreme which is next
the earth is animated unto the North, and the contrary unto the South; so that
in Coition it applies it self quite oppositely, the coition or attraction
being contrary to the verticity or Direction. Contrary if we speak according
unto common use, yet alike if we conceave the virtue of the North pole to
diffuse it self and open at the South, and the South at the North again.

This polarity Iron refrigeration upon extremity and in defect of a Loadstone
might serve to invigorate and touch a needle any where; and this, allowing
variation, is also the truest way at any season to discover the North or South;
and surely far more certain then what is affi^med of the grains and circles
in trees, or the figure in the root of Fern. For if we erect a red hot wire
until it cool, then hang it up with wax and untwisted silk, where the lower
end and that which cooled next the earth does rest, that is the Northern
point; and this we affirm will still be true, whether it be cooled in the air
or extinguished in water, oil of vitrioll, Aqua fortis, or Quicksilver. And
this is also evidenced in culinary utensils and Irons that often feel the
force of fire, as tongs, fireshovels, prongs and Andirons; all which acquire a
magneticall and polary condition, and being suspended, convert their lower
extremes unto the North, with the same attracting the Southern point of the
Needle. For easier experiment if we place a Needle touched at the foot of
tongues or andirons, it will obvert or turn aside its lyllie or North point,
and conform its cuspis or South extreme unto the andiron. The like verticity
though more obscurely is also contracted by brickes and tiles, as we have made
trial in some taken out of the backs of chimneys. Now to contract this
Direction, there needs not a total ignition, nor is it necessary the Irons
should be red hot all over. For if a wire be heated only at one end,
according as that end is cooled upward or downward, it respectively acquires a
verticity, as we have declared before in wires totally candent. Nor is it
absolutely requisite they should be exactly cooled perpendicularly, or strictly
lie in the meridia^, for whether they be refrigerated inclinatorily or somewhat
Aequinoxially, that is toward the Eastern or Western points though in a
lesser degree, they discover some verticity.

Nor is this only true in Irons but in the Loadstone it self; for if a
Loadstone be made red hot in the fire it amits the magneticall vigor it had
before in it self, and acquires another from the earth in its refrigeration;
for that part which cools toward the earth will acquire the respect of the
North, and attract the Southern point or cuspis of the Needle. The experiment
hereof we made in a Loadstone of a parallellogram or long square figure,
wherein only inverting the extremes as it came out of the fire, we altered the
poles or faces thereof at pleasure.

It is also true what is delivered of the Direction and coition of Irons that
they contract a verticity by long and continued position; that is, not only
being placed from North to South, and lying in the meridian, but respecting the
Zenith and perpendicular unto the center of the earth, as is most manifest in
bars of windows, casements, hindges and the like; for if we present the
Needle unto their lower extremes, it wheels about it and turns its Southern
point unto them. The same condition in long time do bricks contract which are
placed in walls, and therefore it may be a fallible way to find out the
meridian by placing the Needle on a wall for some bricks therein which by a
long and continued position, are often magnetically enabled to distract the
polarity of the Needle.

Lastly, Irons do manifest a verticity not only upon refrigeration and
constant situation, but (what is wonderful and advances the magneticall
hypothesis) they evidence the same by mere position according as they are
inverted* and their extremes disposed respectively unto the earth. For if an
iron or steel not formerly excited, be held perpendicularly or inclinatorily
unto the needle, the lower end thereof will attract the cuspis or southern
point; but if the same extreme be inverted and held under the needle, it will
then attract the lilly or northern point; for by inversion it changes its
direction acquired before, and receives a new and southern polarity from the
earth as being the upper extreme. Now if an iron be touched before, it varyeth
not in this manner, for then it admits not this magneticall impression, as
being already informed by the Loadstone and polarily determined by its
pr^action.

And from these grounds may we best determine why the Northern pole of the
Loadstone attracteth a greater weight then the Southern on this side the
Equator, why the stone is best preserved in a natural and polary situation;
and why as Gilbertus observes, it respects that pole out of the earth which
it regarded in its minereall bed and subterraneous position.

It is likewise true and wonderful what is delivered of the Inclination or
Declination of the Loadstone; that is, the descent of the needle below the
plain of the Horizon: for long needles which stood before upon their axis
parallel unto the Horizon, being vigorously excited, incline and bend
downward, depressing the North extreme below the Horizon; that is the North
on this, the South on the other side of the Equator, and at the very Line or
middle circle of the Earth stand parallel, and deflecteth neither. And this is
evidenced not only from observations of the needle in several parts of the
earth, but sundry experiments in any part thereof, as in a long steel, wires
equilibrated or evenly balanced in the air; for excited by a vigorous
Loadstone it will somewhat depresse its animated extreme, and interest the
horizontall circumference. It is also manifest in a needle pierced through a
globe of Cork so cut away and pared by degrees that it will swim under water,
yet sink not unto the bottom, which may be well effected; for if the cork
be a thought too light to sink under the surface, the body of the water may
be attenuated with spirits of wine; if too heavy, it may be incrassated with
salt; and if by chance too much be added, it may again be thinned by a
proportionable addition of fresh water: if then the needle be taken out,
actively touched and put in again, it will depresse and bow down its northern
head toward the bottom, and advance its southern extremity toward the brim.
This way invented by Gilbertus may seem of difficulty; the same with less
labor may be observed in a needled sphere of cork equally contiguous unto the
surface of the water; for if the needle be not exactly equiponderant, that end
which is a thought too light, if touched becomes even; that needle also which
will but just swim under water if forcibly touched will sink deeper, and
sometime unto the bottom. If likewise that inclinatory virtue be destroyed by
a touch from the contrary pole, that end which before was elevated will then
decline; and this perhaps might be observed in some scales exactly balanced,
and in such needles which for their bulk can hardly be supported by the water.
For if they be powerfully excited and equally let fall, they commonly sink down
and break the water at that extreme whereat they were septentrionally excited,
and by this way it is conceived there may be some fraud in the weighing of
precious commodities, and such as carry a value in quarter grains, by placing a
powerful Loadstone above or below, according as we intend to depres or elevate
one extrem.

Now if these magneticall emissions be only qualities, and the gravity of
bodies incline them only unto the earth; surely that which moves other bodies
to descent carries not the stroke in this, but rather the magneticall
alliciency of the earth, unto which alacrity it applies it self, and in the
very same way unto the whole earth, as it does unto a single Loadstone: for if
an untouched needle be at a distance suspended over a Loadstone, it will not
hang parallel, but decline at the north extreme, and at that part will first
salute its Director. Again, what is also wonderful, this inclination is not
invariable; for as it is observed just under the line the needle lies parallel
with the Horizon, but sailing north or south it begins to incline, and
increases according as it approaches unto either pole, and would at last
endeavor to erect it self; and this is no more then what it does upon the
Loadstone, and that more plainly upon the Terrella or sphericall magnet
geographically set out with circles of the Globe. For at the Equator thereof
the needle will stand rectangularly, but approaching northward toward the
tropic it will regard the stone obliquely; and when it attaineth the pole
directly, and if its bulk be no impediment, erect it self and stand
perp^ndicularly thereon. And therefore upon strict observation of this
inclination in several latitudes and due records preserved, instruments are
made whereby without the help of Sun or Star, the latitude of the place may be
discovered; and yet it appears the observations of men have not as yet been so
just and equal as is desirable, for of those tables of declination which I
have perused, there are not any two that punctually agree, though some have been
thought exactly calculated, especially that which Ridley received from Mr. Brigs
in our time Geometry Professor in Oxford.

It is also probable what is delivered concerning the variation of the compass
that is the cause and ground thereof, for the manner as being confirmed by
observation we shall not at all dispute. The variation of the compass is an
Arch of the Horizon intercepted between the true and magneticall meridian, or
more plainly, a deflexion and siding East and West from the true meridian. The
true meridian is a major circle passing through the poles of the world, and the
Zenith or Vertex of any place, exactly dividing the East from the West. Now on
this line the needle exactly lies not, but diverts and varieth its point, that
is the North point on this side the Equator, the South on the other; sometimes
unto the East, sometime toward the West, and in some few places varieth not at
all. First, therefore it is observed that betwixt the shore of Ireland, France,
Spain, Guinie and the Azores, the North point varieth toward the East, and
that in some variety; at London it varieth eleven degrees, at Antwerpe nine, at
Rome but five, at some parts of the Azores it deslecteth not, but lies in the
true meridian on the other side of the Azores; and this side the Equator the
north point of the needle wheeleth to the West, so that in the latitude of 36.
near the shore, the variation is about eleven degrees; but on the other side
the Equator, it is quite otherwise: for about Capo Frio in Brasilia, the south
point varieth twelve degrees unto the West, and about the mouth of the Straites
of Magellan five or six; but elongating from the coast of Brasilia toward the
shore of Africa it varyeth Eastward, and ariving at Capo de las Agullas, it
rests in the Meridian, and looks neither way.

Now the cause of this variation may be the inequality of the earth, variously
disposed, and differently intermixed with the Sea: withal the different
disposure of its magneticall vigor in the eminencies and stronger parts
thereof; for the needle naturally endeavors to conform unto the Meridian, but
being distracted drives that way where the greater and most powerfuller part
of the earth is placed, which may be illustrated from what has been delivered
before, and may be conceived by any that understands the generalities of
Geographie. For whereas on this side the Meridian, or the Isles of Azores,
where the first Meridian is placed, the needle varieth Eastward, it may be
occasioned by that vast Tract of earth, that is, Europe, Asia, and Africa,
seated toward the East, and disposing the needle that way: For arriving at some
part of the Azores, or Islands of Saint Michaels, which have a middle situation
between these continents, and that vast and almost answerable Tract of
America, it seems equally distracted by both, and diverting unto neither,
does parallel and place it self upon the true Meridian. But sailing farther it
veers its Lilly to the West, and regards that quarter wherein the land is
nearer or greater; and in the same latitude as it approaches the shore
augmenteth its variation. And therefore as some observe, if Columbus or
whosoever first discoved America, had apprehended the cause of this variation,
having passed more then half the way, he might have been confirmed in the
discovery, and assuredly foretold there lay a vast and mighty continent toward
the West. The reason I confess, and inference is good, but the instance
perhaps not so. For Columbus knew not the variation of the compass, whereof
Sebastian Cabot first took notice, who after made discovery in the Northern
parts of that continent. And it happened indeed that part of America was first
discovered, which was on (...) side fa^thest distant, that is Jamaica, Cuba,
and the Isles in the Bay of M^xico. And from this variation do some new
discoverers deduce a probability in the attempts of the Northern passage
toward the Indies.

Now because where the greater continents are joined, the action and ^ffl^ence
is also greater, therefore those needles do suffer the greatest variation which
are in Countries which most do feel that Action. And therefore has Rome far
less variation then London; for on the West side of Rome, are seated the great
continents of France, Spain, Germ^ny, which take of the exuperance and in some
way balance the vigor of the E^stern parts; but unto England there is almost
no earth W^st* but the whole extent of Europe and Asia, lies E^stward, and
therefore at London it varieth eleven dgerees, that is almost one Rhomb. Thus
also by reason of the great continent of Brasilia, Peru, and Chili, the needle
deflecteth toward the land twelve degrees; but at the straits of M^gellan where
the land is narrowed, and the Sea on the other side, it varyeth but five or
six. And so likewise, because the Cape (...) Agullas has Sea on both sides
near it, and other land remote and as it were aequid^stant from it, therefore
at that point the needle conforms unto the true Meridian, and is not distract
by the vicinity of Adjacencyes. And this is the general and great cause of
variation. But if in certain creekes and valleys the needle prove irregular,
and vary beyond expect^nce, it may be imputed unto some vigorous part of the
earth, or Magneticall eminence not far distant. And this was the invention of
Dr Gilbert not many years past, a Physician in London. And therefore although
some assume the invention of its direction, and others have had the glory of
the Card, yet in the experiments, grounds, and causes thereof, England
produced the Father Philosopher, and discovered more in it, then Columbus or
Americus did ever by it.

It is also probable what is conceived of its Antiquity, that the knowledge of
its polary power and direction unto the North was unknown unto the Ancients,
and though Levinus Lemnius, and Caelius Calcagninus, are of another belief, is
justly placed with new inventions by Pancirollus; for their Achilles and
strongest argument is an expression in Plautus, a very ancient Author, and
contemporary unto Ennius. Hic ventus jam secundus est cape modo versoriam Now
this ve^soriam they construe to be the compass, which notwithstanding
according unto Pineda, who has discussed the point, Turnebus, Cabeus, and
diverse others, is better interpreted the rope that helps to turn the ship; or
as we say, does make it tack about; the Compass, declaring rather the ship is
tu^ned, then con^erring unto its conversion. As for the long expeditions and
sundry voiages of elder times, which might confirm the antiquity of this
invention, it is not improbable they were performed by the help of stars;
and so might the Phaenicean navigators, and also Ulysses sail about the
Mediterranean, by the flight of birds, or keeping near the shore, and so might
Hanno coast about Africa, or by the help of oars as is expressed in the
voyage of Jonah. And whereas it is contended that this ve^ticity was not
unknown unto Solomon, in whom is presumed a universality of knowledge, it will
as forcibly follow he knew the Art of Typography, powder and gunnes, or had
the Philosophers stone, yet sent unto Ophir for gold. It is not to be denied,
that beside his political wisdom; his knowledge in Philosophy was very
large, and perhaps from his works therein, the ancient Philosophers especially
Aristotle, who had the assistance of Alexanders acquirements, collected great
observables, yet if he knew the use of the Compass, his ships were surely very
s^ow, that made a three years voyage from Eziongeber in the red Sea unto
Ophir, which is supposed to be Taprobana or Malaca in the Indies, not many
months sail, and since in the same or lesser time, Drake and Candish
performed their voyage about the earth.

And as the knowledge of its verticity is not so old as some conceive, so is it
more ancient then most believe; nor had its discovery with gunnes, printing, or
as many think, some years before the discovery of America; for it was not
unknown unto Petrus Peregrinus a French man, who two hundred years since has
left a Tract of the Magnet and a perpetual motion to be made thereby preserved
by Gasserus. Paulus Venetus and about five hundred years past, Albertus Magnus,
make mention hereof, and quoteth for it a book of Aristotle de lapide, which
book although we find in the Catalogue of Laertius, yet with Cabeus I rather
judge it to be the work of some Arabic writer, not many years before the days
of Albertus.

Lastly, It is likewise true what some have delivered of Crocus martis, that
is, steel corroded with vinegar, sulphur, or otherwise, and after reverberated
by fire. For the Loadstone will not at all attract it, nor will it adhere, but
lie therein like sand. This is to be understood of Crocus martis well
reverberated, and into a violet color: for common chalybs praeparatus, or
corroded and powdered steel, the Loadstone attracts like ordinary filings of
iron, and many times most of that which passes for Crocus martis. So that this
way may serve as a test of its preparation, after which it becomes a very
good medicine in fluxes. The like may be affirmed of Flakes of iron that are
rusty and begin to tend unto earth; for their cognation then expireth, and the
Loadstone will not regard them.

CHAP. III.
Concerning the Loadstone, therein of sundry common opinions, and received
relations, Natural, Historical, Medicall, Magical.
ANd first not only a simple Hetorodox, but a very hard Parodox, it will
seem, and of great absurdity unto obstinate ears, if we say attraction is
unjustly appropriated unto the Loadstone, and that perhaps we speak not
properly, when we say vulgarly the Loadstone draws Iron, and yet herein we
should not want experiment and great authority. The words of Renatus des Carts
in his principles of Philosophy are very plain. Praeterea magnes trahet ferrum,
sive potius magnes and ferrum ad invicem accedunt, neque enim ulla ibi tractio
est, The same is solemnly determined by Cabius. Nec magnes trahit proprie
ferrum, nec ferrum ad se magnetem provocat, sed ambo pari conatu ad invicem
con^luunt. Concordant hereto is the assertion of Doctor Ridley, Physician unto
the Emperor of Russia in his Tract of Magnetical bodies; defining Magneticall
attraction to be a natural incitation and disposition conforming unto
contiguitie, an union of one Magneticall body with an other, and no violent
haling of the weak unto the stronger. And this is also the doctrine of
Gilbertus, by whom this motion is termed coition, and that not made by any
faculty attractive of one, but a Syndrome and concourse of each; a coition
always of their vigours, and also of their bodies, if bulk or impediment
prevent not, and therefore those contrary actions which slow from opposite
poles or faces, are not so properly expulsion and attraction, as Sequela and
Fuga a mutual flight and following.

The same is also confirmed by experiment; for if a piece of iron be fastened
in the side of a bowl or basin of water, a Loadstone swimming freely in a boat
of cork, will presently make unto it. And so if a steel or knife untouched be
offered toward the needle that is touched, the needle nimbly moves toward it,
and conformeth unto union with the steel that moves not. Again, If a
Loadstone be finely filed, the atoms or dust thereof will adheare unto iron
that was never touched, even as the powder of iron does also unto the
Loadstone. And lastly, If in two skiphs of cork, a Loadstone and steel be
placed within the orb of their activities, the one does not move, the other
standing still, but both hoise sail and steer unto each other; so that if the
Loadstone attract, the steel has also its attraction; for in this action the
Alliciency is reciprocal, which jointly felt, they mutually approach and run
into each others arms.

And therefore surely more moderate expressions become this action, then what
the Ancients have used, which some have delivered in the most violent terms of
their language, so Austine calls it, Mirabilem ferri rap^orem: Hippocrates,
(...), Lapis qui ferrum rapit. Galen disputing against Epicurus uses the term
(...). but that is also too violent: among the Ancients Aristotle spoke most
warily. (...), Lapis qui ferrum movet: and in some tolerable acception do
run the expressions of Aquinas, Scaliger and Cusanus.

Many relations are made, and great expectations are raised from the Magnes
Carneus, or a Loadstone, that has a faculty to attract not only Iron but
flesh; but this upon enquiry, and as Cabeus has also observed, is nothing else
but a weak an inanimate kind of Loadstone, veyned here and there with a few
magneticall and ferreous lines, but chiefly consisting of a bolary and clammy
substance, whereby it adheres like Haematites, or Terra Lemnia, unto the Lips,
and this is that stone which is to be understood, when Physicians join it with
Aetites or the Eagle stone, and promise therein a virtue against abortion.

There is sometime a mistake concerning the variation of the compass, and
therein one point is taken for another. For beyond the Equator some men
account its variation by the diversion of the Northern point, whereas beyond
that circle the Southern point is sovereign, and the North submits his
preheminency. For in the Southern coast either of America or Africa, the
Southern point deflects and varieth toward the land, as being disposed and
spirited that way by the meridionall and proper Hemisphere. And therefore on
that side of the earth the varying point is best accounted by the South. And
therefore also the writings of some, and Maps of others, are to be enquired,
that make the needle decline unto the East twelve degrees at Capo Frio, and
six at the straits of Magellan, accounting hereby one point for another, and
preferring the North in the liberties and province of the South.

But certainly false it is what is commonly affirmed and believed, that
Garlic does hinder the attraction of the Loadstone; which is notwithstanding
delivered by grave and worthy Writers; by Pliny, Solinus, Ptolomy, Plutarch,
Albertus, Mathiolus, Ru^us, Langius, and many more. An effect as strange as
that of Homers Moly, and the Garlic the gods bestowed upon Ulysses. But that
it is evidently f^lse, many experiments declare. For an Iron wire heated red
hot and quenched in the juice of Garlic, does notwithstanding contract a
verticity from the earth, and attracteth the Southern point of the Needle. If
also the tooth of a Loadstone be covered or stuck in Garlik, it will
notwithstanding attract and animate any Needles excited and fixed in Garlic
until they begin to rust, do yet retain their attractive and polary respects.

Of the same stamp is that which is obtruded upon us by Authors ancient and
modern, that an Adamant or Diamond prevents or suspends the attraction of the
Loadstone, as is in open terms delivered by Pliny. Adam as dissidet cum
Magnete Lapide ut juxta positus ferru^ non patiatur abstrahi, a^t si admotus
magnes apprehenderit, rapiat atque auferat. For if a Diamond be placed between
a needle and a Loadstone, there will nevertheless ensue a Coition even over
the body of the Diamond: and an easy matter it is to touch or excite a needle
through a Diamond, by placing it at the tooth of a Loadstone, and therefore the
relation is false, or our estimation of these gems untrue; nor are they
Diamonds which carry that name amongst us.

It is not suddenly to be received what Paracelsus in his book De generatione
rerum, affirms, that if a Loadstone be anointed with Mercuriall oil, or
only put into Quicksilver, it omitteth its attraction for ever. For we have
found that Loadstones and touched needles which have laid long time in
Quicksilver have not amitted their attraction, and we also find that red hot
needles or wires extinguished in quicksilver, do yet acquire a verticity
according to the Laws of position in extinction. Of greater repugnancy unto
reason is that which he delivers concerning its graduation, that heated in fire
and often extinguished in oil of Mars or Iron, it acquires an ability to
extract or draw forth a nail fastened in a wall; for, as we have declared
before, the vigor of the Loadstone is destroyed by fire, nor will it be
reimpregnated by any other Magnete then the earth.

True it is, and we shall not deny, that besides fire some other ways there
are of its destruction, as Age, Ruste, and what is least dreamt on an
unnatural or contrary situation; for being impolarily adjoined unto a more
vigorous Loadstone, it will in a short time exchange it poles, or being kept in
undue position, that is, not lying on the meridian or with its poles inverted,
it receaves in longer time impair in activity exchange of faces, and is more
powerfully preserved by site then by the dust of steel. But the sudden and
surest way is fire, as we have declared before: that is, fire not only actual
but potentiall; the one surely and suddenly, the other slowly and imperfectly;
the one changing, the other destroying the figure. For if distilled Vinegar or
Aquafortis be powered upon the powder of Loadstone, the subsiding powder dried,
retains some magneticall virtue, and will be attracted by the Loadstone: but
if the menstruum or dissolvent be evaporated to a consistence, and afterward
does shoot into Icycles or crystalls, the Loadstone has no power upon them,
and if in a full dissolution of steel a separation of parts be made by
precipitation or exhalation, the exsiccated powder has lost its wings and
ascends not unto the Loadstone. And though a Loadstone fired do presently omit
its proper virtue, and according to the position in cooling contracts a new
verticity from the earth, yet if the same be laid a while in Aqua fortis or
other corrosive water, and taken out before a considerable corrosion, it still
reserves its attraction, and will convert the Needle according to former
polarity.

It is improbable what Pliny affirms concerning the object of its attraction,
that it attracts not only ferreous bodies, but also liquorem vitri, for in the
body of glass there is no serreous or magneticall nature which might occasion
attraction. For of the glass we use, the purest is made of the finest sand and
the ashes of Chali or Glasseworte, and the courser or green sort of the ashes
of brake or other plants. Beside, vitrification is the last or utmost fusion of
a body vitrifiable, and is performed by a strong and violent fire, which keeps
the melted glass red hot. Now certain it is, and we have showed it before,
that the Loadstone will not attract even steel it self that is candent, much
less the incongenerous body of glass being fired. For fire destroys the
Loadstone, and therefore it declines it in its own defense, and seeks no
union with it. But that the Magnet attracteth more then common Iron, we can
affirm. It attracteth the Smyris or Emery in powder, It draws the shining or
glassie powder brought from the Indies, and usually employed in writing dust.
There is also in Smiths ci^ders by some adhesion of Iron whereby they appear
as it were glazed, sometime to be found a magneticall operation, for some
thereof applied have power to move the Needle.

It is also improbable and something singular what some conceive, and Eusebius
Nierembergius a late writer and Jesuit of Spain delivers, that the body of man
is magneticall, and being placed in a boat, the vessel will never rest until
the head respects the North; if this be true, the bodies of Christians do
lie unnaturally in their graves, and the Jews have fallen upon the natural
position, who in the reverence of their Temple, do place their beds from North
to South. This opinion confirmed would much advance the microcosmicall
conceit, and commend the Geography of Paracelsus; who according to the
cardinal points of the world divides the body of man, and therefore working
upon humane ordure* and by long preparation rendering it odiferous, he terms it
Zibeta Occidentalis, Western Civet; making the face the East, but the
posteriors the America or Western part of his microcosme. The verity or rather
falsity hereof, might easily be tried in Wales, where there are portable boats,
and made of leather, which would convert upon the impulsion of any verticity,
and seem to be the same whereof in his description of Britain, Caesar has
left some mention.

Another kind of verticity, Anagrammatically.
is that which Angelus doce mihi jus, alias, Michael Sundevogis, in a Tract de
sulphur, discovers in Vegetables, from sticks let fall or depressed under
water; which equally framed and permitted unto themselves, will ascend at the
upper end, or that which was vertical in its vegetation, wherein
notwithstanding, as yet, we have not found satisfaction; although perhaps too
greedy of magnallities, we are apt to make but favorable experiments
concerning welcome truths, and such desired verities.

It is also wondrous strange and untrue what Laelius Bisciola reports, that
if unto ten ounces of Loadstone one of Iron be added, it increases not unto
eleven, but weighs ten ounces still: a relation inexcusable in the title of his
work, Horae subsecivae, or leasureable hours: the examination being as ready
as the relation, and the falsity tried as easily as delivered: nor is it to be
omitted what is taken up by Caesius Bernardus a late Mineralogist, and
originally confirmed by Porta, that needles touched with a Diamond contract a
verticity, even as they do with a Loadstone, which will not consist with
experiment. And therefore, as Gilbertus obse^veth, he might be deceived, in
touching such needles with Diamonds, which had a verticity before, as we have
declared most needles to have, and so had he touched them with gold or silver,
he might have concluded a magneticall virtue therein.

In the same form may we place Fracastorius his attraction of silver,
Philostratus his Panturbes, Apollodorus, and Beda his relation of the Loadstone
that attracted only in the night: but most inexcusable is Franciscus Rueus, a
man of our own profession, who in his Discourse of gemmes mentioned in the
Apocalypse, undertakes a Chapter of the Loadstone; wherein substantially and
upon experiment he scarce delivers any thing, making enumeration of its
traditionall qualities, whereof he seems to believe many, and some of those
above, convicted by experience, he is fain to salve as impostures of the
Devil. But Boethius de Boot Physi^ian unto Rodulphus the second, has
recompensed this defect; and in his Tract, de lapidibus and gemmis, speaks
very materially hereof, and his discourse is consonant unto experience and
reason.

As for relations Historical, though many there be of less account, yet two
alone deserve consideration; the first concerns magneticall rocks, and
attractive mountains in several parts of the earth. The other the tomb of
Mahomet and bodies suspended in the air. Of rocks magneticall there are
likewise two relations; for some are delivered to be in the Indies, and some in
the extremity of the North, and about the very pole; the Northern account is
commonly ascribed unto Olaus Magnus Archbishop of Upsale, who out of his
predecessor Joannes, Saxo, and others, compiled a history of some Northern
Nations; but this assertion we have not discovered in that work of his which
passes among us, and should believe his Geographie herein no more then that in
the first line of his book, when he affirms that Biarmia (which is not
seventy degrees in latitude) has the pole for its Zenith* and Equinoctial for
the Horizon.

Now upon this foundation how uncertain soever men have erected mighty
illations, ascribing thereto the cause of the needles direction, and conceiving
the ^ffluxions from these mountains and rocks invite the lilly toward the
north; which conceit though countenanced by learned men, is not made out either
by experience or reason; for no man has yet attained or given a sensible
account of the pole by some degrees; it is also observed the needle does very
much vary as it approaches the pole, whereas were there such direction from
the rocks, upon a nearer approachment it would more directly respect them.
Beside were there such magneticall rocks under the pole, yet being so far
removed they would produce no such effect; for they that sail by the Isle of
Flua now called Elba in the Thuscan sea which abounds in veins of Loadstone,
observe no variation or inclination of the needle, much less may they expect a
direction from rocks at the end of the earth. And lastly, men that ascribe thus
much unto rocks of the north must presume or discover the like magneticalls at
the south: For in the southern seas and far beyond the Equator, variations are
large, and declinations as constant as in the northern Ocean.

The other relation of Loadstone, mines, and rocks, in the shore of India is
delivered of old by Pliny; wherein says he, they are so placed both in
abundance and vigor, that it proves an adventure of hazard to pass those
coasts in a ship with Iron nails. S^rapion the Moore an Author of good esteem
and reasonable antiquity, confirms the same, whose expression in the word
magnes in this. The mine of this stone is in the Sea coast of India, whereto
when Ships approach, there is no Iron in them which flies not like a bird unto
these mountains, and therefore their Ships are fastened not with Iron but wood,
for otherwise they would be torn to pieces. But this assertion how positive
soever is contradicted by all Navigators that pass that way, which are now
many and of our own Nation, and might surely have been controuled by Nearchus
the Admiral of Alexander, who not knowing the compass, was feign to coast
that shore.

For the relation concerning Mahomet, it is generally believed his tomb at
Medina Talnabi, in Arabia, without any visible supporters hangs in the air
between two Loadstones artificially contrived both above and below, which
conceit is very fabulous, and evidently false from the testimony of ocular
Testators; who affirm his ^ombe is made of stone and lies upon the ground; as
besides others* the learned Vossius observes from Gabriel Sionita, and Joannes
Hesronita, two Maronites in their relations hereof. Of such intention^ and
attempt by Mahometans we read in some relators, and that might be the occasion
of the fable; which by tradition of time and distance of place enlarged into
the story of being accomplished: and this has been promoted by attemps of the
like nature; for we read in Pliny that one Dinocrates began to Arche the
Temple of Arsinoe in Alexandria with Loadstone, that so her statue might be
suspended in the air to the amazement of the beholders; and to lead on our
credulity, herein confirmation may be drawn from History and Writers of good
authority: so is it reported by Ruffinus, that in the Temple of Serapis there
was an iron chariot suspended by Loadstones in the air, which stones removed,
the chariot fell and dashed into pieces. The like does Beda report of
Bellerophons horse which framed of iron, and placed between two Loadstones
with wings expansed, hung pendulous in the air.

The verity of these stories we shall not further dispute their possibility, we
may in some way determine; if we conceive, what no man will deny, that bodies
suspended in the air have this suspension from one or many Loadstones placed
both above and below it, or else by one or many placed only above it. Likewise
the body to be suspended in respect of the Loadstone above, is placed first at
a pendulous distance in the medium, or else attracted unto that site by the
vigor of the Loadstone; and so we first affirm that possible it is a body may
be suspended between two Loadstones; that is, it being so equally attracted
unto both that it determines it self unto neither: but surely this position
will be of no duration; for if the air be agitated or the body waved either
way, it omits the equilibration and disposes it self unto the nearest
attractor. Again, it is not impossible (though hardly fe^sible) by a single
Loadstone to suspend an iron in the air, the iron being artificially placed,
and at a distance guided toward the stone, until it find the newtrall point
wherein its gravity just equals the magneticall quality, the one exactly
extolling as much as the other depresseth; and thus must be interpreted
Fracastorius. And lastly, impossible it is that if an iron rest upon the
ground, and a Loadstone be placed over it, it should ever so arise as to hang
in the way or medium; for that vigor which at a distance is able to overcome
the resistance of its gravity and to lift it up from the earth, will as it
approaches nearer be still more able to attract it, and it will never remain
in the middle that could not abide in the extremes; and thus is to be
understood Gilbertus. Now the way of Baptista Porta that by a thread fasteneth a
needle to a table, and then so guides and orders the same, that by the
attraction of the Loadstone it abides in the air, infringeth not this reason;
for this is a violent retention, and if the thread be loosened, the needle
ascends and adheres unto the Attractor.

The third consideration concerns relations Medicall, wherein what ever
effects are delivered, they are derived from its mineral and ferreous
condition, or else magneticall operation. Unto the ferreous and mineral
quality pertains what Dioscorides an ancient Writer and Soldier under
Anthony and Cleopatra, affirms, that half a dram of Loadstone given with
honey and water, proves a purgative medicine, and evacuateth gross humors; but
this is a quality of great incertainty, for omitting the vehicle of water and
honey, which is of a laxative power it self, the powder of some Loadstones in
this dose does rather constipate and bind, then purge and loosen the belly.
And if sometimes it cause any laxity it is probably in the same way with iron
and steel unprepared, which will disturb some bodies, and work by purge and
vomit. And therefore, what is delivered in a book ascribed unto Galen that it
is a good medicine in dropsies, and evacuates the waters of persons so
affected: It may I confess by siccity and astriction afford a confirmation
unto parts relaxed, and such as be hydropically disposed, and by these
qualities it may be useful in Hernias or Ruptures, and for these it is
commended by Aetius, Aegineta and Orbasius, who only affirm that it contains
the virtue of Haematites, and being burnt was sometimes vended for it. To this
mineral condition belongs what is delivered by some, that wounds which are
made with weapons excited by the Loadstone, contract a malignity, and become of
more difficult cure; which nevertheless is not to be found in the incision of
Chyrurgions with knives and lancets touched, which leave no such effect behind
them. Hitherto must we also refer that affirmative which says the Loadstone
is poison, and therefore in the lists of poisons we find it in many Authors;
but this our experience cannot confirm, and the practice of the King of Zeilan
clearly contradicts, who as Garcias ab Horto, Physician unto the Spanish
Viceroy delivers, has all his meat served up in dishes of Loadstone, and
conceives thereby he preserves the vigor of youth.

But surely from a magneticall activity must be made out what is let fall by
Aetius, that a Loadstone held in the hand of one that is podagricall does
either cure or give great ease in the gou^. Or what Marcellus Empericus
affirms, that as an amulet it also cures the headache, which are but additions
unto its proper nature, and hopeful enlargements of its allowed attraction;
for perceiving its secret power to draw unto it self magneticall bodies, men
have invented a new attraction to draw out the dolor and pain of any part. And
from such grounds it surely became a philter, and was conceived a medicine of
some venereall attraction, and therefore upon this stone they graved the Image
of Venus according unto that of Claudian, Venerem magnetica gemma figurat.
Hither must we also refer what is delivered concerning its power to draw out
of the body bullets and heads of arrows, and for the like intention is mixed up
in plasters: which course although as vain and ineffectuall it be rejected by
many good Authors, yet is it not me thinks so readily to be denied, nor the
practice of many ages and Physicians which have thus compounded plasters, thus
suddenly to be condemned, as may be observed in the Emplastrum divinum Nicolai,
the Emplastrum nigrum of Augspurge, the Opodeldoch and At^ractivum of
Paracelsus, with several more in the Dispensatory of Wecker, and practice of
Sennertus; the cure also of Heurnias, or Ruptures in Pareus, and the method
also of curation lately delivered by Daniel Beckherus, and approved by the
Professors of Leyden in the Tract de Cultrivoro Prussiaco, 1636. that is, of a
young man of Spruceland that casually swallowed down a knife about ten inches
long, which was cut out of his stomach and the wound healed up. In which cure
to a^tract the knife to a convenient ^ituation, there was applied a plaster
made up with the powder of Loadstone. Now this kind of practice Libavius,
Gilbertus, and lately Swickardus in his Ars Magnetica, condemn, as vain, and
altogether unusefull; and their reason is, because a Loadstone in powder has
no attractive power; for in that form it omits his polary respects, and
loses those parts which are the rule of its attraction: wherein to speak
compendiously, if experiment has not deceived us, we first affirm, that a
Loadstone in powder omits not all attraction. For if the powder of a rich vein
be in a reasonable quantity presented toward the Needle freely placed, it will
not appear to be void of all activity, but will be able to stir it; nor has
it only a power to move the Needle in powder and by it self, but this will it
also do, if incorporated and mixed with plasters, as we have made trial in
the Emplastrum de Minio, with half an ounce of the mass, mixing a dram of
Loadstone, for applying the magdaleon or roale unto the Needle it would both
stir and attract it; not equally in all parts, but more vigorously in some,
according unto the mine of the stone more plen^ifully dispersed in the mass.
And lastly, in the Loadstone powdered, the polary respects are not wholly
destroyed; for those diminutive particles are not atomicall or merely
indivisible, but consist of dimensions sufficient for their conditions, though
in obscure effects. Thus if unto the powder of Loadstone or Iron we admove the
North pole of the Loadstone, the powders or small divisions will erect and
conform themselves thereto: but if the South pole approach, they will subside,
and inverting their bodies respect the Loadstone with the other extreme. And
this will happen not only in a body of powder together, but in any particle or
dust divided from it.

Now though we affirm not these plasters wholly ineffectuall, yet shall we
not omit two cautions in their use, that therein the stone be not too subtily
powdered; for it will better manifest its attraction in a more sensible
dimension; that where is desired a speedy effect, it may be considered whether
it were not better to relinquish the powdered plasters, and to apply an entyre
Loadstone unto the part: And though the other be not wholly ineffectuall,
whether this way be not more powerful, and so might have been in the cure of
the young man delivered by Beckerus.

The last consideration, concerns Magical relations, in which account we
comprehend effects derived and fathered upon hidden qualities, specifical
forms, Antipathies and Sympathies, whereof from received grounds of Art, no
reasons are derived. Herein relations are strange and numerous, men being apt
in all ages to multiply wonders, and Philosophers dealing with admirable bodies
as Historians have done with excellent men, upon the strength of their great
achievements, ascribing acts unto them not only false, but impossible, and
exceeding truth as much in their relations, as they have others in their
actions. Hereof we shall briefly mention some delivered by Authors of good
^steem, whereby we may discover the fabulous inventions of some, the credulous
supinity of others, and the great disservice unto truth by both; multiplying
obscurities in nature, and authorizing hidden qualities that are false, whereas
wise men are ashamed there are so many true.

And first* Dioscorides puts upon it a shrewd quality, and such as men are apt
enough to experiment, and therewith discovers the incontinencie of a wife by
placing the Loadstone under her pillow; for then she will not be able to
remain in bed with her husband. The same he also makes a help unto theevery;
for thieves says he, having a design upon a house, do make a fire at the
four corners thereof, and (...) therein the fragments of Loadstone, whence
arises a fume that so d^sturbeth the inhabitants, that they forsake the house
and leave it to ^he spoil of the robbers. This relation how ridiculous soever,
has Albertus taken up above a thousand years after, and Marbodeus the
Frenchman has continued it the same in Latin verse, which with the notes of
Pictorious is current unto our days. As strange must be the Litholmancy or
divination from this stone, whereby as Tzetzes in his Chyliads delivers,
Helenus the Prophet foretold the destruction of Troy; and the Magic thereof,
not safely to be believed, what was delivered by Orpheus, that sprinkled with
water it will upon a question emit a voice not much unlike an Infant. But
surely the Loadstone of Laurentius Guascus the Physician is never to be
matched, wherewith as Cardane delivers, whatsoever needles or bodies were
touched, the wounds and punctures made thereby, were never felt at all. And yet
as strange a virtue is that which is delivered by some that a Loadstone
preserved in the salt of a Remora, acquires a power to attract gold out of the
deepest Wells. Certainly a studied absurdity, not casually cast out, but
plotted for a perpetuity: for the strangeness of the effect ever to be
admired, and the difficulty of the trial never to be convicted.

These conceits are of that monstrosity that they refute themselves in their
recitements: there is another of better notice, and whispered through the world
with some attention; credulous and vulgar auditors readily believing it, and
more judicious and distinctive heads, not altogether rejecting it. The conceit
is excellent, and if the effect would follow somewhat divine, whereby we might
communicate like spirits, and confer on earth with Menippus in the Moon;
which is pretended from the sympathy of two needles touched with the ^ame
Loadstone, and placed in the center of two Abscedary circles, or rings with
letters described round about them; one friend keeping one, and another the
other, and agreeing upon an hour wherein they will communicate. For then says
tradition, at what distance of place soever, when one needle shall be removed
unto any letter; the other by a wonderful Sympathy will move unto the same.
But herein I confess my experience can find no truth; for having expressly
framed two circles of wood, and according to the number of the Latin letters
divided each into twenty three parts, placing therein two styles or needles
composed of the same steel, touched with the same Loadstone, and (...) same
point: yet of these two, whenever I removed the one, (...) but at the
distance of half a spanne, the other would stand like Hercules pillars, and if
the earth stand still, have surely no moti^n (...) Now as it is not possible
that any body should have no boundar^ (...) as we term it Sphere of its
activity, so is it improbable it should eff^^t that at distance, which nearer
hand it cannot at all perform.

Again, the conceit is ill contrived, and one effect inferred, whereas indeed
the contrary will ensue. For if the removing of one of the needls from A to B
should have any action or influence on the other, it would not entice it from A
to B but repel it from A to Z: for needles ^xcited by the same point of the
stone, do not attract; but avoid each other, even as these also do, when their
invigorated extremes approach unto one another.

Lastly, were this conceit assuredly true, yet were it not a co^^lusion (...)
every distance to be tried by every head: yet being no ordinary or Almanac
business, but a problem Mathematical, to find out the difference of hours
in different places; nor do the wisest exactly satisfy themselves in all. For
the hours of several places anticipate each other, according unto their
Longitudes, which are not exactly discovered of every place, and therefore the
trial hereof at a considerable intervall, is best performed at the distance of
the (...) that is, such habitations as have the same Meridian and equal
parallel, on different sides of the Equator; or more plainly have the same
Longitude, and the same Latitude unto the South, which we have in the North.
For unto such Situations it is noone and midnight at the very same time.

And therefore the Sympathy of these needles is much of the same mould, with
that intelligence which is pretended from the flesh of one body transmuted by
incision into another. For if the Art of Taliacotius de Curtorum Chyrurgia per
incisionem, a permutation of flesh, or transmutation be made from one man's body
into another, as if a piece of flesh be exchanged from the biciptall muscle of
either parties arm, and about them both, an Alphabet circumscribed; upon a
time appointed as some conceptions affi^me, they may communicate at what
distance soever. For if the one shall prick himself in A, the other at the same
time will have a sense thereof in the same part; and upon inspection of his
arm, per^^ive what letters the other points out in his own; which is a way of
intelligence very strange, and would requite the Art of Pythagoras; who could
read a reverse in the Moon.

Now this Magneticall conceit how strange soever, might have some original in
reason; for men observing no solid body, whatsoever did interrupt its action,
might be induced to believe no distance would terminate the same, and most
conceiving it pointed unto the pole of heaven, might also opinion that nothing
between could restrain it. Whosoever was the Author, the Aeolus that blew it
about, was Famianus Strada, that elegant Jesuit in his Rhetorical prolutions,
who chose out of this subject to express the style of Lucretius. But neither
Baptista Porta, de furtivis literarum notis; Trithemius in his Steganography,
Silenus in his Cryptography, or Nuncius inanimatus written of late years by Dr
Godwin Bishop of Herford, make any consideration hereof: although they deliver
many ways to communicate our thoughts at distance. And this we will not deny
may in some manner be effected by the Loadstone; that is, from one room into an
other, by placing a table in the wall common unto both, and writing thereon the
same letters one against another: for upon the approach of a vigorous Loadstone
unto a letter on this side, the needle will move unto the same on the other:
But this is a very different way from ours at present; and hereof there (...)
many ways delivered, and more may be discovered which contradict not the rule
of its operations.

As for unguentum Armarium, called also Magneticum, it belongs not to this
discourse, it neither having the Loadstone for its ingredient, nor any one of
its actions: but supposes other principles, as common and universal spirits,
which convey the action of the remedy unto the part, and conjoynes the virtue
of bodies far disjoined. But perhaps the c^res it does, are not worth so mighty
principles; it commonly healing but simple wounds, and such as mundified and
kept clean, do need no other hand then that of Nature, and the Balsam of the
proper part. Unto which effect, there being fields of Medicines sufficient. it
may be a hazardous curiosity to rely on this; and because men say the effect
does generally follow, it might be worth the experiment to try, if the same
will not ensue upon the same method of cure, by ordinary Balsams, or common
vulnerary plasters.

Other Discourses there might be made of the Loadstone, as Moral, Mystical,
Theological; and some have handsomely done them, as Ambrose, Austine, Gulielmus
Parisiensis, and many more; but these fall under no rule, and are as boundles as
men's inventions; and though honest minds do glorify God hereby, yet do they
most powerfully magnify him, and are to be looked on with another eye, who
demonstratively set forth its Magnalities, who not from postulated or
precarious inferences, entreat a courteous assent, but from experiments and
undeniable effects, enforce the wonder of its Maker.

CHAP. IV.
Of b^dies Electricall.
HAving thus spoake of the Loadstone and bodies magneticall, I shall in the
next place deliver somewhat of Electricall, and such as may seem to have
attraction like the other; and hereof we shall also deliver what particularly
spoken or not generally known is manifestly or probable true, what generally
believed is also false or dubious. Now by Electricall bodies, I understand not
such as are Metallicall mentioned by Pliny, and the Ancients; for their
Electrum was a mixture made of gold, with the addition of the fifth part of
silver, a substance now as unknown, as true Aurichalcum, or Corinthian brass,
and set down among things lost by Pancirollus. Nor by Electrick bodies do I
conceive such only as take up shavings, strawes, and light bodies, in which
number the Ancients only placed Jet and Amber; but such as conveniently placed
unto their objects attract all bodies palpable whatsoever. I say, conveniently
placed, that is, in regard of the object, that it be not too ponderous, or any
way affixed in regard of the Agent, that it be not foul or sullied, but wiped,
rubbed, and excitated in regard of both, that they be conveniently distant, and
no impediment interposed. I say all bodies palpable, thereby excluding fire,
which indeed it will not attract, nor yet draw through it, for fire consumes
its effluxions by which it should attract.

Now although in this rank but two were commonly mentioned by the Ancients,
Gilbertus discovers many more, as Diamonds, Sapphires, Carbuncles, Iris,
Opalls, Amethistes, Berill, Crystal, Bristoll stones, Sulphur, Mastick, hard
Wax, hard Rosin, Arsenic, Sal gemme, roch Alume, common Glass, Stibium, or
glass of Antimony; unto these Cabeus adds white Wax, Gum Elemi, Gum Guaici,
Pix Hispanica, and Gypsum. And unto these we add gum Anime, Benjamin, Talcum,
Chyna dishes, Sandaraca* Turpentine, Styrax Liquida, and Caranna dried into a
hard consistence. And the same attraction we find not only in simple bodies,
but such as are much compounded, as the Oxicroceum plaster, and obscurely that
ad Herniam, and Gratia Dei, all which smooth and rightly prepared, will
discover a sufficient power to stir the needle settled freely upon a well
pointed pin, and so as the Electrick may be applied unto it without all
disadvantage.

But the attraction of these Electricks we observe to be very different.
Resinous or unctuous bodies, and such as will flame, attract most vigorously
and most thereof without f^ication, as Anime, Benjamin and most powerfully good
hard wax, which will convert the needle almost as actively as the loadstone;
and we believe that all or most of this substance if reduced to hardness
tralucency or cleerenesse, would have some attractive quality; but juyces
concrete, or gums easily dissolving in water, draw not at all, as Aloe, Opium,
Sanguis Draconis, Lacca, Galbanum, Sagapenum. Many stones also both precious
and vulgar, although terse and smooth have not this power attractive; as
Emeralds, Pearl, Jaspis, Corneleans, Agathe* Heliotropes, Marble, Alablaster,
Touchstone, Flint and Bezoar. Glass attracts but weakly though clear, some
slick stones and thick glasses indifferently: Arsenic but weakly, so likewise
glass of Antimony, but Crocus Metallorum not at all. Saltes generally but
weakly, as Sal Gemma, Alum and also Talk; nor very discoverably by any
frication: but if gently warmed at the fire, and wiped with a dry cloth, they
will better discover their Electricities.

No metal attracts, nor any concretian Animal we know, although polite and
smoothe; as we have made trial in Elkes hooves, Hawks talons, the sword of a
Sword fish, Tortoyse shells, Seahorse and Elephants teeth, in bones, in Hearts
horn, and what is usually conceived Unicornes horn, no wood though never so
hard and polished, although out of some Electricks proceed, as Ebony, Box,
Lignum vitae, Cedar, etc. And although Jet and Amber be reckoned among
Bitumens, yet neither do we find Asphaltus, that is, Bitumen of Judea, nor
Seacole, nor Camphire, nor Mummia to attract, although we have tried in large
and polished pieces. Now this attraction have we tried in strawes and paleous
bodies, in needles of Iron equilibrated, powders of wood and Iron, in gold and
silver foliate, and not only in solid but fluent and liquid bodies, as oils
made both by expression and distillation, in water, in spirits of wine,
vitrioll and Aqua fortis.

But how this attraction is made is not so easily determined; that it is
performed by effluviums is plain and granted by most; for Electricks will not
commonly attract, except they grow hot or be perspicable. For if they be foul
and obnubilated, it hinders their effluxion; nor if they be covered though but
with Linen or Sarsenet, or if a body be interposed, for that intercepts the
effluvium. If also a powerful and broad Electrick of wax or Anime be held over
fine powder, the Atoms or small particles will ascend most numerously unto it;
and if the Electrick be held unto the light, it may be observed that many
thereof will fly, and be as it were discharged from the Electrick to the
distance sometime of two or three inches, which motion is performed by the
breath of the effluvium issuing with agility; for as the Electrick cools, the
projection of the Atoms cease.

The manner hereof Cabeus wittily attempteth, affirming that this effluvium
attenuateth and impelleth the neighbor air, which returning home in a
gyration, carries with it the obvious bodies unto the Electrick, and this he
labors to confirm by experiments; for if the strawes be raised by a vigorous
electrick, they do appear to wave and turn in their ascents; if likewise the
Electrick be broad and the strawes light and chaffy, and held at a reasonable
distance, they will not arise unto the middle, but rather adhere toward the
verge or borders thereof. And lastly, if many strawes be laid together and a
nimble Electrick approach, they will not all arise unto it, but some will
commonly start aside and be whirled a reasonable distance from it. Now that the
air impelled returns unto its place in a gyration or whirling, is evident
from the Atoms or moates in the Sun. For when the Sun so enters a hole or
window, that by its illumination the Atoms or moates become perceptible, if
then by our breath the air be gently impelled, it may be perceived that they
will circularly return, and in a gyration unto their places again.

Another way of their attraction is also delivered, that it is made by a
tenuous emanation or continued effluvium, which after some distance retracteth
into it self, as is observable in drops of syrups, oil and seminall
viscosities, which spun at length retire into their former dimensions. Now
these effluviums advancing from the body of the Electrick, in their return do
carry back the bodies which they have laid hold within the sphere or circle of
their continuities, and these they do not only attract but with their viscous
arms, hold fast a good while after. And if any shall wonder why these
effluviums issuing forth impell and protrude not the straw before they can
bring it back, it is because Effluvium passing out in a smaller thread and more
enlengthened filament, it stirs not the bodies interposed but returning unto
its original it falls into a closer substance, and carries them back unto it
self. And this way of attraction is best received, embraced by Sir Kenelme
Digby in his excellent Treaty of bodies, allowed by Des Carts in his
principles of Philosophy, as far as concerns fat and resinous bodies, and
with exception of glass, whose attraction he also deriveth from the recesse of
its effluxion. And this in some manner the words of Gilbertus will bear.
Effluvia illa tenuior a concipiunt and amplectuntur corpora, quibus uniuntur,
and Electris tanquam extensis brachiis and ad fontem, propinquitate
invalescentibus effluviis, deducuntur. And if the ground were true that the
earth were an Electrick body, and the air but the effluvium thereof, we might
perhaps believe that from this attraction and by this effluxion that bodies
tended to the earth, and could not remain above it.

Our other discourse of Electricks concerns a general opinion touching Jet
and Amber, that they attract all light bodies, except Ocymum or B^sil, and such
as be dipped in oil or oyled, and this is urged as high as Theophrastus: but
Scaliger acquitteth him; And had this bin his assertion, Pliny would probably
have taken it up, who herein stands out, and delivers no more but what is
vulgarly known. But Plutarch speaks positively in his Symposiacks, that Amber
attracteth all bodies, excepting Basil and oyled substances. With Plutarch
consent many Authors both ancient and modern, but the most inexcusable are
Lemnius, and Rueus, whereof the one delivering the nature of minerals,
mentioned in Scripture the infallible fountain of truth, confirms their
virtues with erroneous traditions; the other undertaking the occult and hidden
miracles of Nature, accepts this for one, and endeavors to allege a
reason of that which is more then occult, that is not existent.

Now herein, omitting the Authority of others, as the doctrine of experiment
has informed us we first affirm, that Amber attracts not Basil, is wholly
repugnant unto truth; for if the leaves thereof or dried stalks be stripped
into small strawes, they arise unto Amber, Wax, and other Electries no
otherwise then those of Wheat or Rye; nor is there any peculiar fatness or
singular viscosity in that plant that might cause adhesion and so prevent its
ascension. But that Jet and Amber attract not strawes oyled, is in part true
and false, for if the strawes be much wet or drenched in oil, true it is that
Amber draws them not, for then the oil makes the straw to adhere unto the
part whereon they are placed, so that they cannot rise unto the Attractor; and
this is true not only if they be soaked in oil, but spirits of wine or water.
But if we speak of strawes or festucous divisions lightly drawn over with
oil, and so that it causes no adhesion, or if we conceive an antipathy
between oil and Amber, the doctrine is not true; for Amber will attract
strawes thus oyled, it will attract or convert the Needls of Dials made either
of Brass or Iron, although they be much oyled; for in these Needls consisting
free upon their center there can be no adhesion; it will likewise attract oil
it self, and if it approaches unto a drop thereof, it becomes conicall and
arises up unto it, for oil takes not away his attraction, although it be
rubbed over it. For if you touch a piece of wax already excitated with common
oil, it will notwithstanding attract* though not so vigorously as before. But
if you moysten the same with any chymicall oil, water or spirits of wine, or
only breath upon it, it quite omits its Attraction, for either its effluences
cannot get through or will not mingle with those substances.

It is likewise probable the Ancients were generally mistaken concerning its
substance and generation, they conceiving it a vegetable concretion made of the
gums of trees, especially, Pine and Poplar falling into the water, and after
indurated or hardened, whereunto accords the fable of Phaetons sisters: but
surely the concretion is mineral, according as is delivered by Boethius; for
either it is found in mountains and mediterraneous parts, and so it is a fat
and unctuous sublimation in the earth concreted and fixed by salt and nitrous
spirits wherewith it meets; or else, which is most usual, it is collected
upon the sea shore, and so it is a fat and bituminous Juice coagulated by the
saltness of the sea. Now that salt spirits have a power to congele and
coagulate unctuous bodies, is evident in chymicall operations, in the
distillations of Arsenick, sublimate and Antimony, in the mixture of oil of
Juniper, with the salt and acide spirit of Sulphur, for thereupon ensues a
concretion unto the consistence of Birdlime; as also in spirits of salt, or
Aqua fortis powered upon oil of Olive, or more plainly in the manufacture of
Soape. And many bodies will coagulate upon commixture whose separated natures
promise no concretion. Thus upon a solution of Tin by Aqua fortis, there will
ensue a coagulation, like that of whites of eggs. Thus the volatile salt of
urine will coagulate Aqua vitae, or spirits of wine; and thus perhaps (as
Helmont excellently declares) the stones or calculous concretions in Kidney or
bladder may be produced: the spirits or volatile salt of urine conjoyning with
the Aqua vitae potentially lying therein; as he illustrateth from the
distillation of fermented urine. From whence arises an Aqua vitae or spirit,
which the volatile salt of the same urine will congele, and finding an earthy
concurr^nce strike into a lapideous substance.

Lastly, we will not omit what Bellabonus upon his own experiment writ from
Dantzich unto Mellichius, as he has left recorded in his Chapter, De succino,
that the bodies of Flies, Pismires, and the like, which are said often times to
be included in Amber, are not real but apparent and representative, as he
discovered in several pieces broke for that purpose; if so, the two famous
Epigrams hereof in Martial are but poetical, the Pismire of Brassavolus
Imaginary, and Cardans Mousoleum for a fly, a mere fancy. But hereunto we
know not how to assent in the General, as having met with some whose Reals
made good their representations.

CHAP. V.
Compendiously of sundry other common Tenants, concerning Min^rall and Terreous
bodies, which examined, prove either ^alse or dubious.
1. ANd f^^st we hear it in every man's mouth, and in many good Authors we read
it, That a Diamond, which is the hardest of stones, and not yielding unto
steel, Emery, or any thing, but its own powder, is yet made soft, or broke by
the blood of a Goat; Thus much is ass^med by Pliny, Solinus, Albertus, Cyp^ian,
Austin, Isidore, and many Christian Writers, alluding herein unto the heart of
man, and the precious blood of our Savior, who was typified indeed by the Goat
that was sl^ine, and the escape Goat in the wilderness; and at the effusion of
whose blood, not only the hard hearts of his enemies relen^ed, but the stony
rocks and veil of the Temple was shattered. But this I perceive is easier
affirmed then proved. For Lapidaries, and such as p^o^esse the art of cutting
this stone, do generally deny it, and they that seem to countenance it, have
in their deliveries so quali^ied it, that little from thence of moment can be
inferred for it. For first, the holy Fathers, without a further enquiry did
take it (...) granted, and rested upon the authority of the first deliverers.
As for Alber^us, he promises this effect but conditionally, that is not except
the Goat drink wine, and be fed with Siler monta^um, petroselinum, and such
herbs as are conc^ived of power to break the stone in the bladder. But the
words of Pliny from whom most likely the rest at first derived it, if strictly
considered, do rather ove^throw, then any way advantage this effect. His words
are these: Hi^cino rumpitur san guine, nec aliter quam recenti, calidoque
m^c^rata* and sic qu qu^ mu^tis ^ctibus, tunc etiam praet^rquam ex^mias incu^es
mall^e^sque ferreos fr^ngens. That is, i^ is brok^n with Goats blood, bu^ not
(...) it be ^resh and warm* and that not without many blows, and then also it
will bre^ke the best anvills and hamme^s of iron. And answerable he^eto, is the
as^ertion of Isidore and S^l^nus. By which account, a Diamond st^^ped in Goats
blo^d, r^ther increases in h^rdnesse, then acquir^th any softness by the
in^usion; for the best we have are commi^uible without it, and a^e so far from
breaking hammers, that they submit unto pistilla^ion, and r^^sist not an
^ordina^y pestle.

Upon this conceit arose, pe^haps the discovery of another; that is, that the
blood of a Goat, was sovereigne for the stone, as it stands commended by many
good Writers, and brings up the composition in the Lithont^ipticke powder of
Nicolaus* or rather because it was found an excellent medicine ^or the stone,
and its ability comm^nded by some to d^ssolve the hardest thereof; it might be
conceived by amplifying apprehensions, to be able to break a Diamond, and so it
came to be ordered that the Goat should be fed with saxifragous herbs, and
such as are conceived of power to break the stone. However it were as the
effect is false in the one, so is it surely very doubtful in the other. For
although inwardly received it may be very diuretic, and expulse the stone in
the kidnyes; yet how it should dissolve or break that in the bladder, will
require a further dispute, and perhaps would be more reasonably tried by a
warm injection thereof, then as it is commonly used. Wherein notwithstanding,
we should rather rely upon the urine in a Castlings bladder, a resolution of
Crabs eyes, or the second distillation of urine, as Helmont has commended; or
rather, if any such might be found a Chylifactory menstruum or digestive
preparation drawn from species or individualls, whose stomachs peculiarly
dissolve lapideous bodies.

2. That gl^sse is poison, according unto common conceit, I know not how to
grant not only from the innocence of its ingredients, that is fine ^and, and
the ashes of glasse-wort or fearne, which in themselves are harmless and
useful: or because I find it by many commended for the stone, but also from
experience, as having given unto dogs above a dram thereof, subtly powdered
in butter or paste, without any visible disturbance. And the trial thereof we
the rather did make in that animal, because Grevinus in his Treaty of poisons,
affirms that dogs are inevitably destroyed thereby.

The conceit is surely grounded upon the visible mischief of glass grossly
or coursely powdered; for that indeed is mortally noxious, and effectually used
by some to destroy myce and rats; for that by reason of its acuteness and
augularity, commonly excoriates the parts through which it passes, and
sollicits them unto a continual expulsion. Whereupon there ensues fearful
symptoms, not much unlike those which attend the action of poison. From whence
notwithstanding, we cannot with propriety impose upon it that name, either by
occult or elementary quality; which he that concedeth will much enlarge the
catalogue or listes of poisons; for many things, neither deleterious by
substance or quality, (are yet destructive by figure, or) some occasional
activity. So are leeches destructive, and by some accounted poison; not
properly, that is by temperamentall contrariety, occult form, or so much as
elementall repugnancy; but because being inwardly taken they fasten upon the
veins, and occasion an effusion of blood, which cannot be easily stanched. So
a sponge is mischievous, not in it self, for in its powder it is harmless,
but because being received into the stomach it swells, and occasioning a
contiuall distension, induces at last a strangulation. So pins, needls, ^ares
of Rye or Barley, may be poison. So Daniel destroyed the Dragon by a
composition of three things, whereof neither was poison alone, nor properly
altogether, that is pitch, fat and hair, according as is expressed in the
History. Then Daniel took pitch, and fat, and hair, and did sees them
together and made lumps thereof, these he put in the Dragons mouth, and so he
bu^st asunder; that is the fat and pitch being cleaving bodies, and the hair
continually extimulating the parts, by the action of the one, nature was
provoked to expel, but by the tenacity of the other forced to retain: so that
there being left no passage in or out, the Dragon brake in pieces. It must
therefore be taken of grossly powdered glass what is delivered by Grevinus,
and from the same must that mortal dissentery proceed which is related by
Sanctorius; and in the same sense shall we only allow a Diamond to be poison,
and whereby as some relate Paracelsus himself was poisoned. And so also even
the precious fragments and cordial gems which are of frequent use in Physic,
and in themselves confessed of useful faculties, received in gross and
angular powders, may so offend the bowels, as to procure desperate languors,
or cause most dangerous fluxes.

3. That Gold inwardly taken, and that either in substance, infusion, decoction
or extinction is a special cordial of great efficacy, in sundry medicall
uses, although a practice much used is also much questioned, and by no man
determined beyond dispute. There are hereof I perceive two extreme opinions;
some excessively magnifying it, and probably beyond its deserts; others
extremely vilifying it, and perhaps below its demerits. Some affirming it is a
powerful medicine in many diseases, others averring that so used it is
effectual in none; and in this number are very eminent Physicians, Erastus,
Dur^tus, Rondeletius, Brassavolus, and many other; who beside the strigments
and sudorous adhesions from men's hands, acknowledge that nothing proceeds
from gold in the usual decoction thereof. Now the capital reason that led men
unto this opinion was their observation of the inseparable nature of gold; it
being excluded in the same quantity as it was received without alteration of
parts, or diminution of its gravity.

Now herein to deliver somewhat which in a middle way may be entertained; we
first affirm and few I believe will deny it, that the substance of gold is
indeed invincible by the powerfullest action of natural heat, and that not
only alimentally in a substantial mutation, but also medicamentally in any
corporeal conversion; as is very evident, not only in the swallowing of golden
bullets but in the lesser and foliate divisions thereof; passing the stomach
and guts even as it does the throat, that is without abatement of weight or
consistence; so that it enters not the veins with those electuaries, wherein
it is mixed, but takes leave of the permeant parts, at the mouths of the
miseraicks, and accompanies the inconvertible portion unto the siege; nor is
its substantial conversion expectible in any composition or aliment wherein it
is taken. And therefore that was truly a starving absurdity, which befell the
wishes of Midas. And little credit there is to be given to the golden Hen,
related by Wendlerus. And so likewise in the extinction of gold, we must not
conceive it parts with any of its salt or dissoluble principle thereby, as we
may affirm of Iron, for the parts thereof are fixed beyond division; nor will
they separate upon the strongest test of fire. And this we affirm of pure
gold, for that which is current and passes in stamp amongst us, by reason of
its allay, which is a proportion of copper mixed therewith, it is actually
dequantitated by fire, and possibly by frequent extinction.

Secondly, although the substance of gold be not sensibly immuted or its
gravity at all decreased, yet that from thence some virtue may proceed either
in substantial reception or infusion, we cannot safely deny. For possible it
is that bodies may emit a virtue and operation without abatement of weight, as
is most evident in the Loadstone, whose effluencies are both continual and
communicable without a minoration of gravity. And the like is observable in
bodies electricall, whose emissions are less subtle. So will a Diamond or
Sapphire emit an effluvium sufficient to move the needle or a straw without
diminution of weight. Nor will polished amber although it send forth a gross
and corporal exhalement be found a long time defective upon the exactest
scales.

Thirdly, if amulets do work by Aporrhoias, or emanations from their bodies,
upon those parts whereunto they are appended, and are not yet observed to abate
their weight; if they produce visible and real effects by imponderous and
invisible emissions, it may be unjust to deny all ^fficacie of gold in the non
omission of weight, or deperdition of any ponderous particles.

L^stly, since Stibium or glass of Antimony, since also its Regulus will
manifestly communicate unto water, or wine, a purging and vomitory operation;
and yet the body it self, though after iterated infusions, cannot be ^ound to
abate either virtue or weight; I dare not deny but gold may do the like; that
is, impart some ef^luences unto the infusion which carry with them the subtiler
nature, and separable conditions of its body.

That therefore this metal thus received, has any undeniable effect upon the
body either from experience in others or my self, I cannot satisfactorily
affirm. That possibly it may have I not will at all deny. But from power unto
act, from a possible unto an actual operation, the inference is not
reasonable. And therefore since the point is dubious, and not yet authentically
decided, it will be discretion not to depend on disputable remedies; but rather
in cases of known danger, to have recourse unto medicines of known and
approved activity; for beside the benefit accruing unto the sick, hereby may
be avoided a gross and frequent error, commonly committed in the use of
doubtful remedies, conjoyntly with those which are of approved virtue. That
is, to impute the cure unto the conceited remedy, or place it on that whereon
they place their opinion, whose operation although it be nothing, or its
concurrence not considerable, yet does it obtain the name of the whole cure,
and carries often the honor of the capital energie, which had no finger in
it.

4. That a pot full of ashes, will still contain as much water as it would
without them, although by Aristotle in his problems taken for granted, and so
received by most, is surely very false, and not effectible upon the strictest
experiment I could ever make. For when the ayery intersticies are filled, and
as much of the salt of the ashes as the water will imbibe is dissolved, there
remains a gross and terreous portion at the bottom which will possess a
space by it self, according whereto there will remain a quantity of water not
receiveable, and so will it come to pass in a pot of salt, although
decrepitated; and so also in a pot of snow. For so much it will want in
reception, as its solution takes up, according unto the bulk whereof, there
will remain a portion of water not to be admitted. So a glass stuffed with
pieces of sponge, will want about a sixth part of what it would receive without
it. So sugar will not dissolve beyond the capacity of the water, nor a metal
in Aquafortis be corroded beyond its reception. And so a pint of salt of
tartar exposed unto a moist air until it dissolve, will make far more liquor,
or as some term it oil, then the former measure will contain.

Nor is it only the exclusion of air by water, or repletion of caviti^s
possessed thereby which causes a pot of ashes to admit so great a quantity of
water, but also the solution of the salt of the ashes into the body of the
dissolvent; so a pot of ashes will receive somewhat more of hot water then of
cold, for as much as the warm water imbibeth more of the salt, and a vessel
of ashes more then one of pindust or filings of Iron, and a glass full of
water, will yet drink in a proportion of salt or sugar without overflowing.

5. Of white powder and such as is discharged without report, there is no small
noise in the world: but how far agreeable unto truth, few I perceive are able
to determine. Herein therefore to satisfy the doubts of some, and amuse the
credulity of others, We first declare; that gunpowder consists of three
ingredients, that is, Saltpeter, Smal-coale, and Brimstone. Saltpeter,
although it be also natural and found in several places, yet is that of
common use an artificial salt, drawn from the infusion of salt earth, as that
of Stals, Stables, Dovehouses, Cellers, and other covered places, where the
rain can neither dissolve, nor the sun approach to resolve it. Brimstone is
a Mineral body of fat and inflamable parts, and this is used crude, and called
sulpher vive, and is of a sadder color; or after depuration, such as we have
in magdeleons or rolls, of a lighter yellow: Smal-coale is commonly known unto
all, and for this use is made of Sallow, W^llow, Alde^, Hasell, and the like,
which three proportionably mixed, tempered and formed into granulary bodies,
do make up that powder which is in use for gunnes.

Now all these although they bear a share in the discharge, yet have they
distinct intentions, and different offices in the composition: from brimstone
proceeds the continued and durable firing, for Small coal and peter together
will onley spit, nor easily continue the ignition. From Small-coale ensues the
black color and quick accension; for neither brimstone nor peter, although in
powder, will take fire like Small-coale, nor will they easily kindle upon the
sparks of a flint, as neither will Camphire a body very inflamable, but
small-coal is equivolent to tinder, and serves to light the sulphur: from
saltpeter proceeds the force and the report, for sulphur and small-coale
mixed will not take fire with noise, or exilition, and powder which is made of
imp^re, and greasy peter, has but a weak emission, and gives a faint
report, and therefore in the three sorts of powder, the strongest contains
most saltpeter, and the proportion thereof is at the least ten parts of peter,
unto one of coal and sulphur.

But the immediate cause of the report, is the vehement commotion of the air
upon the sudden and violent eruption of the powder; for that being suddenly
fired, and almost altogether, being thus ratified it requires by many degrees
a greater space then before its body occupied; but ^inding resistance, is
actiuely forces out his way, and by concussion of the air, occasioneth the
report. Now with what vigor and violence it forces upon the air, may easily
be conceived, if we admit what Cardan affirms, that the powder fired does
occupy a hundred times a greater space then its own bulk, or rather what
S^ellius more exactly accounts; that it exceeds its former space on less
then 12000. and 500. times. And this is the reason not only of this
tonni^ruous and ful^^i^ating report of gunnes, but may resolve the cause of
those terrible cracks, and affrighting noise of heaven; that is, the nitrous
and sulphurous exhalations, set on fire in the cloud^s, whereupon requiring a
larger place, they force out their way, not only with the breaking of the
cloud, but the ^aceration of the air about it. When if the matter be
spirituous, and the cloud compact, the noise is great and terrible: If the
cloud be thin, and the materials weak, the eruption is languide, and ending
in corrus^ations without any noise, although but at the distance of two miles,
which is esteemed the remotest distance of clouds; and therefore such
lightnings do seldom any harm. And therefore also it is prodigious to have
thunder in a clear sky, as is observably recorded in some Histories.

Now therefore, he that would destroy the report of Powder, must work upon the
peter, he that would exchange the color, must think how to alter the small
coal. For the one, that is, to make white powder, it is surely many ways
feasible: The best I know is by the powder of rotten willowes, spunck, or
touchwood prepared, might perhaps make it russet: and some as Beringuccio in
his Pyrotechny affi^meth, have promised to make it red. All which
notwithstanding does little concern the report: for that as we have showed
depends on another ingredient; and therefore also under the color of black;
this principle is very variable, for it is made not only by Willow, Aller,
Hazell, etc. But some above all commend the coals of Flax and Rushes, and
some also contend the same may be effected with Tinder.

As for the other, that is, to destroy the Report, it is reasonably attempted
but two ways; that is, either by quite leaving out, or else by silencing the
Saltpeter. How to abate the vigor thereof, or silence its bombulation, a way
is promised by Porta, and that not only in general terms by some fat bodies,
but in particular by Borax and Bu^ter mixed in a due proportion; which says
he, will so go off as scarce to be heard by the discharger; and indeed
plentifully mixed, it will almost take off the reporr, and also the force of
the charge. That it may be thus made without Saltpeter, I have met with but
one example, that is, of Alphonsus Duke of Ferrara, who in the relation of
Brassavolus and Cardan invented such a Powder, as would discharge a bullet
without report.

That therefore white Powder there may be, there is therein no absurdity, that
also such a one as may give no report, we will not deny a possibility. But
this however, contrived either with or without Saltpeter, will surely be of
little force, and the effects thereof no way to be feared: For as it omits of
report, so will it of effectual exclusion; for seeing as we have delivered the
strength and report, do necessarily depend upon the violent exclusion, where
there is no report there will be no violent exclusion, and so the charge of no
force which is excluded. For thus much is reported of that famous powder of
Alphonsus, which was not of force enough to kill a chicken, according to the
delivery of Brassavolus. Iamque pulvis inventus est qui glandem sine bombo
proj^cit, nec tamen vehementer ut vel pullum interficere possit.

It is very true and not to be denied, there are ways to discharge a bullet,
not only with powder that makes no noise, but without any powder at all, as is
done by water and windegunnes; but these afford no fulminating report, and
depend on single principles, and even in ordinary powder there are pretended
other ways, to alter the noise and strength of the discharge, and the best, if
not only way consists in the quality of the Nitre: for as for other ways
which make either additions or alterations in the powder, or charge, I find
therein no effect. That unto every pound of sulphur, an adjection of one ounce
of Q^icksilver, or unto every pound of peter, one ounce of Sal Ammoniac will
much intend the force, and cosequently report, as Beringuccio has delivered, I
find no verity therein. That a piece of Opium will dead the force, and blow as
some have promised, I find herein ^o such peculiarity, no more then in any
gum of viscose body, and as much effect there is to be found from Scammonie.
That a bullet dipped in oil by preventing the transpiration of air, will
carry farther, and p^irce deeper, as Portu affirms, my experience cannot with
satis^action discern. That Quicksilver is more distructive then shot is surely
not to be made out; for it will scarce make any penetration, and discharged
from a Pistol, will hardly pierce through a pa^chment. That vinegar, spirits of
wine, or the distilled water of Orange pills, wherewith the powder is
tempored, are more effectual unto the report then common water, as some do
promise, I shall not affirm, but may assuredly be more conduceable unto the
preservation and durance of the powder, as Cataneo has well observed.

But beside the prevalent report from Saltpeter by some antipathie, or
incummiscibility therewith upon the approach of fire. Sulphur may hold a
greater use in the composition and further activitie in the exclusion then is
by most conceived; for sulphur vive makes better powder then common sulphur,
which nevertheless is of as quick accension as the other; for Small-coale,
Saltpeter and Camphire made into powder will be of little force, wherein
notwithstanding there wants not the accending ingredient; for Camphire though
it ^l^me well, yet will not flush so lively, or de^ecate Saltpeter, if you
inject it thereon like sulphur, as in the preparation of Sal prunellae, And
lastly, though many ways may be found to light this powder, yet is there none
I know to make a strong and vigorous powder of Saltpeter, without the admixion
of sulphur. Arsenick red and yellow, that is, Orpement and Sandarach may
perhaps do something, as being inflamable and containing sulphur in them, but
containing also a salt, and hydra^gyrus mixtion, they will be of little effect;
and white or Cristaline a^senick of less, for that being artficiall, and
sublimed with salt, will not endure flamation.

And this antipathy or contention between saltpeter and sulphur upon an actual
fire, and in their complete and distinct bodies, is also manifested in their
preparations, and bodies which invisibly contain them. Thus is the preparation
of Crocus Metallorum, the matter kindles and flusheth like Gunpowder, wherein
notwithstanding, there is nothing but Antimony and Saltpeter, but this
proceeds from the sulphur of Antimony, not enduring the society of saltpeter;
for after three or four accensions, through a fresh addition of peter, the
powder will flush no more; for the sulphur of the Antimony is quite exhaled.
Thus Iron in Aqua fortis will fall into ebullition, with noise and emication,
as also a crasse and fumide exhalation, which are caused from this combat of
the sulphur of Iron, with the acide and nitrous spirits of Aqua fortis. So is
it also in Aurum fulminans, or powder of gold dissolved in Aqua Regis, and
precipitated with oil of Tartar, which will kindle without an actual fire,
and afford a report like Gunpowder, that is, not as Crollius affirms from any
Antipothy between Sal Ammoniac and Tartar, but rather between the nitrous
spirits of Aqua Regis, commixed per minima with the sulphur of gold, as in in
his last, De consensu chymicorum etc. Sennertus has well observed.

6. That Coral (which is a Lithophyton or stone plant, and grows at the
bottom of the Sea) is soft under water, but waxes hard as soon as it
arriveth unto the air, although the assertion of Dioscorides, Pliny, and
consequently Solinus, Isidore, Rueus, and many others, and stands believed by
most, we have some reason to doubt, not only from so sudden a petrifaction and
strange induration, not easily made out from the qualities of Air, but because
we find it rejected by experimental enquirers. Johannes Beguinus in his
Chapter of the tincture of Coral, undertakes to clear the world of this
error, from ^he express experiment of John Baptista de Nicole, In the french
Copy.
who was Overseer of the gathering of Coral upon the Kingdom of Thunis. This
Gentleman, says he, desirous to find the nature of Coral, and to be resolved
how it grows at the bottom of the Sea, caused a man to go down no less
then a hundred fathom into the Sea, with express to take notice whether it
were hard or so^t in the place where it grows, who returning brought in each
hand a branch of Coral, affirming it was as hard at the bottom, as in the
air where he delivered it. The same was also confirmed by a trial of his
own, handling it a fathom under water before it felt the air. Beotius de
Boot in his accurate Tract De Gemmis, is of the same opinion, not ascribing
its concretion unto the air, but the coagulating spirits of salt, and
lapidi^icall juice of the sea, which entering the parts of that plant, overcomes
its vegetability, and converts it into a lapideous substance, and this, says
he, does happen when the plant is ready to decay; for all Coral is not hard,
and in many concreted plants some parts remain ^^petri^ied, that is, the quick
and livelier parts remain as wood, and were never yet converted. Now that
plants and ligneous bodies may indurate under water without approachment of
air, we have experiment in Coralline, with many Coralloidall concretions, and
that little stony plant which Mr. Johnson names, Hippuris coralloides, and
Gesner foliis m^nsu Arenosis; we have our self found in fresh water, which is
the less concre^ive portion of that element. We have also with us the visible
petrification of wood in many waters, whereof so much as if covered with water
converteth into stone, as much as is above, it and in the air retains the
form of wood, and continues as before.

7. We are not thoroughly resolved concerning Porcellane or Chyna dishes, that
according to common belief they are made of earth, which lies in preparation
about an hundred years under ground, for the relations thereof are not only
diverse, but contrary, and Authors agree not herein. Guido Pancirollus will have
them made of Egg shells, Lobster shells, and Gypsum laid up in the earth the
space of 80. years: of the same affirmation is Scaliger, and the common
opinion of most. Ramuzius in his Navigations is of a contrary assertion, that
they are made out of earth, not laid under ground, but hardened in the Sun
and wind, the space of forty years. But Gonzales de Mendoza, a man employed
into Chyna, and with an honorable present, sent from Phillip the second King
of Spain, has upon ocular experience, delivered a way different from al these.
For enquiring into the artifice thereof, he found they were made of a Chalky
earth, which beaten and steeped in water, affoordeth a cream or fatness on the
top, and a gross subsidence at the bottom; out of the cream or
superflui^ance, the finest dishes, says he, are made; out of the residence
thereof the courser; which being formed, they gild or paint, and not after an
hundred years, but presently commit unto the furnace: And this, says he, is
known by experience, and more probable then what Odoardus Barbosa has
delivered, that they are made of shells, and buried under earth of hundred
years: And answerable unto all points hereto, is the relation of Linschotten,
a very diligent enquirer in his Oriental Navigations.

Now if any man enquire, why being so commonly made, and in so short a time,
they are become so scarce, or not at all to be had, the answer is given by
these last Relators, that under great penalties it is forbidden to carry the
first sort out of the Country. And of those surely the properties must
verified, which by Scaliger and others are ascribed to China dishes, That they
admit no poison, That they strike fire, That they will grow hot no higher then
the liquor in them arises. For such as pass amongst us, and under the name of
the finest, will only strike fi^e, but not discover Aconite Mercury, or
Arsenick, but may be useful in dissenteries, and fluxes beyond the other.

8. Lastly, he must have more heads then Janus, that makes out half of those
virtues ascribed unto stones, and their not only medicall, but Magical
proprieties, which are to be found in Authors of great name. In Psellus,
Serapion, Evax, Albertus, Aleazar Marbodeus; in Maiolus, Against poison.
Rueus; Mylius, and many other.

That Lapis Lazul^ has in it a purgative faculty we know, Provoking urine.
that Bezoar is Antidotall, Lapis Judaicus diureticall, Coral Antipilepticall,
we will not deny. Against the fallingsicknesse.
That Cornelians, Jaspis, Heliotropes, and bloudstones, may be of virtue to
those intentions they are employed, experience and visible effects will make us
doubt. But that an Amethist prevents inebriation, that an Emerald will break
if worn in copulation. That a Diamond laid under the pillow, will betray the
incontinency of a wife. That a Saphyre is preservative against enchantments;
that the fume of an Agath will avert a tempest, or the wearing of a Crysoprase
make one out of love with gold, as some have delivered, we are yet, I confess
to believe, and in that infidelity are likely to end our days. And therefore,
they which in the explication of the two Beryls upon the Ephod, or the twelve
stones in the Rational or breast plate of Aaron, or those twelve which
garnished the wall of the holy City in the Apocalypse, have drawn their
significations from such as these, or declared their symbolicall verities from
such traditionall falsities, have surely corrupted the sincerity of their
Analogies, or misunderstood the mystery of their intentions.

CHAP. VI.
Of sundry tenants concerning vegetables or Plants, which examined, prove
either false or dubious.
1. MAny Mola's and false conceptions there are of Mandrakes, the first from
great Antiquity, conceives the Root thereof resembles the shape of man,
which is a conceit not to be made out by ordinary inspection, or any other
eyes, then such as regarding the clouds, behold them in shapes conformable to
preapprehensions.

Now what ever encouraged the first invention, there have not bin wanting many
ways of its promotion. The first a Catacresticall and far derived
similitude, it holds with man; that is, in a byfurcation or division of the
root into two parts, which some are content to call thighs, whereas
notwithstanding they are often times three, and when but two commonly so
complicated and crossed, that men for this deceit, are feign to effect their
design into other plants; And as fair a resemblance is often found in
Carrots, Parse^ips, Bryony, and many others. There are, I confess, diverse
plants which carry about them, not only the shape of parts, but also of whole
animals, but surely not all thereof, unto whom this conformity is imputed.
Whoever shall peruse the signatures of Crollius, or rather the phytognomy of
Port^, and strictly observes how vegetable realities, are commonly forced into
Animal representations, may easily perceive in very many, the semblance is but
postulatory, and must have a more assimilating fancy then mine to make good
many thereof.

Illiterate heads have bin led on by the name, which in the first syllable
expresses its representation; but others have better observed the laws of
Etymology, and deduced it from a word of the same language, that is, (...),
spel^nca, because it delights to grow in obscure and shady places, which
derivation, although we shall not stand to maintain, yet is the other openly
absurd, answerable unto the Etymologies of many Authors, who often confound
such nominall notations. Not to enquire beyond our own profession, the Latin
Physicians, which most adheared unto the Arabic way, have often failed herein,
particularly Valescus de Taranta a received Physician, in whose Philonium or
medicall practice these may be observed; Diarhaea says he, qu^a pluries venit
in die. Herisepela, quasi haerens pilis, emorrohois, ab emach sanguis and
morrhois quod est cadere. Lithargia a Litos quod est oblivio and Targus morbus,
Scotomia a Scotos quod est videre and mias musca, Opth^l mia ab opus Graece
quod est succus, and Talmon quod est occulus, Paralisis, qu^si laesio partis,
Fistula a fos sonus and stolon quod est emissio, quasi emissio soni vel vocis:
which are derivations as strange indeed as the other, and hardly to be
paralleld elsewhere, confirming not only the words of one language with
another, but creating such as were never yet in any.

The received distinction and common notation by sexes, has also promoted the
conceit; for true it is, that Herbalists from ancient times, have thus
distinguished them; naming that the masle, whose leaves are lighter, and fruit
and apples rounder, but this is properly no generative division, but rather
some note of distinction in color, figure or operation. For though Empedocles
affirm, there is a mix^, and undivided sex in vegetables; and Scaliger upon
Aristotle de plantis, does favorably explain that opinion, yet will it not
consist with the common and ordinary acception, nor yet with Aristotle's
definition: for if that be mas^e which generates in another, that female which
procreates in it self; if it be understood of sexes conjoined, all plants are
female, and if of dis^joyned, and congressive generation, there is no male or
female in them at all.

But the Atlas or maine axis, which supported this opinion, was daily
experience, and the visible testimony of sense; for many there are in several
parts of Europe who carry about, and sell roots unto ignorant poeple, which
hansomely make out the shape of man or woman, but these are not productions of
Nature, but contrivances of Art, as diverse have noted, and Mathiolus plainly
detected, who learned this way of trumpery from a vogabond cheator lying under
his cure for the French disease; his words are these, and may determine the
point, Sed profecto vanum and fabulosum, etc. But that is vain and fabulous
which ingnorant people, and simple women believe; for the roots which are
carried about by impostors to deceive unfruitful women, are made of the roots
of Canes, Bryony, and other plants, for in these yet fresh and virent, they
carve out the figures of men and women, first sticking, therein the grains of
barley or millet, where they intend the hair should grow, then bury them in
sand, until the grains shoot forth their roots, which at the longest will
happen in twenty days; afterward clip and trim those tender strings in the
fashion of beard and other hayrie t^guments. All which like other impostures
once discovered is easily effected, and in the root of white Bryony may be
practiced every spring.

What is there fore delivered in favor hereof, by Authors ancient or modern,
must have its roots in tradition, imposture, or far derived similitude; so
may we admit of the epithyte of Pythagoras who calls it (...), and that of
Col^mella, who terms i^ semihomo, otherwise Alber tus magnus is not to be
received when he affirms that Mandrakes so represent mankind, that
distinction of sex and other accidents are manifest therein. And udner these
terms may those Authors be admitted, which for this opinion are introduced by
Drusius, as David Camius, Moses ^ilius Namanis, and Abenezra Hispanus.

The second assertion concerns its production, That it naturally grows
under gallowses and places of execution, arising from fat or urine that drops
from the body of the dead; a story somewhat agreeable unto the fable of the
Serpents teeth sowed in the earth by Cadmus, or rather the birth of Orion from
the urine of Jupiter, Mercury, and Neptune: Now this opinion seems grounded on
the former, that is a conceived similitude it has with man; and therefore from
him in some way they would make out its production. Which conceit is not only
erroneous in the foundation, but injurious unto Philosophy in the
superstruction, making putrifactive generations, correspondent unto seminall
productions, and conceiving in equivocall effects and univocall conformity unto
the efficient; which is so far from being verified of animalls in their
corruptive mutations into plants, that they maintain not this similitude in
their nearer translation into animalls. So when the Ox corrupts into Bees,
or the Horses into hornets, they come not forth in the image of their
originalls. So the corrupt and excrementous humors in man are animated into
lyce; and we may observe that hogs, sheep, goats, hawks, hens, and diverse
other, have one peculiar and proper kind of vermin, not resembling themselves
according to seminall conditions, it carrying a settled and confined habitude
unto their corruptive originalls; and therefore come not forth in generations
erraticall, or different from each other, but seem specifically and in regular
shapes to attend the corruption of their bodies, as do more perfect
conceptions, the rule of seminall productions.

The third affirms the roots of Mandrakes do make a noise or give a shreeke
upon eradication, which is indeed ridiculous, and false below confute; arising
perhaps from a small and stridulous noise, which being firmly rooted, it
makes upon divulsion of parts. A slender foundation for such a vast
conception: for such a noise we sometime observe in other plants, in parsenips,
liquorish, eri^gium, flags, and others.

The last concerns the danger ensuing, that there follows an hazard of life
to them that pull it up, that some evil fate pursues them, and they live not
very long after; therefore the attempt hereof among the Ancients, was not in
ordinary way, but as Pliny informs, when they intended to take up the root of
this plant, they took the wind thereof, and with a sword describing three
circles about it they dug it up, looking toward the West, a conceit not only
injurious unto truth, and confutable by daily experience, but somewhat
derogatory unto the providence of God, that is not only to impose so
destructive a quality on any plant, but conceive a vegetable whose parts are
useful unto many, should in the only taking up prove mortal unto any. To
think he suffers the poison of Nubia to be gathered, Nap^llus, Aconite and
Thora to be eradicated, yet this not to be moved. That he permits Arsenick
and mineral poisons to be forced from the bowels of the earth, yet not this
from the surface thereof. This were to introduce a second forbidden fruit, and
inhance the first malediction; making it not only mortal for Adam to taste the
one, but capital unto his posterity to eradicate or dig up the other.

Now what begot, at least promoted so strange conceptions might be the magical
opinion hereof; this being conceived the plant so much in use with Circe, and
therefore named Circea, as Dioscorides and Theophrastus have delivered; which
being the eminent soceres of elder story, and by the magic of simples
believed to have wrought many wonders, some men were apt to invent, others to
believe any tradition or magical promise thereof.

Analogus relations concerning other plants, and such as are of near affinity
unto this, have made its current smooth, and pass more easily among us; for
the same effect is also delivered by Josephus, concerning the root Baaras, by
Aelian of Cynospastus, and we read in Homer the very same opinion concerning
Moly.

(...)
(...).
The Gods it Moly call, whose root to dig away,
Is dangerous unto man, but Gods they all things may.
Now parallels or like relations alternately releeve each other; when neither
will pass asunder, yet are they plausible together, and by their mutual
concurrences support their solitary instablilities.

Signaturists have somewhat advanced it, who seldom omitting what Ancients
delivered, drawing into inference received distinctions of sex, not willing to
examine its humane resemblance, and placing it in the form of strange and
magical simples, have made men suspect there was more therein, then ordinary
practice allowed, and so became ^pt to embrace what ever they heard or read
conformable unto such conceptions.

Lastly, the conceit promoteth it self: for concerning an effect whose trial
must cost so dear, it fortifies it self in that invention, and few there are
whose experiment it need to ^^are. For (what is most contemptible) although not
only the reason of any head, but experience of every hand may well convict it,
yet will it not by diverse be rejected, for prepossessed heads will ever doubt
it, and timorous beliefes will never dare to try it. So these tradi^ions how
low and ridiculous soever, will find in some suspicion, doubt in others, and
serve as tests or trialls of melancholy, and superstitious tempers for ever.

2. That Cinnamon, Ginger, Clove, Mace and Nutmeg, are but the several parts
and fruits of the same tree, is the common belief of those which daily use
them; whereof to speak distinctly, Ginger is the root of neither tree nor
shrub, but of an herbaceous plant, resembling the water ^lower De ^uce, as
Garcias first described, or rather the common reed, as Lobelius since affirmed,
very common in many parts of India, growing either from root or seed, which in
December and January they take up, and gently dried, role it up in earth,
whereby occluding the pores, they conserve the natural humidity, and so
prevent corruption.

Cinnamon is the inward bark of a Cinnamon tree, whereof the best is brought
from Zeilan; this freed from the outward bark, and exposed unto the Sun,
contracts into those folds wherein we commonly receive it. If it have not a
sufficient insolation it looks pale, and attaines not its laudable color, if
it be sunned too long it suffers a torrefaction, and descends somewhat
below it.

Clove is the rudiment or beginning of a fruit growing upon the Clove tree, to
be found but in few Countries. The most commendable is that of Isles of
Molucca; it is first white, afterward green, which beaten down, and dried in
the Sun becomes black, and in the complexion we receive it.

Nutmeg is the fruit of a tree differing from all these, and as Garcias
describes it, somewhat like a Peach, growing in diverse places, but fructifying
in the Isle of Banda. The fruit hereof, consists of four parts; the first or
outward part is a thick and carnous covering like that of a Walnut. The second
a dry and flosculous coat, commonly called Mace. The third a harder tegument or
shell, which lies under the Mace. The fourth a kernel included in the shell,
which is the same we call Nutmeg; all which both in their parts and order of
disposure, are easily discerned in those fruits, which are brought in preserves
unto us.

Now if because Mace and Nutmegs proceed from one tree, the rest must bear
them company, or because they are all from the East Indies, they are all from
one plant, the Inference is precipitous, nor will there such a plant be found
in the Herball of Nature.

3. That Viscus Arboreus of Misseltoe is bred upon trees, from seeds which
birds, especially Thrushes and Ringdoves let fall thereon, was the creed of the
Ancients, and is still believed among us, is the account of its production, set
down by Pliny, delivered by Virgil, and subscribed by many more. If so, some
reason must be assigned, why it grows only upon cert^ine trees, and not upon
many whereon these birds do light. For as Exotic observers deliver, it grows
upon Almond trees, Chestnut, Apples, Oaks, and Pine trees, as we observe in
England, very commonly upon Apple, Holly, Bays, Crabs, and White thorn,
sometimes upon Sallow, Hasell, and Oak, never upon Bays, Holly, Ashes, Elmes,
and many others. Why it grows not in all countries and places where these
birds are found, for so Brassavolus affirms, it is not to be found in the
territory of Ferrara, and was feign to supply himself from other parts of
Italy. Why if it arises from a seed, if sown it will not grow again, as
Pliny affirms, and as by setting the berryes thereof, we have in vain
attempted its production; why if it comes from seed that falls upon the
tree, it grows often downwards and puts forth under the bough, where seed
can neither fall, nor yet remain. Hereof beside some others, the Lord Verulam
has taken notice. And they surely speak probably who make it an arboreous
excrescence, or rather superplant, bred of a viscous and superfluous sap the
tree it self cannot assimilate, and therefore sprouteth not forth in boughs
and surcles of the same shape and similary unto the tree that bears it, but
in a different form, and secondary unto its specificall intention, wherein
once failing, another form succeeds, and in the first place that of
Misseltoe, in plants and trees disposed to its production. And therefore also
where ever it grows* it is of constant shape, and maintains a vegular figure
like other supercrescenses, and such as living upon the stock of others, are
termed Parasiticall plants, as Polypody, Moss, the smaller Capillaries, and
many more.

Now what begot this conceit, might be the enlargement of that part of truth
contained in its story. For certain it is, that some birds do feed upon the
berries of this vegetable, and we meet in Aristotle with one kind of thrush
called (...), the missell thrush or ^eeder upon misseltoe. But that which has
most promoted it, is a received proverb. Turdus sibi malum cac^t* Appliable
unto such men as are authors of their own misfortune: For according unto
ancient tradition and Plinies relation, the bird not able to digest the fruit
whereon she feeds, from her inconverted muting, arises this plant, of the
berries whereof birdlime is made, wherewith she is after entangled. Now
although proverbs be popular principles, yet is not all true that is
proverbiall; and in many thereof there being one thing delivered, and another
intended, though the verbal expression be false, the proverb is true enough
in the verity of its intention.

As for the Magical virtues in this plant, and conceived efficacy unto
veneficiall intentions, it seems unto me a Pagan relic derived from the
ancient D^uides, the great admirers of the Oak, especially the Misseltoe that
grew thereon; which according unto the particular of Pliny, they gathered with
great solemnity. For after sacrifice the priest in a white garment, ascended
the tree, cut down the Misseltoe with a golden hook, and received it in a
white coat, the virtue whereof was to resist all poisons, and make fruitful
any that used it. Virtues not expected from Classical practice; And did they
answer their promise which are so commended, in Epilepticall intentions, we
would abate these qualities. Country practice has added another, to provoke
the afterbirth, and in that case the decoction is given unto Cowes. That the
berries are poison as some conceive, we are so far from averring, that we have
safely given them inwardly, and can confirm the experiment of Brassavolus,
that they have some purgative quality.

4. The Rose of Jerico, that flourishes every year just upon Christmas Eve is
famous in Christian reports, which notwithstanding we have some reason to
doubt; and we are plainly informed by Bellonius, it is but a Monastical
imposture, as he has delivered in his observations, concerning the plants in
Jericho. That which promoted the conceit, or perhaps begot its continuance, was
a propriety in this plant. For though it be dry, yet will it upon imbibition
of moisture dilate its leaves, and explicate its flowers contracted, and
seemingly dried up. And this is to be effected not only in the plant yet
growing, but in some manner also in that which is brought exuccous and dry unto
us. Which quality being observed, the subtilty or contrivers did commonly play
this show upon the Eve of our Saviors Nativitie, and by drying the plant
again, it closed the next day, and so pretended a double mystery. That is the
opening and closing of the womb of Mary.

There wanted not a specious confirmation from a text in Ecclesiasticus, chap.
24. Quasi palma exaltata sum in Cad^s* and quasi plantatio Rosae in Jericho: I
was exalted like a Palm tree in Engaddi, and as a Rose in Jericho. The sound
whereof in common ears, begat an extraordinary opinion of the Rose of that
denomination. But herein there seems a great mistake; for by the Rose in the
text, is employed the true and proper Rose (...) says the Greek, and ours
accordingly renders it. But that which passes under this name, and by us is
commonly called the Rose of Jericho, is properly no Rose, but a small thorny
shrub or kind of heath, bearing little white flowers, far differing from the
Rose, whereof Bellonius a very inquisitive Herbalist could not find any in his
travells through Jericho. A plant so unlike a Rose, it has been mistaken by
some good Simplist for Amomum, which truly understood is so unlike a Rose,
that as D^oscorides delivers, the flowers thereof, are like the white violet,
and its leaves resemble Bryonie; suitable unto this relation almost in all
points is that of the thorn at Glassenbury, and perhaps the daughter thereof;
herein our endeavors as yet have not attained satisfaction, and cannot
therefore enlarge. Thus much in general we may observe, that strange effects,
are naturally taken for miracles by weaker heads, and artificially improved to
that apprehension by wiser.

5. That ferrum Equinum, or Sferra Cavallo has a virtue attractive of Iron, a
power to break locks, and draw off the shoes of a horse that passes over
it. Whether you take it for one kind of Secu^idaca, or will also take in
Lunaria, we know it to be false; and cannot but wonder at Mathiolus, who upon a
parallel in Pliny was staggered into suspension; who notwithstanding in the
imputed virtue to open things, close and shut up, could laugh himself at that
promise from Aethiopis, and condemn the judgment of Scipio, who having such a
picklock, would spend so many years in battering the gates of Carthage. Which
strange and Magical conceit, seems unto me to have no deeper root in reason,
then the figure of its seed; for therein indeed it somewhat resembles an
horseshooe, which notwithstanding Baptista Porta has thought too low a
signation, and raised the same unto a Lunarie representation.

6. That Bays will protect from the mischief of lightning and thunder, is a
quality ascribed thereto, common with the figtree, Aegle, and skin of a Seal.
Against so famous a quality, Vicomer^atus produces experiment of a Bay tree
blasted in Italy, and therefore although Tiberius for this intent, did wear a
Laurel about his temples. Yet did Augustus take a more probable course, who
fled under arches and hollow vautes for protection. And though Porta conceive,
becasue in a streperous eruption, it rises against fire, it does therefore
resist lightning, yet is that no emboldning Illation: And if we consider the
threefold effect of Jupiters Trisulke, to burn, discuss and terebrate; and if
that be true which is commonly delivered, that it will melt the blade, yet
pass the scabbard, kill the child, yet spare the mother, dry up the wine, yet
leave the hogshead entire; though it favor the amulet it may not spare us; it
will be unsure to rely on any preservative, it is no security to be dipped in
Styx, or clad in the armor of Ceneus. Now that beer, wine, and other liquors,
are spoiled with lightning and thunder, we conceive it proceeds not only from
noise and concussion of the air, but also noxious spirits, which mingle
therewith, and draw them to corruption, whereby they become not only dead
themselves, but sometime deadly unto others, as that which Seneca mentions,
whereof whosoever drank, either lost his life, or else his wits upon it.

7. It has much deceived the hopes of good fellows, what is commonly expected
of bitter Almonds, and though in Plutarch confirmed from the practice of
Claudius his Physician, that Antidote against ebriety has commonly failed.
Surely men much verst in the practice do err in the theory of inebriation,
conceaving in that disturbance the brain does only suffer from exhalations
and vaporous ascentions from the stomach, which fat and oily substances may
suppress, whereas the prevalent intoxication is from the spirits of drink
dispersed into the veins and arteries, from whence by common conveyances they
creep into the brain, insinuate into its ventricles, and beget those
vertigoes, accompanying that perversion. And therefore the same effect may be
produced by a Glister, the head may be intoxicated by a medicine at the heel.
And so the poisonous bytes of Serpents, although on parts at distance from the
head, yet having entered the veins, disturb the animal faculties, and
produce the effects of drink, or poison swallowed. And so as the head may be
disturbed by the skin, it may the same way be relieved, as is observable in
balneations, washings, and fomentations, either of the whole body, or of that
part alone.

8. That every plant might receive a name according unto the disease it cures,
was the wish of Paracelsus; a way more likely to multiply Empericks then
Herbalists, yet what is practiced by many is advantageous unto neither; that
is, relinquishing their proper appellations, to re-baptise them by the name of
Saints, Apostles, Patriarcks and Martyrs, to call this the herb of John, that
of Peter, this of James or Joseph, that of Mary or Barbara, for hereby
apprehensions are made additionall unto their proper natures; whereon
superstitious practices ensue, and stories are framed accordingly to make good
their foundations.

9. We cannot omit to declare the gross mistake of many in the nominall
apprehension of plan^s; to instance but in few. An herb there is commonly
called Betonica Pauli, or Paul's Betony, hereof the people have some conceit in
reference to S. Paul, whereas indeed that name is derived from Paulus Aegineta,
an ancient Physician of Aegina, and is no more then speed well, or Fluellen.
The like expectations are raised from Herba Trinitatis, which notwithstanding
obtains that name only from the figure of its leaves, and is one kind of
liverworte of Hepatica. In Milium Solis, the epithet of the Sun has enlarged
its opinion, which has indeed no reference thereunto, it being no more then
Li^hospermon, or grummell, or rather milium Soler, which as Serapion from Aben
Juliel has taught us, because it grew plentifully in the mountains of Solar,
received that appellation. In Jews ears some thing is conceived extraordinary
from the name, which is in propriety but Fungus sambucinus, or an excrescence
about the roots of Elder, and concerns not the Nation of the Jews, but Judas
Iscariot, upon a conceit, he hanged on this tree, and is become a famous
medicine in Quinses, sore throats, and strangulations ever since. And so are
they deceived in the name of Horse-raddish, Horse-mint, Bull-rush* and many
more: conceiving therein some prenominall consideration, whereas indeed that
expression is but a Grecisme, by the prefix of Hippos and Bous, that is, Horse
and Bull, intending no more then great. According whereto the great dock is
called Hippolapathum; and he that calls the horse of Alexander great head,
expresses the same which the Greeks do in Bucephalus.

10. Lastly, many things are delivered and believed of other plants, wherein at
least we cannot but suspend. That there is a property in Basil to propagate
Scorpions, and that by the smell thereof they are bred in the brains of men,
is much advanced by Hollerius, who found this insect in the brains of a man
that delighted much in this smell. Wherein beside that we find no way to
conjoyne the effect unto the cause assigned; herein the Modernes speak but
timerously, and some of the Ancients quite contrarily. For, according unto
Oribasius, Physician unto Julian, The Affricans, men best experienced in
poisons, affirm whosoever has eaten Basil, although he be stung with a
Scorpion, shall feel no pain thereby: which is a very different effect, and
rather antidotally destroying then seminally promoting its production.

That the leaves of Cataputia or spurge being plucked upward or downward
respectively perform their operations by purge or vomit, as some have written,
and old wives still do preach, is a strange conceit, and indeed somewhat
magneticall, aseribing unto plants positionall operations, and after the manner
of the Loadstone, upon the pole whereof if a knife be drawn from the handle
unto the point, it will take up a neele, but if drawn again from the point to
the handle, it will attract it no more.

That an Ivy cup will separate wine from water, if filled with both, the wine
soaking through, but the water still remaining, as after Pliny many have
averred we know not how to affirm, who making trial thereof, found both the
liquors to soake indistinctly through the bowl.

That Ros solis which rotteth sheep has any such cordial virtue upon us, we
have some reason to doubt.

That Flos Affricanus is poison, and destroys dogs, in two experiments we
have not found.

That Yew and the berries thereof are harmless we know.

That a Snake will not endure the shade of an Ash we can deny.

That Cats have such delight in the herb Nepeta, called therefore Cattaria,
our experience cannot discover. Nor is it altogether inconsiderable what is
affirmed by Bellonius; for if his assertion be true in the first of his
observations, our apprehension is oftentimes wide in ordinary simples, and in
common use we mistake one for another. We know not the true thime, the savory
in our Gardens is not that commended of old, and that kind of hysop the
Ancients used, is unknown unto us who make great use of another.

We omit to recite the many virtues, and endless faculties ascribed unto
plants, which sometime occure in grave and serious Authors, and we shall make
a bad composition for truth to concede a verity in half. To reckon up all, it
were employment for Archimedes, who undertook to write the number of the
sands. Swarms of others there are, some whereof our future endeavors may
discover; common reason I hope will save us a labor in many, whose absurdities
stand naked unto every eye, errors not able to deceive the Emblem of Justice,
and need no Argoes to descry them. Herein there surely wants expurgatory
animadversions, whereby we might strike out great numbers of hidden qualities,
and having once a serious and conc^ded list, we might with more encouragement
and safety, attempt their Reasons.

THE THIRD BOOK.
Of diverse popular and received Tenants concerning Animals, which examined,
prove either false or dubious.
CHAP. I.
Of the Elephant.
THE first shall be of the Elephant, whereof there generally passes an opinion
it has no joints; and this absurdity is seconded with another, that being
unable to lie down, it sleeps against a tree, which the Hunters observing
do saw almost asunder; whereon the beast relying, by the fall of the tree
falls also down it self, and is able to rise no more; which conceit is not the
daughter of latter times, but an old and gray headed error, even in the days
of Aristotle, as he delivers in his book, de incessu animalium, and stands
successively related by several other Authors, by Diodorus Siculus, Strabo,
Ambrose, Cassiodore, Solinus, and many more: Now herein me thinks men much
forget themselves, not well considering the absurdity of such assertions.

For first, they affirm it has no joints, and yet concede it walks and moves
about; whereby they conceive there may be a progression or advancement made in
motion without the inflexion of parts: Now all progression or animal
locomotion being (as Aristotle teaches) performed tractu and pulsu; that is by
drawing on, or impelling forward some part which was before in station, or at
quiet; where there are no joints or flexures neither can there be these
actions; and this is true, not only in Quadrupedes, Volatills and Fishes, which
have distinct and prominent organs of motion, legs, wings, and fins; but in
such also as perform their progression by the truncke, as serpents, worms and
leeches; whereof though some want bones, and all extended articulations, yet
have they arthriticall analogies, and by the motion of fibrous and musculous
parts, are able to make progression; which to conceive in bodies inflexible,
and without all protrusion of parts, were to expect a race from Hercules his
pillars, or hope to behold the effects of Orpheus his ha^pe, when Trees found
legs, and danced after his music.

Again, while men conceive they never lie down, and enjoy not the position of
rest, ordained unto all pedestrious animalls whatsoever, hereby they imagine
(what reason cannot conceive) that an animal of the vastest dimension and
longest duration should live in a continual motion, without that alternity and
vicissitude of rest whereby all others continue; and yet must thus much come to
pass, if we opinion they lie not down and enjoy no decumbence at all; for
station is properly no rest, but one kind of motion, relating unto that which
Physicians (from Galen) do name extensive or tonicall, that is an extension of
the muscles and organs of motion maintaining the body at length or in its
proper figure, wherein although it seem to be immoved is nevertheless without
all motion, for in this position the muscles are sensibly ex^ended, and labor
to support the body, which permitted unto its proper gravity would suddenly
subside and fall unto the earth, as it happens in sleep, diseases and death;
from which occult action and invisible motion of the muscles in station (as
Galen declares) proceed more offensive lassitudes then from ambulation; and
therefore the Tyranny of some have tormented men, with long and enforced
station, and though Ixion and Sisiphus which always moved, do seem to have
the hardest measure, yet was not Titius favored, that lay extended upon
Caucasus, and Tantalus suffered somewhat more then thirst, that stood
perpetually in hell; and thus Mercurialis in his Gym nasticks justly makes
standing one kind of exercise, and Galen when we lie down, commends unto us
middle figures; that is, not to lie directly, or at length, but somewhat
inflected, that the muscles may be at rest; for such as he terms
Hypobolemaioi or figures of excess, either shrinking up or stretching out, are
wearisome positions, and such as perturbe the quiet of those parts.

Moreover men herein do strangely forget the obvious relations of history,
affirming they have no joints, whereas they daily read of several actions
which are not performable without them. They forget what is delivered by
Xiphilinus, and also by Suetonius in the lives of Nero and Galba, that
Elephants have been instructed to walk on ropes, and that in public shows
before the people; which is not easily performed by man, and requires not only
a broad foot, but a pliable flexure of joints, and commandible disposure of all
parts of progression; they pass by that memorable place in Curtius, concerning
the Elephant of King Porus, Indus qui Elephantem regebat descendere eumratus,
more solito procumbere jussit in genua, caeteri quoque (ita en^^ instituti
erant) demisere corpora in terram; they remember not the expression of Osorius
de rebus gestis Emanuelis, when he speaks of the Elephant presented to Leo the
tenth, Pontificemter genibus flexis, and demisso corporis habitu veuerabundus
salutavit: But above all, they call not to mind that memorable show of
Germanicus, wherein twelve Elephants danced unto the sound of music, and after
laid them down in the Tricliniums, or places of festival Recumbency.

Lastly, they forget or consult not experience, whereof not many years past,
we have had the advantage in England, by an Elephant shown in many parts
thereof* not only in the posture of standing, but kneeling and lying down;
whereby although the opinion at present be reasonable well suppressed, yet from
the strings of tradition and fruitful recurrence of error, it is not
improbable, it may revive in the next generation again; for this was not the
first that has been seen in England, for (besides some others since) as
Polydore Virgil relates, Lewis the French King sent one to Henry the third;
and Emanuel of Portugal another unto Leo the tenth into Italy, where
notwithstanding the error is still alive and epidemicall, as with us.

The hint and ground of this opinion might be the gross and somewhat
Cylindricall composure of the legs, the equality and less perceptible
disposure of the joints, especially in the fore legs of this Animal, they
appearing when he stands like pillars of flesh, without any evidence of
articulation: the different flexure and order of the joints might also
countenance the same, being not disposed in the Elephant, as they are in other
quadrupedes, but carry a nearer conformity into those of man, that is the
bought of the fore legs not directly backward, but laterally and somewhat
inward, but the hough or suffraginous flexure behind rather outward, contrary
unto many other Q^ad^upedes, and such as can scratch the care with the hinder
foot, as Horses, Camells, Dear, Sheep and Dogs, for their fore legs bend like
our legs, and their hinder legs like our arms, when we move them to our
shoulders; but quadrupedes oviparous, as Frogs, Lizards, Crocodiles, have their
joints and motive flexures more analogously framed unto ours; and some among
viviparous, that is such thereof as can bring their forefeet and meat therein
into their mouths, as most can do that have the clanicles or coller-bones,
whereby their breasts are broader, and their shoulders more asunder, as the
Ape, the Monkey, the Squirrell, and some others: If therefore any shall affirm
the joints of Elephants are differently framed from most of other Quadrupedes,
and more obscurely and grossly almost then any, he does her^in no injury unto
truth; but if a dicto secundum quid addictum simpliciter, he affirms also
they have no articulations at all, he incurs the controlment of reason, and
cannot avoid the contradiction of sense.

As for the manner of their venation, if we consult historical experience, we
shall find it to be otherwise then as is commonly presumed, by sawing away of
trees; the accounts whereof are to be seen at large in Johannes Hugo, Edwardus
Lopez, Garcias ab Horto, Cadamustus, and many more: other concernments there
are of the Elephant, which might admit of discourse, and if we should question
the teeth of Elephants, that is whether they be properly so termed, or might
not rather be called horns, it were no new enquiry of mine, but a paradox as
old as Oppianus: whether as Pliny and diverse since affirm, that Elephants are
terrified, and make away upon the grunting of Swine, Garcias ab Horto may
decide, who affirms upon experience they enter their stalles, and live
promiscuously in the woods of Malavar; That the situation of the genitalls is
averse, and their copulation like that of Camells, as Pliny has also
delivered, is neither to be received, for we have beheld that part in a
different position, and their coition is made by supersaliency like that of
horses, as we are informed by some who have beheld them in that act. That some
Elephants have not only written whose sentences, as Aelian ocularly testifies,
but have also spoken, as Oppianus delivers, and Christophorus a Costa
particularly relates, although it sound like that of Achilles horse in Homer,
we do not conceive impossible; nor beside the affinity of reason in this
Animal any such intolerable incapacity in the organs of diverse other
Quadrupedes, whereby they might not be taught to speak, or become imitators of
speech like birds; and indeed strange it is how the curiosity of men that have
been active in the instruction of beasts, have never fallen upon this artifice,
and among those many paradoxicall and unheard of imitations, should not attempt
to make one speak; the Serpent that spoke unto Eve, the Dogs and Cats, that
usually speak unto Witches, might afford some encouragement, and since broad
and thick chops are required in birds that speak, since lips and teeth are
also organs of speech; from these there is also an advantage in quadrupedes,
and a proximity of reason in Elephants and Apes above them all.

CHAP. II.
Of the Horse.
THE second Assertion, that an Horse has no gall, is very general, nor only
swallowed by the people, and common Farriers, but also received by good
Veterinarians, and some who have laudably discoursed upon Horses, it seems
also very ancient; for it is plainly set down by Aristotle, an Horse and all
Solipeds have no gall; and the same is also delivered by Pliny, which
notwithstanding we find repugnant unto experience and reason; for first, it
calls in question the providence or wise provision of nature, who not abounding
in superfluities, is neither deficient in necessities, wherein nevertheless
there would be a maine defect, and her improvision justly accusable, if such a
feeding Animal, and so subject unto diseases from bilious causes, should want
a proper conveyance for choler, or have no other receptacle for that humor,
then the veins, and general mass of blood.

It is again controulable by experience; for we have made some search and
enquiry herein, encouraged by Absyrtus a Greek Author, in the time of
Constantine, who in his Hippiaticks, obscurely assigns the gall a place in
the liver* but more especially by Ruino the Bononian, who in his Anatomia del
Cavallo, has more plainly described it, and in a manner as I found it; for in
the dissections of Horses, and particular enquiry into that part, in the
concave or simous part of the liver, whereabout the gall is usually seated in
quadrupeds, I discover an hollow, long and membranous substance of a yellow
color without, and lined with choler and gall within; which part is by
branches diffused into the lobes and several parcells of the liver, from
whence receiving the fiery superfluity, or choleric remainder, upon the
second concoction by a manifest and open passage, it conveyeth it into the
duodenum or upper gut, thence into the lower bowels, which is the manner of
its derivation in man and other animalls; and therefore although there be no
eminent and circular follicle, no round bag or vesicle which long contains
this humor, yet is there a manifest receptacle and passage of choler, from the
liver into the guts; which being not so shut up, or at least not so long
detained, as it is in other animalls, procures that frequent excretion, and
occasions the horse to dung more often then many other; for choler is the
natural glister, or one excretion whereby nature excludes another, which
descending daily into the bowels, extimulates those parts, and excites them
unto expulsion; and so when this humor abounds or corrupts, there succeeds
ofttimes a cholerica passio, that is a sudden and vehement purgation upward and
downward; and so when the passage of gall becomes obstructed, the body grows
costive, and the excrements of the belly white, as it happens oft-times in
the Jaundice.

If any therefore affirm an horse has no gall, that is, no receptacle, or
part ordained for the separation of choler, or not that humor at all, he has
both sense and reason to oppose him; but if he says it has no bladder of
gall, and such as is observed in many other animals, we shall oppose our sense
if we gainesay him; and thus must Aristotle be made out when he denies this
part, and by this distinction we may relieve Pliny of a contradiction; who in
one place affirming an horse has no gall, delivers yet in another, that the
gall of an horse was accounted poison, and therefore at the sacrifices of
horses in Rome, it was unlawful for the Flamen but to touch it; but with more
difficulty, or hardly at all is that reconcilable which is delivered by our
Countreyman, and received veterinarian, whose words in his masterpiece, and
Chapter of diseases from the gall, are somewhat too strict, and scarce admit a
Reconciliation. The fallacy therefore of this conceit is not unlike the former,
A dicto secundum quid ad dictum simpliciter, because they have not a bladder of
gall, like those we usually observe in others, they have no gall at all; which
is a Paralogisme not admittible, a fallacy that dwells not in a cloud, and needs
not the Sun to scatter it.

CHAP. III.
Of the Dove.
THe third Assertion is somewhat like the second, That a Dove or Pigeon has no
gall, which is affirmed from very great Antiquity; for as Pierius observes,
from this consideration the Egyptians did make it the Hieroglyphick of
meekness; it has been averred by many holy Writers, commonly delivered by
Postillers and Commentators, who from the frequent mention of the Dove in the
Canticles, the precept of our Savior to be wise as Serpents, and innocent as
Doves, and especially the appearance of the holy Ghost in the similitude of
this animal, have taken occasion to set down many affections of the Dove, and
what does most commend it, is that it has no Gall; and hereof have made use
not only inferior and minor Divines, but Cyprian, Austin, Isidore, Beda,
Rupertus, Jansenius, and many more.

Whereto notwithstanding we know not how to assent, it being repugnant unto the
Authority and positive determination of ancient Philosophy; the affirmative of
Aristotle in his history of Animals is very plai^e, Felaliis ventri, aliis
intestino jungitur; Some have the Gall adjoined to the guts, as the Crow, the
Swallow, Sparrow, and the Dove, the same is also attested by Pliny, and not
without some passion by Galen, who in his book de Atra bile, accounts him
ridiculous that denies it.

It is not agreeable to the constitution of this Animal, nor can we so
reasonably conceive there wants a gall; that is, the hot and ^iery humor in a
body so hot of temper, which phlegm or melancholy could not effect: Now of
what complexion it is, Julius Alexandrinus declares, when he affirms, that
some upon the use thereof, have fallen into Fevers and Quinsies; the temper
also of their dung and intestinall excretions do also confirm the same, which
Topically applied become a Phaenigmus or Rubifying medicine, and are of such
fiery parts, that as we read in Galen, they have of themselves conceived fire,
and burnt a house about them, and therefore when in the famine of Samaria,
(wherein the fourth part of a cab of Pigeons dung was sold for five pieces of
silver) it is delivered by Josephus, that men made use hereof instead of common
slat, although the exposition seem strange, it is more probable then many
other, for that it contains very much salt; beside the effects before
expressed, it is discernable by taste, and the earth of Columbaries or
Dovehouses, so much desired in the artifice of Saltpeter; and to speak
generally, the excrements of birds which want both bladder and kidneys, has
more of salt and acrimony, then that of other animals, who beside the guts have
also those conveyances; for whereas in these, the salt and lixiviated serosity
with some portion of choler, is divided between the guts and bladder, it
remains und^vided in birds, and has but a single descent, by the guts, with
the exclusions of the belly. Now if because the Dove is of a mild and gentle
nature, we cannot conceive it should be of an hot temper, our apprehensions
are not distinct in the measure of constitutions, and the several parts which
evidence such conditions: for the Irascible passions do follow the temper of
the heart, but the concupiscible distractions the crasis of the liver; now many
have not livers, which have but cool and temperate hearts, and this was
probably the temper of Paris, a contrary constitution to that of Ajax, and in
both but short of Medea, who seemed to exceed in either.

Lastly, it is repugnant to experience, for Anatomicall inquiry discovers in
them a gall, and that according to the determination of Aristotle, not annexed
unto the Liver, but adhering unto the guts; nor is the humor contained in
smaller veins, or obscure capillations, but in a vesicle or little bladder,
though some affirm it has no cystis or bag at all, and therefore the
Hieroglyphick of the Egyptians, though allowable in the sense, is weak in the
foundation, who expressing meekness and lenity by the portract of a Dove with
the tail erected, affirmed it had no gall in the inward parts, but only in
the rumpe, and as it were out of the body, and therefore if they conceived
their gods were pleased with the sacrifice of this Animal, as being without
gall, the ancient Heathen were surely mistaken in the reason, and in the very
oblation, whereas in the holocaust or burnt offerings of Moses the gall was
cast away; for as Ben Maimon instructs, the inwards whereto the gall adhereth
were taken out with the crop, according unto the Law, Levit. 1. which the
Priest did not burn, but cast unto the E^st, that is, behind his back, and
readiest place to be carried out of the Sanctuary. And if they also conceived
that for this reason, they were the birds of Venus, and wanting the furious and
discording part, were more acceptable unto the Deity of Love; they surely added
unto the conceit, which was at first venereall, and in this animal may be
sufficiently made out from that conception.

The ground of this conceit is partly like the former, that is, the obscure
situation of the gall, and out of the Liver, wherein it is commonly enquired,
but this is a very injust illation, not well considering with what variety this
part is seated in birds; in some both at the stomach and the liver, as in the
Cap^iceps, in some at the liver only, as in Cocks, Turkeys, and Phasiants, in
others at the guts and Liver, as in Hawks and Kites; in some at the guts
alone, as Crows, Doves, and many more, and these perhaps may take up all the
ways of situation, not only in birds, but also other animals, for what is
said of the Anchony or (...), that answerable unto its name, it carries the
gall in the head, is further to be enquired; and though the discolored
particles in the skin of an Heron, be commonly termed Galls, yet is not this
animal deficient in that part; and thus when it is conceived that the eyes of
Tobias were cured by the gall of the fish Callyonimus or Scorpius marinus,
commended to that effect by Dioscorides, although that part were not in the
liver, were there reason to doubt that probability, and whatsoever animal it
was, it may be received without exception when it is delivered, the married
couple as a testimony of future concord, did cast the gall of the sacrifice
behind the Altar?

A strict and literal acception of a loose and tropicall expression was a
second ground hereof; for while some affirmed it had no gall, intending only
thereby no evidence of anger or fury, others have construed it anatomically,
and denied that part at all; by which illation we may infer, and that from
sacred Text, a Pigeon has no heart, according to that expression, Hosea 7.
Factus est Ephraim sicut Colum ba seducta non habens cor; and so from the
letter of Scripture we may conclude it is no mild, but a fiery and furious
animal, according to that of Jeremy, chap. 25. Facta est terra in desolationem
a facie irae Columbae: and again, chap. 46. Revertamur ad terram nativitatis
nostrae a facie gladii columbae, where notwithstanding the Dove is not
literally intended, but thereby are employed the Babylonians whose Queen
Semiramis was called by that name, and whose successors did bear the Dove in
their standard: so is it proverbially said, Formicae sua bilis inest, habet and
musca splenem, whereas we all know Philosophy denies these parts, nor has
Anatomy discovered them in insects.

If therefore any shall affirm a Pigeon has no gall, implying no more thereby
then the lenity of this animal, we shall not controvert his affirmation; and
thus may we make out the assertions of ancient Writers, and safely receive the
expressions of those great Divines and worthy Fathers; but if by a transition
from Rhetoric to Logic, he shall contend, it has no such part, or humor,
he commits an open fallacy, and such as was probably first committed
concerning Spanish Mares, whose swiftness tropically expressed from their
generation by the wind, might after be grossly taken, and a real truth
conceived in that conception.

CHAP. IV.
Of the Bever.
THat a Bever to escape the Hunter, bites off his testicles or stones, is a
^enent very ancient, and has had thereby advantage of propagation; for the
same we find in the Hi^roglyphicks of the Egyptians, in the Apologue of
Aesope, an Author of great antiquity, who lived in the beginning of the Persian
Monarchy, and in the time of Cyrus, the same is touched b^ Aristotle in his
Ethics, but seriously delivered by Aelian, Pliny and Solinus, with the same
we meet with in Juvenal, who by an handsome and metricall expression more
welcomely engrafts it in our junior memories -- imitatus Castora, qui se
Eunuchum ipse facit cupiens evadere damno
Testiculo^um, adeo medicatum intelligit inguen,
it has been propagated by Emblems, and some have been so bad Gramarians, as
to be deceived by the name, deriving Castor a castrando; whereas, the proper
L^tine word is Fibor, and Castor, but borrowed from the Greek so called quasi
(...), that is, Animal ventricosum, from his swaggy and prominent belly.

Herein therefore to speak compendiously, we first presume to affirm, that
from a strict enquiry, we cannot maintain the evulsion or biting of any parts,
and this is declareable from the best and most professed Writers, for though
some have made use hereof in a Moral or Tropicall way, yet have the professed
discoursers by silence deserted, or by experience rejected this assertion. Thus
was it in ancient times discovered, and experimentally refuted by one Sestius a
Ph^sitian, as it stands related by Pliny; by Dioscorides, who plainly
affirms that this tradition is false, by the discoveries of modern Authors,
who have expressly discoursed hereon, as Aldrovandus, Mathiolus, Gesne^us,
Bellonius; by Olaus Magnus, Peter Martyr and diverse others, who have described
the manner of their venations in America, they generally omitting this way of
their escape, and have delivered several other, by which they are daily taken.

The original of the conceit was probably Hieroglyphicall, which after became
Mythologicall unto the Greeks, and so set down by Aesop, and by process of
tradition, stole into a total verity, which was but partially true, that is in
i'^s cove^t sense and morallity. Now why they placed this invenion upon the
Bever, (beside the Medicall and Merchantable commodity of castoreum or parts
conceived to be bitten away) might be the sagacitie and wisdom of that
animal, which indeed from the works it performs, and especially i'ts
artifice in building is very strange, and surely not to be matched by any
other, omitted by Plutarch de solertia animalium, but might have much
advantaged the drift of that discourse.

If therefore any affi^me a wise man should demean himself like the B^ver,
who to escape with his life, contemns the loss of his genitalls; that is, in
case of extremity, not strictly to endeavor the preserva^ion of all, but to
sit down in the enjoyment of the greater good, though with the detriment and
hazard of the lesser; we may hereby appr^hend a real and useful truth; and
in this la^i^ude of belief, w^e are content to receive the fable of Hippomanes
who redeemed his life, with the loss of a golden ball; and whether true o^
^alse, we reject not the tragedy of Absyrtus, and the dispersion of his members
b^ Medea to perplex the pursuit of her father; but if he shall positively
affi^me this act, and cannot believe the moral, unless he also credit the
fable, he is surely greedy of delusion, and will hardly avoid deception in
theories of this nature. The error therefore and Alogie in th^s opinion, is
worse then in the last, that is not to receive figures for realities, but
expect a verity in Apologues, and believe, as serious ^ffi^mations, confessed
and studied fables.

Again, if this were true, and that the Bever in chase make some divulsion of
parts, as that which we call Castoreum; yet are not these parts avelled to be
termed Testicles or stones, for these cods or follicles are sound in both
sexes, though somewhat more protuberant in the male; t^ere is hereto no
de^ivation of the seminall parts, nor any passage from hence, unto the vessels
of ej^culations; some perforations only in the part it self, through which
the humor included does exudate; as may be observed in such as are fresh, and
not much dried with age; and lastly, the Testicles properly so called, are of a
lesser magnitude and sea^ed inwardly upon the loins; and therefore it were not
only a fruitless attempt, but impossible act, to eu^uchate or castrate
themselves, and might be an hazardous practice of Art, if at all attempted by
othe^s.

Now all this is confirmed from the experimental testimony of five very
memorable Authors; Bellonius, Gesnerus, Amatus, Rondeletius, and M^^hiolus, who
receivng the hint hereof from Rondeletius in the Anatomy of two Bevers, did
find all true that had been delivered by him, whose words are these in his
learned book de Piscibus: Fibri in ingu^nibus geminos tumores habent
utrinqueunicum, ovi ^nserini magnitudine, inter hos est mentula in m^ribus, in
foeminis pud^ndum hi tumores testes non sunt sed folliculi member ana con^ecti
in quor^ medio singuli sunt meatus e qu^bus exudat liquor pinguis and cerosus
quem ipse Castor saepe admoto ore lambit and ^xug^t, p^stea veluti oleo
corporis pa^tes oblinit; Hos tumores testes non e^s^ hinc m^ixime coll^gitur
quod ab illis nulla est ad mentulam via neque ductus quo humor in mentulae
me^tum derivetur and for as emitt^tur; prae^erea quod ^estes ^n^us reperi^ntur,
eosdem tumores Moscho animali in esse puto, e quibus odoratum illud pus emanat;
then which words there can be none plainer, nor more evidently discover the
improprietie of this appellation: that which is included in the cod or visible
bag about the groine, being not the Testicle, or any spermaticall part, but
rather a collection of some superfluous matter deflowing from the body,
esp^cially the parts of nutrition as unto their proper emunctories, and as it
does in Musck and Civet cats, though in a different and offensive odor,
proceeding partly from i'ts food, that being especially fish, whereof this
humor may be a garous excretion, or a raucide and olidous separation.

Most therefore of the Modernes before Rondeletius, and all the Ancients
excepting Sestius, have misunderstood this part, as conceiving Castoreum for
the Testicles of the Bever, as Dioscorides, Galen, Aegineta, Aetius, and others
have pleased to name it. The Egyptians also ^ailed in the ground of their
Hieroglyphick, when they expressed the punishment of adultery by the Bever
depriving himself of his testicles, which was amongst them the penalty of such
incontinencie. Nor is Ae^^us perhaps, too strictly to be observed, when he
prescribes the (...) of the O^ter, or River-dog, as succedaneous unto
Castoreum: but ^^ost inexcusable of all is Pliny, who having before him in one
place (...) experiment of Sestius against it, sets down in another, that the
Bevers of Pontus bite off their testicles, and in the same place affir^^th the
like of the Hyena.

Now the ground of this mistake might be the resemblance and situation of these
tumors about those parts, wherein we observe the testicles in other animalls;
which notwithstanding is no well founded illation; for the testicles are
defined by their office, and not determined by place or situation; they having
one office in all, but different seats in many; for beside that no serpent or
fishes oviparous, have any stones at all; that neither biped nor quadruped
oviparous have any exteriorly, or prominent in the groyne, some also that are
viviparous contain these parts within, as beside this animal the Elephant, and
the Hedgehog.

If any therefore shall term these, testicles, intending metaphorically, and
in no strict acception, his language is tolerable and offends our ears no more
then the Tropicall names of plants, when we read in Herballs in the several
kinds of Orchis of Dogs, Fox, and Goat-stones; but if he insist thereon, and
maintain a propriety in this language, our discourse has overthrown his
assertion, nor will Logic permit his illation; That is, from things alike, to
conclude a thing the same, and from an accidental convenience that is a
similitude in place or figure, to infer a specificall congruity or substantial
concurrence in nature.

CHAP. V.
Of the Badger.
That a Brock or Badger has his legs of one side shorter then of the other,
though an opinion perhaps not very ancient, is yet very general, received not
only by theorists and unexperienced believers, but assented unto by most who
have the opportunity to behold and hunt them daily; which notwithstanding upon
enquiry I find repugnant unto the three determinators of truth, Authority,
Sense and Reason: For first, Albertus m^gnus speaks dubiously, confessing he
could not confirm the ve^ity hereof, but Aldrovand affirms plainly, there
can be no such inequality observed; and for my own part, upon indifferent
enquiry, I cannot discover this difference, although the regardible side be
defined, and the brevity by most imputed unto the left.

Again, it seems no easy affront unto reason, and generally repugnant unto
the course of nature; for if we survey the total set of animals, we may in
their legs, or organs of progression, obse^ve an equality of length, and parity
of numeration; that is, not any to have an odd leg, or the supporters and
movers of one side not exactly answered by the other* although the hinder may
be unequal unto the fore and middle legs, as in Frogs, Locusts and
Grafhoppers, or both unto the middle, as in some beetles, and spiders, as is
determined by Aristotle de incessu animalium; perfect and viviparous
quadrupeds, so standing in their position of pronenesse, that the opposite
joints of neighbor legs consist in the same plain, and a line de^cending from
their navell intersects at right angles the axis of the earth: It happens
often I confess that a Lobster has the chely or great claw of one side longer
then the other, but this is not properly their leg, but a part of apprehension,
and whereby they hold or seize upon their prey; for in them the legs and proper
parts of progression are inverted backward, and stand in a position opposi^e
unto these.

Lastly, the monstrosity is ill contrived, and with some disadvantage, the
shortness being affixed unto the legs of one side, which might have been more
tolerably placed upon the thwart or Diagoniall movers; for the progression of
quadrupeds being performed per Diametrum, that is the cross legs moving or
resting together, so that two are always in motion, and two in station at the
same time, the brevity had been more tolerable in the cross legs; for then the
motion and station had been performed by equal legs, whereas herein they are
both performed by unequal organs, and the imperfection becomes discoverable at
every hand.

CHAP. VI.
Of the Bear.
THat a Bear brings forth her young informous and unshapen, which she
fashioneth after by licking them over, is an opinion not only vulgar, and
common with us at present, but has been of old delivered by ancient Writers
upon this foundation, it was a Hieroglyphicke amon the Egyptians; Aristotle
seems to countenance it, Solinus, Pliny and Aelian directly affirm it, and
Ovid smoothly delivers it -- -- Nec catulus partu quem reddidit ursa recenti
Sed male viva caro est, lambendo matter in artus
Ducit and in formam qualem cupit ipsa reducit.
Which opinion notwithstanding is not only repugnant unto the sense of every
one that shall with diligence enquire into it, but the exact and deliberate
experiment of three authenticke Philosophers; the first of Mathiolus in his
Comment on Dioscorides, whose words are to this effect. In the valley of Anania
about Trent, in a Bear which the Hunters eventerated, I beheld the young ones
with all their parts distinct, and not without shape, as many conceive, giving
more credit unto Aristotle and Pliny, then experience and their proper senses.
Of the same assurance was Julius Scaliger in his Exercitations, Vrsam faetus
informs potius ejicere, qu (...) parere, si vera dicunt, quos postea linctu
effingat, Quid hujusce fabulae authorib^s fidei habendum ex hac historia
cognosces, In nostris Alpibus venatores faetam ursam cepere, dissecta eafae tus
plane formatus intus inventus est: and lastly, Aldrovandus who from the
testimony of his own eyes affirms, that in the cabinet of the Senate of
Bononia, there was preserved in a glass a Cub dissected out of a Bear
perfectly formed, and complete in every part.

It is moreover injurious unto reason, and much impugneth the course and
providence of nature, to conceive a birth should be ordained before there is a
formation; for the conformation of parts is necessarily required not only unto
the prerequisites and previous conditions of birth, as motion and animation,
but also unto the parturition or very birth it self; wherein not only the Dam,
but the younglings play their parts, and the cause and act of exclusion
proceeds from them both: for the exclusion of animals is not merely passive
like that of eggs, nor the total action of delivery to be imputed unto the
mother; but the first attempt begins from the Infant, which at the
accomplished period attempteth to change his mansion, and struggling to come
forth, dilacerates and breaks those parts which restrained him before.

Beside (what few take notice of) men hereby do in a high measure vilify the
works of God, imputing that unto the tongue of a beast, which is the strangest
artifice in all the acts of nature, that is the formation of the Infant in the
womb, not only in mankind, but all viviparous animals whatsoever, wherein the
plastic or formative faculty, from matter appearing homogeneous, and of a
similary substance erecteth bones, membranes, veins and ar^eries, and out of
these contriveth every part in number, place and figure, according to the law
of its species, which is so far from being fashioned by any outward agent, that
once omitted or perverted by a slip of the inward Phidias, it is not reducible
by any other whatsoever; and therefore, mire me plasmaverunt manus tuae, though
it originally respected the generation of man, yet is it applyable unto that of
other animalls, who entering the womb in indistinct and simple materials,
return with distinction of parts, and the perfect breath of life; he that
shall consider these alterations without, must needs conceive there have been
strange operations within, which to behold it were a spectacle almost worth
ones being, a sight beyond all, except that man had been created first, and
might have seen the show of five days after.

Now as the opinion is repugnant both unto sense and reason, so has it
probably been occasioned from some slight ground in either; thus in regard the
cub comes forth involved in the Chorion, a thick and tough membrane obscuring
the formation, and which the Dam does after bite, and tea^e asunder, the
beholder at first sight conceives it a rude and informous lump of flesh, and
imputes the ensuing shape unto the mouthing of the Dam; which adds nothing
thereunto, but only draws the curtain, and takes away that veil which
conceded the piece before; and thus have some endeavored to enforce the same
from reason; that is, the small and slender time of the Bears gestation, or
going with her young, which lasting but few days (a month some say) the
exclusion becomes precipitous, and the young ones consequently informous;
according to that of Solinus, Trigesimus dies uterum liberat ursae, unde evenit
ut praecipitata faecundita^ informs creet partus; but this will overthrow the
general method of nature, in the works of generation; for therein the
conformation is not only antecedent, but proportional unto the exclusion, and
if the period of the birth be short, the term of conformation will be as
sudden also, there may I confess from this narrow time of gestation ensue a
minority or smalnesse in the exclusion, but this however infers no
informity, and it still receives the name of a natural and legitimate birth;
whereas if we affirm a total informity, it cannot admit so forward a term as
an Abortment; for that supposes conformation, and so we must call this
constant and intended act of nature, a slip, an (...) or effluxion, that is an
exclusion before conforma^ion, before the birth can bear the name of the
parent, or be so much as properly called an Embryon.

CHAP. VII.
Of the Basilisk.
MAny opinions are passant concerning the Basiliske or little king of Serpents,
commonly called the Cockatrice, some affirming, others denying, most doubting
the relations made hereof; what therefore in these incertainties we may more
surely determine, that such an animal there is, if we evade not the testimony
of Scripture, and humane Writers, we cannot safely deny: So is it said Psalm*
91. Super aspidem and Basiliscum ambulabis, wherein the vulgar Translation
retains the word of the Septuagint, using in other places the Latin
expression Regulus, as Proverb. 23. Mordebit ut coluber, and sicut Regulus
venena diffundet, and Jeremy 8. Ecce ego mittam vobis serpents Regulos, etc.
That is, as ou^s translate it, Behold I will send Serpents, Cockatrices among
you which will not be charmed, and they shall bite you; and as for humane
Authors, or such as have discoursed of animals, or poisons, it is to be found
almost in all, as Dioscorides, Galen, Pliny, Soli^us, Aelian, Aetius, Avicen,
Ardoynus, Crevinus, and many more; In Aristotle I confess we find no mention,
but Scaliger in his Comment and enumeration of Serpents, has made supply, and
in his Exercitations delivers that a Basilisk was found in Rome, in the days
of Leo the fourth, and the like is reported by Sigonius, and some are so far
from denying one, that they have made several kinds thereof, for such is the
Catoblepas of Pliny, conceived by some, and the Dryinus of Aetius by others.

But although we deny not the existence of the Basilisk, yet whether we do not
commonly mistake in the conception hereof, and call that a Basilisk which is
none at all, is surely to be questioned; for certainly that which from the
conceit of its generation we vulgarly call a Cockatrice, and wherein (but under
a different name) we intend a formal Identity and adequate conception with the
Basilisk, is not the Basilisk of the Ancients, whereof such wonders are
delivered. For this of ours is generally described with legs, wings, a
serpentine and winding tail, and a crist or comb somewhat like a Cock; but
the Basilisk of elder times was a proper kind of Serpent, not above three
palms long, as some account, and differenced from other Serpents by advancing
his head, and some white marks or coronary spots upon the crown, as all
authentic Writers have delivered.

Nor is this Cockatrice only unlike the Basiliske, but of no real shape in
nature, and rather an Hieroglyphicall fancy, to express their different
intentions, set forth in different fashions; sometimes with the head of a man,
sometimes with the head of an Hawke, as Pierius has delivered, and as with
addition of legs the Heralds and Painters still describe it; nor was it only
of old a symbolicall and allowable invention, but is now become a manual
contrivance of Art, and artificial imposture, whereof besides others, Scaliger
has taken notice: Basilisci f^rmam mentiti sunt vulgo Gallinaceo similem, and
pedibus binis, neque enim absimiles sunt caeteris serpentibus, nisi macula
quasi in vertice candida, unde illi nomen Regium, that is, men commonly
counterfeit the form of a Basilisk, with another like a Cock, and with two
feet, whereas they differ not from other Serpents, but in a white speck upon
their crown; now although in some manner it might be counterfeited in Indian
Cocks, and flying Serpents, yet is it commonly contrived out of the skins of
Thornebacks, Scaites or Maids, as Aldrovand has observed, and also graphically
described in his excellent book of Fishes.

Nor is only the existency of this animal considerable, but many things
delivered thereof, particularly its poison, and its generation. Concerning the
first, according to the doctrine of the Ancients, men still affirm, that it
kills at a distance, that it poysoneth by the eye, and that by priority of
vision; now that deleterious it may be at some distance and destructive
without a corporal contaction, what uncertainty soever there be in the effect,
there is no high improbability in the relation; for if plagues or pestilentiall
Atoms have been conveyed in the air from different Regions, if men at a
distance have infected each other; if the shadows of some trees be noxious,
if Torpedoes deliver their opium at a distance, and stupifie beyond themselves;
we cannot reasonably deny, that, beside our gross and restrained poisons
requiring contiguity unto their actions, there may proceed from subtiler seeds,
more agile emanations, which will contemn those Laws, and invade at distance
unexpected.

That this venenation shoots from the eye, and that this way a Basil^sk may
empoyson, although thus much be not agreed upon by Authors, some imputing it
unto the breath, others unto the bite, it is not a thing impossible; for eyes
receive offensive impressions, from their objects, and may have influences
destructive to each other; for the visible species of things strike not our
senses immaterally, but streaming in corporal rays, do carry with them the
qualities of the object from whence they flow, and the medium through which
they pass: Thus through a green or red glass all things we behold appear
of the same colors; thus sore eyes affect those which are sound, and
themselves also by reflection, as will happen to an inflamed eye that beholds
it self long in a glass; thus is fascination made out, and thus also it is
not impossible, what is affirmed of this animal, the visible rays of their
eyes carrying forth the subtilest portion of their poison, which received by
the eye of man, or beast, infecteth first the brain, and is from thence
communicated unto the heart.

But lastly, that this destruction should be the effect of the first beholder,
or depend upon priority of aspection, is a point not easily to be granted, and
very hardly to be made out upon the principles of Aristotle, Al^azen, Vitello,
and others; who hold that sight is made by Reception, and not by Ex^ram^ssion,
by receiving the rays of the object into the eye, and not by sending any out;
for hereby although he behold a man first, the Basilisk should rather be
destroyed, in regard he first receives the rays of his Antipathy and venomous
emissions which objectively move his sense; but how powerful soever his own
poison be, it invadeth not the sense of man, in regard he beholds him not:
and therefore this conceit was probably first begot by such as held the
contrary opinion of sight by extramission, as did Pythagoras, Plato,
Empedocles, Hipparchus, Galen, Macrobius, Proclus, Simplic^us, with most of the
Ancients, and is the postulate of Euclide in his Optics: and of this opinion
might they be, who from this Antipathy of the Basilisk and man, expressed first
the enmity of Christ and Satan, and their mutual dest^uction thereby; when
Satan being elder then his humanity, beheld Christ first in the ^lesh, and so
he was destroyed by the Serpent, but Elder then Satan in his Divinity, and so
beholding him first he destroyed the old Basilisk, and overcame the effects of
his poison, sin, death, and hell.

As for the generation of the Basilisk, that it proceeds from a Cocks egg
hatched under a Toad or Serpent, it is a conceit as monstrous as the brood it
self: for if we should grant that Cocks growing old, and unable for emission,
amasse within themselves some seminall matter, which may after conglobate into
the form of an egg, yet will this substance be unfruitful, as wanting one
principle of generation, and a commixture of the seed of both sexes, which is
required unto production, as may be observed in the eggs of hens not trodden,
and as we have made trial in some which are termed Cocks eggs; It is not
indeed impossible that from the sperme of a Cock, Hen, or other animal being
once in putrescence, either from incubation, or otherwise, some generation may
ensue, not univocall and of the same species, but some imperfect or monstrous
production; even as in the body of man from putred humors, and peculiar ways
of corruption, there have succeeded strange and unseconded shapes of worms,
whereof we have beheld some our selves, and read of others in medicall
observations: and so may strange and venomous Serpents be several ways
engendered; but that this generation should be regular, and always produce a
Basilisk, is beyond our affirmation, and we have good reason to doubt.

Again, it is unreasonable to ascribe the equivocacy of this form unto the
hatching of a Toade, or imagine that diversifies the production; for Incubation
alters not the species, nor if we observe it so much as concurres either to
the sex or color, as evidently appears in the eggs of Ducks or Partridges
hatched under a Hen, there being required unto their exclusion, only a gentle
and continued heat, and that not particular or confined unto the species or
parent; so have I known the seed of silke-wormes hatched on the bodies of
women, and so Pliny reports that Livia the wife of Augustus hatched an egg in
her bosom; nor is only an animal heat required hereto, but an elementall
and artificial warmth will suffice; for as Diodorus delivers, the Egyptians
were wont to hatch their eggs in ovens, and many eye witnesses confirm that
practice unto this day: and therefore this generation of the Basilisk, seems
like that of Castor and Helena, he that can credit the one, may easily believe
the other; that is, that these two were hatched out of the egg, which Jupiter
in the form of a Swan, begat on his Mistress Leda.

The occasion of this conceit might be an Egyptian tradition concerning the
bird Ibis, which after became transferred unto Cocks; for an old opinion it was
of that Nation, that the Ibis feeding upon Serpents, that venomous food so
inquinated their ovall conceptions, or eggs within their bodies, that they
sometimes came forth in Serpentine shapes, and therefore they always brake
their eggs, nor would they endure the bird to sit upon them; but how
causeless their fear was herein, the daily Incubation of Ducks, Peahens, and
many other testify, and the Sto^ke might have informed them, which bird they
honored and cherished, to destroy their Serpents.

That which much promoted it, was a misapprehension in holy Scripture upon the
Lati^e Translation in Esaias 51. Ova aspidum ruperunt, and telas Aranearum
texuerunt, qui comedent de ovis little morietur, and quod confotum est, erumpet
in Regulum, from whence notwithstanding, beside the generation of Serpents from
eggs there can be nothing concluded; but what kind of serpents are meant not
easy to be determined, for translatio^s are very different: Tremellius
rendering the Asp Haemorrhous, and the Regulus or Basilisk a Viper, and our
translation for the Aspe, sets down a Cockatrice in the text, and an Adder in
the margin.

Another place of Esaias does also seem to countenance it, chap. 14. Ne Lateris
Philistaea quoniam diminuta est virga percussoris tui, de radice enim colubri
egredietur Regulus, and semen ejus absorbens volucrem, which ours somewhat
favorably renders, out of the Serpents Root shall come forth a Cockatrice,
and his fruit shall be a fiery flying Serpent: But Tremellius, e radice
Serpentis prodit Haemorrhous, and fructus illius Praester volans, wherein the
words are different, but the sense is still the same; for therein are
figuratively intended Vzziah and Ezechias, for though the Philistines had
escaped the Minor Serpent Vzziah, yet from his stock, a fiercer Snake should
arise, that would more terribly sting them, and that was Ezechias.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the Wolf.
SUch a Story as the Basilisk is that of the Wolf concerning prioritie of
vision, that a man becomes hoarse or dumb, if a Wolf have the advantage first
to eye him, and this is in plain language affirmed by Pliny: In Italia ut
cred^^ur, ^uporum v^sus est noxius, vocemque homini, quem prius contemplatur
adimere; ^o is it made out what is delivered by Theocritus, and after him by
Virgil -- Vox quoq Moerim
Iam fugit ipsa, Lupi Moerim videre priores.
And thus is the proverb to be understood, when during the discourse the
party or subject interveneth, and there ensues a sudden silence, it is
usually said, Lupus est in fabula: which conceit being already convicted, not
only by Scaliger, R^olanus and others, but daily confutable almost every where
out of England, we shall not further refute.

The ground or occasional original hereof was probably the amazement and sudden
silence, the unexpected appearance of wolves do often put upon travelers; not
by a supposed vapor, or venomous emanation, but a vehement fear which
naturally produces obmutescence, and sometimes irrecoverable silence: thus
birds are silent in presence of an hawk, and Pliny says that dogs are mute in
the shadow of an Hyaena; but thus could not the spirits of worthy Martyrs be
silenced, who being exposed not only unto the eyes, but the merciless teeth
of Wolves, gave loud expressions of their faith, and their holy clamours were
heard as high as heaven.

That which much promoted it beside the common proverb, was an expression in
Theocritus, a very ancient Poet (...), ^Ed^re non poteris vocem, Lycus est tib^
visus; which Lycus was Rival unto another, and suddenly appearing stopped the
mouth of his Corrivall: now Lycus signifying also a Wolf, occasioned this
apprehension; men taking that appellatively, which was to be understood
properly, and translating the genuine acception; which is a fallacy of
Aequivocation, and in some opinions begat the like conceit concerning Romulus
and Remus, that they were fostered by a Wolf, the name of the nurse being
Lupa; and founded the fable of Europa, and her carryage over Sea by a Bull,
because the Ship or Pilots name was Taurus; and thus have some been startled at
the proverb Bos in lingua confusedly apprehending how a man should be said to
have an Ox in his tongue, that would not speak his mind; which was no more
then that a piece of money had silenced him: for by the Ox was only employed a
piece of coin stamped with that figure, first current with the Athenians, and
after among the Romans.

CHAP. IX.
Of Dear.
THe common opinion concerning the long life of Animals, is very ancient,
especially of Crows, Chaughes and Dear; in moderate accounts exceeding the
age of man, in some the days of Nestor, and in others surmounting the years
of Artephius, or Methuselah; from whence Antiquity has raised proverbiall
expressions, and the real conception of their duration, has been the
hyperbolicall expression of others. From all the rest we shall single out the
Dear, upon concession a long lived Animal, and in longaevity by many conceived
to attain unto hundreds; wherein permitting every man his own belief, we
shall our selves crave liberty to doubt, and our reasons are these ensuing.

The first is that of Aristole, drawn from the increment and gestation of this
animal, that is, it is sudden arrivance unto growth and maturitie, and the small
time of it is remainder in the womb; his words in the translation of Scaliger,
are these; Deejus vitae longitudine fabulantur, neque enim aut gestatio aut
incrementum hinnulorum ejusmodi sunt, ut praestent argumentum longaevi
animalis, that is, fables are raised concerning the vivassity of Dear; for
neither are their gestation or increment, such as may afford an argument of
long life; and these says Scaliger, are good mediums conjunctively taken, that
is, not one without the other; For of animalls viviparous such as live long,
go long with young, and attain but slowly to their maturitie and stature; so
the Horse that lives about thirty, arriveth unto his stature about six years,
and remains above nine months in the womb; so the Camel that lives unto
fifty, goes with young no less then ten months, and cease not to grow
before seven; and so the Elephant that lives an hundred, bears i^'s young
above a year, and arriveth unto perfection at twenty; on the contrary, the
Sheep and Goat, which live but eight or ten years, go but five months, and
attain to their perfection at two years; and the like is observable in Cats,
Hares, and Conies; and so the Dear that endures the womb but eight months,
and is complete at six years, from the course of nature, we cannot expect to
live an hundred, nor in any proportional allowance much more then thirty, as
having already passed two general motions observable in all animations, that
is, it is beginning and increase, and having but two more to run through, that
is, it is state and declination, which are proportionally set out by nature in
every kind, and naturally proceeding admit of inference from each other.

The other ground that brings it is long life into suspicion, is the immoderate
salacity, and almost unparalleld excess of venerie, which every September may
be observed in this Animal, and is supposed to shorten the lives of Cocks,
Partridges, and Sparrowes; certainly a confessed and undeniable enemy unto
longaeuitie, and that not only as a sign in the complexionall desire, and
impetuositie, but also as a cause in the frequent act, or iterated performance
thereof; For though we consent not with that Philosopher, who thinks a
spermaticall emission unto the weight of one dragme, is aequivalent unto the
effusion of sixty ounces of blood, yet considering the resolution and languor
ensuing that act in some, the extenuation and marcour in others, and the
visible acceleration it makes of age in most, we cannot but think it much
abridgeth our days: although we also concede that this exclusion is natural,
that nature it self will find a way hereto without either act or object; And
although it be placed among the six non naturals, that is, such as neither
naturally constitutive, nor merely destructive, do preserve or destroy
according unto circumstance; yet do we sensibly observe an impotencie or total
privation thereof, prolongeth life, and they live longest in every kind that
exercise it not at all, and this is true not only in Eunuchs by nature, but
spadoes by Art; For castrated animals in every species are longer lived then
they which retain their virilities: For the generation of bodies is not
effected as some conceive, of souls, that is, by Irradiation, or answerably
unto the propagation of light, without its proper diminution; but therein a
transmission is made materially from some parts, and Ideally from every one,
and the propagation of one, is in a strict acception, some minoration of
another; and therefore also that axiom in Philosophy, that the generation of
one thing, is the corruption of another, although it be substantially true
concerning the form and matter, is also dispositively verified in the
efficient or producer.

As for more sensible arguments, and such as relate unto experiment, from these
we have also reason to doubt its age, and presumed vivacity; for where long
life is natural, the marks of age are late, and when they appear, the journey
unto death cannot be long. Now the age of a Dear (as Aristotle long ago
observed) is best conjectured, by the view or the horns and teeth; from the
horns there is a particular and annual account unto six years, they arising
first plain, and so successively branching, after which the judgment of their
years by particular marks becomes uncertain; but when they grow old, they
grow less branched, and first do lose their (...), or propugnacula; that is,
their brow Antlers, or lowest furcations next the head, which Aristotle says
the young ones use in fight, and the old as needles have them not at all. The
same may be also collected from the loss of their Teeth, whereof in old age
they have few or none before in either jaw. Now these are infallible marks of
age, and when they appear, we must confess a declination, which
notwithstanding (as men inform us in England) where observations may well be
made, will happen between twenty and thirty: As for the bone or rather
induration of the roots of the arterial veyn, and great artery, which is
thought to be found only in the heart of an old Dear, and therefore becomes
more precious in its rarity, it is often found in Dear, much under thirty, and
we have known some affirm they have found it in one of half that age; and
therefore in that account of Pliny of a Dear with a collar about his neck,
put on by Alexander the Great, and taken alive a hundred years after, with
other relations of this nature we much suspect imposture or mistake; and if we
grant their verity, they are but single relations, and very rare contingencies
in individualls, not affording a regular diduction upon the species: For though
U^ysses his Dog lived unto twenty two, and the Athenian Mule unto fourscore, we
do not measure their days by those years, or usually say, they live thus
long, nor can the three hundred years of John of times, or Nestor, overthrow
the assertion of Moses, or afford a reasonable encouragement beyond his
septuagenary determination.

The ground and authority of this conceit was first Hieroglyphicall, the
Egyptians expressing longaevitie by this animal, but upon what uncertainties,
and also convincible fal^ities they often erected such emblems we have
elsewhere delivered; and if that were true which Aristotle delivers of his
time, and Pliny was not afraid to take up long after, the Egyptians could
make but weak observations herein; for though it be said that Aeneas feasted
his followers with Venison, yet Aristotle affi^ms that neither Deer nor Boar
were to be found in Africa; and how far they miscounted the lives and duration
of Animals, is evident from their conceit of the Crow, which they presume to
live five hundred years, and from the lives of Hawks which (as Aelian
delivers) the Egyptians do reckon no less then at seven hundred.

The second which led the conceit unto the Grecians, and prob^bly descended
from the Egyptians, was Poetical, and that was a passage of H^siod, thus
rendered by Ausonius, Ter binos deciesque novem super exit in ann^s
Iusta senes centum quos implet vita virorum
Hos novies super at vivendo garr^la ^ornix
Et qua^er egreditur cornicis saecul^ cervus
Alipedem cervum ter vincit corvus. --
To ninty six the life of man ascends,
Nine times as long that of the Chough extends,
Four times beyond, the life of Dear does go,
And thrice is that surpassed by the Crow.
So that according to this acco^nt, allowing ninety six for the age of man, the
life of a Dear amounts unto three thousand, four hundred, fifty six; A
conceit so hard to be made out, that many have deserted the common and literal
construction. So Theon in Aratus would have the number of nine not taken
strictly, but for many years: In other opinions the compute so far exceeded
truth, that they have thought it more probable to take the word Genea, that is
a generation consisting of many years, but for one year, or a single
revolution of the Sun, which is the remarkable measure of time, and within
the compass whereof we receive our perfection in the womb. So that by this
construction, the years of a Dear should be but thirty six, as is discoursed
at large in that Tract of Plutarch, concerning the cessation of Oracles, and
whereto in his Discourse of the Crow, Aldrovandus also inclines: others not
able to make it out, have rejected the whole account, as may be observed from
the words of Pliny, Hesiodus qui primus aliquid de longaevitate vitae
prodidit, fabulose (reor) multa de hominum aevo reference cornici n^vem nostras
attribuit aetates quadruplum eju^ cervis, id ^riplicatum corvi^* and reliqua
fabulosius de Phaenice and nymphis; and this how slender soever, was probably
the strongest ground Antiquity had for this longaevity of Animalls, that made
Theophrastus expostulate with Nature concerning the long life of Crows, that
begat that Epithet of Deer (...), in Oppianus, and that expression of Juvenal
-- Longa and cervina senectus.

The third ground was Philosophical and founded upon a probable reason in
nature, and that is the defect of a Gall, which part (in the opinion of
Aristotle and Pliny) this animal wanted, and was conceived a cause and reason
of their long life, according (say they) as it happens unto some few men, who
have not this part at all; but this assertion is first defective in the verity
concerning the animal alleged: for though it be true, a Dear has no gall
in the liver like many other animalls, yet has it that part in the guts as is
discoverable by taste and color: and therefore Pliny does well correct
himself, when having affirmed before, it had no gall, he afterward says, some
hold it to be in the guts, and that for their bitterness, dogs will refuse to
eat them. It is also deficient in the verity of the Induction or connumeration
of other annimalls conjoined herewith, as having also no gall; that is, as
Pliny accounts, Equ^, Muli, etc. Horses, Mules, Asses, Deer, Goats, Boars,
Camells, Dolphins, have no gall; concerning Horses, what truth there is herein
we have declared before; as for Goats we find not them without it, what gall
the Camel has, Aristotle declares, that Hogs also have it, we can affirm,
and that not in any obscure place, but in the liver, even as it is seated in
man.

That therefore the Dear is no short lived animal, we will acknowledge, that
comparatively, and in some sense long lived we will concede; and thus much we
shall grant if we commonly account its days by thirty six or forty; for
thereby it will exceed all other cornigerous animalls, but that it attaineth
unto hundreds, or the years delivered by Authors, since we have no authentic
experience for it, since we have reason and common experience against it,
since the grounds are false and fabulous which do establish it, we know no
ground to assent.

Concerning the Dear there also passes another opinion, that the males
thereof do yearly lose their pizzell; for men observing the decidence of their
horns, do fall upon the like conceit of this part that it annually rotte^h
away, and successively renews again. Now the ground hereof, was surely the
observation of this part in Dear after immoderate venery, and about the end of
their Rutt, which sometimes becomes so relaxed and pendulous, it cannot be
quite retracted; and being often beset with ^^yes, it is conceived to rot, and
at last to fall from the body; but herein experience will contradict us: for
those Dear which either dye or are killed at that time, or any other, are
always found to have that part entire; and reason also will correct us, for
spermaticall parts, or such as are framed from the seminall principles of
p^rents, although homogeneous or similary, will not admit a Regeneration, much
less will they receive an integrall restoration, which being organicall and
isntrumental members, consist of many of those. Now this part, or animal of
Plato, contains not only sanguineous and reparable particles, but is made up
of veins, nerves, arteries, and in some animalls of bones, whose reparation is
beyond its own fertility, and a fruit not to be expected from the fructifying
part it self, which faculty were it communicated unto animalls, whose
originalls are double, as well as unto plants, whose seed is within themselves,
we might abate the Art of Taliaco^ius, and the new inarching of noses; and
therefore the pha^sies of Poets have been so modest, as not to set down such
renovations, even from the powers of their di^tyes; for the mu^ilated shoulder
of Pelops was pieced out with Ivory, and that the limbs of Hyppolitus were set
together, not regenerated by Aesculapius, is the utmost assertion of Poetry.

CHAP. X.
Of the Kingfisher.
THat a Kingfisher hanged by the bill, shows in what quarter the wind is, by
an occult and secret propriety, converting the breast to that point of the
Horizon from whence the wind does blow, is a received opinion, and very
strange; introducing natural Weathercocks, and extending magneticall
conditions as far as animal natures: A conceit supported chie^ly by present
practice, yet not made out by reason or experience.

For unto reason it seems very repugnant, that a carcass or body
dis^nimated, should be so affected with every wind, as to carry a conformable
respect and constant habitude thereto: For although in sundry animalls, we deny
not a kind of natural Astrology, or innate presention both of wind and
weather; yet that proceeding from sense receiving impressions from the first
mutation of the air, they cannot in reason retain that apprehension after
death, as being affections which depend on life, and depart upon disanimation,
and therefore with more favorable reason may we draw the same effect, or
sympathy upon the Hedgehog, whose presention of winds is so exact, that it
stops the north or southern hole of its nest, according to prenotion of
these winds ensuing, which some men unexpectedly observing, have been able to
make predictions which way the wind would turn, and have been esteemed hereby
wise men in point of weather. Now this proceeding from sense in the creature
alive, it were not reasonable to hang up an Hedgehog dead, and to expect a
conformable motion unto its living conversion: and though in sundry plants
their virtues do live after death, and we know that Scammonie, Rhubarbe, and
Senna will purge without any vital assistance; yet in animals or sensible
creatures, many actions are mixed, and depend upon their living form, as well
as that of mistion, and though they wholly seem to retain unto the body
depart upon disunion: Thus Glowewormes alive, project a luster in the dark,
which fulgour notwithstanding cease after death; and thus the Torpedo which
being alive stupifies at a distance, applied after death, produces no such
effect, which had they retained, in places where they abound, they might have
supplied Opium, and served as frontalls in Phrensies.

As for experiment we cannot make it out by any we have attempted, for if a
single Kingfisher be hanged up with untwisted silk in an open room, and where
the air is free, it observes not a constant respect unto the mouth of the
wind, but variously converting does seldom breast it right; if two be
suspended in the same room, they will not regularly conform their breasts,
but oft-times respect the opposi^e points of heaven; and if we conceive that
for the exact exploration they should be suspended where the air is quiet and
unmoved, that clear of impediments, they may more freely convert upon their
natural verticity, we have also made this way of inquisition in suspending
them in large and capacious glasses closely stopped; wherein nevertheless we
observed a casual station, and that they rested irregularly upon conversion,
wheresoever they rested remaining inconverted, and poss^ssing one point of the
Compass, whilst the wind perhaps has passed the two and thirty.

The ground of this popular practice might be the common opinion concerning the
virtue prognosticke of these birds, Commonly mistaken for the true Halcion.
the natural regard they have unto the winds, and they unto them again, more
especially remarkable in the time of their nidulation, and bringing forth their
young; for at that time which happens about the brumall Solstice it has
been observed even unto a proverb, that the Sea is calm^, and the winds do
cease, till the young ones are excluded, and forsake their nest, which floateth
upon the Sea, and by the roughness of winds might otherwise be overwhelmed;
but how far hereby to magn^fi^ their prediction we have no certain rule, for
whether out of any particular prenotion they choose to sit at this time, or
whether it be thus contrived by concurrence of causes, and the providence of
Nature, securing every species in their p^oduction, is not yet determined.
Surely many things fall out by the D^signe of the general motor and undreamt
of contrivance of Nature, which are not imputable unto the intention or
knowledge of the particular Actor. So though the seminallity of Ivy be almost
in every earth, yet that it arises and grows not, but where it may be
supported, we cannot ascribe unto the distinction of the seed, or conceive any
science therein which suspends and conditionates its eruption. So if, as Pliny
and Plutarch report, the C^ocodils of Egypt, so aptly lay their eggs, that the
natives thereby are able to know how high the flood will attain; yet is it
hard to make out, how they should divine the ^xtent of the inundation,
depending on causes so many miles remote, that is, the measure of showers in
Aethiopi^; and whereof, as Athanasius in the ^ife of Authony delivers, the
Devil himself upon demand could make no clear prediction; and so are there
likewise many things in Nature, which are the forerunners o^ signs of future
effects, whereto they neither concur in causali^y or prenotion, but are
secretly ordered by the providence of causes, and concurrence of actions
collateral to their signations.

CHAP. XI.
Of Gr^ffons.
THat there are Griffons in Nature, that is a mixed and dubious animal, in the
forepart resembling an E^gle, and behind the shape of a Lion, with erected
ears, fou^e feet, and a long tail, many affirm, and most I perceive deny
no^; the same is averred by Ael^an, Solinus, Mela, and Herodotus, countenanced
by the name sometimes found in Scripture, and was an Hieroglyphick of the
Egyp^ians.

Notwithstanding we fi^de most dil^gent enquirers to be of a contrary
assertion; for beside that Albertus and Pliny have disallowed it, the learned
Ald^ovand has in a large discourse rejected it; Mathia^ Michovius who writ of
those Northern parts wherein men place these Griffins, has positively
concluded against it, and if examined by the doctrine of animals, the invention
is monstrous, nor much in feriour unto the figment of Sphynx, Chimaera, and
Harpies: for though some species there be of a middle and participating
natures, that is, of bird and beast, as we find the Bat to be, yet are their
parts so conformed and set together that we cannot define the beginning or end
of either, there being a commixtion of both in the whole, rather then an
adaptation, or cement of the one unto the other.

Now for the word (...), or Gryps, sometimes mentioned in Scripture, and
frequently in humane Authors, properly understood, it signifies some kind of
Eagle or Vulture, from whence the Epithet Grypus for an hooked or Aquiline
nose. Thus when the Septuagint makes use of this word in the eleventh of
Leviticus, Tremellius and our Translation has rendered it the Ossifrage, which
is one kind of Eagle, although the Vulgar translation, and that annexed unto
the Septuagint retain the word Grips, which in ordinary and school
construction is commonly rendered a Griffin; yet cannot the Latin assume any
other sense then the Greek, from whence it is borrowed; and though the Latin
Gryphes be altered somewhat by the addition of an h, or aspiration of the
letter (...), yet is not this unusual; so what the Greeks call (...), the
Latins will call Trophaeum, and that person which in the Gospel is named (...),
the Latins will render Cleophas, and therefore the quarrel of Origin was
injust and his conception erroneous, when he conceived the food of Griffins
forbidden by the Law of Moses, that is, poetical animals, and things of no
existence: and therefore when in the Hecatombs and mighty oblations of the
Gentiles, it is delivered they sacrificed Gryphes or Griffins, hereby we may
understand some stronger sort of Eagles; and therefore also when it said in
Virgil of an improper match, or Mopsus marrying Nysa, Iungentur jam gryhes
equis, we need not hunt after other sense, then that strange unions shall be
made, and differing natures be conjoined together.

As for the testimonies of ancient Writers, they are but derivative, and
terminate all in one Aristeus a Poet of Proconesus; who affirmed that near the
Arimaspi, or one eyed Nation, Griffins defended the mines of gold: but this as
Herodotus delivers, he wrote by heresay; and Michovius who has expressly
written of those parts plainly affirms, there is neither gold nor Griffins in
that country, nor any such animal extant, for so does he conclude, Ego vero
contra veteres authors, Gryphes nec in illa septentrionis, nec in al^is or bis
partibus inveniri affirmarim.

Lastly, concerning the Hieroglyphicall authority, although it nearest
approaches the truth, it does not infer its existency; the conceit of the
Griffin properly taken being but a symbolicall fancy, in so intolerable a
shape including allowable morality. So does it well make out the properties of
a Guardian, or any person entrusted; the ^ares implying attention, the wings
celerity of execution, the Lion-like shape, courage and audacity, the hooked
bill, reservance and tenacity. It is also an Emblem of valor and magnanimity,
as being compounded of the Eagle and Lion, the noblest animals in their kinds;
and so is it applyable unto Princes, Presidents, Generals, and all heroic
Commanders, and so is it also borne in the Coat arms of many noble Families of
Europe.

CHAP. XII.
Of the Phaenix.
THat there is but one Phaenix in the world, which after many hundred years
burns it self, and from the ashes thereof a^iseth up another, is a conceit
not new or altogether popular, but of great Antiquity; not only delivered by
humane Autho^s, but frequently expressed by holy Writers, by Cyrill,
Epiphanius, and others, by Ambrose in his H^xameron, and Tertul. in his Poem de
Iudicio D^mini, but more agreeably unto the present sense in his excellent
Tract, de Resur. carnis, Illum dico alitem orientis peculiarem, de
singularitate famosum, de posteritate monstruosum, qui sem^tipsum libenter
funerans renovat, na tali fine decedens* at que succedens iterum Phaenix, ubi
jam nemo, iterum ipse, quia non jam alius idem. The Scripture also seems to
favor it, particularly that of Job 21. in the Interpretation of Beda, Dicebam
in nidulo meo moriar and sicut Phaenix multiplicabo di^s, and Psalm 91. (...),
vir justus ut Phaenix florebit, as Tertullian renders it, and so also expounds
it in his book before alleged.

All which notwithstanding we cannot pre^ume the existence of this animal, nor
dare we affirm there is any Phaenix in Na^u^e. For, first there wants herein
the definitive confi^rmato^ and test of things uncertain, that is, the sense
of man: for though many Writers have much enlarged hereon, there is not any
ocular describer, or such as presumes to confirm it upon aspection; and
therefore Herodotus that led the story unto the Greeks, plainly says, he never
attained the sight of any, but only in the picture.

Again, primitive Authors, and from whom the st^e^me of relations is
derivative, deliver themselves very dubiously, and either by a doubtful
parenthesis, or a timorous conclusion overthrow the whole relation: Thus
Herodotus in his Eu^erpe, delivering the story hereof, presently interposeth,
(...); that is, which account seems to me improbable; Tacitus in his Annals
affords a larger story, how the P^aenix was first seen at Heliopolis in the
reign of Sesostris, then in the reign of Amasis, after in the days of
Ptolomy, the third of the Macedonian rare; but at last thus determines, Sed
^ntiquitas obscura; and no^nulli falsum esse hunc Phaenice^, neque Arabu^ e
terris eredidere. Pliny makes yet a fairer story, that the Phaenix flew into
Egypt in the Consulship of Quintus Plancius, that it was brought to Rome in
the Censorship of Claudius, in the 800. year of the City, and testified also
in their records; but after all concludes, Sed quae falsa esse nemo dubitabit,
but that this is false no man will make doubt.

Moreover, such as have naturally discoursed hereon, have so dive^sly,
contrarily, or contradictorily delivered themselves, that no affirmative from
thence can reasonably be deduced; for most have positively denied it, and they
which affirm and believe it, assign this name unto many, and mistake two or
three in one. So has that bird been taken for the Phaenix which lives in
Arabia, and builds its nest with Cinnamon, by Herodotus called Cinnamulgus,
and by Aristotle Cinnamomus, and as a fabulous conceit is censured by Scaliger;
some have conceived that bird to be the Phaenix, which by a Persian name with
the Greeks is called Rhyntace; but how they made this good we find occasion of
doubt, whilst we read in the life of Artax^^xes, that this is a little bird
brought often to their tables, and wherewith Parysatis cunningly poisoned the
Queen. The Manucodiata or bird of Paradise, has had the honor of this name,
and their feathers brought from the Molucca's, do pass for those of the
P^aenix; which though promoted by rariety with us, the Eastern travelers will
hardly admit, who know they are common in those parts, and the ordinary plume
of Janissaries among the Turks. And lastly, the bird Semenda has found the same
appellation, for so has Scaliger observed and refuted; nor will the solitude
of the Phaenix allow this denomination, for many there are of that species, and
whose trifistulary bill and crany we have beheld our selves; nor are men only
at variance in regard of the Phaenix it self, but very disagreeing in the
accidents ascribed thereto: for some affirm it lives three hundred, some
five, others six, some a thousand, others no less then fifteen hundred
years; some say it lives in Aethiopia, others in Arabia, some in Egypt,
others in India, and some I think in Utopia, for such must that be which is
described by Lactantius, that is, which neither was singed in the combustion of
Phaeton, or overwhelmed by the inundation of D^ucalcon.

Lastly, many Authors who have made mention hereof, have so delivered
themselves, and with such intentions we cannot from thence deduce a
confirmation: For some have written Poetically as Ovid, Mantuan, Lactantius,
Claudian, and others: Some have written mystically, as Paracelsus in his book
de Azoth, or de ligno and linea vitae; and as several Hermeticall
Philosophers, involving therein the secret of their Elixir, and enigmatically
expressing the nature of their great work: Some have written Rhetorically, and
concessively not controverting but assuming the question, which taken as
granted advantaged the illation: So have holy men made use hereof as far as
thereby to confirm the Resurrection; for discoursing with heathens who granted
the story of the Phaenix, they induced the Resurrection from principles of
their own, and positions received among themselves. Others have spoken
Emblematically and Hieroglyphically, and so did the Egyptians, unto whom the
Phaenix was the Hieroglyphick of the Sun; and this was probably the ground of
the whole relation, succe^ding ages adding fabulous accounts, which laid
together built up this singularity, which every pen proclaims.

As for the Texts of Scripture, which seem to confirm the conceit duly
perpended, they add not thereunto; For whereas in that of Job, according to
the Septuagint or Greek Translation we find the word Phaenix, yet can it have
no ani^all signification; for therein it is not expressed (...) but (...), the
truncke of the Palm tree, which is also called Phaenix, and therefore the
construction will be very hard, if not applied unto some vegetable nature; nor
can we safely insist upon the Greek expression at all: for though the Vulgar
translates it Palma, and some retain the Phaenix, others do render it by a word
of a different sense; for so has Tremellius delivered it: Dicebam quod apud
nidum meum expirabo, and sicut arena multiplicabo d^es; so has the Geneva and
ours translated it, I said I shall dye in my nest, and shall multiply my days,
as the sand: as for that in the book of Psalms, Vir justus ut Phaenix
florebit, as Epiphanius and Tertullian render it, it was only a mistake upon
the homonymy of the Greek word Phaenix, which signifies also a Palm tree;
which is a fallacy of equivocation, from a community in name, inferring a
common nature, and whereby we may as firmly conclude, that Diaphaenicon a
purging electuary has some part of the Phaenix for its ingredient, which
receives that name from D^tes, or the fruit of the Palm tree, from whence as
Pliny delivers, the Phoenix had its name.

Nor do we only arraigne the existence of this animal, but many things are
questionable which are ascribed thereto, especially its unity, long life, and
generation: As for its unity or conceit there should be but one in nature, it
seems not only repugnant unto Philosophy, but also the holy Scripture, which
plainly affirms, there went of every sort two at least into the Arc of Noah,
according to the text, Genesis 7. Every foul after his kind, every bird of every
sort, they went into the Arc, two and two of all ^lesh, wherein there is the
breath of life, and they that went in, went in both male and female of all
flesh; it infringeth the Benediction of God concerning multiplication, Genesis 1.
God blessed them saying, Be fruitful and multiply, and fill the waters in the
seas, and let fowl multiply in the earth; and again, Chap. 8. Bring forth with
thee, every living thing that they may breed abundantly in the earth, and be
fruitful, and multiply upon the earth, which terms are not applyable unto the
Phaenix, whereof there is but one in the world, and no more now living then at
the first benediction, for the production of one, being the destruction of
another, although they produce and generate, they ^ncrease not, and must not be
said to multiply, who do not transcend an unity.

As for longaevity, as that it lives a thousand years, or more, beside that
from imperfect observations and rarity of appearance, no confirmation can be
made, there may be probably a mistake in the compute; for the tradition being
very ancient and probably Egyptian, the Greeks who dispersed the fable, might
sum up the account by their own numeration of years, whereas the conceit
might have its original in times of shorter compute; for if we suppose our
present calculation, the Phaenix now in nature will be the sixth from the
Creation, but in the middle of its years, That the world should last but six
thousand years.
and if the Rabbines prophecy succeed shall conclude its days, not in its
own, but the last and general flames, without all hope of Reviviction.

Concerning its generation, that without all conjunction, it begets and
reseminates it self, hereby we introduce a vegetable production in animalls,
and unto sensible natures, transfer the propriety of plants, that is to
multiply among themselves, according to the law of the Creation, Genesis 1. Let
the earth bring forth grass, the herb yielding seed, and the tree yielding
fruit, whose seed is in it self; which way is indeed the natural way of
plants, who having no distinction of sex, and the power of the species
contained in every individuum, beget and propagate themselves without
commixtion, and therefore their fruits proceeding from simpler roots, are not
so unlike, or distinguishable from each other, as are the offsprings of
sensible creatures and prolifications descending from double originalls; but
animal generation is accomplished by more, and the concurrence of two sexes is
required to the constitution of one; and therefore such as have no distinction
of sex, engender not at all, as Aristotle conceives of Eles, and testaceous
animalls; and though plant animalls do multiply, they do it not by
copulation, but in a way analogous unto plants; so Hermophrodites although they
include the parts of both sexes, and may be sufficiently potent in either, yet
unto a conception require a separated sex, and cannot impregnate themselves;
and so also though Adam included all humane nature, or was (as some opinion) an
Hermaphrodite, yet had he no power to propagate himself; and therefore God
said, It is not good that man should be alone, let us make him an help meet for
him, that is, an help unto generation; for as for any other help, it had been
fitter to have made another man.

Now whereas some affirm that from one Phaenix there does not immediately
proceed another, but the first corrupts into a worm, which after becomes a
Phaenix, it will not make probable this production; For hereby they confound
the generation of perfect animalls with imperfect, sanguineous, with
exanguious, vermiparous, with oviparous, and erect Anomalies, disturbing the
laws of Nature; Nor will this corruptive production be easily made out, in
most imperfect generations; for although we deny not that many animals are
vermiparous, begetting themselves at a distance, and as it were at the second
hand, as generally insects, and more remarkably Butterflies and Silkwormes; yet
proceeds not this generation from a corruption of themselves, but rather a
specificall, and seminall diffusion, retaining still the Idea of themselves,
though it act that part a while in other shapes: and this will also hold in
generations equivocall, and such are not begotten from Parents like themselves;
so from Frogs corrupting, proceed not Frogs again; so if there be anatiferous
trees, whose corruption breaks forth into Bernacles, yet if they corrupt, they
degenerate into Maggots, which produce not themselves again; for this were a
confusion of corruptive and seminall production, and a frustration of that
seminall power committed to animalls at the creation. The problem might have
been spared, Why we love not our Lice as well as our Children, Noah's Arc had
been needless, the graves of animals would be the fruitfullest wombs; for
death would not destroy, but empeople the world again.

Since therefore we have so slender grounds to confirm the existence of the
Phaenix, since there is no ocular witness of it, since as we have declared, by
Authors from whom the Story is derived, it rather stands rejected, since they
who have seriously discoursed hereof, have delivered themselves negatively,
diversely or contrarily, since many others cannot be drawn into Argument as
writing Poetically, Rhetorically, Enigmatically, Hieroglyphically, since holy
Scripture alleged for it duly prepended, does not advantage it, and lastly
since so strange a generation, unity and long life has neither experience nor
reason to confirm it, how far to rely on this tradition, we refer unto
consideration.

But surely they were not wel-wishers unto (...), or remedies easily acquired,
who de^ived medicines from the Phaenix, as some have done, and are justly
condemned by Pliny, Irridere est vitae, remedia post mill simum annum reditur
a monstrare; It is a folly to find out remedies that are not recoverable under
a thousand years, or propose the prolonging of life by that which the
twentieth generation may never behold; more veniable is a dependence upon the
Philosophers stone, potable gold, or any of those Arcana's, whereby Paracelsus
that dyed himself at 47. gloried that he could make other men immortal; which
secrets, although extremely difficult, and tantum non infesible, yet are they
not impossible, nor do they (rightly understood) impose any violence on Nature,
and therefore if strictly taken for the Phaenix very strange is that which is
delivered by Plutarch, De sanitate tuenda, That the brain thereof is a
pleasant bit, but that it causes the headache; which notwithstanding the
luxurious Emperor could never taste, though he had at his table many a
Phaenicopterus, yet had he not one Phaenix; for though he expected and
attempted it, we read not in Lampridius that he performed it; and considering
the unity thereof it was a vain design, that is, to destroy any species, or
mutilate the great accomplishment of six days; and although some conceive, and
it may seem true, that there is in man a natural possibility to destroy the
world in one generation, that is, by a general conspire to know no woman
themselves and disable all others also; yet will this never be effected, and
therefore Cain after he had killed Abel, were there no other woman living,
could not have also destroyed Eve; which although he had a natural power to
effect, yet the execution thereof, the providence of God would have resisted,
for that would have imposed another creation upon him, and to have animated a
second rib of Adam.

CHAP. XIII.
Frogs, Toades, and Toad-stone.
COncerning the venemons urine of Toads, of the stone in a Toads head, and of
the generation of Frogs, conceptions are entertained which require
consideration; And first, that a Toad pisseth, and this way diffuseth its
venom, is generally received, not only with us, but also in other parts; for
so has Scaliger observed in his Comment, Aversum urinam reddere ob oculos
persecutoris perniciosam ruricolis persuasum est; and Mathiolus has also a
passage, that a Toad communicates its venom, not only by urine, but by the
humiditie and slaver of its mouth; which notwithstanding strictly understood,
will not consist with truth; For to speak properly, a Toad pisseth not, nor do
they contain those urinary parts which are found in other animals, to avoid
that serous excretion; as may appear unto any that exenterats or dissects
them; for therein will be found neither bladder, kidneyes, or ureters, any more
then they are in birds, which although they eat and drink, yet for the moist
and dry excretion, have but one vent and common place of exclusion; and with
the same propriety of language, we may ascribe that action unto Crows and
Kites; and this is verified not only in Frogs and Toades, but for ought I can
discover, that may be true which Aristotle assumeth, that no oviparous
animal, that is, which either spawne or lay eggs does urine, except the
Tortois.

The ground or occasion of this expression might from hence arise, that Toades
are sometimes obse^ved to exclude or spirt out a dark and liquid matter
behind, which indeed we have observed to be true, and a venomous condition
there may be perhaps therein, but it cannot be called their urine; not only
because they want those parts of secretion; but because it is emitted aversly
or backward, by both sexes.

As for the stone commonly called a Toad-stone, which is presumed to be found
in the head of that animal, we first conceive it not a thing impossible, nor
is there any substantial reason, why in a Toade, there may not be found such
hard and lapideous concretions; for the like we daily observe in the heads of
fishes, as Codds, Carpes, and Pearches, the like also in Snailes, a soft and
exosseous animal, whereof in the na^ked and greater sort, as though she would
requite the defect of a shell on their back, nature near the head has placed
a fl^t white stone, or rather testaceous concretion* which though Aldrovand
affirms, that after dissection of many, he found but in some few, yet of the
great gray Sna^les, I have not met with any that wanted it, and the same is
indeed so palpable, that without dissection i^ is discoverable by the hand.

Again, though it be not impossible, yet is it surely very rare, as we are
induced to believe from some enquiry of our own, from the trial of many who
have been deceived, and the frustated search of Porta, who upon the
explorement of many, could never find one; Nor is it only of rarity, but may
be doubted whether it be of existency, or really any such stone in the head of
a Toad at all: For although lapidaries, and questuary enquirers affi^me it, yet
the Writers of Mineralls and natural speculators, are of another belief
conceiving the stones which bear this name, to be a Mineral concretion, nor
to be found in animalls, but in fields; and therefore Boet^us de Boot referres
it to Asteria* or some kind of Lapis stella^is, and plainly concludes,
Reperiuntur in agris, quos tamen alii in annosis* ac qui d^u in Arundinetis,
inter rubos sentesque delituerunt bufonis capitibus generari pertinaciter
affirmant.

Lastly, if any such thing there be, yet must it not for ought I see, be taken
as we receive it, for a loose and moveable stone, but rather a concretion or
induration of the crany it self; for being of an earthy temper living in the
earth, and as some say feeding thereon, such indurations may sometimes happen*
and thus when Brassavolus after a long search had discovered one, he affirms
it was rather the forehead bone petrified, then a stone within the crany; and
of this belief was Gesner. All which considered, we must with circumspection
receive those stones, which commonly be^re this name, muchlesse believe the
traditions, that in envy to mankind they are cast out, or swallowed down by
the Toad, which cannot consist with Anatomy, and with the rest, enforced this
censure from B^etius, Ab (...) tempore pro nugis habui quod de Bufonio lapide,
ejusque origin traditur.

Concerning the generation of Froggs, we shall briefly deliver that account
which observation has taught us. By Frogs I understand not such as arising
from putrefaction, are bred without copulation, and because they subsist not
long, are called Temporariae; nor do I mean hereby the little Frogge of an
excellent Parrat-green, that usually sits on trees and bushes, and is therefore
called Ravunculus viridis, or Arboreus; but hereby I understand the aquatile or
water Frogge whereof in ditches and standing plashes, we may behold many
millions every Spring in England; Now these do not as Plini^ conceives,
exclude black pieces of flesh, which after become Frogs, but they let fall
their spawne in the water, which is of excellent use in Physic, and scarce
unknown unto any; in this spawne of a lentous and transparent body, are to be
discerned many gray specks, or little conglobations, which in a little time
become of deep black; a substance more compacted and terrestrious then the
other, for it rises not in distillation, and affords a powder, when the white
and aqueous part is exhaled. Now of this black or duskie substance is the
Frogge at last formed, as we have beheld, including the spawne with water in a
glass, and exposing it unto the Sun; for that black and round substance, in
a few days began to dilate and grow ovall, after a while the head, the eyes,
the tail to be discerneable, and at last to become that which the Ancients
called Gyrinus, we a Porwigle or Tadpole, and this in some weeks after,
becomes a perfect Frogge, the legs growing out before, and the tail wearing
away, to supply the other behind, as may be observed in some, which have
newly forsaken the water: for in such, some part of the tail will be seen but
curtal'd and short, not long and finny as before; a part provided them a while
to swim and move in the water, that is, until such time as nature excluded
legs, whereby they might be provided not only to swim in the water, but move
upon the land, according to the amphibious and mixed intention of nature, that
is to live in both. And because many affirm, and some deliver, that in regard
it has lungs and breaths a Frogge may be easily drowned, though the reason
be probable, I find not the experiment answerable; for making trial, and
fastening one about a span under water, it lived almost six days.

CHAP. XIV.
Of the Salamander.
THat a Salamander is able to live in flames, to endure and put out fire is an
assertion, not only of great Antiquity, but confirmed by frequent, and not
contemptible testimony; The Egyptians have drawn it into their
Hieroglyphics; Aristotle seems to embrace it, more plainly Nicander,
Serenus, Sammonicus, Aelian, and Pliny, who assigns the cause of this effect.
An animal (says he) so cold that it extinguisheth the fire like Ice; all
which notwithstanding, there is on the negative Authority and experience;
Sex^ius a Physician, as Pliny delivers, denied this effect, Dioscorides
affirmed it a point of folly to believe it, Galen that it endures the fire a
while, but in continuance is consumed therein; For experimental conviction
Mathiolus affirms, he saw a Salamander burnt in a very short time; and of the
like assertion is Amatus Lusitanus, and most plainly Pierius, whose words in
his Hieroglyphics are these; Whereas it is commonly said, that a Salamander
extinguisheth fire, we have found by experience, that it is so far from
quenching hot coals; that it dies immediately therein; As for the contrary
assertion of A^istotle, it is but by hearesay, as common opinion believes,
Haec enim (ut aiunt) ignem ingrediens ^um extinguit; and therefore there was no
absurdity in Galen when as a Septicall medicine he commended the ashes of a
Salamander, and Magicians in vain from the power of this tradition, at the
burning of towns or houses expect a relief from Salamanders.

The ground of this opinion might be some sensible resistance of fire observed
in the Salamander, which being as Galen determines, cold in the fourth, and
moist in the third degree, and having also a nucous humidity above and under
the skin, by virtue thereof may a while endure the flame, which being
consumed it can resist no more. Such an humidity there is observed in Newtes,
or water-Lizards, especially if their skins be pricked or perforated. Thus
will Frogs and Snailes endure the flame, thus will whites of eggs, vitreous
or glassey phlegm extinguish a coal, thus are unguents made which protect a
while from the fire, and thus beside the Hirpini, there are later stories of
men that have passed untoucht through ^ire, and therefore some truth we allow
in the tradition; truth according unto Galen, that it may for a time resist a
fl^me, or as Scaliger avers, extinguish or put out a coal; for thus much will
many humide bodies perform, but that it perseveres and lives in that
destructive element, is a fallacious enlargement; nor do we reasonably
conclude, because for a time it endures fire, it subdueth and extinguisheth
the same, because by a cold and aluminous moisture, it is able a while to
resist it, from a peculiarity of nature it subsisteth and lives in it.

It has been much promoted by Stories of incombustible napkins and textures
which endure the fire, whose materials are called by the name of Salamanders
wool; which many too literally apprehending, conceive some investing part, or
tegument of the Salamander; wherein beside that they mistake the condition of
this animal, which is a kind of Lizard, a quadruped corticated and depilous,
that is without wool, furre, or hair, they observe not the method and
general rule of nature, whereby all Quadrupeds oviparous, as Lizards, Froggs,
Tortois, Chameleons, Crocodiles, are without any hair, and have no covering
part or hairy investment at all; and if they conceive that from the skin of the
Salamander, these incremable pieces are composed, beside the experiments made
upon the living, that of Brassavolus will step in, who in the search of this
truth, did burn the skin of one dead.

Nor is this Salamanders wool desumed from any animal, but a Mineral
substance Metaphorically so called from this received opinion; For beside
Germanicus his heart, and Pyrrhus his great Toe, there are in the number of
Mineralls, some bodies incombustible; more remarkably that which the Ancients
named Asbeston, and Pancirollus treats of in the chapter of Linum vivum:
whereof by Art were weaved napkins, shirts, and coats inconsumable by fire, and
wherein in ancient times, to preserve their ashes pure, and without commixture,
they burnt the bodies of Kings; a napkin hereof Pliny reports that Nero had,
and the like says Paulus Venetus, the Emperor of Tartarie sent unto Pope
Alexander; and affirms that in some parts of Tartarie, there were Mines of Iron
whose filaments were weaved into incombustible cloth, which rare manufacture,
although delivered for lost by Pancirollus, yet Salmuth delivers in his
comment that one Podocaterus a Cyprian, had showed the same at Venice, and his
materials were from Cyprus, where indeed Dioscorides places them; the same is
also ocularly confirmed by Vives upon Austin and Maiolus in his colloquies; and
thus in our days do men practice to make long lasting Snasts or Elychinons
parts for lamps, out of Alumen plumosum; and by the same we read in
Pausanias, that there always burnt a Lamp before the Image of Minerva.

CHAP. XV.
Of the Amphisbaena.
THat the Amphisbaena, that is, a smaller kind of Serpent, which moves
forward and backward, has two heads, or one at either extreme, was affirmed
first by Nicander, and after by many others, by the Author of the book de
Theriaca ad Pisonem, ascribed unto Galen, more plainly Pliny, Geminum habet
caput, tanquam parum esset uno ore effundi venenum: but Aelian most
confidently, who referring the conceit of Chimera and Hydra unto fables, has
set down this as an undeniable truth.

Whereunto while men assent, and can believe a bicipitous conformation in any
continued species, they admit a gemination of principal parts, which is not
naturally discovered in any animal; true it is that other parts in animals are
not equal, for some make their progression with many legs, even to the number
of an hundred, as Juli Scolopend^ae, or such as are termed centipedes; some
fly with two wings, as birds and many insests, some with four, as all
farinaceous or mealy winged animals, as Butter-flies, and Moths, all
vaginipennous or sheathwinged insects, as Beetles and Dorrs; some have three
Testicles, as Aristotle speaks of the Buzzard, and some have four stomachs,
as horned and ruminating animals; but for the principal parts, the liver,
heart, and especially the brain, regularly it is but one in any kind or
species whatsoever.

And were there any such species or natural kind of animal, it would be hard
to make good those six positions of body, which according to the three
dimensions are ascribed unto every animal, that is, infra, supra, ante, retro,
dextrorsum, sinistrorsum; for if (as it is determined) that be the anterior and
upper part wherein the senses are placed, and that the posterior and lower part
which is opposite thereunto, there is no inferior or former part in this
animal, for the senses being placed at both extremes, do make both ends
anteriour, which is impossible, the terms being Relative, which mutually
subsist, and are not without each other, and therefore this duplicity was ill
contrived to place one head at both extremes, and had been more tolerable to
have settled three or four at one, and therefore also Poets have been more
reasonable then Philosophers, and Geryon or Cerberus, less monstrous then
Amphisbaena.

Again, if any such thing there were, it were not to be obtruded by the name
of Amphisbaena, or as an animal of one denomination; for properly that animal
is not one, but multiplicious or many, which has a duplicity or gemination of
principle parts; and this does Aristotle define, when he affirms a monster is
to be esteemed one or many, according to its principle, which he conceived the
heart, whence he derived the original of Nerves, and thereto ascribe many acts
which Physicians assign unto the brain; and therefore if it cannot be called
one, which has a duplicity of hearts in his sense, it cannot receive that
appellation with a plurality of heads in ours; And this the practice of
Christians has acknowledged, who have baptized these geminous births, and
double connascencies with several names, as conceiving in them a distinction
of souls, upon the divided execution of their functions; that is, while one
wept, the other laughing, while one was silent, the other speaking, while one
awaked, the other sleeping, as is declared by three remarkable examples in
Petrach, Vincentius, and the Scottish history of Buchanan.

It is not denied there have been bicipitous Serpents with the head at each
extreme, for an example hereof we find in Aristotle, and in the like form in
Aldrovand we meet with the Icon of a Lizzard; which double formations do often
happen unto multiparous generations, more especially that of Serpents, whose
conceptions being numerous, and their Eggs in chains or links together, (which
sometime conjoyne and inoculate into each other) they may unite into various
shapes, and come out in mixed formations; but these are monstrous productions,
and beside the intention of Nature, and the statutes of generation, neither
begotten of like parents, nor begetting the like again, but irregularly
produced do stand as Anomalies, and make up the Quae genus, in the general
book of Nature; which being the shifts and forced pieces, rather then the
genuine and proper effects, they afford us no illation, nor is it reasonable to
conclude, from a monstrosity unto a species, or from accidental effects, unto
the regular works of Nature.

Lastly, the ground of the conceit was the figure of this animal, and motion
often times both ways; for described it is to be like a worm, and so equally
framed at both extremes, that at an ordinary distance it is no easy matter, to
determine which is the head; and therefore some observing them to move both
ways, have given the appellation of heads unto both extremes, which is no
proper and warrantable denomination, for many animals with one head do
ordinarily perform both different and contrary motions; Crabs move sideling,
Lobsters will swim swiftly backward, Worms and Leeches will move both ways;
and so will most of those animals, whose bodies consist of round and annulary
fibers, and move by undulation, that is, like the waves of the Sea, the one
protruding the other, by inversion whereof they make a backward motion.

Upon the same ground has arisen the same mistake concerning the Scolopendra
or hundred footed insect, as is delivered by Rhodiginus from the scholiast of
Nicander: Dicitur a Nicandro, (...), id est dicepalus aut biceps fictum vero
quoniam retrorsum (ut scribit Aristoteles) arrepit, observed by Aldrovandus,
but most plainly by Muffetus, who thus concludes upon the text of Nicander:
Tamen pace tanti authoris dixerim, unicum illi duntaxat caput licet pari
facilitate, prorsum capite, retrorsum ducente cauda, incedat, quod Nicandro
aliisque imposuisse dubito: that is, under favor of so great an Author, the
Scolopendra has but one head, although with equal facility it moves forward
and backward, which I suspect deceived Nicander and others.

CHAP. XVI.
Of the Viper.
THat the young Vipers force their way through the bowels of their Dam, or that
the female Viper in the act of generation bi^es off the head of the male, in
revenge whereof the young ones eat through the womb and belly of the female is
a very ancient tradition; in this sense entertained in the Hieroglyphics of
the Egyptians, affirmed by Herodotus, Nicander, Pliny, Plutarch, Aelian,
Je^ome, Basil, Isidore, and seems to be countenanced by Aristotle, and his
scholar Theophrastus; from hence is commonly assigned the reason why the
Romans punished parricides by drowning them in a sack with a Viper; and so
perhaps upon the same opinion the men of Melita when they saw a viper upon the
hand of Paul, said presently without conceit of any other sin, No doubt this
man is a murderer, whom though he have escaped the Sea, yet ven^geance
suffers him not to live; that is, he is now paid in his own way, the
parricidous animal and punishment of Murderers is upon him; and though the
Tradition were current among the Greeks to confirm the same the Latin name
is introduced, V^pera quasi vipariat; That pass^ge also in the Gospel, O ye
generation of Vipers, has found expositions which countenance this conceit;
notwithstanding which au^ho^ities, transcribed relations and conjectures, upon
enquiry we find the some repugnant unto experience and reason.

And first it seems not only injurious unto the providence of Nature, to
ordain a way of production which should destroy the producer, or contrive the
continuation of the species by the destruction of the continuator; but it
overthrowes and frustrates the great Benediction of God, which is expressed
Genesis 1. God blessed them saying, Be fruitful and multiply. Now if it be so
ordained that some must regularly perish by multiplication, and these be the
fruits of fructifying in the Viper; it cannot be said that God did bless, but
curse this animal; upon thy belly shall thou go, and dust shall thou eat all
thy life, was not so great a punishment unto the Serpent after the fall, as
increase, be fruitful and multiply, was before. This were to confound the
maledictions of God, and translate the curse of the Woman upon the Serpent;
that is, in dolor paries, in sorrow shall thou bring forth, which being proper
unto the women, is verified best in the Viper, whose delivery is not only
accompanied with pain, but also with death it self. And lastly, it overthrows
the careful course, and parentall provision of nature, whereby the young ones
newly excluded are sustained by the Dam, and protected until they grow up to a
sufficiency for themselves; all which is perverted in this eruptive
generation, for the Dam being destroyed, the younglings are left to their own
protection, which is not conceiveable they can at all perform, and whereof
they afford us a remarkable confirmance many days after birth; for the young
ones supposed to break through the belly of the Dam, will upon any fright for
protection run into it; for then the old one receives them in at her mouth,
which way the fright b^ing past they will return again; which is a peculiar
way of refuge; and though it seem strange is avowed by frequent experience, and
undeniable testimony.

As for the experiment although we have thrice attempted it, it has not well
succeeded; for though we fed them with milk, branne, cheese, etc. the females
always dyed before the young ones were mature for this eruption, but rest
sufficiently confirmed in the experi^ments of worthy enquirers: Wherein to omit
the ancient conviction of Apollonius, we shall set down some few of modern
Writers: The first, of Amatus Lusitanus in his Comment upon Dio^corides.
Vidimus nos viperas praegnantes inclusas pyxidibus parere, quae inde ex partu
nec mortuae, nec visceribus perforatae manserunt: The second is that of
Scaliger, Viperas ab impatientibus morae faetibus numerosissimis rumpi atque
interire falsum esse scimus, qui in Vincentii Camerint circulatoris lignea
the^a vidimus enatas viperellas, parente saiva: The last and most plain of
Franciscus Bustamantinus, a Span^sh Physician of Alcala de Henares, whose words
in his third de Animantibus Scripturae are these: Cum vero per me and per alios
haec ipsa disquisissem servata Vip^rina progeny, etc. that is, when by my
self and others I had enquired the truth hereof, including Vipers in a glass,
and feeding them with cheese and branne, I undoubtedly found that the Viper was
not delivered by the tearing of her bowels, but I beheld them excluded by the
passage of generation near the orifice of the seidge.

Now although the Tradition be untrue, there wanted not many grounds which made
it plausibly received. The first was a favorable i^dulgence and special
contrivance of nature, which was the conceit of Herodotus who thus delivers
himself: Fearful animalls, and such as serve for food, nature has made more
fruitful, but upon the offensive and noxious kind, she has not conferred
fertility: So the Hare that becomes a prey unto man, unto beasts, and fowls
of the air, is fruitful even to superfae^ation, but the Lion a fierce and
ferocious animal has young ones but seldom, and also but one at a time;
Vipers indeed, although destructive, are fruitful; but lest their number
should increase, providence has contrived another way to abate it, for in
copulation the female bites off the head of the male, and the young ones
destroy the mother; but this will not consist with reason, as we have declared
before: And if we more nearly consider the condition of Vipers and noxious
animalls, we shall discover another provision of nature; how although in their
paucity she has not abridged their malignity, yet has she notoriously
effected it by their secession or latitancie; for not only offensive insects as
Hornets, waspes, and the like; but sanguineous corticated animals, as Serpents,
Toads and Lizards, do lie hid and betake themselves to coverts in the Winter;
whereby most Countries enjoying the immunity of Ireland and Candie, there
arises a temporal security, from their venom, and an intermission of their
mischiefs, mercifully requiting the time of their activities.

A second ground of this effect, was conceived the justice of Nature, whereby
she compensates the death of the father by the matricide or murder of the
mother, and this was the expression of Nicander; but the cause hereof is as
improbable as the effect, and were indeed an improvident revenge in the young
ones, whereby in consequence, and upon defect of provision they must destroy
themselves; and whereas he expresses this decollation of the male by so full a
term as (...), that is, to cut or lop off, the act is hardly conceiveable; for
the female Viper has but four considerable teeth, and those so disposed so
slender and needle-pointed, that they are ap^er for puncture then any act of
incision; and if any like action there be, it may be only some fast retention
or sudden compression in the Orgasmus or fury of their lust, according as that
expression of Horace is construed concerning Lydia and Telephus -- Sive puer
furens*
Impressit memorem dente ^abris notam.
Others ascribe this effect unto the numerous conception of the Viper, and this
was the opinion of Theophrastus, who though he denies the exesion or forcing
through the belly, conceives nevertheless that upon a full and plentiful
impletion there may perhaps succeed a disruption of the matrix, as it happens
sometimes in the long and slender fish Acus: Now although in hot Countries, and
very numerous conceptions in the Viper or other animalls, there may sometimes
ensue a dilaceration of the genitall parts, yet is this a rare and contingent
effect, and not a natural and constant way of exclusion; for the wise Creator
has formed the organs of animalls unto their operations, and in whom he
ordains a numerous conception, in them he has prepared convenient
receptacles, and a suitable way of exclusion.

Others do ground this disruption upon their continued or protracted time of
delivery, presumed to last twenty days, whereat, excluding but one a day, the
latter brood impatient, by a forcible prorup^ion anticipate their period of
exclusion, and this was the assertion of Pliny, Caeteri tarditatis impatientes
prorumpunt latera, occisa parente, which was occasioned upon a mistake of the
Greek text in Aristotle, (...), which are literally thus translated, Paret
autem una die secundum unum, parit autem plures quam viginti, and may be thus
Englished, She brings forth in one day one by one and sometimes more then
twenty; and so has Scaliger rendered it, sigillatim parit, absolvit una die
interdum plures quam viginti: But Pliny whom Gaza follows has differently
translated it, singulos diebus* singulis pa^rit, numero fere viginti, whereby
he extends the exclusion unto twenty days, which in the textuary sense is
fully accomplished in one.

But what has most advanced it, is a mistake in another text of Aristotle,
which seems directly to determine this disruption, (...): which Gaza has
thus translated, Parit catulos obvolutos membran^ quae tertio die rumpuntur,
^ve^t interdum ut qui in utero adhuc sunt abrosis membranis prorumpant. Now
herein very probably Pliny, and many since have been mistaken, for the
dis^uption of the membranes or skins, which include the young ones, conceiving
a dilaceration of the matrix and belly of the viper, and concluding from a
casual dilaceration, a regular and constant disruption.

As for the Latin word Vipera, which in the E^ymologie of Isidore promoteth
this conceit, more properly it may imply vivipera; for whereas other Serpents
lay eggs, the Viper excludes living animalls; and though the Cerastes be also
viviparous, and we have found formed Snakes in the belly of the Cecilia or
slow-worme, yet may the Viper emphatically bear that name; for the notation or
Etymology is not of necessity adequate unto the name; and therefore though
animal be deduced from anima, yet are there many animations beside, and plants
will challenge a right therein as well as sensible creatures.

As touching the Text of Scripture, and compellation of the Pharisees, by
generation of Vipers, although constructions be made hereof conformable to
this Tradition, and it may be plausibly expounded, that out of a viperous
condition, they conspired against their Prophets, and destroyed their
spiritual parents; yet (as Jansenius observes) Gregory and Jerome, do make
another construction, apprehending thereby what is usually employed by that
Proverb, Mali corvi malum ovum; that is, of evil parents, an evil generation,
a posterity not unlike their majority, of mischievous progenitors, a venomous
and destructive progeny.

And lastly, concerning the Hieroglyphicall account, according to the Vulgar
conception set down by Orus Apollo, the authority thereof is only
Emblematicall, for were the conception true or false, to their apprehensions,
it expressed filial impiety; which strictly taken, and totally received for
truth, might perhaps begin, but surely promote this conception.

CHAP. XVII.
Of Hares.
THat Hares are both male and female, beside the Vulgar opinion, was the
affirmative of Archelaus, of Plutarch, Philostratus, and many more; nor are
there hardly any who either treat of mutation or mixtion of sexes, who have not
left some mention of this point; some speaking positively, others dubiously,
and most resigning it unto the enquiry of the Reader: now hereof to speak
distinctly, they must be male and female by mutation and succession of sexes,
or else by composition, by mixture or union thereof.

As for the mutation of sexes, or transition into one another, we cannot deny
it in Hares, it being observable in man: for hereof beside Empedocles or
Tiresias, there are not a few examples; and though very few, or rather none
which have emasculated or turned women, yet very many who from an esteem or
reallity of being women have infallibly proved men: some at the first point of
their menstruous eruptions, some in the day of their marriage, others many
years after, which occasioned disputes at Law, and contestations concerning a
restore of the dow^y; and that not only mankind, but many other animalls, may
suffer this transexion, we will not deny, or hold it at al impossible; although
I confess by reason of the posticke and backward position of the feminine
parts in quadrupeds, they can hardly admit the substitution of a protrusion
effectual unto masculine generation, except it be in Retromingents, and such
as couple backward.

Nor shall we only concede the succession of sexes in some, but shall not
dispute the transition of reputed species in others; that is, a transmutation,
or (as Paracelsians term it) the Transplantation of one into another; hereof
in perfect animalls of a congenerous seed, or near affinity of natures,
examples are not unfrequent, as Horses, Asses, Dogs, Foxes, Phaisants, Cocks,
etc. but in imperfect kinds, and such where the discrimination of sexes is
obscure, these transformations are more common: and in some within themselves
without commixtion, as particularly in Caterpillars or Silk-wormes, wherein
there is visible and triple transfiguration: but in Plants wherein there is no
distinction of sex, these transplantations are yet more obvious then any; as
that of barley into oats, of wheat into darnell, and those grains which
generally arise among corn, as cockle, Aracus, Aegilops, and other
degenerations which come up in unexpected shapes, when they want the support
and maintenance of the primary and master-formes: And the same do some affirm
concerning other plants in less analogy of figures, as the mutation of Mint
into Cresses, Basil into Serpoile, and Turnips into Radishes; in all which as
Severinus conceives there may be equivocall seeds and Hermaphroditicall
principles, which contain the radicality and power of different forms; thus in
the seed of wheat there lies obscurely the seminality of Darnell, although in
a secondary or inferior way, and at some distance of production; which
nevertheless if it meet with convenient promotion, or a conflux and
conspiration of causes more powerful then the other, it then begins to
edify in chief, and contemning the superintendent form, produces the
signatures of its self.

Now therefore although we deny not these several mutations, and do allow
that Hares may exchange their sex, yet this we conceive does come to pass but
sometimes, and not in that vicissitude or annual alternation as is presumed;
that is, from imperfection to perfection, from perfection to imperfection, from
female unto male, from male to female again, and so in a circle to both
without a permansion in either; for beside the inconceiveable mutation of
temper, which should yearly alternate the sex, this is injurious unto the order
of nature, whose operations do rest in the perfection of their intents; which
having once attained, they maintain their accomplished ends, and relapse not
again into their progressionall imperfections: so if in the minority of
natural vigor, the parts of feminality take place, when upon the increase or
growth thereof the masculine appear, the first design of nature is achieved,
and those parts are after maintained.

But surely it much impeacheth this iterated transexion of Hares, if that be
true which Cardan and other Physicians affirm, that Transmutation of sex is
only so in opinion, and that these transfeminated persons were really men at
first, although succeeding years produced the manifesto or evidence of their
virilities; which although intended and formed, was not at first excluded, and
that the examples hereof have undergone no real or new transexion, but were
Androgynally borne, and under some kind of Hermaphrodites: for though Galen do
favor the opinion, that the distinctive parts of sexes are only different in
position, that is inversion or protrusion, yet will this hardly be made out
from the Anatomy of those parts, the testicles being so seated in the female
that they admit not of protrusion, and the neck of the matrix wanting those
parts which are discoverable in the organ of virility.

The second and most received acception, is, that Hares are male and female by
conjunction of both sexes, and such are sound in mankind, Poetically called
Hermaphrodites, supposed to be formed from the equality, or non victory of
either seed, carrying about them the parts of man and woman; although with
great variety in perfection, site and ability; not only as Aristotle conceived,
with a constant impotencie in one; but as latter Observers affirm, sometimes
with ability of either venery: and therefore the providence of some Laws have
thought good, that at the years of maturity, they should elect one sex, and
the errors in the other should suffer a severer punishment; whereby
endeavoring to prevent incontinencie, they unawares enjoined perpetual
chastity; for being executive in both parts, and confined unto one, they
restrained a natural power, and ordained a partial virginity. Plato and some
of the Rabbines proceeded higher, who conceived the first man an Hermaphrodite;
and Marcus Leo the learned Jew, in some sense has allowed it, affirming that
Adam in one suppositum without division, contained both male and female; and
therefore whereas it is said in the Text, that God created man in his own
Image, in the Image of God created he him, male and female created he them,
applying the singular and plural unto Adam, it might denote that in one
substance, and in himself he included both sexes which was after divided, and
the female called Woman. The opinion of Aristotle extends farther, from whose
assertion all men should be Hermaphrodites; for affirming that women do not
spermatize, and confer a place or receptacle rather then essential
principles of generation, he deductively includes both sexes in mankind; for
from the father proceed not only males and females, but from him also must
Hermaphroditicall and masculo-feminine generations be derived, and a commixtion
of both sexes arise from the seed of one: But the Schoolmen have dealt with
that sex more hardly then any other, who though they have not much disputed
their generation, yet have they controverted their Resurrection, and raised a
query whether any at the last day should arise in the sex of women, as may be
observed in the supplement of Aquinas.

Now as we must acknowledge this And^ogynall condition in man, so can we not
deny the like does happen in beasts. Thus do we read in Pliny that Neroes
Chariot was drawn by four Hermaphroditicall Mares, and Cardan affirms he
also beheld one at Antwerpe; and thus may we also concede, that Hares have been
of both sexes, and some have ocularly confirmed it; but that the whole species
or kind should be bisexous we cannot affirm, who have found the parts of male
and female respectively distinct and single in any wherein we have enquired;
and whereas it is conceived, that being an harmless animal and delectable
food unto man, nature has made them with double sexes, and that actively and
passively performing they might more numerously increase; we forget an higher
providence of nature whereby she especially promotes the multiplication of
Hares, which is by superfetation; that is, a conception upon a conception, or
an improvement of a second fruit before the first be excluded, preventing
hereby the usual intermission and vacant time of generation, which is very
common and frequently observable in Hares, mentioned long ago by Aristotle,
Herodotus, and Pliny; and we have often observed that after the first cast,
there remain successive conceptions, and other younglings very immature, and
far from their term of exclusion.

Nor need any man to question this in Hares, for the same we observe does
sometime happen in women; for although it be true that upon conception, the
inward orifice of the matrix exactly closes, so that it commonly admits
nothing after; yet falls it out sometime, that in the act of coition, the
avidity of that part dilateth it self, and receives a second burden, which if
it happen to be near in time unto the first, they commonly do both proceed
unto perfection, and have legitimate exclusions, and periodically succeed each
other: but if the superfetation be made with considerable intermission, the
latter most commonly proves abortive; for the first being confirmed, engrosseth
the aliment from the other: However therefore the project of Julia seem very
plausible, and that way infallible when she received not her passengers, before
she had taken in her lading, there was a fallibility therein; nor indeed any
absolute security in the policy of adultery after conception; for the Matrix
(which some have called another animal within us, and which is not subjected
unto the law of our will) after reception of its proper Tenant, may yet receive
a strange and spurious inmate, as is confirmable by many examples in Pliny, by
Larissaea in Hippocrates, and that merry one in Plautus urged also by
Aristotle, that is of Iphicles and Hercules, the one begat by Jupiter, the
other by Amphitryon upon Al^maena; as also in those superconceptions where one
child was like the father, the other like the adulterer, the one favored the
servant, the other resembled the master.

Now the grounds that begat, or much promoted the opinion of a double sex in
hares might be some little bags or tumors, as first glance representing stones
or Testicles, to be found in both sexes about the parts of generation; which
men observing in either sex, were induced to believe a masculine sex in both;
but to speak properly these are no Testicles or parts official unto
generation, but glandulous substances that seem to hold the nature of
Emunctories; for herein may be perceived slender perforations, at which may be
expressed a black and ^oeculent matter; if therefore from these we shall
conceive a mixtion of sexes in Hares, with fairer reason we may conclude it in
Bevers, whereof both sexes contain a double bag or tumor in the groine,
commonly called the Cod of Castor, as we have delivered before.

Another ground were certain holes or cavities observeable about the siedge;
which being perceived in males, made some conceive there might be also a
faeminine nature in them, and upon this very ground, the same opinion has
passed upon the Hyaena, as is declared by Aristotle, and thus translated by
Scaliger; Quod autem aiunt utriusque sexus habere genitalia falsum est, quod
videtur esse foemineum sub cauda, est simile sigur a foeminino verum pervinum
non est; and thus is it also in Hares, in whom these holes, although they seem
to make a deep cavity, yet do they not perforate the skin, nor hold a
community with any part of generation, but were (as Pliny delivers) esteemed
the marks of their age, the number of those decyding their number of years;
what verity there is herein, we shall not contend; for if in other animals
there be authentic notations, if the characters of years be found in the
horns of Cowes, or in the Antlers of Dear, if we conjecture the age of Horses
from joints in their dockes, and undeniably presume it from their teeth; we
cannot affirm, there is in their conceit, any affront unto nature, although,
who ever enquireth shall find no assurance therein.

The last foundation was Retromingency or pissing backward, for men observing
both sexes to urine backward, or aversly between their legs, they might
conceive there was a foeminine part in both; wherein they are deceived by the
ignorance of the just and proper site of the Pizell or part designed unto the
Excretion of urine, which in the Hare holds not the common position, but is
aversly seated, and in its distention enclines unto the coccix or scut. Now
from the nature of this position, there ensues a necessity of
Retrocopulation, which also promoteth the conceit; for some observing them to
couple without ascension, have not been able to judge of male or female, or to
determine the proper sex in either, and to speak generally this way of
copulation, is not appropriate unto Hares, nor is there one, but many ways of
Coition, according to diverse shapes and different conformations; for some
couple laterally or sidewise as worms, some circularly or by complication as
Serpents, some pronely, that is by contaction of prone parts in both, as Apes,
Porcupines, Hedgehogges, and such as are termed Mollia, as the Cuttlefish and
the Purple; some mixtly, that is, the male ascending the female, or by
application of the prone parts of the one, unto the postick parts of the other,
as most Quadrupes; Some aversely, as all Crustaceous animals, Lobsters,
Shrimps, and Crevises, and also Retromingents, as Panthers, Tigers, and Hares:
This is the constant Law of their Coition, this they observe and transgress
not: only the vitiositie of man has acted the varieties hereof; nor content
with a digression from sex or species, has in his own kind run through the
Anomalies of venery, and been so bold, not only to act, but represent to view,
the Irregular ways of lust.

CHAP. XVIII.
Of Molls.
THat Molls are blind and have no eyes, though a common opinion is received
with much variety; some affirming only they have no sight, as Oppianus, the
Proverb Talpa Caecior, and the word (...), or Talpitas, which in Hesichius is
made the same with Caecias: some that they have eyes, but no sight, as the text
of Aristotle seems to imply, some neither eyes nor sight, as Albertus, Pliny,
and the vulgar opinion; some both eyes and sight as Scaliger, Aldrovandus, and
some others. Of which opinions the last with some restriction, is most
consonant unto truth: for that they have eyes in their head is manifest unto
any, that wants them not in his own, and are discoverable, not only in old
ones, but as we have observed in young and naked conceptions, taken out of the
belly of the dam; and he that exactly enquires into the cavitie of their
cranies, may discover some propagation of nerves communicated unto these parts;
but that the humors together with their coats are also distinct, (though Galen
seem to affirm it) transcendeth our discovery; for separating these little
Orbs, and including them in magnifying glasses, we discerned no more then
Aristotle mentions, that is, (...), that is; humorem nigrum, nor any more if
they be broken: that therefore they have eyes we must of necessity affirm,
but that they be comparativly incomplete we need not to deny: So Galen
affirms the parts of generation in women are imperfect, in respect of those of
men, as the eyes of Molls in regard of other animals; So Aristotle terms them
(...), which Gaza translates oblaesos, and Scaliger by a word of Imperfection,
inchoatos.

Now as that they have eyes is manifest unto sense, so that they have sight not
incongruous unto reason, if we call not in question the providence of this
provision, that is, to assign the organs, and yet deny the office, to grant
them eyes and withold all manner of vision: for as the inference is fair,
affirmatively deduced from the action to the organ, that they have eyes because
they see, so is it also from the organ to the action, that they have eyes,
therefore some sight designed; if we take the intention of Nature in every
species, and except the casual impediments, or morbosities in individuals; but
as their eyes are more imperfect then others, so do we conceive of their sight,
or act of vision; for they will run against things, and hudling forwards fall
from high places; so that they are not blind, nor yet distinctly see, there is
in them no cecity, yet more then a cecutiency; they have sight enough to
discern the light, though not perhaps to distinguish of objects or colors; so
are they not exactly blind, for light is one object of vision; and this (as
Scaliger observes) might be as full a sight as Nature first intended; for
living in darkness under the earth, they had no further need of eyes then to
avoid the light, and to be sensible when ever they lost that darkness of
earth, which was their natural confinement; and therefore however Translators
do render the word of Aristotle, or Galen, that is, imperfectos, oblaesos, or
inchoatos, it is not much considerable; for their eyes are sufficiently begun
to finish this action and competently perfect, for this imperfect Vision.

And lastly, although they had neither eyes nor sight, yet could they not be
termed blind; for blindness being a privative term unto sight, this
appellation is not admittible in propriety of speech, and will overthrow the
doctrine of privations, which presuppose positive forms or habits, and are not
indefinite negations, denying in all subjects but such alone wherein the
positive habits are in their proper nature, and placed without repugnancy. So
do we improperly say a Moll is blind, if we deny it the organs or a capacity
of vision from its created nature; so when the Text of John had said, that man
was blind from his nativity, whose cecity our Savior cured, it was not
warrantable in Nonnus to say he had no eyes at all, as he describes in his
paraphrase, and as some ancient Fathers affirm, that by this miracle they were
created in him; and so though the sense may be accepted, that proverb must be
heartily interpreted which makes fishes mute, and call them silent which have
no voice in Nature.

Now this conceit is erected upon a misapprehension or mistake in the symptoms
of vision, men confounding abolishment, diminution and depravement, and naming
that an abolition of sight, which indeed is but an abatement. For if vision be
abolished, it is called caecitas, or blindness, if depraved and receive its
objects erroneously, Hallucination, if dimished, hebetudo visus, caligati^, or
dimnesse; now instead of a diminution or imperfect vision in the Moll, we
a^^irme an abolition or total privation, in stead of caligation or dimnesse,
we conclude a cecity or blindness, which has been frequently committed
concerning other animals; so some affirm the water Rat is blind, so
Sammonicus and Nicander do call the Mus-Aran^us the shrew or Ranny, blind; And
because darkness was before light, the Egyptians worshipped the same: So are
slow-Wormes accounted blind, and the like we a^^irme proverbially of the
Beetle, although their eyes be evident, and they will fly against lights, like
many other insects, and though also Aristotle determines, that the eyes are
apparent in all flying insects, though other senses be obscure, and not
perceptible at all; and if from a diminution we may infer a total
privation, or affirm that other animals are blind which do not acutely fee
or comparatively unto others, we shall condemn unto blindness many not so
esteemed; for such as have corneous or horney eyes, as Lobsters and crustaceous
animals, are generally dim sighted, all insects that have antennae, or long
horns to feel out their way, as Butter-flies and Locusts, or their fore legs
so disposed, that they much advance before their heads, as may be observed in
Spiders; and if the Aegle were judge, we might be blind our selves; the
expression therefore of Scripture in the story of Jacob is surely with
circumspection, And it came to pass when Jacob was old, and his eyes were
dim, quando caligarunt oculi, says Jerome and Tremellius, which are
expressions of diminution, and not of absolute privation.

CHAP. XIX.
Of Lampries.
WHether Lampries have nine eyes, as is received, we durst refer it unto
Polyphemus, who had but one to judge it: an error concerning eyes, occasioned
by the error of eyes, deduced from the appearance of diverse cavities or holes
on either side, which ^ome call eyes that carelessly behold them, and is not
only refutable by experience, but also repugnant unto reason; for beside the
monstrosity they fasten unto Nature, in contriving many eyes, who has made but
two unto any animal, that is, one of each side, according to the division of
the brain, it were a superfluous and inartificiall act to place and settle so
many in one place; for the two extremes would sufficiently perform the office
of sight without the help of the intermediate eyes, and behold as much as all
seven joined together; for the visible base of the object would be defined by
these two, and the middle eyes although they behold the same thing, yet could
they not behold so much thereof as these; so were it no advantage unto man to
have a third eye between those two he has already; and the fiction of Argus
seems more reasonable then this; for though he had many eyes, yet were they
placed in circumference and positions of advantage.

Again, these cavities which men call eyes are seated out of the head, and
where the Gils of other fish are placed, containing no organs of sight, nor
having any communication with the brain; now all sense proceeding from the
brain, and that being placed (as Galen observes) in the upper part of the
body, for the fitter situation of the eyes, and convenience required unto
sight, it is not reasonable to imagine that they are any where else, or deserve
that name which are seated in other parts; and therefore we relinquish as
fabulous what is delivered of Sternopthalmi, or men with eyes in their breast;
and when it is said by Solomon, A wise man's eyes are in his head, it is to be
taken in second sense, and affords no objection: True it is that the eyes of
animals are seated with some difference, but all whatsoever in the head, and
that more forward then the ear or hole of hearing. In quadrupedes, in regard
of the figure of their heads, they are placed at some distance, in latirostrous
and flat-bild birds they are more laterally seated; and therefore when they
look intently they turn one eye upon the object, and can convert their heads
to see before and behind, and to behold two opposite points at once; but at a
more easy distance are they situated in man, and in the same circumference
with the ear, for if one foot of the compass be placed upon the Crown, a
circle described thereby will intersect, or pass over both the ears.

The error in this conceit consists in the ignorance of these cavities, and
their proper use in nature; for this is a particular disposure of parts, and a
peculiar conformation whereby these holes and sluices supply the defect of Gils,
and are assisted by the conduit in the head; for like cetaceous animals and
Whales, the Lamprey has a fistula spout or pipe at the back part of the head,
whereat they spirt out water: Nor is it only singular in this formation, but
also in many other, as in defect of bones, whereof it has not one, and for the
spine or backbone, a cartilagineous substance without any spondyles,
processes, or protuberance whatsoever; as also in the provision which Nature
has made for the heart, which in this animal is very strangely secured, and
lies immured in a cartilage or gristly substance; and lastly, in the color of
the liver, which is in the male of an excellent grass green, but of a deeper
color in the female, and will communicate a fresh and durable verdure.

CHAP. XX.
Of Snayles.
THat Snayles have two eyes, and at the end of their horns, beside the
assertion of the people, is the opinion of some learned men; which
notwithstanding Scaliger terms but imitation of eyes, which Pliny
contradicts, and Aristotle upon consequence denies, when he affirms that
testaceous animals have no eyes at all; And for my own part after much
inquiry, I am not satisfied that these are eyes, or that those black and
a^ramentous spots which seem to represent them are any ocular reallities; for
if any object be presented unto them, they will sometime seem to decline it,
and sometime run against it; if also these black extremities, or presumed eyes
be clipped off, they will notwithstanding make use of their protrusions or
horns, and poke out their way as before: Again, if they were eyes or
instruments of vision, they would have their originals in the head, and from
thence derive their motive and optic organs, but their roots and first
extremities are seated low upon the sides of the back, as may be perceived in
the whiter sort of Snayles when they retract them: And lastly, if we concede
they have two eyes, we must also grant, they have no less then four, for not
only the two greater extensions above have these imitations of eyes, but also
the two lesser below, as is evident unto any, and if they be dexterously
dissected, there will be found on either side two black filaments or membranous
strings which extend into the long and shorter cornicle upon protrusion; and
therefore if they have two eyes, they have also four, which will be monstrous,
and beyond the affirmation of any.

Now the reason why we name these black strings eyes, is because we know not
what to call them else, and understand not the proper use of that part, which
indeed is very obscure, and not delivered by any, but may probably be said to
assist the protrusion, and retraction of their horns, which being a weak and
hollow body, require some inward establishment, to confirm the length of their
advancement, which we observe they cannot extend without the concurrence
hereof; for if with your finger you apprehend the top of the horn, and draw
out this black, and membranous emission, the horn will be excluded no more;
but if you clip off the extremity, or only sindge the top thereof with Aqua
f^rtis, or other corrosive water, leaving a considerable part behind, they
will nevertheless exclude their horns, and therewith explorate their way as
before; and indeed the exact sense of these extremities is very remarkable; for
if you dip a pen in Aqua fortis, oil of vitriol, or Turpentine, and present it
toward these points, they will at a reasonable distance, decline the acrimony
thereof, retyring or distorting them to avoid it; and this they will nimbly
perform if objected to the extremes, but slowly or not at all, if approached
unto their roots.

What has been therefore delivered concerning the plurality, paucity, or
anomalous situation of eyes, is either monstrous, fabulous, or under things
never seen includes good sense or meaning: and so may we receive the figment
of Argus, who was an Hieroglyphick of heaven, in those centuries of eyes
expressing the stars; and their alternate wakings, the vicissitude of day and
night; which strictly taken cannot be admitted, for the subject of sleep is not
the eye, but the common sense, which once asleep, all eyes must be at rest: And
therefore what is delivered as an Emblem of vigilance, that the Hare and Lion
do sleep with one eye open, does not evince they are any more awake then if
they were both closed; for the open eye beholds in sleep no more then that
which is closed, and no more one eye in them then two in other animals that
sleep with both open, as some by disease, and others naturally which have no
eye lids at all.

As for Polyphemus although his story be fabulous, the monstrosity is not
impossible; for the act of Vision may be performed with one eye, and in the
deception and fallacy of sight, has this advantage of two, that it beholds not
objects double, or sees two things for one; for this does happen when the axis
of the visive coves, diffused from the object, fall not upon the same plane,
but that which is conveyed into one eye, is more depressed or elevated then
that which enters the other. So if beholding a candle we protrude either upward
or downward the pupil of one eye, the object will appear double; but if we
shut the other eye, and behold it but with one, it will then appear but
single, and if we abduce the eye unto either corner, the object will not
duplicate, for in that position the axes of the coves remain in the same
plane, as is demonstrated in the optics, and delivered by Galen, in his tenth
De usa partium.

Relations also there are of men that could make themselves invisible, which
belongs not to this discourse, but may serve as notable expressions of wise and
prudent men, who so contrive their affairs, that although their actions be
manifest, their designs are not discoverable: in this acception there is
nothing left of doubt, and Giges ring remains still among us; for vulgar eyes
behold no more of wise men then does the Sun, they may discover their exterior
and outward ways, but their interior and inward pieces he only sees, that
sees beyond their beings.

CHAP. XXI.
Of the Cameleon.
COncerning the Chameleon there generally passes an opinion that it lives
only upon air, and is sustained by no other aliment; Thus much is in plain
terms affirmed by Solinus, Pliny, and diverse other, and by this periphrasis is
the same described by Ovid; All which notwithstanding upon enquiry, I find the
assertion mainly controvertible, and very much to fail in the three
inducements of belief.

And first for its verity, although asserted by some, and traditionally
delivered by others, yet is it very questionable. For beside Aelian* who is
seldom defective in these accounts; Aristotle distinctly treating hereof, has
made no mention of this remarkable propriety; which either suspecting its
verity, or presuming its falsity he surely omitted; for that he remained
ignorant of this account it is not easily conceivable, it being the common
opinion, and generally received by all men: Some have positively denied it, as
Augustinus, Niphus, Stobaeus, Dalechampius, Fortunius, L^cetus, with many more;
others have experimentally refuted it, as namely Johannes Landius, who in the
relation of Scaliger, observed a Chameleon to lick up a fly from his breast;
But Bellonius has been more satisfactorily experimental, not only affirming
they feed on Flies, Caterpillars, Beetles, and other insects, but upon
exenteration he found these animals in their bellies; and although we have not
had the advantage of our own observation, yet have we received the like
confirmation from many ocular spectators.

As touching the verisimility or probable truth of this relation, several
reasons there are which seem to overthrow it; For first, there are found in
this animal, the guts, the stomach, and other parts official unto nutrition,
which were its aliment the empty reception of air, their provisions had been
superfluous; Now the wisdom of Nature abhorring super^luities, and effecting
nothing in vain, unto the intention of these operations, respectively
contriveth the organs; and therefore where we find such Instruments, we may
with strictness expect their actions, and where we discover them not, we may
with saf^ty conclude the non-intention of their operations: So when we observe
that oviperous animals, as Lizards, Frogs, Birds, and most Fishes have neither
bladder nor kidneys, we may with reason infer they do not urine at all: But
whereas in this same kind we discover these parts in the Tortoys beyond any
other, we cannot deny he exercises that excretion; Nor was there any
absurdity in Pliny, when for medicinal uses he commended the urine of a
Tortoise: so when we perceive that Bats have teats, it is not unreasonable to
infer they suckle their younglings with milk; but whereas no other flying
animal has these parts, we cannot from them expect a viviparous exclusion,
but either a generation of eggs, or some vermiparous separation, whose navell
is within it self at first, and its nutrition after not inwardly dependent of
its original.

Again, nature is so far from leaving any one part without its proper
action, that she oft-times imposes two or three labors upon one; so the
pizell in animals is both official unto urine and to generation, but the first
and primary use is generation; for many creatures enjoy that part which urine
not, as fishes, birds, and quadrupeds oviparous; but not on the contrary, for
the secondary action subsisteth not alone, but in concommitancie with the
other; so the nostrills are useful both for respiration and smelling, but the
principal use is smelling; for many have nostrills which have no lungs, as
fishes, but none have lungs or respiration, which have not some show, or some
analogy of nostrills: And thus we perceive the providence of nature, that is
the wisdom of God, which disposes of no part in vain, and some parts unto
two or three uses, will not provide any without the execution of its proper
office, nor where there is no digestion to be made, make any parts inservient
to that intention.

Beside the teeth, the tongue of this animal is a second argument to overthrow
this ayrie nutrication, and that not only in its proper nature, but also in its
peculiar figure; for indeed of this part properly taken there are two ends;
that is, the formation of the voice, and the execution of taste; for the voice,
it can have no office in Camelions, for they are mute animals, as, beside
fishes, are most other sort of Lizards: As for their taste, if their nutriment
be air, neither can it be an instrument thereof; for the body of that element
is ingustible, void of all sapidity, and without any action of the tongue, is
by the rough artery or weazon conducted into the lungs: and therefore Plini^
much forgets the strictness of his assertion, when he allows excrements unto
that animal, that feeds only upon air, which notwithstanding with the urine
of an Ass, he commends as a magical medicine upon our enemies.

The figure of the tongue seems also to overthrow the presumption of this
aliment, which according to the exact delineation of Aldrovand, is in this
animal peculiar, and seems contrived for prey; for in so little a creature
it is at the least half a palm long, and being it self very slow of motion,
has in this part a very great agility; withal its food being slyes and such
as suddenly escape, it has in the tongue a spongy and mucous extremity,
whereby upon a sudden emission, it inviscates and tangleth those insects: And
therefore some have thought its name not unsuitable unto its nature; the
nomination is Greek, (...), that is a little Lion, not so much for the
resemblance of shape, but affinity of condition, that is for the vigilance in
its prey and sudden rapacity thereof, which it performs not like the Lion
with its teeth, but a sudden and unexpected ejaculation of the tongue. This
exposition is favored by some, especially the old gloss upon Leviticus,
whereby in the Translation of Jerome and the Septuagint, this animal is
forbidden; what ever it be, it seems more reasonable then that of Isidore, who
derives this name, a Camelo and Leone, as presuming herein some resemblance
with a Camel; for this derivation offends the rules of Etymology, wherein
indeed the notation of names should be Orthographicall, not exchanging
dipthongs for vowells, or converting consonants into each other.

As for the possibility hereof, it is not also unquestionable, and many wise
men are of opinion, the bodies of animalls cannot receive a proper aliment from
air: for beside that taste being (as Aristotle terms it) a kind of touch, it
is required the aliment should be tangible, and fall under the palpable
affections of touch; beside also that there is some sapor in all aliments, as
being to be distinguished and judged by the guste, which cannot be admitted in
air; Beside these, I say, if we consider the nature of aliment, and the
proper use of air in respiration, it will very hardly fall under the name
hereof, or properly attain the act of nutrication.

And first concerning its nature, to make a perfect nutrition into the body
nourished, there is required a transmutation of the nutriment; now where this
conversion or aggeneration is made, there is also required in the aliment a
familiarity of matter, and such a community or vicinity unto a living nature,
as by one act of the soul may be converted into the body of the living, and
enjoy one common soul; which indeed cannot be effected by the air, it
concurring only with our flesh in common principles, which are at the largest
distance from life, and common also unto inanimated constitutions; and
therefore when it is said by Fernelius, and asserted by diverse others, that we
are only nourished by living bodies, and such as are some way proceeding from
them, that is the fruits, effects, parts, or seeds thereof, they have laid out
an object very agreeable unto assimulation; for these indeed are sit to receive
a quick and immediate conversion, as holding some community with our selves,
and containing approximate disposition unto animation.

Secondly (as is argued by Aristotle against the Pythagoreans) whatsoever
properly nourishes, before its assimulation, by the action of natural heat it
receives a compulency or incrassation progressionall unto its conversion;
which notwithstanding it cannot be effected upon the air, for the action of
heat does not condense but rarifie that body, and by attenuation, rather then
for nutrition, disposes it for expulsion.

Thirdly (which is the argument of Hippocrates) all aliment received into the
body, must be therein a considerable space retained, and not immediately
expelled: now air but momentally remaining in our bodies, it has no
proportionable space for its conversion, that being only of length enough to
refrigerate the heart, which having once performed, lest being it self heated
again, it should suffocate that part, it makes no stay, but hastes back the
same way it passed in.

Fourthly, the proper use of air attracted by the lungs, and without which
there is no durable continuation in life, is not the nutrition of parts, but
the contemperation of that fervor in the heart, and the ven^tilation of that
fire always maintained in the forge of life; whereby although in some manner
it concurreth unto nutrition, yet can it not receive the proper name of
nutriment; and therefore by Uippocrites de alimento, it is tetmed Alimentum non
Alimentum, a nourishment and no nourishment; that is in a large acception, but
not in propriety of language conserving the body, not nourishing the same, not
repairing it by assimulation, but preserving it by ventilation; for thereby the
natural flame is preserved from extinction, and so the individuum supported in
some way like nutrition: And so when it is said by the same Author, Pulmo
contrarium corpori alimentum trahit, reliqua omnia idem, it is not to be taken
in a strict and proper sense, but the quality in the one, the substance is
meant in the other; for air in regard of our natural heat is cold, and in
that quality contrary unto it, but what is properly aliment, of what quality
soever, is potentially the same, and in a substantial identity unto it.

And although the air attracted may be conceived to nourish that invisible
flame of life, in as much as common and culinary flames are nourished by the
air about them; I confess we doubt the common conceit, which affirms that
air is the pabulous supply of fire, much less that flame is properly air
kindled: And the same before us, has been denied by the Lord of Verulam, in
his Tract of life and death, and also by Dr. Jorden in his book of Mineral
waters: For that which substantially maintains the fire, is the combustible
matter in the kindled body, and not the ambient air, which affords
exhalation to its fuliginous atoms, nor that which causes the flame properly
to be termed air, but rather as he expresses it, the accention of fuliginous
exhalations, which contain an unctuosity in them, and arise from the matter of
fuel; which opinion is very probable, and will salve many doubts, whereof the
common conceit affords no solution.

As first, how fire is stricke^ out of flints, that is not by kindling the air
from the collision of two hard bodies; for then Diamonds and glass should do
the like as well as slint, but rather from the sulphur and inflamable
effluviums contained in them. The like says Jorden we observe in canes and
woods, that are unctuous and full of oil, which will yield ^ire by frication,
or collision, not by kindling the air about them, but the inflamable oil with
them: why the fire goes out without air? that is because the fuligenous
exhalations wanting evaporation recoyle upon the flame and choke it, as is
evident in cupping glasses, and the artifice of charcoals, where if the air be
altogether excluded, the (...) goes out, why some lamps included in close
bodies, have burned many hundred years, as that discovered in the sepulcher of
Tullia the sister of Cicero, and that of Olibius many years after, near
Padua; because what ever was their matter, either a preparation gold, or
Naptha, the duration proceeded from the purity of their oil which yielded no
fuligenous exhalations to suffocate the fire; For if air had nourished the
^lame, it had not continued many minutes, for it would have been spent and
wasted by the fire: Why a piece of ^laxe will kindle, although it touch not the
^lame? because the fire extends further, then indeed it is visible, being at
some distance from the week a pellucide and transparent body, and thinner then
the air it self: why metals in their Equation, although they intensly heat
the air above their surface, arise not yet into a ^lame, nor kindle the air
about them? because them sulphur is more fixed, and they emit not inflamable
exhalations: And lastly, why a lamp or candle burns only in the air about
it, and in^lameth not the air at a distance from it? because the flame
extends not beyond the inflamable e^^^uence, but closly adheres unto the
original of its in^lamation, and therefore it only warmeth, not kindles the
air about it, which notwithstanding it will do, if the ambient air be
impregnate with subtle inflamabilities, and such as are of quick accension, as
experiment is made in a close room, upon an evaparation of spirits of wine and
Camphir, as subterran^ous fires do sometimes happen, and as Cre^sa and
Alex^anders boy in the bath were set on ^ire by Naptha.

Lastly, the Element of air is so far from nourishing the body, that some
have questioned the power of water; many conceiving it enters not the body in
the power of aliment, or that from thence, there proceeds a substantial
supply: For beside that some creatures drink not at all, unto others it
performs the common office of air, and se^ves for refrigeration of the heart,
as unto fishes, who receive it, and expel it by the gills; even unto our
selves, and more perfect animals, though many ways assistent thereto, it
performs no substantial nutrition, in s^^ving for refrigeration, dilution of
solid aliment, and its elixation in the sto^macke, which from thence as a
vehicle it conveighs through less accessible cavities into the liver, from
thence into the veins, and so in a ^oride substance through the capillarie
cavities into every part; which having performed, it is afterward excluded by
urine, sweat and serous separations. And this opinion surely possessed the
Ancients, for when they so highly commended that water which is suddenly hot
and cold* which is without all favor, the lightest, the thinnest, and which
will soonest boil Beans or Pease, they had no consideration of nutrition;
whereunto had they had respect, they would have surely commended gross and
turbid streams, in whose confusion at the last, there might be contained some
nutriment; and not jejune or limpid water, and nearer the simplicity of its
Element.

All which considered, severer heads will be apt enough to conceive the opinion
of this animal, not much unlike unto that of the Astomi, or men without mouths
in Pliny, suitable unto the relation of the Mares in Spain, and their
subventaneous conceptions, from the western wind; and in some way more
unreasonable then the figment of Rabican the famous horse in Ariosto, which
being conceived by flame, and wind never tasted grass, or fed on any grosser
provender then air; for this way of nutrition was answerable unto the
principles of his generation; which being not ayrie, but gross and seminall in
the Chameleon, unto its conservation there is required a solid pasture, and a
food congenerous unto the principles of its nature.

The grounds of this opinion are many, The first observed by Theophrastus, was
the in^lation or swelling of the body made in this animal upon inspiration or
drawing in its breath, which people observing, have thought it to feed upon
air. But this effect is rather occasioned upon the greatness of its lungs,
which in this animal are very large, and by their backward situation, afford a
more observable dilatation, and though their lungs be less, the like
inflation is also observable in Toads.

A second is the continual hiation or holding open its mouth, which men
observing conceive the intention thereof to receive the aliment of air; but
this is also occasioned by the greatness of its lungs, for repletion whereof not
having a sufficient or ready supply by its nostrils, it is enforced to dilate
and hold open the jaws.

The third is the paucitie of blood observed in this animal, scarce at all to
be found but in the eye, and about the heart; which defect being observed,
inclined some into thoughts, that the air was a sufficient maintenance for
these exauguious parts. But this defect or rather paucity of blood, is also
agreeable unto many other animals, whose solid nutriment we do not
controvert, as may be observed in other sorts of Lizards, in Frogs, and
diverse Fishes, and therefore an Horse-leech will hardly be made to fasten upon
a fish, and we do not read of much blood that was drawn from Frogs by Mice
in that famous battle of Homer.

The last and most common ground which begat or promoted this opinion, is the
long continuation hereof without any visible food, which some precipitously
observing, conclude they eat not any at all. It cannot be denied it is (if not
the most of any) a very abstemious animal, and such as by reason of its
frigidity, paucity of blood, and lat^tancy in the winter, (about which time the
observations are often made) will long subsist without a visible sustentation:
But a like condition may be also observed in many other animals, for Lizards
and Leeches, as we have made trial, will live some months without sustenance,
and we have included Snailes in glasses all winter, which have returned to
feed again in the spring: Now these notwithstanding, are not conceived to
pass all their lives without food; for so to argue is fallacious, that is, A
minori ad majus, A dicto secundum quid ad dictum simpliciter, and is moreover
sufficiently convicted by experience, and therefore probably other relations
are of the same verity, which are of the like affinity, as is the conceit of
the Rhin^ace in Persia, the Cavis Levis of America, and the Manucodiata or bird
of Paradise in India.

To assign a reason of this abstinence in animals, or declare how without a
supply there ensues no destructive exhaustion, exceeds the limits of my
intention, and intention of my discourse. Fortunius Licetus in his excellent
Tract, De his qui diu vivunt sine alimento, has very ingeniously attempted it,
deducing the cause hereof from an equal conformity of natural heat and
moisture, at least no considerable exuperancy in either; which concurring in an
unactive proportion, the natural heat consumes not the moisture (whereby
ensues no exhaustion) and the condition of natural moisture is able to resist
the slender action of heat, (whereby it needs no reparation) and this is
evident in Snakes, Lizards, Snails, and diverse other insects latitant many
months in the year; which being cold creatures, containing a weak h^at, in a
crasse or copious humidity do long subsist without nutrition: For the activity
of the agent, being not able to overmaster the resistance of the patient, there
will ensue no deperdition. And upon the like grounds it is, that cold and
phlegmatic bodies, and (as Hippocrates determines) that old men, will best
endure fasting. Now the same harmony and stationary constitution, as it
happens in many species, so does it fall out sometime in Individualls; For
we read of many who have lived long time without aliment, and beside deceites
and impostures, there may be veritable Relations of some, who without a
miracle, and by peculiarity of temper, have far outfasted Elias.

CHAP. XXII.
Of the Oestridge.
THe common opinion of the Oestridge, Struthiocamelus, or Sparrow-Camell
conceives that it digesteth Iron; and this is confirmed by the affirmations of
many; beside swarms of others, Rhodiginus in his prelections takes it for
granted, Johannes Langius in his Epistles pleads experiment for it, the
common picture also confirms it which usually describes this animal, with
an horshooe in its mouth; notwithstanding upon enquiry we find it very
questionable, and the negative seems most reasonably entertained; whose verity
indeed we do the rather desire, because hereby we shall relieve our
ignorance of one occult quality; for in the list thereof it is accounted, and
in that notion imperiously obtruded upon us: For my own part, although I have
had the sight of this animal, I have not had the opportunity of its
experiment, but have received great occasions of doubt, from learned
discoursers thereon.

For Aristotle and Oppianus who have particularly treated hereof are silent in
this singularity, either omitting it as dubious, or as the Comment says,
rejecting it as fabulous; Pliny speaks generally, affirming only, the
digestion is wonderful in this animal; Aelian delivers, that it digesteth
stones, without any mention of Iron; Leo Africanus, who lived in those
Countries wherein they most abound, speaks diminutively, and but half way
into this assertion, Surdum ac simplex animal est, quicquid invenit, absque
delectu, usque ad ferrum devorat: Fernelius in his second book De abditis
rerum causis, extenuates it, and Riolanus in his Comment thereof positively
denies it: Some have experimentally refuted it, as Albertus Magnus, and most
plainly of all other Ulysses Aldrovandus, whose words are these, Ego ferri
frusta devorare, dum Tridenti essem, observavi, sede quae in cocta rursus
excerneret, that is, at my being at Trent, I observed the Oestridge to swallow
Iron, but yet to exclude it undigested again.

Now beside experiment, it is in vain to attempt against it by Philosophical
argument, it being an occult quality, which contemnes the law of Reason, and
defends it self by admitting no reason at all* As for its possibility, we
shall not at present dispute, nor will we affirm that Iron ingested, receives
in the stomach of the Oestridge no alteration whatsoever; but if any such there
be, we suspect this effect rather from some way of corrosion, then any of
digestion; not any liquid reduction or tendance to chilification by the power
of natural heat, but rather some attrition from an acide and vitriolous
humidity in the stomach, which may absterse, and shave the scorious parts
thereof; so rusty Iron crammed down the throat of a Cock, will become terse
and clear again in its gizard: So the Counter, which according to the
relation of Amatus, remained a whole year in the body of a youth, and came out
much consumed at last; might suffer this diminution, rather from sharp and
acide humors, then the strength of natural heat, as he supposes. So silver
swallowed and retained some time in the body will turn black, as if it had
been dipped in Aqua fortis, or some corrosive water; but Lead will remain
unaltered, for that metal contains in it a sweet salt and manifest sugar,
whereby it resists ordinary corrosion, and will not easily dissolve even in
Aqua fortis: So when for medicall uses, we take down the filings of Iron or
steel* we must not conceive it passes unaltered from us; for though the
grosser parts be excluded again, yet are the volatile and dissoluble parts
extracted, whereby it becomes effectual in deopilations; and therefore for
speedier operation we make extinctions, infusions, and the like, whereby we
extract the salt and active parts of the medicine, which being in solution,
more easily enter the veins. And this is that the Chemists mainely drive at in
the attempt of their Aurum potabile, that is, to reduce that indigestible
substance into such a form as may not be ejected by seidge, but enter the
cavities, and less accessible parts of the body, without corrosion.

The ground of this conceit is its swallowing down fragments of Iron, which
men observing, by a forward illation, have therefore conceived it digesteth
them; which is an inference not to be admitted, as being a fallacy of the
consequent, that is, concluding a position of the consequent, from the position
of the antecedent: For many things are swallowed by animals, rather for
condiment, gust, or medicament, then any substantial nutriment. So Poultrey,
and especially the Turkey, do of themselves take down stones, and we have
found at one time in the gizard of a Turkey no less then seven hundred: Now
these rather concur unto digestion, then are themselves digested, for we have
found them also in the guts, and excrements, but their descent is very slow,
for we have given them in paste, stones and final pieces of Iron, which
eighteen days after we have found remaining in the gizard; and therefore the
experiment of Langius and others might be mistaken, whilst after the taking
they expected it should come down within a day or two after: Thus also we
swallow cherry-stones, but void them unconcocted, and we usually say they
preserve us from surfeit, for being hard bodies they conceive a strong and
durable heat in the stomach, and so prevent the crudities of their fruit; And
upon the like reason do culinary operators observe that flesh boyles best, when
the bones are boiled with it: Thus dogs will eat grass, which they digest
not: Thus Camels to make the water sapide do raise the mud with their feet:
thus horses will knabble at walls, Pigeons delight in salt stones, Rats will
gnaw Iron^, and Aristotle says the Elephant swalloweth stones; and thus may
also the Oestridge swallow Iron, not as his proper aliment, but for the ends
above expressed, and even as we observe the like in other animals.

What effect therefore may be expected from the stomach of an Oestridge by
application alone to further digestion in ours, beside the experimental refute
of Galen, we refer it unto the considerations above alleged; or whether
there be any more credit to be given unto the medicine of Aelian, who affirms
the stones they swallow have a peculiar virtue for the eyes, then that of
Hermolaus and Pliny drawn from the urine of this animal, let them determine
who can swallow so strange a transmission of qualities, or believe that any
Bird or flying animal does urine beside the Bat.

CHAP. XXIII.
Of Unicorns horns.
GReat account and much profit is made of Unicornes horn, at least of that
which bears the name thereof* wherein notwithstanding, many I perceive
suspect an Imposture, and some conceive there is no such animal extant: herein
therefore to draw up our determinations, beside the several places of
Scripture mentioning this animal (which some perhaps may contend to be only
meant of the Rhinoceros) we are so far from denying there is any Unicorne at
all, that we affirm there are many kinds thereof, in the number of
Quadrupedes, we will concede no less then five; that is, the Indian Ox, the
Indian Ass, the Rhinoceros, the Oryx, and that which is more eminen^ly termed
Monoceros, or Vnicornis: Some in the list of fishes, as that described by
Olaus, Albertus, and many other: and some Unicornes we will allow even among
insects, as those four kinds of nasicornous Beetles described by Muffetus.

Secondly, although we concede there by many Unicornes, yet are we still to
seek; for whereunto to affixe this horn in question, or to determine from
which thereof we receive this magnified medicine, we have no assurance, or any
satisfactory decision: for although we single out one, More especially.
and Antonomastically thereto assign the name of the Unicorne, yet can we not
be secure what creature is meant thereby, what constant shape it holds, or in
what number to be received: For as far as our endeavors discover, this animal
is not uniformely described, but differently set forth by those that undertake
it: Pliny affirms it is a fierce and terrible creature, Vartomannus a tame
and mansuete animal: those which Garcias ab Horto described about the cape of
good hope, were beheld with heads like horses; those which Vartomannus beheld,
he described with the head of a Dear; Pliny, Aelian Solinus, and after these
from ocular assurance Paulus Venetus affirms the feet of the Unicorne are
undivided, and like the Elephants: But those two which Vartomannus beheld at
Mecha, were as he describes footed like a Goat: As Aelian describes, it is
in the bigness of an horse, as Vartomannus of a Colt, That which Thevet
speaks of was not so big as an Heifer; But Paulus Venetus affirms, they are
but little less then Elephants; which are discriminations very material, and
plainly declare, that under the same name Authors describe not the same
animal: So that the Unicornes horn of the one, is not that of another,
although we proclaim an equal virtue in either.

Thirdly, although we were agreed what animal this was, or differed not in its
description, yet would this also afford but little satisfaction, for the horn
we commonly extol, is not the same with that of the Ancients; For that in the
description of Aelian and Pliny was black, this which is showed amongst us is
commonly white, none black; and of those five which Scaliger beheld, though one
spadiceous, or of a light red, and two inclining to red, yet was there not any
of this complexion among them.

Fourthly, what horns soever they be which pass amongst us, they are not
surely the horns of any one kind of animal, but must proceed from several
sorts of Unicornes; for some are wreathed, some not: That famous one which is
preserved at S. Dennis near Paris, has awfractuous spires, and chocleary
turnings about it, which agrees with the description of the Unicornes horn in
Aelian; Those two in the treasure of S. Mark are plain, and best accord with
those of the Indian Ass, or the descriptions of other Unicornes: Albertus
Magnus describes one ten foot long, and at the base about thirteen inches
compass; And that of Antwerpe which Goropius Becanus describes, is not much
inferior unto it; which best agree unto the descriptions of the Sea-Unicornes,
for these, as Olaus affirms, are of that strength and bigness, as able to
penetrate the ribs of ships; the same is more probable, in that it was brought
from Island, from whence, as Becan^s affirms, three other were brought in his
days; And we have heard of some which have been found by the sea side, and
brought unto us from America: So that while we commend the Unicornes horn, and
conceive it peculiar but unto one animal, under apprehension of the same
virtue, we use very many, and commend that effect from all, which every one
confineth unto some one, he has either seen or described.

Fifthly, although there be many Unicornes, and consequently many horns, yet
many there are which bear that name, and currantly pass among us, which are
no horns at all; and such are those fragments, and pieces of Lapis Ceratites,
commonly termed Cornufossile, whereof Boethius had no less then twenty several
sorts presented him for Unicorns horn: hereof in subterraneous cavities* and
under the earth there are many to be found in several parts of Germany, which
are but the Lapidescencies, and petrifactive mutations of hard bodies, sometime
of horn, of teeth, of bones, and branches of trees, whereof there are some so
imperfectly converted, as to retain the odor and qualities of their originals,
as he relates of pieces of Ash and Wallnut. Again, in most if not all which
pass amongst us, and are extolled for precious horns, we discover not one
affection common unto other horns, that is, they mollify not with fire, they
soften not upon decoction, or infusion, nor will they afford a jelly, or
muccilaginous concretion in either; which notwithstanding we may effect in
Goats horns, Sheep, Cows, and Hearts horn, in the horn of the Rhinoceros,
the horn of the Pristis or Sword-fish. Briefly that which is commonly
received, and whereof there be so many fragments preserved in England, is not
only no horn, but a substance harder then a bone, that is, the tooth of a
Morse or Seahorse, in the midst of the solider part containing a curdled
grain, which is not to be found in Ivory; this in Northern regions is of
frequent use for hafts of knives, or hilts of swords, and being burnt becomes a
good remedy for fluxes: but antidotically used, and exposed for Unicornes
horn, it is an insufferable delusion, and with more veniable deceit, it might
have been practiced in Hearts horn.

Sixthly, although we were satisfied we had the Unicornes horn, yet were it no
injury unto reason to question the efficacy thereof, or whether those virtues
which are pretended do properly belong unto it; for what we observe (and it
escaped not the observation of Paulus Iovius many years past) none of the
Ancients ascribed any medicinal or antidotall virtue unto the Unicornes horn;
and that which Aelian extolleth, who was the first and only man of the
Ancients who spoke of the medicall virtue of any Unicorne, was the horn of the
Indian Ass, whereof, says he, the Princes of those parts make boales and
drink therein, as preservatives against poison, Convulsions, and the
Falling Sickness; Now the description of that horn is not agreeable unto that
we commend; for that (says he) is red above, white b^low, and black in the
middle, which is very different from ours, or any to be seen amongst us; And
thus, though the description of the Unicorne be very ancient, yet was there of
old no virtue ascribed unto it, and although this amongst us receive the
opinion of the same virtue, yet is it not the same horn whereunto the Ancients
ascribed it.

Lastly, although we allow it an Antidotall efficacy, and such as the Ancients
commended, yet are there some virtues ascribed thereto by Modernes not easily
to be received; and it has surely fallen out in this as other magnified
medicines, whose operations effectual in some diseases, are presently extended
unto all: That some antidotall quality it may have we have no reason to deny;
for since Elkes hoofes and horns are magnified for Epilepsies, since not only
the bone in the heart, but the horn of a Dear is Alexipharmacall, and
ingredient into the confection of Hyacinth, and the Electuary of Maximilian,
we cannot without prejudice except against the efficacy of this: But when we
affirm it is not only Antidotall to proper venomes, and substances
destructive by qualities, we cannot express; but that it resists also
Sublimate, Arsenick, and poisons which kill by second qualities, that is, by
corrosion of parts, I doubt we exceed the properties of its nature, and the
promises of experiment will not secure the adventure: And therefore in such
extremities, whether there be not more probable relief from fat and oily
substances, which are the open tyrants of salt and corrosive bodies, then
precious and cordial medicines which operate by secret and disputable
proprieties; or whether he that swallowed Lime, and drank down Mercury water,
did not more reasonably place his cure in milk, butter, or oil, then if he
had recurred unto Pea^le and Bezoar, common reason at all times, and necessity
in the like case would easily determine.

Since therefore there be many Unicornes, since that whereto we appropriate a
horn is so variously described, that it seems either never to have been
seen by two persons, or not to have been one animal; Since though they
agreed in the description of the animal, yet is not the horn we extol the
same with that of the Ancients; Since what horns soever they be that pass
among us, they are not the horns of one but several animals: Since many in
common use and high esteem are no horns at all: Since if they were true
horns, yet might their virtues be questioned: Since though we allowed some
vir^tues, yet were not others to be received, with what security a man may rely
on this remedy, the mistress of fools has already instructed some, and to
wisdom (which is never too wise to learn) it is not too late to consider.

CHAP. XXIV.
That all Animals of the Land, are in their kind in the Sea.
THat all Animals of the Land, are in their kind in the Sea, although received
as a principle, is a tenent very questionable, and will admit of restraint; for
some in the Sea are not to be matched by any enquiry at Land, and hold those
shapes which terrestrious forms approach not; as may be observed in the Moon
fish, or Orthragoriscus, the several sorts of Raia's, Torpedo's, Oysters, and
many more; and some there are in the Land which were never maintained to be in
the Sea, as Panthers, Hyaena's, Camels, Sheep, Molls, and others which carry no
name in Icthyologie, nor are to be found in the exact descriptions of
Rondeletius, Gesner, or Aldrovandus.

Again, though many there be which make out their nominations, as the
Hedg-hog, Sea-serpents, and others; yet are there also very many that bear the
name of animals at Land, which hold no resemblance in corporal configuration;
in which account we compute Vulpecula, Canis, Rana, Passer, Cuculus, Asellus,
Turdus, Lepus, etc. wherein while some are called the Fox, the Dog, the
Sparrow, or Frog-fish, and are known by common names with those at land; as
their describers attest, they receive not these appellations, as we conceive,
from a total similitude in figure, but any concurrence in common accidents, in
color, condition, or single conformation: as for Sea-horses which much
confirm this assertion, in their common descriptions, they are but Crotesco
deliniations which fill up empty spaces in Maps, and mere pictoriall
inventions, not any Physical shapes: suitable unto those which (as Pliny
delivers) Praxiteles long ago set out in the Temple of Domitius: for that
which is commonly called a Seahorse is properly called a Morse, and makes not
out that shape: That which the Ancients named Hippocampus is a little animal
about six inches long, and not preferred beyond the classis of Insects: that
they termed Hippopotamus an amphibious animal, about the River Nile, so
little resembles an horse, that as Mathiolus observes in all, except the
seet, it better makes out a swine: that which they termed a Lion, was but a
kind of Lobster: and that they called the Bear, was but one kind of Crab,
and that which they named Bos marinus, was not as we conceive a fish resembling
an Ox, but a Skaite or Thornbacke, so named from its bigness, expressed by
the Greek word Bous, which is a prefixe of augmentation to many words in that
language.

And therefore although it be not denied that some in the water do carry a
justifiable resemblance to some at the Land, yet are the major part which bear
their names unlike; nor do they otherwise resemble the creatures on earth,
then they on earth the constellations which pass under animal names in
heaven: nor the Dog-fish at sea much more make out the Dog of the land, then
that his cognominall or namesake in the heavens. Now if from a similitude in
some, it be reasonable to infer a correspondency in all, we may draw this
analogy of animalls upon plants; for vegetables there are which carry a near
and allowable similitude unto animals, as we elsewhere declare: we might also
presume to conclude that animal shapes were generally made out in mineralls:
for several stones there are that bear their names in relation to animals
parts, as Lapis anguinus, Conchites, Echinites, Eucephalites, Aegopthalmus, and
many more, as will appear in the writers of Mineralls, and especially in
Boethius.

Moreover if we concede, that the animalls of one Element, might bear the
names of those in the other, yet in strict reason the watery productions should
have the prenomination: and they of the land rather derive their names, then
nominate those of the sea: for the watery plantations were first existent, and
as they enjoyed a priority in form, had also in nature precedent
denominations: but falling not under that nomenclature of Adam, which unto
terrestrious animalls assigned a name appropriate unto their natures, from
succeeding spectators they received arbitrary appellations, and were
respectively denominated unto creatures known at land, which in themselves had
independent names, and not to be called after them, which were created before
them.

Lastly, by this assertion we restrain the hand of God, and abridge the
variety of the creation; making the creatures of one Element, but an acting
over those of an other, and conjoyning as it were the species of things which
stood at distance in the intellect of God, and though united in the Chaos, had
several seeds of their creation: for although in that indistinguisht mass, all
things seemed one, yet separated by the voice of God, according to their
species they came out in incommunicated varieties, and irrelative seminalities,
as well as divided places; and so although we say the world was made in six
days, yet was there as it were a world in every one, that is, a distinct
creation of distinguished creatures, a distinction in time of creatures divided
in nature, and a several approbation, and survey in every one.

CHAP. XXV.
Compendiously of sundry Tenants concerning other Animals, which examined prove
either false or dubious.
1. ANd first from times of great Antiquity, and before the Melody of Sirens,
the Musical notes of Swans has been commended, and that they sing most
sweetly before their death. For thus we read in Plato de Legibus, that from the
opinion of Melempsuchosis, or transmigration of the souls of men into the
bodies of beasts most suitable unto their humane condition, after his death,
Orpheus the Musician became a Swan. Thus was it the bird of Apollo the god of
Music by the Greeks, and a Hieroglyphick of Music among the Egyptians,
from whom the Greeks derived the conception, has been the affirmation of many
Latins, and has not wanted assertors almost from every Nation.

All which notwithstanding we find this relation doubtfully received by Aelian,
as an hearsay account by Bellonius, as a false one by Pliny, expressly refuted
by Myndius in Athenaeus, and severely rejected by Scaliger, whose words unto
Cardan are these. De Cygni vero cantu suavis simo quem cum parente mendaciorum
Graecia jactare ausus es, ad Luciani tribunal, apud quem novi aliquid dicas,
statuo. Authors also that countenance it, speak not satifactorily of it. Some
affirming they sing not till they die; some that they sing, yet die not; some
speak generally, as though this note were in all; some but particularly, as
though it were only in some; some in places remote, and where we can have no
trial of it; others in places where every experience can refute it, as
Aldrovand upon relation, delivered, concerning the Music of the Swans on the
river of the Thames near London.

Now that which countenanceth, This figuration to be fonnd in Elkes, and not in
common Swans.
and probably confirms this opinion, is the strange and unusual conformation
of the wind pipe, or vocal organ in this animal: observed first by
Aldrovandus, and conceived by some contrived for this intention: for in its
length it far exceeds the gullet, and has in the chest a sinuous revolution,
that is, when it arises from the lunges, it ascends not directly unto the
throat, but ascending first into a capsulary reception of the breast bone, by a
Serpentine and Trumpet recurvation it ascends again into the neck, and so by
the length thereof a great quantity of air is received, and by the figure
thereof a musical modulation effected. But to speak indifferently (what
Aldrovand himself acknowledges) this formation of the Weazon, is not peculiar
unto the Swan but common also, unto the Platea or Shovelard, a bird of no
Musical throat; And as himself confesses may thus be contrived in the Swan
to contain a larger stock of air, whereby being to feed on weeds at the
bottom, they might the longer space detain their heads under water. And indeed
were this formation peculiar, or had they unto this effect an advantage from
this part: yet have they a known and open disadvantage from an other, which is
not common unto any singing bird we know, that is a flat bill: For no
Latirostrous animal (whereof nevertheless there are no slender numbers) were
ever commended for their note, or accounted among those animals which have been
instructed to speak.

When therefore we consider the dissension of Authors, the falsity of
relations, the indisposition of the Organs, and the immusicall note of all we
ever beheld or heard of, if generally taken and comprehending all Swans, or of
all places, we cannot assent thereto. Surely he that is bit with a Tarantula,
shall never be cured by this Music, and with the same hopes we expect to hear
the harmony of the Spheres.

2. That there is a special propriety in the flesh of Peacocks roast or
boiled, to preserve a long time incorrupted, has been the assertion of many,
stands yet confirmed by Austine, De Civitate Dei, by Gygas Sempronius, in
Aldrovand, and the same experiment we can confirm our selves, in the brawne or
fleshy parts of Peacocks so hanged up with thread, that they touch no place
whereby to contract a moisture; and hereof we have made trial both in the
summer and winter. The reason some I perceive, attempt to make out from the
siccity and drines of its flesh, and some are content to rest in a secret
propriety thereof. As for the siccity of the flesh, it is more remarkable in
other animals, as Aegles, Hawks, and birds of prey; And that it is a
propriety, or agreeable unto none other, we cannot with reason admit: for the
same preservation, or rather incorruption we have observed in the flesh of
Turkeys, Capons, Hares, Partridge, Venison, suspended freely in the air, and
after a year and a half, dogs have not refused to eat them.

As for the other conceit that a Peacocke is ashamed when he looks on his
legs, as is commonly held, and also delivered by Cardan, beside what has
been said against it by Scaliger, let them believe that hold specificall
deformities, or that any part can seem unhansome to their eyes, which has
appeared good and beautiful unto their makers. The occasion of this conceit,
might first arise from a common observation, that when they are in their pride,
that is, advance their train, if they decline their neck to the ground, they
presently demit and let fall the same: which indeed they cannot otherwise do,
for contracting their body, and being forced to draw in their foreparts, to
establish the hinder in the elevation of the train, if the foreparts depart
and incline to the ground, the hinder grow too weak, and suffer the train to
fall. And the same in some degree is also observeable in Turkyes.

3. That Storkes are to be found and will only live in Republikes or free
States, is a pretty conceit to advance the opinion of popular policies, and
from Antipathies in nature, to disparage Monarchical government. But how far
agreeable unto truth, let them consider who read in Pliny, that among the
Thessalians who were governed by Kings, and much abounded with Serpents, it was
no less then capital to kill a Storke. That the ancient Egyptians honored
them, whose government was from all times Monarchical. That Bellonius
affirms, men make them nests in France. And lastly, how Jeremy the Prophet
delivered himself unto his countrymen, whose government was at that time
Monarchical. Milvus in Coel^ cognovit tempus suum. Turtur Hirundo and Ciconia
custodierunt tempus adventus sui. Wherein to exprobrate their Stupiditie, he
induces the providence of Storkes. Now if the bird had been unknown, the
illustration had been obscure, and the exprobation but improper.

4. That a Bittor makes that mugient noise, or as we term it Bumping by
putting its bill into a reed as most believe, or as Bellonius and Aldrovand
conceive, by putting the same in water or mud, and after a while retaining the
air by suddenly excluding it again, is not so easily made out. For my own
part though after diligent enquiry, I could never behold them in this motion;
Notwithstanding by others whose observations we have expressly requested, we are
informed, that some have beheld them making this noise on the Shore, their
bills being far enough removed from reed or water; that is, first strongly
attracting the air, and unto a manifest distention of the neck, and presently
after with great Contention and violence excluding the same again. As for what
others affirm of putting their bill in water or mud, it is also hard to make
out. For what may be observed from any that walks the Fenns, there is little
intermission, nor any observable pawse, between the drawing in and sending
forth of their breath. And the expiration or breathing forth does not only
produce a noise, but the inspiration or haling in of the air, affords a
sound that may be heard almost a flight shoot.

Now the reason of this strange and peculiar noise, is well deduced from the
conformation of the windepipe, which in this bird is different from other
volatiles. For at the upper extreme it has no Larinx, or throttle to qualify
the sound, and at the other end, by two branches deriveth it self into the
Lunges. Which division consists only of Semicircular fibers, and such as
attain but half way round the part; By which formation they are dilatable into
larger capacities, and are able to contain a fuller proportion of air, which
being with violence sent up the weazon, and finding no resistance by the
Larinx, it issues forth in a sound like that from cavernes, and such as
sometimes subterraneous eruptions, from hollow rocks afford; As Aristotle
observes in a Problem of the 25. Section, and is observable in pichards,
bottles, and that instrument which Aponensis upon that problem describes,
wherewith in Aristotle's time Gardiners affrighted birds.

5. That whelps are blind nine days and then begin to see, is the common
opinion of all, and some will be apt enough to descend unto oaths upon it. But
this I find not answerable unto experience; for upon a strict observation of
many, I have not found any that see the ninth day, few before the twelfth, and
the eyes of some will not open before the fourteenth day. And this is agreeable
unto the determination of Aristotle: who computeth the time of their anopsie or
invision by that of their gestation; for some says he do go with their young,
the sixth part of a year, a day or two over or under, that is, about sixty days
or nine weeks, and the whelps of these see not till twelve days; some go the
fifth part of a year, that is, 71. days, and these says he see not before the
fourteenth day. Others do go the fourth part of a year, that is, three whole
months, and these says he are without sight no less then seventeen days:
wherein although the accounts be different, yet does the least thereof exceed
the term of nine days which is so generally received. And this compute of
Aristotle does generally overthrow, the common cause alleged for this effect,
that is, a precipitation or over hasty exclusion before the birth be perfect,
according unto the vulgar Adage. Festinans canis coecos parit catulos: for
herein the whelps of longest gestation, are also the latest in vision. The
manner hereof is this. At the first littering their eyes are fastly closed,
that is, by coalition or joining together of the eyelids, and so continue
until about the twefth day, at which time they begin to separate, and may be
easily divelled or parted asunder; they open at the inward canthis, or greater
angle of the eye, and so by degrees dilate themselves quite open. An effect
very strange, and the cause of much obscurity, wherein as yet men's enquiries
are blind, and satisfaction acquirable from no man. What ever it be, thus much
we may observe, those animalls are only excluded without sight, which are
multiparous and multifidous, that is, which have many at a litter, and have
also their feet divided into many portions; for the Swine although multiparous,
yet being bisulcous, and only cloven hoofed, is not excluded in this manner,
but farrowed with open eyes, as other bisulcous animals.

6. The Antipathy between a Toad and a Spider, and that they poisonously
destroy each other is very famous, and solemn Stories have been written of
their combats, wherein most commonly the victory is given unto the Spider. Of
what Toades and Spiders it is to be understood, would be considered. For the
Phalangium, and deadly Spiders, are different from those we generally behold in
England. How ever the verity hereof, as also of many others, we cannot but
desire; for hereby we might be surely provided of proper Antidotes in cases
which require them; But what we have observed herein, we cannot in reason
conceal, who having in a glass included a Toad with several Spiders, we
beheld the Spiders without resistance to sit upon his head, and pass over all
his body, which at last upon advantage he swallowed down, and that in few
hours to the number of seven. And in the like manner will Toades also serve
Bees, and are accounted an enemy unto their Hives.

7. Whether a Lion be also afraid of a Cock, as is related by many, and
believed by most, were very easy in some places to make trial. Although how
far they stand in fear of that animal, we may sufficiently understand, from
what is delivered by Camerarius, whose words in his Symbola are these. Nostris
temporibus in Aula serenissimi Principis Bavariae, unus ex Leonibus miris
saltibus in vicinam cujusdam domu^ aream sese dimisit, ubi Gallinaciorum cantum
aut clampres nihil reformidans ipsos una cum plurimis gallinis devoravit. That
is, in our time in the court of the Prince of Bavaria, one of the Lions leaped
down into a neighbous yard, where nothing regarding the crowing or noise of
the Cocks, he eat them up with many other Hens. And therefore a very unsafe
defensative it is against the fury of this animal, and surely no better then
Virginity, or blood Royal, which Pliny does place in Cock broth: For herewith,
says he, who ever is anointed (especially if Garlic be boiled therein) no
Lion or Panther will touch him.

8. It is generally conceived, an earewigge has no wings, and is reckoned
amongst impennous insects by many, but he that shall narrowly observe them, or
shall with a needle put aside the short and sheathie cases on their back, may
extend and draw forth two wings of a proportionable length for flight, and
larger then many flies. The experiment of Pennius is yet more perfect, who with
a rush or bristle so pricked them as to make them fly.

9. That worms are exanguious animalls, and such as have no blood at all, is
the determination of Philosophy, the general opinion of Scholars, and I know
not well to dissent from thence my self: if so, surely we want a proper term
whereby to express that humor in them which so strictly resembles blood: and
we refer it unto the discernment of others what to determine of that red and
sanguineous humor, found more plentifully about the Torquis or carneous circle
of great worms in the spring, affording in linen or paper an indiscernable
tincture from blood; or wherein that differs from a vein, which in an
apparent blew runs along the body, and if dexterously pricked with a lancet
emitteth a red drop, which pricked on either side it will not readily afford.

In the upper parts of worms, there are likewise found certain white and
ovall glandulosities which Authors term eggs, and in magnifying glasses, they
also represent them: how properly may also be enquired; since if in them there
be distinction of sexes, these eggs are to be found in both. For in that which
is presumed to be their coition that is their usual complication, or rather
laterall adhesion above the ground, dividing suddenly with two knives the
adhering parts of both, I have found these eggs in either.

10. That Flies, Bees, etc. do make that noise or humming sound by their
mouth, or as many believe with their wings only, would be more warily asserted,
if we consulted the determination of Aristotle, who as in sundry other places,
so more expressly, in his book of respiration, affirms this sound to be
made, by the allision of an inward spirit upon a pellicle, or little membrane
about the precinct or pectorall division of their body. If we also consider
that a Be or Fly, so it be able to move the body, will buz though its head be
off; that it will do the like if deprived of wings reserving the head whereby
the body may be the better moved. And that some also which are big and lively
will humme without either head or wing.

Nor is it only the brating upon this little membrane, by the inward and
connaturall spirit as Aristotle determines, or the outward air as Scaliger
conceives which affords this humming noise, but perhaps most of the other
parts may also concur hereto, as will be manifest if while they humme we lay
our finger on the back or other parts; for thereupon will be felt a serrous or
jarring motion like that which happens while we blow on the teeth of a comb
through paper; and so if the head or other parts of the trunk be touched with
oil, the sound will be much impaired, if not destroyed: for those being also
dry and membranous parts, by attrition of the spirit do help to advance the
noise: And therefore also the sound is strongest in dry weather, and very weak
in rainy season, and toward winter; for then the air is moist, and the inward
spirit growing weak, makes a languid and dumb allision upon the parts.

11. There is found in the Summer a kind of spider called a Tainct of a red
color, and so little of body that ten of the largest will hardly outway a
grain; this by Country people is accounted a deadly poison unto cowes and
horses, who, if they suddenly dye, and swell thereon, ascribe their death
hereto, and will commonly say, they have licked a Tainct. Now to satisfy the
doubts of men, we have called this tradition unto experiment; we have given
hereof unto dogs, chickens, calves and horses, and not in the singular number,
yet never could find the least disturbance ensue. There must be therefore
other causes enquired of the sudden death, and swelling of cattle, and perhaps
this insect is mistaken, and unjustly accused for some other; for some there
are which from elder times, have been observed pernicious unto cattle, as the
Buprestis or burst cow, the Pityocampe or cruca Pinuum, by Dioscorides, Galen
and Aetius, the Staphilinus described by Aristotle and others, or those red
Phalangious spiders like Cantharides mentioned by Muffetus. Now although the
animal may be mistaken and the opinion also false, yet in the ground and
reason which makes men most to doubt the verity hereof there may be truth
enough, that is the small inconsiderable quantity of this insect. For that a
poison cannot destroy in so small a bulk, we have no reason to affirm. For if
as Leo Africanus reports, the tenth part of a grain of the poison of Nubia
will dispatch a man in two hours, if the bite of a Viper and sting of a
Scorpion, is not conceived to impart so much, if the bite of an Aspe will kill
within an hour, yet the impression scarce visible, and the poison communicated
not ponderable, we cannot as impossible reject this way of destruction; or deny
the power of death in so narrow a circumscription.

12. Wondrous things are promised from the Glow^worme* thereof perpetual
lights are pretended, and waters said to be distilled which afford a luster in
the night; and this is asserted by Cardan, Albertus, Gaudentius, Mizaldus and
many others. But hereto we cannot with reason assent: for the light made by
this animal depends upon a living spirit, and seems by some vital irradiation
to be actuated into this luster. For when they are dead they shine not, nor
always while they live, but are obscure or light according to the diffusion of
this spirit, and the protrusion of their luminous parts, as observation will
instruct us; for this flammeous light is not over all the body, but only
visible on the inward side, in a small white part near the tail. When this is
full and seems protruded, there arises a double flame of a circular figure
and Emerald green color, which is discernable in any dark place in the day;
but when it falls and seems contracted, the light disappeareth, and the
color of the part only remains. Now this light, as it appears and
disappeareth in their life, so does it go quite out at their death. As we have
observed in some, which preserved in fresh grass have lived and shined
eighteen days, but as they declined their light grew languid, and at last went
out with their lives. Thus also the Torpedo which alive has a power to
stupifie at a distance, has none upon contaction being dead, as Galen and
Rondoletius particularly experimented. And this has also disappointed the
mischief of those intentions, which study the advancement of poisons, and
fancy destructive compositions from Aspes or Vipers teeth, from Scorpions or
Hornet stings; for these omit their efficacy in the death of the individual,
and act but dependantly on their forms. And thus far also those Philosophers
concur with us which held the Sun and Stars were living creatures, for they
conceived their luster depended on their lives; but if they ever dyed their
light must perish also.

True it is, and we have observed it, that a Glow-worme will afford a faint
light, almost a days space when many will conceive it dead, but this is a
mistake in the compute of death, and term of disanimation; for indeed, it is
not then dead, but if it be distended will slowly contract it self again,
which when it cannot do it cease to shine any more. And to speak strictly it
is no easy matter to determine the point of death in insects and creatures who
have not their vitalities radically confined unto one part; for these are not
dead when they cease to move or afford the visible evidencies of life; as may
be manifestly observed in flies, who when they appear even desperate and quite
forsaken of their forms, by virtue of the sun or warm ashes will be revoked
unto life, and perform its functions again.

13. The wisdom of the Pismire is magnified by all, and in the Panegyricks of
their providence we always meet with this, that to prevent the growth of corn
which they store up they bite off the end thereof: And some have conceived that
from hence they have their name in Hebrew: From whence arises a conceit that
corn will not grow if the extremes be cut or broken. What other provision they
make for this intention we know not, but herein we find no security to prevent
its germination, as having made trial in grains whose ends cut off have
notwithstanding suddenly sprouted, and according to the law of their kinds,
that is the roots of barley and oats at contrary ends, of wheat and rye at the
same. And therefore some have delivered that after rainy weather they dry these
grains in the Sun, which if effectual, we must conceive to be made in a high
degree and above the progression of Malt, for that Malt will grow this year
has informed us, and that unto a perfect ^ar.

THE FOVRTH BOOK.
Of many popular and received Tenants concerning Man, which examined, prove
either false or dubious.
CHAP. I.
Of the erectnesse of Man.
THat only Man has an erect figure, and that for to behold and look up
toward heaven, according to that of the Poet -- Pronaque cum spectant animalia
caetera terram
Os h^mini sublime dedit, caelumque tueri
Iussit, and erectos ad sydera tollere vultus,
is a double assertion, whose first part may be true, if we take erectnesse
strictly, and so as Galen has defined it; for they only, says he, have an
erect figure, whose spine and thigh bone are carried in right lines, and so
indeed of any we yet know, Man only is erect; for the thighs of other animals
do stand at angles with their spine, and have rectangular positions in birds,
and perfect Quadrupedes; nor does the Frog, though stretched out, or swimming,
attain the rectitude of man, or carry its thigh without all angularity: and
thus is it also true that man only sits, if we define sitting to be a
firmation of the body upon the Ischias; wherein if the position be just and
natural the thigh bone lies at right angles to the spine, and the leg bone or
tibia to the thigh; for others when they seem to sit, as Dogs, Cats, or Lions,
do make unto their spine acute angles with their thigh, and acute to the thigh
with their shanke: Thus is it likewise true, what Aristotle alleges in that
Problem; why man alone is (...) or suffers pollutions in the night; that is,
because man only lies upon his back, if we define not the same by every
supine position, but when the spine is in rectitude with the thigh, and both
with the arms lie parallel to the Horizon, that a line through their navel
will pass through the Zenith and center of the earth, and so cannot other
animals lie upon their backs; for though the spine lie parallel with the
Horizon, yet will their legs incline, and lie at angles unto it; And upon these
three diverse positions in man wherein the spine can only be at right lines with
the thigh, arise those remarkable postures, prone, supine, and erect, which
are but differenced in sight, or inaugular postures upon the back, the belly
and the feet.

But if erectnesse be popularly taken, and as it is largely opposed unto
pronenesse, or the posture of animals looking downwards, carrying their
venters or opposite part to the spine directly toward the earth, it must not
be strictly taken; for though in Serpents and Lizards we may truly allow a
pronenesse, yet Galen acknowledges that perfect Quadrupedes, as Horses, Oxen,
and Camels, are but partly prone, and have some part of erectnesse; and birds
or flying animals, are so far from this kind of pronenesse, that they are
almost erect, advancing the head and breast in their progression, and only
prone in the act of their volitation; and if that be true which is delivered of
the Penguin or Anser Magellanicus, and often described in Maps about those
Straits, that they go erect like men, and with their breast and belly do make
one line perpendicular unto the axis of the earth; it will make up the exact
erectnesse of man; nor will that insect come very short which we have often
beheld, that is, one kind of Locust which stands not prone, or a little
inclining upward, but in a large erectnesse, elevating always the two fore
legs, and susteining it self in the middle of the other four; by Zoographers
called mantis, and by the Common people of Province, Pr^ga Dio, that is, the
Prophet and praying Locust, as being generally found in the posture of
supplication, or such as resembles ours, when we lift up our hands to heaven.

As for the end of this erection, to look up toward heaven, though confirmed
by several testimonies, and the Greek E^ymology of man, it is not so readily
to be admitted; and as a popular and vain conceit was anciently rejected by
Galen; who in his third, De usu partium, determines, that man is erect because
he was made with hands, and was therewith to exercise all Arts which in any
other figure he could not have performed, as he excellently declares in that
place where he also proves that man could have been made neither Quadruped,
nor Ce^taur.

The ground and occasion of this conceit was a literal apprehension of a
figurative expression in Plato, as Galen plainly delivers, the effect of whose
words is this: To opinion that man is erect to look up and behold the heavens,
is a conceit only fit for those that never saw the fish Uranoscopus, that is,
the Beholder of heaven; which has its eyes so placed, that it looks up
directly to heaven, which man does not, except he recline, or bend his head
backward; and thus to look up to heaven agrees not only unto men, but Asses;
to omit birds with long necks, which look not only upwards, but round about
at pleasure; and therefore men of this opinion understood not Plato when he
said that man does Sursum aspicere, for thereby was not meant to gape or look
upward with the eye, but to have his thoughts sublime, and not only to behold,
but speculate their nature with the eye of the understanding.

Now although Galen in this place makes instance but in one, yet are there
other fishes, whose eyes regard the heavens, as Plane, and cartilagineous
fishes as pectinals, or such as have the Apophyses of their spine made
laterally like a comb, for when they apply themselves to sleep or rest upon
the white side, their eyes on the other side look upward toward heaven: for
birds, they generally carry their heads erectly like man, and some have
advantage in that they move not their upper eyelid; and many that have long
necks, and bear their heads somewhat backward, behold far more of the
heavens, and seem to look above the aequinoxiall circle; and so also in many
Quadrupeds, although their progression be partly prone, yet is the sight of
their eye direct, not respecting the earth but heaven, and makes an higher arch
of altitude then our own. The position of a Frogge with his head above water
exceeds these; for therein he seems to behold a large part of the heavens,
and the acies of his eye to ascend as high as the Tropic; but he that has
beheld the posture of a Bitour, will not deny that it beholds almost the very
Zenith.

CHAP. II.
Of the heart.
THat the heart of man is seated in the left side, is an asseveration which
strictly taken, is resutable by inspection; whereby it appears the base and
center thereof is in the midst of the chest* true it is that the Mucro or point
thereof inclines unto the left, for by this position it gives way unto the
ascension of the midriffe, and by reason of the hollow vein could not
commodiously deflect unto the right* from which diversion, nevertheless we
cannot so properly say it is placed in the left; as that it consists in the
middle, that is, where its center rests; for so do we usually say a Gnomon
or needle is in the middle of a Dial, although the extremes may respect the
North or South and approach the circumference thereof.

The ground of this mistake is a general observation from the pulse or motion
of the heart, which is more sensible on this side; but the reason hereof is not
to be drawn from the situation of the heart, but the site of the left
ventricle wherein the vital spirits are labored, and also the great Artery
that conveyeth them out, both which are situated on the left, and upon this
reason epithems or cordial applications are justly applied unto the left breast,
and the wounds under the fist rib may be more suddenly destructive if made on
the sinister side; and the spear of the soldier that pierced our Savior, is
not improperly described when Painters direct it a little toward the left.

The other ground is more particular and upon inspection; for in^ dead bodies
especially lying upon the spine, the heart does seem to incline unto the left,
which happens not from its proper site, but besides its sinistrous gravity is
drawn that way by the great artery, which then subsideth and haleth the heart
unto it, And therefore strictly taken, the heart is seated in the middle of the
chest; but after a careless and inconsiderate aspection, or according to the
readiest sense of pulsation, we shall not quarrel if any affirm it is seated
toward the left; and in these considerations must Aristotle be salved, when he
affirms the heart of man is placed in the left side, and thus in a popular
acception may we receive the periphrasis of Persius when he takes the part
under the left pappe for the heart; Lava in part mamillae.
and if rightly apprehended, it concerns not this controversy, when it is
said in Ecclesiastes, The heart of a wiseman is in the right side, but that of
a fool in the left.

That assertion also that man proportionally has the largest brain, I did I
confess somewhat doubt, and conceived it might have failed in birds,
especially such as having little bodies, have yet large cranies, and seem to
contain much brain, as Snipes, Woodcoks, etc. but upon trial I find it very
true. The brains of a man Archangelus and Bauhinus, observe to weigh four
pound, and sometime five and an half, if therefore a man weigh one hundred and
forty pounds, and his brain but five, his weight is 27. times as much as his
brain, deducting the weight of that five pound which is allowed for it; now in
a Snype which waighed four ounces two dragmes, I find the brains to weigh but
half dragme, so that the weight of the body (allowing for the brain) exceeded
the weight of the brain, sixty seven times and an half.

CHAP. III.
Of Pleurisies.
THat Pleurisies are only on the left side, is a popular Tenent, not only
absurd but dangerous. From the misapprehension hereof, men omitting the
opportunity of those remedies, which otherwise they would not neglect; chiefly
occasioned by the ignorance of Anatomy, and the extent of the part affected,
which in an exquisite Pleurisy is determined to be the skin or membrane which
investeth the ribs, for so it is defined, Inflammati^ membrane costas
succingentis; An Inflammation either simple consisting only of an hot and
sanguineous affluxion, or else Oedematous, Schirrous, Erisipelatous according to
the predominancy of melancholy, phlegm, or choler; The vessels whereby the
morbificall matter is derived unto this membrane, are either the ascending
branches of the hollow vein, which disperse themselves into the four upper
ribbs, or else the Azygos, or vena sine pari, whose surcles are disposed unto
the other lower; The membrane thus inflamed, is properly called Pleura, from
whence the disease has its name, and this investeth not only one side, but
overspreadeth the cavitie of the chest, and affords a common coat unto the
parts contained therein.

Now therefore the Pleura being common unto both sides, it is not reasonable to
confine the inflammation unto one, nor strictly to determine it is always in
the side, but sometimes before and behind, that is, inclining to the spine or
brestbone, for thither this coat extends; and therefore with equal propriety
we may affirm, that ulcers of the lungs, or Apostems of the brain do happen
only in the left side, or that Ruptures are confineable unto one side, whereas
the peritoneum or rimme of the belly may be broke, or its perforations relaxed
in either.

CHAP. IV.
Of the Ring finger.
AN opinion there is, which magnifies the condition of the fourth finger of the
left hand, presuming therein a cordial relation, that a particular vessel,
nerve, vein, or artery is conferred thereto from the heart, and therefore
that especially has the honor to bear our rings; which was not only the
Christian practi^e in Nuptial contracts, but observed by the heathens, as
Alexander ab Alexandro, Gellius, Macrobius, and Pierius have delivered, as
lately Levinus Lemnius has confirmed, who affirms this peculiar vessel to
be an Artery, and not a nerve, as antiquity conceived it; adding moreover
that rings hereon peculiarly affect the heart; that in Lipothymis or swoundings
he used the frication of this finger with saffron and gold; that the ancient
Physicians mixed up their Medicines herewith; that this is seldom or last of
all affected with the Gout, and when that becomes nodous, men continue not
long after: notwithstanding all which we remain unsatisfied, nor can we think
the reasons alleged sufficiently establish the privilege of this finger.

For first, concerning the practice of antiquity the custom was not general
to wear their rings either on this hand or finger; for it is said, and that
emphatically in Jeremiah, Si fuerit ^econias filius Ioachim re^gis Iudae
annulus in manu dextra mea, inde evella^^ eum: Though Coniah the son of Joachim
King of Judah were the signet on my right, hand, yet would I pluck thee thence:
So is to observed by Pliny that in the portraits of their Gods the rings were
worn on the finger next the thumb, that the Romans wore them also upon their
little finger, as Nero is described in Petronius: some wore them on the middle
finger as the ancient Gauls and Britans, and some upon the forefinger, as is
deduceable from Julius Pollux, who names that ring Corionos.

Again, that the practice of the Ancients had any such respect of cordiality
or reference unto the heart will much be doubted if we consider their rings
were made of Iron; such was that of Prometheus who is conceived the first that
brought them in use; so, as Pliny affirms, for many years the Senators of
Rome did not wear any rings of Gold: but the slaves wore generally Iron rings
until their manumission or preferment to some dignity; That the Lacedaemonians
continued their Iron rings unto his days, Pliny also delivers; and surely
they used few of Gold, for beside that Lycurgus prohibited that metal, we
read in Athenaeus that having a desire to guild the face of Apollo, they
enquired of the oracle where they might purchase so much gold, and were
directed unto Craesus King of Lydia.

Moreover whether the Ancients had any such intention, the grounds which they
conceived in vein, nerve, or artery, are not to be justified, nor will
inspection confirm a peculiar vessel in this finger: for as Anatomy informs,
the Basilica vein dividing into two branches below the cubit, the outward
sends two surcles unto the thumb, two unto the forefinger, and one unto the
middlefinger in the inward side; the other branch of the Basilica sends one
surcle unto the outside of the middlefinger, two unto the Ring, and as many
unto the little fingers; so that they all proceed from the Basilica, and are in
equal numbers derived unto every one: In the same manner are the branches of
the axillary artery distributed into the hand, for below the cubit it divides
into two parts, the one running along the Radius, and passing by the wrest or
place of the pulse, is at the fingers subdivided into three branches, whereof
the first conveyeth two surcles unto the thumb, the second as many to the
forefinger, and the third one unto the middle finger; the other or lower
division of the artery descends by the ulna, and furnishes the other
fingers, that is the middle with one surcle, and the ring and little fingers
with two; as for the nerves they are disposed much after the same manner, and
have their original from the brain, and not the heart, as many of the Ancients
conceived; which is so far from affording nerves unto other parts, that it
receives very few it self from the sixth conjugation, or pair of nerves in the
brain.

Lastly, these propagations being communicated unto both hands, we have no
greater reason to wear our rings on the left, then on the right, nor are there
cordial considerations in the one, more then the other; and therefore when
Forestus for the stanching of blood makes use of Topicall applications unto the
fourth finger, he consines not that practice unto the left, but varieth the
side according to the nostrill bleeding: and so in fevers, where the heart
primarily suffers, we apply medicines unto the wrests of either arm; and so
we touch the pulse of both, and judge of the affections of the heart by the one
as well as the other: and although in indispositions of liver or spleen
considerations are made in Phlebotomy respectively to their situation; yet when
the heart is affected men have thought it as effectual to bleed on the right
as the left; and although also it may be thought, a nearer respect is to be had
of the left, because the great artery proceeds from the left ventricle, and so
is nearer that arm, it admits not that consideration; for under the channel
bones the artery divides into two great branches, from which trunk or point
of division the distance unto either hand is equal, and the consideration
answerable.

And therefore Macrobius discussing the point, has alleged another reason,
affirming that the g^station of rings upon this hand and finger, might rather
be used for their convenience and preservation then any cordial relation; for
at first (says he) it was both free and usual to wear rings on either hand,
but after that luxury increased, when precious gems and rich insculptures were
added, the custom of wearing them on the right hand was translated unto the
left, for that hand being less employed, thereby they were best preserved; and
for the same reason they placed them on this finger, for the thumb was too
active a finger, and is commonly employed with either of the rest: the Index or
forefinger was too naked whereto to commit their pretiosities and has the
tuition of the thumb scarce unto the second joint: the middle and little
finger they rejected as extremes, and too big or too little for their rings,
and of all chose out the fourth as being least used of any, as being guarded on
either side, and having in most this peculiar condition that it cannot be
extended alone and by it self, but will be accompained by some finger on
either side: and to this opinion assenteth Alexander ab Alexandro, Annulum
^nuptialem prior aetas in sinistr^ ferebat, credideri^ ne attereretur.

Now that which begat or promoted the common opinion, was the common conceit
that the heart was seated on the left side, but how far this is verified, we
have before declared. The Egyptian practice has much advanced the same, who
unto this finger derived a nerve from the heart, and therefore the Priest
anointed the same with precious oils before the altar; but how weak Anatomists
they were, which were so good Embalmers we have already showed; and though this
reason took most place, yet had they another which more commended that
practice, and that was the number whereof this singer was an Hieroglyphick: for
by holding down the fourth finger of the left hand, while the rest were
extended, they signified the perfect and magnified number of six; for as
Pierius has graphically declared, Antiquity expressed numbers by the fingers
of either hand; on the left they accounted their digits and articulate numbers
unto an hundred, on the right hand hundreds and thousands; the depressing this
finger which in the left hand implied but six, in the right indigitated six
hundred: In this way of numeration may we construe that of Juvenal concerning
Nestor. -- mortem
Distulit, atque suos jam dextra comptuat annos.
And how ever it were intended, and in this sense it will be very elegant what
is delivered of Wisdom, Prove. 3. Length of days is in her right hand, and in
her left hand riches and honor.

As for the observation of Lemnius an eminent Physician, concerning the gowt,
how ever it happened in his country, we may observe it otherwise in ours; that
is, that chiragricall persons do suffer in this finger as well as in the rest,
and sometimes first of all, and sometimes no where else; and for the mixing up
medicines herewith, it is rather an argument of opinion then any considerable
effect, and we as highly conceive of the practice in Diapalma, that is in the
making of that plaster, to stir it with the stick of a Palm.

CHAP. V.
Of the right and left Hand.
IT is also suspicious, and not with that certainty to be received, what is
generally believed concerning the right and left hand, that men naturally make
use of the right, and that the use of the other is a digression or aberration
from that way which nature generally intends; and truly we do not deny that
almost all Nations have used this hand, and ascribed a pre-eminence thereto:
hereof a remarkable passage there is in the 48. of Genesis, And Joseph took
them both, Ephraim in his right hand toward Isreal's left hand, and Manasses in
his left hand toward Isreal's right hand, and Israel stretched out his right
hand and laid it upon Ephraims head, who was the younger, and his left hand
upon Manasses head guiding his hands wittingly, for Manasses was the first
borne; and when Joseph saw that his father laid his right hand upon the head of
Ephraim, it displeased him, and he held up his fathers hand to remove it from
Ephraims head unto Manasses head, and Joseph said not so my father, for this is
thy first borne, put thy right hand upon his head: And the like appears from
the ordinance of Moses in the consecration of their Priests, Then shall thou
kill the Ram, and take of his blood, and put it upon the tip of the right ear
of Aaron, and upon the tip of the right ear of his sons, and upon the thumb
of the right hand, and upon the great toe of the right foot, and sprinkle the
blood on the Altar round about: That the Persians were wont herewith to plight
their faith, is testified by Diodorus: That the Greeks and Romans made use
hereof, beside the testimony of diverse Authors, is evident from their custom
of discumbency at their meals, which was upon their left side, for so their
right hand was free, and ready for all service; nor was this only in use with
diverse Nations of men, but was the custom of whole Nations of women, as is
deduceable from the Amazones in the amputation of their right breast, whe^eby
they had the freer use of their ^ow: all which do declare a natural
preheminency and pref^rment of the one unto motion before the other, wherein
notwithstanding in submission to future information, we are unsatisfied unto
great dubitation.

For first, if there were a determinate prepotency in the right, and such as
arises from a constant root in nature, we might expect the same in other
animals, whose parts are also differenced by dextrality, wherein
notwithstanding we cannot discover a distinct and complying account, for we
^inde not that Horses, Bulls, or Mules, are generally stronger on this side; and
as for animals whose forelegs more sensibly supply the use of arms, they hold
if not an equality in both, a prevalency often times in the other, as Squirrels,
Apes, and Monkeys, and the same is also discernible in Parrets, and men observe
that the eye of a Tumbler is biggest not constantly in one, but in the bearing
side.

That there is also in men a natural prepotency in the right we cannot with
constancy affirm, if we make observation in children, who permitted the
freedom of both, do often times confine unto the le^t, and are not without great
difficulty restrained from it: and therefore this prevalency is either
uncertainly placed in the laterallity, or custom determines its indifferency:
which is the resolution of Aristotle in that Problem, which enqui^es why the
right side being better then the left, is equal in the senses? because, says
he, the right and left do differ by use and custom which have no place in the
senses: and the reason is allowable; for right and le^t as parts inservient
unto the motive faculty are differenced by degrees from use and assuefaction,
according whereto the one grows stronger, and often times bigger then the other;
but in the senses it is otherwise; for they acquire not their perfection by use
or custom, but at the first we equally hear and see with one eye, as well as
with another: and therefore, were this indifferency permitted, or did not
institution, but Nature determine dextrality, there would be many more
Scevolaes then are delivered in story; not should we wonder at seven thousand
in one Army, as we read concerning the Benjamites. True it is, that although
there be an indifferency in either, or a prevalency indifferent in one, yet is
it most reasonable for uniformity, and sundry respective uses, that men should
apply themselves to the constant use of one, for there will otherwise arise
anomalous disturbances in manual actions, not only in Civil and artificial,
but also in Military affairs, and the several actions of war.

Secondly, the grounds and reasons alleged for the right are not
satisfactory, and afford no rest in their decision: Scaliger finding a defect
in the reason of Aristotle, introduces one of no less deficiency himself,
Ratio materialis (says he) sanguinis crassitud^ simul and multitud^, that is,
the reason of the vigor of this side is the crassitude and plenty of blood;
but this is no way sufficient, for the crassitude or thickness of blood,
affords no reason why one arm should be enabled before the other, and the
plenty thereof, why both not enabled equally: Fallopius is of another conceit,
deducing the reason from the Azygos or vena sine part, a large and considerable
vein arising out of the cava or hallow vein, before it enters the right
ventricle of the heart, and placed only in the right side; but neither is this
perswasory, for the Azygos communicates no branches unto the arms or legs on
either side, but disperseth into the ribs on both, and in its descent does
furnish the left Emulgent with one vein, and the first vein of the loins on
the right side with another; which manner of derivation does not confer a
peculiar addition unto either. Caelius Rodiginus undertaking to give a reason
of Ambidexters and left handed men, delivers a third opinion: Men, says he,
are Ambidexters, and use both hands alike, when the heat of the heart does
plentifully disperse into the left side, and that of the Liver into the right,
and the spleen be also much dilated; but men are left handed when ever it
happens that the heart and Liver are seated on the left side, or when the
Liver is on the right side, yet so obducted and covered with thick skins, that
it cannot diffuse its virtue into the right: which reasons are no way
satisfactory; for herein the spleen is injustly introduced to invigorate the
sinister side, which being dilated it would rather infirm and debilitate; as
for any tunicles or skins which should hinder the Liver from enabling the
deutrall parts, we must not conceive it diffuseth its virtue by mere
irradiation, but by its veins and proper vessels, which common skins and
teguments cannot impede, and as for the seat of the heart and Liver in one
side whereby men become left handed, it happens too rarely to countenance an
effect so common; for the seat of the Liver on the left side is very monstrous,
and scarce at all to be met with in the observations of Physicians. Others not
considering ambidextrous and left handed men, do totally submit unto the
efficacy of the Liver, which though it be seated on the right side, yet by the
subclavian division does equidistantly communicate its activity unto either
arm, nor will it salve the doubts of observation, for many are right handed
whose Livers are weakly constituted, and many use the left, in whom that part
is strongest; and we observe in Apes and other animals, whose Liver is in the
right, no regular prevalence therein, and therefore the Brain, especially the
spinall marrow, which is but the brain prolonged, has a fairer plea hereto,
for these are the principles of motion wherein dextrality consists, and are
bipartited within and without the Crany; by which division transmitting nerves
respectively unto either side, according to the indifferency or original and
native prepotency, there arises an equality in both, or prevalency in either
side; and so may it be made out, what many may wonder at, why some most
actively use the contrary arm and leg, for the vigor of the one depends
upon the upper part of the spine, but the other upon the lower.

And therefore many things are Philosophically delivered concerning right and
left, which admit of some suspension; that a woman upon a masculine conception
advances her right leg, will not be found to answer strict observation; That
males are conceived in the right side of the womb, females in the left, though
generally delivered, and supported by ancient testimony, will make no
infallible account; it happening often times that males and females do lie upon
both sides, and Hermaphrodites for ought we know on either: It is also
suspicious what is delivered concerning the right and left testicle, that males
are begotten from the one, and females from the other; for though the left
seminall vein proceeds from the Emulgent, and is therefore conceived to
carry down a serous and feminine matter, yet the ^eminall Arteryes which send
forth the active materials, are both derived from the great Artery: Beside this
original of the left vein was thus contrived, to avoid the pulsation of the
great Artery over which it must have passed to attain unto the Testicle: Nor
can we easily infer such different effects from the diverse situation of parts
which have one end and office; for in the kidneys which have one office, the
right is seated lower then the left, whereby it lies free, and gives way unto
the Liver, and therefore also that way which is delivered for masculine
generation, to make a strait ligature about the left Testicle, thereby to
intercept the evacuation of that part, deserves consideration; for one
suffices unto generation, as has been observed in semicastration, and often
times in carnous ruptures: beside the seminall ejaculation proceeds not
immediately from the Testicle, but from the spermatick glandules; and therefore
Aristotle affirms, (and reason cannot deny) that although there be nothing
diffused from the Testicles, an Horse or Bull may generate after castration,
that is, from the stock and remainder of seminall matter, already prepared and
stored up in the Prostates or glandules of generation.

Thirdly, although we should concede a right and left in Nature, yet in this
common and received account we may aberre from the proper acception, mistaking
one side for another, calling that in man and other animals the right which is
the left, and that the left which is the right, and that in some things right
and left, which is not properly either.

For first the right and left, are nor defined by Philosophers according to
common acception, that is, respectively from one man unto another, or any
constant site in each; as though that should be the right in one, which upon
confront or facing stands a thwa^t or diagonially unto the other, but were
distinguished according to the activitie and predominant locomotion upon either
side: Thus Aristole in his excellent Tract de Incessu anim^lium, ascribes six
positions unto animals, answering the three dimensions; which he d^termineth
not by site or position unto the heavens, but by their faculties and functions,
and these are Imum summum, Ante Retro, Dextra and Sin^slra: that is, the
superior part where the aliment is received, that the lower extreme where it
is last expelled; so he terms a man a plant inverted; for he supposes the
root of a tree the head or upper part thereof, whereby it ^eceiveth it aliment,
although therewith it respects the Center of the earth, but with the other the
Zenith; and this position is answerable unto longitude: Those parts are
anterior and measure profunditie where the senses, especially the eyes are
placed, and those posterior which are opposite hereunto; The dextrous and
sinistrous parts of the body make up the Latitude, and are not certain and
inalterable like the other* for th^^ ^aith he, is the right side from whence
the motion of the body begins, that is, the active or moving side, but that
the sinister which is the weaker or more quiescent part: of the same
determination were the Platonicks and Pythagoria^s before him, who conceiving
the heavens an animated body, named the East the right or dextrous part, from
whence began their motion: and thus the Greeks from wence the Latins have
borrowed their appellation, have named this hand (...) denominating it not from
the site, but office from (...) capio, that is, the hand which receives, or is
usually implied in that action.

Now upon these grounds we are most commonly mistaken, defining that by
situation which they determined by motion, and give the term of right hand to
that which does not properly admit ^t: For first, many in their infancy are
sinistrously disposed, and diverse continue all their life (...) that is left
handed, and have but weak and imperfect use of the right; now unto these that
hand is properly the right, and not the other esteemed so by situation: Thus may
Aristotle be made out, when he affirms the right claw of Crabbes and
Lobsters is biggest, if we take the right for the most vigorous side, and not
regard the relative situation; for the one is generally bigger then the other,
yet not always upon the same side: so may it b^e verified what is delivered by
Scaliger in his Comment, that Palsies do oftnest happen upon the left side if
understood in this sense; the most vigorous part prot^cting it self, and
protruding the matter upon the w^aker and less resistive side: and thus the
Law of Commonweals, that cut off the right hand of Malefactors, if
Philosophically executed, is impartial, otherwise the amputation not equally
punishes all.

Some ar^ (...), that is, ambidexterous or right-handed on both sides, which
happens only unto strong and Athleticall bodies, whose heat and spirits are
able to afford an ability unto both; and therefore Hippocrates says, that
women are not ambidexterous, that is, not so often as men, for some are found,
which indifferently make use of both; and so may Aristotle say, that only man
is Ambidexter; of this constitution was Asteropaeus in Homer, and Parthenopeus
the Theban Captain in Statius; and of the same do some conceiv^ our Father
Adam to have been, as being perfectly framed, and in a constitution admitting
least defect: Now in these men the right hand is on both sides, and that which
is the opposite to the one, is not the left unto the other.

Again, some are (...) as Galen has expressed: that is, Ambilevous or left
handed on both sides; such as with agility and vigor have not the use of
either, who are not gym^astically composed; nor actively use those parts; now
in these there is no right hand: of this constitution are many women, and some
men; who though they accustom themselves unto either hand, do dexte^ously make
use of neither; and therefore although the Political advise of Aristotle be
very good, that men should accustom themselves to the command of either hand,
yet cannot the execution or performance thereof be general, for though there
be many found that can use both, yet will there diverse remain that can
strenuously make use of neither.

Lastly, these lateralities in man are not only fallible, if relatively
determined unto each others, but made in reference unto the heavens, and
quarters of the Globe: for those parts are not capable of these conditions in
themselves, nor with any certainty respectively derived from us, nor we from
them again. And first in regard of their proper nature, the heavens admit not
these sinister and dexter respects, there being in them no diversity or
difference, but a simplicity of parts, and equiformity in motion continually
succeeding each other; so that from what point soever we compute, the account
will be common unto the whole circularity, and therefore though it be
plausible, it is not fundamental what is delivered by Solinus, That man was
therefore a Microcosm^ or little world, because the dimensions of his positions
were answerabl^ unto the greater; for as in the heavens the distance of the
North and Southern pole, which are esteemed the sup^riour and inferior
poynt^, is equal unto the space between the East and West, accounted the
dextrous and sinistrous parts thereof; so is it also in man: for the extent of
his fathom, or distance betwixt the extremity of the finger^ of either hand
upon expansion, is equal unto the space between the soal^ of the foot and the
crown; but this does but petionarily infer a dextrality in the heavens, and
we may as reasonably conclude a right an left laterallity in the Ark or navall
edifice of Noah: for the length thereof was thirty cubits, the breadth fifty,
and the height or profundity thirty, which well agrees unto the proportion of
man, whose length that is a perpendicular from the vertix unto the soal of the
foot is ^extuple unto his breadth, or a right line drawn from the ribs of one
side to another; and decuple unto his profundity, that is a direct line between
the breast bone and the spine.

Again, they receive not these conditions with any assurance or stability from
our selves; for the relative foundations and points of denomination, are not
fixed and certain, but variously designed according to imagination. The
Philosopher accounts that East from whence the heavens begin their motion. The
Astronomer regarding the South and Meridian Sun, calls that the dextrous part
of heaven which respects his right hand, and that is the West. Poets
respecting the West assign the name of right unto the North which regards
their right hand^ and so must that of Ovid be explaned, utque duae dextra z^nae
totidemque sinistra: But Augurs or Southsayers turning their face to the East,
did make the right in the South, which was also observed by the Hebrews and
Chaldaeans. Now if we name the quarters of heaven respectively unto our sides,
it will be no certain or invariable denomination; for if we call that the
right side of heaven which is seated Easterly unto us, when we regard, the
meridian Sun, the inhabitants beyond the equator and Southern Tropic when
they face us regarding the meridian will contrarily defin^ it; for unto them,
the opposite part of heaven will respect the left, and the Sun arise to their
right.

And thus have we at large declared that although the right be most commonly
used, yet has it no regular or certain root in nature: Since it is most
confirmable from other animalls: Since in children it seeme^ either indifferent
or more favorable in the other, but more reasonable for uniformity in action
that men accustom unto one: Since the grounds and reasons urged for it do no
way support it: Since if there be a right and stronger side in nature, yet may
we mistake in its denomination, calling that the right which is the l^ft, and
the left which is the right: Since some have one right, some both, some
neither: and lastly, Since these affections in man are not only fallible in
relation unto one another, but made also in reference unto the heavens, they
being not capable of these conditions in themselves, nor with any certainty
from us, nor we from them again.

And therefore what admission we owe unto many conceptions concerning right and
left requires circumspection; that is, how far we ought to rely upon the
remedy of Kiramides, that is the left ^ye of an Hedgehog fried in oil to
procure sleep, and the right foot of a frog in a Deers skin for the gowt; or
that to dream of the loss of righ^ or left tooth presageth the death of male
or female kindred, according to the doctrine of Metrodorus; what verity there
is in that numerall conceit in the laterall division of man by even and odd,
ascribing the odd unto the right side, and even unto the left; and so by
parity or imparity of letters in men's names determine misfortunes on either
side of their bodies; by which account in Greek numeration H^phaestus or
Vulcane was lame in the right foot, and Anniball lost his right eye: And
lastly, what substance there is in that Auspiciall principle, and fundamental
doctrine of Ariolation that the left hand is ominous, and that good things do
pass sinistrously upon us, because the left hand of man respected the right
hand of the Gods, which handed their favors unto us.

CHAP. VI.
Of Swimming.
THat men swim naturally, if not disturbed by fear; that men being drowned and
sunk, do float the ninth day when their gall breaks; that women drowned
swim prone but men supine, or upon their back^, are popular affirmations,
whereto we cannot assent: And first, that man should swim naturally, because we
observe it is no lesson unto others we cannot well conclude; for other animalls
swim in the same manner as they go, and need no other way of motion, for
natation in the water, then for progression upon the land; and this is true
whether they move per latera, that is two legs of one side together, which is
Tollutation or ambling, or per diametrum, which is most general, lifting one
foot before, and the cross foot behind, which is succussation or trotting, or
whether per fron^em or quadratum, as Scaliger terms it, upon a square base of
the legs of both sides moving together as frogs, and salient animalls, which is
properly called leaping; for by these motions they are able to support and
impell themselves in the water, without addition or alteration in the stroke
of their legs, or position of their bodies.

But with man it is performed otherwise; for in regard of site he alters his
natural posture and swimmeth pron^, whereas he walks ^rect; again in
progression the arms move parallel to the legs and the arms and legs unto
each other; but in natation they intersect an make all sorts of Angles: and
lastly, in progressive motion, the arms and legs do move successively, but in
natation both together; all which aptly to perform, and so as to support and
advance the body, is a point of art, and such as some in their young and docile
years could never attain. But although it be acquired by art, yet is there
somewhat more of nature in it then we observe in other habits, nor will it
strictly fall under that definition, for once obtained it is not to be removed;
nor is there any who from disuse did ever yet forget it.

Secondly, that persons drowned arise and ^loat the ninth day when their gall
breaks, is a questionable determination both in the time and cause, for the
time of ^loating it is uncertain according to the time of putrefaction, which
will retard or accelerate according to the subject and season of the year; for
as we have observed cats and mice will arise unequally and at different times,
though drowned at the same; such as are fatted do commonly float soonest, for
their bodies soonest ferment, and that substance approaches nearest unto air:
and this is one of Aristotle's reasons why dead E^les will not ^loat, because
says he, they have but slender bellies, and little fat.

As for the cause it is not so reasonably imputed unto the breaking of the gall
as the putrefaction of the body, whereby the unnatural heat prevailing the
putrefying parts do suffer a turgescence and in^lation, and becoming airy and
spumous affect to approach the air, and ascend unto the surface of the matter:
and this is also evidenced in eggs whereof the sound ones sink, and such as are
addled swim, as do also those which are termed hypenemia or wind-egges, and
this is also a way to separate seeds, whereof such as are corrupted and sterill
swim; and this agrees not only unto the seed of plants locked up and capsulated
in their husks, but also unto the sperme and seminall humor of man, for such a
passage has Aristotle upon the Inquisition and test of its fertility.

That the breaking of the gall is not the cause hereof experience has informed
us, for opening the abdomen, and taking out the gall in cats and mice, they did
notwithstanding arise: and because we had read in Rhodiginus of a Tyrant, who
to prevent the emergencie of murdered bodies did use to cut off their lungs,
and found men's minds possessed with this reason, we committed some unto the
water without lungs, which notwithstanding floated with the others: and to
complete the experiment, although we took out the guts and bladder, and also
perforated the Cranium, yet would they arise, though in a longer time: from
these observations in other animalls, it may not be unreasonable to conclude
the same in man, who is too noble a subject on whom to make them expressly,
and the casual opportunity too rare almost to make any. Now if any shall
ground this effect from gall or choler, because it is the highest humor and
will be above the rest; or being the ^iery humor will readiest surmount the
water, we must confess in the common putr^scence it may promote elevation,
which the breaking of the bladder of gall so small a part in man, cannot
considerably advantage.

Lastly, that women drowned float prone, that is with their bellies downward,
but men supine or upward is an assertion wherein the hoti or point it self is
dubious; and were it true the reason alleged for it, is of no validity. The
reason yet current was first expressed by Pliny, veluti pudori defunctarum
parcente natura, nature modestly ordaining this position to conceal the shame
of the dead, which has been taken up by Solinus, Rhodiginus, and many more:
This indeed (as Scaliger terms it) is ratio civilis non philosophica, strong
enough for morality or Rhetoricks, not for Philosophy or Physics: for first,
in nature the concealment of secret parts is the same in both sexes and the
shame of their reveal equal: so Adam upon the taste of the fruit was ashamed
of his nakedness as well as Eve: and so likewise in America and countries
unacquainted with habits, where modesty conceales these parts in one sex, it
does it also in the other; and therefore had this been the intention of nature,
not only women, but men also had swimmed downwards, the posture in reason being
common unto both where the intent is also common.

Again, while herein we commend the modesty, we condemn the wisdom of
nature: for that prone position we make her contrive unto the woman, were best
agreeable unto the man in whom the secret parts are very anterior and more
discoverable in a supine and upward posture: and therefore Scaliger declining
this reason has recurred unto another from the diff^rence of parts in both
sexes, Quod ventre vasto sunt mulieres plenolque intestinis, itaque minus
impletur and subsidet, inanior maribus quibus nates preponderant: If so, then
men with great bellies will ^loat downward, and only Callipygae and women
largely composed behind, upward. But Anatomists observe that to make the
larger cavity for the Infant, the hanch bones in women, and consequently the
parts appendant are more protuberant then they are in men: They who ascribe the
cause unto the breasts of women, take not away the doubt, for they resolve not
why children ^loat downward who are included in that sex, though not in the
reason alleged: but hereof we cease to discourse lest we undertake to afford
a reason of the Of the cause whereof much dispute was made, and at last proved
an imposture.
golden tooth, that is to invent or assign a cause, when we remain
unsatisfied or unassured of the effect.

CHAP. VII.
Concerning Weight.
THat men weigh heavier dead then alive, if experiment has not failed us, we
cannot reasonably grant; for though the trial hereof cannot so well be made on
the body of man, nor will the difference be sensible in the abate of scruples
or dragmes, yet can we not confirm the same in lesser animalls from whence the
inference is good; and the affirmative of Pliny says that it is true in all:
for exactly weighing and strangling a chicken in the Scales, upon an immediate
ponderation, we could discover no sensible difference in weight, but suffering
it to lie eight or ten hours, until it grew perfectly cold, it weighed most
sensibly lighter; the like we attempted, and verified in mice, and performed
their trials in Scales that would turn upon the eighth or tenth part of a
grain.

Now whereas some allege that spirits are light substances, and naturally
ascending do elevate and wast the body upward, whereof dead bodies being
destitute contract a greater gravity; although we concede that spirits are
light, comparatively unto the body, yet that they are absolutely so, or have no
weight at all, we cannot readily allow; for since Philosophy a^^irmeth that
spirits are middle substances betw^^ne the soul and body, they must admit of
some corporiety which ^^ppos^th weight or gravity. Beside, in carcasses warm,
and bodies newly disa^imated while transpiration remains, there do exhale
and breathe out vaporous and fluid parts, which carry away some power of
g^avitation; which though we must allow, we do not make answerable unto living
expiration, and therefore the Chicken or Mice were not so light being dead, as
they would have been after ten hours kept alive, for in that space a man
abateth many ounces; nor if it had slept, for in that space of sleep, a man
will sometimes abate forty ounces, nor if it had been in the middle of summer,
for then a man weighs some pounds less then in the height of winter,
according to experience, and the statick aphorisms of Sanctorius.

Again, whereas men affirm they perc^ave an addition of ponderosity in dead
bodies, comparing them usually unto blocks and stones, whenever they lift or
carry them, this accession^ll prepond^rancy is rather in appearance th^n
reality; for being destitute of any motion, they con^erre no relief unto the
Agents or Elevators, which makes us meet with the same complaints of gravity in
animated and living bodies, where the nerves subside, and the faculty
locomotive seems abolished, as may be observed in the lifting or supporting of
persons inebriated, Apoplecticall, or in Lipothymies and swoundings.

Many are also of opinion, and some learned men maintain, that men are lighter
after meals then before, and that by a supply and addition of spirits
obscuring the gross ponderosity of the aliment ingested; but the contrary
hereof we have found in the trial of sundry persons in diff^r^nt sex, and
ages; and we conceave men may mistake if they distinguish not the sense of
levity unto themselves, and in regard of the scale or decision of t^^tination;
for after a draught of wine a man may seem lighter in himself from sudden
refection, although he be heavier in the balance, from a corporal and
ponderous addition; but a man in the morning is lighter in the scale, because
in sleep some pounds have perspired, and is also lighter unto himself,
because he is refected.

And to speak strictly, a man that holds his breath is weightier while his
lungs are ^ull, then upon expiration; for a bladder blown is weightier then
one empty, and if it contain a quart, expressed and emptied it will abate
about half a grain; and we somewhat mistrust the experiment of a pumice-stone
taken up by Montanus, in his Comment upon Avicenna, where declaring how the
rarity of parts, and numerosity of pores, occasioneth a lightness in bodies,
he affirms that a pumice-stone pow^^r^d, is lighter then one entire, which is
an experiment beyond our satisfaction; for beside that abatement can hardly be
avoided in the T^ituration; if a bladder of good capacity will scarce include a
grain of air, a pumice of three or four dragmes, cannot be presumed to
contain the hund^^th part thereof, which will not be sensible upon the
exactest beams we use: Nor is it to be taken strictly what is delivered by the
learned Lord Verulam, and referred unto further experiment; That a dissolution
of Iron in Aquafortis* will bear as good weight as their bodies did before,
notwithstanding a great deal of waste by a thick vapor that issues during
the wo^king; for we cannot find it to hold neither in Iron, nor Copper, which
is dissolved with less ^bullition; and hereof we mad^ ^^iall in Scales of good
exactness, wherein if there be a defect, or such as will not turn upon
quarter grains, there may be frequent mistakes in experiments of this nature:
but stranger is that, and by the favourablest way of trial we cannot make out
what is d^livered by ^am^rus Poppius, that Antimony calcined or reduced to
ashes by a burning glass, although it ^mitte a gross and ponderous
exhalation, does rather exceed then abate its former gravi^y: whose words are
these in his Basilica Antimonii, Si speculum incensorium soli exponatur, ita ut
pyramidis luminosae apex Antimonium pulverisatum feriat, cum m^^to ^umi
profusione ad nivis albedinem calcinabitur, and quod mirabile est Antimonii
pondus post calcinationem auctum potius quam diminutum deprehenditur, Mistake
may be made in this way of trial, when the Antimony is not weighed immediately
upon the calcination, but permitted the air it imbibeth the humidity thereof,
and so repayreth its gravity.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the passage of meaete and drink.
THat there are different passages for meat and drink, the meat or dry
aliment descending by the one, the drink or moystning vehicle by the other, is
a popular Tenent in our days, but was the assertion of learned men of old, for
the same was affirmed by Plato, maintained by E^stathius in Mac^obius, and is
deducible from Eratosthenes, Eupolis and Euripides: now herein men contradict
experience, not well understanding Anatomy, and the use of parts; for at the
throat there are two cavities or conducting parts, the one the Oesophagus or
gullet, s^at^d next the spine, a part official unto nutrition, and whereby the
aliment both wet and dry is conveyed unto the stomach; the other (by which it is
conceived the drink does pass) is the weazon, rough artery, or winde-pipe, a
part inservient to voice and respiration, for thereby the air descends into
the lungs, and is communicated unto the heart; and therefore all animals that
breath or have lungs, have also the weazon, but many have the gullet or ^eeding
channel, which have no lungs or winde-pipe; as fishes which have gills,
whereby the heart is refrigerated, for such thereof as have lungs and
respiration, are not without the weazon, as Whales and cetaceous animals.

Again, beside these parts destined to diverse offices, there is a peculiar
provision for the winde-pipe, that is, a cartiliagineous flap upon the opening
of the Larinx or throttle, which has an open cavity for the admission of the
air; but lest thereby either meat or drink should descend, Providence has
placed the Epiglottis Ligula, or ^lap like an Ivy leaf, which always closes
when we swallow, or that the meat and drink passes over it into the gullet,
which part although all have not that breathe, as all cetaceous and oviparous
animals, yet is the w^azon secured some other way; and therefore in Whales that
breathe, lest the water should get into the lungs, an ejection th^reof is
contrived by a Fistula or spout at the head; and therefore also though birds
have no Epiglottis, yet can they so contract the rhyme or chinck of their
Larinx, as to prevent the admission of wet or dry ingested, either whereof
getting in occasioneth a cough, until it be ejected; and this is the reason
why a man cannot drink and breathe at the same time; why if we laugh while we
drink, the drink ^lies out at the nostrils, why when the water enters the
weazon, men are suddenly drowned; and thus must it be understood, when we
read of one that dyed by the seed of a Grape, and another by an hair in milk.

Now if any shall still affirm, that some truth there is in the assertion,
upon the experiment of Hippocrates, who killing an Hog after a red potion,
found the tincture thereof in the Larinx; if any will urge the same from
medicall practice, because in affections both of Lungs and weazon, Physicians
make use of ^yrupes, and lambitive medicines; we are not averse to acknowledge,
that some may distill and insinuate into the windpipe, and medicines may creep
down, as well as the rheum before them; yet to conclude from hence, that air
and water have both one common passage, were to state the question upon the
weaker side of the distinction, and from a partial or guttulous irrigation, to
conclude a full and total descension.

CHAP. IX.
Of Sneezing.
COncerning Sternutation or Sneezing, and the custom of saluting or blessing
upon that motion, it is pretended, and generally believed to derive its
original from a disease, wherein Sternutation proved mor^all, and such as
Sneezed dyed: and this may seem to be proved from Carolus Sigonius, who in his
History of Italy, makes mention of a Pestilence in the time of Gregory the
Great, that proved pernicious and deadly to those that Sneezed; which
notwithstanding will not sufficiently determine the grounds hereof, and it will
evidently appear, that custom has an elder Era then this Chronology
affords.

For although the age of Gregory extend above a thousand, yet is this custom
mentioned by Apuleius in the fable of the Fullers wife, who lived three hundred
years before; by Pliny likewise in that Problem of his, our Sternutantes
salutantur, and there are also reports that T^berius the Emperor otherwise a
very sour man, would perform this rite most punctually unto others, and
expect the same from others, unto himself; Petronius Arbiter, who lived before
them both, and was Proconsul of Bythinia in the reign of Nero, has mentioned
it in these words, Gyton collectione spiritus plenus, ter contin^o ita
sternutavit ut grabatum concuteret, ad quem motum Eumolpus conversus, Salvere
G^tona jubet. Caelius Rhodiginus has an example hereof among the Greeks, far
antienter then these, that is, in the time of Cyrus the younger, when
consulting about their retreat, it chanced that one among them sneezed, at the
noise whereof, the rest of the soldiers called upon Jupiter Sot^r; There is
also in the Gr^^ke Authologie a remarkable mention hereof, in an Epigram upon
one Proclus, the Latin whereof we shall deliver, as we find it often
translated. Non potis est Proclus digitis ^mungere nasum
namque est pro nasi m^le pu^illa manus,
Non vocat ille Iovem sternutans, quippe ^ec audit
Se sternutantem, tam procul ^ure sonat.
Proclus with his hand his nose can never wipe,
His hand too little is his nose to grype;
He sneezing calls not Jove, for why? he hears
himself not sneeze, the sound's so far from's ears:
Nor was this only an ancient custom among the Greeks and Romans, and is
still in force with us, but is received at this day in remotest parts of
Africa; for so we read in Codignus, that upon a sneeze of the Emperor of
Monomotapa, there passed acclamations successively through the city.

Now the ground of this ancient custom was probably the opinion the ancients
held of Sternutation: which they generally conceived to be a good sign or a
bad, and so upon this motion accordingly used, a Salve or (...), as a
gratulation for the one, and a deprecation from the other: Now of the ways
whereby they enquired and determined it signality; the first was natural
arising from Physical causes, and consequencles of times naturally succeeding
this motion; and so it might be justly esteemed a good sign; for sneezing
being properly a motion of the brain, suddenly expelling through the nostrils
what is offensive unto it, it cannot but afford some evidence of its vigor;
and therefore says Aristotle in his Problems, they that hear it (...) they
honor it as somewhat Sacred, and a sign of Sanity in the diviner part; and
this he illustrates from the practice of Physicians, who in persons near death
do use Sternutatories, or such as provoke unto sneezing; when if the faculti^
arise and Sternutation ensue, they conceive hopes of life, and with gratulation
receive the signs of safety; and so is it also of good signality in lesser
considerations, according to that of Hippocrates, that sneezing cures the
hickett, and is profitable unto women in hard labor; and so is it of good
signality in Lethargies, Apoplexies, Catalepsies, and Coma's: and in this
natural way it is sometime likewise of bad effects or signs, and may give
hints of deprecation; ^s in diseases of the chest, for therein Hippocrat^s
cond^mneth it as too much exagitating in the beginning of Catarrhs according
unto Avicenna as hindering concoction, in new and tender conceptions, (as Pliny
observes) for then it endangers abortion.

The second way was superstitious and Augurial, as Caelius Rhodiginus has
illustrated in testimonies, as ancient as Theocritus and Homer; as appears from
the Athenian mast^r, who would have r^tired, because a boatman sneezed, and the
t^stimony of Austine, that the Ancients were wont to go to bed again if they
sneezed while they put on their shoe; and in this way it was also of good and
bad signification; so Aristotle has a Problem, why sneezing from noon^ unto
midnight was good, but from night to noon unlucky? So Eustathius upon Homer
observes, that sneezing to the left hand was unlucky, but prosperous unto the
right; and so as Plutarch relates, when Themistocles sacrificed in his galley
before the battle of Xerxes, and one of the assistants upon the right hand
sneezed, Euphrantides the Southsayer presaged the victory of the Greeks, and
the overthrow of the Persians.

And thus we may perceive the custom is more ancient then commonly is
conceived, and these opinions hereof in all ages, not any one disease to have
been the occasion of this salute and deprecation* arising at first from this
vehement and affrighting motion of the brain, inevitably observable unto the
standers by; from whence some finding dependent effects to ensue, others
ascribing hereto as a cause what perhaps but casually or inconexedly succeeded,
they might proceed unto forms of speeches, felicitating the good, or
deprecating the evil to follow.

CHAP. X.
Of the Jews.
THat Jews stinck naturally, that is, that in their race and nation there is
(...) or evil savor, is a received opinion, we know not how to admit;
although we concede many questionable points, and dispute not the verity of
sundry opinions which are of affinity hereto: we will acknowledge that certain
odours attend on animalls, no less then certain colors; that pleasant smells
are not confined unto vegetables, but found in diverse animalls, and some more
richly then in plants: and though the Problem of Aristotle enquire why none
smells sweet beside the parde? yet later discoveries add diverse sorts of
Monkeys, the Civet cat, and Gazela, from which our musk proceeds: we
confess that beside the smell of the species, there may be Individual odours,
and every man may have a proper and peculiar savor; which although not
perceptible unto man, who has this sense, but weak, yet sensible unto dogs,
who hereby can single out their Masters in the dark: we will not deny that
particular men have sent forth a pleasant savor, as Theophrastus and Plutark
report of Alexander the great, and Tzetzes and Cardan do testify of
themselves; That some may also emit an unsavory odor, we have no reason to
deny, for this may happen from the quality of what they have taken, the Faetor
whereof may discover it self by sweat and urine, as being unmasterable by the
natural heat of man, nor to be dulcified by concoction beyond an unsavory
condition: the like may come to pass from putrid humors, as is often
discoverable in putrid and malignant fevers; and sometime also in gross and
humide bodies even in the latitude of sanity; the natural heat of the parts
being insufficient for a perfect and through digestion, and the errors of one
concoction not rectifiable by another: but that an unsavory odor is
gentilitious or national unto the Jews, if rightly understood, we cannot well
concede, nor will the information of reason or sense induce it.

For first upon consult of reason, there will be found no easy assurance for
to fasten a material or temperamentall propriety upon any nation; there being
scarce any condition (but what depends upon clime) which is not exhausted or
obscured from the commixture of introvenient nations either by commerce or
conquest; much more will it be difficult to make out this affection in the
Jews, whose race how ever pretended to be pure, must needs have suffered
inseparable commixtures with nations of all sorts, not only in regard of their
proselytes, but their universal dispersion; some being posted from several
parts of the earth, others quite lost, and swallowed up in those nations where
they planted: for the tribes of Ruben, Gad, part of Mana^^es and Naphthali,
which were taken by Assure, and the rest at the sacking of Samaria which were
led away by Salmanasser, into Assyria, and after a year and half, and arived
at Arsereth as is delivered in Esdras, these I say never returned, and are by
the Jews as vainly expected as their Messiah: of those of the tribe of Juda
and Benjamin, which were led captive into Babylon by Nebuchadnezzar many
returned under Zorobabel, the rest remained, and from thence long after upon
invasion of the Saracens, fled as far as India; where yet they are said to
remain, but with little difference from the Gentiles.

The tribes that returned to India, were afterward widely dispersed; for beside
sixteen thousand which Titus sent to Rome unto the triumph of his father
Vespasian, he sold no less then an hundred thousand for slaves; not many
years after Adrian the Emperor, who ruined the whole Country, transplanted
many thousands into Spain, from whence they dispersed into diverse Countries,
as into France, and England, but were banished after from both: from Spain
they dispersed into Africa, Italy, Constantinople, and the dominions of the
Turk, where they remain as yet in very great numbers, and if (according to
good relations) where they may freely speak it, they forbear not to boast
that there are at present many thousand Jews in Spain, France, and England,
and some dispensed withal, even to the degree of Priesthood, it is a matter
very considerable, and could they be smelled out, would much advantage, not
only the Church of Christ, but also the coffers of Princes.

Now having thus lived in several Countries, and always in subjection, they
must needs have suffered many commixtures, and we are sure they are not
exempted from the common contagion of Venerie contracted first from Christians;
nor are fornications unfrequent between them both, there commonly passing
opinions of invitement, that their women desire copulation with them, rather
then their own nation, and affect Christian carnality above circumcised
venery. It being therefore acknowledged, that some are lost, evident that
others are mixed, and scarce probable that any are distinct, it will be hard to
establish this quality upon the Jews, unless we also transfer the same, unto
those whose generations are mixed, whose genealogies are Jewish, and naturally
derived from them.

Again, if we concede a national unsavourinesse in any people, yet shall we
find the Jews less subject hereto then any, and that in those regards which
most powerfully concur to such effects, that is, their diet and generation;
As for their diet, whether in obedience unto the precepts of reason, or the
Injunctions of parsimony, therein they are very temperate, seldom offending
inebrietie or excess of drink, nor erring in gulosity or superfluity of m^ats;
whereby they prevent indigestion and crudities, and consequently putrescence of
humors; they have in abomination all flesh maimed, or the inwards any way
vitiated, and therefore eat no meat but of their own killing. They observe
not only fasts at certain times, but are restrained unto very few dishes at
all times; so few, that whereas S. Peter's sheet will hardly cover our tables,
their Law does scarce permit them to set forth a Lordly feast, nor any way to
answer the luxury of our times, or those of our forefathers; for of flesh
their Law restraines them many sorts, and such as complete our feasts: That
animal, Propter convivianatum, they touch not, not any of its preparations, or
parts so much in request at Roman tables; nor admit they unto their board,
Hares, Conies, Herons, Plovers, or Swans: Of Fishes, they only taste of such
as have both sins and scales, which are comparatively but few in number, such
only, says Aristotle, whose egg or spawne is arenaceous and friable, whereby
are excluded all cetaceous and cartilagineous fishes, many pectinall, whose
ribs are rectilineall, many costall, which have their ribs embowed, all
spinall, or such as have no ribs, but only a back bone, or somewhat analogous
thereto, as E^les, Congers, Lampries; all that are testaceous, as Oysters,
Cocles, W^lks, Schollops, Muscles, and likewise all crustaceous, as Crabs,
Shrimps, and Lobsters; So that observing a spare and simple diet, whereby they
prevent the generation of crudities, and fasting often, whereby they might also
digest them, they must be less inclinable unto this infirmity then any other
Nation, whose proceedings are not so reasonable to avoid it.

As for their generations and conceptions, (which are the purer from good diet)
they become more pure and perfect by the strict observation of their Law; upon
the injunctions whereof, they severely observe the times of Purification, and
avoid all copulation, either in the uncleanness of themselves, of impurity of
their women; A rule, I fear not so well observed by Christians, whereby not
only conceptions are prevented, but if they proceed, so vitiated and defiled,
that durable inquinations, remain upon the birth, which when the conception
meets with these impurities, must needs be very potent, since in the purest and
most fair conceptions, learned men derive the cause of Pox and Meazels, from
principles of that nature, that is, the menstruous impurities in the mothers
blood, and the virulent tinctures contracted by the Infant, in the nutriment of
the womb.

Lastly, experience will convict it, for this offensive odor is no way
discoverable in their Synagogues where many are, and by reason of their number
could not be concealed; nor is the same discernible in commerce or conversation
with such as are cleanly in apparel, and decent in their houses; surely the
Viziars and Turkish Basha's are not of this opinion, who as Sir Henry Blunt
informs, do generally keep a Jew of their private Counsel; and were this
true, the Jews themselves do not strictly make out the intention of their Law,
for in vain do they scruple to approach the dead, who livingly are cadaverous,
or fear any outward pollution, whose temper pollutes themselves. And lastly,
were this true, our opinion is not impartial, for unto converted Jews who are
of the same seed, no man imputes this unsavory odor; as though Aromatized by
their conversion, they admitted their sent with their Religion, and they smelt
no longer then they savoured of the Jew.

Now the ground that begat or propagated this assertion might be the
distasteful averseness of the Christian from the Jew, from their corruptnesse,
and the villainy of that fact, which made them abominable and stinck in the
nostrils of all men; which real practice* and metapho^icall expression, did
after proceed into a literal construction; but was a fraudulent illation; for
such an evil savor their father Jacob acknowledged in himself, when he said,
his sons had made him, s^inke in the land, that is, to be abominable unto the
inhabitants thereof: Now how dangerous it is in sensible things to use
metaphorical expressions unto the people, and what absurd conceits they will
swallow in their literals, an impatient example we have in our own
profession, who having c^lled an eating Ulcer by the name of a Wolf, common
apprehension conceives a reality therein, and against our selves ocular
affirmations are pretended to confirm it.

The nastinesse of that Nation, and sluttish course of life has much promoted
the opinion, occasioned by their servile condition at first, and inferior
ways of parsimony ever since; as is delivered by Mr. Sandys, They are
generally fat, says he, and rank of the savours which attend upon sluttish
corpulency: The Epithites assigned them by ancient times have also advanced the
same; for Ammia^^s Marcellinus describes them in such language, and Martial
more ancient, in such a relative expression sets forth unsavory Bassa, Quod
j^junia Sabbatariorum
Mallem, quam quod oles, olere Bassa.
-- From whence notwithstanding we cannot infer an inward imperfection in
the temper of that Nation, which was but an effect in the breath from outward
observation, (...), Iejuntia olere.
in their strict and tedious fasting; and was a common effec^ in the breaths of
other Nations, became a proverb among the Greeks, and the reason thereof
occasioned a Problem in Aristotle.

Lastly, if all were true, and were this savor conceded, yet are the reasons
alleged for it no way satisfactory: Hucherius in his Tract de sterilitate,
and after him Alsarius Crucius in his medicall Epistles, imputes this effect
unto their abstinence from salt or salt meats; which how to make good in the
present diet of the Jews we know not, nor shall we conceive it was observed of
old, if we consider they seasoned every sacrifice, and all oblations
whatsoever, whereof we cannot deny a great part was eaten by the Priests; and
if the offering were of flesh it was salted no less then thrice, that is, once
in the common chamber of salt, at the footestep of the Altar, and upon the top
thereof, as is at large delivered by Maimonides: nor if they refrained all
salt, is the illation very urgent; for many there are not noted for ill odors,
which ^ate no salt at all, as all carnivorous animals, most children, many
whole Nations, and probably our Fathers after the Creation; there being indeed
in every thing we eat^, a natural and concealed salt, which is separated by
digestions, as does appear in our tears, sweat and urines, although we
refrain all salt, or what does seem to contain it.

Another cause is urged by Campegius, and much received by Christians, that
this ill ^^vour i^ a curse derived upon them by Christ, and stands as a badge
or brand of a generation that crucified their Salvator; but this is a conceit
without all warrant, and an easy way to take off dispute in what point of
obscurity soever: a method of many Writers, which much deprecia^es the esteem
and value of miracles, that is, therewith to salve not only r^all v^ri^ies,
but also non-existences: Thus have elder times, not only ascribed the
immunitie of Ireland from any venomous beast, unto the s^a^^e or rod of
Patrick, but the long tails of Kent unto the malediction of Austin.

Thus therefore, although we concede that many opinions are true which hold
some conformity unto this, yet in assenting hereto, many difficulties must
arise, it being a dangerous point to annex a constant property un^o any Nation,
and much more this unto the Jew; since it is not verisiabl^ by observation,
since the grounds are feeble that should establish it, and lastly, since if all
were tr^e, yet are the reasons alleged for it, of no sufficiency to maintain
it.

CHAP. XI.
Of Pigmies.
BY Pigmies we understand a dwar^ish race of people, or lowest diminution of
mankind, comprehended in one c^bit, or as some will have it, i^ two ^oot, or
three spa^s; not taking them single, but nationally considering them, and as
they make up an aggrega^ed habitation, whereof although affirmations be many,
and testimonies more frequent then in any other point which wise men have cast
into the list of fables, yet that there is, or ever was such a race or Nation,
upon exact and confirmed testimonies, our strictest enquiry receaves no
satisfaction.

I say, exact testimonies, first, in regard of the Authors from whom we derive
the account, for though we meet herewith in Herodotus, Philostratus, Mel^,
Pliny, S^linus, and many more; yet were they derivative Relators, and the
primitive Author was Homer; who, not only intending profit but pleasure, and
using often similies, as well to delight the ear, as to illustrate his matter,
in the third of his Iliads, compares the Trojanes unto the Cranes, when they
descend against the Pigmies; which was more largely set out by Oppian,
Juvenall, Mantuan, and many Poets since; and being only a pleasant similitude
in the fountain, became a solemn story in the stream, and current still
among us.

Again, many professed enquirers have rejected it; Strabo an exact and
judicious Geographer, has largely condemned it as a fabulous story in the
first of his Geographie. Julius Scaliger a diligent enquirer, accounts thereof,
but as a Poetical fiction; Ulysses Aldrovandus a most exact Zoographer in an
express discourse hereon, concludes the story fabulous, and a poetical account
of Homer; and the same was formerly conceived by Eustathius his excellent
commentator, Albertus Magnus a man oftimes too credulous, herein was more then
dubious, for he affirms, if any such dwarfes were ever extant, they were
surely some kind of Apes; which is a conceit allowed by Cardan, and not
esteemed improbable by many others.

There are I confess two testimonies, which from their authority admit of
consideration. The first of Aristotle, whose words are these, in the eighth of
his History of animals, (...) etc. That is, Hic locus est quem incolunt Pygmei,
non enim id fabula est sed pusillum genus, ut aiunt. Wherein indeed Aristotle
plays the A^istotle, that is, the wary and evading assertor; For though with
non est in fabula, he seem at first to confirm it, yet at the last he claps
in, Sic^t aiunt, and shakes the belief he put before upon it; and therefore I
observe Scaliger has not translated the first, perhaps supposing it
surreptitious, or unworthy so great an assertor: and truly for those books of
animals, or work of eight hundred talents, as Atheneus terms it, although it
be ever to be admired, and contain most excellent truths, yet are many
things therein delivered upon relation, and some things repugnant unto the
history of our senses; as we are able to make out in some, and Scaliger has
observed in many more, as he has freely declared himself in his Comment upon
that piece.

The second testimony is deduced from holy Canonical Scripture; that is,
Ezech. 27. verse 11. thus rendered in the vulgar translation, Sed and Pygmaei
qui erant in turribus tuis pharetras suas suspenderunt in muris tuis per gyrum:
from whence notwithstanding we cannot infer this assertion; for first the
Translatours accord not, and the Hebrew word Gamadim is very variously rendered:
Though Aquila, Vatablus and Lyra will have it Pygmaei, yet in the Septuagint,
it is not more then Watchmen; in the Chaldie, Cappadocians; in Symmachus,
Medes; Theodotion of old, and Tremellius of late, have retained the Textuarie
word, and so have the Italian, French, and English Translatours, that is, the
men of Arvad were upon thy walls round about, and the Gammadims were in thy
towers.

Nor do men only dissent in the Translation of the word, but in the
exposition of the sense and meaning thereof, for some by Gammadims understand a
people of Syria, so called from the city Gamala; some hereby understand the
Cappadocians, many the Medes, and h^reof Forerius has a singular exposition,
conceivng the watchmen of Tire, who might well be called Pigmies, the towers
of that City being so high, that unto men below they appeared in a cubitall
stature; others expounded it quite contrary to common acception that is not men
of the least, but of the larg^st size; so does Cornelius construe Pygmaei or
viri cubitales, that is not men of a cubit high, but of the largest stature,
whose height like that of Giants is rather to be taken by the cubit then the
foot; in which phrase we read the measure of Goliath whose height is said to be
six cubits and a span: of affinity hereto is also the exposition of Jerome, not
taking Pygmies for Dwarffes, but stout and valiant Champions; not taking that
sense of (...), which signifies the cubit measure, but that which expresses
pugills, that is, men fit for combat and the exercise of the fist: Thus can
there be no satisfying illation from this text, the diversity or rather
contrariety of Expositions and Interpretations, distracting more then
confirming the truth of the story.

Again, I say exact testimonies in reference unto its circumstantiall
relations so diversely or contrarily delivered; thus the relation of Aristotle
places above Egypt toward the head of Nyle in Africa; Philostratus affirms
they are about Ganges in Asia, and Pliny in a third place, that is Geravia in
Scythia: some write they fight with Cranes, but Menecles in Atheneus affirms
they fight with Partridges, some say they ride on Partridges, and some on the
backs of Rams.

Lastly, I say confirmed testimonies; for though Paulus Iovius delivers there
are Pygmies beyond Japan, Pigafe^a, about the Molucca's, and Olaus Magnus
places them in Greenland; yet wanting frequent confirmation in a matter so
confirmable, their affirmation carries but slow persuasion; and wise men may
think there is as much reallity in the Pygmies of Paracelsus; that is, his
non-Adamicall men, or middle natures betwixt men and spirits.

There being thus no sufficient confirmation of their verity, some doubt may
arise concerning their possibility; wherein, since it is not defined in what
dimensions the soul may exercise her faculties, we shall not conclude
impossibility, or that there might not be a race of Pygmies, as there is
sometimes of Giants; and so may we take in the opinion of Austine, and his
Comment Ludovicus; but to believe they should be in the stature of a foot or
span, requires the preaspection of such a one as Philetas the Poet in
Athenaeus, who was feign to fasten lead unto his feet lest the wind should blow
him away, or that other in the same Author, who was so little u^ ad obolum
acceder^t, a story so strange that we might herein accuse the Printer, did not
the account of Aelian accord unto it, as Causabone has observed in his learned
Animadversions.

Lastly, if any such Nation there were, yet is it ridiculous what men have
delivered of them; that they fight with Cranes upon the backs of Rams or
Partridges: or what is delivered by Ctesias that they are Negroes in the
midst of India, whereof the King of that Country entertaineth three thousand
Archers for his guard; which is a relation below the tale of Oberon, nor could
they better defend him, then the Emblem says they offended Hercules whilst he
slept, that is to wound him no deeper, then to awake him.

CHAP. XII.
Of the great Climactericall year, that is sixty three.
CErtainly the eyes of the understanding, and those of sense are differently
deceived in their greatest objects; the sense apprehending them in lesser
magnitudes then their dimensions require; so it beholds the Sun, the
Stars, and the Earth it self; but the understanding quite otherwise, for
that ascribes unto many things far larger horizons then their due
circumscriptions require, and receives them with amplifications which their
reallity will not admit: thus has it fared with many Heroes and most worthy
persons, who being sufficiently commendable from true and unquestionable
merits, have received advancement from falsehood and the fruitful stock of
fables: Thus has it happened unto the stars and luminaries of heaven, who
being sufficiently admirable in themselves have been set out by effects no way
dependent on their efficiencies, and advanced by amplifications to the
questioning of their true endowments: Thus is it not improbable it has also
fared with number, which though wonderful in it self, and sufficiently
magnifyable from its demonstrable affections, has yet received adjections of
admiration from the multiplying conceits of men, and stands laden with
additions which its equity will not admit.

And so perhaps has it happened unto the number 7. and 9. which multiplied
into themselves do make up 63. commonly esteemed the great Climactericall of
our lives; for the days of men are usually cast up by septenaries, and every
seventh year conceived to carry some altering character with it, either in the
temper of body, mind, or both; but among all other, three are most remarkable,
that is 7. times 7. or forty nine, 9. times 9. or eighty one, and 7. times 9.
or the year of sixty three; which is conceived to carry with it, the most
considerable fatality, and consisting of both the other numbers was apprehended
to comprise the virtue of either, is therefore expected and entertained with
fear, and esteemed a favor of fate to pass it over; which notwithstanding
many suspect to be but a Panick terror, and men to fear they justly know not
what; and for my own part, to speak indifferently, I find no satisfaction,
nor any sufficiency in the received grounds to establish a rational fear.

Now herein to omit Astrologicall considerations (which are but rarely
introduced) the popular foundation whereby it has continued is first, the
extraordinary power and secret virtue conceived to attend these numbers,
whereof we must confess there have not wanted not only especial
commendations, but very singular conceptions. Among Philosophers, Pythagoras
seems to have played the leading part, which was long after continued by his
disciples, and the Italicke School, the Philosophy of Plato, and most of the
Platonists abound in numerall considerations; above all Philo the learned Jew,
has acted this part even to superstition, bestowing diverse pages in summing up
every thing which might advantage this number: All which notwithstanding when a
serious Reader shall perpend, he will hardly find any thing that may convince
his judgment or any further persuade, then the lenity of his belief, or
prejudgement of reason inclines.

For first, not only the number of 7 and 9 from considerations abstruse have
been extolled by most, but all or most of the other digits have been as
mystically applauded by many; or the number of one and three have not been only
admired by the heathens, but from adorable grounds, the untiy of God, and
mystery of the Trinity admired by many Christians. The number of four stands
much admired not only in the quaternity of the Elements, which are the
principles of bodies, but in the letters of the name of God, which in the
Greek, Arabian, Persian, Hebrew, and Egyptian, consists of that number; and
was so venerable among the Pythagoreans, that they swore by the number four.
That of six has found many leaves in its favor, not only for the days of the
Creation, but its natural consideration, as being a perfect number, and the
first that is completed by its parts; that is, the sixth, the half, and the
third, 1. 2. 3. which drawn^ into a sum make six: The number of ten has been
as highly extolled, as containing even, odd, long and plain, quadrate and
cubicall numbers; and Aristotle observed with admiration, that Barbarians as
well as Greeks, did use a numeration unto Ten; which being so general was not
to be judged casual, but to have a foundation in nature: So that only 7 and 9*
but all the rest have had their Elogies, as may be observed at large in
Rhodiginus, and in several Writers since: every one extolling number,
according to his subject, and as it advantaged the present discourse in hand.

Again, they have been commended not only from pretended grounds in nature, but
from artificial, casual, or fabulous foundations; so have some endeavored to
advance their admiration, from the 9 Muses, from ^he 7 Wonde^s of the Wo^ld,
and from the 7 gates of Thebes, in that 7 Ci^ies contended for Homer, in that
there are 7 stars in Ursa minor, and 7 in Charles wayne or Plaust^um of Ursa
major; wherein indeed al^hough the ground be natural, yet either from
constellations or their rema^kable parts, there is the like occasion to commend
any other ^umber; the number 5 from the stars in Sagitta, 3 from the girdle
of O^i^n, and 4 ^^om Equiculus, Crusero, or the feet of the Centaure; yet are
^uch as these clapped in by very good Authors, and some not omit^^d by Philo.

N^r ar^ they only ex^olled from Arbitrary and Poetical grounds, but from
^o^^dations and principles either false or dubious: That wom^n are m^nst^uant
and men pubescent at the year of twice seven, is accounted a punctual truth;
which period n^verthelesse we dare not precisely dete^mine, as having observed
a variation and latitude in most, agr^e^bly unto the heat of clime or temper;
men arising variously unto virility, according to the activity of causes that
promote it, Sanguis menstruosus ad diem ut plurimum, septimum durat, says
Philo; which notwithstanding is repugnant unto experience, and the doctrine of
Hippocrates, who in his book, de diaeta plainly affirms, it is thus but with
few women, and only such as abound with pituitous and watery humors.

I^ is further conceived to receive addition, in that there are 7 heads of
Nyle, but we have made manifest elsewhere that by the description of
Geographers they have been sometime more, and are at present ^ewer.

In that there were 7 wise men of Greece; which though it be generally
received, yet having enquired into the verity thereof, we cannot so readily
determ^ne it; for in the life of Thales who was accounted in that number,
Diogenes La^rtius plainly says Magna de little numero discordia est, some
holding but four, some ten, others twelve, and none agreeing in their names,
though according in their number.

In that there are just seven Planets or errant Stars in the lower orbs of
heaven* but it is now demonstrable unto sense, that there are many more, as
Galileo has declared in his Nuncius Sydereus; that is two more in the orb of
Saturn, and no less then four more in the sphere of Jupiter: and the like
may be said of the Pleiades or 7 Stars, which are also introduced to magnify
this number; for whereas scarce discerning six. we account them 7, by his
relation in the same book, there are no less then forty.

That the heavens are encompassed with 7 circles, is also the allegation of
Philo; which are in his account, The Artick, Antartick, the Summer and Winter
Tropicks, the Equator, Zodiac and the milky circle, whereas by Astronomers
they are received in greater number; for though we leave out the Lacteous
circle (which Aratus, Geminus, and Proclus out of him has numbered among the
rest) yet are there more by four then Philo mentions, that is, the Horizon,
Meridian and both the Colures* circles very considerable and generally
delivered, not only by Ptolomie and the Astronomers since his time, but such as
flourished long before, as Hipparchus and Eudoxus: So that for ought I know, if
it make for our purpose, or advance the theme in hand, with equal liberty, we
may affirm there were 7 Sybills, or but 7 signs in the Zodiac circle of
heaven.

That verse in Virgill translated out of Homer, O terque quaterque beati; that
is, as men will have it 7 times happy has much advanced this number in
critical apprehensions; yet is not this construction so indubitably to be
received, as not at all to be questioned: for though Rhodiginus, Beroaldus and
others from the authority of Macrobius so interpret it, yet Servius the best of
his Comments conceives no more thereby then a finite number for indefinite, and
that no more is implied then often happy. Strabo the ancientest of them all, in
the first of his Geography conceives no more by this expression in Homer, then
a full and excessive expression; whereas in common phrase and received language
he should have termed them thrice happy, herein exceeding that number he
called them four times happy that is more then thrice; and this he illustrates
by the like expression of Homer in the speech of Circe, who to express the
dread and terror of the Ocean, sticks not unto the common form of speech in
the strict account of its reciprocations, but largely speaking says, it ebbes
and ^lows no less then thrice a day, terque die revomit fluctus, iterumque
resorbet; and so when '^is said by Horace, faelices ter and amplius, the
exposition is sufficient, if we conceive no more then the letter fairly
bears, that is, four times, or indefinitly more then thrice.

But the maine considerations which most set of this number are observations
drawn from the motions of the Moon, supposed to be measured by sevens; and
the critical or decretory days dependent on that number. As for the motion of
the Moon, though we grant it to be measured by sevens, yet will not this
advance the same before its fellow numbers; for hereby the motion of others are
not measured, the fixed Stars by many thousand years, the Sun by 365.
days, the superior Planets by more, the inferior by somewhat less: and if
we consider the revolution of the first Moveable, and the daily motion from
East to West, common unto all the orbs, we shall find it measured by another
number; for being performed in four and twenty hours, it is made up of 4 times
6: and this is the measure and standard of other parts of time, of months, of
years, Olympiades, Lustres, Indictions, Cycles, Jubilies, etc.

Again, months are not only Lunary, and measured by the Moon, but also
Solary, and determined by the motion of the Sun, that is, the space wherein the
Sun does pass 30. degrees of the Eccliptick; by this month Hippocrates
computed the time of the Infants gestation in the womb, for 9. times 30. that
is, 270. days, or complete 9. months make up forty weeks the common compute of
women, and this is to be understood in his book De octimestripartu, when he
says, 2. days makes the fifteenth, and 3. the tenth part of a month; this was
the month of the ancient Hebrews before their departure out of Egypt; and
hereby the compute will fall out right, and the account concur, when in one
place it is said, the waters of the flood prevayled an hundred and fifty days,
and in another it is delivered, that they prevailed from the seventeenth day of
the second month, unto the seventeenth day of the seventh: and as for weeks,
although in regard of their Sabboths they were observed by the Hebrews, yet is
it not apparent, the ancient Greeks, or Romans used any, but had another
division of their months into Ides, Nones, and Calends.

Moreover, months howsoever taken are not exactly divisible into septuaries or
weeks, which fully contain seven days, whereof four times do make completely
twenty eight; for, beside the usual or Calendary month, there are but four
considerable, that is, the month of Peragration, of Apparition, of Consecution,
and the medicall or Decretoriall month, whereof some come short, others exceed
this account. A month of Peragration, is the time of the Moons revolution from
any part of the Zodiac, unto the same again, and this contains but 27.
days, and about 8. hours, which comes short to complete the septenary
account. The month of Consecution, or as some will term it, of Progression, is
the space between one conjunction of the Moon with the Sun unto another, and
this contains 29. days and an half; for the Moon returning unto the same
point wherein it was kindled by the Sun, and not finding it there again,(for
in the mean time, by its proper motion it has passed through 2. signs) it
follows after, and attaines the Sun in the space of 2. days, and 4. hours
more, which added unto the account of Peragration, makes 29. days and an
half; so that this month exceeds the latitude of Septenaries, and the fourth
part compr^hendeth more then 7. days. A month of Apparition, is the space
wherein the Moon appears, (deducting three days wherein it commonly
disappeareth; and being in combustion with the Sun, is presumed of less
activity) and this contains but 26. days, and 12. hours. The Medicall month
not much exceeds this, consisting of 26. days, and 22. hours, and it made
up out of all the other months; for if out of 29. and an half, the month of
Consecution, we deduct 3. days of disappearance, there will remain the month
of Apparition 26. days, and 12. hours, whereto if we add 27. days and 8.
hours, the month of Peragration, there will arise 53. days and 10. hours,
which divided by 2. makes 26. days and 22. hours, called by Physicians the
medicall month; introduced by Galen against Archigenes, for the better compute
of Decretory or Critical days.

As for critical days, (such I mean wherein upon a decertation between the
disease and nature, there ensues a sensible alteration, either to life, or
death) the reasons thereof are rather deduced from Astrology, then Arithmetic;
for accounting from the beginning of the disease, and reckoning on unto the
seventh day, the Moon will be in a Tetragonall or Quadrate aspect, that is, 4.
signs removed from that wherein the disease began; in the 14. day it will be
in an opposite aspect, and at the end of the third septenary Tetragonall
again, as will most graphically appear in the figures of Astrologers,
especially Lucas Gauricus, De diebus decretoriis.

Again, (beside that computing by the medicall month the first hebdomade or
septenary consists of 6. days, 17. hours and an half, the second happeth in
13. days and eleven hours, and the third but in the twentieth natural day)
what Galen first, and Aben-Ezra since observed in his Tract of Critical days,
in regard of Eccentricity and the Epicycle or lesser orb wherein it moves,
the motion of the Moon is various and unequal, whereby the critical account
must also vary: for though its middle motion be equal, and of 13. degrees, yet
in the other it moves sometimes fifteen, sometimes less then twelve; for
moving in the upper part of its orb, it performs its motion more slowly then
in the lower, insomuch that being at the height it arriveth at the Tetragonall
and opposite signs sooner, and the Critical day will be in 6. and 13. and
being at the lowest, the critical account will be out of the latitude of 7.
nor happen before the 8. or ninth day, which are considerations not to be
neglected in the compute of decretory days, and manifestly declare that other
numbers must have a respect here in as well as 7. and fourteen.

Lastly, some things to this intent are deduced from holy Scripture; thus is
the year of Jubilie introduced to magnify this number, as being a year made
out of 7. times 7. wherein notwithstanding there may be a misapprehension; for
this arises not from 7. times 7. that is, 49. but was observed the fiftieth
year, as is expressed, Levit. 25. And you shall hallow the fiftieth year, a
Jubilie shall that fiftieth year be unto you; answerable whereto is the
exposition of the Jews themselves, as is delivered by Ben-maimon, that is, the
year of Jubilie comes not into the account of the years of 7. but the forty
ninth is the Release, and the fiftieth the year of Jubilie. Thus is it also
esteemed no small advancement unto this number, that the Genealogy of our
Savior is summed up by 14. that is, this number doubled, according as is
expressed, Mat. 1. So all the generations from Abraham to David are fourteen
generations, and from David unto the carrying away into Babylon, are fourteen
generations, and from the carrying away into Babylon unto Christ, are fourteen
generations, which nevertheless must not be strictly understood as numerall
relations require; for from David unto Jeconiah are accounted by Matthew but
14. generations, whereas according to the exact account in the history of
Kings, there were at least 17. and 3. in this account, that is, Ahazias, Joas,
and Amazias are left out: for so it is delivered by the Evangelist; And Joram
begat Ozias, whereas in the Regal genealogy there are 3. successions between,
for Ozias or Uzziah, was the son of Amazias, Amazias of Joas, Joas of Azariah,
and Azariah of Joram, so that in strict account Joram was the Abavus or
grandfather twice removed, and not the father of Ozias, and these omitted
descents made a very considerable measure of time, in the Royal chronology of
Judah; for though Azariah reigned but one year, yet Joas reigned forty, and
Amazias no less then nine and twenty: However therefore these were delivered
by the Evangelist, and carry no doubt an incontroulable conformity unto the
intention of his delivery, yet are they not appliable unto precise numerality,
nor strictly to be drawn unto the rigid test of numbers.

Lastly, though many things have been delivered by Authors concerning number,
and they transferred unto the advantage of their nature, yet are they oftimes
otherwise to be understood, then as they are vulgarly received in active and
causall considerations; they being many times delivered Hieroglyphically
metaphorically, illustratively, and not with reference unto action, or
causality. True it is, that God made all things in number, weight, and measure,
yet nothing by them or through the efficacy of either; Indeed our days,
actions, and motions being measured by time (which is but motion measured) what
ever is observable in any, falls under the account of some number; which
notwithstanding cannot be denominated the cause of those events; and so do we
injustly assign the power of Action even unto Time it self, nor do they
speak properly who say that Time consumes all things; for Time is not
effective, nor are bodies destroyed by it, but from the action and passion of
their Elements in it, whose account it only affords, and measuring out their
motion, informs us in their periods and terms of their duration, rather then
effects, or physically produces the same.

A second consideration which promoteth this opinion, are confirmations drawn
from Writers, who have made observations or set down favorable reasons for
this climacteriall year; so have Henricus Ranzovius, Baptista Codr^nchus, and
Levinus Lemnius much confirmed the same; but above all, that memorable Letter
of Augustus sent unto his Nephew Caius, wherein he encourages him to celebrate
his nativitie, for he had now escaped 63. the great Climactericall and
dangerous year unto man; which notwithstanding rightly perpended, it can be no
singula^ity to question it, nor any new Paradox to deny it.

For first it is implicitly, and upon consequence denied by Aristotle in his
Politics, in that discourse against Plato, who measured the vicissitude and
mutation of States, by a periodicall fatality of number: Ptolomie that famous
M^thematician plainly says, he will not deliver his doctrines by p^rts and
numbers which are ineffectuall, and have not the nature of causes; now by these
numbers says Rhodiginus and Mirandula, he implies Climactericall years, that
is, septenaries, and novenaries set down by the bare obse^vation of numbers:
Censori^us an Author of great authority, and sufficient antiquity, speaks yet
more amply in his book De die Natali, wherein expr^sly treating of
Climactericall days, he thus delivers himself: Some maintain that 7.
times 7. that is, 49. is most dangerous of any other, and this is the most
general opinion, others unto 7. times 7. add 9. times 9. that is, the year
of 81. both which consisting of square and quadrate numbers, were thought by
Plato and others to be of great consideration; as for this year of 63. or 7.
times 9. though some esteem it of most danger, yet do I conceive it less
dangerous then the other; for though it contains both numbers above named,
that is, 7. and 9. yet neither of them square or quadrate, and as it is
different from them both, so is it not potent in either: Nor is this year
remarkable in the death of many famous men. I find indeed that Aristotle dyed
this year, but he by the vigor of his mind, a long time sustained a
natural infirmity of stomach, that it was a greater wonder he attained unto
63. then that he lived no longer: The Psalm of Moses has mentioned a year of
danger differing from all these: and that is ten times 7. or seventie; for so
it is said, The days of Man are threescore and ten; and the very same is
affirmed by Solon, as Herodotus relates in a speech of his unto C^aesus, Ego
annis septuaginta humanae vitae modum definio: and surely that year most be of
greatest danger, which is the Period of all the rest, and ^ewest safely pass
through that, which is set as a bound for few or none to pass; and therefore
the consent of elder times, settling their conceits upon Climacters, not only
differing from this of ours, but an another, though several nations and ages
do ^ancy unto themselves different years of danger, yet every one expects the
same event, and constant verity in either.

Again, though Varro divided the days of man into five portions, Hippocrates
into 7. and Solon into ten; yet probably their divisions were to be received
with latitude, and their considerations not strictly to be confined unto their
last unities: So when Varro extends P^eritia unto 15. Adolescentia unto 30.
Iuventus unto 35. there is a large latitude between the terms or Periods of
compute, and the verity holds good in the accidents of any years between
them: So when Hippocrates divides our life into 7. degrees or stages, and
makes the end of the first 7. of the second 14. of the third 28. of the fourth
35. of the fifth 47. of the sixth 56. and of the seventh, the last year when
ever it happens; herein we may observe he makes not his divisions precisely
by 7. and 9. and omits the great Climactericall; beside there is between every
one at least the latitude of 7. years, in which space or intervall, that is
either in the third or fourth year, what ever falls out is equally verified
of the whole degree, as though it had happened in the seventh. Solon divided it
into ten Septenaries, because in every one thereof, a man received some
sensible mutation, in the first is Dedentition or falling of teeth: in the
second Pubescence, in the third the beard grows, in the fourth strength
prevails, in the fifth maturitie for issue; in the sixth Moderation of
appetite, in the seventh, Prud^nce, etc. Now herein there is a tolerable
latitude, and though the division proceed by 7 yet is not the total verity to
be restrained unto the last year, nor constantly to be expected the beard
should be complete at 21. or wisdom acquired just in 49. and thus also though
7. times 9. contain one of those septenaries, and does also happen in our
declining years, yet might the events thereof be imputed unto the whole
septenarie; and be more reasonably entertained with some latitude, then
strictly reduced unto the last number, or all the accidents from 56. imputed
unto 63.

Thirdly, although this opinion many seem confirmed by observation, and men
may say it has been so observed, yet we speak also upon experience, and do
believe that men from observation will collect no satisfaction: that other
years may be taken against it, especially if they have the advantage to
precede it; as sixty again 63. and 63. again 66. for fewer attain to the
latter then the former; and so surely in the first septenarie do most die, and
probably also in the very f^^st year, for all that ever lived were in the
account of that year; beside the infirmities that attend it are so many, and
the body that receives them so confirmed, we scarce count any alive that is not
past it.

Franciscus Paduanius in his work De catena temporis, discoursing of the great
Climactericall, attempts a numeration of eminent men, who dyed in that year;
but in so small a number, as not sufficient to make a considerable Induction;
he mentions but four, Diogenes Cynicus, Dionysius Heracleoticus, Xenocrates
Platonicus, and Plato: as for Dionysius, as Censorinus witnesses, he famished
himself in the 82. year of his life; Xenocrates by the testimony of Laertius
fell into a cauldron, and dyed the same year; and Diogenes the Cynicke by the
same testimony lived almost unto ninety: The date of Platoes death is not
exactly agreed on, but all dissent from this which he determines; Neanthes in
Laertius extends his days unto 84. Suidas unto 82. but Hermippus defines
his death in 81. and this account seems most exact; for if, as he
delivers, Plato was borne in the 88. Olympiade, and dyed in the first year
of the 108. the account will not surpass the year of 81. and so in his death
he verified the opinion of his life, and of the life of man, whose Period, as
Censorinus records, he placed in the Quadrate of 9. or 9. times 9. that is,
81. and therefore as Seneca delivers, the Magicians at Athens did sacrifice
unto him, as declaring in his death somewhat above humanity, because he dyed in
the day of his nativity, and without deduction justly accomplished the year of
eighty one. Bodine I confess delivers a larger list of men that died in this
year, whose words in his method o^ History are these, Moriuntur innumerabiles
anno sexagesimotertio, Aristoteles, Chrysippus, Bocatius, Bernardus, Erasmus,
Lutherus, Melancthon, Sylvius, Alexander, Jacobus Sturmius, Nicolaus Cusanus,
Thomas Linacer, codem anno Cicero caesus est: wherein beside that it were no
difficult point to make a larger Catalogue of memorable persons that dyed in
other years, we cannot but doubt the verity of his Induction: as for Silvius
and Alexander, which of that name he means I know not; but for Chrysippus by
the testimony of Laertius, he dyed in the 73. year, Bocatius in the 62.
Linacer the 64. and Erasmus exceeded 7^. as Paulus Jovius has delivered in his
Elogie of learned men; and as for Cicero, as Plutarch in his life affirms, he
was slain in the year of 64. and therefore sure the question is hard set, and
we have no easy reason to doubt, when great and entire Authors shall introduce
injustifiable examples, and authorize their assertions by what is not
authentical.

Fourthly, they which proceed upon strict numerations, and will by such regular
and determined ways measure out the lives of men, and periodically define the
alterations of their tempers; conceive a regularity in mutations, with an
equality in constitutions, and forget that variety which Physicians therein
discover: For seeing we affirm that women do naturally grow old before men,
that the choleric fall short in longaevitie of the sanguine, that there is
senium ante senectutem, and many grow old before they arive at age; we cannot
^o reasonably affixe unto them all one common point of danger, but should
rather assign a respective fatality unto each: which is concordant unto the
doctrine of the numerists, and such as maintain this opinion: for they affirm
that one number respects men, another women, as Bodin explaining that of
Seneca, Septimus quisque annus aetati signum imprimit, subjoynes* hoc de
maribus dictum oportuit, hoc primum intueri licet, perfectum numerum, id est
saextum faeminas, septenarium mores immutare.

Fifthly, since we esteem this opinion to have some ground in nature, and that
nine times seven revolutions of the Sun, imprints a dangerous Character on
such as arive unto it; it will leave some doubt behind, in what subjection
hereunto were the lives of our forefathers presently after the flood, and more
especially before it, who attaining unto 8. or 900. years, had not their
Climacters computable by digits, or as we do account them; for the great
Climactericall was past unto them before they begat children, or gave any
Testimony of their virilitie; for we read not that any begat children before
the age of sixty five, and this may also afford a hint to enquire, what are
the Climacters of other animated creatures, whereof the lives of some attain
not so far as this of ours, and that of others extends a considerable space
beyond.

Lastly, the imperfect accounts that men have kept of time, and the difference
thereof both in the same and diverse common wealths, will much distract the
certainty of this assertion; for though there were a fatality in this year,
yet diverse were, and others might be out in their account, aberring several
ways from the true and just compute, and calling that one year, which perhaps
might be another.

For first they might be out in the commencement or beginning of their account,
for every man is many months elder then he computeth; for although we begin
the same from our nativitie, and conceive that no arbitrary, but natural term
of compute, yet for the duration of life, or existence, we participate in the
womb the usual distinctions of time, and are not to be exempted from the
account of age and life, where we are subject to diseases, and often suffer
death; and therefore Pythagoras, Hippocrates, Diocles, Avicenna and others,
have set upon us, numerall relations and temporal considerations in the womb;
not only affirming the birth of the seventh month to be vital, that of the
eighth mortal, but the progression thereto to be measured by rule, and to hold
a proportion unto motion and formation; as what receives motion in the
seventh, is perfected in the Triplicities; that is the time of conformation
unto motion is double, and that from motion unto the birth, treble; So what is
formed the 35. day is moved the seaventy, and borne the 210. day; and therefore
if any invisible causalitie there be, that after so many years does ^vidence
it self at 63. it will be questionable whether its activitie only set out at
our nativitie, and begin not rather in the womb, wherein we place the like
considerations, which does not only entangle this assertion, but has already
embroiled the endeavors of Astrology in the erection of Schemes, and the
judgment of death, or diseases; for being not incontroulably determined, at
what time to beging, whether at conception, animation, or exclusion, (it being
indifferent unto the influence of heaven to begin at either) they have invented
another way, that is, to begin ab H^ra quaestionis, as Haly, Messahallach,
Ganivetus, and Guido Bonatus have delivered.

Again, in regard of the measure of time by months and years, there will ^e no
small difficulty, and if we shall strictly consider it, many have been and
still may be mistaken; for neither the motion of the Moon, whereby months are
computed, nor of the Sun whereby years are accounted consists of whole
numbers, but admits of fractions, and broken parts, as we have declared of the
Moon. That of the Sun consists of 365. days, and almost 6 hours, that is
wanting eleven minutes; which 6 hours omitted, or not taken notice of, will in
process of time largely deprave the compute; and this is the occasion of the
Bissextile of leapyeare, which was not observed in all times, nor punctually in
all Commonwealths; so that in 63. years there may be lost almost 18. days,
omitting the intercalation of one day every fourth year, allowed for this
quadrant, or 6 hours supernumerary: and though the same were observed, yet to
speak strictly a man may be somewhat out in the account of his age at 63. for
although every fourth year we insert one day, and so fetch up the quadrant,
yet those eleven minutes whereby the year comes short of perfect 6 hours,
will in the circuit of those years arise unto certain hours, and in a larger
progression of time unto certain days, whereof at present we find
experience in the Calender we observe; for the Julian year of 365. days being
eleven minutes larger then the annual revolution of the Sun, there will
arise an anticipation in the Aequinoxes, and as Junctinus computeth in every
136. year they will anticipate almost one day; and therefore those ancient men
and Nestors of old times, which yearly observed their nativities, might be
mistaken in the day; nor that to be construed without a grain of Salt, which
is delivered by Moses in the Book of Exodus, At the end of four hundred
years, even the self same day, all the host of Israel went out of the land
of Egypt; for in that space of time the Equinoxes had anticipated, and the
eleven minutes had amounted far above a day; and this compute rightly
considered will fall fouler on them who cast up the lives of Kingdoms, and
sum up their duration by particular numbers as Plato first began, and some
have endeavored since by perfect and sphericall numbers by the square and cube
of 7 and 9 and 12, the great number of Plato: wherein indeed Bodine has
attempted a particular enumeration, whereby notwithstanding beside the mistakes
committible in the solary compute of years, the difference of Chronology
disturbes the satisfaction and quiet of his computes, some adding, others
detracting, and few punctually according in any one year, whereby indeed such
accounts should be made up, for the variation in one unity destroys the total
illation.

Thirdly, the compute may be unjust not only in a strict acception, or few
days or hours, but in the latitude also of some years, and this may happen
from the different compute of years in diverse Nations, and even such as did
maintain the most probable way of account, their year being not only
different from one another, but the civil and common account disagreeing much
from the natural year, whereon the consideration is founded: Thus from the
testimony of Herodotus, Censorinus and others, the Greeks observed the Lunary
year, that is, twelve revolutions of the Moon 354. days, but the Egyptians,
and many others adhered unto the Solary account, that is, 365. days, that is
eleven days longer; now hereby the account of the one would very much exceed
the other: A man in the one would account himself 63. when one in the other
would think himself but 61. and so although their nativities were under the
same hour, yet did they at different years believe the verity of that which
both esteemed affixed and certain unto one: The like mistake there is in a
tradition of our days; men conceiving a peculiar danger in the beginning days
of May, which are set out as a fatal period unto consumptions and Cronicall
diseases; wherein notwithstanding w^ compute by Calenders, not only different
from our ancestors, but one another, the compute of the one anticipating that
of the other; so that while we are in April, others begin May, and the danger
is past unto one, while it begins with another.

Fourthly, men were not only out in the number of some days, the latitude of a
few years, but might be wide by whole Olympiades and diverse Decades of years;
for as Censorinus relates, the ancient Arcadians observed a year of three
months, the Carians of six, the Iberians of four; and as Diodorus and
Xenophon, de Aequivocis alleges, the ancient Egyptians have used a year of
three, two, and one month, so that the Climactericall was not only different
unto those Nations, but unreasonably distant from ours; for 63. will pass in
their account, before they arive so high as ten in ours.

Nor if we survey the account of Rome it self, may we doubt they were
mistaken, and if they feared climactericall years might err in their
numeration; for the civil year whereof the people took notice, did sometime
come short, and sometimes exceed the natural; for as it appears by Varro,
Suetonius, and Censorinus, their year consisted first of ten months which
comprehended by 304. days, that is 61. less then ours contains; after by
Numa or Tarquine from a superstitious conceit of impariety were added 51.
days, which made 355. one day more then twelve revolutions of the Moon; and
thus a long time it continued, the civil compute exceeding the natural; the
correction whereof, and the due ordering of the leap-yeare was referred unto
the Pontifices, who either upon favor or malice, that some might continue
their offices a longer or shorter time, or from the magnitude of the year that
men might be advantaged or endamaged in their contracts, by arbitrary
intercalations they depraved the whole account; of this abuse Cicero accused
Verres, which at last proceeded so far that when Julius Caesar came unto that
office before the redress hereof he was feign to insert two intercalary months
unto November and December, when he had already inserted 23. days unto
February; so that that year consisted of 445. days; a quarter of a year longer
then that we observe, and though at the last the year was reformed, yet in the
mean time they might be out, wherein notwithstanding they summed up
Climactericall observations.

Lastly, one way more there may be of mistake, and that not unusual among us,
grounded upon a double compute of the year; the one beginning from the 25. of
March, the other from the day of our birth unto the same again, which is the
natural account: Now hereupon many men do frequently miscast their days; for
in their age they diduce the account not from the day of their birth, but the
year of our Lord, wherein they were borne; so a man that was borne in January,
1582. if he live to fall sick in the latter end of March, 2645. will sum up
his age, and say I am now 63. and in my Climactericall and dangerous year, for
I was borne in the year 1582. and now it is 1645. whereas indeed he wants
many months of that year, con^idering the true and natural account unto his
birth, and accounts two months for a year: and though the length of time and
accumulation of years do render the mistake insensible, yet is it all one, as
if one borne in January 1644. should be accounted a year old the 25. of March,
1645.

All which perpended, it may be easily perceived with what insecu^ity of truth
we adhere unto this opinion, ascribing not only effects depending on the
natural period of time unto arbitrary calculations, and such as vary at
pleasure, but confirming our tenants by the uncertain account of others and
our selves; there being no positive or indisputeable ground where to begin our
compute, that if there were, men might and have been several ways mistaken,
the best in some latitude, others in greater, according to the different
compute of diverse states, the short and irreconcilable years of some, the
exceeding error in the natural frame of others, and the lapses and false
deductions of ordinary accountants in most.

CHAP. XIII.
Of the Canic^lar or Dogdayes.
Whereof to speak distinctly: among the Southern Constellations two there
are which bear the name of the Dog; the one in 16. degrees of latitude,
containing on the left thigh a Star of the first magnitude, usually called
Procyon or Ant^canis, because say some it rises before the other; which if
truly understood, must be restrained unto those habitations, who have elevation
of pole above thirty two degrees; Iam Procyon fuerit and vesani Leonis.
mention thereof there is in Horace, who seems to mistake or confound the one
with the other; and after him in Galen, who is willing the remarkablest star
of the other should be called by this name, because it is the first that
arises in the constellation; which notwithstanding, to speak strictly, it is
not, unless we except one of the third magnitude in the right paw in his own
and our elevation, and two more on his head in and beyond the degree of sixty;
it is also called Canis min^r, though not canicula, by which diminitive is
meant the greater Dog Star: A second and more considerable one there is, and
neighbor unto the other in 40. degrees of Latitude, containing 18. stars,
whereof that in his mouth of the first magnitude the Greeks call (...), the
Latins Canis major, and we emphatically the Dog-Starre.

Now from the rising of this star not cosmically, that is with the Sun, but
Heliacally, that is, its emersion from the rays of the Sun, the Ancients
computed their canicular days; concerning which there generally passes an
opinion, that during those days, all medication or use of Physic is to be
declined, and the cure committed unto Nature, and therefore as though there
were any feriation in nature or justitiums imaginable in professions, whose
subject is natural, and under no intermissive, but constant way of mutation;
this season is commonly termed the Physicians vacation, and stands so received
by most men: which conceit however general, is not only erroneous, but
unnatural, and subsisting upon foundations either false, uncertain, mistaken,
or misapplied, deserves not of mankind that indubitable assent it finds.

For first, which seems to be the ground of this assertion, and not to be
drawn into question, that is, the magnified quality of this Star conceived
to cause or intend the heat of this season, whereby these days become more
observable then the rest, we find that wiser Antiquity was not of this
opinion, which seven hundred years ago was as a vulgar error rejected by
Geminus, a learned Mathematician in his Elements of Astronomy; wherein he
plainly affirms, that common opinion made that a cause, which was at first
observed but as a sign. The rising and setting both of this Star and others
being observed by the Ancients, to denote and testify certain points of
mutation, rather then conceived to induce or effect the same; For our
forefathers, says he, observing the course of the Sun, and marking certain
mutations to happen in his progress through particular parts of the Zodiac,
they registered and set them down in their Parapegmes, that is, certain
Astronomicall Canons, as Rhodiginus out of Vitruvius interprets it; and being
not able to design these times by days, months, or years, (the compute
thereof, and the beginning of the year being different, according unto
different Nations) they thought best to settle a general account unto all, and
to determine these alterations by some known and invariable signs; and such
did they conceave the rising and setting of the fixed Stars; not ascribing
thereto any part of causality, but notice and signification; and thus much
seems employed in that expression of Homer, when speakeing of the Dog Star, he
concludes -- (...), Malum autem signum est; the same as Petavius observes, is
employed in the word of P^olomy, and the Ancients, (...), that is, of the
signification of star^es. The term of Scripture also favors it, as that of
Isaiah, Nolite timere a signis coeli, and that in Genesis, Vt sint in signa and
tempora: Let there be lights in the firmament, and let them be for signs and
for seasons.

But if all were silent, Galen has explained this point unto the life, who
expounding the reason why Hippocrates declared the affections of the year by
the rising and setting of stars, it was says he, because he would proceed on
signs and principles best known unto all Nations; and upon his words, in the
first of the Epidemicks, In Thaso Autumno circa Equinoxium and subvirgilias
pluviae erant multae, he thus enlarges: I^ (says he) the same compute of
times and months were observed by all Nations, Hippocrates had never made any
mention either of Arcturus, Pleiades, or the Dog Star, but would have plainly
said, In Macedonia, in the month Dion, thus or thus was the air disposed; but
for as much as the month Dion is only known unto the Macedonians, but obscure
unto the Athenians, and other Nations, he found more general distinctions of
time, and instead of naming months, would usually say, at the Aequinox, the
rising of the Pleiades, or the Dog Star: And by this way did the Ancients
devide the seasons of the year, the Autumn, Winter, Spring, and Summer, by
the rising of the Pleiades, denoting the beginning of Summer, and by that of
the Dog Star, the declination thereof; by this way Aristotle through all his
books of Animals, distinguishes their times of generation Latitancy,
migration, sanity and venation; and this were an allowable and general way of
compute, and still to be retained, were the site of the stars as inalterable,
and their ascents as invariable as primitive Astronomy conceaved them: And
therefore though Aristotle frequently mentions this star, and particularly
affirms that fishes in the Bosphorus are best to be catched from the arise of
the Dog-starre, must we conceave the same a mere effect thereof? Nor though
Scaliger from hence be willing to infer the efficacy of this star, are we
induced hereto; except because the same Philosopher affi^meth; that Tunny is
fat about the rising of the Pleiades, and departs upon Arcturus, or that most
insects are latent, from the setting of the 7. stars; except, I say, he give
us also leave to infer that these particular effects and alterations proceed
from those stars, which were indeed but designations of such quarters and
portions of the year, wherein the same were observed: Now what Pliny affirms
of the Orix, that it seems to adore this star, and takes notice thereof by
voice and sternutation, until we be better assured of its verity, we shall
not salve the sympathy.

Secondly, what slender opinion the Ancients held of the efficacy of this
star is declarable from their compute; for as Geminus affirms, and Petavius
his learned Comment proves, they began their account from its Heliacall
emersion, and not its cosmicall ascent; The cosmicall ascension of a star we
term that, when it arises together with the Sun, or the same degree of the
Ecliptic wherein the Sun abides; and that the ^eliacall, when a star which
before for the vicinity of the Sun was not visible, being further removed
begins to appear: for the annual motion of the Snn from West to East being
far swif^er then that of the fixed stars, he must of necessity leave them on
the East whilst he hastneth forward, and obscureth others to the West: and so
the Moon who performs its motion swifter then the Sun, (as may be observed in
their Conjunctions and E^^ipses) gets Eastward out of his rays, and appears
when the Sun is set; if therefore the Dog Star had this effectual heat which
is ascribed unto it, it would afford best evidence thereof, and the season
would be most ^ervent, when it arises in the probablest place of its activity,
that is, the cosmicall ascent, for therein it arises with the Sun, and is
included in the same irradiation: but the time observed by the Ancients was
long after this ascent, and in the Heliacall emersion, when it becomes at
greatest distance from the Sun, neither rising with it nor near it; and
therefore, had they conceived any more then a bare signality in this Star, or
ascribed the heat of the season thereunto, they would not have computed from
its Heliacall ascent which was of inferior efficacy, nor imputed the veh^mency
of heat unto those points wherein it was more remiss, and where with less
probability they might make out its action.

Thirdly, although we derive the authority of these days from observations of
the Ancients, yet are our computes very different, and such as confirm not
each other, for whereas they observed it Heliacally, we observe it Cosmically;
for before it arises Heliacally unto our la^itude, the Summer is even at an
end: Again, we compute not only from different ascents, but also from diverse
stars; they from the greater Dog Star* we from the lesser; they from Orio^s,
we from Cephalus hi^ dog; they from S^irius, we from Procyon; for the beginning
of the Dog-dayes with us is set down the 19. of July, at which time the lesser
Dog Star arises with the Sun, whereas the star of the greater D^g ascends
not until about the 31. of July, in the 18. degree of Leo; and the joint
compute by both is only justifiable in the latitude of 30. degrees where both
these stars arise together. So that their observations confirm not ours, nor
ours theirs, but rather confute each other, computing from different
foundations, and translating at pleasure the effects and power of one star
unto another.

Fourthly, (which is the Argument of Gem^^us) were there any such effectual
heat in this star, yet could it but weakly evidence the same in Summer, it
being about 40. degrees distant from the Sun, and should rather manifest its
warming power in the winter, when it remains conjoined with the Sun in its
Hybernall conversion; for about the 29. of October, and in the 16. of Sco^pius,
and so again in January the Sun performs his revolution in the same
parallel with the Dogge-starre; Again, if we should impute the heat of this
season, unto the cooperation of any stars with the Sun, it seems more
favorable for our times, to ascribe the same unto the constellation of Leo;
where besides that the Sun is in his proper house, it is conjoined with many
stars, whereof two of the first magnitude, and in the 8th of August is
corporally conjoined with Basiliscus, a star of eminent name in Astrology,
and seated in the very Eclipticke.

Fifthly, if all were granted, that observation and reason were also for it,
and were it an undeniable truth that an effectual se^vour proceeded from this
star; yet would not the same determine the opinion now in question, it
necessarily suffering such restrictions as take of general illations; for
first in regard of different latitudes unto some, the ca^icular days are in
the winter, as unto such as have no latitude, but live in a right Sphere that
is under the Aequinoctiall line; for unto them it a^iseth with the Sun about
the Tropicke of Cancer, which seas^^ unto them is winter, and the Sun
remotest from them: nor ^ath the same position in the summer, that is, in the
Aequinoctiall points any advantage from it; for in the one point the Sun is
at the Meridian, before the Dogge-starre arises, in the other the star is at
the Meridian before the Sun ascends.

Some latitudes have no canicular days at all; as namely all those which have
more then 73. degrees of northern Elevation, as the territory of Nova Zembla,
part of Greenland and Tartarie; for unto that habitation the Dogge-starre is
invisible, and appears not above the Horizon.

Unto such Latitudes as it arises, it carries a various and a very different
respect; unto some it ascends when Summer is over, whether we compute
Heliacally or Cosmically; for though unto Alexandria it arises in Cancer, it
arises not unto Biarmia Cosmically before it be in Virgo, and Heliacally
about the Autum^all aequinox; even unto the Latitude of 52. the efficacy
thereof is not much considerable, whether we consider its ascent, Meridian
altitude, or abode above the Horizon; for it arises very late in the year,
about the eighteenth of Leo, that is, the 31. of July; Of Meridian Altitude it
has but 23. degrees, so that it plays but obliquely upon us, and as the Sun
does about the 23. of January, and lastly his abode above the Horizon is not
great; for in the eighteenth of Leo, the 31. of July, although they arise
together, yet does it set above 5. hours before the Sun, that is, before two
of the clock, after which time we are more sensible of heat, then all the day
before.

Scondly, in regard of the variation of the longitude of the stars, we are to
consider (what the Ancients observed not) that the site of the fixed stars is
alterable, and that since elder times they have suffered a large and
considerable variation of their longitudes; the longitude of a star to speak
plainly, is its distance from the first point of numeration toward the East,
which first point unto the Ancients was the vernall aequinox* Now by reason of
their motion from West to E^st, they have very much varied from this point: The
first star of Aries in the time of Meton the Athenian was placed in the very
intersection, which is now el^ngated and removed Eastward 28. degrees; insomuch
that now the sign of Aries possesses the place of Taurus, and Taurus that of
Gem^^i; which variation of longitude must very much distract the opinion of the
Dogge-starre, not only in our days, but in times before and after; for since
the world began it has arisen in Taurus, and before it end may have its ascent
in Virgo; so that we must place the canicular days, that is the hottest time
of the year in the spring in the first Age, and in the Autumn in the ages to
come.

Thirdly, the stars have not only varied their longitudes, whereby their
ascents have altered; but have also changed their declinations, whereby their
rising at all, that is, their appearing has varied. The longitude of a star
we call its shortest distance from the Equator. Now though the poles of the
world and the Equator be immovable, yet because the stars in their proper
motions, from West to East do move upon the poles of the Eclipticke distant
23. degrees and an half (...) poles of the Equator, and describe circles
parallel not unto the Equator, but the Eclipticke, they must be therefore
sometimes nearer, ^ometimes removed further from the Equator: All stars that
have their distance from ^he Eclipticke Northward not more then 23. degrees and
an half, which is the greatest distance of the Eclipticke from the Equator,
may in progression of time have declination Southward, and move beyond the
Equator: but if any star has just this distance of 23. and an half, as
has Cappella on the back of E^icthonius, it may hereafter move under the
Aequinoctiall, and the same will happen respectively unto stars which have
declination Southward: and therefore many stars may be visible in our
Hemisphere, which are not so at present, and many which are at present, shall
take leave of our Horizon, and appear unto Southern habitations; and
therefore the time may come that the Dogge-starre may not be visible in our
Horizon, and the time has been, when it has not showed it self unto our
neighbor latitudes; so that canicular days there have been none nor shall
be, yet certainly in all times some season of the year more notable hot then
other.

Lastly, we multiply causes in vain, for the reason hereof we need not have
recourse unto any star but the Sun and the continuitie of its action: For
the Sun ascending into the Northern signs, begets first a temperate heat
in the air, which by his approach unto the solstice he intends, and by
continuation increases the same even upon declination; for running over the
same degrees again, that is in Leo, which he has done in Taurus, in July
which he did in May, he augmenteth the heat in the later which he began in the
first, and easily intends the same by continuation which was well promoted
before: So is it observed that they which dwell between the Tropicks and the
Equator, have their second summer hotter and more maturative of fruits then
the former: so we observe in the day (which is a short year) the greatest heat
about two in the afternoon, when the Sun is past the Meridian (which is his
diurnall Solstice) and the same is evident from the Thermometer or observations
of the weather-glasse; so are the colds of the night sharper in the summer
about two or three after midnight, and the frosts in winter stronger about
those hours: so likewise in the year we observe the cold to augment, when the
days begin to increase, though the Sun be then ascensive, and returning from
the winter Tropic, and therefore if we rest not in this reason for the heat
in the declining part of summer, we must discover freezing stars that may
resolve the latter colds of winter, which who ever desires to invent, let him
study the stars of Andromeda, or the nearer constellation of Pegasus, which
are about that time ascendent.

It cannot therefore unto reasonable constructions seem strange, or savor of
singularity that we have examined this point, since the same has been already
denied by some, since the authority and observations of the Ancients rightly
understood do not confirm it, since our present computes are different from
those of the Ancients, whereon notwithstanding they depend; since there is
reason against it, and if all were granted, yet must it be maintained with
manifold restraints, far otherwise then is received; and lastly since from
plain and natural principles, the doubt may be fairly salved, and not clapped
up from petitionary foundations and principles unestablished.

But that which chiefly promoted the consideration of these days, and
medically advanced the same, was the doctrine of Hippocrates a Physician of
such repute, that he received a testimony from a Christian, that might have
been given unto Christ: Qui (...) fallere potest nec falli.
The first in his book de Ae^e, Aquis, and locis, Syd^rum ortus. etc. That is,
we are to observe the rising of Stars, especially the Dogge-starre,
Arcturus, and the setting of the Pleiades or seven Stars; from whence
notwithstanding we cannot in general infer the efficacy of these Stars, or
coefficacie particular in medications: probably expressing no more hereby then
if he should have plainly said, especial notice we are to take of the
hottest time in Summer, of the beginning of Autumn and winter, for by the
rising and setting of those stars were these times and seasons defined; and
therefore subjoynes this reason, Quoniam his temporibus morbi finiuntur,
because at these times diseases have their ends, as Physicians well know, and
he else where affirms, that seasons determine diseases, beginning in their
contraries, as the spring the diseases of Autumn, and the summer those of
winter; now (what is very remarkable) whereas in the same place he advises to
observe the times of notable mutations, as the Aequinoxes, and the Solstices,
and to decline Medication ten days before and after, how precisely soever
canicular cautions be considered, this is not observed by Physicians, nor taken
notice of by the people. And indeed should we blindly obey the restraints both
of Physicians and Astrologers, we should contract the liberty of our
prescriptions, and confine the utility of Physic unto a very few days; for
observing the Dogdayes, and as is expressed some days before, and likewise
ten days before, and after the Aequinoctiall and Solsticiall points, by this
observation alone are exempted above an hundred days; whereunto if we add the
two Egyptian days in every month, the interlunary and pleniluary exemptions,
the Eclipses of Sun and Moon, conjunctions and oppositions Planeticall, the
houses of Planets, and the site of the Luminaries under the signs, (wherein
some would induce a restraint of Purgation or Phlebotomy) there would arise
above an hundred more; so that of the whole year the use of Physic would not
be secure much above a quarter; now as we do not strictly observe these days,
so need we not the other, and although consideration be made hereof, yet might
we preserve the nearer Indications, before those which are drawn from the time
of the year, or other caelestial relation.

The second Testimony is taken out of the last piece of his Age, and after the
experience (as some think) of no less then an hundred years, and that is his
book of Aphorisms, or short and definitive determinations in Physic; the
Aphorism alleged is this, sub Cane and ante Canem difficiles sunt
purgationes; sub Cane and Anticane, say some, including both the Dogstarres,
but that cannot consist with the Greek (...), nor had that Criticisme been ever
omitted by Galen; now how true this sentence was in the mouth of Hippocrates,
and with what restraint it must be understood, will readily appear from the
difference between us in circumstantiall relations.

And first, concerning his time and Chronology, he lived in the reign of
Artaxerxes Longimanus about the 82. Olympiade, 450. years before Christ, and
from our times above two thousand. Now since that time (as we have already
declared) the Stars have varied their longitudes, and having made large
progressions from West to E^st, the time of the Dogstars ascent must also very
much alter; for it arises later now in the year, then it formerly did in the
same latitude, and far later unto us who have a greater elevation; for in the
days of Hippocrates this Star ascended in Cancer which now arises in Leo,
and will in progression of time arise in Virgo; and therefore in regard of the
time wherein he lived, the Aphorism was more considerable in his days then it
is to us, or unto his country in ours.

The place of his nativity was Coos, an Island in the Myrtoan Sea, not far from
Rhodes, described in Mappes by the name of Lango, and called by the Turks who
are masters thereof Stancora, according unto Ptolomie of Northern latitude 36.
degrees; that he lived and writ in these parts, is not improbably collected
from the Epistles that passed betwixt him and Artaxe^xes, as also between the
Citizens of Abdera, and Coos, in the behalf of Democritus; which place being
seated from our latitude of 52, 16 degrees Southward, there will arise a
different consideration, and we may much deceive our selves if we conform the
ascent of Stars in one place unto another, or conceive they arise the same
day of the month in Coos and in England; for as Petavius computes in the first
Julian year, at Alexandria of la^itude 31. the Star arose cosmically in the
twelfe degree of Ca^cer, Heliacally the 26. by the compute of Geminus about
this time at Rhodes of latitude 37. it ascended cosmically the 16 of Cancer,
Heliacally the first of Leo; and about that time at Rome of latitude 42.
cosmically the 22. of Cancer and Heliacally the first of Leo, for unto places
of greater latitude it arises ever later, so that in some latitudes the
cosmicall ascent happens not before the twentieth degree of Virgo, ten days
before the Autumnall Aequinox, and if they compute Heliacally after it in Libra.

Again, should we allow all, and only compute unto the latitude of Coos, yet
would it not impose a total omission of Physic; for if in the hottest season
of that clime, all Physic were to be declined, then surely in many other,
none were to be used at any time whatsoever; for unto many parts, not only in
the Spring and Autumn, but also in the Winter the Sun is nearer, then unto the
clime of Coos in the Summer.

The third consideration concerns purging medicines, which are at present far
different from those employed in this Aphorism, and such as were commonly used
by Hippocrates; for three degrees we make of purgative medicines: The first
thereof is very benign, nor far removed from the nature of Aliment, into which
upon defect of working, it is often times converted, and in this form do we
account Manna, Cassia, Tamarindes and many more, whereof we find no mention in
Hippocrates: the second is also gentle, having a familiarity with some humor,
into which it is but converted if it fail of its operation; of this sort are
Aloe, Rhabarbe, Senna, etc. whereof also few or none were known unto
Hippocrates: The third is of a violent and venomous quality, which frustrate of
its action, assumes as it were the nature of poison, such as are Scammoneum,
Colocynthis, Elaterium, Euphorbium, Tithymallus, Laureola, Peplum, etc. of this
sort it is manifest Hippocrates made use, even in Fevers, Pleurisies and
Quinsies; and that composition is very remarkable which is ascribed unto
Diogenes in Aeius, that is of Pepper, Sal Ammoniac, Euphorbium, of each an
ounce, the Dosis whereof four scruples and an half, which whosoever should
take, would find in his bowels more then a canicular heat though in the depth
the Winter; many of the like nature may be observed in Aetius Tetrab. 1. Sermon.
3. or in the book De Dinamidiis, ascribed unto Galen, which is the same
verbatim with the other.

Now in regard of the second, and especially the first degree of Purgatives,
the Aphorism is not of force, but we may safely use them, they being benign
and of innoxious qualities; and therefore Lucas Gauricus, who has endeavored
with many testimonies to advance this consideration, at length concedeth that
lenitive Physic may be used, especially when the Moon is well affected in
Cancer or in the watery signs; but in regard of the third degree the Aphorism
is considerable; purgations may be dangerous, and a memorable example there is
in the medicall Epistles of Crucius, of a Roman Prince that dyed upon an ounce
of Diaphaenicon, taken in this season; from the use whereof we refrain not
only in hot seasons, but warily exhibit it at all times in hot diseases, which
when necessity requires we can perform more safely then the Ancients, as
having better ways of preparation and correction; that is, not only by
addition of other bodies, but separation of noxious parts from their own.

But beside these differences between Hippocrates and us, the Physicians of
these times and those of Antiquity, the condition of the dis^ase, and the
intention of the Physician, holds a maine consideration in what time and place
soever: for Physic is either curative or preventive; Preventive we call that
which by purging noxious humors, and the causes of diseases preventeth
sickness in the healthy, or the recourse thereof in the val^tudinary; and this
is of common use both at the Spring and Fall, and we commend not the same at
this season: Therapeuticke or curative Physic, we term that which restores
the Patient unto sanity, and takes away diseases actually affecting; now of
diseases some are cronicall and of long duration, as quartane Agues, Scurvy,
etc. wherein because they admit of delay we defer the cure to more
advantageous seasons: others we term acute, that is of short duration and
danger, as Fevers, Pleurifies, etc. in which, because delay is dangerous, and
they arise unto their state before the Dogdayes determine, we apply present
remedies according unto Indications, ^especting rather the acuteness of the
disease, and precipitancy of occasion, then the rising or setting of Stars, the
effects of the one being disputable, of the other assured and inevitable.

And although Astrology may here put in, and plead the secret influence of
this Star; yet Gal^n I perceive in his Comment, makes no such consideration,
confirming the truth of the Aphorism from the heat of the year, and the
operation of Medicines exhibited, in regard that bodies being heated by the
Summer, cannot so well endure the acrimony of purging Medicines, and because
upon purgations contrary motions ensue, the heat of the Air attracting the
humors outward, and the action of the Medicine retracting the same inward: but
these are readily salved in the distinctions before alleged, and particularly
in the constitution of our climate and diverse others, wherein the Air makes no
such exhaustion of spirits; and in the benignity of our Medicines, whereof some
in their own natures, others well prepared, agitate not the humors, or make a
sensible perturbation.

Nor do we hereby reject or condemn a sober and regulated Astrology; we hold
there is more truth therein then in Astrologers, in some more then many allow,
yet in none so much as some pretend; we deny not the influence of the Stars,
but often suspect the due application thereof; for though we should affirm
that all things were in all things, that heaven were but earth celestified, and
earth but heaven terrestrified, or that each part above had an influence upon
its divided affinity below; yet how to single out these relations, and duly to
apply their actions is a work often times to be effected by some revelation, and
Cabala from above, rather then any Philosophy, or speculation here below; what
power soever they have upon our bodies, it is not requisite they should destroy
our reasons, that is, to make us rely on the strength of Nature, when she is
least able to relieve us, and when we conceive the heaven against us, to refuse
the assistance of the earth created for us; this were to suffer from the mouth
of the Dog above, what others do from the teeth of Dogs below; Upon the biting
of a mad dog there ensues an hydrophobia or fear of water*
that is, to be afraid of their proper remedy, and refuse to approach any
water, though that has often proved a cure unto their disease. There is in
wise men a power beyond the stars; and Ptolomy encourages us, that by
foreknowledge, we may evade their actions; for, being but universal causes,
they are determined by particular agents, which being inclined not constrained,
contain within themselves the casting act, and a power to command the
conclusion.

Lastly, if all be conceded, and were there in this Aphorism an unrestrained
truth, yet were it not reasonable to infer from a caution a non-usance or
abolition, from a thing to be used with discretion, not to be used at all;
because the Apostle bids us beware of Philosophy, heads of extremity will have
none at all; an usual fallacy in vulgar and less distinctive brains, who
having once overshot the mean, run violently on, and find no rest but in the
extremes.

And hereon we have the longer insisted, because the error is material, and
concerns oftimes the life of man: an error to be taken notice of by State,
and provided against by Princes, who are of the opinion of Solomon, that their
riches consist in the multitude of their Subjects: an error worse then some
reputed Heresies, and of greater danger to the body, then they unto the soul*
which whosoever is able to reclaim, he shall save more in one Summer, then
Themison destroyed in any Autumn; he shall introduce a new way of cure,
preserving by Theorie, as well as practice, and men not only from death, but
from destroying themselves.

THE FIFTH BOOK.
Of many things questionable as they are commonly described in Pictures.
CHAP. I.
Of the picture of the Pelecan.
ANd first in every place we meet with the picture of the Pelecan, opening her
breast with her bill, and feeding her young ones with the blood distilling from
her: Thus is it set forth not only in common signs, but in the Crest and
Scucheon of many Noble families, has been asserted by many holy Writers, and
was an Hieroglyphicke of pieti^ and pity among the Egyptians, on which
consideration, they spared them at their tables.

Notwithstanding upon inquiry we find no mention hereof in Ancient
Zoographers, and such as have particularly discoursed upon Animals, as
Aristotle, Aelian, Pliny, Solinus and many more, who seldom forget proprieties
of such a nature, and have been very punctual in less considerable Records:
Some ground hereof I confess we may allow, nor need we deny a remarkable
affection in Pelecans toward their young; for Aelian discoursing of Storkes,
and their affection toward their brood whom they instruct to fly, and unto
whom they redeliver up the provision of their bellies, concludes at last, that
Herons and Pelecans do the like.

As for the testimonies of ancient Fathers, and Ecclesiastical writers, we may
more safely conceive therein some Emblematicall then any real Story: so does
Eucherius confess it to be the Emblem of Christ; and we are unwilling
literally to receive that account of Jerome, that perceiving her young ones
destroyed by Serpents, she opens her side with her bill, by the blood whereof
they revive and return unto life again; by which relation they might indeed
illustrate the destruction of man by the old Serpent, and his restorement by
the blood of Christ; and in this sense we shall not dispute the like relations
of Austine, Isidore, Albertus, and many more, and under an Emblematicall
intention, we accept it in coat armor.

As for the Hieroglyphick of the Egyptians, they erected the same upon another
Story, that is, from earnestly protecting her young, when her nest was set on
fire; for as for letting out her blood, it was not the assertion of the
Egyptians, but seems translated unto the Pelecan from the Vulture, as Pierius
has most plainly delivered Sed quod Pelicanum (^t etiam alijs plerisque
persu^sum est) rostro pectus dissecantem pingunt, ita ut suo sanguine filios
alat, ab Aegyptiorum historia valde alienum est, illi enim vulturem tantum id
facere tradiderunt.

And lastly, as concerning the picture, if naturally examined, and not
Hieroglyphically conceived, it contains many improprieties, disagreeing
almost in all things from the true and proper description: for first, whereas
it is commonly set forth green or yellow, in its proper color, it is inclining
to white, excepting the extreamities or tops of the wing feathers, which are
black: It is described in the bigness of a Hen, whereas it approaches and
sometimes exceeds the magnitude of a Swanne; it is commonly painted with a
short bill, whereas that of the Pelecan attaineth sometimes the length of two
spannes. The bill is made acute or pointed at the end; whereas indeed it is
flat and broad, and somewhat inverted at the extreme. It is discribed like
fissipedes, or birds which have their feet or claws divided; whereas it is
palmipedous, or fin-footed like Swannes and Geese, according to the Method of
nature, in latirostrous or flat bild birds, which being generally swimmers,
the organ is wisely contrived unto the action, and they are framed with fins or
oars upon their feet; and therefore they neither light, nor build on trees, if
we except Cormorants, who make their nests like Herons. Lastly, there is one
part omitted more remarkable then any other, and that is the chowle or croppe
adhering unto the lower side of the bill, and so descending by the throat; a
bag or sachell very observable, and of capacity almost beyond credit; which
notwithstanding, this animal could not want; for therein (as Aristotle,
Aelian, and Bellonius since averreth) it receives Oysters, Cochles, Sckollops,
and other testaceous animals, which being not able to break, it retains them
until they open, and vomitting them up, takes out the meat contained. This is
that part preserved for a rarity, and wherein (as Sanctius delivers) in one
dissected, a Negro child was found.

CHAP. II.
Of the picture of Dolphins.
THat Dolphins are crooked, is not only affirmed by the hand of the Painter,
but commonly conceived their natural and proper figure; which is not only the
opinion of our times, but seems the belief of elder times before us: for
beside the expressions of Ovid and Pliny, their Pourtraicts in some ancient
Coins are framed in this figure, as will appear in some thereof in Gesner,
others in Goltsius, and Laevinus Hulsius in his description of Coins, from
Julius Caesar unto Rhodulphus the second.

Notwithstanding, to speak strictly in their natural figure they are
straight, nor have they their spine connexed, or more considerably embowed,
then Sharkes, Porposes, Whales, and other Cetaceous animalls, as Scaliger
plainly affirms; Corpus habet non magis curvum quam reliqui pisces; as ocular
enquiry informs, and as unto such as have not had the opportunity to behold
them, their proper pourtraicts will discover in Rondeletius, Gesner, and
Aldrovandus, and as indeed is deducible from pictures themselves; for though
they be drawn repandous, or connexedly crooked in one piece, yet the Dolphin
that carries Arion is concavously inverted, and has its spine depressed in
another.

And therefore what is delivered of their incurvitie, must either be taken
Emphatically, that is not really but in appearance; which happens, when they
leap above water, and suddenly shoot down again; which is a fallacy in
vision, whereby straight bodies in a sudden motion protruded obliquely
downward, appear unto the eye crooked, and this is the construction of
Bellonius: or if it be taken really, it must not universally and perpetually,
that is, not when they swim and remain in their proper figures, but only
when they leap, or impetuously whirle their bodies any way, and this is the
opinion of Gesnerus. Or lastly, it must be taken neither really, nor
Emphatically, but only Emblematically; for being the Hyeroglyphick of
celerity, and swifter then other animals, men best expressed their velocity by
incurvity, and under some figure of a bow, and in this sense probably do
Heralds also receive it, when from a Dolphin extended, they distinguish a
Dolphin imbowed.

And thus also must that picture be taken of a Dolphin clasping an Anchor; that
is not really, as is by most conceived out of affection unto man* conveighing
the Anchor unto the ground, but Emblematically, according as Pierius has
expressed it, The swiftest animal con^o^ned with that heavy body, implying
that common moral, Festina lent, and that celerity should always be
contempered with cunctation.

CHAP. III.
Of the Picture of a Grasshopper.
THere is also among us a common description and picture of a Grasshopper, as
may be observed in the pictures of Emblematists in the coats of several
families, and as the word Cicada is usually translated in Dictionaries; wherein
to speak strictly, if by this word Grasshopper, we understand that animal
which is implied by (...) with the Greeks, and by C^cada with the Latins, we
may with safety affirm the Picture is widely mistaken, and that for ought
enquiry can inform, there is no such insect in England, which how paradoxicall
soever, upon a strict enquiry, will prove undeniable truth.

For first, that animal the French term Santerelle, we a Grasshopper, and
which under this name is commonly described by us, is named (...) by the
Greeks, by the Latins Locusta, and by our selves in proper speech a Locust;
as in the diet of John Baptist, and in our Translation, Prove. 30. The Locusts
have no King, yet go they forth all of them by bands. Again, between the
Cicad^ and that we call a Grasshopper, the differences are very many, as may
be observed in themselves, or their descriptions in Mathiolus, Aldrovandus,
and Muffetus: for first, they are differently cucullated or capuched upon the
head and back, and in the Cicada the eyes are more prominent; the Locusts have
Antenuae or long horns before, with a long falcation or forcipated tail
behind, and being ordained for saltation, their hinder legs do far exceed the
other. The Locust or our Grasshopper has teeth, the Cicada none at all, nor any
mouth according unto Aristotle, the Cicada is most upon trees; and lastly, the
note or fritiniancy thereof is far more shrill then that of the Locust, and its
life so short in Summer, that for provision it needs not recourse unto the
providence of the Pismire in Winter.

And therefore where the Cicada must be understod, the pictures of Heralds and
Emblematists are not exact, nor is it sa^e to adhere unto the interpretation of
Dictionaries, and we must with candor make out our own Translations: for in
the plague of Egypt, Exodus 10. the word (...) is translated a Locust, but in
the same sense and subject, Wisdom 16. it is translated a Grasshopper, For them
the bitings of Grasshoppers and ^lyes killed: whereas we have deciared before
the Cicada has no teeth, but is conceived to live upon dew, and the
possibility of its subsistence is disputed by Licetus. Hereof I perceive
Muffetus has taken notice, and dissenteth from Langius and Lycostenes, while
they deliver, the cicada's destroyed the fruits in Germany, where indeed that
insect is not found; and therefore concludes, Tam ipsos quam alios deceptos
fuisse autumo, dum locustas cicadas esse vulgari err^re crederent.

And hereby there may be some mistake in the due dispensation of medicines
desumed from this animal, particularly of Dia^^ttigon commended by Aetius in
the affections of the kidneys: It must be likewise understood with some
restriction what has been affirmed by Isidore, which is yet delivered by many,
that Cicades are bred out of Cuccow spittle, or Woodseare; that is, that
spumous frothy dew or exudation or both, found upon Plants, especially about
the joints of Lavender and Rosemary, and observable with us about the latter
end of May; for here the true cicada is not bred, but certain it is, that out
of this, some kind of locust does proceed; for herein may be discovered a
little insect of a festucine or pale green, resembling in all parts a Locust,
or what we call a Grasshopper.

Lastly, the word it self is improper, and the term of Grasshopper not
appliable unto the Cicada; for therein the organs of motion are not contrived
for saltation, nor are the hinder legs of such extension, as is observable in
salient animalls, and such as move by leaping; whereto the Locust is very well
conformed; for therein the legs behind are longer then all the body, and make
at the second joint acute angles, at a considerable advancement above their
backs.

The mistake therefore with us might have its original from a defect in our
language; for having not the insect with us, we have not fallen upon its proper
name, and so make use of a term common unto it and the Locust, whereas other
countries have proper expressions for it; so the Italian calls it cicada, the
Spaniard cigarra, and the French cigale; all which appellations conform unto
the original, and properly express this animal.

CHAP. IV.
Of the picture of the Serpent tempting Eve.
IN the picture of Paradise, and delusion of our first Parents, the Serpent is
often described with humane visage, and not unlike unto Cadmus, or his wife, in
the act of their Metamorphosis, which is not merely a pictoriall contrivance or
invention of the Painter, but an ancient tradition and conceived reallity, as
it stands delivered by Beda and Authors of some Antiquity; that is, that Satan
appeared not unto Eve in the naked form of a Serpent, but with a Virgins head,
that thereby he might become more acceptable, and his temptation find the
easier entertain; which nevertheless is a conceit not to be admitted, and
the plain and received figure, is with better reason embraced.

For first, as Pierius observes from Barcephas, the assumption of humane
shape, had proved a disadvantage unto Satan; affording not only a suspicious
amazement in Eve, before the fact, in beholding a third humanity beside her
self and Adam; but leaving some excuse unto the woman, which afterward the man
took up with lesser reason; that is, to have been deceived by another like her
self.

Again, there was no inconvenience in the shape assumed, or any considerable
impediment that might disturb that performance in the common form of a
Serpent: for whereas it is conceived the woman must needs be afraid thereof,
and rather fly then approach it, it was not agreeable unto the condition of
Paradise and state of innocence therein; if in that place as most determine,
no creature was hurtful or terrible unto man, and those destructive effects
they now discover succeeded the curse, and came in with them is chief of
thorns and briars; and therefore Eugubinus (who affirms this Serpent was a
Basiliske) incurreth no ab^urdity, nor need we infer that Eve should be
destroyed immediately upon that Vision; for noxious animalls could offend them
no more in the Garden, then Noah in the Arc: as they peaceably received their
names, so they friendly possessed their natures: and were their conditions
destructive unto each other, they were not so unto man, whose constitutions
were antidotes, and needed not fear poisons, who had not incurred mortality.
And if (as most conceive) there were but two created of every kind, they could
not at that time destroy either man or themselves; for this had frustrated the
command of multiplication, destroyed a species, and imperfected the Creation:
and therefore also if Cain were the first man borne, with him entered not only
the act, but the first power of murder; for before that time neither could the
Serpent nor Adam destroy Eve, nor Adam and Eve each other, for that had
overthrown the intention of the world, and put its Creator to act the sixth day
over again.

Moreover, whereas in regard of speech, and vocal conference with Eve, it may
be thought he would rather assume an humane shape and organs, then the improper
form of a Serpent, it implies no material impediment; nor need we to wonder
how he contrived a voice out of the mouth of a Serpent, who has done the like
out of the belly of a Pythonissa, and the trunk of an Oak, as he did for many
years at Dodona.

Lastly, whereas it might be conceived that an humane shape was fitter for this
enterprise, it being more then probable she would be amazed to hear a Serpent
speak; some conceive she might not yet be certain that only man was
privileged with speech, and being in the novity of the Creation, and
inexperience of all things, might not be affrighted to hear a Serpent speak:
Beside she might be ignorant of their natures who was not versed in their
names, as being not present at the general survey of Animalls, when Adam
assigned unto every one a name concordant unto its nature; nor is this only my
opinion, but the determination of Lombard and Tostatus, and also the reply of
Cyrill unto the objection of Julian, who compared this story unto the fables of
the Greeks.

CHAP. V.
Of the Picture of Adam and Eve with Navells.
ANother mistake there may be in the picture of our first Parents, who after
the manner of their posterity are both delineated with a Navell: and this is
observable not only in ordinary and stained pieces, but in the Authenticke
draughts of Urbin, Angelo, and others; which notwithstanding cannot be allowed,
except we impute that unto the first cause, which we impose not on the second,
or what we deny unto nature, we impute unto Naturity it self, that is, that in
the first and most accomplished piece, the Creator affected superfluities, or
ordained parts without all use or office.

For the use of the Navell is to continue the infant unto the Mother, and by
the vessels thereof to convey its aliment and sustentation: the vessels
whereof it consists, are the umbilicall vein, which is a branch of the
Porta, and implanted in the liver of the Infant; two Arteries likewise arising
from the Iliacall branches, by which the Infant receives the purer portion of
blood and spirits from the mother; and lastly, the Urachos or ligamentall
passage derived from the bottom of the bladder, whereby it discharges the
waterish and urinary part of its aliment: now upon the birth when the Infant
forsakes the womb although it dilacerate, and break the involving membranes,
yet do these vessels hold, and by the mediation thereof the Infant is
connected unto the womb not only before, but a while also after the birth:
these therefore the midwife cutteth off, contriving them into a knot close unto
the body of the Infant, from whence ensues that tortuosity or complicated
nodosity we usually call the Navell, occasioned by the colligation of vessels
before mentioned: now the Navell or vessels whereof it is constituted, being a
part precedent, and not subservient unto generation, nativity, or parturition,
it cannot be well imagined at the creation or extraordinary formation of Adam,
who immediately issued from the Artifice of God; nor also that of Eve, who was
not solemnly begotten, but suddenly framed, and anomalously proceeded from Adam.

And if we be led into conclusions that Adam had also this part, because we
behold the same in our selves, the inference is not reasonable; for if we
conceive the way of his formation, or of the first animalls did carry in all
points a strict conformity unto succeeding productions, we might fall into
imaginations that Adam was made without teeth, or that he ran through those
notable alterations in the vessels of the heart, which the Infant su^^ereth
after birth: we need not dispute whether the egg or bird were first, and might
conceive that dogs were created blind, because we observe they are littered
so with us; which to affirm, is to confound, at least to regulate creation unto
generation, the first acts of God, unto the second of Nature, which wre
determined in that general indulgence, Increase and multiply, produce or
propagate each other; that is, not answerably in all points, but in a prolonged
method according to seminall progression: for the formation of things at ^i^st
was different from their generation after; and although it had no thing to
precede, it was aptly contrived for that which should succeed it: and therefore
though Adam were framed without this part, as having no other womb then that
of his proper principles, yet was not his posterity without the same: for the
seminalty of his fabric contained the power thereof, and was endu^d with the
science of those parts whose predestinations upon succession it did accomplish.

All the Navell therefore and conjunctive part we can suppose in Adam, was his
dependency on his Maker, and the connection he must needs have unto heaven, who
was the Son of God, for holding no dependence on any preceding efficient but
God, in the act of his production there may be conceived some connection, and
Adam to have been in a momentall Navell with his Maker: and although from his
carnallity and corporal existence the conjunction seems no nearer then of
causality and effect, yet in his immortal and diviner part he seemed to hold
a nearer coherence, and an umbilicality even with God himself: and so indeed
although the propriety of this part be found but in some animalls, and many
species there are which have no navell at all* yet is there one link and
common connection, one general ligament, and necessary obligation of all
whatever unto God; whereby although they act themselves at distance, and seem
to be at loose, yet do they hold a conti^^ity with their Maker; which
catenation or conserving union when ever his pleasure shall divide, let go, or
separate, they shall fall from their existence, essence, and operations; in
brief, they must retire unto their primitive nothing, and shrink into their
Chaos again.

CHAP. VI.
Of the Pictures of Eastern Nations, and the Jews at their feasts, especially
(...) Savior at the Passover.
COncerning the pictures of the Jews, and Eastern Nations at their feasts,
concerning the gesture of our Savior at the Passover, who is usually
described sitting upon a stool or bench at a square table, in the midst of
the twelve, many make great doubt; and though they concede a table jesture will
hardly allow this usual way of Session.

Wherein restrayning no man's enquiry, it will appear that accubation, or lying
down at meals was a gesture used by very many nations. That the Parthians
used it, is evident from Athenaeus, who delivers out of Possidonius, that
their King lay down at meals, on an higher bed then others. That Cleopatra
thus entertained Anthony, the same Author manifests when he says, she
prepared twelve Tricliniums. That it was in use among the Greeks, the word
T^iclinium implies, and the same is also declareable from many places in the
Symposiacks of Plutarke. That it was not out of fashion in the days of
Aristotle, he declares in his Politics, when among the Institutionary rules
of youth, he advises they might not be permitted to hear Iambicks and
Tragedies before they were admitted unto discumbency or lying along with others
at their meals. That the Romans used this gesture at repast, beside many more
is evident from Lipsius, Mercurialis, Salmasius, and Ciaconius who have
expressly and distinctly treated hereof.

Now of their accumbing places, the one was called Stibadion and Sigma,
carrying the figure of an half Moon^, and of an uncertain capacity,
whereafter it received the name of Hexaclinon, Octoclinon, according unto that
of Martial, Accipe Lunata scriptum testudine Sigma
Octo capit, veniat quis quis amicus ^rit.
Here at the left wing was the principal place, and the most honorable
person, if he were not master of the feast possessed that room. The other was
termed Triclinium, that is, Three beds encompassing a table, as may be seen in
the figures thereof, and particularly in the Rhamnusian Triclinium, set down by
Mercurialis. The customary use hereof was probably deduced from the frequent
use of bathing, after which they commonly retired to bed, and refected
themselves with repast; and so that custom by degrees changed their cubiculary
beds into discubitory, and introduced a fashion to go from the bathes unto
these.

As for their gesture or position, the men lay down leaning on their left
elbow, their back being advanced by some pillow or soft substance; the second
lay so with his back toward the first, that his head attained about his
bosom; and the rest in the same order: For women, they sat sometimes
distinctly with their sex, sometime promiscuously with men, according to
affection or favor, as is delivered by Juvenal -- Gremio jacuit nova nupta
mariti -- and by Suetonius of Caligula, that at his feasts he placed his
sisters, with whom he had been incontinent, successively in order below him.

Again, as their beds were three, so the guests did not usually exceed that
number in every one, according to the ancient Laws, and proverbiall
observations to begin with the Graces, and make up their feasts with the Muses:
and therefore it was remarkable in the Emperor Lucius Verus, that he lay down
with twelve: which was, says Julius Capitolinus, praeter exempla majorum, not
according to the custom of his P^edecessors, except it were at public and
nuptial suppers.

Lastly, for the disposing and ordering of the persons: The first and middle
bed^ were for the guests, the third and lowest for the master of the house and
his family; he always lying in the first place of the last bed, that is next
the middle bed, but if the wife or children were absent, their rooms were
supplied by the Umbrae or hangers on, according to that of Juvenal -- Locus est
and pluribus Vmbris: for the Guests, the honou^blest place in every bed was the
first, excepting the middle or second bed, wherein the most honorable guest of
the feast was placed in the last place, because by that position he might be
next the mast^r of the feast; for the master lying in the first of the last
bed, and the p^incipall gu^st in the last place of the second, they must needs
be next each other, as this figure does plainly declare, and whereby we may
apprehend the feast of Perpenna made unto Sertorius, described by S^l^stius,
whose words we shall thus read with Salmasius: Igitur dis^ubuere, Sertor^us
inferior in medio lecto, supra Fabius, Antonius in summo, I^fra Scriba ^ertorij
Versius, alter s^riba Maecenas in Imo, Medius inter Tar quitium and Dominum
Perpennam.

At this feast there were but seven; the middle places of the highest and
middle bed being vacant, and hereat was Sertorius the General and principal
guest slain; and so may we make out what is delivered by Plutark in his life,
that lying on his back, and raising himself up, Perpenna cast himself upon
his stomach; which he might very well do being master of the feast, and lying
next unto him, and thus also from this Tricliniarie disposure, we may
illustrate that obscure expression of Seneca; That the Northwinde was in the
middle, the North-East on the higher side, and the North-West on the lower; for
as appears in the circle of the winds, the North-East will answer the bed
ofAntonius, and the North-West that of Perpenna.

That the custom of feasting upon beds was in use among the Hebrews, many
diduce from the 23. of Ezekiel. Thou sattest upon a stately bed, and a table
prepared before it. The custom of Discalceation or putting off their shoes at
meals, is conceived by some to confirm the same; as by that means keeping
their beds clean, and therefore they had a peculiar charge to eat the
Passover with their shoes on, which Injunction were needless, if they used
not to put them off.

That this discumbency at meals was in use in the days of our Savior is
conceived propable from several speeches of his expressed in that phrase, even
unto common Auditors, as Luke the 14. Cum Invitatus fueris ad nuptias non
discumbas in primo loco, and besides many more, Matthew the 23. when
reprehending the Scribes and Pharisees, he says, Amant protoclisias id est
primos recubitus in caenis, and Protocathedrias sive primas cathedras in
Synagogis: wherein the terms are very distinct, and by an Antithesis do
plainly distinguish the posture of sitting, from this of lying on beds.

That they used this gesture at the Passover, is more then probable from the
testimony of Jewish writers, and particularly of Ben-maimon recorded by
Scaliger de emendatione temporum: After the second cup according to the
Institution, Exodus 12. The son asks, what means this service? Then he that
makes the declaration says, How different is this night from all other
nights? for all other nights we wash but once, but this night twice; all other
we eat leavened or unleavened bread, but this only leavened; all other we eat
flesh roasted, boiled, or baked, but this only roasted; all other nights we eat
together lying or sitting, but this only lying along; and this posture they
used as a token of rest and security which they enjoyed far different from
that, at the eating of the Passover in Egypt.

That this gesture was used when our Savior eat the Passover, is not
conceived improbable from the words whereby the Evangelists express the same,
that is, (...),(...),(...), which terms do properly signify this gesture in
Aristotle, Athenaeus, Euripides, Sophocles, and all humane Authors; and the
like we meet with in the paraphrasticall expression of Nonnus.

And thus may it properly be made out; what is delivered John 13. Erat
recumbens unu^ ex Discipulis ejus in sinu Jesus quem diligebat; Now there was
leaning on Jesus bosom one of his Disciples whom Jesus loved; which gesture
will not so well agree unto the position of sitting, but is natural, and
cannot be avoided in the Laws of accubation; and the very same expression is to
be found in Pliny, concerning the Emperor Nerva and Veiento whom he favored,
Caenabat Nerva cum paucis, Veiento recumbeb at propius atque etiam in sinu; and
from this custom arose the word (...), that is, a near and bosom friend: and
therefore Causabon justly rejects Theophylact, who not considering the
ancient manner of decumbency, imputed this gesture of the beloved Disciple unto
Rusticity, or an act of incivility; And thus also have some conceived; it may
be more plainly made out what is delivered of Mary Magdalen, Luke 7. That the
stood at Christ's feet behind him weeping, and began to wash his feet with
tears, and did wipe them with the hairs of her head; which actions, if our
Savior sat, she could not perform standing, and had rather stood behind his
back, then at his feet; and thus it cannot be reconciled what is observable in
many pieces, and even of Raphaell U^bin, wherein Mary Magdalen is pictured
before our Savior, washing his feet on her knees, which will not consist with
the strict description and letter of the Text.

Now whereas this position may seem to be discountenanced by our Translation,
which usually renders it sitting, it cannot have that illation; for the French
and Italian translations expressing neither position of session or recubation,
do only say that he placed himself at the table, and when ours expresses the
same by sitting, it is in relation unto our custom, time, and apprehension;
and the like upon occasion is not unusual in our translation; so when it is
said Luke 4. (...), and the Vulgar renders it, Cum plicasset librum, ours
translateth it, he shut or closed the book, which is an expression proper unto
the paginall books of our times, but not so agreeable unto volumes or rolling
books in use among the Jews, not only in elder times, but even unto this day.
So when it is said, the Samaritan delivered unto the host two pence for the
provision of the Levite; and when our Savior agreed with the Laborers for a
penny a day, in strict translation it should be seven pence half penny, and is
not to be conceived our common penny, the sixtieth part of an ounce; for the
word in the Original is (...), in Latin, Denarius, and with the Romans did
value the eight part of an ounce, which after five shillings the ounce
amounts unto seven pence half penny of our money.

Lastly, whereas it might be conceived that they eat the Passover standing
rather then sitting, or lying down, according to the Institution, Exodus 12.
Thus shall you eat with your loins girded, your shoes on your feet, and your
staff in your hand; the Jews themselves reply, this was not required of
succeeding generations, and was not observed, but in the Passover of Egypt,
and so also many other injunctions were afterward omitted, as the taking up of
the Paschall Lamb, from the tenth day, the eating of it in their houses
dispersed, the striking of the blood on the door posts, and the eating thereof
in haste; solemnities and Ceremonies primitively enjoined, afterward omitted,
as was also this of station, for the occasion ceasing, and being in security,
they applied themselves unto gestures in use among them.

CHAP. VII.
Of the picture of our Savior with long hair.
ANother picture there is of our Savior described with long hair, according
to the custom of the Jews, and his description sent by Lentulus unto the
Senate; wherein indeed the hand of the Painter is not accusable, but the
judgment of the common Spectator, conceaving he observed this fashion of his
hair, because he was a Nazarite, and confounding a Nazarite by vow, with those
by birth or education.

The Nazarite by vow is declared Numb. 6. and was to refrain three things,
drinking of Wine, cutting the hair, and approaching unto the dead, and such a
one was Sampson: Now that our Savior was a Nazarite after this kind, we have
no reason to determine, for he drank wine, and was therefore called by the
Pharisees (...), a Wine bibber; he approached also the dead, as when he raised
from death Lazarus, and the daughter of Jairus.

The other Nazarite was a Topicall appellation, and applyable unto such as were
borne in Nazareth, a City of Galilee, and in the Tribe of Napthali; neither if
strictly taken, was our Savior in this sense a Nazarite; for he was borne in
Bethleem in the Tribe of Judah; but might receave that name, because he abode
in that City, and was not only conceaved therein, but there also passed the
silent part of his life, after his return from Egypt, as is delivered by
Matthew, And he came and dwelt in a City called Nazareth, that it might be
fulfilled which was spoken by the Prophet, he shall be called a Nazarene; both
which kinds of Nazarites, as they are distinguishable by Zain, and Tsade in
the Hebrew, so in the Greek, by Alpha and Omega; for as Jansenius observes,
where the votary Nazarite is mentioned, it is writ^en (...), as Levit. 6. and
Lamentations the fourth, where it is spoken of our Savior, we read it (...),
as in Matthew, Luke, and John, only Mark who writ his Gospel at Rome did
Latinize and wrote it (...).

CHAP. VIII.
Of the picture of Abraham sacrifi^in Isaac.
IN the picture of the Immolation of Isaac, or Abraham sacrificing his son,
Isaac is described as a little boy, which notwithstanding is not consentaneous
unto the authority of Expositors, or the circumstance of the Text; for therein
it is delivered that Isaac carried on his back the wood for the sacrifice,
which being an holocaust or burnt offering to be consumed unto ashes, we cannot
well conceive the wood a burden for a boy, but such a one unto Isaac, as that
which it typified was unto Christ, that is, the wood or cross whereon he
suffered, which was too heavy a load for his shoulders, and was feign to be
relieved therein by Simon of Cyrene.

Again, he was so far from a boy, that he was a man grown, and at his full
stature, if we believe Josephus, who places him in the last of Adolescency,
and makes him twenty five years old; and whereas in the vulgar Translation he
is termed puer, it must not be strictly apprehended, (for that age properly
ends in puberty, and extends but unto fourteen) but respectively unto
Abraham, who was at that time above sixscore: And therefore also herein he was
not unlike unto him who was after led dumb unto the slaughter, and commanded
by others, who had legions at command, that is in meekness and humble
submission; for had he resisted, it had not been in the power of his aged
parent to have enforced; and many at his years, have performed such acts, as
few besides at any: David was too strong for a Lion and a Bear, Pompey had
deserved the name of Great, Alexander of the same cognomination was
Generalissimo of Greece, and Anniball but one year after succeeded Asdruball
in that memorable War against the Romans.

CHAP. IX.
Of the Picture of Moses with Horns.
IN many pieces, and some of ancient Bibles, Moses is described with Horns;
whereof the ground was surely the Hebrew text, in the History of Moses, when he
descended from the mount; for therein the original word being Aequivocall, and
signifying horned as well as shining, the Vulgar Translation has retained the
former; Qui videbant faciem egredientis Mosis esse cornutam. But the word in
the Septuagint is (...), that is his face was glorified, and this passage of
the Old Testament is well explaned by another of the New, that is Corinth. 3.
wherein it is delivered that they could not steadfastly behold the face of
Moses, (...), that is, for the glory of his face. And surely the exposition of
one Text is best performed by another, men vainly interposing their
constructions, where the Scripture decideth the controversy; and therefore
some have seemed too active in their expositions, who in the story of Rahab the
harlot, have given notice that the word also signifies an Hostess; for in the
Epistle to the Hebrews, she is plainly termed (...), which signifies not an
Hostess, but a pec^niary and prostituting Harlot, a term applied unto Lais
by the Greeks, and distinguished from (...), or amlca, as may appear in the
thirteenth of Athenaeus.

And therefore more allowable is the Translation of Tremellius, then that of
the Vulgar, Quod splendida facta esset cubis faciei ejus; or rather as Estius
has interpreted it, facies ejus erat radiosa, his face was radiant, and
dispersing beams like many horns and cones about his head; which is also
consonant unto the original signification, and yet observed in the pieces of
our Savior, and the Virgin Mary, who are commonly drawn with scintillations,
or radiant Halo's about their head; which after the French expression are
usually termed, the Glory.

Now if besides this occasional mistake, any man shall contend a propriety in
this picture, and that no injury is done unto Truth by this description,
because an horn is the hieroglyphick of authority, power and dignity, and in
this Metaphor is often used in Scripture, the piece I confess in this
acception is harmless and agreeable unto Moses. But if from the common
mistake, or any solary consideration we persist in this description, we vili^ie
the mystery of the irradiation, and authorize a dangerous piece conformable
unto that of Jupiter Hammon, which was the Sun, and therefore described with
horns; as is delivered by Macrobius; Hammonem quem Deum solemn occidentem
Lybies existimant, arietinis cornibus ^ingunt, quibus id animal valet sicut
radiis Sol* we herein also imitate the picture of Pan, and Pagan emblem of
Nature; and if (as Macrobius and very good Authors concede) Bacchus (who is
also described with horns) be the same Diety with the Sun, and if (as
Vossius well contendeth) Moses and Bacchus were the same person, their
descriptions must be relative, or the Tauricornous picture of the one, perhaps
the same with the other.

CHAP. X.
Of the Scucheons of the Tribes of Israel.
WE will not pass over the Scucheons of the tribes of Israel, as they are
usually described in the Mappes of Canaan and several other pieces; generally
conceived to be the proper coats, and distinctive badges of their several
tribes. So Ruben is conceived to bear three Bars wave, Judah a Lion Rampant,
Dan a Serpent nowed, Simeon a Sword inpale the point erected, etc. the ground
whereof is the last Benediction of Jacob, wherein he respectively draws
comparisons from things here represented.

Now herein although we allow a considerable measure of truth, Genesis 49.
yet whether as they are usually described, these were the proper cognizances,
and coat arms of the Tribes, whether in this manner applied, and upon the
grounds presumed, material doubts remai^e.

For first, they are not strictly made out, from the Prophetical blessing of
Jacob; for Simeon and Levi have distinct coats, that is a Sword, and the two
tables, yet are they by Jacob included in one Prophecy, Simeon and Levi are
brethren, Instruments of cruelties are in their habitations. So Joseph bears
an Ox, whereof notwithstanding there is no mention in this Prophecy; for
therein it is said Joseph is a fruitful bough, even a fruitful bough by a
well; by which repetition are intimated the two Tribes descending from him
Ephraim and Manasses; whereof notwithstanding Ephraim bears an Ox: True it
is, that many years after in the benediction of Moses, it is said of Joseph,
His glory is like the firstlings of his Bullock; Deuteronomy. 33.
and so we may concede, what Vossius learnedly declares, that the Egyptians
represented Joseph in the symbol of an Ox, for thereby was best employed the
dream of Pharaoh, which he interpreted, the benesit by Agriculture, and
provident provision of corn which he performed, and therefore did Serapis
bear a bushel upon his head.

Again, if we take these two benedictions together, the resemblances are not
appropriate, and Moses therein conformes not unto Jacob; for that which in the
Prophecy of Jacob is appropriated unto one, is in the blessing of Moses made
common unto others: So whereas Judah is compared unto a Lion by Jacob, Judah is
a Lions whelpe; the same is applied unto Dan by Moses, Dan is a Lions whelpe,
he shall leap from Bashan: and also unto Gad, he dwells as a Lion, and
teareth the arm with the Crown of the head.

Thirdly, if a Lion were the proper coat of Judah, yet were it not probably a
Lion Rampant, as it is commonly described, but rather couchant or dormant, as
some Heralds and Rabins do determine, according to the letter of the Text,
Recumbens dormisti ut Leo, He couched as a Lion, and as a young Lion, who shall
rouse him?

Lastly, when it is said, Every man of the children of Israel shall pitch by
his own standard with the Ensign of their fathers house; Numb. 2.
upon enquiry what these standards and ensigns were there is no small
incertainty, and men conform not unto the Prophecy of Jacob. Christian
Expositors are feign herein to rely upon the Rabbis, who notwithstanding are
various in their traditions, and confirm not these common descriptions; for as
for inferior Ensigns either of particular bands or houses they determine
nothing at all, and of the four principle or Legionary standards, that is of
Judah, Ruben, Ephraim, and Dan, (under every one whereof marched three tribes)
they explain them very variously. Jonathan who compiled the Thargum, conceives
the colors of these banners to answer the precious stones in the breastplate,
and upon which the names of the Tribes were engraven. So the standard for the
camp of Judah, was of three colors according unto the stones, Chalcedony,
Saphir, and Sardonix; and therein were expressed the names of the three tribes,
Judah, Isachar, and Zabulon, and in the midst thereof was witten, Numb. 10.
Rise up Lord, and let thy enemies be scattered, and let them that hate thee
fly before thee; in it was also the pourtrait of a Lion: The standard of Ruben
was also of three colors, Sardine, Topaz, and Amethyst, therein were expressed
the names of Ruben, Deuteronomy. 6.
Simeon, and Gad, in the midst was written, Hear, O Israel, The Lord our
God, the Lord is one: Therein was also the pourtraiture of a Heart. But Abenezra
and others beside the colors of the field, do set down other charges, in
Rubens the form of a man or mandrake, in that of Judah a Lion, in Ephraims an
Ox, in Dan's the figure of an Aegle.

And thus indeed the four figures in the banners of the principal squadrons
of Israel are answerable unto the Cherubins in the vision of Ezechiel, every
one carrying the form of all these: Ezekiel. 1.
As for the likeness of their faces, they four had the likeness of the face
of a Man, they four had also the face of an Aegle, and the face of a Lion on
the right side, and they four had the face of an Ox on the left side, they
four had also the face of an Aegle; and conformable hereunto the pictures of
the Evangelists (whose Gospells are the Christian banners) are set forth with
the addition of a Man or Angel, an Ox, a Lion, and an Aegle; and these
symbolically represent the office of Angels, and Ministers of Gods will; in
whom is required understanding as in a Man, courage and vivacity as in the
Lion, service and ministerial officiousness, as in the Ox, expedition or
celerity of execution, as in the Aegle.

From hence therefore we may observe that these descriptions the most
authenticke of any, are neither agreeable unto one another, nor unto the
Scuchions in question; for though they agree in Ephraim and Judah, that is the
Ox and the Lion, yet do they differ in those of Dan, and Ruben, as far as
an Aegle is different from a Serpent, and the figure of a Man, Heart, or
Mandrake, from three Bars wave, wherein notwithstanding we rather declare the
incertainty of Arms in this particular, then any way question their antiquity;
for hereof more ancient examples there are, then the Scucheons of the Tribes,
if Osyris, Mizraim or Jupiter the Just, were the son of Cham; for of his two
sons, as Diodorus delivers, the one for his Device gave a Dog, the other a
Wolf; and beside the shield of Achilles, and many ancient Greeks, if we
receive the conjecture of Vossius, that the Crow upon Corvinus his head, was
but the figure of that Animal upon his helmet, it is an example of Antiquity
among the Romans.

CHAP. XI.
Of the Pictures of the Sibylls.
THe Pictures of the Sibylls are very common, and for their Prophesies of
Christ in high esteem with Christians; described commonly with youthful faces,
and in a de^ined number; common pieces making twelve, and many precisely ten,
observing therein the account of learned Varro; that is, Sibylla Delphica,
Erythraea, Samia, Cumana, Cumaea, or Cimmeria, Hellespontiaca, Lybica, Phrygia,
Tiburtina, Persica. In which enumeration I perceive learned men are not
satisfied, and many conclude an irreconcilable incertainty; some making more,
others fewer, and not this certain number; for Suidas though he affirm that
in diverse ages there were ten* yet the same denomination he affords unto
more; Boy^ardus in his Tract of Divination has set forth the Icons of these
Ten, yet adds two others, Epirotica, and Aegyptia; and some affirm that
Prophesying women were generally named Sibylls.

Others make them fewer: Martianus Capella two, Pliny and Solinus three, Aelian
four, and Salmasius in effect but seven, for discoursing hereof in his Plinian
Exercitations, he thus determine^h; Ridere licet hodiernos Pictores, qui
tabulas proponunt Cumana, Cumeae, and Erythraeae, qu^si trium diversarum
Sibyllarum; cum una eademque fuerit Cumana, Cumaea, and Erythraea, ex plurium
and doctissimorum Authorum sententia: Boysardus gives us leave to opinion there
was no more then one; for so does he conclude, In tanta Scriptorum varictate
liberum relinquim^s Lectori cred^re, an una and eadem in diversis regionibus
peregrinata, cognomen sortita sit ab iis locis ubi or acula reddidiss^
comperitur, an plures extiterint: And therefore not discovering a resolution of
their number from the pens of the best Writers, we have no reason to determine
the same from the hand and pencill of Painters.

As touching their age, that they are generally described as young women,
History will not allow; for the Sibyll whereof Virgill speaks is termed by
him longava sacerdos, and Servius in his Comment amplifieth the same. The other
that sold the books unto Tarquine, and whose History is plainer then any, by
Livie and Gellius is termed Anus, Anus, quasi A (...), sine me^te
that is properly no woman of ordinary age, but full of years, and in the
days of doteage, according to the Etymology of Festus, and consonant unto the
History; wherein it is said, that Tarquine thought she doted with old age;
which duly perpended, the Licentia pictoria is very large, and with the same
reason they may delineate old Nestor like Adonis, Hecuba with Helens face, and
Time with Absalons head.

CHAP. XII.
Of the Picture describing the death of Cleopatra.
THe Picture concerning the death of Cleopatra with two Aspes or venomous
Serpents unto her arms, or breasts, or both, requires consideration: for
therein (beside that this variety is not excusable) the thing it self is
questionable; nor is it indisputably certain what manner of death she dyed.
Plutarch in the life of Antonie plainly delivers, that no man knew the manner
of her death; for some affirmed she perished by poison, which she always
carried in a little bollow comb, and wore it in her hair; beside there were
never any Aspes discovered in the place of her death, although two of her maids
perished also with her, only it was said two small and almost insensible
pricks were sound upon her arm; which was all the ground that Caesar had to
presume the manner of her death. Galen who was contemporary unto Plutarch,
delivers two ways of her death: that is, that she killed her self by the
bite of an Aspe, or bit an hole in her arm, and powered poison therein. Strabo
that lived before them both, has also two opinions, that she dyed by the byte
of an Aspe, or else a poisonous ointment.

We might question the length of the Aspes which are sometimes described
exceeding short, whereas the Chersaea or land Aspe which most conceive she
used, is above four cubits long: their number is not unquestionable; for
whereas there are generally two described, Augustus (as Plutarch relates) did
carry in his triumph the Image of Cleopatra but with one Aspe unto her arm: as
for the two pricks, or little spots in her arm, they rather infer the sex,
then plurality: for like the viper, the female Aspe has four, but the male
two teeth, whereby it left this impression, or double puncture behind it.

And lastly, we might question the place; for some apply them unto her breast,
which notwithstanding will not consist with the history, and Petrus Victorius
has well observed the same: but herein the mistake was easy, it being the
custom in capital malefactors to apply them unto the breast, as the Author De
Theriaca ad Pisonem, an eyewitness hereof in Alexandria, where Cleopatra dyed,
determines: I beheld says he, in Alexandria, how suddenly these Serpents
bereave a man of life; for when any one is condemned to this kind of death, if
they intend to use him favorably, that is, to dispatch him suddenly, they
fasten an Aspe unto his breast, and bidding him walk about, he presently
perishes thereby.

CHAP. XIII.
Of the Pictures of the nine Worthies.
THe pictures of the nine Worthies are not unquestionable, and to critical
spectators may seem to contain sundry improprieties: Some will enquire why
Alexander the Great is described upon an Elephant? for indeed, we do not find
he used that animal in his Armies, much less in his own person; but his
horse is famous in history, and its name alive to this day: Beside, he fought
but one remarkable battle, wherein there were any Elephants, and that was
with Porus King of India; In which notwithstanding, as Curtius, Arrianus, and
Plutarch report, he was on horseback himself; and if because he fought
against Elephants, he is with propriety set upon their backs, with no less or
greater reason is the same description agreeable unto Judas Maccabeus, as may
be observed from the history of the Maccabees; and also unto Julius Caesar,
whose triumph was honored with captive Elephants, as may be observed in the
order thereof, set forth by Iacobus Laurus: and if also we should admit this
description upon an Elephant, yet were not the manner thereof unquestionable,
that is, in his ruling the beast alone; for, beside the champion upon their
back, there was also a guide or Ruler, which sat more forward to command or
guide the beast: Thus did King Porus ride when he was overthrown by
Alexander; and thus are also the towred Elephants described, Maccab. 2. 6. Upon
the beasts there were strong towers of wood which covered every one of them,
and were girt fast unto them by devices; there were also upon every one of them
thirty two strong men, beside the Indian that ruled them.

Others will demand, not only why Alexander upon an Elephant, but Hector upon
an Horse? whereas his manner of fighting, or presenting himself in battle,
was in a Chariot, as did the other noble Trojans, who as Pliny affirms were
the first inventers thereof; the same way of fight is testified by Diodorus,
and thus delivered by Sir Walter Raleigh. Of the vulgar little reckoning was
made, for they fought all on foot, slightly armed, and commonly followed the
success of their Captains, who road not upon horses, but in Chariots drawn
by two or three horses; and this was also the ancient way of fight among the
Britains, as is delivered by Diodorus, Caesar, and Tacitus; and there want not
some who have taken advantage hereof, and made it one argument of their
orginall from Troy.

Lastly, by any man versed in Antiquity, the question can hardly be avoided,
why the horses of these Worthies, especially of Caesar, are described with the
furniture of great sadles, and styrrops; for sadles largely taken, though some
defense there may be, yet that they had not the use of stirrops, seems out of
doubt; as Pancirollus has observed, as Polydore Virgil and Petrus Victorius
have confirmed, expressly discoursing hereon; as is observable from Pliny, and
cannot escape our eyes in the ancient monuments, medals and Triumphant arches
of the Romans. Nor is there any genuine or classick word in Latin to express
them; for staphia or stapes is not to be found in Authors of Antiquity; and
whereas the name might promise some Antiquity, because among the three small
bones in the Auditory Organ, by Physicians termed Incus Malleus, and stapes,
one thereof from some resemblance does bear this name; these bones were not
observed, much less named by Hippocrates, Galen or any ancient Physician; but
as Laurentius observes concerning the invention of the stapes or stirrup bone,
there is some contention between Columbus and Ingrassias, the one of Sicilia,
the other of Cremona, and both within the compass of this Century.

The same is also deduceable from very approved Author^: Polybius speaking of
the way which Anniball marched into Italy, uses the word (...), that is says
Petrus Victorius, it was stored with devices for men to get upon their horses,
which ascents were termed Be^mata; and in the life of Caius Gracchus, Plutarch
expresses as much; for endeavoring to ingratiate himself with the people,
besides the placing of stones at every miles end, he made at nearer distances
certain elevated places, and Scalary ascents, that by the help thereof they
might with better ease ascend or mount their horses. Now if we demand how
Cavalliers then destitute of stirrops did usually mount their horses, Vegetius
resolves us, that they used to vault or leap up, and therefore they had wooden
horses in their houses and abroad, that thereby young men might enable
themselves in this action, wherein by instruction and practice they grew so
perfect, that they could vault up on the right or left, and that with their
sword in hand, according to that of Virgil -- Poscit equos, atque arma simul
saltuque superbus
Emicat.
And again: Infraenant alii currus and corpor a saltu
Injic^unt in equuos.
-- And so Julius Pollux advises to teach horses to incline, dimit, and bow
down their bodies, that their riders may with better ^ase ascend them; and
thus may it more causally be made out, what Hippocrates affirms of the
Scythians, that using continual riding, they were generally molested with the
Sciatica or hippegowte; or what Suetonius delivers of Germanicus, that he had
slender legs, but increased them by riding after meals; that is, the humors
descending upon their pendulosity, they having no support or suppedaneous
stability.

Now if any shall say that these are petty errors and minor lapses not
co^siderably injurious unto truth, yet is it neither reasonable nor safe to
contemn inferior falsities; but rather as between falsehood and truth, there
is no medium, so should they be maintained in their distances, nor the
insinuation of the one, approach the sincerity of the other.

CHAP. XIV.
Of the Picture of Iehptha sacrificing his daughter.
THe hand of the Painter confidently se^teth forth the picture of Jephthah in
the posture of Abraham, sacrificing his only daughter; Thus indeed is it
commonly received, and has had the attest of many worthy Writers;
notwithstanding upon enquity we find the matter doubtful, and many upon
probable grounds to have been of another opinion; conceaving in this oblation
not a natural but a Civil kind of death, and a separation only unto the
Lord; for that he pursued not his vow unto a literal oblation, there want not
arguments both from the Text and reason.

For first, it is evident that she deplored her virginity, and not her death;
Let me go up and down the mountains, and bewail my virginity, I and my
fellows.

Secondly, when it is said, that Jephthah did unto her according unto his vow,
it is immediately subjoyned, Et non cognovit virum* and she knew no man, which
as immediate in words, was probably most near in sense unto the vow.

Thirdly, it is said in the Text, that the daughters of Israel went yearly to
talk with the daughter of J^phthah four days in the year, which had she
been sacrificed, they could not have done; For whereas the word is sometime
translated to lament, yet does it also signify to talk or have conference
with one, and by Tremellius who was well able to judge of the Original, it is
in this sense translated: Ibant filii Israelitarum ad confabulandum cum filia
Iephthaci, quatuor diebus quotannis: And so it is also set down in the
marginall notes of our Translation: And from this annual concourse of the
daughters of Israel, it is not improbable in future Ages, the daughter of
Jephthah came to be worshipped as a Deity, and had by the Samaritans an annual
festivity observed unto her honor, as Epiphanius has left recorded in the
heresy of the Melchidecians.

It is also repugnant unto reason, for the offering of mankind was against the
Law of God, who so abhorred humane sacrifice, that he admitted not the oblation
of unclean beasts, and confined his altars but unto five kinds of Animals;
that is, the Ox, the Goat, the Sheep, the Pigeon and its kinds: in the
cleansing of the leper, there is I confess, mention made of the Sparrow, but
great dispute may be made whether it be properly rendered, and therefore the
Scripture with indignation, often times makes mention of humane sacrifice among
the Gentiles, whose oblations scarce made scruple of any Animal, sacrificing
not only man, but I Iorses, Lions, Aegles; and though they come not into
holoca^sts, yet do we read the Syrians did make oblations of fishes unto the
goddess Derceto; It being therefore a sacrifice so abominable unto God,
although he had pursued it, it is not probable the Priests and wisdom of
Israel would have permitted it, and that not only in regard of the subject or
sacrifice it self, but also the sacrificator, which the picture makes to be
Jepthah, who was neither Priest, nor capable of that office; for he was a
Gileadite, and as the text affirms, the son also of an harlot; And how hardly
the Priesthood would endure encroachment upon their function, a notable example
there is in the Story of Ozias.

Secondly, the offering up of his daughter was not only unlawful, and
entrenched upon his religion, but had been a course and progress that had
much condemned his discretion, that is, to have punished himself in the
strictest observance of his Vow, when as the Law of God had allowed an evasion;
that is, by way of commutation or redemption, according as is determined, Levi.
27. whereby if she were between the age of five and twenty, she was to be
estimated but at ten shekels, and if between twenty and sixty, not above
thirty; a sum that could never discourage an indulgent Parent, it being but the
value of a servant slain, and the inconsiderable Salarie of Judas, and will
make no greater noise then three pound fifteen shillings with us; and therefore
their conceit is not to be exploded, who say that from the Story of Jepthah
sacrificing his own daughter, might spring the fable of Agam^mnon, delivering
unto sacrifice his daughter Iphigenia, who was also contemporary unto J^pthah;
wherein to answer the ground that hinted it, Iphigenia was not sacrificed her
self, but redeemed with an Heart, which Diana acc^pted for her.

Now the ground at least which much promoted the opinion, might be the dubious
words of the text, which contain the sense of his vow; most men adhering unto
their common and obvious acception. Whatsoever shall come forth of the doors
of my house shall surely be the Lords, and I will offer it up for a burnt
offering. Now whereas it is said, Erit Iehova, and offeram illud holocaustum,
The word signifying both and and aut, it may be taken disjunctively, aut
offeram, that is, it shall either be the Lords by separation, or else, an
holocaust by common oblation, even as our marginal translation advertiseth; and
as Tremellius renders it, Erit inquam Iehovae, aut offer am illud holocaustum:
and for the vulgar translation, it uses often and where aut must be presumed,
as Exodus 21. Si quis percusserit patrem and matrem, that is not both, but
either. There being therefore two ways to dispose of her, either to separate
her unto the Lord, or offer her as a sacrifice, it is of no necessity the
latter should be necessary; and surely less derogatorie unto the sacred text,
and history of the people of God, must be the former.

CHAP. XV.
Of the picture of John the Baptist.
THe picture of John the Baptist, in a Camells skin is very questionable, and
many I perceive have condemned it; the ground or occasion of this description
are the words of the holy Scripture, especially of Matthew and Mark, for Luke
and John are silent herein; by them it is delivered, his garment was of Camells
hair, and had a leatherne girdle about his loins. Now here it seems the
Camels hair is taken by Painters for the skin or pelt with the hair upon it:
But this exposition will not so well consist with the strict acception of the
words; for Mark 1. It is said, he was (...), and Matthew 3, (...), that is, as
the vulgar translation, that of Beza, that of Sixtus Quintus, and Clement the
eight has rendered it, vestimentum habebat e pilis camelinis; which is as ours
translateth it, a garment of Camells hair; that is made of some texture of
that hair, a course garment, a cilicious or sackcloth habit; suitable to the
austerity of his life, and the severity of his doctrine, Repentance, and the
place thereof the wilderness, his food and diet locusts and wild honey;
agreeable unto the example of Elias, who Kings 1. 8. is said to vir pilosus,
that is as Junius and Tremellius interpret, Vest villoso cinctus; answerable
unto the habit of the ancient Prophets, according to that of Zachary 13. In
that day the Prophets shall be ashamed, neither shall they wear a rough
garment to deceive, and suitable to the Cilicious and hairie Vestes of the
strictest Orders of Friars, who derive the Institution of their Monastic life
from the example of John and Elias.

As for the wearing of skins, where that is properly intended, the expression
of the Scripture is plain, so is it called Heb. 11. they wandered about (...),
that is in Goats skins; and so it is said of our first Parents, Genesis 3. that
God made them (...) Vestes pelliceas, or coats of skins; which though a
natural habit unto all, before the invention of Texture, was something more
unto Adam, who had newly learned to die; for unto him a garment from the dead,
was but a Dictate of death, and an habit of mortality.

Now if any man will say this habit of John, was neither of Camells skin, nor
any course texture of its hair, but rather some finer weave of Camelot,
Grograine or the like, in as much as these stuffes are supposed to be made of
the hair of that Animal, or because that Aelian affirms, that Camells hair
of P^^^ia, is as fine as Milesians wool, wherewith the great ones of that
place were clothed; they have discovered an habit, not only unsuitable unto
his leatherne cincture, and the coursnes of his life, but not consistent with
the words of our Savior, when re^soning with the people concerning John, he
says, What went you out into the wilderness to see, a man clothed in soft
raiment? Behold they that wear soft raiment are in kings houses.

CHAP. XVI.
Of the picture of S. Christopher.
THe picture of St. Christopher, that is a man of a Giant like sta^ure, bearing
upon his shoulders our Savior Christ, and with a staff in his hand, wading
through the water, is known unto children, common over all Europe, not only as
a sign unto houses, but is described in many Churches, and stands Colossus
like in the entrance of Nostre Dame in Paris.

Now from hence, common eyes conceive an history suitable unto this description,
that he carried our Savior in his Minority over some river or water, which
notwithstanding we cannot at all make out; for we read not thus much in any
good Author, nor of any remarkable Christopher, before the reign of Decius,
who lived 250. years after Christ; this man indeed according unto History
suffered as a Martyr in the second year of that Emperor, and in the Roman
Calender takes up the 21. of July.

The ground that begat or promo^ed this opinion was, first the fabulous
adjections of succeeding ages, unto the veritable acts of this Martyr, who in
the most probable accounts was remarkable for his staff, and a man of a goodly
stature.

The second was a mistake or misapprehension of the picture; most men
conceiving that an History which was contrived at first but as an Emblem or
Symbolicall fancy, as from the Annotations of Baronius upon the Roman
Martyrology, Lipellous in the life of St Christopher has observed in these
words; Acta S. Christophori a multis depravata inveniuntur; quod quidem non
al^unde originem sumpsisse certum est, quam quod Symbolicas figur as imperiti
ad veritatem successu temporis transtulerint itaque cuncta illa de Sancto
Christophero pingi consueta, Sym bola potius quam historiae alicujus
existimandum est, esse expressam imaginem: Now what Emblem this was, or what
its signification conjectures are many; Pierius has set down one, that is, of
the Disciple of Christ; for he that will carry Christ upon his shoulders, must
rely upon the staff of his direction, whereon if he firmeth himself, he may
be able to overcom the billows of resistance, and in the virtue of this staff
like that of Jacob pass over the waters of Jordan: or otherwise thus; He that
will submit his shoulders unto Christ, shall by the concurrence of his power
increase into the strength of a Giant, and being supported by the staff of his
holy Spirit, shall not be overwhelmed by the waves of the world, but wade
through all resistance.

CHAP. XVII.
Of the Picture of S. George.
THe Picture of St. George killing the Dragon, and, as most ancient draughts
do run, with the daughter of a King standing by, is famous amongst Christians;
and upon this description depends a solemn story, how by this atchieveme he
redeemed a Kings daughter, which is more especially believed by the English,
whose Protector he is, and in which form and history, according to his
description in the English College at Rome, he is set forth in the Icons or
Cuts of Martyrs by Cevallerius. Now of what authority soever this piece be
among us, it is I perceive received with different beliefes: for some men
believe the person and the story; some the person, but not the story, and
others deny both.

That such a person there was, we shall not contend: the indistinction of many
in the community of name, or the application of the act of one unto another,
have made some doubt there was no such man at all; For of this name we meet
with more then one in history, and no less then two of Cappadocia, the one an
Arrian, who was slain by the Alexandrians in the time of Julian, the other a
valiant Soldier and Christian Martyr, beheaded in the reign of Dioclesian:
And this is the George conceived in this picture, who has his day in the
Roman Calender, on whom so many fables are delivered, whose story is set forth
by Metaphrastes, and his miracles by Turonensis.

As for the story depending hereon, we cannot make out the verity thereof, and
conceive the literal acception a mere mistake of the symbolicall exppession;
apprehending that a veritable history, which was but an emblem or piece of
Christian posie. And this Emblematicall construction has been received by men
who are not forward to extenuate the acts of their Saints, as from Baronius,
Lipellous the Carthusian has delivered in the life of St. George, Picturam
illam St. Georgii qua effingitur eques armatus, qui hastae cuspide hostem
interficit juxta quam etiam virgo posita, manus supplices tendens, ejus
explorat auxilium, Symboli potius quam historiae alic^jus censenda expressa
Imago, consuevit quidem ^t equestris militiae miles equestri imagine referri.

Now in the picture of this S^. and Soldier was employed the Christian Soldier
and true Champion of Christ; A horseman armed Cap a pe, intimating the Panoplia
or complete armor of a Christian, combating with the D^agon, that is, with the
Devil, in defense of the Kings daughter, that is the Church of God; and
therefore although the history be not made out, it does not disparage the
Knights and noble order of St. George, whose cognizance is honorable in the
emblem of the Soldier of Christ, and is a worthy memorial to conform unto
its mystery; nor, were there no such person at all, had they more reason to be
ashamed, then the noble order of Burgundy, and Knights of the golden Fleece,
whose badge is a confessed fable.

CHAP. XVIII.
Of the Picture of Jerome.
THe Picture of Jerome usually described at his study, with a Clock hanging by
him is not to be omitted; for though the meaning be allowable, and probable it
is that industrious Father did not let slip his time without account, yet must
not perhaps that Clock be set down to have been his measure thereof: For
Clocks are Automatous organs, and such whereby we now distinguish of time, have
found no mention in any ancient Writers, but are of late invention, as
Pancirollus observes, and Polydore Virgil discoursing of new inventions
whereof the authors are not known makes instance in Clocks and Guns: now
Jerome is no late Writer, but one of the ancient Fathers, and lived in the
fourth Century, in the reign of Theodosius the first.

It is not to be denied that before the days of Jerome there were Horologies,
and several accounts of time; for they measured the hours not only by drops of
water in glasses called Clepsydrae, but also by sand in glasses called
Clepsammia; there were also from great antiquity, Sciotericall or Sun Dialls,
by the shadow of a style or gnomon denoting the hours of the day: an invention
ascribed unto Anaximenes by Pliny; hereof a very memorable one there was in
Campus Martius from an obelisk erected, and golden figures placed horizontally
about it, which was brought out of Egypt by Augustus, and described by Jacobus
Laurus. And another of great antiquity we meet with in the story of Ezechias;
for so it is delivered Kings 2. 20. That the Lord brought the shadow backward
ten degrees by which it had gone down in the Dial of Ahaz; that is, say some,
ten degrees, not lines, for the hours were denoted by certain divisions or
steps in the Dial, which others distinguished by lines according to that of
Persius -- Stertimus indomit^m quod despumare Falernum
Sufficiat quinta dum linea tangitur umbra.
-- That is, the line next the Meridian, or within an hour of noone.

Of latter years there succeeded new inventions, and horologies composed by
Trochilick or the artifice of wheels, whereof some are kept in motion by
weight, others perform without it: now as one age inst^ucts another, and time
that brings all things to ruin perfects also every thing, so are these indeed
of more general and ready use then any that went before them: by the
water-glasses the account was not regular; for from attenuation and
condensation, whereby that Element is altered, the hours were shorter in hot
weather then in cold, and in Summer then in Winter; as for Sciotericall Dialls,
whether of the Sun or Moon, they are only of use in the actual radiation of
those Luminaries, and are of little advantage unto those inhabitants, which for
many months enjoy not the luster of the Sun.

It is I confess no easy wonder how the horometry of Antiquity discovered not
this Artifice, how Architas that contrived the moving Dove, or rather the
Helicoscopie of Archimedes, fell not upon this way; surely as in many things,
so in this particular, the present age has far su^passed Antiquity, whose
ingenuity has been so bold not only to proceed, below the account of minutes,
but to attempt perpetual motions, and engines whose revolutions (could their
substance answer the d^signe) might outlast the examplary mobility, and out
measure time it self; for such a one is that mentioned by John Dee, whose
words are these in his learned Presace unto Euclide: By wheels strange works
and incredible are done: A wondrous example was seen in my time in a certain
Ia^trument, which by the Inventer and A^ti^icer was sold for twenty talents of
Gold; and then by chance had received some injury, and one Janellus of Cremona
did mend the same, and presented it unto the Emperor Charles the si^t.
Jeronymus Cardanus, can be my witness, that therein was one wheel that moved
in such a rate, that in seven thousand years only his own period should be
finished; a thing almost incredible, but how far I keep within my bounds, many
men yet alive can tell.

CHAP. XIX.
Of the Pictures of Mermaids, Unicorns, and some others.
FEw eyes have escaped the Picture of the Mermaids; that is, according to
Horace his Monster, with woman's head above, and fishy extremity below: and this
is conceived to answer the shape of the ancient Sirens that attempted upon
Ullysses, which notwithstanding were of another description, containing no
fishie composure, but made up of Man and Bird; the humane mediety variously
placed not only above but below, according unto Aelian, Suidas, Servius,
Boccatius, and Aldrovandus, who has referred their description unto the story
of fabulous birds, according to the description of Ovid, and the account
thereof in Hyginus, that they were the daughters of Melpomene, and
metamorphosied into the shape of man and bird by Ceres.

And therefore these pieces so common among us, do rather derive their
original, or are indeed the very descriptions of Dagon, which was made with
humane figure above, and fishy shape below; whose stumpe, 1 Samuel 5.
or as Tremellius and our margin renders it, whose fishie part only remained,
when the hands and upper part fell before the Arc. Of the shape of Atergates,
or Derceto with the Phaeniceans; in whose fishie and feminine mixture, as some
conceive, were employed the Moon and the Sea, or the Deity of the waters; and
therefore, in their sacrifices they made oblations of fishes: from whence were
probably occasioned the pictures of Nereides and Tritons among the Grecians,
and such as we read in Macrobius, to have been placed on the top of the
temple of Saturn.

We are unwilling to question the Royal supporters of England, that is, the
approved descriptions of the Lion and the Unicorne; although, if in the Lion
the position of the pizell be proper, and that the natural situation; it will
be hard to make out their retrocopula^^on, or their coupling and pissing
backward, according to the determin^tion of Aristotle; All that urine backward
do copulate (...), clunatim, or ave^sly, as Lions, Hares, Linxes.

As for the Unicorne, if it have the head of a Dear, and the tail of a Boar,
as Vartomannus describes it, how agreeable it is in this picture every eye may
discern: if it be made bisulcous or cloven footed, it agrees unto the
description of Vartomannus, but scarce of any other; and Aristotle supposes
that such as devide the hoof do double the horn; they being both of the same
nature, and admitting division together. And lastly, if the horn have this
situation, and be so forwardly affixed, as is described, it will not be easily
conceived, how it can seed from the ground, and therefore we observe that
Nature in other cornigerous animals, has placed the horns higher and
reclining, as in Bucks; in some inverted upwards, as in the Rhinoceros, the
Indian Ass, and the Unicornous Beetles; and thus have some affirmed it is
seated in this animal.

We cannot but observe that in the picture of Jonah and others, Whales are
described with two prominent spouts on their heads; whereas indeed they have
but one in the forhead, and terminating over the windepide. Nor can we
overlooke the picture of Elephants with Castles on their backs, made in the
form of land Castles, or stationary fortifications, and answerable unto the
Arms of Castile, or Sir John Old Castle; whereas the towers they bore were
made of wood, and girt unto their bodies, as is delivered in the books of
Maccabees, and as they were appointed in the Army of Antiochus.

We will not dispute the pictures of Telary Spiders, and their position in the
web, which is commonly made laterall, and regarding the Horizon; although, if
it be observed, we shall commonly find it downward, and their heads
respecting the Center: We will not controvert the picture of the seven Stars,
although if thereby be meant the Pleiades, or subconstellation upon the back of
Taurus, with what congruity they are described, either in site or magnitude, in
a clear night an ordinary eye may discover, from July unto April. We will not
question the tongues of Adders and Vipers, described like an Anchor, nor the
picture of the Flower de Luce, though how far they agree unto their natural
draughts, let every Spectator determine.

Many more there are whereof our pen shall take no notice, nor shall we urge
their enquiry; we shall not enlarge with what incongruity, and how dissenting
from the pieces of Antiquity, the pictures of their gods and goddesses are
described, and how hereby their symbolicall sense is lost, although herein it
were not hard, to be informed from Phornutus, Fulgentius, and Albricus. Whether
Hercules be more properly described strangling then tearing the Lion, as
Victorius has disputed, nor how the characters and figures of the Signs and
Planets be now perverted, as Salmasius has learnedly declared: We will
dispense with Bears with long tails, such as are described in the figures of
heaven; We shall tolerate flying Horses, black Swans, Hydrae's, Centaur's,
Harpies, and Satyrs; for these are monstrosities, rarities, or else Poetical
fancies, whose shadowed moralities require their substantial falsities:
wherein indeed we must not deny a liberty, nor is the hand of the Painter more
restrainable then the pen of the Poet; but where the real works of Nature, or
veritable acts of story are to be described, digressions are aberrations; and
Art being but the Imitator or secondary representor, it must not vary from the
verity of the example, or describe things otherwise then they truly are or have
been: for hereby introducing false Idea's of things, it perverts and deformes
the face and symmetrie of truth.

CHAP. XX.
Of the Hieroglyphicall pictures of the Egyptians.
CErtainly of all men that suffered from the confusion of Babel, the Egyptians
found the best evasion; for, though words were confounded, they invented a
language of things, and spoke unto each other by common notions in Nature,
whereby they discoursed in silence, and were intuitively understood from the
theory of their Expresses: for, they assumed the shapes of animals common unto
all eyes, and by their conjunctions and compositions were able to communicate
their conceptions unto any that coapprehended the Syntaxis of their natures.
This do many conceive to have been the primitive way of writing, and of
greater Antiquity then letters; and this indeed might Adam well have spoken,
who understanding the nature of things, had the advantage of natural
expressions, which the Egyptians but taking upon trust upon their own or
common opinion, from conceded mistakes they authentically promoted errors,
describing in their Hieroglyphics creatures of their own invention; or from
known and conceded animals, erecting significations not inferrible from their
natures.

And first, although there were more things in Nature then words which did
express them, yet even in these mute and silent discourses, to express
complexed significations, they took a liberty to compound and piece together
creatures of allowable forms unto mixtures inexistent; and thus began the
descriptions of Griphins, Basilisks, Phaenix, and many more; which Emblematists
and Heralds have entertained with significations answering their institutions;
Hieroglyphically adding Martegres, Wivernes, Lion fishes, with diverse others;
pieces of good and allowable invention unto the prudent Spectator, but are
looked on by vulgar eyes as literal truths, or absurd imp^ssibilities; whereas,
indeed they are commendable inventions, and of laudable significations.

Again, beside these pieces fictitiously set down, and having no copy in
Nature, they had many unquestionably drawn of inconsequent signification, nor
naturally verfying their intention. We shall instance but in few, as they
stand recorded by Orus: The male sex they expressed by a Vulture, because of
Vultures all are females, and impregnated by the wind, which authentically
transmitted has passed many pens, and became the assertion of Aelian, Ambrose,
Basil, Isidore, Tzetzes, Philes, and others; wherein notwithstanding what
injury is offered unto the Creation in this con^inement of sex, and what
disturbance unto Philosophy in the concession of windy conceptions, we shall
not here declare: By two dragmes they thought it sufficient to signify an
heart, because the heart at one year weighs two dragmes, that is, a quarter
of an ounce, and unto fifty years annually increases the weight of one
dragme, after which in the same proportion it yearly decreaseth; so that the
life of a man does not naturally extdend above an hundred, and this was not
onley a populary conceit, but consentaneous unto their Physical principles,
Heurnius has accounted it, in his Philosophica Barbarica.

A woman that has but one child, they express by a Lioness; for that
conceaveth but once: fecundity they set forth by a Goat, because but seven
days old, it begins to use coition: the abortion of a woman they describe
by an horse kicking a wolf; because a Mare will cast her fool if she tread in
the track of that animal. Deformity they signify by a Bear, and an unstable
man by an Hyaena, because that animal yearly exchangeth his sex: A woman
delivered of a female child, they imply by a Bull looking over his left
shoulder, because if in coition a Bull part from a Cow on that side, the Calfe
will prove a female.

All which with many more, how far they consent with truth, we shall not
disparage our Reader to dispute; and though some way allowable unto wiser
conceits, who could distinctly receive their significations; yet carrying the
majesty of H^eroglyphicks, and so transmitted by Authors, they crept into a
belief with many, and favorable doubt with most: And thus, I fear, it has
fared with the Hieroglyphicall symboles of Scripture, which excellently
intended in the species of things sacrifized, in the prohibited meats, in the
dreams of Pharaoh, Joseph, and ma^y other passages, are often times wrackt
beyond their symbolizations, and enlarged into constructions disparaging their
true intentions.

CHAP. XXI.
Compendiously of many questionable customs, opinions, pictures, practices,
and popular observations.
1. IF an Hare cross the high way there are few above threescore that are not
perplexed thereat, which notwithstanding is but an Auguriall terror, according
to that received expression, Inauspicatum datiter oblatus Lepus, and the ground
of the conceit was probably no greater then this, that a fearful animal
passing by us portended unto us some thing to be feared; as upon the like
consideration the meeting of a Fox presaged some future imposture, which was a
superstitious observation prohibited unto the Jews, as is expressed in the
Idolatry of Maimonides, and is referred unto the sin of an observer of
Fortunes, or that abuses events unto good or bad signs, forbidden by the Law
of Moses, Deuteronomy 18.
which notwithstanding sometimes succeeding, according to fears or desires,
have left impressions and timorous expectations in credulous minds for ever.

2. That Owls and Ravens are ominous appearers, and presignifying unlucky
events, as Christians yet conceit, was also an Auguriall conception. Because
many Ravens were seen when Alexander entered Babylon, they were thought to
preominate his death; and because an Owl appeared before the battle, it
presaged the ruin of Crassus, which though decrepite superstitions, and such
as had their nativity in times beyond all history, are fresh in the observation
of many heads, and by the credulous and feminine party still in some Majesty
among us. And therefore the Emblem of Superstition was well set out by Ripa,
in the picture of an Owl, an Hare, and an old woman; and it no way confirms
the Auguriall consideration, that an Owl is a forbidden food in the Law of
Moses; or that Jerusalem was threatened by the Raven and the Owl, in that
expression of Esaias 34. That it should be a court for Owls, that the Cormorant
and the B^terne should possess it, and the Owl and the Raven dwell in it; ^or
thereby was only employed their ensuing desolation, as is expounded in the words
succeeding, he shall draw upon it the line of confusion, and the stones of
emptiness.

3. The falling of Salt is an authenticke presagement of ill lu^ke, nor can
every temper contemn it, from whence notwithstanding nothing can be naturally
feared: nor was the same a general prognosticke of future evil among the
ancients, but a particular omination concerning the breach of friendship: for
salt as incorruptible, was the Simbole of friendship, and before the other
service was offered unto their guests; which if it casually fell was accounted
ominous, and their amity of no duration.

4. To break the eggeshell after the meat is out, we are taught in our
childhood, and practice it all our lives, which nevertheless is but a
superstitious relict according to the judgment of Plini^; Huc pertinet ov^rum,
ut exorbuerit quisque calices protinus frangi, aut cosdem choclearibus
perforari, and the intent hereof was to prevent witchcraft; for lest witches
should draw or prick their names therein, and veneficiously mischief their
persons, they broke the shell, as Dalecampius has observed.

5. The true lovers knot is very much magnified and still retained in presents
of love among us, which though in all points it does not make out, had perhaps
its original from Nodus Herculanus, or that which was called Hercules his
knot, resembling the Snaky complication in the caduceus or rod of Hermes; and
in which form the Zone or woollen girdle of the Bride was fastened, as
Turnebus observes in his Adversaria.

6. When our cheek burns or ^are tingleth, we usually say that some body is
talking of us; which is an ancient conceit, and ranked among superstitious
opinions by Plini^. Absentes tinnitu aurium (...) sermones de se receptum est,
according to that Disticke noted by Dalecampius. Garrula quid totis resona^
mihi noctibus auris?
Nescio quem dicis nunc meminisse mei:
which is a conceit hardly to be made out without the concession of a
signifying Genius, or universal Mercury, conducting sounds unto their distant
subjects, and teaching us to hear by touch.

7. When we desire to confine our words we commonly say they are spoken under
the Rose; which expression is commendable, if the Rose from any natural
property may be the Symbol of silence, as Nazianzene seems to imply in these
translated verses. Vtque latet Rosa Verna suo put amine clausa,
Sic os vincla ferat, validisque arct^tur habenis,
Indicatque sui^ prolixa silentia labris,
and is also tolerable, if by desiring a secrecy to words spoke under the Rose,
we only mean in society and compotation, from the ancient custom in
Symposiacke meetings, to wear chapletts of Roses about their heads; and so we
condemn not the Germane custom, which over the Table describes a Rose in the
seeling; but more considerable it is, if the original were such as Lemnius and
others have recorded; that the Rose was the flower of Venus, which Cupid
consecrated unto Harpocrates the God of silence, and was therefore an Emblem
thereof to conceal the prancks of Venery, as is declared in this Tetrasticke
-- Est Rosa flos veneris, cujus quo facta laterent
Harpocrati matris, dona dicavit Amor;
Inde Rosam mensis hospes suspendit Amicis,
Convivae ut sub ea dicta tacenda sciant.


8. That smoke does follow the fairest is an usual saying with us, and in
many parts of Europe, whereof although there seem no natural ground, yet is
it the continuation of a very ancient opinion, as Petrus Victorius and Causabon
have observed from a passage in Athenaeus, wherein a Parasite thus describes
himself. To every table first I come,
Whence Porridge I am called by some:
A Capaneus at stares I am,
To enter any room a Ram;
Like whipps and thongs to all I ply,
Like smoke unto the fair I fly.


9. To set cross legg^d, or with our fingers pectinated or shut together is
accounted bad, and friends will persuade us from it. The same conceit
religiously possessed the Ancients, as is observable from Pliny. Poplites
alternis genibus imponere nefas olim; and also from Athenae^s, that it was an
old venesicious practice, and Juno is made in this postu^^ to hinder the
delivery of Alcmaena; and therefore, as Pierius observes, in the Medall of
Julia Pia the right hand of Venus, was made extended with the inscription of
Venus Genetrix; for the complication or pectination of the fingers was an
Hieroglyphick of impediment, as in that place he declares.

10. The set and statary times of payring of nails, and cutting of hair is
thought by many a point of consideration, which is perhaps but the continuation
of an ancient superstition: for piaculous it was unto the Romans to pare their
nails upon the nundinae observed every ninth day; and was also feared by
others in certain days of the week, according to that of Ausonius, Ungues
Mercurio, Barbam Jove, Cypride crines; and was one part of the wickedness that
filled up the measure of Manasses, when it is delivered he observed times,
Chron. 2. 23.

11. A common fashion it is to nourish hair upon the molls of the face, which
is the perpetuation of a very ancient custom, and though innocently practiced
among us, may have a superstitious original, according to that of Pliny;
Naevos in facie tondere rel^giosum habent nunc multi; from the like might
proceed the fears of polling Elvelockes or complicated hairs of the head, and
also of locks longer then the other hair, they being votary at first, and
dedicated upon occasion, preserved with great care, and accordingly esteemed by
others, as appears by that of Apuleius; Adjuro per dulcem capilli tui nodulum.

12. A custom there is in most parts of Europe to adorn Aqueducts, spouts and
Cisternes with Lions heads; which though no illaudable ornament is an Egyptian
continuation, who practiced the same under a symbolicall illation; for because
the Sun being in Leo, the flood of Nilus was at the full, and water became
conveyed into every part, they made the spouts of their Aqueducts through the
head of a Lion: and upon some celestial respects it is not improbable the
great Mogull or Indian King does bear for his Arms a Lion and the Sun.

13. Many conceive there is somewhat amiss, and that as we usually say, they
are unblest until they put on their girdle: wherein (although most know not
what they say) there are involved unknown considerations; for by a girdle or
cincture are symbollically implied Truth, Resolution and Readiness unto
Action, which are parts and virtues required in the service of God: according
whereto we find that the Isr^elites eat the Paschall Lamb with their loins
girded, and the Almighty challenging Job, bids him gird up his loins like a
man; so runs the expression of Peter, Gird up the loins of your minds, be
sober and hope to the end; so the high P^iest was girt with the girdle of fine
linen; so is it part of the holy habit to have our loins girt about with
truth; and so is it also said concerning our Savior, Righteousness shall be
the girdle of his loins, and faithfulness the girdle of his reins. Esaias 1^.


Moreover by the girdle the heart and parts which God requires are divided from
the inferior and epithumeticall organs; implying thereby a memento unto
purification and cleanness of heart, which is commonly defiled from the
concupiscence and affection of those parts; and therefore unto this day the Jews
do bless themselves when they put on their zone or cincture: and thus may we
make out the doctrine of Pythagoras, to offer sacrifice with our feet naked,
that is, that our inf^riour parts and farthest removed from Reason might be
free, and of no imdiment unto us. Thus Achilles though dipped in Styx, yet
having his heel untouched by that water, although he were fortified elsewhere,
he was slain in that part, and as only vulnerable in the inferior and brutall
part of Man: This is that part of Eve and her posterity the devil still does
bruise; that is, that part of the soul which adhereth unto earth, and walks in
the paths thereof; and in this secondary and symbolicall sense it may be also
understood, when the Priests in the Law washed their feet before the sacrifice;
when our Savior washed the feet of his Disciples, and said unto Peter, if I
wash not thy feet thou have no part in me; and thus is it symbollically
explainable and implies purification and cleanness, when in the burnt
offerings the Priest is commanded to wash the inwards and legs thereof in
water, and in the peace and sin offerings, to burn the two kidneys, the fat
which is about the ^lancks, and as we translate it the Caul above the Liver.
But whether the Jews when they blessed themselves, Jer. 13.
had any eye unto the words of Jeremy, wherein God makes them his Girdle; or
had therein any reference unto the girdle, which the Prophet was commanded to
hide in the hole of the rock of Euphrates, and which was the type of their
captivity, we leave unto higher conjecture.

14. The picture of the Creator, or God the Father in the shape of an old Man,
is a dangerous piece, and in this fecundity of sect^ may revive the
Anthropomorphites, which although maintained from the expression of Daniel, I
beheld where the Ancient of days did sit, whose hair of his head was like the
pure woole; yet may it be also derivative from the Hieroglyphicall description
of the Egyptians* who to express their E^eph, or Creator of the world,
described an old man in a blew mantle, with an egg in his mouth, which was the
emblem of the world. Surely those heathens, that notwithstanding their
exemplary advantage in heaven, would endure no pictures of Sun or Moon, as
being visible unto all the world, and needing no representation, do evidently
accuse the practice of those pencils, that will describe invisibles. And he
that challenged the boldest hand unto the picture of an Echo, must laugh at
this attempt not only in the description of invisibility, but circumscription
of Ubiquity, and fetching under lines incomprehensible circularity.

The pictures of the Egyptians were more tolerable, and in their sacred
letters more veniably expressed the apprehension of Divinity; for though they
employed the same by an eye upon a Scepter, by an Eagles head, a Crocodill and
the like; yet did these manual descriptions pretend no corporal
representations, nor could the people misconceive the same unto real
correspondencies. So though the Cherub carried some apprehension of Divinity,
yet was it not conceived to be the shape thereof: and so perhaps because it is
metaphorically predicated of God, that he is a consuming fire, he may be
harmlesly described by a flaming representation: yet if, as some will have it,
all mediocrity of folly is foolish, and because an unrequitable evil may ensu^
an indifferent convenience must be omitted; we shall not urge such
representments, we could spare the holy Lamb for the picture of our Savior,
and the Dove or fiery Tongues to represent the holy Ghost.

15. The Sun and Moon are usually described with humane faces; whether herein
there be not a Pagan imitation, Or quarelsome with pictures.
and those visages at first employed Apollo and Diana we make some doubt; and
we find the statua of the Sun was framed with rays about the head, which
were the indiciduous and unshaven locks of Apollo. We should be too Iconomicall
to question the pictures of the winds, as commonly drawn in humane heads, and
with their cheeks distended, which notwithstanding we find condemned by
Minutius, as answering poetical fancies, and the gentile description of Aeolus
Boreus, and the feigned Deities of winds.

16. We shall not, I hope, disparage the Resurrection of our Redeemer, if we
say the Sun does not dance on E^ster day. And though we would willingly assent
unto any sympathicall exultation, yet cannot conceive therein any more then a
Tropicall expression; whether any such motion there were in that day wherein
Christ arised, Scripture has not revealed, which has been punctual in other
records concerning solary miracles: and the Areopagite that was amazed at the
Eclipse, took no notice of this, and if metaphorical expression^ go so
far, we may be bold to affirm, not only that one Sun danced, but two arose
that day: That light appeared at his nativity, and darkness at his death, and
yet a light at both; for even that darkness was a light unto the Gentiles,
illuminated by that obscurity. That 'twas the first time the Sun set about the
Horizon, that although there were darkness above the earth there was light
beneath it, nor dare we say that hell was dark if he were in it.

17. Great conceits are raised of the involution or membranous covering,
commonly called the silly how, that sometimes is found about the heads of
children upon their birth, and is therefore preserved with great care, not
only as medicall in diseases, but effectual in success, concerning the
Infant and others, which is surely no more then a continued superstition; for
hereof we read in the life of Antoninus delivered by Spartianus, that children
are borne sometimes with this natural cap, which Midwives were wont to sell
unto credulous Lawyers, who had an opinion it advantaged their promotion.

But to speak strictly the effect is natural, and thus to be conceaved, the
Infant has three ^eguments, or membranous ^ilmes which cover it in the womb,
that is, the Corion, Amnio^, and Allantois; the Corion is the outward membrane
wherein are implanted the veins, Arteries and umbilicall vessels, whereby its
nourishment is conveyed: the Allantois a thin coat seated under the Corion,
wherein are received the watery separations conveyed by the urachus, that the
acrimony thereof should not offend the skin. The Amnios is a general
investment, containing the sudorous or thin serosity perspirable through the
skin. Now about the time when the Infant breaks these cov^^ings, it sometime
carries with it about the head a part of the Amnios or nearest coat; which
says Spiegelius, either proceeds from the toughness of the membrane or
weakness of the Infant that cannot get clear thereof: and therefore herein
significations are natural and concluding upon the Infant, but not to be
extended unto magical signalities or any other pers^.

18. That it is good to be drunk once a month, is a common flattery of
sensuality, supporting it self upon physic, and the healthful effects of
inebriation. This indeed seems plainly affirmed by Avicenna, a Physician of
great Authority, and whose religion prohibiting Wine could less extenuate
ebriety. But Averroes a man of his own faith was of another belief,
restraining his ebriety unto hilarity, and in effect making no more thereof,
then Seneca commends, and was allowable in Cato; that is, a sober
incalescence and regulated aestuation from wine, or what may be conceived
between Joseph and his brethren, when the Text expresses they were merry, or
drank largely; and whereby indeed the commodities set down by Avicenna, that
is, alleviation of spirits, resolution of superfluities, provocation of sweat
and urine may also ensue. But as for dementation, sopition of reason, and the
diviner particle from drink, though American religion approve, and Pagan piety
of old has practiced, even at their sacrifices; Christian morality and the
Doctrine of Christ will not allow. And surely that religion which excuses the
fact of Noah, in the aged surprisall of six hundred years, and unexpected
inebriation from the unknown effects of wine, will neither acquit ebriosity
nor ebriety, in their known, and intended perversions.

And indeed, although sometimes effects succeed which may relieve the body, yet
if they carry mischief or peril unto the soul, we are therein restraineable
by Divinity, which circumscribeth Physic, and circumstantially determines the
use thereof. From natural considerations, Physic commends the use of
venery; and happily, incest, adultery, or stupration may prove as physically
advantageous, as conjugall copulation; which notwithstanding must not be
drawn into practice. And truly effects, consequents, or events which we
commend, arise often times from ways which all condemn. Thus from the fact of
Lot, we derive the generation of Ruth, and blessed Nativity of our Savior;
which notwithstanding did not extenuate the incestuous ebriety of the
generator. And if, asit is commonly urged, we think to extenuate ebriety from
the benefit of vomit often succeeding; Egyptian sobriety will condemn us, who
purges both ways twice a month, without this perturbation: and we foolishly
contemn the liberal hand of God, and ample field of medicines which soberly
produce that action.

19. A conceit there is that the Devil commonly appears with a cloven hoof,
wherein although it seem excessively ridiculous there may be somewhat of
truth; and the ground thereof at first might be his frequent appearing in the
shape of a Goat, which answers that description. This was the opinion of
ancient Christians concerning the apparitions of Panites, Faunes and Satyrs,
and in this form we read of one that appeared unto Antony in the wilderness.
The same is also confirmed from expositions of holy Scripture; for whereas it
is said, Thou shall not offer unto Devils, the Original word is Seghnirim,
that is, Lev. 17.
rough and hayrie Goats, because in that shape the Devil most often appeared,
as is expounded by the Rabbis, as Tremellius has also explained; and as the
word Ascimah, the god of Emath is by some conceived; nor did he only assume
this shape in elder times, but commonly in later days, especially in the place
of his worship. If there be any truth in the confession of Witches, and as in
many stories it stands confirmed by Bodinus; and therefore a Goat is not
improperly made the Hieroglyphick of the Devil, as Pierius has expressed it;
so might it be the Emblem of sin, as it was in the sin offering; and so
likewise of wicked and sinful men, according to the expression of Scripture in
the method of the last distribution, when our Savior shall separate the Sheep
from the Goats, that is, the sons of the Lamb from the children of the Devil.

20. A strange kind of exploration and peculiar way of Rhabdomancy is that
which is used in Mineral discoveries, that is, with a forked hazell, commonly
called Moses his rod, which freely held forth, will stir and play if any mine
be under it: and though many there are who have attempted to make it good, yet
until better information, we are of opinion with Agricola, that in it self it
is a fruitless exploration, strongly senting of Pagan derivation, and the
virgula Divina, proverbially magnified of old; the ground whereof were the
Magical rods in Poets; that of Pollas in Homer, that of Mercury that charmed
Argus, and that of Circe which transformed the followers of Ulysses; too boldly
usurping the name of Moses rod; from which notwithstanding, and that of Aaron
were probably occasioned the fables of all the rest; for that of Moses must
needs be famous unto the Egyptians, and that of Aaron unto many other nations,
as being preserved in the Arc, until the destruction of the Temple built by
Solomon.

21. A practice there is among us to determine doubtful matters, by the
opening of a book, and letting fall a staff; which notwithstanding are
ancient fragments of Pagan divination; the first an imitation of sorts
Homericae, or Virgilianae, drawing determinations from verses casually
occurring. The same was practiced by Severus, who entertained ominous hopes of
the Empire, from that verse in Virgil, Tu regere imperio populos Roman
memento; and Gordianus who reigned but few days was discouraged by another,
that is, Ostendunt terris hunc tantum fata nec ultra esse sinunt. Nor was this
only performed in Heathen Authors, but upon the sacred text of Scripture, as
Gregorius Turonensis has le^t some account, and as the practice of the
Emperor Heraclius, before his Expedition into Asia minor, is delivered by
Cedrenus.

As for the Divination or decision from the staff it is an Auguriall relic,
Hosea 4.
and the practice thereof is accused by God himself; My people ask counsel
of their stocks, and their staff declares unto them. And of this kind of
Rhabdomancy was that practiced by Nabuchadonosor in that Caldean miscellany,
Ezekiel. 24.
delivered by Ez^kiel, The King of Babylon stood at the parting of the way, at
the head of the two ways to use divination, he made his arrows b^ight, he
consulted with Images, he looked in the Liver; at the right hand were the
divinations for Jerusalem, that is, as Estius expounds it the left way
leading unto Rhabbah the chief city of the Ammonites, and the right unto
Jerusalem, he consulted Idols and entrals, he threw up a bundle of Arrows, to
see which way they would light, and falling on the right hand he marched
toward Jerusalem. A like way of Belomancy or Divination by Arrows has been
in request with Scythians, Alanes, Germans, with the Africans and Turks of
Algier; but of another nature was that which was practiced by El^sha, when by
an Arrow shot from an Eastern window, he presignified the destruction of
S^ria; or when according unto the three strokes of Joash, with an arrow upon
the ground, he foretold the number of his victories; for thereby the Spirit of
God particular'd the same, and determined the strokes of the King unto three,
which the hopes of the Prophet expected in twice that number.

We are unwilling to enlarge concerning many other, only referring unto
Christian considerations, what natural effects can reasonably be expected,
when to prevent the Ephialtes or night M^re we hang up an hallow stone in our
stables; when for amulets against Agues we use the chips of Gallows and
places of Execution. When for warts we rub our hands before the Moon, or
commit any maculated part unto the touch of the dead. Swarms hereof our
learned Seldom and critical Philologers might illustrate, whose abler
performances our adventures do but solicit, mean while we hope they will
plausibly receave our attempts, or candidely correct our misconjectures.

THE SIXTH BOOK.
Of sundry common opinions Cosmographicall and His^oricall. The first Discourse
comprehended in several all Chapters.
CHAP. I.
Concerning the beginning of the World, that the time thereof is not precisely
to be known, ^s men generally suppose: Of men's enquiries in what season or
point of the Zodiac it began. That as they are generally made they are in
vain, and as particularly applied uncertain. Of the division of the seasons
and four quarters of the year, according to Astronomers and Physicians. That
the common compute of the Ancients, and which is yet retained by most, is
unreasonable and erroneous. Of some divinations and ridiculous diductions from
one part of the year to another. And of the providence and wisdom of God in
the site and motion of the Sun.
COncerning the World and its temporal circumscriptions, who ever shall
strictly examine both extremes, shall easily perceive there is not only
obscurity in its end but its beginning; that as its period is inscrutable, so
is its nativity indeterminable: That as it is presumption to enquire after the
one, so is there no rest or satisfactory decision in the other. And hereunto we
shall more readily assent, if we examine the informations, and take a view of
the several difficultie^ in this point; which we shall easily do, if we
consider the different conceits of men, and duly perpend the imperfections of
their discoveries.

And first, the Heathens or histories of the Gentiles afford us slender
satisfaction, nor can they relate any story, or affixe a probable point to its
beginning: For some thereof (and those of the wisest amongst them) are so far
from determining its beginning, that they opinion and maintain it never had
any at all; as the doctrine of Epicurus implies, and more positively Aristotle
in his books de Caelo declares, endeavoring to confirm it with arguments of
reason, and those appearingly demonstrative; wherein to speak indifferently,
his labors are rational, and uncontrollable upon the grounds assumed, that is
of Physical generation, and a primary or first matter, beyond which no other
hand was apprehended: But herein we remain sufficiently satisfied from Moses,
and the doctrine delivered of the Creation, that is a production of all things
out of nothing, a formation not only of matter, but of form, and a meteriation
even of matter it self.

Others are so far from defining the original of the world or of mankind,
that they have held opinions not only repugnant unto Chronology but Philosophy;
that is, that they had their beginning in the soil where they inh^bit^d,
assuming or receiving appellations conformable unto such conceits: So did the
Athenians term themselves (...) or Aborigines, and in testimony thereof did
wear a golden insect on their heads; the very same name is also given unto the
Inlanders or Midland inhabitants of this Island by Caesar. But this is a
conceit answerable unto the generation of the Giants, not admittable in
Philosophy, much less in Divinity, which distinctly informs we are all the
seed of Adam, that the whole world perished unto eight persons before the
blood, and was after peopled by the Colonies of the sons of Noah; there was
therefore never any Autochthon, or man arising from the earth but Adam, for the
woman being formed out of the rib, was once removed from earth, and framed from
that element under incarnation. And so although her production were not by
copulation, yet was it in a manner seminall: For if in every part from whence
the seed does flow, there be contained the Idea of the whole, there was a
seminality and contracted Adam in the rib, which by the information of a soul,
was individuated into Eve. And therefore this conceit applied unto the orginall
of man, and the beginning of the world, is more justly appropriable unto its
end; for then indeed men shall rise out of the earth, the graves shall shoot up
their concealed seeds, and in that great Au^umne men shall spring up, and awake
from their Chaos again.

Others have been so blind in deducing the original of things, or delivering
their own beginnings, that when it has fallen into controversy they have not
recurred unto Chronology or the records of time, but betaken themselves unto
probabilities, and the conjecturalities of Philosophy. Thus when the two
ancient Nations, that is, Aegyprians and Scythians contended for antiquity, the
Egyptians (as Diodorus and Justine relate) pleaded their antiquity from the
fertility of their soil, inferring that men there first inhabited, where they
were with most facility sustained, and such a land did they conceive was Egypt.

The Scythians although a cold and heavier Nation urged more acutely, deducing
their arguments from the two active elements and principles of all things Fire
and Water; for if of all things there was first an union, and that afterward
fire overruled the rest, surely that part of earth which was coldest would
first get free, and afford a place of habitation: But if all the earth were
first involved in water, those parts would surely first appear, which were
most high, and of most elevated situation, and such was (...): These reasons
carried indeed the antiquity from the Aegyptian^, but confirmed it not in the
Scythians; for as Herodotus relates from Pargitants their first King unto
Darius, they accounted but two thousa^^ years.

As for the Egyptians they inv^^^ted another way of trial, for as the same
Author relates, Psamnitichus their King attempted this decision by a new and
unknown experiment, bringing up two Infants with goats, and where they never
heard the voice of man; concluding that to be the ancientest Nation, whose
language they should first deliver; but herein he forgot that speech was by
instruction not instinct, by imitation, nor by nature; that men do speak in
some kind but like Parrets, and as they are instructed, that is in simple
terms and words, expressing the open notions of things, which the second act
of reason compoundeth into propositions, and the last into syllogisms and forms
of ratiocination. And howsoever the account of Man^th the Egyptian Priest run
very high, and it be evident that Miz^aim peopled that Country, whose name with
the Hebrews it bears unto this day; and there be many things of great
antiquity related in holy Scripture, yet was their exact account not very
ancient; for P^olomy their Countryman begins his Astronomicall compute no
higher then Nabonasser, who is conceived by some the same with Salmanasser: As
for the argument deduced from the ^^rtility of the soil, duly enquired, it
rather overthrows then promoteth their antiquity; for that Country whose
fertility, they so advance, was in elde^ and ancient times no firm or open
la^d, but some vast lake or part o^ the Sea, and bec^me gained ground by the
mud and limous matter brought down by the river Nilus, which settled by degrees
into a firm land; according as is expressed by Strabo, and more at large by
Herodotus in his Enterpe, both from the Egyptian tradition and probable
inducements from reason, called therefore fluvii donum, an accession of the
earth or tract of land acquired by the river.

Lastly, some indeed there are, who have kept records of time, and that of a
considerable duration, yet do the exactest thereof afford no satisfaction
concerning the beginning of the world, or any way point out the time of its
creation. The most authentic records and best approved antiquity are those of
the Chaldeans; yet in the time of Alexander the Great, they attained not so
high as the ^loud: For as Simplicius relates, Aristotle required of
Calisthenes who accompain^d that Worthy in his expedition, that at his arrive
at Babylon, he would enquire of the antiquity of their Records, and those upon
compute he found to amount unto 1903. years, which account notwithstanding
arises no higher then 95. years after the flood. The Arcadians I confess,
were esteemed of great Antiquity, and it was usually said they were before the
Moon, according unto that of Seneca, Sydus post veteres Arcades editum; and
that of Ovid, Luna gens prior illa fuit: But this as Censorinus obse^veth, must
not be taken grossly, as though they were existent before that Luminary, but
were so esteemed because they observed a set course of year, before the Greeks
conformed their year unto the course and motion of the Moon.

Thus the heathens affording no satisfaction herein, they are most likely to
manifest this truth who have been acquainted with holy Scripture, and the
sacred Chronology delivered by Moses, who distinctly sets down this account,
computing by certain intervalls, by memorable Ara's, Epoche's, or terms of
time: A^ from the creation unto the flood, from thence unto Abraham, from
Abraham unto the departure from Egypt, etc. Now in this number have only been
Samaritans, Jews, and Christians: for the Jews they agree not in their
accounts, as Bodine in his method of history has observed out of Baal Seder,
Rabbi Nassom, Gersom, and others, in whose compute the age of the world is not
yet 5400. years; and the same is more evidently observable from two most
learned Jews, Philo and Josephus, who very much differ in the accounts of
time, and variously sum up these intervalls assented unto by all. Thus Philo
from the departure out of Egypt unto the building of the Temple accounts but
920. years, but Josephus sets down 1062. Philo from the building of the
Temple to its destruction 440, Josephus 470, Philo from the creation to the
destruction of the Temple 3373; but Josephus 3513, Philo from the deluge to the
destruction of the Temple 1718, but Josephus 1913, in which computes there are
manifest disparities, and such as much divide the concordance and harmony of
times.

But for the Samaritans, their account is different from these or any others;
for they account from the Creation to the Deluge, but 1302 years, which
comes to pass upon the different accoun^ of the ages of the Patriarks set
down when they begat children. For whereas the Hebrew, Greek and Latin texts
account Jared 162 when he begat Enoch, they account but 62, and so in others.
Now the Samaritans were no incompetent judges of times and the Chronology
thereof* for they embraced the five books of Moses, and, it seems, preserved
the Text with far more integrity then the Jews; who as Tertullian, Chrysostom,
and others observe did several ways corrupt the same especially in passages
concerning the prophesies of Christ, so that as Jerome professes, in his
translation he was feign sometime to relieve himself by the Samaritane
Pentateuch, as amongst others in that Text, Deuteronomy 27, Maledictus omnis
qui non permans^rit in omnibus quae scripta sunt in libro Legis. From hence St.
Paul, Gal. 3. infers there is no justification by the Law, and urges the
Text according to the Septuagint. Now the Jews to afford a latitude unto them
selves in their copies expunged the word (...) or Syncategorematicall term
omnis, wherein lies the strength of the Law, and of the Apostles argument; but
the Samaritan Bible retained it right, and answerable unto what the Apostle had
urged.

As for Christians from whom we should expect the exactest and most concurring
account, there is also in them a manifest disagreement, and such as is not
easily reconciled. For first, the Latins accord not in their account; for to
omit the calculation of the Ancients, of Austin, Bid, and others, the
Chronology of the Modernes does manifestly dissent; for Josephus Scaliger, whom
Helvicus seems to follow, accounts the Creation in 765. of the Julian period;
and from thence unto the nativity of our Savior allows 3947. years; But
Dionysius Petavius a learned Chronologer dissenteth from this compute almost
40. years, placing the Creation in the 730. of the Julian period, and from
thence unto the Incarnation accounts 3983. years.

For the Greeks, their accounts are more anomalous; for if we recurre unto
ancient computes, we shall find that Clemens Alexandrinus an ancient Father
and preceptor unto Origin, accounted from the Creation unto our Savior, 5664.
years; for in the first of his Stromaticks, he collecteth the time from Adam
unto the death of Commodus to be 5858. years; now the death of Commodus he
places in the year after Christ 194. which number deducted from the former
there remains 5664. Theophilus Bishop of Antioch accounts unto the nativity
of Christ 5515. deduceable from the like way of compute, for in his first book
ad Antolycum, he accounts from Adam unto Aurelius Verus 5695. years; now
that Emperor dyed in the year of our Lord 180. which deducted from the former
sum there remains 5515. Julius Africanus an ancient Chronologer, accounts
somewhat less, that is, 5500. Eusebius Orosius and others dissent not much
from this, but all exceed five thousand.

The latter compute of the Greeks, as Petavius observes, has been reduced
unto two or three accounts. The first account unto our Savior 5501. and this
has been observed by Nicephorus, Theophanes, and Maximus; the other accounts
5509. And this of all at present is most generally received by the Church of
Constantinople, observed also by the Moscovite, as I have seen in the date of
the Emperors letters, wherein this year of ours 1645. is from the year of
the world 7154. which does exactly agree unto this last account 5509. for if
unto that sum be added 1645. the product will be 7154. by this Chronology are
many Greek Authors to be understood; and thus is Martinus Crusius to be made
out, when in his Turcograecian history he delivers, the City of Constantinople
was taken by the Turks in the year (...) that is, 6961. and thus unto these
Chronologists, the Prophecy of Elias the Rabbin, so much in request with the
Jews, and in some credit also with Christians, that the world should last but
six thousand years, unto these, I say, it has bee^e long and out of memory
disprov^l for the ^a^^aticall and 7000. year wherein the world should (...) on
the seventh day) unto them is long ago (...), they are proceeding in the eight
thousand year, and numbers (...) days which men have made the types and
shadows of (...) certainly what Marcus Leo the Jew conceaveth of the end of the
heav^ns, exceeds the account of all that ever shall be; for though (...)
con^eaveth the Elementall (...) shall end in the seventh or (...) millenary,
yet cannot he opinion the heavens and more durable part of the Creation shall
perish before seen times seven, or 49. that is, the Quadrant of the other
seven, and perfect Jubilie of thousands.

And thus may we observe the difference and wide dissent of men's (...), and
there by the great incertainty in this establishment. The (...) only
dissenting from the Samaritans, the Latins from (...) every one from another;
insomuch that all can be in ^he right it is impossible; that any one is so, not
with assurance de^^^minable; and therefore as Petavius confesses, to effect
the same exactly without inspiration it is impossible, and beyond the (...) but
God himself: And therefore also what satisfaction (...) obtained from those
violent disputes, and eager enqui^ers in what day of the month the world began,
either of March or October, (...) what face or position of the Moon, whether
at the prime (...), let our second and serious considerations (...).

(...) the reason and ground of this dissent, is the ^^happy (...) the Greek
and ^ebrew editions of the Bible, for unto these two Languages have all
Translations conformed; the holy Scripture being first delivered in Hebrew, and
first translated into Greek. For the Hebrew, it is incontrove^tibly the
primitive and surest text to rely on, and to preserve the same entire and
incorrupt, there has been used the most apparent caution humanity could
invent; For as R. Ben. Maimon has declared, if in the copying thereof one
letter were written twice, or if one letter but touched another, that copy was
not admitted into their Synagogues, but only allowable to be read in Schools,
and private families; neither were they careful only in the exact number of
their sections of the Law, but had also the curiosity to (...) every word, and
affixed the account unto their several books: Notwithstanding all which,
diverse corruptions e^sued, and several depravations slipped in, arising from
many and manifest grounds, as has been ^xactly noted by Morinus in his
preface unto the Septuagint.

As for the Septuagint, it is the first and most ancient Translation recorded,
and of greater Antiquity then is the Chaldie version, occasioned by the request
of P^olo^eus Philadelphus King of A^gypt, for the richest ornament of his
memorable Library; unto whom the high Priest addressed six Jews out of every
Tribe, which amounts unto 72. and by these was effected that Translation we
usually term the Septuagint, or Translation of seventy; which name however it
obtain from the number of their persons, yet in respect of one common Spirit,
it was the Translation but as it were of one man. For, as the story relates,
although they were set apart and severed from each other, yet were their
Translations found to agree in every point, according as is related by Philo
and Josephus, although we find not the same in Aristeus, who has expressly
treated thereof.

This Translation in ancient times was of great authority: By this many of the
Heathens received some notions of the Creation and the mighty works of God;
This in express terms is often followed by the Evangelists, by the Apostles,
and by our Savior himself in the quotations of the Old Testament. This for
many years was used by the Jews themselves, that is, such as did Hellenize and
dispersedly dwelt out of Palestine with the Greeks; And this also the
succeeding Christians and ancient Fathers observed, although there succeeded
other Greek versions, that is, of Aquila, Theodosius and Symmachus; for the
Latin translation of Jerome, called now the Vulger, was about 800. years
after, although we shall not deny there was a Latin translation before, called
the Italick version, and Austin forbad that of Jerome to be used in his Diocese.

Whatsoever Interpretations there have been since, have been especially
effected with reference unto these, that is, the Greek and Hebrew text; the
Translators sometimes following the one, sometimes adhering unto the other,
according as they found them consonant unto truth, or most correspondent unto
the rules of faith. Now however it comes to pass these two are very
different in the enumeration of Genealogies, and particular accounts of time;
for in the second intervall, that is between the flood and Abraham, there is
by the S^ptuagint introduced one Cainan to be the son of Arphaxad and father of
Salah; whereas in the Hebrew there is no mention of such a person, but Arphaxad
is set down to be the father of Salah. But in the first intervall, that is,
from the Creation unto the flood, their disa^reement is more considerable, for
therein the Greek exceeds the Hebrew, and common account almost 600. years;
and it is indeed a thing not very strange, to be at the difference of a third
part, in so large and collective an account, if we consider how differently
they are set forth in minor and less mistakeable numbers. So in the Prophecy
of Jonah, both in the Hebrew and Latin text, it is said, Yet forty days and
Ninivy shall be overthrown: But the Septuagint says plainly, and that in
letters at length, (...), that is, yet three days and Ninivy shall be
destroyed; which is a difference not newly crept in, but an observat^on very
ancient, discussed by Austin, and Theodoret, and was conceived an error
committed by the Scribe. Men therefore have raised different computes of time,
according as they have followed these different texts, and so have left the
history of times far more perplexed then Chronology has reduced.

Again, however the texts were plain, and might in their numerations agree,
yet were there no small difficulty to set down a determinable Chronology, or
establish from hence any sixed point of time; for the doubts concerning the
time of the Judges are inexplicable, that of the Reigns and succession of
Kings is as perplexed, it being uncertain whether the years both of their
lives and reigns ought to be taken as complete, or in their beginning and but
current accounts. And thus also it is not unreasonable to make some doubt
whether in the first Ages, and long lives of our fathers, Moses does not
sometime account by full and round numbers, whereas strictly taken they might
be some few years above or under; As in the age of Noah, it is delivered to be
just ^ive hundred when he begat Sem, whereas perhaps he might be somewhat
above or below that ^ound and complete number, for the same way of speech is
usual in diverse other expressions: Thus do we say the Septuagint, and using
the full and articulate number, do write the Translation of Seventy, whereas
we have shown before, the precise number was seventy two; so is it said that
Christ was three days in the grave, according to that of Matthew, as Jonas was
three days and three nights in the Whales belly, so shall the Son of man be
three days and three nights in the heart of the earth: which notwithstanding
must be taken Synechdochically, or by understanding a part for an whole day;
for he remained but two nights in the grave, for he was buried in the
afternoon of the first day, and arose very early in the morning on the third;
that is, he was interred in the Eve of the Sabbath, and arose the morning
after it.

Moreover, although the number of years be determined and rightly understood,
there be without doubt a certain truth herein, yet the text speaking obscurely
or dubiously, there is often times no slender difficulty at what point to begin
or terminate the account. So when it is said, Exodus 12. the sojourning of the
children of Israel who dwelt in Egypt was 430. years, it cannot be taken
strictly, and from their first arivall into Egypt, for their habitation in
that land was far less; but the account must begin from the covenant of God
with Abhraham, and must also comprehend their sojourne in the land of Canaan,
according as is expressed, Gal. 3. The Covenant that was con^irmed before of
God in Christ, the Law which was 430. years after cannot disanull. Thus has
it also happened in the account of the 70. years of their captivity, according
to that of Jeremy, chap. 20. This whole land shall be a desolation, and these
nations shall serve the King of Babylon 70. years; now where to begin, or end
this compute arises no small difficulty: for there were three remarkable
captivities, and deportations of the Jews; the first was in the third or
fourth year of Joachim, and first of Nabuchodonozer, when Daniel was carried
away; the second in the reign of Jeconiah, and the eighth year of the same
King; the third and most deploreable in the reign of Zedechias, and in the
nineteenth year of Nabuchodonozer, whereat both the Temple and City were
burned. Now such is the different conceit of these times, that men have
computed from all; but the probablest account and most concordant* unto the
intention of Jeremy, is from the first of Nabuchodonozer unto the first of King
Cyrus over Babylon; although the Prophet Zachary, chap. 1. 12. accounts from
the last. O Lord of hosts, How long! Will thou not have mercy on Jerusalem,
against which thou have had indignation these threescore and ten years? for he
makes this expostulation in the second year of Darius Histaspes, wherein he
prophesied, which is about eighteen years in account after the other.

Thus also although there be a certain truth therein, yet is there no easy
doubt concerning the seventie weeks, or seventie times seven years of Daniel;
whether they have reference unto the nativitie or passion of our Savior, and
especially from whence, or what point of time they are to be computed; for thus
is it delivered by the angel Gabriel: Seventy weeks are determined upon thy
people; and again in the following verse: Know therefore and understand, that
from the going forth of the Commandment to restore and to build Jerusalem unto
the Messiah the Prince, shall be seven weeks, and threescore and two weeks,
the street shall be built again, and the wall even in troublesome times; and
after threescore and two weeks shall Messiah be cut off; Now the going out of
the Commandment to build the City, being the point from whence to compute,
there is no slender controversy when to begin; for there are no less then
four several Edicts to this effect; the one in the first year of Cyrus, the
other in the second of Da^ius, the third and fourth in the seventh, and in the
twentieth of Artaxerxes Longimanus; although as Petavius accounts it best,
accords unto the twenty year of Artaxerxes, from whence Nehemiah deriveth
his Commission: Now that computes are made incertainely with reference unto
Christ, it is no wonder, since I perceive the time of his Nativitie is in
controversy, and no less his age at his Passion: For Clemens and Tertullian
conceive he suffered at thirty, but Irenaeus a Father nearer his time, is
further off in his account, that is, between forty and fifty.

Longomontanus a late Astronomer, endeavors to discover this secret from
Astronomicall grounds, that is, the Apogeum of the Sun, conceiving the
Excentricity invariable, and the Apogeum yearly to move one scruple, two
seconds, fifty thirds, etc. Wherefore if in the time of Hipparchus, that is, in
the year of the Julian period 4557. it was in the fifth degree of Gemini, and
in the days of Tycho Brahe, that is, in the year of our Lord 1588. or of the
world 5554. the same was removed unto the fifth degree of Cancer; by the
proportion of its motion, it was at the creation first in the beginning of
Aries, and the Perigeum or nearest point in Libra. But this conceit how
ingenious or subtle soever is not of satisfaction; it being not determinable,
or yet agreed in what time precisely the Apogeum absolveth one degree, as
Pe^avius has also delivered in his fourth de Doctrina temporum.

Lastly, however these or other difficulties intervene, and that we cannot
satisfy our selves in the exact compute of time, yet may we notwithstanding
sit down with the common and usual account; nor are these differences
derogatorie unto the Advent or Passion of Christ, unto which indeed they all
do seem to point; for the Prophecies concerning our Savior, were
indefinitely delivered before that of Daniel; for so was that pronounced unto
Eve in Paradise, that after of Balaam, those of Isaiah and the Prophets, and
that memorable one of Jacob, the Scepter shall not depart from Israel until
Shilo come; which time notwithstanding it did not define at all. In what year
therefore soever, either from the destruction of the Temple, from the
reedifying thereof, from the Flood, or from the Creation he appeared, certain
it is, that in the fullness of time he came. When he therefore came is not so
considerable, as that he is come; in the one there is consolation, in the other
no satisfaction; The greater Quere is, when he will come again, and yet indeed
it is no Quere at all; for that is never to be known, and therefore vainly
enquired; it is a professed and authentic obscurity, unknown to all but to the
omniscience of the Almighty. Certainly the ends of all things are wrapped up in
the hands of God, he that undertakes the knowledge thereof forgets his own
beginning, and disclaimes his principles of earth; No man knows the end of the
world, nor assuredly of any thing in it: God sees it because unto his Eternity
it is present, he knows the ends of us, but not of himself, and because he
knows not this, he knows all things, and his knowledge is endless, even in
the object of himself.

CHAP. II.
Of men's Enquiries in what season or point of the Zodiac it began, that as
they are generally made they are in vain, and as perticularly uncertain.
COncerning the Seasons, that is, the quarters of the year, some are ready to
enquire, others to determine, in what season, whether in the Autumn, Spring,
Winter or Summer the world had its beginning. Wherein we cannot but affirm,
that as the question is generally, and in respect of the whole earth proposed,
it is most vainly, and with a manifest injury unto reason in any particular
determined, because when ever the world had its beginning it was created in all
these four. For, as we have else where delivered, whatsoever sign the Sun
possesses (whose recesse or vicinity de^ineth the quarters of the year) those
four seasons were all actually existent, it being the nature of that Luminary
to distingu^sh the several seasons of the year, all which it makes at one
time in the whole earth, and successively in any part thereof. Thus if we
suppose the Sun created in Libra, in which sign unto some it makes Autumn,
at the same time it had been winter unto the Northern-pole; for unto them at
that time the Sun begins to be invisible, and to show it self again unto
the pole of the South, unto the position of a right Sphere, or directly under
the Equator, it had been Summer; for unto that situation the Sun is at that
time vertical: unto the latitude of Capricorn, or the Winter Solstice it had
been spring; for unto that position it had been in a middle point, and that of
ascent, or approximation; but unto the latitude of Cancer or the Summer
Solstice it had been Autumn; for then had it it been placed in a middle
point, and that of descent, or ^longation.

And if we shall take it literally what Moses described popularly, this was
also the constitution of the first day: for when it was evening unto one
longitude, it was morning unto another; when night unto one, day unto another;
and therefore that question whether our Savior shall come again in the
twilight, as is conceived he arose, or whether he shall come upon us in the
night, according to the comparison of a thief, or the Jewish tradition, that
he will come about the time of their departure our of Egypt, when they eat
the Passover, and the Angel passed by the doors of their houses; this Quere
I say needs not further dispute, for if the earth be almost every where
inhabited, and his coming (as Divinity affi^meth) must needs be unto all, then
must the time of his appearance be both in the day and night: For if unto
Jerusalem, or what part of the world soever he shall appear in the night, at
^he same time unto the Antipodes it must be day, if twilight unto them, broad
day unto the Indians; if noone unto them, yet night unto the Americans; and so
with variety according unto various habitations, or different positions of the
Sphere, as will be easily conceived by those who understand the affections of
different habitations, and the conditions of Antaeci, Perieci, and Antipodes;
and so although he appear in the night, yet may the day of Judgment or
Doomesday well retain that name; for that implies one revolution of the Sun,
which makes the (...), that is, the day and night, and that one natural day:
and yet to speak strictly, if (as the Apostle affirms) we shall be changed
in the twinkling of an eye, (and as the Schools determine) the destruction of
the world shall not be successive but in an instant, we cannot properly apply
thereto the usual distinctions of time, calling that twelve hours, which
admits not the parts thereof, or use at all the name of time, when indeed the
nature thereof shall perish.

But if the enquiry be made unto a particular place, and the question
determined unto some certain Meridian; as namely, unto Mesopotamia, wherein
the seat of Paradise is presumed, the Quaery becomes more seasonable, and is
indeed in nature also determinable; yet positively to define that season, there
is I conceive no slender difficulty; for some contend that it began in the
Spring, as beside Eusebius, Ambrose, Bid, and Theodoret, some few years past
Henrico Philippi in his Chronology of the Scripture: Others are altogether for
Autumn; and from hence do our Chronologers commence their compute, as may be
observed in Helvicus, Jos. Scaliger, Calvisius and Petavius.

CHAP. III.
Of the Divisions of the seasons and four quarters of the year, according
unto Astronomers and Physicians, that the common compute of the Anci^nts, and
which is still retained by some is very questionable.
AS for the divisions of the year, and the quartering out this remarkable
standard of time, there have passed especially two distinctions; the first in
frequent use with Astronomers, according to the cardinal intersections of the
Zodiac, that is the two Aequinoctials and both the Solsticial points; defining
that time to be the spring of the year, wherein the Sun does pass from the
Aequinox of Aries unto the Solstice of Cancer; the time between the Solstice
and the Aequin^x of Libra, Summer; from thence unto the Solstice of Capric^^^,
Autumn; and from thence unto the Aequinox of Aries again Wint^^. Now this
division although it be regular and equal, is not universal; for it includes
not those latitudes, which have the seasons of the year double; as have the
Inhabitants under the Equator, or else between the Tropicks; for unto them the
Sun is vertical twice a year, making two distinct Summers in the different
points of verticallity. So unto those which live under the Equator, when the
Sun is in the Aequinox it is Summer, in which points it makes Spring or
Autumn unto us; and unto them it is also Winter when the Sun is in either
Tropic; whereas unto us it makes always Summer in the one: And the like will
happen unto those habitations, which are between the Tropicks, and the Equator.

A second and more sensible division there is observed by Hippocrates, and most
of the ancient Greeks, according to the rising and setting of diverse stars,
dividing the year, and establishing the account of seasons from usual
alterations, and sensible mutations in the air, discovered upon the rising and
setting of those stars; accounting the Spring from the Aequinoxiall point of
Aries, from the rising of the Pleiades, or the several stars on the back of
Taurus, the Summer, from the rising of Arcturus, a star between the thighs
of Boots, Autumn, and from the setting of the Pleiades, Winter: of these
divisions because they were unequal they were feign to subdivide the two
larger portions, that is of the Summer and Winter quarters; the first part of
the Summer they named (...), the second unto the arising of the Dog Star,
(...), from thence untothe setting of Arcturus; (...) the Winter they divided
also into three parts, the sirst pare, or that of seed time they named (...),
the middle or proper Winter, (...), the last which was their planting or
grasing time (...); this way of division was in former ages received, is very
often mentioned in Poets, translated from one Nation to another, from the
Greeks unto the Latins, as is received by good Authors, and delivered by
Physicians, even unto our times.

Now of these two, although the first in some latitude may be retained, yet is
not the other in any to be admitted: For in regard of time (as we declare in
the Chap. of canicular days) the stars do vary their longitudes, and
consequently the times of their ascension and discention; That star which is
the term of numeration or point, from whence we commence the account, altering
his site and longitude in process of time, and removing from West to East,
almost one degree in the space of 72 years; so that the same star, since the
age of Hippocrates who used this account, is removed in consequentia about 27
degrees; which difference of their longitudes, does much diversifie the times
of their ascents, and rendereth the account unstable which shall proceed
thereby.

Again, in regard of different latitudes, this cannot be a settled rule or
reasonably applied unto many Nations; for whereas the setting of the Pleiades
or seven stars is designed the term of Autumn, and the beginning of Winter;
unto some latitudes these stars do never set, as unto all beyond 67 degrees;
and if in several and far distant latitudes we observe the same star as a
common term of account unto both, we shall fall upon an unexpected, but an
unsufferable absurdity; and by the same account it will be Summer unto us in
the North, before it be so unto those, which unto us are Southward, and many
degrees approaching nearer the Sun. For if we consult the doctrine of the
sphere, and observe the ascension of the Pleiades, which makes the beginning
of Summer, we shall discover that in the latitude of 40, these stars arise in
the 16 degree of Taurus; but in the latitude of 50 they ascend in the eleventh
degree of the same sign, that is 5 day^^ sooner; so shall it be S^mmer unto
London before it be unto Toledo, and begin to scortch in England, before it
grow hot in Spain.

This is therefore no general way of compute, nor reasonable to be derived
from one Nation unto another, the defect of which consideration has effected
diverse errors in Latin Poets, translating these expressions from the Greeks,
and many difficulties even in the Greeks themselves; which living in diverse
latitudes, observed yet the same compute; so that to make them out, we are
feign to use distinctions, sometime computing cosmically what they intended
heliacally, and sometime in the same expression the rising heliacally, the
setting cosmically; otherwise it will be hardly made out, what is delivered by
approved Authors* and is an observation very considerable unto those which meet
with such expressions in ancient Writers, as they are very frequent in the
Poets of elder times, especially Hesiod, Aratus, Virgil, Ovid, and M^nilius,
and the Authors Geoponicall, or which have ^reated de re Rustica, as
Constantine, Marcus Cato, Columella, Pallad^^^s and Varro.

L^stly, the absurdity in making common unto many Nations those consi^erations,
whose verity is but particular unto some, will more evidently appear, if we
examine the rules and precepts of some one clymate, and fall upon consideration
with what incongruity they are transferable unto others; Thus is it advised by
Hesiod Pleiadibus Atlante natis orientibus
Incipe messem, Arationem vero occidentibus:
implying hereby the Helia^^^ (...) and cosmicall descent of those stars. Now
herein he sets down a precept to begin harvest at the arise of the
Pleiades, which in his time was in the beginning of May. This indeed was
consonant unto the clyme wherein he lived, and their harvest began about that
season, but is not applyable unto our own; for therein we are so far from
expecting an harvest, that our Barley seed is not ended: Again, correspondent
unto the precept of Hesiod, Virgil affords another -- Ante tibi e^ae
Atlantides abscondautur,
Debita quam sulcis committas semina.
Understanding hereby their Cosmicall descent, or their setting when the Sun
arises, and not their Heliacall obscuration, or their inclusion in the luster
of the Sun, as Servius upon this place would have it; for at that time these
stars are many signs removed from that luminary. Now herein he strictly
delivers a precept, not to begin to sow before the setting of these
stars; which notwithstanding without an injury to agriculture, cannot be
observed in England; for they set unto us about the 12 of November, when our
seed time is almost ended.

And this diversity of clyme and observations Caelestiall, precisely observed
unto certain stars and months, has not only overthrown the deductions of
one Nation to another, but has perturbed the observation of festivities and
statary solemnities, even with the Jews themselves: for unto them it was
commanded that at their entrance into the land of Canaan, in the fourteenth of
the first month, that is Abib or Nisan which is Spring with us, they should
observe the celebration of the Passover; and on the morrow after, which is the
fifteenth day of the feast of unleavened bread; and in the sixteenth of the
same month, that they should offer the first sheafe of the harvest. Now all
this was feasible and of an easy possibility in the land of Canaan, or
latitude of Jerusalem; for so is it observed by several Authors in later
times, and is also testified by holy Scripture in times very far before; Josh.
3.
for so when the children of Israel passed the river Jordan, it is delivered by
way of Parenthesis, that the river overfloweth its banks in the time of
harvest, which is conceived the time wherein they passed, and chap. 5. it is
after delivered, that in the fourteenth day they celebrated the Passover,
which according to the Law of Moses was to be observed in the first month, or
month of Abib.

And therefore it is no wonder, nor any Paradox what is related by Luke, that
the Disciples upon the Deuteroproton, as they passed by, plucked the ears of
corn; for the Deuteroproton or second first Sabbath, was the first Sabbath
after the deutera or second of the Passover, which was the sixteenth of Nisan
or Abib; and this is also evidenced from the receiv^d construction of the first
and latter rain, delivered Deuteronomy. 11. I will give you the rain of your land in
his due season, the first rain and the latter rain; for the first rayn fell
upon the seed time about October, and was to make the seed to root, the latter
was to fill the car, and fell in Abib, or March the first month; according as
is expressed Joel 2. And he will cause to come down for you the rain, the
^ormer rain, and the latter rain in the first month, that is the month of
Abib wherein the Passover was observed. This was the Law of Moses, and this in
the land of Canaan was well observed according to the first institution; but
since their dispersion and habitation in Countries, whose constitutions admit
not such tempestivity of harvest, and many not before the latter end of Summer,
notwithstanding the advantage of their Lunary account, and intercalary month,
Veader affixed unto the beginning of the year, there will be found a great
disparity in their observations, nor can they strictly and at the same season
with their forefathers observe the commands of their God.

To add yet further, those Geoponicall rules and precepts of Agriculture which
are delivered by diverse Authors, are not to be generally received, but
respectively unde^stood unto clymes wherein they are determined. For whereas
one advises to sow this or that at one season, a second to set this or that at
another, it must be conceived relatively, and every Nation must have its
Country Farm; for herein we may observe a manifest and visible difference, not
only in the seasons of harvest, but in the grains themselves; for with us
Barley harvest is made after Wheat harvest, but with the Israelites and
Egyptians it was otherwise; and so is it expressed by way of priority, Ruth
the 2. So Ruth kept fast by the maidens of Boaz to gleane unto the end of
Barley harvest and of Wheat harvest; which in the plague of hayle in Egypt is
more plainly delivered Exodus 9. And the Flax and the Barley were smitten, for
the Barley was in the ear and the Flax was bolled, but the Wheat and the Rye
were not smitton, for they were not grown up.

And thus we see the account established upon the arise or descent of the
stars can be no reasonable rule unto distant Nations at all, and by reason of
their retrogression but temporary unto any one; nor must these respective
expressions be entertained in absolute considerations; for so distinct is the
relation, and so artificial the habitude of this inferior globe unto the
superior, and even of one thing in each unto the other: that general rules
are dangerous, and applications most safe that run with security of
circumstance, which rightly to effect is beyond the subtilty of sense, and
requires the artifice of reason.

CHAP. IV.
Of some computation of days and diductions of one part of the year unto
another.
FOurthly, there are certain vulgar opinions concerning days of the year and
conclusions popularly deduced from certain days of the month; men commonly
believing the days increase and decrease equally in the whole year, which
notwithstanding is very repugnant unto truth; For they increase in the month of
March, almost as much as in the two months of January and February; and
decrease as much in September, as they do in July and August: For indeed the
days increase or decrease according to the declina^ion of the Sun; that is,
its deviation Northward or Southward from the Equator. Now this digression is
not equal, but near the Aequinoxiall intersections, it is right and greater,
near the Solstices more oblique and lesser. So from the eleventh of March the
vernall Aequinox unto the eleventh of April the Sun decl^neth to the North
twelve degrees; from the eleventh of April unto the eleventh of May but 8,
from thence unto the 15 of June, or the Summer Solstice but 3 and a half; all
which make 23 degrees and an half, the greatest declination of the Sun.

And this inequality in the declination of the Sun in the Zodiac or line of
life, is correspondent unto the growth or declination of man; for setting out
from our infancy we increase not equally, or regularly attain to our state or
perfection; nor when we descend from our state, and tend unto the earth again
is our declination equal, or carries us with even paces unto the grave. For,
as Hippocrates affirms, a man is hottest in the first day of his life, and
coldest in the last; his natural heat sets forth most vigorously at first,
and declineth most sensibly at last. And so though the growth of man end not
perhaps until 21. yet in his stature more advanced in the first septe^ary then
in the second, and in the second, more then in the third, and more indeed in
the first seven years, then in the fourteen succeeding: for, what stature we
attain unto at seven years, we do sometimes but double, most times come short
at one and twenty. And so do we decline again; for in the latter age upon the
Tropic and first descension from our solstice, we are scarce sensible of
declination; but declining further, our decrement accelerates, we set apace,
and in our last days precipitate into our graves. And thus are also our
progressions in the womb, that is, our formation, motion, our birth or
exclusion. For our formation is quickly effected, our motion appears later,
and our exclusion very long after: if that be true which Hippocrates and
Avicenna have declared, that the time of our motion is double unto that of
formation, and that of exclusion treble unto that of motion; as if the Infant
be formed at 35. days, it moves at 70. and is borne the 210. day, that is,
the seventh month; or if it receaves not formation before 45. days, it moves
the 90. day, and is excluded in 270. that is, the 9. month.

There are also certain popular prognostics drawn from festivals in the
Calendar, and conceaved opinions of certain days in months, so is there a
general tradition in most parts of Europe, that infers the coldness of
succeeding winter from the shining of the Sun upon Candlemas day, according to
the proverbiall distich. -- Si Sol splendescat Mari^ puri^icante,
Major erit glacies post festum quam fuit ante.
So is it usual amongst us to qualify and conditionate the twelve months of
the year, answerably unto the temper of the twelve days in Christmasse, and
to ascribe unto March certain borrowed days from April; all which men seem
to believe upon annual experience of their own, and the received traditions of
their forefathers.

Now it is manifest, and most men likewise know, that the Calenders of these
computers, and the accounts of these days are very different; the Greeks
dissenting from the Latins, and the Latins from each other; the one observing
the Julian or ancient account, as great Britain and part of Germany; the other
adhering to the Gregorian or new account, as Italy, France, Spain, and the
united Provinces of the Netherlands. Now this latter account by ten days at
least anticipateth the other; so that before the one begins the accout, the
other is past it; yet in these several calculations, the same events seem
true, and men with equal opinion of verity, expect and confess a confirmation
from them both. Whereby is evident the Oraculous authority of tradition, and
the easy seduction of men, neither enquiring into the verity of their
substance, nor reforming upon repugnance of circumstance.

And thus may diverse easily be mistaken who superstitiously observe certain
times, or set down unto themselves an observation of unfortunate months, or
days, or hours; As did the Egyptians, two in every month, and the Romans,
the days after the Nones, Ides, and Calends. And thus the Rules of Navigators
must often fail, setting down, as Rhodiginus observes, suspected and ominous
days, in every month, as the first and seventh of March, the fifth and six^ of
April, the sixth, the twelfth and fifteenth of February. For the accounts
hereof in these months are very different in our days, and were different with
several nations in Ages past; and yet how strictly soever the account be made,
and even by the self same Calender, yet is it p^ssible that Navigators may be
out. For so were the Hollanders, who p^ssing W^stward through fretum le Mayre,
and compassing the Globe, upon their return into their own Country, found
that they had lost a day. For if two men at the same time travel from the same
place, the one E^stward, the other Westward round about the earth, and meet in
the same place from when^e they first set forth; it will so ^all out, that he
which has moved Eastward against the diurnall motion of the Sun, by
anticipating daily something of its circle with his own motion, will gain
one day; but he that travelleth Westward, with the motion of the Sun, by
seconding its revolution, shall lose or come short a day; and therefore also
upon these grounds that D^los was seated in the middle of the earth, it was no
exact decision, because two Eagles let sly^ East and West by Jupiter, their
meeting fell out just in the Island Delos.

CHAP. V.
A Digression of the wisdom of God in the site and motion of the Sun.
HAving thus beheld the Ignorance of man in some things, his error and
blindness in others; that is, in the measure of duration both of years and
seasons, let us a while admire the Wisdom of God in this distinguisher of
times, and visible Deity, as some have termed it, the Sun; which though some
from its glory adore, and all for its benefits ad^ire, we shall advance from
other considerations, and such as illustrate the artifice of its Maker; nor do
we think we can excuse the duty of our knowledge, if we only bestow the
flourish of Poetry hereon, or those commendatory conceits which popularly set
forth the eminency of this creature, except we ascend unto subtiler
considerations, and such as rightly understood, convinsively declare the
wisdom of the Creator, which since a Spanish Physician has begun, we will
enlarge with our own deductions; and this we shall endeavor from two
considerations, that is, its proper situation, and wisely ordered motion.

And first, we cannot pass over his providence in that it moves at all; for,
had it stood still, and were it fixed like the earth, there had been then no
distinction of times, either of day or year, of Spring, of Autumn, of Summer,
or of Winter; for these seasons are defined by the motions of the Sun; when
that approaches nearest us, we call it Summer, when furthest off, Winter,
when in the middle spaces, Spring or Autumn; whereas remaining in one place
these distinctions had ceased, and consequently the generation of all things
depending on their vicissi^udes; making in one hemisphere a perpetual Summer,
in the other a deplorable and comfortless Winter, and thus had it also been
continual day unto some, and perpetual night unto others; for the day is
defined by the abode of the Sun above the Horizon, and the night by its
continuance below; so should we have needed another Sun, one to illustrate our
hemisphere, a second to enlighted the other, which inconvenience will ensue, in
what site soever we place it, whether in the poles, or the Equator, or
between them both; no sphericall body of what bigness soever illuminating the
whole sphere of another, although it illuminate something more then half of a
lesser, according unto the doctrine of the Opiticks.

His wisdom is again discernable not only in that it moves at all, and in
its bare motion, but wonderful in contriving the line of its revolution; which
from his artifice is so effected, that by a vicissitude in one body and light,
it suf^iceth the whole earth, affording thereby a possible or pleasurable
habitation in every part thereof; and that is the line Eclyptick, all which to
effect by any other circle it had been impossible. For first, if we imagine
the Sun to make his course out of the Eclyptick, and upon a line without any
obliquity, let it be conceaved within that Circle, that is, either on the
Equator, or else on either side (for, if we should place it either in the
Meridian or Colures, beside the subversion of its course from East to West,
there would ensue the like incommodities.) Now if we conceave the Sun to move
between the obliquity of this Eclyptick in a line upon one side of the
Equator, then would the Sun be visible but unto one pole, that is, the same
which was nearest unto it. So that unto the one it would be perpetual day,
unto the other perpetual night; the one would be oppressed with constant
heat, the other with unsufferable cold; and so the defect of alternation would
utterly impugn the generation of all things, which naturally require a
vicissitude of heat to their production, and no less to their increase and
conservation.

But if we conceive it to move in the Equator; first, unto a parallel sphere,
or such as have the pole for their Zenith, it would have made neither perfect
day nor night; for being in the Equator it would intersect their Horizon, and
be half above, and half beneath it; or rather it would have made perpe^uall
night to both: for though in regard of the rational Horizon, which bissecteth
the Globe into equal parts, the Sun in the Equator would intersect the
Horizon: yet in respect of the sensible Horizon (which is defined by the eye)
the Sun would be visible unto neither. For if as ocular witnesses report, and
some do also write, by reason of the connexity of the E^rth the eye of man
under the Equator cannot discover both the poles, neither would the eye under
the pole^ discover the Sun in the Equator. And thus would there nothing
^ructifie either near or under them, the Sun being Horizontall to the poles,
and of no considerable altitude unto parts a reasonable distance from them.
Again, unto a right sphere, or such as dwell under the Equator, although it
made a difference in day and night, yet would it not make any distinction of
seasons: for unto them it would be constant Summer, it being always vertical,
and never de^lecting from them: So had there been no fructification at all, and
the Countries subjected would be as inhabitable, as indeed antiquity conceived
them.

Lastly, it moving thus upon the Equator, unto what position soever, although
it had made a day, yet could it have made no year; for it could not have had
those two motions now ascribed unto it, that is, from E^st to West, whereby it
makes the day, and likewise from West to East, whereby the year is computed:
for according to Astronomy, the poles of the Equator are the same with those
of the Primum Mobile. Now it is impossible that on the same circle, having the
same poles, both these motions from opposite terms, should be at the same time
performed; all which is salved if we allow the Sun an obliquity in his
annual motion, and conceive him to move upon the poles of the Zodiac, distant
from these of the world 23 degrees and an half: And thus may we discern the
necessity of its obliquity, and how inconvenient its motion had been upon a
circle parallel to the Equator, or upon the Equator it self.

Now with what providence this obliquity is determined, we shall evidently
perceive upon the ensuing inconveniences from any deviation: for first, if its
obliquity had been less, as instead of twenty three degrees, twelve or the
half thereof, the vicissitude of seasons appointed for the generation of all
things, would surely have been too short; for different seasons would have
hudled upon each other, and unto some it had not been much better then if it
had moved on the Equator: but had the obliquity been greater then now it is,
as double or of 40. degrees, several parts of the earth had not been able to
endure the disproportionable differences of seasons, occasioned by the great
recesse, and distance of the Sun: for unto some habitations the Summer would
have been extreme hot, and the Winter extreme cold; likewise the Summer
temperate unto some, but excessive and in extremity unto others, as unto those
who should dwell under the Tropicke of Cancer, as then would do some part of
Spain, or ten degrees beyond, as Germany, and some part of England, who would
have Summers as now the Moors of Africa; for the Sun would sometime be
vertical unto them: but they would have Winters like those beyond the Articke
Circle, for in that season the Sun would be removed above 80 degrees from
them. Again, it would be temperate to some habitations in the Summer, but very
extreme in the Winter; temperate to those in two or three degrees beyond the
Artick Circle, as now it is unto us; for they would be equidistant from that
Tropic, even as we are from this at present; but the Winter would be extreme,
the Sun being removed above an hundred degrees, and so consequently would not
be visible in their Horizon; no position of sphere discovering any star
distant above 90 degrees, which is the distance of every Zenith from the
Horizon. And thus if the obliquity of this Circle had been less, the
vicissitude of seasons had been so small as not to be distinguished; if
greater, so large and disproportionable as not to be endured.

Now for its situation, although it held this Eclypticke line, yet had it been
seated in any other Orb, inconveniences would ensue of condition like the
former; for had it been placed in the lowest sphere, and where is now the
Moon, the year would have consisted but of one month; for in that space of
time it would have passed through every every part of the Eclyptick, so would
there have been no reasonable distinction of seasons required for the
generation and fructifying of all things; contrary seasons which destroy the
effects of one another, so suddenly succeeding; besides by this vicinity unto
the earth its heat had been intolerable: for if (as many affirm) there is a
different sense of heat from the different points of its proper orb, and that
in the Apogeum or highest point (which happens in Cancer) it is not so hot
under that Tropic, on this side the Equator, as unto the other side in the
Perigeum or lowest part of the eccentric (which happens in Capricornus)
surely being placed in an orb far lower, its heat would be unsufferable, nor
needed we a fable to set the world on fire.

But had it been placed in the highest Orb or that of the eight sphere, there
had been none but Platoes year, and a far less distinction of seasons; for
one year had then been many, and according unto the slow revolution of that
orb which absolveth not his course in many thousand years, no man had lived to
attain the account thereof. These are the inconveniences ensuing upon its
situation in the extreme orbs, and had it been placed in the middle orbs of
the Planets, there would have ensued absurdities of a middle and participating
nature.

Nor whether we adhere unto the hypothesis of Copernicus, affirming the Earth
to move, and the Sun to stand still; or whether we hold as some of late have
concluded from the spots in the Sun, which appear and dis-appeare again; that
besides the revolution it makes with its Orbs, it has also a dineticall
motion and rowles upon its own poles; whether I say we affirm these or no,
the illations before mentioned are not thereby infringed: we therefore conclude
this contemplation, and are not afraid to believe, it may be literally said of
the wisdom of God, what men will have figuratively spoken of the works of
Christ, that if the wonders thereof were duly described, the whole world, that
is all within the last circumference, would not contain them; for as his
wisdom is in^init, so cannot the due expressions thereof be finite, and if the
world comprise him not, neither can it comprehend the story of him.

CHAP. VI.
Concerning the vulgar opinion that the earth was slenderly peopled before the
Flood.
BEside the sl^nder consideration men of latter times do hold of the first
ages, it is commonly opinioned, and at first thought generally imagined, that
the Earth was thinly inhabited, at least not remotely planted before the Flood;
so that some conceiving it needless to be universal, have made the deluge
particular, and about those parts where Noah built his Arc; which opinion
because it is not only injurious to the Text, humane history, and common
reason, but also derogatory unto that great work of God, the universal
inundation, it will be needful to make some farther Inquisition; and (although
predetermined by opinion) whether many might not suffer in the first Flood, as
they shall in the last Flame, that is who knew not Adam nor his offense, and
many perish in the deluge, who never heard of Noah or the Arc of his
preservation.

Now for the true inquiry thereof, the means are as obscure as the matter,
which being naturally to be explored by History humane or divine, receives
thereby no small addition of obscurity: for as for humane relations, they are
so fabulous in Deucalions flood, that they are of little credit about Ogyges
and Noah's; for the Heathens (as Varro accounts) make three distinctions of
time: the first from the beginning of the World unto the general Deluge of
Ogyges they term, adelon; that is a time not much unlike that which was before
time, immanifest and unknown, because thereof there is almost nothing or very
obscurely delivered: for though diverse Authors have made some mention of the
Deluge, as Mane^hon the Egyptian Priest, Zenophon de aequivocis Fabius Pictor
de Aureo seculo, Mar. Cato de originibus and Archilochus the Greek, who
introduces also the testimony of Moses in his fragment de temporibus: yet have
they delivered no account of what preceded or went before it. Josephus I
confess in his Discourse against Appion induces the antiquity of the Jews
unto the flood, and before, from the testimony of humane W^iters; insisting
especially upon Maseas of Damascus, Jeronymus Aegyp^ius, and Berosus; and
confirming the long duration of their lives, not only from these, but the
authority of Hesiod, Erathius, Hellanicus and Agesilaus. Berosus the Chaldean
Priest, writes most plainly mentioning the City of Enos, the name of Noah and
his sons, the building of the Arc, and also the place of its landing. And
Diodorus Siculus has in his third book a passage which examined advances as
high as Adam; for the Chaldeans, says he, derive the original of their
Astronomy and letters forty three thousand years before the Monarchy of
Al^xander the Great; now the years whereby they computed the antiquity of
their letters being as Xenophon interprets to be accounted Lunary, the compu^e
will arise unto the time of Adam: for forty three thousand Lunary years make
about three thousand six hundred thirty fou^e years, which answers the
Chronology of time from the beginning of the world unto the reign of
Alexander, as Annius of Viterbo computeth in his Comment upon Berosus.

The second space or inte^vall of time is accounted from the Flood unto the
first Olympiade, that is the year of the world 3174. which extends unto the
days of Isaiah the Prophet, and some twenty years before the foundation of
Rome; this ^hey term mythicon or fabulous, because the account thereof
especially of the first part is fabulously or imper^ectly delivered: hereof
some things have been briefly related by the Authors above mentioned; more
particularly by D^res Phrygius, Dictys Cretensis, Herodotus, Diodorus Si^^lus,
and Trogus Pompeius; the most famous Greek Poets lived also in this Intervall,
as Orpheus, Linus, Musaeus, Homer, Hesiod; and herein are comprehended the
grounds and first inventions of Poetical fables, which were also taken up by
historical Writers, perturbing the Chaldean and Egyptian Records with
fabulous additions, and confounding their names and stories, with their own
inventions.

The third time succeeding until their present ages, they term histo^icon,
that is such wherein matters have been more truly histor^fied, and may
therefore be believed. Of these times also have written Herodotues, Thucydides,
Xenophon, Diodorus, and both of these and the other preceding such as have
delivered universal Histo^ie^ or Chronologies; as to omit Philo, whose
Narrations concern the Hebrews, Eusebius, Julius Africanus, Orosius, Ado of
Vienna, Marianus Scotus, Historia tripartita, Vrspergensis, Carrion, Pineda,
Salian, and with us Sir Walter Raleigh.

Now from the first hereof that most concerns us, we have little or no
assistance, the fragments and broken records hereof enforcing not at all our
purpose; and although some things not usually observed, may be from thence
collected, yet do they not advantage our discourse, nor any way make evident
the point in hand: For the second, though it directly concerns us not, yet in
regard of our last medium and some illustrations therein, we shall be
constrained to make some use thereof. As for the last it concerns us not at
all, for treating of times far below us, it can no way advantage us; and though
diverse in this last Age have also written of the first, as all that have
delivered the general accounts of time, yet are their Tractates little
auxiliary unto ours, nor afford us any light to detenebrate and clear this
truth.

As for holy Scripture and divine relation, there may also seem therein but
slender information, there being only left a brief narration hereof by Moses,
and such as afford no positive determination. For the text delivers but two
genealogies, that is, of Cain and Seth; in the line of Seth there are only ten
descents, in that of Cain but seven, and those in a right line with mention of
father and son, excepting that of Lamech, where is also mention of wives,
sons, and a daughter: notwithstanding if we shall seriously consider what is
delivered therein, and what is also deducible, it will be probably declared
what is by us intended, that is, the populous and ample habitation of the earth
before the flood, which we shall labor to induce not from postulates and
entreated Maxims, but undeniable principles declared in holy Scripture, that
is, the length of men's lives before the flood, and the large extent of time
from the creation thereunto.

We shall only first crave notice, that although in the relation of Moses
there be very few persons mentioned, yet are there many more to be presumed;
nor when the Scripture in the line of Seth nominats but ten persons, are they
to be conceaved all that were of this generation; the Scripture singly
delivering the holy line, wherein the world was to be preserved, first in Noah,
and afterward in our Savior. For in this line it is manifest there were many
more borne then are named; for it is said of them all, that they begat sons and
daughters. And whereas it is very late before it is said they begat those
persons which are named in the Scripture, the soonest at 65. it must not be
understood that they had none before, but not any in whom it pleased God the
holy line should be continued. And although that expression that they begat
sons and daughters be not determined to be, before or after the mention of
these, yet must it be before in some; for before it is said that Adam begat
Seth at the 130. year, it is plainly affirmed that Cain knew his wife, and had
a son, which must be one of the daughters of Adam, one of those whereof it is
after faid, he begat sons and daughters. And so for ought can be disproved
there might be more persons upon earth then are commonly supposed, when Cain
slew Abel, nor the fact so hainously to be aggravated in the circumstance of
the fourth person living. And whereas it is said upon the nativity of Seth, God
has appointed me another seed instead of Abel, it does not imply he had no
other all this while, but not any of that expectation, or appointed (as his
name implies) to make a progression in the holy line, in whom the world was to
be saved, and from whom he should be borne, that was mystically slain in Abel.

Now our first ground to induce the numerosity of people before the flood, is
the long duration of their lives beyond 7. 8. and 9. hundred years, which how
it conduces unto populosity we shall make but little doubt, if we consider
there are two maine causes of numerosity in any kind or species, that is, a
frequent and multiparous way of breeding, whereby they fill the world with
others, though they exist not long themselves; or a long duration and
subsistence, whereby they do not only replenish the world with a new
annumeration of others, but also maintain the former account in themselves.
From the first cause we may observe examples in creatures oviparous, as birds
and ^ishes; in vermiparous, as Flies, Locusts, and G^ats; in animals also
viviparous, as Swine and Conies; of the first there is a great example in the
heard of Swine in Galilee, although it were an unclean beast, and forbidden
unto the Jews. Of the other a very remarkable one in Atheneus, in the Isle
Astipalea, one of the Cyclades now called Stampalia, wherein from two that were
imported, the number so increased, that the Inhabitants were constrained to
have recourse unto the Oracle of Delphos, for an invention how to destroy them.

Others there are which make good the paucity of their breed with the length
and duration of their days, whereof there want not ex^amples in animals
uniparous: First, in bisulcous or cloven hooft, as Camels, and Beeves, whereof
there is above a million annually slain in England: It is also said of Job,
that he had a thousand yoke of Oxen, and six thousand Camels; and of the
children of Israel passing into the land of Canaan, that they took from the
Midianites threescore and ten thousand Beeves; and of the Army of Semiramis,
that there were therein 100000. Camels; for Solipes, or firm hoofed creatures,
as Horses, Asses, Mules, etc. they are also in mighty numbers; so is it
delivered that Job had a thousand she Asses: that the Midianites lost 61000.
Asses: for horses it is affirmed by Diodorus, that Ninus brought against the
Bactrians 280000. horses; after him Semiramis 500000. horses, and Chariots
100000. even in creatures sterill and such as do not generate, the length of
life conduces much unto the multiplicity of the species; for the number of
Mules which live far longer then their Dammes or Sires, in countries where
they are bred is very remarkable, and far more common then horses.

For animals multifidous, or such as are digitated or have several divisions
in their feet, there are but two that are uniparous, that is, Men and
Elephants; in whom though their generations be but single, they are
notwithstanding very numerous. The Elephant (as Aristotle affirms) carries
the young two years and conceaveth not again (as Edvardus Lopez affirms) in
many after; yet does their age requite this disadvantage, they living commonly
one hundred, sometime two hundred years. Now although they be unusual with us
in Europe, and altogether unknown unto America, yet in the two other parts
they are abundant, as evidently appears by the relation of Gorcias ab Horto,
Physician to the Viceroy at Goa; who in his Chapter de Ebore, relates that at
one venation the King of Sian took four thousand, and is of opinion they are
in other parts, in greater number then herds of Beeves in Europe. And though
this delivered from a Spaniard unacquainted with our Northern droves, may
seem very far to exceed, yet must we conceave them very numerous, if we
consider the number of teeth transported from one Country to another, they
having only two great teeth, and those not falling or renewing.

As for man the disadvantage in his single issue is the same with these, and in
the latenesse of his generation somewhat greater then any; yet in the
continual and not interrupted time thereof, and the extent of days, he
becomes at present, if not then any other species, at least more numerous then
these before mentioned. Now being thus numerous at present, and in the measure
of threescore, four score or an hundred years, if their days extended unto
six, seven, or eight hund^ed, their generations would be proportionably
multiplied; their times of generation being not only multiplied, but their
subsistence continued; for though the great Grandchild went on, the Tycho or
first Original would subsist and make one of the world, though he outlived all
the terms of consanguinity, and became a stranger unto his proper progeny. So
by compute of Scripture Adam lived unto the ninth generation, unto the days of
Lamech the father of Noah; Methuselah unto the year of the flood, and Noah was
contemporary unto all from Enoch unto Abraham. So that although some dyed, the
father beholding so many discents, the number of survivers must still be very
great; for if half the men were now alive, which lived in the last Century,
the earth would scarce con^aine their number; whereas in our abridged and
septuagesimall ages, it is very rare and deserves a distich to behold the
fourth generation: Xerxes complaint still remaining, and what he lamented in
his Army, being almost deplorable in the whole world, men seldom ariving unto
those years whereby Methuselah exceeded nine hundred, and what Adam came short
of a thousand, was defined long ago to be the age of man.

Now although the length of days conduces mainely unto the numerosity of
mankind, and it be manifest from Scripture they lived very long, yet is not
the period of their lives determinable, and some might be longer livers, then
we account that any were; For, (to omit that conceit of some, that Adam was the
oldest man, in as much as he is conceaved to be created in the maturity of
mankind, that is, at 60. (for in that age it is set down they begat children)
so that adding this number unto his 930. he was 21. years older then any of
his posterity) that even Methuselah was the longest lived of all the children
of Adam, we need not grant, nor is it definitively set down by Moses: Indeed
of those ten mentioned in Scripture with their several ages it must be true;
but whether those seven of the line of Caine and their progeny, or any of the
sons or daughters posterity after them outlived those, is not expressed in holy
Scripture; and it will seem more probable that of the line of Caine, some were
longer lived then any of Seth, if we concede that seven generations of the one
lived as long as nine of the other. As for what is commonly alleged, that God
would not permit the life of any unto a thousand, because (alluding unto that
of David) no man should live one day in the sight of the Lord, although it be
urged by diverse, yet is it me thinks an inference somewhat Rabbinicall, and not
of power to persuade a serious examinator.

Having thus made manifest in general how powerfully the length of lives
conduced unto populosity of those times, it will yet be easier acknowledged if
we descend to particularities, and consider how many in seven hundred years
might descend from one man; wherein considering the length of their days, we
may conceave the greatest number to have been alive together. And this that no
reasonable spirit may contradict, we will declare with manifest disadvantage;
for whereas the duration of the world unto the ^loud was above 1600. years, we
will make our compute in less then half that time; nor will we begin with the
first man, but allow the earth to be provided of women fit for marriage the
second or third first Centuries; and will only take as granted, that they
might beget children at sixty, and at an hundred years have twenty, allowing
for that number forty years. Nor will we herein single out Methuselah, or
account from the longest livers, but make choice of the sho^test of any we
find recorded in the Text, excepting Enoch; who after he had lived as many
years as there be days in the year, was translated at 365. And thus from one
stock of seven hundred years, multiplying still by twenty, we shall find the
product to be one thousand, three hundred forty seven millions, three hundred
sixty eight thousand, four hundred and twenty.

Centurie 1 20. 2 400. 3 800. 4 160,000. 5 3,200,000. 6 46,000,000. 7
1,280,000,000. The product 1,347,368,420

Now had we computed by Methuselah the sum had exceeded five hundred
thousand millions; as large a number from one stock as may be conceaved in
Europe; especially if in Constantinople the greatest City thereof, there be no
more then Botero accounts, seven hundred thousand souls, which duly
considered, we shall rather admire how the earth contained its inhabitants,
then doubt its inhabitation; and might conceave the Deluge not simply penal,
but in some way also necessary; as many have conceaved of translations, if Adam
had not sinned, and the race of man had remained upon earth immortal.

Now whereas some to make good their longevity, have imagined that the years
of their compute were Lunary; unto these we must reply; That if by a lunary
year they understand twelve revolutions of the Moon, that is, 354. days,
eleven fewer then in the Solary year; there will be no great difference, at
least not sufficient to convince or ^x^enuate the question: But if by a Lunary
year they mean one revolution of the Moon, that is, a month; they first
introduce a year never used by the Hebrews in their Civil accounts; and what
is delivered before of the Chaldean years, (as Xenophon gives a caution) was
only received in the Chronology of their Arts. Secondly, they contradict the
Scripture, which makes a plain enumeration of many months in the account of
the Deluge, for so it is expressed in the Text. In the tenth month, in the
first day of the month were the tops of the mountains seen; Concordant
whereunto is the relation of ^uma^^ Authors, for so says Xenophon de
Aequivocis, Inund ^iones plures fuere, prima novimestris inundatio terrarum sub
prisco Ogyge; and the like also Solinus, Meminisse hoc loco par est post primum
diluv^um Ogygi temporibus notatum, cum novem and amplius mensibus diem continua
nox inumbrasset, Delon ante omnes terras radiis solis illuminatum sort^tum que
ex eo nomen. And lastly, they fall upon an absurdity, for they make E^och to
beget children about six years of age; for whereas it is said he begat
Methuselah at 65. if we shall account every month a year, he was at that time
some six years and an half, for so many months are contained in that space
of time.

Having thus declared how much the length of men's lives conduced unto the
populosity of their kind, our second foundation must be the large extent of
time, from the Creation unto the Deluge; that is, according unto received
computes about 1655 years) a longer time then has passed since the nativity
of our Savior; and which we cannot but conceive sufficient for a very large
increase, if we do but affirm what reasonable enquirers will not deny; That the
earth might be as populous in that number of years before the Flood, as we can
manifest it was in the same number after. And whereas there may be conceived
some disadvantage, in regard that at the Creation, the original of mankind
was in two persons, but after the Flood their propagation issued at least from
six; against this we might very well set the length of their lives before the
Flood, which were abreviated after, and in half this space contracted into
hundreds and threescores. Notwithstanding to equalize accounts, we will allow
three hundred years, and so long a time as we can manifest from the Scripture,
There were four men at least that begat children, Adam, Cain, Seth, and Enos;
so shall we fairly and favorably proceed if we affirm the world to have been
as populous in sixteen hundred and fifty years before the Flood, as it was in
thirteen hundred after. Now how populous and largely inhabited it was within
this period of time, we shall endeavor to declare from probabilities, and
several testimonies of Scripture and humane Authors.

And first, to manifest the same near those parts of the Earth where the Arc
is presumed to have rested, we have the relation of holy Scripture accounting
the genealogy of Japhet, Cham and Sem, and in this last, four descents unto
the division of the earth in the days of Peleg, which time although it were
not upon common compute much above an hundred years, yet were they at this
time mightily increased; nor can we well conceive it otherwise, if we consider
they began already to wander from their first habitation, and were able to
attempt so mighty a work as the building of a City and a Tower, whose top
should reach unto the heavens, whereunto there was required no slender number
of persons, if we consider the magnitude thereof, expressed by some, and
conceived to be Turris Beli in Herodotus; and the multitudes of people recorded
at the erecting of the like or inferior structures: for so is it delivered in
the Book of Kings, that at the building of Solomon's Temple there were
threescore and ten thousand that carried burdens, and fourscore thousand hewers
in the mountains, beside the chief of his officers three thousand and three
hundred; and at the erecting of the Pyramids in the reign of King Cheops, as
Herodotus reports there were december myriades, that is an hundred thousand men.
And though it be said of the Egyptians, Porrum and caepe nefas violare and
frangere morsu; yet did the sums expended in Garlic and Onyons amount unto
no less then one thousand six hundred Talents.

The first Monarchy or Kingdom of Babylon is mentioned in Scripture under the
foundation of Nimrod, which is also recorded in humane history; as beside
Berosus, in Diodorus and Justine, for Nimrod of the Scriptures is Belus of the
Gentiles, and Assure the same with Ninus his successor. There is also mention
of diverse Cities, particularly of Ninivy and Resen expressed emphatically in
the Text to be a great City.

That other Countries round about were also peopled, appears by the Wars of
the Monarchs of Assyria with the Bactrians, Indians, Scythyans, Aethiopians,
Armenians, Hyrcanians, Parthians, Persians, Susians; they vanquishing (as
Diodorus relates) Egypt, Syria, and all Asia minor, even from Bosphorus unto
Tanais. And it is said, that Semiramis in her expedition against the Indians,
brought along with her the King of Arabia. About the same time of the Assyrian
Monarchy, do Authors place that of the Sycionians in Greece, and soon after,
that of the Argives, and not very long after, that of the Athenians under
Cecrops; and within our period assumed are hystorified many memorable actions
of the Greeks, as the expedition of the Argonautes, with the most famous Wars
of Thebes and Troy.

That Canaan also and Egypt were well peopled far within this period,
besides their plantation by Canaan and Misraim, appears from the history of
Abraham, who in less then 400 years after the Flood journied from Mesopotamia
unto Canaan and Egypt; both which he found well peopled and policied into
Kingdoms; wherein also in 430 years, from threescore and ten persons which
came with Jacob into Egypt he became a mighty Nation: for it is said, at their
departure, there journyed from Rhamesis to Succoth about six hundred thousand
on foot, that were men besides children. Now how populous the land from whence
they came was, may be collected not only from their ability in commanding so
mighty subjections, but from the several accounts of that Kingdom delivered
by Herodotus; and how soon it was peopled is evidenced from the pillar of
their King Osyris, with this inscription in Diodorus; Mihi pater est Saturnus
deorum junior, sum vero Osyris rex qui totum peragravi orbem usque ad Indorum
fines, ad eos quoque sum profectus qui septentrioni subjacent usque ad Istri
fontes, and alias parts usque ad Oceanum. Now according unto the best
determinations Osyris was Mizraim, and Saternus Aegyptius, the same with Cham,
after whose name Egypt is not only called in Scipture the land of Ham, but
thus much is also testified by Plutarch; for in his Treatise de Osyride, he
delivers that Egypt was called Chamia a Chamo Noe si^ io, that is from Cham
the son of Noah. And if according to the consent of ancient Fathers, Adam was
buried in the same place, where Christ was crucified, that is Mount Calvary,
the first man ranged far before the Flood, and laid his bones many miles from
that place, where its presumed he received them: And this migration was the
greater, if as the Text expresses, he was cast out of the East Side of
Paradise to till the ground, and as the Position of the Cherubins implies, who
were placed at the East end of the garden, to keep him from the tree of life.

That the extreme and remote parts of the earth were in this time inhabited, is
also induceable from the like Testimonies; for (omitting the numeration of
Josephus, and the genealogies of the sons of Noah) that I^aly was inhabited
appears from the Records of Livie, and Dionysius Halicarnasseus, the story of
Aenaeas, Evander, and Janus, whom Annius of Viterbo, and the Chorographers of
Italy, do make to be the same with Noah: that Sicily was also peopled, is made
out from the frequent mention thereof in Homer, the Records of Diodorus and
others; but especially from a remarkable passage touched by Aretius and
Rauzanus Bishop of Lucerium, but fully explained by Thoma^ F^zelli in his
accurate history of Sicily; that is, from an ancient inscription in a stone at
Panormo, expressed by him in its proper characters, and by a Syrian thus
translated: Non est alius Deus praeter unum Deum, non est al^us potens praeter
eundem Deum, neque est alius victor praeter ^undem quem colimus Deum: Hujus
turris praefectus est Sapha filius Eliphar, fil^i Esau, fratris Jacob, filii
Isaac, filii Abraham; and turri quidem ipsi nomen est Baych, sed turri huic
proximae nomen est Pharath. The antiquity of the inhabitation of Spain is also
confirmable, not only from Berosus in the plantation of Tuball and a City
continuing yet in his name, but the story of Gerion, the travells of Hercules
and his pillars, and especially a passage in Strabo, which advances unto the
time of Ninus, thus delivered in his fourth Book. the Spaniards (says he)
affirm that they have had laws and letters above six thousand years. Now the
Spaniards or Iberians observing (as Xenophon has delivered) Annum
qu^drimestrem, four months unto a year, this compute will make up 2000 Solary
years, which is about the space of time from Strabo who lived in the days of
Augustus, unto the reign of Ninus.

That Mauritania and the coast of Africa were peopled very soon, is the
conjecture of many wise men, and that by the Phaeniceans, who left their
Country upon the invasion of Canaan by the Israelites: for beside the
conformity of the punicke or Carthaginean language with that of Phaenicea,
there is a pregnant and very remarkable testimony hereof in Procopius, who in
his second de bello Vandalico, records, that in a Town of Mauritania
Tingitana, there was to be seen upon two white Columns in the Phaenicean
language these ensuing words; Nos Maurici sumus qui fugimus a facie Iehoschuae
filii Nunis praedatoris. The fortunate Islands or Canaries were not unknown;
for so does Starbo interpret that speech in Homer of Proteus unto Menelaus --
Sed te qu ^terrae postremus termin^s extat,
Elysium in Campum coelestia numina ducunt.


The like might we affirm from credible histories both of France and Germany,
and probably also out of our own Country; for omitting the fabulous and Trojan
original delivered by Jeofrey of Monmouth, and the express text of Scripture,
that the race of J^phet did people the Isles of the Gentiles; (in which number
this of ours has been specially accounted) their original was so obscure in
Caesar's time, that he affirms the Inland inhabitants were Aborigines, that
is, such as reported, that they had their beginning in the Island; That Ireland
our neighbor Island was not long time without Inhabitants, may be made
probable by sundry accounts, although we ab^te the Tradition of Bartholanus the
Scythian, who arrived there three hundred years after the Flood, or the
relation of Giraldus, that Caesaria the daughter of Noah dwelt there before.

Thus though we have declared how largely the world was inhabited within the
space of 1300 years, yet must it be conceived more populous then can be
evinced; for a greater part of the Earth has ever been peopled, then has been
known or described by Geographers, as will appear by the discoveries of all
ages; for neither in Herodotus or Thucydides do we find any mention of Rome,
nor in Ptolomy of many parts of Europe, Asia, or Africa: and because many
places we have declared of long plantation, of who^e populosity
notwithstanding or memorable actions we have no ancient story, if we may
conjecture of these by what we find related of others, we shall not need many
words, nor assume the half 1300 years, and this we might illustrate from the
mighty acts of the Assyrians performed not long after the Flood, and recorded
by Justine and Diodorus, who makes relation of expeditions by Armies more
numerous then have been ever since. For Ninus King of Assyria brought against
the Bactrians 700000 foot, 200000 horse, 10600 Chariots; Semiramis his
successor led against the Indians 1300000 foot, 500000 horse, 100000 Chariots,
and as many upon Camells: And it is said, Staurobates the Indian King met her
with greater force then she brought against him; all which was performed within
less then four hundred years after the Flood.

Now if any man imagine the unity of their language did hinder their dispe^sion
before the Flood, we confess it some hindrance at first, but not much
afterward: for though it might restrain their dispersion, it could not their
populosity, which necessarily requires transmigration and emission of
Colonies, as we read of Romans, Greeks, Phaeniceans in ages past, and have
beheld examples thereof in our days; and we may also observe that after the
Flood before the confusion of tongues, men began to disperse; for it is said,
they journied toward the East, and the Scripture it self expresses a
necessity conceived of their dispersion, for the intent of erecting the Tower
is so delivered in the text, lest we be scattered abroad upon the face of the
earth.

Again, if any man imagine the planta^ion of the earth more easy in regard of
Navigation and shipping discovered since the Flood, whereby the Islands and
divided parts of the earth are now inhabited; he must consider that whether
there were Islands or no before the Flood is not yet determined, and is with
probability denied by very learned Authors.

Lastly, if we shall fall into apprehension that it was less inhabited,
because it is said in the sixth of Genesis about 120. years before the Flood,
and it came to pass that when men began to multiply upon the face of the
earth: Beside that this may be only meant of the race of Cain, it will not
import they were not multiplied before, but that they were at that time
plentifully increased; for so is the same word used in other parts of
Scripture. And so is it afterward in the 9. Chap. said that Noah began to be an
husbandman, that is, he was so, or earnestly performed the Acts thereof: so it
is said of our Savior that he began to cast them out that bought and sold in
the Temple; that is, he actually cast them out, or with alacrity effected it.

And thus have I declared my private and probable conceptions in the enquiry of
this truth; but the certainty hereof let the Arithmeticke of the last day
determine, and therefore expect no further belief then probability and reason
induce; only desire men would not swallow dubiosi^ies for certainties, and
receive as principles, points mainly controvertible, for we are to adhere unto
things doubtful in a dubious and opinative way; it being reasonable for every
man to vary his opinion according to the variance of his reason, and to affirm
one day what he denied another, wherein although at last we miss of truth, we
dye notwithstanding in harmless and inoffensive errors, because we adhere
unto that whereunto the examen of our reasons, and honest enquiries induce us.

CHAP. VII.
Of East and West*
THe next shall be of East and West; that is, the proprieties and conditions
ascribed unto Regions respectively unto those situations, which has been the
obvious conception of Philosophers and Geographers, magnifying the condition of
India, and the Eastern Countries, above the setting and occidentall Climates;
some ascribing hereto the generation of gold, precious stones, and spices,
others the civility and natural endowments of men; conceiving the bodies of
this situation to receive a special impression from the first salutes of the
Sun, and some appropriate influence from his ascendent and oriental
radiations. But these proprieties affixed unto bodies, upon considerations
deduced from East, West, or those observable points of the sphere, how specious
and plausible soever, will not upon enquiry be justified from such foundations.

For, to speak strictly, the^e is no East and West in nature; nor are those
absolute and invariable, but respective and mutable points, according unto
different longitudes, or distant parts of habitation, whereby they suffer many
and considerable variations. For first, unto some, the same part will be East
o^ West in respect of one another, that is, unto such as inhabit the same
parallel, or differently dwell from East to West; Thus as unto Spain, Italy
lies East, unto Italy, Greece, unto Greece Pe^sia, and unto Persia China; so
again unto the Country of China, Persia lies West, unto Persia Greece, unto
Greece Italy, and unto Italy Spain; so that the same Country is sometimes East
and sometimes West, and Persia though East unto Greece, yet is it West unto
China.

Unto other habitations the same poin^ will be both East and West, as unto
those that are Antipodes or seated in points of the Globe diame^^ically
opposed; so the Americans are Antipodall unto the Indians, and some part of
India is both East and West unto America, according as it shall be regarded
from one side or the other, to the right or to the left; and setting out from
any middle point, either by East or West, the distance unto the place intended
is equal, and in the same space of time in nature also performable.

To a third that have the Poles for their vertex, or dwell in the position of a
pa^allell sphere, there will be neither E^st nor West, at least the greatest
part of the year; for if (as the name Oriental implies) they shall account
that part to be E^st where ever the Sun arises, or that West where the Sun
is occidentall or sets, almost half the year they have neither the one nor
the other; for half the year it is below their Horizon, and the other half
it is continually above it; and circling round about them intersecteth not the
Horizon, nor leaves any part for this compu^e. And if (which will at first
seem very reasonable) that part should be termed the Eastern point, where the
Sun at the Aequinox, and but once in the year arises, yet will this also
disturb the Cardinal accounts, nor will it with propriety admit that
appellation: For that surely cannot be accounted East which has the South on
both sides, which notwithstanding, this position must have; for if unto such as
live under the pole, that be only North which is above them, that must be
Southerly which is below them, which is all the other portion of the Globe
beside that part possessed by them. And thus these points of East and West
being not absolute in any, respective in some, and not at all relating unto
others, we cannot hereon establish so general considerations, nor reasonably
erect such immutable assertions, upon so unstable foundations.

Now the ground that begat or promoted this conceit, was first a mistake in the
apprehension of East and West, considering thereof as of the North and South,
and computing by these as invariably as by the other; but herein, upon second
thoughts there is a great disparity: For the North and Southern pole, are the
invariable terms of that Axis whereon the heavens do move, and are therefore
incommunicable and fixed points whereof the one is not apprehensible in the
other; b^t with the East and West it is quite otherwise, for the revolution of
the Orbs being made upon the poles of North and South, all other points about
the Axis are mutable; and wheresoever therein the E^st point be determined, by
su^cession of parts in one revolution every point b^commeth East: and so if
where the Sun arises, that part be ^earmed East, every habitation differing
in longitude, will have this point also different, in as much as the Sun
successively arises unto every one.

The second ground, although it depend upon the former, approaches nearer the
effect; and that is the efficacy of the Sun, set out and divided according
to priority of assent, whereby his in^luence is conceived more favorable unto
one Country then another, and to felicitate India more then any after. But
hereby we cannot avoid absurdities and such as infer effects controulable by
our senses: For first, by the same reason that we affirm the Indian richer then
the American, the American will also be more plentiful then the Indian, and
England or Spain more fruitful then Hispaniola or golden Castile; in as much
as the Sun arises unto the one sooner then the other, and so accountably
unto any Nation subjected unto the same parallel, or with a considerable
diversity of longitude from each other.

Secondly, an unsufferable absurdity will ensue; for thereby a Count^y may be
more fruitful then it self: For India is more fertile then Spain, because
more East, and that the Sun arises first unto it; Spain likewise by the
same reason more fruitful then America, and America then India; so that Spain
is less fruitful then that Country, which a less fertile Country then it
self, excels.

Lastly, if we conceive the Sun has any advantage by the priority of its
ascent, or makes thereby one Country more happy then another, we introduce
injustifiable acceptions; and impose a natural partiality on that luminary,
which being equidistant from the Earth, and equally removed in the East as in
the West, his power and efficacy in both places must be equal, as Boethius
has taken notice in his first de Gemmis, and Scaliger has graphically
declared in his Exercitations; some have therefore forsaken this refuge of the
Sun, and to salve the effect have recurred unto the influence of the stars,
making their activities National, and appropriating their powers unto
particular regions: So Cardan conceives the tail of Ursa major peculiarly
respects Europe, whereas indeed once in 24 hours it also absolveth its
course over Asia and America: And therefore it will not be easy to apprehend
those stars peculiarly glance on us, who must of necessity carry a common eye
and regard unto all Countries unto whom their revolution and verticity is also
common.

The effects therefore are different productions in several Countries, which
we impute unto the action of the Sun, must surely have nearer and more
immediate causes then that Lumina^y; and these if we place in the propriety of
the clime, or condition of soil wherein they are produced, we shall more
reasonably proceed, then they who ascribe them unto the activity of the Sun,
whose revolution being regular, it has no power nor efficacy peculiar from
its orientality, but equally disperseth his beams unto all which equally and
in the same restriction receive his luster; and being an universal and
indefini^e agent, the effects or productions we behold, receive not their
circle from his causality, but are determined by the principles of the place or
qualities of that region which admits them: and this is evident not only in
gemmes, mineralls, and metalls, but observable in pla^ts and animalls, whereof
some are common unto many Countries, some peculiar unto one, some not
communicable unto another: For the hand of God that first created the earth,
has with variety disposed the principles of all things, wisely contriving them
in their proper seminaries, and where they best maintain the intention of
their species; whereof if they have not a concurrence, and be not lodged in a
convenient matrix, they are not excited by the efficacy of the Sunn^, or
failing in particular causes receive a relief or sufficient promotion from the
universal. For although superior powers cooperate with inferior activities,
and may (as some conceive) carry a stroke in the plasticke and formative
draught of all things, yet do their determinations belong unto particular
agents, and are defined from their proper principles. Thus the Sun which with
us is fruitful in the generation of frogs, toads, and serpents, to this effect
proves impotent in our neighbor Island; wherein as in all other carrying a
common aspect, it concurreth but unto predisposed effects, and only suscitates
those forms, whose determinations are seminall, and proceed from the Idea of
themselves.

Now whereas there be many observations concerning East, and diverse
considerations of Art which seem to extol the quality of that point, if
rightly understood they do not really promote it. That the Astrologer takes
account of nativities from the Ascendent, that is, the first house of the
heavens, whose beginning is toward the East, it does not advantage the conceit;
for, he establishes not his Judgment upon the Orientality thereof, but
considers therein his first ascent above the Horizon; at which time its
efficacy becomes observable, and is conceaved to have the signification of
life, and to respect the condition of all things, which at the same time arise
from their causes, and ascend to their Horizon with it. Now this ascension
indeed falls out respectively in the East; but as we have delivered before, in
some positions there is no Eastern point from whence to compute these
ascensions. So is it in a parallel sphere: for, unto them six houses are
continually depressed, and six never elevated; and the Planets themselves,
whose revolutions are of more speed, and influences of higher consideration,
must find in that place* very imperfect regard; for half their period they
absolve above, and half beneath the Horizon; and so for six years, no man can
have the happiness to be borne under Jupiter, and for fifteen together all
must escape the ascendent dominion of Saturn.

That A^istotle in his Politics, commends the situation of a City which is
open toward the East, and admits the rays of the rising Sun, thereby is
employed no more particular efficacy then in the West; But that site is
commended, in regard the damps and vaporous exhalations ingendered in the
absence of the Sun, are by his returning rays the sooner dispelled, and men
thereby more ea^ly enjoy a clear and healthy habitation; and upon these and
the like considerations it is, that Marcus Varro de re Rustica, commends the
same situation, and expose^h his farm unto the equinoxiall ascent of the Sun;
that Palladius advises the front of his edifice should so respect the South,
that in the first angle it receave the rising rays of the winter Sun, and
decline a little from the winter setting thereof. And concordant hereunto is
the instruction of Columella in his Chapter Depositione villae, which he
contriveth into Summer and Winter habitations; ordering that the Winter
lodgings regard the winter ascent of the Sun, that is, South-East; and the
rooms of repast at supper, the Aequinoxiall setting thereof, that is, the
West; that the Summer lodgings regard the Aequinoxiall Meridian, but the rooms
of caenation in the Summer, he obverts unto the winter assent, that is,
South-East; and the Balnearies or bathing places, that they may remain under
the Sun until evening, he exposes unto the Summer setting, that is,
North-West; in all which, although the Cardinal points be introduced, yet is
the consideration Solary, and only determined unto the aspect or visible
reception of the Sun.

That Mahumetans and Jews in these and our neighbor parts are observed to use
some gestures toward the East, as at their benediction, and the killing of
their meat it cannot be denied; and though many ignorant spectators, and not a
few of the actors conceave some Magic or mystery therein, yet is the Ceremony
only Topicall, and in a memorial relation unto a place they honor. So the
Jews do carry a respect and cast an eye upon Jerusalem; for which practice they
are not without the example of their forefathers, and the encouragement of
their wise King; Dan. 6.
For so it is said that Daniel went into his house, and his windows being
opened toward Jerusalem, he kneeled upon his knees three times a day, and
prayed; So is it expressed in the prayer of Solomon, what prayer or
supplication soever be made by any man, which shall spread forth his hands
toward this house, if thy people go out to battle, and shall pray unto the
Lord toward the City which thou have chosen, and toward the house which I have
chosen to build for thy Name, then hear thou in heaven their prayer, and their
supplication, and maintain their cause. Now the observation hereof, unto the
Jews that are dispersed Westward, and such as most converse with us, directs
their regard unto the East; But the words of Solomon are applyable unto all
quarters of heaven, and by the Jews of the East and South must be regarded in a
contrary position. So Daniel in Babylon looking toward Jerusalem had his face
toward the West; So the Jews in their own Land looked upon it from all
quarters. For the Tribe of Judah beheld it to the North; Manasses, Z^bulon, and
Nap^thali unto the South; Ruben and Gad unto the West; only the Tribe of Dan
regarded it directly or to the due East: and so when it is said Luke 12. when
you see a cloud rise out of the West, you say there comes a shower, and so it
is; the observation was respective unto Judea; nor is this a reasonable
illation in all other (...) whatsoever; For the Sea lay West unto that Country,
and the winds brought rain from that quarter; But this consideration cannot be
transferred unto India or China, which have a vast Sea Eastward, and a vaster
Continent toward the West. So likewise when it is said by Job, in the vulgar
Translation, Gold comes out of the North; is this a reasonable inducement
unto us and many other Countries, from some p^rticular mines septentrionall
unto his situation, to search after that me^all in cold and Northern regions,
which we most plentifully discover in hot and Southern habitations?

For the Mahometans* as they partake with all Religions in something, so they
imitate the Jew in this. For in their observed gestures, they hold a regard
unto Mecha and Medina Taln^bi, two Cities in Arabia faelix; where their Prophet
was borne and buried; whither they perform their pilgrimages; and from whence
they expect he should return again. And therefore they direct their faces
unto these parts, which unto the Mahometans of Barbary and Egypt lie E^st, and
are in some point thereof, unto many other parts of Turkey: wherein
notwithstanding there is no Oriental respect; for wi^h the same devotion on
the other side they regard these parts toward the West, and so with variety
wheresoever they are seated, conforming unto the ground of their conception.

Fourthly, whereas in the ordering of the Camp of Israel, the East quarter is
appointed unto the noblest Tribe, that is the Tribe of Judah, according to the
command of God, Numb. 2. In the East Side toward the rising of the Sun, shall
the Standard of the Tribe of Judah pitch, it does not peculiarly extol that
point; for herein the East is not to be taken strictly, but as it signifies
or implies the foremost place; for Judah had the Van, and many Countries
through which they passed were seated E^sterly unto them. Thus much is employed
by the Original, and expressed by Translations which strictly conform
thereto: So Tremellius and Junius, Castra habentium ab anteriore part Orientem
versus, vexillum esto castrorum Iudae; so has R. Solomon Jarchi expounded it,
the foremost or before, is the E^st quarter, and the West is called behind: And
upon this Interpretation may all be salved that is alleageable against it. For
if the Tribe of Judah were to pitch before the Tabernacle at the East, and yet
to march first, as is commanded Numb. 10. there must ensue a disorder in the
Camp, nor could they conveniently observe the ^xecution thereof: For when they
set out from Mount Sinah where the Command was delivered, they made Northward
unto Rithmah; from Rissah unto Ezionbeber about fourteen stations they marched
South: From Almon Diblathaim through the mountains of Yabarim and plains of
Moab toward Jordan the face of their march was West: So that if Judah were
strictly to pitch in the E^st of the Tabernacle, every night he encamped in the
Rear: And if (as some conceive) the whole Camp could not be less then twelve
miles long, it had been preposterous for him to have marched foremost, or set
out first, who was most remote from the place to be approached.

Fifthly, that Learning, Civility and Arts, had their beginning in the East, it
is not imputable ^ither to the action of the Sun, or its Orientality, but of
the first plantation of Man in those parts, which unto Europe do carry the
respect of East; for on the mountains of Ararat, that is part of the hill
Taurus, between the East Indies and Scythia, as Sir W. Ralegh accounts it, the
Arc of Noah rested; from the East they traveled that built the Tower of
Babell, from thence they were dispersed and successively enlarged, and learning
good Arts and all Civility communicated. The progression whereof was very
sensible; and if we consider the distance of time between the confusion of
Babell, and the civility of many parts now eminent therein, it traveled late
and slowly into our quarters; for notwithstanding the learning of Bardes and
D^uides of elder times, he that shall peruse that work of Tacitus de moribus
Germanorum, may easily discern how little civility two thousand years had
wrought upon that Nation; the like he may observe concerning our selves, from
the same Author in the life of Agricola, and more directly from Strabo; who to
the dishonor of our Predecessors, and the disparagement of those that glory
in the Antiquity of their Ancestors, affirms, the Britans were so simple,
that though they abounded in Milk, they had not the Artifice of Cheese.

Lastly, that the Globe it self is by Cosmographers divided into East and
West, accounting from the first Meridian, it does not establish this conceit;
for that division is not naturally founded, but artificially set down, and by
agreement; as the aptest terms to define or commensurate the longitude of
places. Thus the ancient Cosmographers do place the division of the E^st and
Western Hemisphere, that is the first term of longitude in the Canary or
fortunate Islands; conceiving these parts the extremest habitations Westward:
But the Modernes have altered that term and translated it unto the Azores or
Michaels Islands, and that upon a plausible conceit of the small or insensible
variation of the compass in those parts; wherein nevertheless, and though
upon second invention, they proceed upon a common and no appropriate
foundation; for even in that Meridian farther North or South the compass
observably varieth; and there are also other places wherein it varieth not, as
Alphonso and Rodoriges de Lago will have it about Capo de las Agullas in
Africa; as Maurolycus affirms in the shore of Peloponesus in Europe, and as
Gilbertus averreth, in the midst of great regions, in most parts of the earth.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the River Nilus.
HEreof uncontroulably and under general consent many opinions are passant,
which notwithstanding upon due ^xamination, do admit of doubt or restriction:
It is generally esteemed, and by most unto our days received, that the River
of Nilus has seven ostiaries; that is, by seven Channells disburdeneth it
self into the Sea; wherein notwithstanding, beside that we find no concurrent
determination of ages past, and a positive and undeniable refute of these
present, the affirmative is mutable, and must not be received without all
limitation.

For some, from whom we receive the greatest illustrations of Antiquity, have
made no mention hereof: So Homer has given no number of its Channells, nor so
much as the name thereof in use with all Historians. Eratosthenes in his
description of Egypt has likewise passed them over: Aristotle is so
indistinct in their names and numbers, that in the first of Meteors, he plainly
affirms the Region of Egypt, which we esteem the ancientest Nation in the
World, was a mere gained ground; and that by the settling of mud and limous
matter brought down by the River Nilus, that which was at first a continued
Sea, was raised at last into a firm and habitable Country. The like opinion
he held of Maeotis Palus, that by the floods of Tanais and ea^^h brou^ht down
^h^reby, it grew observably shallower in his days* and would in process of
time become a fi^me land. And though his (...) yet fulfilled, yet is the like
observable in the River Gi^on, a (...) of E^ph^ates and River of Paradise,
which having in former Ages discharged it self into the Persian Sea, does at
pr^sent ^all short, being lost in the lak^^ of Chaldea, and has left betw^en^
the Sword^, a large and considerable p^rt of dry land.

Others (...) t^^a^ing hereof have diversely delivered themselves; H^rodotus in
his E^terp^ makes mention of seven, but carelessly of two th^reof; that is,
Bolb^ti^um, and Bucolicum; for these, says he, were not the natural currents,
but made by Art for some occasional convenience. Strabo in his Geography
naming but two, Pel^siacu^ and Canopicum, plainly affirms there were many
more then seven; Inter haec a^ia quinque etc. There are (says he) many
remarkable towns within the C^rrents of Nile, especially such which have given
the names unto the ostearies thereof, not unto all, for they are eleven, and
four besides, but unto seven and most considerable; that is, Canopicum,
Bulbitinum, Selenneticum, Se^enneticum, Pharniticum, Me^desium, Taniticum, and
Pelusium; wherein to make up the number, one of the artificial channels of
Herodotus is accounted: Ptolomy an Egyptian, and bo^ne at the P^lusian mo^th
of Nile, in his Geography makes nine, and in the third Map of Africa, has
unto their mouths prefixed their several names, that is, Her acl^oticum,
Bolbitinum, Sebennetic^m, Pineptum, Diolcos, Pathmeticum, Mendesium, Taniticum,
Peleu^^acum; wherein notwithstanding there are no less then three different
names from those delivered by Pliny: All which considered, we may easily
discern that Authors accord not either in na^^ or number, and must needs
confirm the Judgment of Magi^us, de Os^iorum, Nili numer^ and nominibus,
valde antiqui script^res discordant.

Modern Geographers and travelers do much abate of this number; for as
Maginus and others observe, there are now but three or four mouths thereof, as
Gulielmus Tyrius long ago, and Bellonius since, both ocular enquirers, with
others have attested. For below Cairo, the River devides it self into four
branches, whereof two make the chief and navigable streams, the one running
to Pelusium of the Ancients, and now Damiats; the other unto Canopium and now
Roscett^; the other two, says Mr. Sandys, do run between these, but poor
in water; of those seven mentioned by Herodotus, and those nine by Ptolomy,
these are all I could either see, or hear of.

Lastly, what ever was or is their number, the contrivers of Cards and Maps,
afford us no assurance or constant description therein. For whereas Ptolomy
has set forth nine, Hondius in his Map of Africa, makes but eight, and in that
of Europe ten. Ortelius in his Theatrum Botannicum, in the M^p of the Turkish
Empire, sets down eight, in that of Egypt eleven, and Maginus in his Map
of that Country has observed the same number; and if we enquire farther, we
shall find the same diversity and disco^d in diverse others.

And thus may we perceave that this account was differently related by the
Ancients, that it is undeniably rejected by the Modernes, and must be warily
received by any. For if we receave them all into account* they were more then
seven, If only the natural sluices they were f^wer; and however we (...) them,
there is no agreeable and constant description thereof. And therefore how
reasonable it is to draw continual and durable deductions from alterable and
uncertain foundations, let them consider who make the gates of Th^be^, and the
mouths of this River a constant and continued periphrasis for this number, and
in their Poetical expressions do give the River that Epithi^^ unto this day;
conceaving a perpetuity in mutability, and upon unstable foundations erecting
eter^all assertions.

The same River is also accounted the greatest of the earth, called therefore
Fluviorum p^ter, and totius Orbis maximus by O^telius; with the verity hereof,
I confess I could be well contented, nor do I w^sh the ruin of this
assertion; nevertheless if this be true, many Maps must be corrected, or the
relations of diverse good Authors renounced.

For first, in the deliniations of many Maps of Africa, the River Niger
exceed^th it about ^en degrees in length, that is, no less^ then six hundred
miles. For, arising beyond the Equator it makes Northward almost 15. degrees,
and deflecting after Westward, without meanders, continues a strait course
about 40. degrees; and with many great currents dis^urden^th it self into the
Occidentall Ocean. Again, if we credit the descriptions of good Authors,
other Rivers excel it in length or breadth, or both; Arrianus in his history
of Alexander, assigns the first place unto the River Ganges, which truly
according unto later relations, if not in length, yet in breadth and debth may
be granted to excel it: For the magnitude of Nilus consists in the
dimension of Longitude, and is inconsiderable in the other, what stream it
maintains beyond Syene or Asna, and so forward unto its original, relations
are very imperfect, but below these places and farther removed from the head,
the current is but narrow; and we read in the history of the Turks, the Tartar
horsemen of Selimus, swa^ over the Nile from Cairo, to meet the forces of
Tonombeius; Scortias the Jesuit expressly treating hereof, preserreth the River
of Plate in Am^rica; for that as Maff^us has delivered, falls into the Ocean
in the latitude of forty Leagues, and with that source and plenty that men at
Sea do taste fresh water, before they approach so near as to discover the
land: So is it exceeded by that which by Cardan is termed the greatest in the
world, that is the River Oregliana in the same Continent, which as Maginus
delivers, has been navigated 6000. miles, and opens in a Channel of ninety
leagues broad; so that, as Acosta an ocular witness records, they that sail
in the middle, can make no land of either side.

Now the ground of this assertion was surely the magnifying esteem of the
Ancients, arising from the indiscovery of its head. For as things unknown
seem greater then they are, and are usually received with amplifications above
their nature; So might it also be with this River, whose head being unknown
and drawn to a proverbiall obscurity, the opinion thereof became without
bounds, and men must needs conceat a large extent of that to which the
discovery of no man had set a period. And this an usual way to give the
superlative unto things of eminency in any kind: and when a thing is very
great, presently to define it to be the greatest of all; whereas indeed
Superlatives are difficult, whereof there being but one in every kind, their
determinations are dangerous, and must not be made without great
circumspection. So the City of Rome is magnified by the Lati^s to be the
greatest of the earth; but time and Geography inform us, that Cairo is bigger
then ever it was, and Quinsay in China far exceeds both. So is Olympus
extolled by the Greeks, as an hill attaining unto heaven; but the enlarged
Geography of after times makes slight account hereof, when they discourse of
Andes in Peru, or Teneriffa in the Canaries. So have all Ages conceaved, and
most are still ready to swear, the Wren is the least of birds, yet the
discoveries of America, and even of our own Plantations have showed us one
far less, that is, the Humbird, not much exceeding a Beetle. And truly, for
the least and greatest, the highest and the lowest of every kind, as it is
very difficult to define them in visible things, so is it to understand in
things invisible. Thus is it no easy lesson to comprehend the first matter,
and the affections of that which is next neighbor unto nothing; and impossible
truly to comprehend God, who indeed is all things; and so things as they arise
unto perfection, and approach unto God, or descend to imperfection, and draw
nearer unto nothing, fall both imperfectly into our apprehensions; the one
being too weak for our conception, our conception too weak for the other.

Thirdly, diverse conceptions there are concerning its increment or inundation.
The first unwarily opinions, that this increase or annual overflowing is
proper unto Nile, and not agreeable unto any other River; which notwithstanding
is common unto many currents of Africa. For about the same time the River
Niger, and Zaire do ove^flow, and so do the Rivers beyond the mountains of the
Moon, as Suama, and Spirito Santo: and not only these in Africa, but some
also in Europe and Asia* for so it is reported of Menan in India, and so does
Botero report of Duina in Livonia, and the same is also observable in the River
Jordan in Judea; for so is it delivered Josuah 3. that Jordan overfloweth all
his banks in the time of harvest.

The effect indeed is wonderful in all, and the causes surely best resolvable
from observations made in the Countries themselves, the parts through which
they pass, or whence they take their original; That of Nilus has been
attempted by many, and by some to that despair of resolution, that they have
only referred it unto the providence of God, and the secret manuduction of all
things unto their ends; but diverse have attained the truth, and the cause
alleged by Diodorus, Seneca, Strabo and others is allowable; that the
inundation of Nilus in Egypt proceeded from the raines in Aethiopia, and the
mighty source of waters falling toward the fountains thereof. For, this
inundation unto the Egyptians happens when it is winter unto the
Aethiopians; which habitations, although they have no cold winter, the Sun
being no farther removed from them in Cancer, then unto us in Taurus; yet is
the fervor of the air so well remit^ed, as it admits a sufficient generation
of vapors, and plenty of showers ensuing thereupon. This theory of the
Ancients is since confirmed by experience of the Modernes, as namely by
Franciscus Alvarez who lived long in those parts, and has left a description
of Aethiopia; affirming that from the middle of June unto September, there fell
in his time continual raines. As also Antonius Ferdinandus, who in an Epistle
written from thence, and noted by Condignus, affirms that during the winter,
in those Countries there passed no day without rain.

Now this is also an usual course to translate a remarkable quality into a
propriety, and where we admire an effect in one, to opinion there is not the
like in any other, with these conceits do common apprehensions entertain the
antidotall and wondrous condition of Ireland; conceaving in that Land only an
immunity from venomous creatures; but unto him that shall further enquire, the
same will be affirmed of Creta* memorable in ancient stories, even unto
fabulous causes and benediction from the birth of Jupiter: The same is also
found in Ebusus or Evisa, an Island near Majorca upon the coast of Spain.
With these opinions do the eyes of neighbor spectators behold Aetna, the
flaming mountain in Sicilia; But Navigators tell us there is a burning
mountain in Island, a more rema^keable one in Teneri^^a of the Canaries, and
many vulcano's or fiery hills elsewhere. Thus Crocodiles were thought to be
peculiar unto Nile, and the opinion so possessed Alexander, that when he had
discovered some in Ganges, he fell upon conceit he had found the head of Nilus;
but later discoveries affirm they are not only in Asia and Africa, but very
frequent in some Rivers of America.

Another opinion confineth its inundation, and positively affirms, it
constantly increases the seventeenth day of June, wherein notwithstanding a
larger form of speech were safer, then that which punctually prefixeth a
constant day thereto: for first, this expression is different from that of the
Ancients, as Herodotus, Diodorus, Seneca, etc. delivering only that it
happens about the entrance of the Sun into C^ncer; wherein they warily
deliver themselves, and reserve a reasonable latitude. So when Hippocrates
says, Sub Cane and ante Canem difficiles sunt purgationes; there is a latitude
of days comprised therein, for under the Dogstar he contains not only the
day of its ascent, but many following, and some ten days preceding: So
Aristotle delivers the affections of animalls, with the wary terms of Circa
and magna ex part: and when Theodorus translateth that part of his, Coeunt
Thunni and Scombri mense Februario post Idus, pariunt I^nio ante N^nas:
Scaliger for ante Nonas, renders it Iunii init^o, because that exposition
affords the latitude of diverse days: For affirming it happens before the
Nones, he allows but one day, that is the Calends, for in the Roman account
the second day is the fourth of the Nones of June.

Again, were the day definitive it had prevented the delusion of the Devil,
nor could he have gained applause by its prediction; who (notwithstanding as
Athanasius in the life of Anthony relates) to magnify his knowledge in things
to come, when he perceived the rains to fall in Aethiopia, would presage unto
the Egyptians the day of its inundation. And this would also make useless
that natural experiment observed in earth or sand about the River, by the
weight whereof (as good Authors report) they have unto this day, a knowledge of
its increase.

Lastly, it is not reasonable from variable and unstable causes, to derive a
fixed and constant effect, and such are the causes of this Inundation, which
cannot indeed be regular, and therefore their effects not prognosticable like
Ecclipses; for depending upon the clouds and descent of showers in Aethiopia,
which have their generation from vaporous exhalations, they must submit their
existence unto contingencies, and endure anticipation and recession from the
moveable condition of their causes. And therefore some years there has been
no increase at all, as Seneca and diverse relate of the eleventh year of
Cleopatra, nor nine years together, as is testified by Calisthenes. Some
years it has also retarded, and came far later then usually it was expected,
as according to Sozomen and Nicephorus it happened in the days of Theodosius;
whereat the people were ready to mutiny, because they might not sacrifice unto
the River according to the custom of their Predecessors.

Now this is also an usual way of mistake, and many are deceived who too
strictly construe the temporal considerations of things. Thus books will tell
us, and we are made to believe that the fourteenth year males are seminificall
and pubescent; but he that shall enquire into the generality, will rather
adhere unto the cautelous assertion of Aristotle, that is bis septem annis
exactis, and then but magna ex part. That Whelps are blind nine days, and
then begin to see is generally believed; but as we have elsewhere declared, it
is exceeding rare, nor do their eyelids usually open until the twelfth, and
sometimes not before the fourteenth day. And to speak strictly an hazardable
determination it is unto fluctuating and indifferent effects, to affixe a
positive type or period; for in effects of far more regular causalities
difficulties do often arise, and even in time it self which measures all
things, we use allowance in its commensuration. Thus while we conceive we have
the account of a year in 365 days, exact enquirers and computists will tell
us, that we escape 6 hours, that is a quarter of a day; and so in a day which
every one accounts 24 hours, or one revolution of the Sun; in strict account
we must allow the addition of such a part as the Sun does make in his proper
motion, from West to East, whereby in one day he describes not a perfect
circle.

Fourthly, it is affirmed by many, and received by most, that it never raineth
in Egypt, the River supplying that defect, and bountifully requiting it in its
Inundation: but this must also be received in a qualified sense, that is, that
it raines but seldom at any time in the Summer, and very rarely in the Winter.
But that great showers do sometimes fall upon that Region, beside the assertion
of many Writers, we can confirm from honorable and ocular testimony, Sir
Wiliam Paston.
and that not many years past, it rayned in Grand Cairo 8 or 9 days together.
Beside men hereby forget the relation of holy Scripture, as is delivered Ex. 9.
Behold I will cause it to rain a very grievous hail, such as has not been in
Egypt since the foundation thereof even until now: wherein God threatening
such a rain as had not happened, it must be presumed they had been acquainted
with some before; and were not ignorant of the substance, the menace being made
in the circumstance.

Now this mistake arises from a misapplication of the bounds or limits of
time, and an undue transition from one unto another; which to avoid we must
observe the punctual differences of time, and so reasonably distinguish
thereof, as not to confound or lose the one in the other. For things may come
to pass, Semper, Plerumque* Saepe, or Nunquam, Aliquando, Raro; that is
Always or never, for the most part or Sometimes, Oftimes or Seldom: Now the
deception is usual which is made by the misapplication of these; men presently
concluding that to happen often, which happens but sometimes; that never,
which happens but seldom; and that always which happens for the most part:
So is it said, the Sun shines every day in Rhodes, because for the most part,
it fails not: So we say and believe that a Camelion never ^ateth, but lives
only upon air, whereas indeed it is seen to eat very seldom, but many there
are who have beheld it to feed on flies. And so it is said, that children borne
in the eighth month live not; that is, for the most part, but not to be
concluded always; nor it seems in former ages in all places; for it is
otherwise recorded by Aristotle concerning the births of Egypt.

Lastly, it is commonly conceived that diverse Princes have attempted to cut the
Isthmus or tract of land which parts the Arabian, and Mediterran^an Sea; but
wher^in upon enquiry I find some difficulty concerning the place a^tempted;
many with good authority affirming, that the intent was not immediately to unit^
these Seas, but to make a navigable channel between the Red Sea and the Nile,
the marke^ whereof are extant to this day; it was first attempt^d by
Sersostris, after by D^^i^s, and in a fear to drown the Country deser^ed by
them both, but was long after re-attempted, and in some manner effected by
Phil^d^lphus; and so the Grand Signior who is Lord of the Country* conveyeth
his Gallyes into the Red Sea by the Nile; for he brings them down to Grand
Cairo where they are taken in p^^ces, ca^^yed upon Camels backs, and rejoyned
together at Su^s, his port and navall station for that Sea, whereby in effect
he acts the design of Cleopatra, who after the battle of Actium, in a
different way would have conveyed her Galleys into the Red Sea.

And therefore that proverb to cut an Isthmus, that is to take great pains,
and ^ffect nothing, alludeth not unto this attempt; but is by Erasmus applied
unto several other, as that undertaking of C^idians to cut their Isthmus, but
especially that of Corinth so unsuccessefully attempted by many Emp^rors. The
Cnidians were deterred by the peremptory disswasion of Apollo, plainly
commanding them to desist; for if God had thought it fit, he would have made
that Country an Isl^nd at first. But this perhaps will not be thought a
reasonable discou^ag^ment unto the activity of those spirits which endeavor to
advantage nature by Art, and upon good grounds to promote any part of the
universe; nor will the ill success of some (...) made a sufficient determent
unto others; who know that many learned men affi^me, that Isl^nds were not from
the beginning* that many have been made since by Art, that some Isthmes have
been ^at through by the Sea, and others cut by the (...): And if policy and
conveniencie would permit, that of Panama in America were most worthy the
attempt, it being but ^ew miles over, and would open a shorter cut unto the
East Indies and China.

CHAP. IX.
Of the Red Sea.
COntrary apprehensions are made of the Erythraean or Red Sea; most
apprehending a material redness therein, from whence they derive its common
denomination; and some so lightly conceiving hereof, as if it had no redness
at all, are feign to recurre unto other originalls of its appellation, wherein
to deliver a distinct account, we first observe that without consideration of
color it is named the Arabian Gulf: The Hebrews who had best reason to
remember it, do call it Zuph, or the weedy Sea, because it was full of sedge,
or they found it so in their passage; the Mahometans who are now Lords thereof
do know it by no other name then the Gulf of Mecha a City of Arabia.

The stream of Antiquity deriveth its name from King Erythrus; so slightly
conceiving of the nominall d^duction from Redness, that they plainly deny
there is any such accident in it. The words of Curtius are plain beyond
evasion, Ab Erythrorege inditum est nomen, proter quod ignar^ rubere oquas
credunt: O^ no more obscurity are the words of Philostrarus, and of later times
S^bellicus, Stulte persuasum est vnlgo rubras alicubi esse maris aquas, quin ab
Erythrorege nomen pel^go ind^tum of this opinion was (...) Co^sal^us, Pliny,
So^inu, Dio, Cassius, who although they denied not all redness, yet did they
rely upon (...) from King Erythrus.

O (...) have ^^llen upon the like, or perhaps the same (...) another
appellation; deducing its (...) not from King Erythan^ but Esau or Edom whose
habitation was upon the coasts thereof: Now Edom is as much as Erythrus, and
the Red Sea no more then the I^u^^can; from whence the posterity of Edom
removing toward the Mediterran^^n coast; according to their former nomination
by the Greeks went called (...) or red men, and from a plantation and colony of
theirs an Island near, Spain, was by the Greek describes termed Erythra, as
is declared by (...) and Solinus.

Very many omitting the nominall derivation do rest in the gross and li^^rall
conception thereof, appre^^nding a real redness and constant color of parts.
Of which opinion are also they which hold the Sea receives a red and mimous
(...) from springs, wells, and currents, that fall into it: and of the same
belief are probably many Christians who conceiving the passage of the (...)
through this Sea to have been the type of Baptism, according to that of the
Apostle, 1 Cor. 10. 2.
All were baptized unto Moses in the cloud, and in the Sea, for the better
resemblance of the blood of (...), they willingly received it in the
apprehension of redness, and a color agreeable unto its mystery; according to
that of Austen, Significat mare illud r^brum Baptismum Christi; unde nobis
Biaptismu^ Christi nisi sanguine Christi consecratus?

Bu^ diverse M^dernes not considering th^se concep^ions, and appealing unto the
Testimony of s^nse, have at last determined the point; concluding a redness
herein, but not in the sense received. Sir Walter Raleigh from his own and
Portugal observations, does place the redness of this Sea, in the reflection
from red Islands, and the redness of the earth at the bottom, wherein Coral
grows very plentifully, and from whence in great abundance it is transpor^ed
into Europe, the observations of Albe^queroque, and Stephanus de Gama, as from
Johannes de Barros, Fernandius de Cor^lov^^ (...) this redness from the color
of the sand and ^^^lous earth at the bottom; for being a shallow Sea, while it
rouleth to and (...), there appears a redness upon the water, which is most
discernible in sunny and windy weather. But that this is no more then an
apparent (...) he confirms by an experiment: for in the reddest (...) of
water, it distered not from the complexion of other Seas, nor is this color
discoverable in every place of that Sea; for as he (...) in some places it is
very green, in others (...) and yellow, according to the color of the earth or
sand at the bottom. And so may (...) be made out when he says, this Sea is
blue; or (...) denying this redness, because he beheld not that color about
(...); or when Corsa^^us at the mouth thereof could not discover the ^ame.

Now although we have ^^qui^ed the ground of (...) in this Sea, yet are we
(...) for what is forgot by many, and known by few, there is another Red Sea
whose (...) we pre^^nd not to make out from these (...)* that is* the Persian
Gulf or Bay, which divides the (...) as (...) has described it, Mare rubrum
in duos d^vid^tur sinus, i^ qui ab Orient est Persicus appellatur or as
Solinus expresses it. Qui ab Orient est Persicus appellatur, ex adversounde
Arabia est, Ar^bic^^; wherei^ (...) and many more* and therefore there is no
(...) he delivers that Tigris and (...) do fall into the Red Sea, and
Fernandus de Cordova, justly defends his (...) Seneca in that expression, Et
qui renatum pr^rsus exciplens diem Teptdum Rubenti (...),

Nor has only the Persian Sea received the same (...) with the Arabian, but,
what is strange, and much con^ounds the distinction, the name thereof is also
derived (...) King Erythrus, who was conceived to be buried in an Island of
this Sea, as Dionysius Afer, Curtius, and Suidas do deliver, which were of no
less probability then the other, if as with the same Authors (...) affirms,
he was buried near Caramania bordering upon the Persian Gulf; and if his
(...) was seen by Nearchus, it was not so likely so be in the Arabian Gulf;
for we read that from the River Indus he came unto Alexander at Babylon, some
few days before his death. Now Babylon was seated upon the River Euphrates,
which runs into the Persian Gulf; and therefore however the Latin
expresses it in Strabo, that Nearchus suffered much in the Arabian Sinus, yet
is the original (...), that is the Gulf of Persia.

That therefore the Red Sea or Arabian Gulf received its name from personal
derivation is but uncertain, that both the Seas of one name should have one
common denominator less probable; that one from name, another from color not
incredible; that there is a gross and material redness in either not to be
affirmed, that there is an emphaticall or apparent redness in one, not well to
be denied; and this is sufficient to make good the Allegory of the Christians;
and in this distinction may we justi^ie the name of the Black Sea, given unto
Pontus Euxinus, the name of Xanthus, or the Yellow River of Phrygia, and the
name of Mar Vermeio, or the Red Sea in America.

CHAP. X.
Of the Blackness of Negroes.
IT is evident not only in the general frame of Nature, that things most
manifest unto sense, have proved obscure unto the understanding: But even in
proper and appropriate objects, wherein we affirm the sense cannot err, the
faculties of reason most often fail u^. Thus of colors in general, under
whose gloss and vernish all things are seen, no man has yet beheld the true
nature, or positively set down their incontroulable causes; which while some
ascribe unto the mixture of the Elements, others to the graduality of opacity
and light; they have left our endeavors to grope them out by twilight, and by
darkness almost to discover that whose existence is evidenced by light. The
Chemists have attempted laudably, reducing their causes unto Sal, Sulphur, and
Mercury; and had they made it out so well in this, as in the objects of smell
and taste, their endeavors had been more acceptable: For whereas they refer
Sapor unto Salt, and Odor unto Sulphur, they vary much concerning color; some
reducing it unto Mercury, some to Sulphur, others unto Salt; wherein indeed the
last ^onc^it does not oppress the former, and Salt may carry a strong
concurrence therein. For beside the fixed and terrestrious Salt, there is in
natural bodies a Sal niter referring unto Sulphur; there is also a volatile or
Ammoniac Salt, retaining unto Mercury; by which Salts the colors of bodies are
sensibly qualified, and receive degrees of luster or obscurity, superficiality
or profundity, fixation or volatility.

Their general or first natures being thus obscure, there will be greater
difficulties in their particular discoveries; for being farther removed from
their simplicities they fall into more complexed considerations, and so require
a subtiler act of reason to distinguish and call forth their natures. Thus
although a man understood the general nature of colors, yet were it no easy
problem to resolve, Why grass is green? Why Garlic, Molyes, and Porrets have
white roots, deep green leaves, and black seeds? Why several docks, and sorts
of Rhubarb with yellow roots, send forth purple flowers? Why also from Lactary
or milky plants which have a white and lacteous juice dispersed through every
part, there arise flowers blue and yellow? Moreover beside the specificall and
first digressions ordained from the Creation, which might be urged to salve
the variety in every species; why shall the marvel of Pe^u produce its
flowers of di^ferent colors, and that not once, or constantly, but every day
and va^^o^sly? Why Tulips of one color produce some of another, and running
through almost all, should still escape a blew? And lastly, why some men, yea
and they a mighty and considerable part of mankind, should first acquire and
still retain the gloss and tincture of blackness? which who ever strictly
enquires, shall find no less of darkness in the cause, then blackness in
the effect it self, there arising unto examination no such satisfactory and
unquarrellable reasons, as may confirm the causes generally received, which
are but two in number; that is the heat and sco^ch of the Sun, or the curse
of God on C^^m and his poste^i^y.

The first was generally received by the Ancients, especially the heathen, who
in obscurities had no higher recourse then Nature, as may appear by a
Discourse concerning this point in Strabo: By Aristotle it seems to be employed,
in those Problems which enquire why the Sun makes men black, and not the fire?
why it whitens wax, yet blacks the skin? By the word Aethiops it self, applied
to the m^morablest Nations of Negroes, that is of a burnt or torrid
countenance: The fancy of the fable infers also the Antiquity of the opinion,
which de^iveth the complexion from the deviation of the Sun, and the
con^lagration of all things under Phaeton: But this opinion though generally
embraced, was I perceive rejected by Aristobulus a very ancient Geographer, as
is discovered by Strabo; It has been doubted by several modern Writers,
particularly by Ortelius, but amply and satisfactorily discussed as we know by
no man; we shall therefore endeavor a full delivery hereof, declaring the
grounds of doub^, and reasons of d^niall; which rightly understod, may if not
overthrow, yet shrewdly shake the security of this assertion.

And first, many which countenance the opinion in this reason, do tacitly and
upon consequence overthrow it in another: For whilst they make the River Senaga
to divide and bound the Moors, so that on the South Side they are black, on
the other only tawnie; they imply a secret causality herein from the air,
place or River, and seem not to derive it from the Sun; the effects of whose
activity are not precipitously abrupted, but gradually proceed to their
cessations.

Secondly, if we affirm that this effect proceeded, or as we will not be
backward to concede, it may be advanced and fomented from the fervor of the
Sun; yet do we not hereby discover a principle sufficient to decide the
question concerning other animals; nor does he that affirms the heat makes
man black, afford a reason why other animalls in the same habitations
maintain a constant and agreeable hue unto those in other parts, as Lions,
Elephants, Camels, Swans, Tigers, Est^iges; which though in Aethiopia, in the
disadvantage of two Summers, and perpendicular rays of the Sun, do yet make
good the complexion of their species, and hold a colorable correspondence unto
those in milder regions. Now did this complexion proceed from heat in man, the
same would be communicated unto other animalls which equally participate the
Influence of the common Agent: For thus it is in the effects of cold in Regions
far removed from the Sun; for therein men are not only of fair complexions,
gray eyed, and of light hair, but many creatures exposed to the air, deflect
in extremity from their natural colors, from brown, russet and black,
receiving the complexion of Winter, and turning perfect white; for thus Olaus
Magnus relates, that after the Autumnall Aequinox, Foxes begin to grow white;
thus Michovius reports, and we want not ocular confirmation, that Ha^es and
Partridges turn white in the Winter; and thus a white Crow, a Proverbiall
rarity with us, is none unto them; but that ins^parable accident of Aristotle's
is separated in many hundreds.

Thirdly, if the fervor of the Sun, or intemperate heat of clime did solely
occasion this complexion, surely a migration or change thereof might cause a
sensible, if not a total mutation; which notwithstanding experience will not
admit: For Negroes tra^splan^ed although into cold and ^legmaticke habitations
continue their hue both in themselves, and also their generations; except they
mix with different complexions, whereby notwithstanding there only succeeds a
remission of their tinctures, there remaining unto many descents, a full shadow
of their originalls; and if they preserve their copulations entire they still
maintain their complexions, as is very remarkable ^n the dominions of the
Grand Signior, and most observable in the Moors in B^a^ilia, which
transplanted about an hundred years past, continue the tinctures of their
fathers unto this day: and so likewise fair or white people translated into
hotter Countries receive not impressions amounting to this complexion, as has
been observed in many Europeans who have lived in the land of Negroes: and as
Edvardus Lopes testifies of the Spanish plantations, that they retained their
native complexions unto his days.

Fourthly, if the fervor of the Sun were the sole cause hereof in Aethiopia
or any land of Negroes, it were also reasonable that inhabitants of the same
latitude subjected unto the same vicinity of the Sun, the same diurnall arch,
and direction of its rays, should also partake of the same hue and complexion,
which notwithstanding they do not; For the Inhabitants of the same latitude in
Asia are of a different complexion, as are the Inhabitants of Cambogia and
Java; insomuch that some conceave the Negroe is properly a native of Africa,
and that those places in Asia inhabited now by Moors, are but the in^rusions
of Negroes ariving first from Africa, as we generally conceave of Madagascar,
and the adjoining Islands, who retain the same complexion unto this day. But
this defect is more remarkable in America, which although subjected unto both
the Tropicks, yet are not the Inhabitants black betwee^e, or near, or under
either, neither to the Southward in Brasilia, Chili, or Peru, nor yet to the
Northward in Hispaniola, Castilia, del Oro, or Nicaraguava; and although in
many parts thereof it be confessed there be at present swarms of Negroes
serving under the Spaniard, yet were they all transported from Africa, since
the discovery of Columbus, (...) are not indigenous or proper natives of
America.

Fifthly; we cannot conclude this complexion in Nations from the vicinity or
habitude they hold unto the Sun, for even in Africa they be Negroes under the
Southern Tropic, but ar^ not all of this hu^ either under or near the
Northern. So the people of Gualata, Aga^es, ^aramantes, and of Goaga, all
within the Northern Tropicks are not Negroes, but on the other side about Capo
Negro, Cefala, and Madagascar, they are of a Jetty black.

Now if to salve this Anomaly we say the heat of the Sun is more powerful in
the Southern Tropic, because in the sign of Capricorn falls out the
Perigeum or lowest place of the Sun in his Excentrick, whereby he becomes
nearer unto them then unto the other in Cancer, we shall not absolve the
doubt. And if any insist upon such nicities, and will presume a different
effect of the Sun, from such a difference of place or vicinity, we shall
balance the same with the concernment of its motion, and time of revolution;
and say he is more powerful in the Northern hemisphere, and in the Apoge^^;
for therein his motion is slower, and so his heat respectively unto those
habitations, as of duration so also of more effect. For, though he absolve his
revolution in 365. days, odd hours and minutes, yet by reason of his
Excentricity, his motion is unequal, and his course far longer in the
Northern semicircle, then in the Southern; for the latter he passes in 178.
days, but the other takes him 187. that is, eleven days more; so is his
presence more continued unto the Northern Inhabitant, and the longest day in
Cancer is longer unto us, then that in Capricorn unto the Southern habitator.
Beside, hereby we only infer an inequality of heat in different Tropicks,
but not an equality of effects in other parts subjected to the same; For, in
the same degree, and as near the earth he makes his revolution unto the
American, whose Inhabitants notwithstanding partake not of the same effect. And
if herein we seek a relief from the Dogstarre, we shall introduce an effect
proper unto a few, from a cause common unto many, for upon the same grounds
that Star should have as forcible a power upon America and Asia, and although
it be not vertical unto any part of Asia, but only passes by Beach, in terra
incognita; yet is it so unto America, and vertically passes over the
habitations of Peru and Brasilia.

Sixthly, and which is very considerable, there are Negroes in Africa beyond the
Southern Tropic, and some so far removed from it, as Geographically the clime
is not intemperate, that is, near the cape of good Hope, in 36. of Southern
Latitude. Whereas in the same elevation Northward, the Inhabitants of America
are fair, and they of Europe in Candy, Sicily, and some parts of Spain
deserve not prop^rly so low a name as Tawny.

Lastly, whereas the Africans are conceaved to be more p^culiarly scorched and
torrified from the Sun, by addition of dryness from the soil, from want and
defect of water, it will not excuse the doubt. For the parts which the Negroes
possess, are not so void of Rivers and moisture, as is herein presumed; for on
the other side the mountains of the Moon, in that great tract called
Zanzibar, there are the mighty Rivers of Suama, and Spirito Santo; on this
side, the great River Zaire, the mighty Nile and Niger, which do not only
moysten, and contemperate the air by their exhalations, but refresh and
hum^ctate the earth by their annual inundations. Beside, in that part of
Africa, which with all disadvantage is most dry, that is, in site between the
Tropicks, defect of Rivers and inundations, as also abundance of sands, the
people are not esteemed Negroes; and that is Lybia, which with the Greeks
carries the name of all Africa; A region so des^rt, dry and sandy, that
travelers (as Leo reports) are feign to carry water on their Camels, whereof
they find not a drop sometime in 6. or 7. days; yet is this Country
accounted by Geographers no part of terra Nigritarum, and P^olomy places
herein the Leuco Aethiopes, or pale and Tawney Moors.

Now the ground of this opinion might be the visible quality of Blackness
observably produced by heat, fire, and smoke; but especially with the
Ancients the violent esteem they held of the heat of the Sun, in the hot or
torrid Zone; conceaving that part unhabitable, and therefore that people in the
vicinities or frontiers thereof, could not escape without this change of their
complexions. But how far they were mistaken in this apprehension, modern
Geography has discovered: And as we have declared, there are many within this
Zone whose complexions descend not so low as blackness. And if we should
strictly insist hereon, the possibility might fall into some question; that is,
whether the heat of the Sun, whose fe^vor may swar^e a living part, and even
black a dead or dissolving flesh, can yet in animals whose par^^ are successive
and in continual fl^x, produce this deep and perfect gloss of Blackness.

Thus having evinced at least made dubious, the Sun is not the Author of this
blackness, how and when this tincture first began i^ yet a Riddle, and
positively to determine it surpasses my presumption. Seeing therefore we
cannot certainly discover what did effect it, it may afford some piece of
satisfaction to know what might procure it: It may be therefore considered,
whether the inward use of certain waters or fountains of peculiar operations,
might not at first produce the ^ffect in question. For, of the like we have
records in story related by Aristotle, Strabo, and Pliny, who has made a
collection hereof, as of two fountains in Baeotia, the one making Sheep
white, the other black, of the water of Siberis which made Oxen black, and the
like effect i^ had also upon men, dying not only the skin, but making their
hairs black and curled. This was the conceit of Aristobulus, who received so
little satisfaction from the other, or that it might be caused by ^eate, or any
kind of fire, that he conceaved it as reasonable to impute the effect unto
water.

Secondly, it may be perpended whether it might not fall out the same way that
Jacobs cattle became speckled, spotted and ringstraked, that is, by the power
and efficacy of Imagination; which produces effects in the conception
correspondent unto the fancy of the Agents ingeneration, and sometimes
assimilates the Idea of the generator into a realty in the thing engendered.
For, hereof there pass for current many indisputed examples; so in Hippocrates
we read of one, that from the view and intention of a picture conceaved a
Negroe; And in the history of Heliodore of a Moorish Queen, who upon aspection
of the picture of Andromeda, conceaved and brought forth a fair one. And thus
perhaps might some say it was at the beginning of this complexion, induced
first by Imagination, which having once impregnated the seed, found afterward
concurrent productions, which were continued by Climes, whose constitution
advantaged the first impression. Thus Plotinus conceaveth white Peacocks first
came in: Thus as Aldrovand relates, many opinion that from aspection of the
Snow which lies long in Northern Regions, and high mountains, Hawks, Kites,
Bears, and other creatures become white; And by this way Austin conceaveth the
Devil provided, they never wanted a white spotted Ox in Egypt, for such an
one they worshipped, and called it Apis.

Thirdly, it is not indisputable whether it might not proceed from such a cause
and the like foundation of Tincture, as does the black Jaundise, which meeting
with congenerous causes might settle durable inquinations, and advance their
generations unto that hue, which was naturally before but a degree or two below
it: And this transmission we shall the easier admit in color, if we remember
the like has been effected in organicall parts and figures; the Symmetry
whereof being casually or purposely perverted, their morbosities have
vigorously desc^nded to their posterities, and that in durable d^^o^mities.
This was the b^ginning of Macrophali or people with long heads, whereof
Hippocrat^s, De Aere, Aquis, and Locis, has cleer^ly delivered himself: Cum
primum ^ditus est Infans, caput ^jus tenellum manibus effingunt, and in
longitudine adolescere ^ogunt; hoc institutum primum hujusmodi, naturae d^dit
vitium, successu vero temporis in naturam (...), ut proinde instituto nihil
amplius opus esset; semen en^m genitale ex omnibus corporis partibus provenit,
ex s^nis quidem sanum, ex morbosis morbosum: Si igitur ex caluis calui, ex
caeciis caecii, and ex distortis, ut plurimum, distorti gignuntur, cademque in
caeteris formis valet ratio, quid prohibet cur non ex macrocephalis
macrocephali gignantur? Thus as Aristotle observes, the Deeres of (...) had
their ears divided, occasioned at first by s^^tting the ears of D^ere. Th^s
have the Chinese little feet, most Negroes great lips and ^lat nos^s* and
thus many Spaniards, and medite^^anea^ Inhabi^ants, which are of the race of
Barbary Moors, (although after frequent commixture) have not worn out the
Camoys nose unto this day.

Lastly, if we must still be urged to particularities, and such as declare how
and when the seed of Adam did first receave this tincture; we may say that
men became black in the same manner that some Foxes, Squirrels, Lions first
turned of this complexion, whereof there are a constant sort in diverse
Countries; that some Chaughes came to have red legs and bills, that Crows
became pyed; All which (...) however they began, depend on durable foundations,
and such as may continue for ever. And if as yet we cannon satisfy, but must
farther define the cause and manner of this mutation; we must confess, in
matters of Antiquity, and such as are decided by History, if their Originals
and first beginnings escape a due relation, they fall into great obscurities,
and such as future Ages seldom reduce unto a resolution. Thus if you deduct
the Administration of Angels, and that they dispersed the creatures into all
parts after the flood, as they had congregated the^ into Noah's Arc before* it
will be no easi^ question to resolve, how several sorts of Animalls were first
dispersed into Islands, and almost how any into America. How the v^nereall
contagion began in that part of the earth, since history is silen^, is not
easily resolved by Philosophy; For, whereas it is imputed unto Anthropophagy,
or the eating of ma^s (...), the cause has been common unto many other
Countries, and there have been Canibal^ or men-ea^ers in the three other parts
of the world, if we credit the relations of Ptolomy, Strabo, and Pliny. And
thus, if the favorable pen of Moses had not r^vealed the confusion of tongues,
and positively declared unto us their division at Babell, our disputes
concerning their beginning had been without end, and I fear we must have left
the hopes of that decision unto Elias.

And if any will yet insist, and urge the question farther still upon me, I
shall be enforced unto diverse of the like nature, wherein perhaps I shall
receave no greater satisfaction. I shall demand how the Camels of Bactria came
to have two bunches on their backs, whereas the Camels of Arabia in all
relations have but one? How Oxen in some Countries began and continue gibbous
or bunch backed? what way those many different shapes, colors, hairs, and
natures of Dogs came in? how they of some Countries became depilous and without
any hair at all, whereas some sorts in excess abound therewith? How the
Indian Hare came to have a long tail, whereas that part in others attaines no
higher then a scut? How the hogs of Illyria which Aristotle speaks of, became
to be solipedes or wholl hoofed* whereas in all other parts they are bisulcous
and described cloven hoo^ed by God himself? All which with many others must
need^ seem^ strange unto those, that hold there were but two of the uncle^^^
sort in the Arc, and are forced to reduce these varieties to unknown
originals ^ince.

However therefore this complexion was first acquired, it is evidently
maintained by generation, and by the tincture of the skin as a spermaticall
part traduced from father unto son, so that they which are strangers contract
it not, and the Natives which transmigrate omit it not without commixture, and
that after diverse generations. And this affection (if the story were true)
might wonderfully be confirmed, by what Maginus and others relate of the
Emperor of Aethiopia, or Prester John, who derived from Solomon is not yet
descended into the hue of his Country, but remains a Mulatto, that is, of a
mongrill complexion unto this day. Now although we conceive this blackness to
be seminall, yet are we not of Herodotus conceit, that is, that their seed is
black; an opinion long ago rejected by Aristotle, and since by sense and
enquiry; his assertion against the Historian was probable, that all seed was
white; that is, without great controversy in viviparous Animals, and such as
have Testicles, or preparing vessels wherein it receives a manifest dealbation:
And not only in them, but (for ought I know) in Fishes, not abating the seed
of Plants, whereof though the skin and covering be black, yet is the seed and
fructifying part not so: as may be observed in the seeds of Onyons, Pyonie, and
Basil: most controvertible it seems, in the spawne of Frogs, and Lobsters,
whereof notwithstanding at the very first the spawne is white, contracting by
degrees a blackness, answerable in the one unto the color of the shell, in
the other unto the porwigle or Tadpole, that is, that animal which first
proceeds from it: And thus may it also be in the generation and sperme of
Negroes; that being first and in its naturals white, but upon separation of
parts, accidents before invisible become apparent; there arising a shadow or
dark ^^^lorescence in the outside, whereby not only their legitimate and
timely births, but their abortions are also duskie, before they have felt the
scortch and fervor of the Sun.

CHAP. XI.
Of the same.
A Second opinion there is, that this complexion was first a curse of God
derived unto them from Cham, upon whom it was was inflicted for discovering the
nakedness of Noah. Which notwithstanding is sooner affirmed then proved, and
carries with it sundry improbabilities. For first, if we derive the curse on
Cham, or in general upon his posterity, we shall Benegroe a greater part of
the earth then ever was, or so conceived; and not only paint the Ae^hiopians,
and reputed sons of Cush, but the people also of Egypt, Arabia, Assyria, and
Chaldea; for by his race were these Countries also peopled. And if concordantly
unto Berosus, the fragment of Cato de Originibus, some things of
Halicarnasseus, Macrobius, and out of them of Leandro and Annius, we shall
conceive of the travailes of Camese or Cham, we may introduce a generation of
Negroes as high as Italy, which part was never culpable of deformity, but has
produced the magnified examples of beauty.

Secondly, the curse mentioned in Scripture was not denounced upon Cham, but
Canaan his youngest son, and the reasons thereof are diverse; the first, from
the Jewish Tradition, whereby it is conceived, that Canaan made the discovery
of the nakedness of Noah, and notified it unto Cham. Secondly, to have cursed
Cham had been to cu^se all his posterity, whereof but one was guilty of the
fact. And lastly, he spared Cham, because he had blessed him before, cap. 9.
Now if we confine this curse unto Canaan, and think the same fulfilled in his
posterity, then do we induce this complexion on the Sidonians, then was the
promised land a tract of Negroes; For from Canaan were descended the
Canaanites, Jebusites, Amorites, Gergezites, and Hevites, which were possessed
of that Land.

Thirdly, although we should place the original of this curse upon one of the
sons of Cham, yet were it not known from which of them to derive it. For the
particularity of their discents is imperfectly set down by accountants, nor is
it distinctly determinable from whom thereof the Aethiopians are proceeded.
For, whereas these of Africa are generally esteemed to be the Issue of Chus,
the elder son of Cham, it is not so easily made out. For the land of Chus,
which the Septuagint translates Aethiopia, makes no part of Africa, nor is it
the habitation of Blackmo^es, but the country of Arabia, especially the Happy,
and stony; possessions and Colonies of all the sons of Chus, excepting Nimrod,
and Havila^, possessed and planted wholly by the children of Chus, that is, by
Sabtah and Raamah, Sabtacha, and the sons of Raamah, Dedan and Sheba, according
unto whose names the Nations of those parts have received their denominations,
as may be collected from Pliny and P^olomy; and as we are informed by
credible Authors, they hold a fair Analogy in their names, even unto our
days. So the wife of Moses translated in Scripture an Ethiopian, and so
confirmed by the fabulous relation of Josephus, was none of the daughters of
Africa, nor any Negroe of Aethiopia, but the daughter of J^thro, Prince and
Priest of Madian, which was a part of Arabia the stony, bordering upon the Red
Sea. So the Queen of Sheba came not unto Solomon out of Aethiopia, but from
Arabia, and that part thereof which bore the name of the first planter thereof,
the son of Chus. So whether the Eunuch which Philip the Deacon baptized, were
servant unto Candac^ Queen of the African Aethiopia, (although Damianus a
Goes, Codignus, and the Aethiopick relations aver) is yet by many, and with
strong suspicions doubted. So that Army of a million, which Zerah King of
Aethiopia is said to bring against Asa, was drawn out of Arabia, and the
plantations of Chus, not out of Aethiopia, and the remote habitations of the
Moors; For it is said that Asa pursuing his victory, took from him the city
Gerar; now Gerar was no city in or near Aethiopia, but a place between Cadesh
and Zur, where Abraham formerly sojourned. Since therefore these African
Aethiopians, are not convinced by the common acception to be the sons of Chus,
whether they be not the posterity of Phut, or Mizraim, or both, it is not
assuredly determined; For Mizraim, he possessed Egypt, and the East parts of
Africa: From Ludym his son came the Lybians, and perhaps from them the
Aethiopians: Phut possessed Mauritania, and the Western parts of Africa, and
from these perhaps descended the Moors of the West, of Mandinga, Meleguette and
Guinie. But from Canaan, upon whom the curse was pronounced, none of these had
their original, for he was restrained unto Canaan and Syria; although in after
Ages many Colonies dispersed, and some thereof upon the coasts of Africa, and
the prepossessions of his elder brothers.

Fourthly, to take away all doubt or any probable divarication, the curse is
plainly specified in the Text, nor need we dispute it, like the mark of C^in;
Servus servorum erit fratribus suis, Cursed be Canaan, a servant of servants
shall he be unto his brethren; which was after fulfilled in the conquest of
Canaan, subdued by the Israelites, the posterity of Sem; which Prophecy Abraham
well understanding, took an oath of his servant not to take a wife for his Son
Isaac out of the daughters of the Canaanites; And the like was performed by
Isaac in the behalf of his son Jacob. As for Cham and his other sons this
curse attained them not, for Nimrod the son of Chus set up his kingdom in
Babylon, and erected the first great Empire, Mizraim and his posterity grew
mighty Monarchs in Egypt; and the Empire of the Aethiopians has been as
large as either.

Lastly, whereas men affirm this color was a Curse, I cannot make out the
propriety of that name, it neither seeming so to them, nor reasonably unto us;
for they take so much content therein, that they esteem deformity by other
colors, describing the Devil, and terrible objects White. And if we
seriously consult the definitions of beauty, and exactly perpend what wise men
determine thereof, we shall not reasonably apprehend a curse, or any deformity
therein. For first, some place the essence thereof in the proportion of parts,
conceiving it to consist in a comely commensurability of the whole unto the
pa^ts, and the parts between themselves, which is the determination of the
best and learned Writers: and whereby the Moors are not excluded from beauty;
there being in this description no consideration of colors, but an apt
connection and frame of parts and the whole. Others there be, and those most in
number, which place it not only in proportion of parts, but also in grace of
color; But to make Color essential unto Beauty, there will arise no slender
difficulty; For, Aristotle in two definitions of pulchritude, and Galen in one,
have made no mention of color: Neither will it agree unto the Beauty of
Animals, wherein notwithstanding there is an approved pulchritude. Thus horses
are handsome under any color, and the symmetry of parts obscures the
consideration of complexions; Thus in concolour animals and such as are
confined unto one color we measure not their Beauty thereby; for if a Crow or
Black^bird grow white, we generally accounted it more pretty, And even in
monstrosity descend not to opinion of deformity. And by this way likewise the
Moors escape the curse of deformity, there concurring no stationary color,
and sometimes not any unto Beauty.

The Platonic contemplators reject both these descriptions ^ounded upon parts
and colors, or either, as M. Leo the Jew has excellently discoursed in his
Genealogy of Love, defining Beauty a formal grace, which delights and moves
them to love which comprehend it. This grace say they, discoverable outwardly,
is the resplendor and Raye of some interior and invisible Beauty, and
proceeds from the forms of compositions amiable; whose faculties if they can
aptly contrive their matter, they beget in the subject an agreeable and
pleasing beauty, if over ruled thereby, they evidence not their perfections,
but run into deformity. For seeing that out of the same materials, Thersites
and Paris Beauty and monstrosity may be contrived, the forms and operative
faculties introduce and determine their perfections; which in natural bodies
receive exactness in every kind, according to the first Idea of the Creator,
and in contrived bodies the phancie of the Artificer: And by this consideration
of Beauty, the Moors also are not excluded, but hold a common share therein
with all mankind.

Lastly, in whatsoever its Theory consists, or if in the general, we allow
the common conceit of symmetry and of color, yet to descend unto
singularities, or determine in what symmetry or color it consisted, were very
dangerous; for beauty is determined by opinion, and seems to have no essence
that holds one notion unto all; that seeming beauteous unto one, which has no
favor with another, and that unto every one, according as custom has made it
natural, or sympathy and conformity of minds shall make it seem agreeable.
Thus flat noses seem comely unto the Moore, an Aquiline or hawked one unto the
Persian, a large and prominent nose unto the Roman, but none of all these are
acceptable in our opinion. Thus some think it most ornamentall to wear their
Bracelets on their wrests, others say it is better to have them about their
Ancles; some think it most comely to wear their Rings and Jewels in the
Ear, others will have them about their privities; a third will not think they
are complete except they hang them in their lips, cheeks or noses. Thus Homer
to set off Minerva calls her (...), that is gray or light blew eyed: now this
unto us seems far less amiable then the black. Thus we that are of contrary
complexions accuse the blacknes of the Mores as ugly: But the Spouse in the
Canticles excuses this conceit, in that description of he^s, I am black, but
comely: And howsoever Cerberus, and the furies of hell be described by the
Poets under this complexion, yet in the Beauty of our Savior blackness is
commended, when it is said his locks are bushie and black as a Raven. So that
to infer this as a curse, or to reason it as a deformity, is no way
reasonable; the two foundations of beauty Symmet^y and Complexion, receiving
such various apprehensions, that no deviation will be expounded so high as a
curse or undeniable deformity, without a manifest and confessed degree of
monstrosity.

Lastly* it is a very injurious method unto Philosophy, and a perpetual
promotion unto Ignorance, in points of obscurity, nor open unto easy
considerations, to fall upon a present refuge unto Miracles, or recurre unto
immediate contrivance from the insearchable hands of God. Thus in the conceit
of the evil odor of the Jews, Christians without a farther research into the
verity of the thing, or enquiry into the cause, draw up a judgment upon them,
from the passion of their Savior. Thus in the wondrous effects of the clime of
Ireland, and the freedom from all venomous creatures, the credulity of common
conceit imputes this immunity unto the benediction of St. Patrick, as Beda and
Gyraldus have left recorded. Thus the Ass having a peculiar mark of a cross
made by a black list down his back, and another athwart, or at right angles
down his shoulders; common opinion ascribe this figure unto a peculiar
^ignation, since that beast had the honor to bear our Savior upon his back.
Certainly this is a course more desperate then Antipathies, Sympathies or
occult qualities; wherein by a final and satisfactive discernment of faith, we
lay the last and particular effects upon the first and general cause of all
things, whereas in the other we do but palliate our determinations, until
our advanced endeavors do totally reject or partially salve their evasions.

CHAP. XII.
A digression concerning Blackness.
THere being therefore two opinions repugnant unto each other, it may not be
presumptive or skepticall in me to doubt of both, and because we remain
imperfect in the general theory of Colors, we shall deliver at present a
short discovery of blacknes, wherein although perhaps we afford no greater
satisfaction then others, yet shall our attempts exceed any; for we shall
emperically and sensibly discourse hereof, deducing the causes of Blackness
from such originalls in Nature, as we do generally observe things are
de^igrated by Art: And herein I hope our progression will not be thought
unreasonable; For Art being the imitation of Nature, or Nature at the second
hand; it is but a sensible expression of effects dependant on the same, through
more removed causes, and therefore the works of the one, must prove reasonable
discoverers of the other.

And first, things become black by a ^ootish and fuligi^ous matter proceeding
from the sulphur of bodies torrified, not taking fuligo strictly, but in
opposition unto (...), that is any kind of vaporous or madefying excretion, and
comprehending (...), that is as Aristotle defines it, a separation of moist and
dry parts made by the action of heat or fire, and coloring bodies objected.
Hereof, in his Meteors, from the qualities of the subject he raises three
kinds; the exhalations from ligneous and lean bodies, as bones, hair, and the
like he calls (...) fumus; from ^at bodies, and such as have not their
fatness conspicuous or separated, he terms (...) fuligo, as wax, rosin,
pitch, or turpentine; that from unctuous bodies, and such whose oylinesse is
evident, he names (...) or nidor; now every one of these do black the bodies
objected unto them, and are to be conceived in the sooty and ful^ginous matter
expressed.

I say, proceeding from the sulphur of bodies torrified, that is the oily fat
and unctuous parts wherein consist the principles of flammability; not pure and
refined sulphur, as in the spirits of wine often rectified, but containing
terrest^ious parts, and carrying with it the volatile salt of the body, and
such as is distinguishable by taste in ^oot; nor vulgar and usual sulphur, for
that leaves none or very little blackness, except a metalline body receive the
exhalation.

I say, torrified, ^indged, or suffering some impression from fire, thus are
bodies casually or artificially denigrated, which in their naturalls are of
another complexion; thus are Charcoales made black by an infection of their own
suffitus; so is it true what is assumed of combustible bodies, Adusta nigra,
perusta alba, black at first from the fuliginous tincture, which being exhaled
they become white, as is perceptible in ashes. And so does fire cleanse and
purify bodies, because it consumes the sulphurous parts, which before did
make them foul; and therefore refines those bodies which will never be (...)
by (...). Thus Camphire of a white substance, by its fuligo affords a (...)
black. So is pitch black, although it proceed from the same (...) with rozen,
the one distilling forth, the other fo^ced by fire; so of the su^^^tus of a
torch, do Painters make a velvet black^; so is lamp black made; so of burnt
Hearts horn a sable; so is Bacon denigrated in Chimneyes: so in fevers and hot
distempers from choler adust is caused ^ blackness in our tongues, teeth and
excretions: so are ustilag^, (...) corn and trees black by blasting, so parts
cauterized, gangrenated, ^^^derated and mortified, become black, the radical
moisture, or (...) sulphur suffering an ex^inction, and smothered in the part
affected. So not only actual but potentiall fire, nor burning fire, but also
corroding water will induce a blacknes. So are Chimneyes and furna^^^ generally
black, except they receive a clear and manifest sulphur; for the smo^k of
sulphur will not black a paper, and is commonly used by wom^^ to whiten
Tiffanies; which it performs by an acide (...) penetrating spirit ascending
from it, by reason whereof it is no^ (...) to kindle any thing, nor will it
easily light a candle, until that spirit be spent, and the ^lame approaches
the match: And this is that acide and piercing spirit which with such activity
and compunction invad^th the brains and nostrills of those that receive it.
And thus when B^llonius affirms that Charcoales, made out of the wood of
Oxycedar are white, Dr. Jordan in his judicious Discourse of mineral waters
yields the reason, because their vapors are rather sulphurous then of any
other combustible substance. So we see that Tinby coals will not black linen
being hanged in the smoke thereof, but rather whiten it, by reason of the
drying and penetrating quality of sulphur, which will make red Roses white: And
therefore to conceive a general blackness in Hell, and yet therein the
material flames of sulphur, is no Philosophical conception, nor will it
consist with the real effects of its nature.

These are the advenient and artificial ways of denigration, answerably
whereto may be the natural progress: These are the ways whereby culinary and
common fires do operate, and correspondent here^nto may be the effects of fire
elementall. So may Bitumen, coals, Jet, black lead, and diverse mineral
earths become black; being either ^uliginous concretions in the earth, or
suffering a scortch from denigrating principles in their formation: So Iron (as
Metallists express it) consisting of impure Mercury and combust sulphur,
becomes of a dark and sad complexion, whereas other metalls have a vivacity
and quickness in a^pect. So men and other animalls receive different tin^^ures
from constitution and complexionall efflorescences, and descend (...) low^r, as
they partake of the fuliginous and denigrating humor. (...) so may the
Aethiopians or Negroes become coal-blacke from (...) efflorescences and
complexionall tinctures arising from such probabilities, as we have declared
before.

The second way whereby bodies become black, is an Atramentous condition or
mixture, that is a vitriolate or copperose quality conjoyning with a
terrestrious and astringent humidity, for so is Atramentum scriptorium, or
writing Ink commonly made, by copperose cast upon a decoction o^ infusion of
galls. I say, a vitriolous or copperous quality; for vitr^oll is the active or
chief ingredient in Ink, and no other salt that I know will strike the color
with galls; neither Alom, Sal-gemme, Ni^r^, no^ Armoniack: now artificial
copperose, and such as we commonly use, is a rough and acrimonious kind of
salt drawn out of ferreous and eruginous earths, partaking chiefly of Iron and
Copper, the blew of copper, the green most of Iron: Nor is it unusual to
dissolve ^ragments of Iron in the liquor thereof, for advan^age in the
concretion. I say, a terrestrious or astringent humidity; for without this
there will ensue no tincture; for copperose in a decoction of Lett^ce or
Mallows affords no black, which with an astringent mix^ure it will do, though
it be made up with oil as in printing and painting Ink: But whereas in this
composition we use only Nutgalles, that is an excrescence from the Oak,
therein we follow and beat upon the old receipt; for any plant of austere and
stipticke parts will suffice, as I have experimented in Bistorte, Myrobolaus,
Myrtus Brabantica, Balaustium, and Red-roses: and indeed, most decoctions of
astringent plants, of what color soever, do leave in the liquor a deep and
Muscadine red, which by addition of vitrioll descend into a black: And so
Dioscorides in his receipt of Ink, leaves out gall, and with copperose makes
use of ^oot.

Now if we inquire in what part of vitriol this Atramentall and denigrating
condition lodges, it will seem especially to lie in the fixed salt thereof;
For the phlegm or aqueous evaporation will not denigrate, nor yet spirits of
vitriol, which carry with them volatile and nimbler Salt: For if upon a
decoction of Copperose and gall, be powered the spirits or oil of vitriol, the
liquor will relinquish his blacknes, the gall and parts of the copperose
precipitate unto the bottom, and the Ink grow clear again, which indeed it
will not so easily do in common Ink, because that gum is dissolved therein,
which hinders the sepa^ation: But Colcothar or vitriol burnt, though unto a
redness containing the fixed salt, will make good Ink, and so will the
Lixivium, or Lie made thereof with warm water; but the Terra or insipide earth
remaining, affords no black at all, but serves in many things for a gross and
useful red.

And if we yet make a more exact enquiry, by what this salt of vitriol more
peculiarly gives this color, we shall find it to be from a metalline
condition, and especially an Iron property or ferreous participation: For blew
Copperose which deeply partakes of the copper will do it but weakly;
Verdigrise which is made out of copper will not do it at all; But the filings
of Iron infused in vinegar, will with a decoction of galls make good Ink,
without any coppe^ose at all, and so will infusion of Loadstone, which is of
affinity with Iron, and though more conspicuously in Iron, yet such a
Calcan^^ous or Atramentous quality, we will not wholly reject in other m^^^lls,
whereby we often observe black tinctures in their solutions. Thus a Lemmon,
Quince, or sharp Apple cut with a knife becomes immediately black: And so from
the lik^ cause, Artichokes, so sublimate beat up with whites of Eggs, if
touched with a knife becomes incontinently black. So Aqua Fortis, whose
ingredient is vitriol will make white bodies black. So Leather dressed with
the bark of Oak, is easily made black by a bare solution of copperose. So
diverse Mineral wa^ers and such as participate of Iron, upon an infusion of
galls become of a dark color, and entering upon black. So steel infused,
makes not only the liquo^ (...), but in bodies wherein it concurs with
proportionable tinctures makes also the excretions black. And so also from this
vi^riolous quality Mercuries dulcis, and vitriol vomitive occasion black
ejections.

Such a condition there is naturally in some livi^g creatures. Thus that black
humor by Aristotle na^ed (...), and commonly translated Atramentum, may be
occasioned in ^he Cu^tle. Such a condition there is naturally in some plants,
as Black-be^ries, Walnut rind^, Black cherries, whereby they extinguish
in^lama^ions, corroborate the stomach, and are esteemed, specificall in the
Epilepsie. Such an Atramentous condition there is to be found sometime in the
blood, when that which some call Acetum, others vitriolum, concurs with parts
prepared for this tincture. And so from these conditions the Moors might
possibly become Negroes, receiving Atramentous impressions in some of those
ways, whose possibility is by us declared.

Nor is it strange that we affirm there are vitriolous parts, qualities, and
even at some distance Vitriol it self in living bodies; for there is a sour,
stipticke salt diffused through the earth, which passing a concoction in
plants, becomes milder and more agreeable unto the sense, and this is that
vegetable vitriol, whereby diverse plants contain a grateful sharpness; as
Lemmons, Pomegranates, Cherries, or an austere and inconcocted roughness, as
Sloes, Medlers and Quinces: And that not only vitriol is a cause of
blackness, but that the salts of natural bodies do carry a powerful stroke
in the tincture and vernish of all things, we shall not deny, if we contradict
not experience, and the visible art of Dyars, who advance and graduate their
colors with Salts, for the decoctions of simples which bear the visible
colors of bodies decocted, are dead and evanid without the commixtion of
Alume, Argol, and the like; and this is also apparent in Chymicall
preparations. So Cinaber becomes red by the acide exhalation of sulphur, which
otherwise presents a pure and niveous white. So spirits of Salt upon a blew
paper make an orient red. So Tartar or vitriol upon an infusion of violets
affords a delightful crimson. Thus it is wonderful what variety of colors
the spirits of Saltpeter, and especially, if they be kept in a glass while
they pierce the sides thereof; I say, what Orient greens they will project:
from the like spirits in the earth the plants thereof perhaps acquire their
verdure. And from such salary irradiations may those wondrous varieties arise,
which are observable in Animalls, as Mallards heads, and Peacocks feathers,
receiving intention or alteration according as they are presented unto the
light. Thus S^ltpeter, Ammoniack and Mineral spirits emit delectable and
various colors; and common Aqua fortis will in some green and narrow mouthed
glasses, about the verges thereof, send forth a deep and G^ntianell a bl^w.

Thus have we at last drawn our conjectures unto a period; wherein if our
contemplations afford no satisfaction unto others, I hope our attempts will
bring no condemnation on our selves; (for besides that adventures in knowledge
are laudable, and the assayes of weaker heads affords oftentimes imp^oveable
hints unto better) although in this long journey we miss the intended end, yet
are there many things of truth disclosed by the way: And the collateral
verity, may unto reasonable speculations, requite the capital indiscovery.

THE SEVENTH BOOK.
Concerning many Historical Tenants generally received, and some deduced from
the History of holy Scripture.
CHAP. I.
Of the Forbidden fruit.
THat the Forbidden fruit of Paradise was an Apple, is commonly believed,
confirmed by Tradition, perpetuated by writings, verses, pictures; and some
have been so bad Prosodians, as from thence to derive the Latin word Malum;
because that fruit was the first occasion of evil, wherein notwithstanding
determinations are presumptuous, and many I perceive are of another belief;
for some have conceived it a Vine, in the mystery of whose fruit lay the
expiation of the Transgression: Goropius Becanus reviving the conceit of
Barcephas, peremptorily concludes it to be the Indian Fig Tree, and by a witty
Allegory labors to confirm the same. Some fruits we observe to pass under
the name of Adams apples, which in common acception admit not that appellation,
the one described by Mathiolus under the name of Pom^m Adami, a very fair
fruit, and not unlike a Citron, but somewhat rougher chopped and cranied,
vulgarly conceived the marks of Adams teeth; another, the fruit of that plant
Serapion terms Musa, but the Eastern Christians commonly the Apples of
Paradise; not resembling an apple in figure, and in taste a Melon or Cowcumber;
which fruits although they have received appellations suitable unto the
Tradition, yet can we not from thence infer they were this fruit in question;
no more then Arbor vitae, so commonly called, to obtain its name from the tree
of life in Paradise, or arbor Iudae, to be the same which supplied the gibbet
unto Judas.

Again, there is no determination in the Text, wherein is only particulared
that it was the fruit of a tree good for food and pleasant unto the eye, in
which regards many excel the Apple; and therefore learned men do wisely
conceive it inexplicable, and Philo puts determination unto despair, when he
affirms the same kind of fruit was never produced since. Surely, were it not
requisite or reasonable to have been concealed, it had not passed unspecified,
nor the tree revealed which concealed their nakedness, and that concealed
which revealed it; for in the same Chapter mention is made of Fig Leaves, and
the like particulars although they seem uncircumstantiall are often set down in
holy Scripture; so is it specified that Elias sat under a Junip^r tree,
Absolon hanged by an Oak, and Zacheus got up into a Sycomore.

And although to condemn such indeterminables, unto him that demanded on what
hand Venus was wounded, the Philosopher thought it a sufficient resolution to
reinquire upon what leg King Philip halted; and the Jews not undoubtedly
resolved of the Sciatica side of Jacob, do cautelously in their diet abstain
from the sinews of both; yet are there many nice particulars which may be
authentically determined. That Peter cut off the right ear of Malchus is
beyond all doubt. That our Savior eat the Passover in an upper room, we may
determine from the Text; and some we may concede which the Scripture plainly
defines not. That the Dyall of Ahaz was placed upon the West side of the
Temple, we will not deny, or contradict the description of Adricomius. That
Abraham's servant put his hand under his right thigh, we shall not question; and
that the Thief on the right hand was saved, and the other on the left
reprobated, to make good the Method of the last Judicial dismission, we are
ready to admit; but surely in vain we enquire of what wood was Moses rod, or
the tree that sweetened the waters; Pes cedrus est, truncus cupressu^, oliva
supremum, palm^que transversum Christi sunt in cruce lignum.
or though tradition or humane history might afford some light, whether the
crown of thorns was made of Paliurus, whether the cross of Christ were made
of those four woods in the Disticke of Durantes, or only of Oak according
unto Lipsius and Goropius, we labor nor to determine; for though hereof
prudent symbolls and pious Allegories be made by wi^er conceivers, yet common
heads will fly unto superstitious applications, and hardly avoid miraculous or
magical expectations.

Now the ground or reason that occasioned this expression by an Apple, might be
the community of this fruit, and which is often taken for any other. So the
Goddess of gardens is termed Pom^na; so the Proverb expresses it to give
Apples unto Alcinous; so the fruit which Paris decided was called an Apple; so
in the garden of Hesperides (which many conceive a fiction drawn from
Paradise) we read of golden Apples guarded by the Dragon; and to speak
strictly in this appellation they placed it more safely then any other; for
beside the great variety of Apples, the word in Greek comprehends Or^nges,
Lemmons, Citrons, Quinces, and as Ruellius defines, such fruits as have no
stone within, and a soft covering without, (...) the Pomegranate.

It has been promoted in some constructions from a passage in the Canticles,
Cant. ^.
as it runs in the vulgar Translation, Sub arbore malo suscitavite, ibi
corrupta est matter tua, ibi violata est genetrix tua; which words
notwithstanding parabollically intended, admit no literal inference, and are
of little force in our Translation, I raised thee under an Apple tree, there
thy mother brought thee forth, there she brought thee forth that bare thee. So
when from a basket of Summer fruits, or Apples, as the Vulgar renders them,
God by Amos foretold the destruction of his people, we cannot say they had any
reference unto the fruit of Paradise which was the destruction of man; but
thereby is declared the propinquity of their desolation, and that their
tranquillity was of no longer duration then those horary and soon decaying
fruits of Summer; nor when it is said in the same Translation, Poma desiderii
animae tuae discesserunt a te, Apoc. 14.
the Apples that thy foul lusted after are departed from thee, is there any
allusion therein unto the fruit of Paradise? but thereby is threatened unto
Babylon, that the pleasures and delights of their palate should forsake them:
and we read in Pierius, that an Apple was the Hieroglyphicke of Love, and that
the Statua of Venus was made with one in her hand.

Since therefore after this fruit curiosity fruitlessesly enquireth, and
confidence blindly determines, we shall surcease our Inquisition, rather
troubled that it was tasted, then troubling our selves in its decision; this
only we observe, when things are left uncertain men will assure them by
determination; which is not only verified concerning the fruit but the Serpent
that persuaded; many defining the kind or species thereof. So Bonaventure and
Comestor affirm it was a Dragon, Eugubinus a Basiliske, Delrio a viper, and
others a common snake, wherein men still continue the delusion of the Serp^nt,
who having deceived Eve in the maine, sets her posterity a work to mistake in
the circ^mstance, and endeavors to propagate errors at any hand; and those he
surely most desires which e^ther concern God or himself; for they dishonor
God who is absolute truth and goodness; but for himself, who is extremely
evil, and the worst we can conceive, by aberration of conceit they extenuate
his depravity, and ascribe some goodness unto him.

CHAP. II.
That a man has one rib less^ then a woman.
THat a (...) has one rib less then a woman, is a common conceit derived from
the history of Genesis, wherein it stands delivered, that Eve was framed out of
a rib of Adam; whence it is concluded the sex of man still wants that rib our
Father lost in Eve; and this is not only passant with the many, but was urged
against Columbus in an Anatomy of his at Pisa, where having prepared the
Sceleton of a woman that chanced to have thirteen ribs of one side, there
arose a party that cried him down, and even unto oaths affirmed, this was the
rib wherein a woman exceeded; were this true, it would autoptically silence
that dispute out of which side Eve was framed; it would determine the opinion
of Olea^^er, Os ex ^ssibus mei^.
that she was made out of the ribs of both sides, or such as from the
expression of the Text maintain there was a plurality required; and might
indeed decry the parabolicall exposi^ion of Origin, Cajetan, and such as
fearing to concede a monstrosity, or mutilate the Integrity of Adam,
preventively conceive the creation of thirteen ribs.

But this will not consist with reason or inspection: for if we survey the
Sceleton of both sexes* and therein the compage of bones, we shall readily
discover tha^ m^n and women have four and twenty ribs, that is, twelve on each
side, seven greater annexed unto the Sternon, and five lesser which come short
thereof, wherein if it sometimes happen that either sex exceed, the
conformation is irregular deflecting from the common rate or number, and no
more inferrible upon mankind, then the monstrosity of the son of Rapha, or the
vicious excess in the number of fingers and toes: and although some difference
there be in figure, and the female ^s inominatum be somewhat more protuberant,
to make a fayrer cavity for the Infant, the coccyx sometime more reflected to
give the easier delivery, and the ribs themselves seem a little flatter, yet
are they equal in number. And therefore, while Aristotle doubts the
relations made of Nations which had but seven ribs on a side, and yet
delivers that men have generally no more then eight; as he rejects their
history, so can we not accept of his Anatomy.

Again, although we concede there wanted one rib in the Sceleton of Adam, yet
were it repugnant unto reason and common observation that his posterity should
want the same; for we observe that mutilations are not transmitted from father
unto son; the blind begetting such as can see, men with one eye, children with
two, and criples mutilate in their own persons, do come out perfect in their
generations. For, the seed conveigheth with it not only the extract and single
Idea of every part, whereby it transmits their perfections or infirmities, but
double and over again; whereby sometimes it multipliciously delineates the
same, as in Twins in mixed and numerous generations. And to speak more
strictly, parts of the seed do seem to contain the Idea and power of the
whole; so parents deprived of hands, beget manual issues, and the defect of
those parts is supplied by the Idea of others. So in one grain of corn
appearing similary and insufficient for a plural germination, there lies
dormant the virtuality of many other, and from thence sometimes proceed an
hundred ears: and thus may be made out the cause of multiparous productions;
for though the seminall materials disperse and separate in the matrix, the
formative operator will not delineat a part, but endeavor the formation of the
whole; effecting the same as far as the matter will permit, and from divided
materials attempt entire formations. And therefore, though wondrous strange, it
may not be impossible what is confirmed at Lausdun concerning the Countess of
Holland, nor what Albertus reports of the birth of an hundred and fifty, and if
we consider the magnalities of Generation in some things, we shall not
controver^^^ possibilities in others; nor easily question that great work,
whose wonders are only second unto those of the Creation, and a close
apprehension of the one, might perhaps afford a glimmering light, and
crepusculous glance of the other.

CHAP. III.
Of Meth^selah.
What has been every where opinion'd by all men, and in all times, is more
then Paradoxicall to dispute; and so that Methuselah was the longest liver of
all the posterity of Adam we quietly believe: but that he must needs be so, is
perhaps below Paralogy to deny. For hereof there is no determination from the
Text; wherein it is only particular'd he was the longest liver of all the
Patriarchs whose age is there expressed, but that he outlived all others we
cannot well conclude. For of those nine whose death is mentioned before the
flood, the Text expresses that Enoch was the shortest liver, who saw but three
hundred sixty five years; but to affirm from hence, none of the rest, whose
age is not expressed, did dye before that time, is surely an illation whereto
we cannot assent.

Again, many persons there were in those days of longevity, of whose age
notwithstanding there is no account in Scripture; as of the race of Caine, the
wives of the nine Patriarchs, with all the sons and daughters that every one
begat, whereof perhaps some persons might outlive Methusela^; the Text
intending only the masculine line of Seth, conduceable unto the Genealogy of
our Savior, and the antediluvian Chronology. And therefore we must not
contract the lives of those which are left in silence by Moses; for neither is
the age of Abel expressed in the Scripture yet is he conceived far elder then
commonly is opinion'd: and if we believe the conclusion of his Epitaph as made
by Adam, and so set down by Salian, Posuit maerens pater cui a silio justius
positum foret, Anno ab ortu rerum 130. ab ^bele nato 129. we shall not need to
doubt; which notwithstanding Cajetan and others confirm; nor is it improbable,
if we conceive that Abel was borne in the second year of Adam, and Seth a
year after the death of Abel: for so it being said, that Adam was an hundred
and thirty years old when he begat Seth, Abel must perish the year before,
which was one hundred twenty nine.

And if the account of Cain extend unto the Deluge, it may not be improbable,
that some thereof exceeded any of Seth: nor is it unlikely in life, riches,
power and temporal blessings, they might surpass them in this world, whose
lives re^erred unto the next; for so when the seed o^ Jacob was under
affliction and captivity, that of Ismael and (...) and grew mighty, there
proceeding from the one ^welve Princes, from the other, no less then
fourteen Dukes and ^ight Kings. And whereas the age of Cain and his posterity
is not delivered in the Text, some do salve it from the secret method of
Scrip^^e, which sometimes wholly omits, but seldom or never delive^s the
entire duration of wicked and faithless persons; as is observable in the
history of Esau, and the Kings of Israel and Judah. And therefor, that mention
is made that Ismael lived 137. years, some conceive he adhered unto the faith
of Abraham; for so did others who were not descended from Jacob; for Job is
thought to be an Idumean, and of the seed of Esau.

Lastly, (although we rely not thereon) we will not omit that conceit u^ged by
learned men, that Adam was elder then Methuselah, in as much as he was created
in the perfect age of Man, which was in those days fifty or sixty years, for
about that time we read that they begat children; so that if unto 930. we
add sixty years, he will exceed Methuselah. And therefore if not in length of
days, at least in old age he surpassed others; he was older then all who was
never so young as any; for though he knew old age he was never acquainted with
puberty, youth, or Infancy; and so in a strict account he begat children at one
year old; and if the usual compute will hold, that men are of the same age
which are borne within compass of the same year, Eve was as old as her
husband and parent Adam, and Cain their son coetaneous unto both.

Now that conception that no man did ever attain unto a thousand years,
because none should ever be one day old in the sight of the Lord, unto whom
according to that of David, A thousand years are but as one day, does not
advantage Methuselah; and being deduced from a popular expression, which will
not stand a Metaphysicall and strict examination, is not of force to divert a
serious enquirer; for unto God a thousand years are no more then one moment,
and in his sight Methuselah lived no nearer one day then Abel, for all parts of
time are alike unto him, unto whom none are referable, and all things present,
unto whom nothing is past or to come; and therefore, although we be measured by
the Zone of time, and the flowing and continued instants thereof, do weave at
last a line and circle about the eldest; yet can we not thus commensurate the
sphere of Trismegistus, or sum up the unsuccessive and stable duration of God.

CHAP. IV.
That there was no Rainebow before the Flood.
THat there shall no Rainebow appear forty years before the end of the world,
and that the preceding drought unto that great flame shall exhaust the materials
of this Meteor, was an assertion grounded upon no solid reason: but that there
was not any in sixteen hundred years, that is, before the flood, seems
deduceable from holy Scripture, Genesis 9. I do set my bow in the clouds, and it
shall be for a token of a Covenant between me and the earth. From whence
notwithstanding we cannot conclude the nonexistence of the Rainebow; nor is
that Chronology naturally established, which computeth the antiquity of effects
arising from physical and settled causes, by additionall impositions from
voluntary determinators. Now by the decree of reason and Philosophy, the
Rainebow has its ground in Nature, and caused by the rays of the Sun,
falling upon a roride and oppo^it^ cloud; whereof some reflected, others
refracted beget that semicircular variety we generally call the Rainebow; which
must succeed upon concurrence of causes and subjects aptly praedisposed. And
therefore, to conceive there was no Rainebow before, because God chose this out
as a token of the Covenant, is to conclude the existence of things from their
signalities, or of what is objected unto the sense, a coexistence with that
which is internally presented unto the understanding. With equal reason we may
infer there was no water before the Institution of Baptism, nor bread and
wine before the holy Eucharist.

Again, while men deny the antiquity of one Rainebow, they anciently concede
another. For, beside the solary Iris which God showed unto Noah there is
another Lunary, whose efficient is the Moon, visible only in the night, most
commonly at full Moon, and some degrees above the Horizon. Now the existence
hereof men do not controvert, although effected by a different Luminary in the
same way with the other; and probably appeared later, as being of rare
appearance and rarer observation, and many there are which think there is no
such thing in Nature. And therefore by casual spectators they are looked upon
like prodigies, and significations made not signified by their natures.

Lastly, we shall not need to conceive God made the Rainebow at this time, if
we consider that in its created and predisposed nature, it was more proper for
this signification then any other Meteor or celestial appearency whatsoever.
Thunder and lightning had too much terror to have been tokens of mercy;
Comets or blazing Stars appear too seldom to put us in mind of a Covenant to
be remembered often, and might rather signify the world should be once
destroyed by fire, then never again by water. The Galaxia or milky Circle had
been more probable; for, (beside that unto the latitude of thirty it becomes
their Horizon twice in four and twenty hours, and unto such as live under the
Equator, in that space the whole Circle appears) part thereof is visible unto
any situation, but being only discoverable in the night and when the air is
clear, it becomes of unfrequent and comfortless signification. A fixed Star
had not been visible unto all the Globe, and so of too narrow a signality in a
Covenant concerning all. But Rainebowes are seen unto all the world, and every
position of sphere; unto our own Elevation it may appear in the morning while
the Sun has attained about forty five degrees above the Horizon, (which is
conceived the largest semidiameter of any Iris) and so in the afternoon when
it has declined unto that altitude again; which height the Sun not attaining
in winter, Rainebowes may happen with us at noone or any time. Unto a right
position of sphere it may appear three hours after the rising of the Sun,
and three before its setting; for the Sun ascending fifteen degrees an hour,
in three attaineth forty five of altitude. Even unto a parallel sphere, and
such as live under the pole, for half a year some segments may appear at any
time and under any quarter, the Sun not setting, but walking round about them.

But the propriety of its Election most properly appears in the natural
signification and prognostic of it self; as containing a mixed signality of
rain and fair weather; for being in a roride cloud and ready to drop, it
declares a pluvious disposure in the air; but because when it appears the
Sun must also shine, there can be no universal showers, and consequently no
deluge. Thus when the windows of the great deep were open, in vain men looked
for the Rainebow, for at that time it could not be seen, which after appeared
unto Noah. It was therefore existent before the flood, and had in Nature some
ground of its addition; unto that of Nature God superadded an assurance of his
promise, that is, never to hinder its appearance, or so to replenish the
heavens again as that we should behold it no more. And thus, without
disparaging the promise, it might rain at the same time when God showed it
unto Noah; thus was there more therein then the Heathens understood, when they
called it the Nuncia of the gods, and the laugh of weeping heaven; and thus may
it be elegantly said, I put my Bow, Risus plorantis Olympi.
not my Arrow in the clouds, that is, in the menace of Rain the mercy of fair
weather.

Laudable is the custom of the Jews, who upon the appearance of the Rainebow,
do magnify the fidelity of God in the memory of his Covenant, according to
that of Syracides, Look upon the Rainebow, and praise him that made it. And
though some pious and Christian pens have only symboliz'd the same from the
mystery of its colors, yet are there other affections which might admit of
Theological allusions; nor would he find a more improper subject that should
consider, that the colors are made by refraction of light, and the shadows
that limit that light; that the Center of the Sun, the Rainebow, and the eye of
the beholder must be in one right line; that the spectator must be between the
Sun and the Rainebow; that sometime three appear, sometime one reversed; with
many others, considerable in Meteorologicall Divinity, Thaumantias.
which would more sensibly make out the Epithet of the Heathens, and the
expression of the son of Syrach, very beautiful is the Rainebow, It compasses
the heaven about with a glorious circle, and the hands of the most High have
bended it.

CHAP. V.
Of Sem, Ham and Iaphet.
COncerning the three sons of Noah, Sem, Ham and Japhet, that the order of
their nativity was according ^o that of numeration, and Japhet the youngest
son, as most believe, as Austin and others account, the sons of Japhet and
Europeans ^eed not grant; nor will it so well concord unto the letter of the
Text, and its readiest Interpretations: For, so is it said in our Translation,
Sem the father of all the sons of Heber, the brother of Japhet the elder; so by
the Septuagint, and so by that of Tremellius; and therefore when the Vulgar
reads it, Fratre Iaphet majore, the mistake, as Junius observes, might be
committed by neglect of the Hebrew accent, which occasioned Jerome so to render
it, and many after to believe it. Nor is that argument contemptible which is
deduced from their Chronology; for probable it is, that Noah had none of them
before, and begat them from that year when it is said he was five hundred
years old and begat Sem, Ham, and Japhet; Again, it is said he was six
hundred years old at the flood, and that two years after Sem was but an
hundred, therefore Sem must be borne when Noah was five hundred and two, and
some other before in the year of five hundred and one.

Now whereas the Scripture affords the priority of order unto Sem, we cannot
from thence infer his primogeniture; for in Sem the holy line was continued,
and therefore however borne, his genealogy was most remarkable. Genesis 11.
So is it not unusual in holy Scripture to nominate the younger before the
elder; Genesis 28.
so is it said, That Ta^ah begat Abraham, Nachor, and Haram; whereas Haram was
the eldest. So Rebecca is termed the mother of Jacob and Esau. Nor is it
strange the younger should be first in nomination, who have commonly had the
priority in the blessings of God, and been first in his benediction. So Abel
was accepted before Cain, Abraham the younger, preferred before Ismael the
elder, Jacob before Esau, Joseph was the youngest of twelve, and David the
eleventh son, and but the caddet of Jesse.

Lastly, though Japhet were not elder then Sem, yet must we not affirm that he
was younger then Cham, for it is plainly delivered, that after Sem and Japhet
had covered Noah, he awaked, and knew what his youngest son had done unto him.
(...), is the expression of the Septuagint, Filius minor of Jerome, and minimus
of Tremellius. And upon these grounds perhaps Josephus does vary from the
Scripture enumeration, and names them Sem, Japhet, and Cham, which is also
observed by the Annian Berosus; Noah cum tribus fil^is, Semo, Iapeto, Chem. And
therefore although in the priority of Sem and Japhet there may be some
difficulty, though Cyrill, Epiphanius, and Austin have accounted Sem the elder,
and Salian the Annalist, and Petavius the Chronologist contend for the same,
yet Cham is more plainly and confessedly named the youngest in the Text.

CHAP. VI.
That the Tower of Babel was erected against a second deluge.
AN opinion there is of some generality, that our fathers after the Flood
attempted the tower of Babel to secure themselves from a second Deluge. Which
however affirmed by Josephus and others, has seemed improbable unto many who
have discoursed hereon. For, (beside that they could not be ignorant of the
promise of God never ^o drown the world again, and had the Rainebow before
their eyes to put them in mind thereof) it is improbable from the nature of
the Deluge, which being not possibly causable from natural showers above, or
watery ^ruptions below, but requiring a supernatural hand, and such as all
acknowledge irresistible; we must disparage their knowledge and judgment in
so succeslesse attempts.

Again, they must probably hear, and some might know, that the waters of the
flood ascended fifteen cubits above the highest mountains. Now, if as some
define, the perpendicular altitude of the highest mountains be four miles,
or as others, but fifteen furlongs, it is not easily conceived how such a
structure could be effected; except we receive the description of Herodotus
concerning the Tower of Belus, whose first tower was eight furlongs higher, and
eight more built upon it; except we believe the Annian Berosus, or the
traditionall relation of Jerome.

It was improbable from the place, that is a plain in the land of Shinar. And
if the situation of Babylon were such at first as it was in the days of
Herodotus, it was rather a seat of amenity and pleasure, then conducing unto
this intention; it being in a very great plain, and so improper a place to
provide against a general Deluge by towers and eminent structures, that they
were feign to make provisions against particular and annual inundations by
ditches and trenches, after the manner of Egypt. And therefore Sir Walter
Ralegh accordingly objecteth; If the Nations which followed Nimrod, still
doubted the surprise of a second flood, according to the opinions of the
ancient Hebrews, it sounds ill to the ear of Reason, that they would have
spent many years in that low and overflowne valley of Mesopotamia. And
therefore in this situation, they chose a place more likely to have secured
them from the worlds destruction by fire, then another Deluge of water, and as
Pierius observes, some have conceived that this was their intention.

Lastly, the reason is delivered in the Text. Let us build us a City and a
Tower, whose top may reach unto heaven, and let us make us a name, lest we be
scattered abroad upon the whole earth, as we have already began to wander over
a part. These were the open ends proposed unto the people, but the secret
design of Nimrod, was to settle unto himself a place of dominion, and rule
over the rest of his brethren, as it after succeeded, according to the delivery
of the Text, The beginning of his kingdom was Babel.

CHAP. VII.
Of the Mandrakes of Leah.
WE shall not omit the Mandrakes of Leah, according to the History of
Genesis. And Reuben went out in the days of Wheat-harvest and found Mandrakes
in the field, and brought them unto his mother Leah; then Rachel said unto
Leah, Give me, I pray thee, of thy sons Mandrakes, and she said unto her, Is
it a small matter that thou have taken my husband, and would thou take my
sons Mandrakes also? and Rachel said, therefore he shall lie with thee this
night for thy sons Mandrakes; from whence has arisen a common conceit, that
Rachel requested these plants as a medicine of fecundation, or whereby she
might become fruitful; which notwithstanding is very questionable, and of
incertaine truth.

For first from the comparison of one Text with another, whether the Mandrakes
here mentioned, be the same plant which holds that name with us there is some
cause to doubt; the word is used in another place of Scripture, Cant. 7.
when the Church inviting her beloved into the fields, among the delightful
fruits of Grapes and Pomegranats, it is said, the Mandrakes give a smell, and
at our gates are all manner of pleasant fruits. Now instead of a smell of
delight, our Mandrakes afford a papaverous and unpleasant odor, whether in the
leaf or apple as is discoverable in their simplicity or mixture; the same is
also dubious from the different interpretations: for though the Septuagint and
Josephus do render it the Apples of Mandrakes in this Text yet in the other of
the Canticles the Chaldy Paraphrase terms it Balsame. R. Solomon, as Drusius
observes, conceives it to be that plant the Arabians named Jesemin. Oleaster
and Georgius Venetus the Lilly; and that the word Dudaim, may comprehend any
plant that has a good smell, resembles a woman's breast, and flourishes in
wheat harvest; Junius and Tremellius interpret the same for any amiable flowers
of a pleasant and delightful odor: but the Geneva Translators have been more
wary then any; for although they retain the word Mandrake in the Text, they in
effect retract it in the Margin, wherein is set down, The word in the
original is Dudaim, which is a kind of fruit or slower unknown.

Nor shall we wonder at the dissent of exposition, and difficulty of definition
concerning this Text, if we perpend how variously the vegetables of Scripture
are expounded, and how hard it is in many places to make out the species
determined. Thus are we at variance concerning the plant that covered Jonas,
which though the Septuagint does render Colocynthis, the Spanish Calabaca, and
ours accordingly a gourd, yet the vulgar translates it Hedera or Juice; and, as
Grotius observes, Jerome thus translated it, not as the same plant but best
apprehended thereby. The Italian of Diodati and that of Tremellius have named
it Ricinus, and so has ours in the Margin; for palma Christi is the same with
Ricinus. The Geneva Translators have herein been also circumspect; for they
have retained the original word Kikaion, and ours has also affixed the same
unto the Margin: nor are they indeed always the same plants which are
delivered under the same name, and appellations commonly received amongst us;
so when it is said of Solomon that he writ of plants from the Cedar of
Lebanus, unto the Hysop that grows upon the wall, that is from the greatest
unto the smallest, it cannot be well conceived our common hysop; for neither is
that the least of vegetables, nor observed to grow upon walls; but rather as
Lemnius well conceives some kind of the capillaries, which are very small
plants and only grow upon walls and stony places; nor are the fair species in
the holy ointment, Cinnamon, Myr^he, Calamus and Cassi^; nor the other in the
holy perfume, Frankincense, Stacte, Onycha, and Galbanum, so agreeably
expounded unto those in use with us, as not to leave considerable doubts
behind them; nor must that perhaps be taken for a simple unguent, which
Matthew only terms a precious ointment, but rather a composition, as Mark
and John imply by pistick Nard, that is faithfully dispensed; and as Mathiolus
observes in his Epistles, may be that famous composition described by
Dioscorides, made of oil of Ben, Malabathrum, Juncus odoratus, Costus, Amomum,
Myrrh, B^lsam and Nard; which Galen affirms to have been in use with the
delicate Dames of Rome, and that the best thereof was made at Laodicea, from
whence by Merchants it was conveyed unto other parts; but how to make out that
T^anslation concerning the Tithe of Mint, Anise, and Cumin, we are still to
seek; for we find not a word in the Text that can properly be rendered Anise,
the Greek being (...), which the Latins call Anethum, and is properly
Englished Dill.

Again, it is not deducible from the Text or concurrent sentence of Comments,
that Rachel had any such intention, and most do rest in the determination of
Austine, that she desired them for rarity, pulchritude or suavity; nor is it
probable she would have resigned her bed unto Leah, when at the same time she
had obtained a medicine to fructi^ie her self, and therefore Drusius who has
expressly and favorably treated hereof, is so far from conceding this
intention, that he plainly concludes hoc quo modo illis in mentem venerit
conjicere nequ^o; how this conceit fell into men's minds it cannot fall into
mine, for the Scripture delivers it not, nor can it be clearly deduced from
the Text.

Thirdly, if Rachel had any such intention, yet had they no such effect, for
she conceived not many years after of Joseph; whereas in the mean time Leah
had three children, Isachar, Zabulon, and Dinah.

Lastly, although at that time they failed of this effect, yet is it mainly
questionable whether they had any such virtue either in the opinions of those
times or in their proper nature; that the opinion was popular in the land of
Canaan it is improbable, and had Leah understood thus much she would not surely
have parted with fruits of such a faculty, especially unto Rachel who was no
friend unto her. As for its proper nature, the Ancients have generally esteemed
it Narcotick or stupefactive, and is to be found in the list of poison set
down by Dioscorides, Galen, Aetius, Aegineta, and several Antidotes delivered
by them against it. It was I confess from good Antiquity, and in the days of
Theophrastus accounted a philt^e, or plant that conciliates affection, and so
delivered by Dioscorides; and this intent might seem more probable, had they
not been the wives of holy Jacob, had Rachel presented them unto him, and not
requested them for her self.

Now what Dioscorides affirms in favor of this effect, that the grains of
the Apples of Mandrakes mundifie the Matrix and applied with sulphur stop the
fluxes of women, he overthrows by qualities destructive unto conception;
affirming also that the juice thereof purges upward like Hellebore, and
applied in pessaries provokes the menstruous flows and procures abortion.
Petrus Hispanus, or Pope John the twentieth speaks more directly in his
Thesaurus pauperum; wherein among the receipts of saecundation, he
experimentally commends the wine of Mandrakes given with Triphera Magna: but
the soul of the medicine may lie in Triphera magna, an excellent composition,
and for this effect commended by Nicolaus. And whereas Levinus Lemnius that
eminent Physician does also concede this effect it is from manifest causes and
qualities elementall occasionally producing the same; for he imputes the same
unto the coldness of that simple, and is of opinion that in hot climates, and
where the uterine parts exceeed in heat, by the coldness hereof they may be
reduced into a conceptive constitution, and Crasis accommodable unto
generation; whereby indeed we will not deny the due and frequent use may
proceed unto some effect, from whence notwithstanding we cannot infer a
fertiliating condition or property of fecundation: for in this way all
vegetables do make fruitful according unto the complexion of the Matrix; if
that excel in heat, plants exceeding in cold do recti^ie it, if it be cold,
simples that are hot reduce it, if dry moist, if moist dry correct it, in which
division all plants are comprehended; but to distinguish thus much is a point
of Art, and beyond the method of Rachels or feminine Physic. Again, whereas
it may be thought that Mandrakes may fecundate since Poppy has obtained the
Epithet of fruitful, and that fertility was hieroglyphically described, by
Venus with an head of poppy in her hand; the reason hereof, was the multitude
of seed within it self, and no such multiplying in humane generation. And
lastly, whereas they may well have this quality, since Opium it self is
conceived to extimulate unto venery, and for that intent is sometimes used by
Tu^kes, Persians, and most oriental Nations; although Winclerus does seem to
favor the conceit, yet Ama^us (...), and Rodericus a Castro are against it,
Garcias ab Horto refutes it from experiment; and they speak probably who
affirm, the intent and effect of eating Opium, is not so much to invigorate
themselves in coition, as to prolong the Act, and spinne out the motions of
car^nality.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the three Kings of Collein.
A Common conceit there is of the th^ee Kings of Collein, conceiv^d to be the
wise men that traveled unto our Savior by the dire^^ion of the S^ar; wherein
omit^ing the large Discourses of Baronius, Pineda, and Montacutius, That they
might be Kings, beside the ancient Tradition and authority of many Fathers, the
Scripture also implies. The Gentiles shall come to thy ^ight, and Kings to the
brightness of thy rising. The Kings of (...) and the Isles, the Kings of
Arabia and Saba shall offer (...) ^laces most Christians and many Rabbines
interpret of the (...). Not that they are to be conceived potent Monarchs, or
mighty Kings, but Toparks, Kings of Cities or narrow (...), such as were the
Kings of Sodo^e and Gomorrah, the Kings of (...) thirty which Josuah subdued,
and such as (...) the f^iends of Job to have been.

But although we grant they were Kings, yet can we not be assured they were
three: for the Scripture makes no mention of any number, and the number of
their presents, Gold, Myrrh and Frankinscence, concludes not the number of
their persons; for these were the commodities of their Country, and such as
probably the Queen of S^eba in one person had brought before unto Solomon; and
so did not the sons of Jacob divide the present unto Joseph, but are conceived
to carry one for them all, according to the expression of their father, Take of
the best fruits of the land in your ves^ells, and carry down the man a
present: and therefore their number being uncertain, what credit i^ to be
given unto their names, Gaspar, Melchior, Balthazar? what to the charm thereof
against the ^alling sickness? or what unto their habits, complexions, and
corporal accidents, we must rely on their uncertain story, and authenticke
pourtarits of Collein. Lastly, although we grant them Kings, and three in
number, yet could we not conceive that they were Kings of Collein. For though
Collein were the chief City of the Vhii, then called Vbiopolis, and afterward
Agrippina, yet will no history inform us there were three Kings thereof.
Beside these being rulers in their Countries, and returning home would have
probably converted their subjects; but according unto Munsters report, their
conversion was not wrought until seventy years after by Maternus a disciple
of Peter. And lastly, it is said that the wise men came from the East; but
Collein is seated Westward from Jerusalem, for Collein has of longitude
thirty four degrees, but Jerusalem seventy two.

The ground of all was this; these wise men or Kings, were probably of Arabia,
and descended from Abraham by Keturah, who apprehending the mystery of this
star, either by the Spirit of God, the prophecy of Balaam, the prophecy,
which (...) mentions, received and constantly believed through all the East,
that out of Jury one should come that should rule the whole world* or the
divulged expectancy of the Jews from the expiring prediction of Daniel, were
by the same conducted unto Judea, returned into the^ Country, and were after,
baptized by Thomas; from whence about three hundred years after by Helena the
Empress their bodies were translated to Constantinople, from thence by
Eustathius unto Millane, and at last by Renatus the Bishop unto Collein; where
they are believed at present to remain, their monuments shown unto strangers,
and having lost their Arabian titles, are crowned Kings of Collein.

CHAP. IX.
Of the food of John Baptist, Locusts and wild honey.
COncerning the food of John Baptist in the wilderness, Locusts and wild
honey, lest popular opiniatrity should arise, we will deliver the chief
opinions; the first conceives the Locusts here mentioned to be that fruit the
Greeks name (...), mentioned by Luke in the diet of the Prodigal son, the
Latins Siliqua, and some, Panis Sancti Iohannis, included in a broad Cod, and
indeed of taste almost as pleasant as honey. But this opinion does not so truly
impugn that of the Locusts; and might rather call into controversy the
meaning of wild honey.

The second affirms they were the tops or tender crops of trees; for so
Locusta also signifies: which conceit is plausible in Latin, but will not hold
in Greek, wherein the word is (...), except for (...), we read (...), or (...),
which signify the extremities of trees; of which belief have diverse been; more
con^idently Isidore Pelusiota, who in his Epistles plainly affi^meth they
think unlearnedly who are of another belief; and this so wrought upon
Bar^^ius that he concludes in a newtrality, Haec cum scribat ^sidorus
desiniendum nobis non est, and totum relinquimus lectoris arbitrio; ^am constat
Graecam dictionem (...), and Locustam insecti genus, and arborum summitates
significare. Sed f^llitur, says Montacutius, nam constat contrarium, (...)
apud nullum authorem classicum (...) significare. But above all Paracelsus with
most animosity promoteth this opinion, and in his book de melle, spares not
his friend Erasmus. Hoc a nonnullis ita explicatur ut dicant Locustas aut
cicadas Iohanni procibo fuisse; sed hi siultitiam dissimulare non possunt,
veluti Ieronymus, Erasmus, and alii prophetae Neoterici in Latinitate immortui.

A third affirms that they were properly Locusts, that is a sheathwinged and
six-^ooted insect, such as is our Grasshopper; and this opinion seems more
probable then the other: for beside the authority of Origin, Jerome,
Chrysostom, Hillary, and Ambrose to confirm it, this is the proper
signification of the word, thus used in Scripture by the Septuagint, Greek
vocabula^ies thus expound it; Suidas on the word (...) observes it to be that
animal whereon the Baptist fed in the desert, in this sense the word is used
by Aristotle, Dioscorides, Galen, and several humane Authors. And lastly,
there is no absurdity in this interpretation, or any solid reason why we should
decline it; it being a food permitted unto the Jews, whereof four kinds are
reckoned up among clean meats. Beside, not only the Jews, but many other
Nations long before and since, have made an usual food thereof. That the
Aethiopians, Mauritanians, and Arabians, did commonly ^at them is testified by
Diodorus, Strabo, Solinus, Aelian and Pliny; that they still feed on them is
confirmed by Leo, Cadamustus and others. John therefore as our Savior says,
came neither eating nor drinking, that is far from the diet of Jerusalem and
other riotous places; but fa^ed coursely and poorly according unto the
apparel he wore, that is of Camells hair; the place of his abode, the
wilderness; and the doctrine he preached, humilation and repentance.

CHAP. X.
That John the Evangelist should not dye.
THe conceit of the long living or rather not dying of John the Evangelist is
not to be omitted; and although it seem inconsiderable, and not much weightier
then that of Joseph the wandering Jew; yet being deduced from Scripture, and
abetted by Authors of all times, it shall not escape our enquiry. John 21.
It is drawn from the speech of our Savior unto Peter after the prediction of
his martyrdom; Peter says unto Jesus, Lord, and what shall this man do? Jesus
says unto him, If I will that he tarry until I come, what is that to thee?
follow thou me; then went this saying abroad among the brethren that this
disciple should not dye.

Now the apprehension hereof has been received either grossly and in the
general, that is not distinguishing the manner or particular way of this
continuation, in which sense probably the grosser and undiscerning party
received it; or more distinctly apprehending the manner of his immortality;
that is, that John should never properly dye, but be translated into Paradise,
there to remain with Enoch and Elias until about the coming of Christ, and
should be slain with them under Antichrist, 12.
according to that of the Apocalypse. I will give power unto my two witnesses,
and they shall prophecy a thousand two hundred and threescore days clothed
in sackcloath, and when they shall have finished their Testimony, the beast
that ascends out of the bottomless pit, shall make war against them, and
shall overcome them and kill them. Hereof, as Baronius observes, within three
hundred years after Christ, Hippolytus the martyr was the first assertor, but
has been maintained by many since; by Metaphrastes, by ^^^culphus, but
especially by Georgius Trapezuntius, who has expressly treated upon this Text;
and although he lived but in the last Centurie, did still affirm that John was
not yet dead.

As for the gross opinion that he should not dye, it is unto my judgment
sufficiently refuted by that which first occasioned it, that is the Scripture
it self, and no further of, then the very subsequent verse: yet Jesus said not
unto him he should not dye, but if I will that he tarry till I come, what is
that to thee? and this was written by John himself whom the opinion concerned,
and as is conceived many years after when Peter had suffered, and fulfilled
the Prophecy of Christ.

For the particular conceit the foundation is weak, nor can it be made out
from the Text alleged in the Apocalypse: for beside that therein two persons
are only named, no mention is made of John a third Actor in this Tragedy; the
same is overthrown by History, which records not only the death of John,
but assigns the place of his burial, that is Ephesus a City in Asia minor;
whither after he had been banished into Patmos by Domitian he returned in
the reign of Nerva there deceased, and was buried in the days of Trajan, and
this is testified by Jerome de Scriptoribus Ecclesiasticis, by Tertullian de
Anima, by Chrysostom, and by Eusebius, in whose days his Sepulcher was to be
seen; and by a more ancient Testimony alleged also by him, that is of
Polycrates Bishop of Ephesus, not many successions after John; whose words are
these in an Epistle unto Victor Bishop of Rome, Iohan^es ille qui supra pectus
Domini recumbebat Doctor optimus apud Ephesum dormivit; many of the like nature
are noted by Baronius, Jansenius, ^stius, Lipellous, and others.

Now the maine and primitive ground of this error, was a gross mistake in the
words of Christ, and a false apprehension of his meaning; understanding that
positively which was conditionally expressed, or receiving that (...) which was
but concessively delivered; for the words of (...) Savior run in a doubtful
strain, rather reprehending then satisfying the cu^osity of Peter; that is, as
though he should have said, Thou have thine own doom, why inquire thou
after thy brothers? what relief unto thy affliction will be the society of
another? why pryest thou into the secrets of Gods judgments? if he stay
until I come, what concerns it thee? who shall be sure to suffer before
that time? and such an answer probably he returned because he foreknew John
should not suffer a violent death, but go unto his grave in peace; which had
Peter assuredly known, it might have cast some water on his flames, and
smothered those fires which kindled after unto the honor of his Master.

Now why among all the rest John only escaped the death of a Martyr, the reason
is given; because all other fled away or withdrew themselves at his death, and
he alone of the Twelve beheld his passion on the Cross; wherein
notwithstanding, the affliction that he suffered could not amount unto less
then Martyrdom: for if the naked relation, at least the intentive
consideration of that passion, be able still and at this disadvantage of time,
to rend the hearts of pious con^emplators; surely the near and sensible vision
thereof must needs occasion agonies beyond the comprehension of flesh, and the
trajectio^s of such an object more sharply pierce the martyred soul of John,
then afterward did the nails the crucified body of Peter.

Again, they were mistaken in the Emphaticall apprehension, placing the
consideration upon the words, If I will, whereas it properly lay in these, when
I come: which had they apprehended as some have since, that is, not for his
ultimate and last return, but his coming in judgment and destruction upon
the Jews; or such a coming as it might be said, that that generation should
not pass before it was fulfilled: they needed not, much less need we suppose
such diuturnity; for after the death of Peter, John lived to behold the same
fulfilled by Vespasian: nor had he then his Nunc dimittis, or went out like
unto Sim^on; but old in accomplished obscurities, and having seen the expire of
Daniels prediction, as some conceive, he accomplished his Revelation.

But besides this original, and primary foundation, diverse others have made
impressions according unto different ages and persons by whom they were
received; for some established the conceit in the disciples and brethren, which
were contemporary unto him, or lived about the same time with him* and this was
first the extraordinary affection our Savior ^a^e unto this disciple, who has
the honor to be called the disciple whom Jesus loved. Now ^om hence they
might be apt to believe their M^ster would dispenc^ with his death, or suffer
him to live ^o see him return in glory, who was the only Apostle that beheld
him to dy^ in dishonor. Another wa^ the belief and opinion of those times
that Christ would sudd^nly come; for they held not ge^^ally ^he same opinion
with their successors, or as descending ages after so many Centu^ies, but
conceived his coming would not be long after his passion, according unto
several expressions of our Savior grossly understood, and as we ^^^de the
same opinion not long after reprehended by St. Paul; and thus conceiving his
coming would not be long, These. 2.
they might be induced to believe his favorite should live unto it. Lastly,
the long li^e of John might much advantage this opinion; for he survived the
other Twelve, he was aged 22 years when he was called by Christ, and 25 that
is the age of Priesthood at his death, and lived 93 years, that is 68 after
his Savior, and dyed not before the second year of Trajane. Now having
outlived all his f^llows, the world was confirmed he might live still, and even
(...) the coming of his Master.

The grounds which promoted it in succeeding ages were especially two; the the
first his escape of Martyrdom: for whereas all the rest suffered some kind of
forcible death, we have no history that he suffered any; and men might think
he was not capable thereof, for so, as History has related, by the command of
Domitian he was cast into a Cauldron of burning oil, and came out again
unsinged. Now future ages apprehending he suffered no violent death, and
finding also the means that tended thereto could take no place, they might be
confirmed in their opinion that death had no power over him* and easily believe
he might live always who could not be destroyed by fire, and resist the fury
of that Element which nothing shall resist. The second was a corruption crept
into the Latin Text, reading for Si, Sic eum manner volo, whereby the answer
of our Savior becomes positive, or that he will have it so, which way of
reading was much received in former ages, and is still retained in the vulgar
Translation; but in the Greek and original, the word is (...), signifying Si or
if, which is very different from (...), and cannot be translated for it: and
answerable hereunto is the translation of Iunius and T^emellius, and that also
annexed unto the Greek by the authority of Sixtus quintus.

The third confirmed it in ages farther descending, and proved a powerful
argument unto all others following; that in his tomb at Ephesus there was no
corpse or relic thereof to be found; whereupon arised diverse doubts, and many
suspicious conceptions, some believing he was not buried, some that he was
buried, but risen again; others, that he descended alive into his tomb, and
from thence departed after. But all these proceeded upon unveritable grounds,
as Barooius has observed, who alleges a letter of Celestine Bishop of Rome,
unto the Council of Ephesus, wherein he declares the relics of John were
highly honored by that City, and a passage also of Chrysostom in the Homilies
of the Apostles. That John being dead did cures in Ephesus, as though he were
still alive. And so I obse^ve that Esthius discussing this point concludes
hereupon, Quod corpus ^jus nunquam reperiatur, hoc non diserent si veterum
scripta diligenter perlustrassent.

Now that the first ages after Christ, those succeeding, or any other should
proceed into opinions so far divided from reason, as to think of Immortality
after the fail of Adam, or conceit a man in these later times should outlive
our fathers in the first, although it seem very strange, yet is it not
incredible, for the credulity of men has been deluded into the like conceits,
and as Ireneus and Tertullian have made mention, one Menander a Samaritan
obtained belief in this very point, whose doctrine it was that death should
have no power on his disciples, and such as received his b^ptisme, should
receive Immortality ^herewith: 'Twas surely an apprehension very strange; nor
usually falling either from the absurdities of Melancholy or vanities of
ambition; some indeed have been so ^ffectedly vain as to counterfeit
Immortality, and have stolen their death in a hope to be esteemed immortal;
and others have conceived themselves dead: but surely few or none have fallen
upon so bold an error, as not to think that they could dye at all. The reason
of those mighty ones, whose ambition could suffer them to be called (...),
would never be flattered into Immortality, but the proudest (...), have by the
daily dictates of corruption convinced the impropriety of that appellation.
And surely, although delusion may run high, and possible it is that for a
while a man may forget his nature, yet cannot this be durable, for the
inconcealeable imperfections of our selves, or their daily examples in others,
will hourly prompt us our corruptions, and lowdly tell us we are the sons of
earth.

CHAP. XI.
More compendiously of some others.
MAny others there are which we resign unto Divinity, and perhaps deserve not
controversy. Whether David were punished only for pride of heart in numbering
the people, as most do hold, or whether as Josephus and many maintain, he
suffered also for not performing the commandment of God concerning capi^ation,
that when the people were numbered, Exodus 30.
(...) they should pay unto God a sh^kell, we shall not here cont^nd. Surely,
if it were not the occasion of this plague, we must acknowledg^ the omission
thereof was threatened with that punishment* according to ^he words of the Law.
When thou take the sum of the children of Israel, then shall they give
every man a ransom for his soul unto the Lord, that there be no plague
amongst them. Now, how deeply hereby God was defrauded in the time of David,
Exodus 38.
and opulent State of Israel, will easily appear by the sums of former
(...). For in the first, the silver of them tha^ were numbered was an hundred
Talents, and a thousand seven hundred threescore and (...)

We will not question the (...) of Lots wife, or whether she were transformed
into (...): though some conceive that expression Metaphorical, (...) thereby
then a lasting and durable column; according (...) of salt, which admits no
corruption; in which (...) of God is termed a Covenant of Salt, and it is also
said, God, (...) the kingdom unto David for ever, or by a covenant of Salt.

That Absalon was hanged by the hair of the (...), and not caught up by the
ne^k, as Josephus conceives, and the common argument against long hair
affirms, we are not ready to deny, Although I confess a great and learned
party there are of another opinion; although if he had his Morion or helmet on,
I could not w^ll conceive it; although the Translation of Jerome or Tremellius
do not prove it, and our own seems rather to overthrow it.

That Judas hanged himself, much more that he perished thereby, we shall not
raise a doubt. Although Jansenius discoursing the point, produces the
testimony of Theophylact and Euthymius, that he died not by the Gallows, but
under a Cart wheel; and Baronius also delivers this was the opinion of the
Greeks, and derived a high as Papias, one of the Disciples of John, although
how hardly the expression of Matthew is reconcilable unto that of Peter, and
that he plainly hanged himself, with that that falling headlong he burst
asunder in the midst, with many other, the learned Grotius plainly does
acknowledge. And lastly, although as he also urges the word (...) in Matthew,
does not only signi^ie suspension, or pendelous illaqueation, as the common
picture describes it, but also suffocation, strangulation or interception of
breath, which may arise from grief, despair, and deep dejection of spirit,
in which sense it is used in the history of Tobit concerning S^ra, (...). Ita
tristata est ut strangulatione premeretur, says Junius; and so might it happen
from the horror of mind unto Judas. And so do many of the Hebrews affirm,
that Achitophell was also strangled, that it, not from the rope, but passion.
For the Hebrew and Arabi^k word in the Text not only signifies supension, but
indignation, as Grotius has also observed.

Many more there are of indifferent truths, whose dubious expositions worthy
Divines and Preachers do often draw into wholesome and sober uses, whereof
nevertheless we shall not speak; with industry we decline such paradoxies,
and peaceably submit unto their received acceptions.

CHAP. XII.
Of the cessation of Oracles.
THat Oracles ceaed or grew (...) at the coming of Christ, is best understood
in a qualified sense and not without all latitude; as though precisely there
were (...) after, nor any decay before. For what we must con^esse (...) of
Antiquity; some pre-decay is observable from that of (...) by Baronius; Cur
isto modo jam oracula Delphis non eduntur, non modo nostra aetate, sed jam diu,
ut nihil possit esse contemptius. That during his life they were not altogether
dumb, is deduceable from Su^tonius in the life of Tiberius, who attempting to
subvert the Oracles adjoining unto Rome, was de^erred by the Lots or chances
which were delivered at Preneste; After his death we meet with many; Suetonius
reports, that the Oracle of Autium forewarned Caligula to beware of Cassius,
who was one that conspired his death. Plu^arch enquiring why the Oracles of
Greece ceased, excepteth that of Lebadia; and in the same place Demetrius
affirms the Oracles of Mopsus and Amphilochus were much frequented in his
days; In brief, histories are frequent in examples, and there want not some
even to the reign of Julian.

That therefore we may consist with history; by cessation of Oracles, with
Montacutius we may understand their intercision, not absission or consummate
desolation; their rare delivery not a total dereliction: and yet in regard of
diverse Oracles, we may speak strictly, and say there was a proper Cessation.
And thus may we reconcile the accounts of times, and allow those few and
broken Divinations, whereof we read in story and undeniable Authors. For that
they received this blow from Christ, and no other causes alleged by the
Heathens, from oraculous confession they cannot deny; whereof upon record there
are some very remarkable. The first that Oracle of Delphos delivered unto
Augustus. Me puer Hebraeus Divos Deus ipse gubernans
Cedere sede jubet* tristemque redire sub orcum;
Arir ergo dehi^c tacitus discedito nostris.
An Hebrew child, a God all gods excelling,
To hell again commands me from this dwelling.
Our Altars leave in silence, and no more
A resolution 'ere from hence implore.
A second recorded by Plutarch, of a voice that was heard to cry unto Mariners
at the Sea, Great Pan is dead; which is a relation very remarkable, and may be
read in his Defect of Oracles. A third reported by Eusebius in the life of his
magni^ied Constantine; that about that time Apollo mourned, declaring his
Oracles were false, and that the righteous upon earth did hinder him from
speaking truth. And a fourth related by Theodore^, and delivered by Apollo
Daphnes unto Julian, upon his Persian Expedition, that he should remove the
bodies about him, before he could return an answer, and not long after his
Temple was burnt with Lightning.

All which were evident and convincing acknowledgements of that power which
shut his lips, and restrained that delusion which had reigned so many
Centuries. But as his malice is vigilant, and the sins of men do still continue
a toleration of his mischiefs, he rests not, nor will he ever cease to
circumvent the sons of the first deceaved, and therefore expelled his Oracles
and solemn Temples of delusion, he runs into corners, exercising minor
trumperies, and acting his deceits in Witches, Magicians, Diviners, and such
inferior seductions. And yet (what is deplorable) while we apply our selves
thereto, and affirming that God has left to speak by his Prophets, expect in
doubtful matters a resolution from such Spirits; while we say the Devil is
mute, yet confess that these can speak; while we deny the substance, yet
practice the effect; and in the denied solemnity maintain the equivalent
efficacy; in vain we cry that Oracles are down, Apolloe's alter yet does
smoke, nor is the fire of Delphos out unto this day.

Impertinent it is unto our intention to speak in general of Oracles, and
many have well per^ormed it. The p^ain^st of others was that recorded by
Herodotus and delivered unto C^aesus; who as a trial of her omniscience sent
unto distant Oracles, and so contrived with the messengers, that though in
several places, yet at the same time they should demand what C^aesus was then
a doing. Among all others the Oracle of Deiphos only hit it, returning answer,
he was boiling a Lamb with a To^toyse, in a br^ze^ vess^ll with a cover of
the same metal. The style is ^^ughty in G^eeke, though somewhat lower in
Latin -- Aequ^ris est spatium and numerus mihi notus arenae,
Mutum percipio, fautis nihil audio vocem.
Ven^^ ad ho^ sensus nidor testudinis acris,
Quae sem^l ag^ina coquitur cum carne lebete,
Aere infrastrato, and stratum cui desuper aes est.
I know the space of Sea, ^he number of the sand,
I hear the silent, mute I understand.
A t^nder Lamb joined with Tortoise flesh,
Thy Master King of Lydia now does dress.
The sent thereof (...) in my nostrills hover
From brazen pot closed with brazen cover.
Hereby ind^ed he acqui^ed much wealth and more honor, and was reputed by
Craesu^ as a Diety: and yet not long after, by a vulgar fallacy he deceived
his favorite and greatest friend to Oracles into an irrep^^able overthrow by
Cyrus. And surely the same success are li^ely all to have that (...) or depend
upon him; 'twas the first play he practiced on mortali^^y, and as time has
rendered him more perfect in the Art, so has the inv^teratenesse of his malice
more ready in the execution. It Is therefore the sovereign degree of folly, and
a crime not only against God, but also our own reasons, to expect a favor
from the Devil, whose mercies are more cruel then those of Polyphemus; for
he devours his favorites first, and the nearer a man ^pproacheth, the sooner
he is scorched by Moloch. In brief, his favors (...) deceitful and double
headed, he does apparent good, for real and convincing evil after it, and
exalts us up to the top of the Temple, but to humble us down from it.

CHAP. XIII.
Of the death of Aristotl^.
THat Aristotle drowned himself in Euripus as despairing to resolve the cause
of its reciprocation, or ebb and flow seven times a day, with this
determination, Si quidem ego non capio te tu capies me, was the assertion of
Procopius, Nazia^zen, Iustine Martyr, and is generally believed amongst us;
wherein, because we perceive men have (...) an imperfect knowledge, some
conceiving ^uripus to be a River, others not knowing where or in what part to
place it, we first advertise, it generally signifies any strait fret, or
channel of the Sea, running between two shoares, as Julius Pollux has
defined it, as we read of Euripus Hellespontiacus, Pyrrhaeus and this whereof
we treat, Euripus Euboicus or Chalcidicus; that is, a narrow passage of Sea
deviding Attic^ and the Island of Eubae^, now called Col^o de Negroponte, from
the name of the Island and chief City thereof, famous in the wars of
Antiochus, and was taken from the Venetians by Mahome^ the great.

Now that in this Euripe o^ fret of Negropont, and upon the occasion mentioned,
Aristotle drowned himself, as many affirm, and almost all believe, we have
some room to doubt. For without any mention of this, we find two ways
delivered of his death by Diogenes Laertius, who expressly treats thereof, the
one from Eumolus and Phavo^inus, that being accused of impiety for composing an
Hymn unto Hermias, (upon whose Concubine he begat his son Nichomachu^) he
withdrew into Chalcis, where drinking poison he dyed* the Hymn is extant in
Laertius, and the fifteenth book of Athenaeus. Another by Apollodorus, that he
dyed at Chalcis of a natural death and languishment of stomach, in his sixty
three, or great Climactericall year; and answerable hereto is the account of
Suidas and Censorinus.

Again, beside the negative of Authority, it is also deniable by reason, nor
will it be easy to obtrude such desperate attempts unto Aristotle, upon a non
ability or unsatisfaction of reason, who so often acknowledged the imbecility
thereof; who in matters of difficulty, and such which were not without
abstrusities, conceived it sufficiant to deliver conjecturalities; and surely
he that could sometimes sit down with high improbabilities, that could content
himself, and think to satisfy others, that the variegation of Birds was from
their living in the Sun, or erection made by deliberation of the Testicles,
would not have been dejected unto death with this; He that was so well
acquainted with (...), and (...), utrum, and An Quia, as we observe in the
Queries of his Problemes; with (...) and (...), fortasse and plerumque, as is
observable through all his Works; had certainly rested with probabilities,
and glancing conjectures in this: Nor would his resolutions have ever run
into that mortal Antanaclasis, and desperate piece of Rhetoric, to be
comprised in that he could not comprehend. Nor is it indeed to be made out he
ever endeavored the particular of Euripus, or so much as to resolve the ebb
and flow of the Sea. For, as Vicomercatus and others observe, he has made no
mention hereof in his Works, although the occasion present it self in his
Meteors; wherein he disputes the affections of the Sea: nor yet in his
Problemes, although in the twenty third Section, there be no less then one and
(...) Q^eries of the Sea; some mention there is indeed in a Work (...) the
propriety of Elements, ascribed unto Aristotle, which notwith^^anding is not
reputed genuine, and was perhaps the same whence this was urged by Plutarch, De
placitis Philoso phorum.

Lastly, the thing it self whereon the opinion depends, that is, the variety
of the fl^x and reflux of Euripus, or whether the same do ebb and flow seven
times a day, is not incontrovertible; and for my own part, I remain
unsatisfied therein. For, though Pomponius Mela, and after him Solinus, and
Pliny have affirmed it, yet I observed Thuc^dides, who speaks often of
Eubaea, has omitted it. Pausanias an ancient Writer, who has left an exact
description of Greece, and in as particular a way as Leandro of Italy, or
Cambden of Great Britain, describing not only the Country Towns, and Rivers,
but hills, springs, and houses, has left no mention hereof. Aeschines in
C^esiphon only alludeth unto it; and Strabo, that accurate Geographer sp^akes
warily of it, that is, (...), and as men commonly reported. And so does also
Maginus, Velocis ac varii fluctus est mare, ubi quater in die* aut septies, ut
(...) dicunt, reciprocantur aestus. Botero more plainly, Il mar cresce e cala
con un impe^o mirabile qu^tro volte il di, ben che communimente se dica set
volte, etc. This S^a with wondrous impetuosity ebbeth and flows four times a
day, although it be commonly said seven times, and generally opinion'd, that
Aristotle despairing the reason, drowned himself therein. In which description
by four times a day, it exce^ds not in number the motion of other Seas, taking
the words properly, that is, twice ^bbing and twice flowing in four and twenty
hours; and is no more then what Thomaso Porrcacchi affirms, in his
description of famous Islands, that twice a day it has such an impetuous
^loud, as is not without wonder. Livy speaks more particula^ly, Haud facile
infestior classistatio est and fretum ipsum Euripi non septies die, (si^ut fama
fert) temporihus certis reciprocat, sed temere in modum venti, nunc huc
nuncjillve verso mari, velut monte praecipiti devolutus torrens rapitur. There
is hardly a worse harbor, the fret or channel of Euripus not certainly
ebbing or flowing seven times a day, according to common report, but being
uncertainely, and in the manner of a wind carried hither and thither, is
whirled away as a torrent down a hill. But the experimental testimony of
Gillius is most considerable of any, who having beheld the course thereof, and
made enquiry of Millers that dwelt upon its shore, received answer, that it
ebbed and flowed four times a day, that is, every six hours, according to
the Law of the Ocean; but that indeed sometimes it observed not that certain
course. And this irregularity though seldom happening, together with its
unruly and tumultuous motion might afford a beginning unto the common opinion;
thus may the expression in Ctesiphon be made out; and by this may Arist^^le be
interpreted, when in his Problemes he seems to borrow a Met^phor from Euripus;
(...) in the five and twentieth Section he ^nquireth, why in the upper (...) of
houses the air does Euripize, that is, (...) whirled hither and (...).

Now the ground, o^ that which gave li^e unto the a^s^rtion, might be his death
at Cha^cis, the chief City of (...), and seated upon Euripus, where it is
confessed by all he ended his day^s. That he emaciated and pi^ed away in the
too anxious (...) of (...) reciprocations, ^^though not drowned therein* as
Rhodigi^^^ (...) some conceived, was a hal^e confession thereof not justi^iable
from Antiquity. Surely the Philo^ophy of flux and reflux was ver^ imp^rfect of
old among the Greeks and Latins; nor could they hold a sufficient theory
thereof, who only observes the Mediterranean, which in some places has no
ebb, and not much in any part. Nor can we affirm our knowledge is at the
height, who have now the Theory of the Ocean and narrow Seas beside. White we
refer it unto the Moon, we give some satisfaction for the Ocean, but no
general salve for ^reeks, and (...) which know no flood; nor resolve why it
^lowes three or (...) in the bottom of the Gol^e, yet scarce at all at Anco^^
Durazzo, or (...), which ly^ but by the way. And therefore old abstrusities
have caused new inven^ions; and some from the Hypotheses of Copernicus or the
D^^rnall and annual motion of the earth, endeavor to (...) the flows and
motions of these seas, illustrating the same by water in a ^oale, that rising
or falling to either side, according to (...) of the vessel; the conceit is
ingenuous, salves, some (...), and is discovered at large by Galilae^ in his
Systeme of the world.

However therefore A^^stotle died, what was his end, or upon what occasion,
although it be not altogether assured, yet that his memory and worthy name
shall live, no man will deny, nor grateful scholar doubt: and if according to
the Elogie of Solon, a man may be only said to be happy after he is dead, and
cease to be in the (...) capacity of (...): or if according unto his own
Ethics, sense is not essential unto felicity, but a man may be happy without
the app^^hension thereof* surely in that sense he is pyramidally happy, nor can
he ^ver perish but in the Euripe of Ignorance, or till the Torrent of
Barbarism overwhelme all.

A like conceit there passes of Mel^sigenes, alias Home^, the father Poet,
that he pined away upon the Riddle of the fishermen. But Herodotus who wrote
his life has cleared this point; delivering that passing from Samos unto
Athens, he went sick ashore upon the Island Jos, where he dyed, and was
solemnly enterred upon the Sea side; and so decidingly concludes, Ex hac
aegritudine extremum diem clansit Homerus in Io, non, ut arbitrantur aliqui,
Aenigmatis perplexitate enectus, sed morbo.

CHAP. XIV.
Of the Wish of Philoxenus.
THat Relation of Aristotle and conceit generally received concerning
Philoxenus, who wished the neck of a Crane, that thereby he might tak^ more
pleasure in his mea^, although it pass without exception, upon enquiry I find
not only doubtful in the story, but absurd in the desire or reason alleged
for it. For though his Wish were such as is delivered, yet had it not perhaps
that end to delight his gust in eating, but rather to obtain advantage thereby
in singing, as is declared by Mirandula. Aristotle (says he) in his Ethics
and Problemes, accuses Philoxenus of sensuality, for the greater pleasure of
gust in desiring the neck of a Crane; which desire of his, assenting unto
Aristotle, I have formerly condemned; But since I perceive that Aristo^le for
this accusation has been accused by diverse Write^s; for Philoxenus was an
excellent Musician, and desired the neck of a Crane, not for any pleasure at
meat, but fancying thereby an advantage in singing or warbling, and deviding
the notes in music. And indeed, many Writers there are which mention a
Musician of that name, as Plu^arch in his book against Usury, and Aristotle
himself in the eight of hi^ Politics speaks of one Philoxenus a Musician,
that went off from the Dorick Dytherambicks unto the Phrygian Ha^mony.

Again, be the story true or false, rightly applied or not, the intention is
not reasonable, and that perhaps neither one way nor the other* For, if we
rightly consider the organ of taste, we shall find the length of the neck to
conduce but little unto it. For the tongue being the instrument of taste, and
the tip thereof the most exact distinguisher, it will not advantage the gust to
have the neck ex^ended, wherein the Gullet and conveying parts are only
seated, which partake not of the nerves of gustation or appertaining unto
^apor, but receive them only from the sixth pair; whereas the ne^ves of taste
des^^nd from the third and forth propagations, and so diffuse themselves into
the tongue. And therefore Cranes, Hernes, and Swans, have no advantage in taste
beyond Hawks, Kites, and others of shorter necks.

Nor, if we consider it, had Nature respect unto the taste in the different
contrivance of necks, but rather unto the parts contained, the compos^^^^ of
the rest of the body, and the manner whereby they ^eed. Thus animals of long
leg^, have generally long necks; that is, for the convenience of feeding, as
having a necessity to apply their mouths unto the earth. So have Horses,
Camels, Dromedaries long necks, and all tall animals, except the Elephant, who
in defect thereof is furnished with a Trunck, without which he could not
attain the ground. So have Cranes, Hernes, Storks, and Shovelards long necks;
and so even in Man whose figure is erect, the length of the neck follows the
proportion of other parts; and such as have round faces, or broad chests and
shoulders, have seldom or never long necks. For, the length of the face twice
exceeds that of the neck, and the space betwixt the throat pit and the navell
is equal unto the circumference thereof. Again, animals are framed with long
necks, according unto the course of their life or feeding: so many with short
legs have long necks, because they seed in the water, as Swans, Geese,
P^^^licans, and other sin-footed animals. But Hawks and birds of prey have
short necks and trussed legs; for that which is long is weak and flexible, and
a shorter figure is best accommodated unto that intention. Lastly, the necks of
animals do va^y, according to the parts that are contained in them, which are
the weazon and the gullet. Such as have no weazon and breathe not, have scarce
any neck, as most sorts of fishes, and some none at all, as all sorts of
pectinals, Soales, Thornback, Flounders; and all crustacco^^ animals, as
Crevises, Cr^^^, and Lobsters.

All which considered, the Wish of P^^loxenus will hardly consist with reason.
More excusable had it been to ^ave wished himself an Ape, which if common
conceit speak true, is exacter in taste then any. Rather some kind of
granivorous bird then a Crane, for in this sense they are so exquisite, that
upon the first peck of their bill, they can distinguish the qualities, of hard
bodies, which the sense of man discernes not without mastication. Rather some
ruminating animal, that he might have eat his meat twice over; or rather, as
Theophilus observed in Athenaeus, his desire had been more reasonable, had he
wished himself an Elephant, or an Horse; for in these animals the appetite is
more vehement, and they receive their viands in large and plenteous manner. And
this indeed had been more suitable, if this were the same Philoxenus whereof
Plutarch speaks, who was so uncivilly greedy, that to engrosse the mess, he
would preventively deliver his nostrils in the dish.

As for the musical advantage, although it seem more reasonable, yet do we
not observe that Cranes and birds of long necks have any musical, but harsh
and clangous throats. But birds that are canorous and whose notes we most
commend, are of little throats, and short necks, as Nightingales, Finches,
Linnets, Canary birds and Larkes. And truly, although the weazon, throtle and
tongue be the instruments of voice, and by their agitations do chiefly
concur unto these delightful modulations, yet cannot we assign the cause
unto any particular formation; and I perceive the best thereof, the Nightingale
has some disadvantage in the tongue; which is not acuminate and pointed as in
the rest, but seems as it were cut off; which perhaps might give the hint
unto the fable of Philomela, and the cutting off her tongue by Tereus.

CHAP. XV.
Of the Lake Asphaltites.
COncerning the Lake Asphaltites, the Lake of Sodom, or the dead Sea, that
heavy bodies cast therein sink not, but by reason of a salt and bituminous
thickness in the water floate and swim above, narrations already made are of
that variety, we can hardly from thence deduce a satisfactory determination,
and that not only in the story it self, but in the cause alleged. For, as
for the story men deliver it variously; some I ^eare too largely, as Pliny, who
affirms that bricks will swim therein. Mandevill goes farther, that Iron
swimmeth, and feathers sink. Munster in his Cosmography has another relation,
although perhaps derived from the Poem of Tertullian, that a candle burning
swimmeth, but if extinguished sinketh. Some more moderately, as Josephus, and
many other; affirming only that living bodies ^loate, nor peremptory av^rring
they cannot sink, but that indeed they do not easily descend. Most
traditionally, as Galen, Pliny, Solinus and Strabo, who seems to mistake the
Lake Serbonis for it; few experimentally, most contenting themselves in the
experiment of Vespasian, by whose command some captives bound were cast therein
and found to floate as though they could have swimmed: diverse contradictorily,
or contrarily, quite overthrowing the point. Aristotle in the second of his
Meteors speaks lightly thereof, (...), and esteems thereof as a fable.
Biddulphus devideth the common accounts of Judea into three pa^ts, the one
says he are apparent truths, the second apparent falsehoods, the third are
dubious or between both, in which form he ranketh the relation of this Lake.
But Andrew Thevet in his Cosmography does ocularly overthrow it; for he
affirms, he saw an Ass with his saddle cast therein, and drowned. Now of
these relations so different or contrary unto each other, the second is most
moderate, and ^a^est to be embraced, which says, that living bodies swim
therein, that is, they do not easily sink: and this, until exact experiment
further determine, may be allowed, as best consistent with this quality, and
the reasons alleged for it.

As for the cause of this effect, common opinion conceives it to be the salt
and bituminous thickness of the water. This indeed is probable, and may be
admitted as far as the second opinion conceadeth. For, certain it is that
salt water will support a greater burden then fresh, and we daily see an egg
will descend in salt water, which will swim in brine. But that Iron should
floate therein, from this cause is hardly granted; for heavy bodies will only
swim in that liquor, wherein the weight of their bulk exceeds not the weight
of so much water as it occupies or takes up. But surely no water is heavy
enough to answer the ponderosity of Iron; and therefore that metal will sink
in any kind thereof, and it was a perfect miracle which was wrought this way
by Elisha. Thus we perceive that bodies do swim or sink in different
liquors, according unto the tenuity or gravity of those liquors which are to
support them. So salt water bears that weight which will sink in vinegar,
vinegar that which will fall in fresh water, fresh water that which will sink
in spirits of Wine, and that will swim in spirits of Wine which will sink in
clear oil, as we made experiment in globes of wax pierced with light sticks
to support them. So that although it be conceived an hard matter to sink in
oil, I believe a man should find it very difficult, and next to flying to
swim therein. And thus will Gold swim in Quicksilver, wherein Iron and other
metals sink; for the bulk of Gold is only heavier then that space of
Quicksilver which it contains; and thus also in a solution of one ounce of
Quicksilver in two of Aqua fortis, the liquor will bear Amber, horn and the
softer kinds of stones, as we have made trial in each.

But a private opinion there is which crosses the common conceit, maintained
by some of late, and alleged of old by Strabo, that is, that the ^loating of
bodies in this Lake proceeds not from the thickness of the water, but a
bituminous ebullition from the bottom, whereby it wafts up bodies injected,
and suffers them not easily to sink. The verity thereof would be enquired by
ocular exploration, for this way is also probable; so we observe, it is hard to
wade deep in baths where springs arise, and thus sometime are bals made to play
upon a spouting stream.

And therefore, until judicious and ocular experiment confirm or distinguish
the assertion, that bodies do not sink herein at all we do not yet believe;
that they not easily or with more difficulty descend in this then other water
we shall already assent: but to conclude an impossibility from a difficulty, or
affirm whereas things not easily sink, they do not drown at all; beside the
fallacy, is a frequent addition in humane expression, and an amplification not
unusual as well in opinions as in relations; which oftentimes give indistinct
accounts of proximities, and without restraint transcend from one unto another.
Thus for as much as the torrid Zone was conceived exceeding hot, and of
difficult habitation, the opinions of men so advanced its constitution, as to
conceive the same unhabitable, and beyond possibility for man to live therein.
Thus, because there are no Wolves in England, nor have been observed for
diverse generations, common people have proceeded into opinions, and some wise
men into affirmations, they will not live therein although brought from other
Countries. Thus most men (...) few here will believe the contrary, that there
be no Spiders (...) I^eland (...) beheld some in that Country, and though but
(...), some cobwebs we behold in Irish wood in England. Thus ^he (...) from and
(...) growing ^^to an exceeding mag^^^de, (...) and diverse Writers deliver, it
has no period of (...) long as it lives. And thus in brief, in most (...)
men extend the considerations of things, and (...) beyond the propriety of
their natur^es.

CHAP. XVI.
Of (...) other relations.
1. THe relation of Aver^^oes and now common in every month, of the woman that
conceived in a b^th, by attracting the sperme or seminall effluxion of a man
admi^^ed to bathe in some vicinity unto her, I have ^carce faith to believe;
and had I been of the Jury, should have hardly thought I had found the father
in the person that stood by (...) and unseconded way in History to fornica^^ at
a distance, and much (...) the rules of Physic, which say, there is no
generation without a joint emission, (...) a virtuall but (...) and carnal
contaction. And although Aristone and his adheren^s do^ cut off the one, who
conceive no effectual ejaculation in women, yet in defense of the other they
cannot be introduced: For, as he delivers, the inodina^e longitude of the
organ, though in its proper recipient, may be a means to improlificate the
seed, surely the distance of place, with the commi^ture of an aqu^ou^ body,
must prove an effectual impediment and (...)of a conception. And therefore that
conceit concerning the (...) Lot, that they were i^pregnated by their ^leeping
father, or conceived by seminal pollution received at (...) from him, will
hardly be admitted. And therefore what is related of Devils, and the co^^^ved
delusion of wicked spritis, that they (...) the seminall emissions of man, and
transmit them into their (...), is much to be suspected, and altogether to be
denied, that there ensue conceptions thereupon, however husbanded by Art, and
the wisest menagery of that most subtle impostor. And therefore also that our
magnified Merlin was thus begotten by the Devil, is a groundless co^cep^ion
and as vain to think from thence to give the reason of his prophetical spirit.
For f a generation could succeed, yet should not te issue inherit the (...) of
the D^vil, who is but an auxiliary and no univocal Actor, nor will his nature
substantially concur to such production.

2. The relation of Lucill^^s, and now become common, concerning Crassus the
grandfather of Marcus te wealthy Roman, that he never laughed but once in all
his life, and that was at an Ass earing Thistles, is something strange. For,
if an indifferent and unridiculous object could draw his habitual austerenesse
unto a smile, it will be hard to believe he could with perpetuity resist the
proper motives thereof: for the act of laughter which is a sweet co^^raction of
the muscles of the face, and a pleasant agitation of the vocal o^gans, is not
merely voluntary, or totally within the jurisdiction of our selves: but as it
may be constrai^^d by corp^rall contraction in any, and has been enfo^^ed in
some even in their death; so the new unus^all or unexpected jucundities, which
present themselves to any man in his life, at some time or other will have
activity enough to excitate the earthiest soul, and raise a smile from most
composed tempers. Certainly the times were dull when these things happened,
and the wits of those Ages short of th^se of ours, when men could maintain
such immutable faces, as to remain like statues under the ^latteries of wit,
and persist unalterable at all effortes of Jocula^ity. The spirits in hell, and
Pluto himself, which Lucian makes to laugh at passages upon earth, will
plainly condemn^ these Saturni^es, and make ridiculous the magnified
Heraclitus, who wept preposterously, and made a hall on earth; for rejecting
the consolations of life, he passed (...) days in tears, and the
uncomfortable (...) of hell.

3. The same conceit there pass^th concerning our blessed Savior, and is
sometimes urged as an high example of gravity. And this is opinioned, because
in holy Scripture it is recorded he sometimes wept, bu^ never that he laughed.
Which howsoever granted, it will be hard to con^eive how he passed his younger
years and childhood (...) a smile; if as Divinity affirms, for the assurance
of his humanity unto men, and the concealment of his D^vinity from the Devil,
he passed this age like other children, and so proceeded until he evidenced
the same. And surely no danger there is to a^^irme the act or performance of
that, whereof we acknowledge the power and essential property; and whereby
indeed he most nearly convinced the doubt of his ^umanity. Nor need we be
afraid to ascribe that unto the incarna^^ S^n, which sometimes is attributed
unto the uncarnate Father, of whom it is said, He that dwells in the heavens
shall laugh the wicked to scorn. For, a laugh there is of contempt or
indignation, as well as of mirth and Jocosity; And that our Savior was not
exempted from, the ground hereof, that is, the passion of anger, regulated and
rightly ordered by reason, the Schools do not deny; and besides (...)
experience of the money changers, Zelus domus tuae comedit me.
and Dove-sellers in the Temple, is testified by S. John when he says, the
speech of David w^^fulfilled in our Savior.

Now the Alogie of this opinion consists in the ill^^^ion; it being not
reasonable to conclude from Scripture negatively in points which are not
matters of faith, and pertaining unto salvation; and therefore although in the
description of the creation there be no mention of fire, Christian Philosophy
did not think it reasonable presently to annihilate that Element, or
positively to decree there was no such thing at all. Thus whereas in the brief
narration of Moses there is no record of wine before the flood, can we
satisfactorily conclude that Noah was the first that eve^ tasted thereof? And
thus because the word Brain is scarce mentioned once, Only in the vulgar
Latin Judge. 9. 53.
but Heart above an hundred times in holy Scripture; will Physicians that
dispute the principality of parts be induced from hence to ber^ave the animal
organ of its priority; wherefore the Scriptures being serious, and commonly
omitting such Parergies, it will be unreasonable from hence to condemn all
laughter, and from considerations inconsiderable to discipline a man out of his
nature* for this is by a rusticall severity to benish all urbanity, whose
harmless and con^ined condition as it stands commended by morality, so is it
consistent with Religion, and does not offend Divinity.

4. The custom it is of Popes to change their name at their creation; and the
Author thereof is commonly said to be Bocca di Porco, or Swines face, who
therefore assumed the style of Sergius the second, as being ashamed so ^oule a
name should dishonor the chair of Peter; wherein notwithstanding from
Montacutius and others, I find there may be some mistake: For Massonius who
writ the live^ of Popes, acknowledges he was not the first that changed his
name in that Sea; nor as Platina affirms, have all his successors precisely
continued that custom; for Adrian the sixth, and Marcellus the second, did
still retain their Baptismall denominations, nor is it proved, or probable
that Sergius changed the name of Bocca di Porco, for this was his surname or
gentilitious appellation, nor was it the custom to alter that with the other;
but he commuted his Christian name Peter for Sergius, because he would seem to
decline the name of Peter the second. A scruple I confess not thought
considerable in other Seas, whose originalls and first Patriarchs have been
less disputed; nor yet perhaps of that reallity as to prevail in po^nts of
the same nature. For the names of the Apostles, Patriarchs and Prophets have
been assumed even to affectation; the name of Jesus has not been appropriate,
but some in precedent ages have borne that name, and many since have not
refused the Christian name of Emanuel. Thus are there few names more frequent
then Moses and Abraham among the Jews; The Turks without scruple affect the^^
(...) of Mahomet, and with gladness receive so honorable cogno^^ination.

And truly in (...) there ever have been many well directed intentio^^, whose
rationalities will never bear a rigid examination; and though in some way they
do commend their Authors and such as first beg^n them, yet have they proved
insufficient to perpetuate imitation in such as have succeeded them. Thus was
it a worthy resolution of Godfrey, and most Christians have applauded it, That
he refused to wear a Crown of gold where his Savior had (...) one of
thorns. Yet did not his Successors durably inherit that (...), but some were
anointed, and solemnly accepted the Dia^^^e of Reg^lity. Thus Julius Augustus
and Tiberius with great ^umility or popularity refused the name of Imperator;
but their Successors have challenged that title, and retain the (...) even in
its titularity. And thu^, to come nearer our subject, the humility of Gregory
the Great, would by no means admit the style of Universal Bishop; but the
ambition of Boniface his immediate Successor made no scruple thereof; nor of
more queasie resolutions have been their Successors eve^ since.

5. That Tamedaane was a Scythian Shepherd, from Mr. Knolls and others, from
Alh^zen a learned Arabian who wrote his life, and w^^ sp^^tator of many of his
exploits, we have reasons to deny: not only from his birth; for he was of the
blood of the Tartarian Emperors, whose ^ather Og had for his possession the
Country of Sagathay, which was no slender Teritory, but comprehended all that
tract wherein were contained Bactriana, Sogdiana, Margiana, and the Nation of
the Massagetes; whose capital City was (...); a place though now decayed, of
great esteem and trade in former Ages: but from his Regail Inauguration; for
it is said, that being about the age of fifteen, his old father resigned the
Kingdom, and men of war unto him. And also from his education; for as the
story speaks it, he was instructed in the Arabian learning, and afterward
exercised himself therein: Now Arabian learning was in a manner all the
liberal Sciences, especially the Mathematics, and natural Philosophy;
whe^ein not many Ages before him, there ^lourished Avi^^nna, Aver^hoes,
Ave^zoar, Geber, Almanzor and Alhaz^n cognominall unto him that wrote his
history; whose Chronology indeed, although it be obscure, yet in the opinion of
his Commentator, he was contemporary unto Avicenna, and has le^t (...) books
of Optics, of great esteem with Ages past, and textuary unto our days.

Now the ground of this mistake was surely that which the Turkish historian
declares. Some, says he, of our historians will needs have Tamerlane to be
son of a Shepherd; but this they have said, not knowing at all the custom
of their Country; wherein the principal rev^newes of the King and Nobles
consists in cattle; who despising gold and silver, abound in all sorts
thereof. And this was the occasion that some men call them Shepherds, and also
affirm this Prince descended from them. Now, if it be reasonable, that great
men whose possessions are chiefly in cattle, should bear the name of
Shepherds, and fall upon so low denominations, then may we say that Abraham
was a Shepherd, although too powerful for four Kings; that Job was of that
condition, who beside Camels and Oxen had seven thousand Sheep; and yet is
said to be the greatest man in the East. Surely it is no dishonorable course
of life which Moses and Jacob have made exemplary, it is a profession supported
upon the natural way of acquisition, and though contemned by the Egyptians,
much countenanced by the Hebrews, whose sacrifices required plenty of Sheep
and Lambs. And certainly they were very numerous; for, at the consecration of
the Temple, beside two and twenty thousand Oxen, King Solomon sacrificed an
hundred and twenty thousand Sheep; and the same is observable from the daily
provision of his house, which was ten fat Oxen, twenty Oxen out of the
pastures, and an hundred Sheep, beside row Buck, fallow Dear, and fatted
Fowls. Wherein notwithstanding (if a punctual relation thereof do rightly
inform us) the grand Seignor does exceed: the daily provision of whose
Seraiglio in the reign of Achmet, beside Beeves, consumed two hundred Sheep,
Lambs and Kids when they were in season one hundred, Calves ten, Geese fifty,
Hens two hundred, Chickens one hundred, Pigeons an hundred pair.

CHAP. XVII.
Of some others.
1. WE are sad when we read the story of Belisarius that worthy Cheiftaine
of Justinian; who, after the Victories of Vandals, Goths and Persians, and his
Trophies in three parts of the World, had at last his eyes put out by the
Emperor, and was reduced to that distress, that he begged relief on the high
way, in that uncomfortable petition, Date obolum Belisario. And this we do not
only hear in discourses, Orations and Themes, but find it also in the leaves
of Petrus Crinitus, Volateranus and other worthy Writers.

But, what may somewhat consolate all men that honor virtue, we do not
discover the latter Scene of his misery in Authors of Antiquity, or such as
have expressly delivered the story of those times. For, Suidas is silent herein,
Cedrenus and Zonaras, two grave and punctual Authors, delivering only the
confiscation of his goods, omit the history of his mendication. Paulus Diaconus
goes farther, not only passing over this act, but affirming his goods and
dignities were restored. Agathius who lived at the same time, declares he
suffered much from the envy of the Court, but that he descended thus deep
into affliction, is not to be gathered from his pen. The same is also omitted
by Procopius a contemporary and professed enemy unto Justinian and Belisarius,
and who as Suidas reports, did write an opprobrious book against them both.

And in this opinion and hopes we are not single; but Andreas Alciatus the
Civilian in his Parerga, and Franciscus de Cordua in his Didascalia, have both
declaratorily confirmed the same. Certainly, sad and Tragical stories are
seldom drawn within the circle of their verities; but as their Relators do
either intend the hatred or pity of the persons, so are they set forth with
additionall amplifications. Thus have some suspected it has happened unto the
story of Oedipus; and thus do we conceive it has fared with that of Judas,
who having sinned beyond aggravation, and committed one villainy which cannot
be exasperated by all other; is yet charged with the murder of his reputed
brother, parricide of his father, and Incest with his own mother, as
Florilegus or Matthew of Westminster has at large related. And thus has it
perhaps befallen the noble Belisarius, who, upon instigation of the Empress,
having contrived the exile, and very hardly treated Pope Serverius, Latin pens,
as a judgment of God upon this fact, have set forth his future sufferings: and
omitting nothing of amplification, they have also delivered this, which
notwithstanding Johannes the Greek, makes doubtful, as may appear from his
Iambicks in Baronius.

2. That fluctus Decumanus, or the tenth wave is greater and more dangerous
then any other, some no doubt will be offended if we deny; and hereby we shall
seem to contradict Antiquity; for, answerable unto the literal and common
acception the same is ave^red by many Writers, and plainly described by Ovid --
Qui venit hic fluctus, fluctus supereminet omnes,
Posterior nono est, ^ndecimoque prior.
Which notwithstanding is evidently false, nor can it be made out by
observation either upon the shore or the Ocean, as we have with diligence
explored in both; and surely in vain we expect a regularity in the waves of
the Sea, or in the particular motions thereof, as in its general
reciprocations, whose causes are constant and their effects therefore
correspondent; whereas its fluctuations are but motions subservient, which
winds, storms, shoares, shelves, and every interjacency irregulates. With
sem^lable reason we might expect a regularity in the winds; whereof though
some be stata^y, some anniversary, and the rest do tend to determinate points
of heaven; yet do the blasts and undulary breaths thereof maintain no
certainty in their course: nor are they numerally feared by Navigators.

Of affinity hereto is that conceit of Ovum decumanum, so called, because the
tenth egg is bigger then any other, according unto the reason alleged by
Festus, Decumana ^va dicuntur, quia ^vum decimum majus nascit^r. For the honor
we bear unto the Clergy, we cannot but wish this true; but herein will be
found no more of verity then in the other: and surely few will assent hereto
without an implicit credulity, or as Pythagoricall submission unto every
conception of number.

For, surely the conceit is numerall, and though not in the since apprehended,
relates unto the number of ten, as Franciscus Sylvius has most probably
declared. For, whereas amongst simple numbers or Digits, the number of ten is
the greatest, ther^fo^e whatsoever was the greatest in every kind, might in
some sense be n^med from this number. Now, because also that which was the
greatest, was metaphorically by some at first called Decumanus, therefore
^ha^soever passed under this name was literally conceived by others to respect
and make good this number.

The conceit is also Latin, for the Greeks to express the greatest wave, do
use the number of three, that is, the word (...), which is a concurrence of
three waves in one, whence arose the proverb, (...), or a trifluctuation of
evils, which E^asmus does render, Molarum fluctus Decumanus. And thus, al^hough
the terms be very diff^rent, yet are they made to signi^ie the self same
thing; the number of ten to explain the number of three, and the single number
of one wave the collective concurrence of more.

3. The poison of Parysatis reported from C^esias by Plutarch in the life of
Artaxerxes, whereby anointing a knife on the one side, and therewith dividing
a bird, with the one half she poisoned Statira, and safely fed her self on
the other, was certainly a very subtle one, and such as our ignorance is well
content it knows not. But surely we had discovered a poison that would not
endure Pandoraes Box, could we be satisfied in that which for its cold^esse
nothing could contain but an Asses hoof, and wherewith some report that
Alexander the Great was poisoned. Had men de^ived so strange an effect from
some occult or hidden qu^l^^ies, they might have silenced contradiction; but
ascribi^g it unto the manifest and open qualities of cold, they must pardon our
belief, who perceive the coldest and most Stygian waters may be included in
glasses, and by Aristotle, who says, that glass is the perfectest work of
Art, we understand they were not then to be invented.

And though it be said that poison will break a Venice glass, yet have we
not met with any of that nature. Were there a ^^uth herein, it were the best
preservative for Princes, and personages exalted unto such fears: and surely
far better then diverse now in use. And though the best of China dishes, and
such as the Emperor himself does use, be thought by some of infallible
virtue unto this effect, yet will they not, I fear, be able to elude the
mischief of such intentions. And though also it be true, that God made all
things double, and that if we look upon the works of the most High there are
two and two, one against another; that one contrary has another, and poison is
not without a poison unto its self; yet has the curse so far prevailed, or
else our industry defected, that poisons are better known then their
Antidotes, and some thereof do scarce admit of any. And lastly, although unto
every poison men have delivered many Antidotes, and in every one is promised an
equality unto its adversary; yet do we often find they fail in their
effects: Terra Melit^a.
Moly will not resist a weaker cup then that of Circe; a man may be poisoned
in a Lemnian dish, without the miracle of John, there is no confidence in the
earth of Paul; and if it be meant that no poison could work upon him, we
doubt the story, and expect no such succ^sse from the diet of Mithridates.

4. A story there passes of an Indian King, that sent unto Alexander a fair
woman fed with Aconites and other poisons, with this intent, either by converse
or copulation complexionally to destroy him. For my part, although the design
were true, I should have doubted the success. For, though it be possible that
poisons may meet with tempers whereto they may become Aliments, and we observe
from fowls that feed on fishes, and others feed with garlic and onyons, that
simple aliments are not always concocted beyond their vegetable qualities; and
therefore that even after carnal conversion, poisons may yet retain some
portion of their natures; yet are they so refracted, cicurated, and subdued, as
not to make good their first and destructive malignities. And therefore the
Storke that eats Snakes, and the Stare that feeds upon Hemlock, though no
commendable aliments, are not destructive poisons. For, animals that can
innoxiously digest these poisons become antidotall unto the poison digested;
and therefore whether their breath be attracted, or their flesh ingested, the
poisonous relics go still along with their Antidote, whose society will not
permit their malice to be destructive. And therefore also animals that are not
mischifed by poyson^ which destroy us, may be drawn into Antidote against
them; The blood or flesh of Storks against the venom of Serpents, the Quail
against Hellebore, and the diet of Starlings against the draught of Socrates.
Upon like grounds are some parts of Animals Alexipharmacall unto others, and
some veins of the earth, and also whole regions, not only destroy the life of
venomous creatures, but also prevent their productions. For, though perhaps
they contain the seminals of Spiders, and Scorpions, and such as in other
earths by suscitation of the Sun may arise unto animation; yet lying under
command of their Antidote, without hope of emergency they are poisoned in their
matrix by those powers, that easily hinder the advance of their originals,
whose confirmed forms they are able to destroy.

5. The story of the wandering Jew is very strange, and will hardly obtain
belief, yet is there a formal account thereof set down by Matthew Paris,
from the report of an Armenian Bishop; who came into this kingdom about four
hundred years ago, and had often entertained this wanderer at his Table. That
he was then alive, was first called Ca^taphilus, Vade quid moraris? Eg^ vado,
tu aute^ morare donec ve^io.
was keeper of the Judgment Hall, whence thrusting out our Savior with
expostulation for his stay, was condemned to stay until his return; was after
baptized by Ananias, and by the name of Joseph; was thirty years old in the
days of our Savior, remembered the Saints that arised with him, the making of
the Apostles Creed, and their several peregrinations. Surely were this true,
he might be an happy arbitrator in many Christian controversies; but must
impardonably condemn the obstinacy of the Jews, who can contemn the Rhetoric
of such miracles, and blindly behold so living and lasting (...).

CHAP. XVIII.
More briefly of some others.
OTher relations there are, and those in very good Authors; which though we do
not positively deny, yet have they not been unquestioned by some, and as
improbable truths do stand rejected by others. Unto some it has seemed
incredulous what Herodotus reports of the great Army of Xerxes, that drank
whole Rivers dry. And unto the Author himself it appeared wondrous strange,
that they exhausted not the provision of the Country, rather then the waters
thereof. For, as he makes the account, and Budeus de Ass correcting the
miscompute of Valla, delivers it; if every man of the Army had had a chenix
of Corn a day, that is a sextary and half, or about two pints and a quarter,
the Army had daily expended ten hundred thousand and forty medimna's, or
measures containing six Bushels. Which rightly considered, the Abderites had
reason to bless the heavens, that Xerxes eat but one meal a day, and Pythius
his noble host might with less charge and possible provision entertain both
him and his Army. And yet may all be salved, if we take it hyperbolically, and
as wise men receive that expression in Job, concerning Behemoth, or the
Elephant; Behold, he drinks up a River and hastes not, he trusts that he
can draw up Jordane into his mouth.

2. That Anniball eat or brake through the Alps with Vinegar, may be too
grossly taken, and the Author of his life annexed unto Pl^tarch affirms,
only he used this artifice upon the tops of some of the highest mountains.
For, as it is vulgarly understood, that he cut a passage for his Army through
those mighty mountains, it may seem incredible, not only in the greatness
of the effect, but the quantity of the efficient: and such as behold them, may
think an Ocean of Vinegar too little for that effect. 'Twas a work indeed
rather to be expected from earthquakes and inundations, then any corrosive
waters, and much condemns the judgment of Xerxes, that wrought through Mount
Athos with Mattocks.

3. The received story of Milo, who by daily lifting a Calfe, attained an
ability to carry it being a Bull, is a witty conceit, and handsomely sets forth
the efficacy of Assuefaction. But surely the account had been more reasonably
placed upon some person not much exceeding in strength, and such a one as
without the assistance of custom could never have performed that act; which
some may presume that Milo without precedent artifice or any other preparative,
had strength enough to perform. For, as relations declare, he was the most
pancraticall man of Greece, and as Galen reports, and Mercurialis in his
Gymnasticks represents, he was able to persist erect upon an oyled planke,
and not to be removed by the force or protrusion of three men; and if that be
true which Atheneus reports, he was little beholding to custom for this
ability. For, in the Olympic games, for the space of a furlong, he carried an
Ox of four years upon his shoulders; and the same day he carried it in his
belly; for as it is there delivered he eat it up himself: Surely he had been
a proper guest at Grandgousiers feast, In Rabelais.
and might have matched his throat that eat six pilgrims for a salad.

4. It much disadvantageth the Pa^egyrick of Synesius, Who writ in the praise
of baldness.
and is no small disparagement unto baldness, if it be true what is related
by Ae^ian concerning Aeschilus, whose balde pate was mistaken for a rock, and
so was brained by a Tortoise which an Eagle let fall upon it. Certainly, it
was a very great mistake in the perspica^ity of that Animal, and some men
critically disposed, would perhaps from hence confute the opinion of
Copernicus, never conceiving how the motion of the earth below should not wave
him from a knock perpendicularly directed from a body in the air above.

5. It crosses the proverb, and Rome might well be built in a day; if that
were true which is traditionally related by Strabo; that the great Ci^ies
Anchiale and Tarsus, were built by Sardanapalus both in one day, accordnig to
the inscription of his monument, Sardanapalus Anacyndaraxis silius, Anchialen
and Tarsum una die edificavi, It Is autem hospes Ede, Lude, Bibe etc. which it
stirctly taken, that is, for the finishing thereof, and not only for the
beginning, for an artificial or natural day, and not one of Daniels weeks,
that is, seven whole years; surely their hands were very heavy that wasted
thirteen years in the private house of Solomon; it may be wondered how forty
years were spent in the erection of the Temple of Jerusalem, and no less then
an hundred in that famous one of Ephesus. Certainly, it was the greatest
Architecture of one day, since that great one of six; an Art quite lost with
our Mechanics, and a work not to be made out, but like the walls of Thebes,
and such an Artificer as Amphion.

6. It had been a sight only second unto the Arc, to have beheld the great
Syracusia, or mighty Ship of Hiero, described in Atheneus; and some have
thought it a very large one, wherein were to be found ten stables for horses,
eight Towers, besides fishponds, Gardens, Tricliniums, and many fair rooms
paved with Agath, and precious stones; but nothing is impossible unto
Archimedes, the learned contriver thereof; nor shall we question his removing
the earth, when he finds an immovable base to place his engine upon it.

7. The relation of Plutarch of a youth of Sparta, that suffered a Fox
concealed under his robe to tear out his bowels, before he would either by
voice or countenance betray his theft; and the other of the Spartan Lad, that
with the same resolution suffered a coal from the Altar to burn his arm;
although defended by the Author that writes his life, is I perceive mistrusted
by men of judgment, and the Author with an aiunt, is made to salve himself.
Assuredly it was a noble Nation that could afford an hint to such inventions of
patience, and upon whom, if not such verities, at least such verisimilities of
fortitude were placed. Were the story true, they would have made the only
Disciples for Zeno and the Stoics, and might perhaps have been persuaded to
laugh in Phaleris his Bull.

8. If any man shall content his belief with the speech of Balams Ass,
without a belief of that of Mahomets Camel, or Livies Ox; if any man make a
doubt of Giges ring in Justinus, or conceives he must be a Jew that believes
the Sabbaticall river in Josephus. If any man will say he does not apprehend
how the tail of an African weather out weighs the body of a good Calfe, that
is, an hundred pound, according unto Leo Africanus; or desires before belief,
to behold such a creature as is the Ruc in Paulus Venetus, for my part I shall
not be angry with his incredulity.

9. If any man doubt of the strange Antiquities delivered by historians, as of
the wonderful corpse of Antaeus untombed a thousand years after his death by
Sertorius; whether there were no deceit in those fragments of the Arc so
common to be seen in the days of Berosus; whether the pillar which Josephus
beh^ld long ago, Tertullian long after, and Bartholomeus de Saligniaco, and
Borchardus long since be the same with that of Lots wife; whether this were the
hand of Paul, or that which is commonly shown the head of Peter, if any doubt,
I shall not much dispute with their suspicions. If any man shall not believe
the Turpentine betwixt Jerusalem and Bethlem, under which the Virgin suckled
our Savior, as she passed between those Cities; or the figtree of Bethanie
showed to this day, whereon Zacheus ascended to behold our Savior, I cannot
tell how to enforce his belief, nor do I think it requisite to attempt it.
For, as it is no reasonable proceeding to compel a Religion, or think to
enforce our own belief upon another, who cannot without the concurrence of
Gods Spirit, have any indubitable evidence of things that are obtruded; so is
it also in matters of common belief; whereunto neither can we indubitably
assent, without the cooperation of our sense or reason, wherein consist the
principles of persuasion. For, as the habit of faith in Divinity is an argument
of things unseene, and a stable assent unto things inevident, upon authority of
the divine Revealer; So the belief of man which depends upon humane Testimony,
is but a staggering assent unto the affirmative, not without some fear of the
negative. And as there is required the Spirit of God, and an infused
inclination unto the one, so must the actual sensation of our senses, at least
the non opposition of our reasons procure our assent and acquiescence in the
other. So when Eusebius an holy writer affirms there grew a strange and
unknown plant near the statue of Christ, erected by his hemarroidall patient
in the Gospel, which attaining unto the hemne of his vesture, acquired a sudden
faculty to cure all diseases. Although he says he saw the statua in his days,
has it found in many men so much as humane belief; some believing, others
opinioning, a third suspecting it might be otherwise. For, indeed in matters of
belief the understanding assenting unto the relation, either for the authority
of the person, or the probability of the object; although there may be a
confidence of the one, yet if there be not a satisfaction in the other, there
will arise suspensions; nor can we properly believe until some argument of
reason, or of our proper sense convince or determine our dubitations.

And thus it is also in matters of certain and experimented truth: for, if unto
one that never heard thereof, a man should undertake to persuade the affections
of the Loadstone, or that Jet and Amber attracteth strawes and light bodies,
there would be little Rhetoric in the authority of Aristotle, Pliny, or any
other. Thus, although it be true that the string of a Lute or Violl will stir
upon the stroke of an unison or Diapazon in another of the same kind; that
Alcanna being green, will suddenly infect the nails and other parts with a
durable red; that a candle out of a Musket will pierce through an inch board,
or an Urinall force a nail through a planke, can few or none believe thus much
without a visible experiment. Which notwithstanding falls out more happily for
knowledge; for these relations leaving unsatisfaction in the hearers, do
stir up ingenuous dubiosities unto experiment, and by an exploration of all,
prevent delusion in any.

CHAP. XIX.
Of some relations whose truth we fear.
LAstly, as there are many relations whereto we cannot afford our assent, and
make some doubt thereof, so a^e there diverse others whose verities we fear,
and heartily wish there were no truth therein.

1. It is an unsufferable affront unto filial piety, and a deep
discouragement unto the expectation of all aged Parents, who shall but read
the story of that barbarous Q^eene, who afte^ she had beheld her royal parents
ruin, lay yet in the arms of his assassine, and carrouled with him in the
skull of her father; for my part, I should have doubled the ^peration of
antimony, where such a potion would not work; 't was an act me thinks beyond
Anthropophagy, and a cup fit to be serv^d up only at the Table of A^reus.

2. While we laugh at the story of Pygmaleon, an receive as a fable tha he fell
in love with a (...), we cannot but fear it may be (...), what is delivered
by (...) the Egyptian Pollinctors, or such as (...) the dead, (...) thereof
were found in the act of carnality with them; from (...) it is (...) then
incontinency for Hylas to sp^rt with Hecuba, and youth to flame in the frozen
embraces of age, we require a name for this: wherein Peronius or Martial
cannot relieve us. The tyranny of M^zen^ius did never equal the vitiosity of
this (...), that could embrace corruption, and make a Mistress of the grave;
that could not resist the dead provocations of beauty, whose quick invitements
scarce excuse submission. Surely, if such dep^^vities there be yet alive,
deformity need not despair; nor will the eldest, (...), since death has
spurs, and carcasses have been courted.

3. I am heartily sorry and wish it were not true, what to the (...) of
Christianity is affi^med of the Italian, who after he had (...) his enemy to
disclaim his faith for the redemption of his life, did pres^ntly (...) him, to
prevent repentance, and assure his eternal death. The villainy of this
Christian exceeded the persecution of Heathens, whose (...) was never so
Longima^us as to reach the soul of their enemies, or to (...) the exile of
their Ely^^^^. And though the blindness of some ferities have savaged on the
dead, and been so injurious unto worms, as to disenterre the bodies of the
deceased; yet had they therein no design upon the soul; and have been so
far from the destruction of that, or desires of a perpetual death, that for
the satisfaction of their revenge they wished them many souls, and were it in
their power would have reduced them unto life again. It is great depravi^y in
our natures, and surely an affection that somewh^^ ^avoureth of hell, to desire
the society, or comfort our selves in the ^^llowship of others that suffer with
us; but to procure the miseries of others in those extremities, wherein we hold
an hope to have no society our selves, is me thinks a strain above Lucifer,
and a project beyond the primary seduction of Hell.

4. I hope it is not true, and some indeed have strongly denied, what is
recorded of the Monk that poisoned Henry the Emperor, in a draught of the
holy Eucharist. 'Twas a scandalous wound unto Christian Religion, and I hope
all Pagans will forgive it, when they shall read that a Christian was poisoned
in a cup of Christ, and received his bane in a draught of his salvation. Had I
believed Transubstantiation, I should have doubted the effect; and surely the
sin it self received an aggravation in that opinion. It much commends the
Innocence of our forefathers, and the simplicity of those times, whose Laws
could never dream so high a crime as parricide: whereas this at the least may
seem to outreach that fact, and to exceed the regular distinctions of murder.
I will not say what sin it was to act it; yet may it seem a kind of
martyrdom to suffer by it: For, although unknowingly he dyed for Christ his
sake, and lost hs life in the ordained testimony of his death. Certainly, had
they known it, some noble zeales would scarcely have refused it, rather
adventuring their own death, then refusing the memorial of his.

Many other accounts like these we meet sometimes in history, scandalous unto
Christianity, and even unto humanity; whose verities not only, but whose
relations honest minds do deprecate. For of sins heteroclitall, and such as
want either name or president, there is often times a sin even in their
histories. We desire no records of such enormities; sins should be accounted
new, that so they may be esteemed monstrous. They omit of monstrosi^y as they
fall from their rarity; for, men count it venial to err with their
forefathers, and foolishly conceive they divide a sin in its socie^y. The
pens of men may sufficiently expatiate without these singularities of Villainy;
For, as they increase the hatred of vice in some, so do they enlarge the
theory of wickedness in all. And this is one thing that may make latter Ages
worse then were the former; For, the vicious examples of Ages past, poison the
curiosity of these present, affording a hint of sin unto seduceable spirits,
and soliciting those unto the imitation of them, whose heads were never so
perversely principled as to invent them. In this kind we commend the wisdom
and goodness of Galen, who would not leave unto the world too subtle a Theory
of poisons; unarming thereby the malice of venomous spirits, whose ignorance
must be contented with Sublimate and Arsenick. For, surely there are subtiler
venenations, such as will invisibly destroy, and like the B^sili^ks of heaven.
In things of this nature silence condemns history, Who writ de Antiquis
deperditis, or of inventions lost.
it is the veniable part of things lost; wherein there must never rise a
Pancirollus, nor remain any Register but that of hell.

And yet, if as some Stoics opinion, and Seneca himself disputes, these
unruly affections that make us sin such prodigies, and even sins themselves
be animals; there is an history of Africa and story of Snakes in these. And if
the transanimation of Pythagoras or method thereof were true, that the souls
of men transmigrated into species answering their former natures; some men must
surely live over many Serpents, and cannot escape that very brood whose sire
Satan entered; and though the objection of Plato should take place, that bodies
subjected unto corruption, must fail at last before the period of all things,
and growing fewer in number, must leave some souls apart unto themselves; the
spirits of many long before that time will find but naked habitations; and
meeting no assimilables wherein to react their natures, must certainly
anticipate such natural desolations.

FINIS.
Some errors in interpunctions or poyntings the advertency of the Reader may
(...)* what others, by ^eason of the obscurity of the Copy (...) him thus to
rectify.
PAge (...) for po^^^^ity, read posteriority. p. 14. l. 21. for understood,
misunderstood. p. 21. l* 10. for lives, lines. p. 33. l. 22, for 25, 20* p. 35,
l. 8* for induce, to induce. p. 38. l. 41. for miserable, miserablest. p. 59.
l. 39. for Iron, from. p. 61. l. 28. for interest, inter^ect. p. 62. l. 13.
read which with (...). p. 67. l. 41. for any, and. p. 76. l. 29. for yet, it.
and after, for the Art, by the Art, for incision, (...). p. 95. l. 16, for it,
yet. p. 105. l. 16. for without. not without. p. 107. l. 24. for whose, whole*
p. 117. l. 24. for conceded, concealed. p. 134. l. 21* for among, within. p.
140. l. 24. for Elychino^s, Blychnious. p. 150. l. 30. for pervinum, perulium.
p. 159. l. 40. read corpulency, and dele it. p. 180. l. 15. for sight, site.
and read inangular, p. 194. l. 17. for matter, water. p. 199. l. 14. for our,
Cur. p. 202. l. 10. for India, Judea. p. 204. l. 15. read amitted* p. 216. l.
34. read inconfirmed. p. 222. l. 33. for seven, seventeene. p. 226, l. 28. for
Longitude, Declination* p. 235. l. (...). reconveyed. p. 238. ^ with the
mischief p* 259. l. 17. for are, or. p. 169. l. 29. for about, above* p. 27 1.
l. 1. ^ purged. p. 285. l. 1 4. r grafting. p. 287. l. 8. dele of p. (...).
convexity. p. 308. l. 15. for (...), or. p. 320. l. (...).


