Vera Effigies Joannis Brown Regis Majestati Chirurg: Ordinar: Aetatis suae 36.
An^o: Dom* 1678.
R: White delin:

et sculp:



A Complete DISCOURSE OF WOUNDS Both in GENERAL and PARTICULAR:

Whereunto are Added the several Fractures of the Skull, with their variety of
Figures.

As also a TREATISE Of Gunshot-Wounds in General.

Collected and Reduced into a New method By JOHN BROWN, Sworn Surgeon in
Ordinary to the Kings most Excellent MAJESTY, and approved, and allowed by his
MAJESTY'S Chief Surgeons; and may be of singular use to all Practitioners
in the Art of Surgery.

Satis nunquam Dicitur, quod nunquam Satis Discitur.

LONDON, Printed by E. Flesher, for William Jacob, at the Black Swan in
Holborn. 1678.

IMPRIMATUR
Liber cui Titulus, (A Complete Discourse of Wounds, etc.)

March 6. 1677/8. Geo. Thorp, Reverendissimo in Christo Patri, and Domino, Dom.
Gulielmo Archiep. Cant. a Sacris domesticis.

TO THE MOST EXCELLENT AND MIGHTY MONARCH CHARLES II.
By the Gracious Providence of God KING Of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith, etc.

THESE CHIRURGICAL ESSAYS

Are most humbly Dedicated by YOUR MAJESTY'S Most Loyal and Obedient Subject
and Servant, John Brown.

Industriam Joannis Brown, Authoris hujus Libri de Vulneribus, maxim probamus,
atque hoc Opus omnibus Chirurgis perutile ac necessarium esse posse judicamus.

J. Knight, Reg. Chirurg. Princip. Sackvill Whittle, Reg. Chirurg. J. Pearse,
Reg. Chirurg.

TO Mr. JOHN BROWN, Upon his TREATISE of WOUNDS
SIR,
YOU have taken great and good Pains in the Composure of this Work, which
treats so particularly of many subjects; wherein having made use of Approved
Authors, and Choice of Effectual Medicines, together with proper Historical
Illustrations; that it will not only be of great use unto others, but also an
encouragement unto your self in your Chirurgicall endeavors.

Sir, I am Your Friend to serve you, Thomas Brown.

TO Mr. JOHN BROWN Surgeon, Formerly my Servant.
SIR,
I Cannot but highly approve, and value your study and pains in this Treatise
of Wounds, which without doubt will be of singular use, and special advantage
to the industrious Practitioners of our Mystery and Art.

Ita censuit Thomas Hollier, Surgeon of his Majesty's Hospitalls.
London.
AN ELENCHUS Of the Authors Names concerned in this Book of Wounds.
ALbucasis. Aquapendens. Avicen. Alexandrinus. Arcaeus. Benivenius. Boccatius.
Berengarius. Blosius. Brasavolus. Benedictus. Camerarius. Cardanus. Ctesias.
Celsus. Carpus. Crollius. Clowes. Diemerbroeck. Dovinaetus. Fabritius Hildanus
Forestus. Fallopius. Florentinus. Fernelius. Fracazinus. Galen. Gordonius.
Guido. Glandorp. Gilbertus Anglicus. Hippocrates. Hali Abbas. Hollerius.
Hercules Saxoniae. Jessenius. Jacotius. Amatus Lusitanus. Lemnius. Lindanus.
Laurentius. Mercurialis. Matthiolus. Nicolaus. Oribasius. Paraeus. Platerus.
Paulus Aegineta. Placentinus. Quercetanus. Rhasis. Read. Schenkius. Spigelius.
Soranus. Spererius. Tagaultius. Tragus. Velasius. Valleriola. Vertunianus.
Vigo. Weckerus. Felix Wirtz. Willis.
ERRATA.
Page 23. lin. 29. Read native heat. p. 29. r. replenish. p. 145. l. r. (...).
p. 152. l. 8. r. Menth. p. Diversis r. Epuloticks. p. 219. 7. r. Conjunctiva.
p. 238. l. 3. r. Rack. p. 248. l. 27. r. Cure. Omnibus locis, r. aqu. fontanae.

CHIRURGICAL INSTITUTIONS As Touching WOUNDS.
IF, according to the ancient Sentence of the Stoics, Man was bred and born
for the public good of his Neighbor: what greater service may be allowed in
reason to be performed for a Commonweal, then to study the health of its
People; and the preserving their parts in vigor, form and beauty? And as the
Learned and prudent Plutarch declares, that man had life given him from his
Maker for Knowledge sake, the which does as well procure Renown to his Name, as
produce his Virtues into Action: so daily Experience does evince, that the
Industrious hands, and unwearied Labors of men of worth and Learning, have
been of great effect, use, and benefit to all ages. And may we not well grant
the same of Surgery? where we may with pleasure and admiration view and
behold, how variously man, being either wounded, incised, pricked, battered,
contused, or the like, is brought into a good form and shape by this excellent
Art. It is he alone that can check fear in the Patient, and banish danger by
his Judgment; foretell Symptoms, and prevent accidents: he is as well the
Comfort in the Field, as a Friend* in the City. It is by his practice and Art
that divided parts are united, it is his Skill that keeps them thus united. And
as Homer says, we stand as much in need of his help as we do of Water or Fire,
(...). And for this reason was it, that the Ancients taught their Scholars this
Art of Surgery in their Schools, from whence also they learned their first
rudiments and Institutions.

And since my present task wholly relates to Wounds, I shall divide them into
general and particular Discourses. To these also have I adjoined Gunshot
Wounds, and a particular discourse of all kinds of Wounds of the Head, thence
accompanying this Treatise with Wounds in particular, (viz.) such as in their
order may be said to fall from thence to the Foot. And as every of these do
carry with them many differences, forms, shapes, and habits, it shall be my
present endeavor to acquaint the Young Surgeon, how to provide and arm
himself against these, and with what necessary Instruments he may perform this
task, and to conquer and cure the direful Symptoms which attend many Wounds,
which may inflict or accompany some parts of the Body. And that I may place him
in his right Tract, which may conduct him to the true and well management of
these: these four things will necessarily fall under our Confideration, being
very proper engines in their places to be used in Wounds, and these are
Ligatures, Medicines, Bolsters and Pledgets, of each of which a particular
respect is to be had, for they all require a right Order in their applications,
both as touching their long or short continuance at the part, a slight passing
by of which, does very often prove detrimentall.

Ligature and its two Species.
And first as touching Ligature, of this there are proposed two contrary
Species, the one to be made more strict, whilst the other may be made more
loose. And these two have diversity of parts allowed them, some parts being
property said to be thick, and others called thin or rare. That part is
accounted thick which is covered both with Bolsters and Roulers, these
appointed both for keeping the part warm, and also for making it more firm:
that called or said to be rare or loose, which only binds, not covers. And
these also are to be considered according to the Times of the year, in which
they are used or said to be applied. Thus Winter time does generally allow to
make more use of these then the Summer. Three fingers breadth for them is a
very good allowance. Those Ligatures are generally accounted best which are
made and applied most naturally, and those do for the most part express the
greatest honor to the Surgeon which are most exquisitely performed by him.
This made Wise Hippocrates affirm, that good Ligature does delight the eye, as
well as give the Patient satisfaction.

The next two shall be Section or Incision, and Cautery or Incision and Cautery.
Adustion; these also in some cases are very useful and necessary, and being
either made sooner or later do carry an equal praise and estimate: for in some
cases Incision is speedily required, and in these, delay may bring pain and
other bad Symptoms, and these fix or place a new fear on the Patients front:
But where many Incisions are to be made, a more deliberate care is to be had
and used, granting and allowing the Patient some Intervalls of rest: and these
are to be so performed, as that they bring no pain to the Patient. To the well
doing of which, the prompting of convenient Instruments and Medicines do much
conduce, every one of which is to be disposed in its proper Orb and Sphere, not
hindering or detarding one another. Then are these to be applied in their right
method and form. The length and shortness hereof ought also to be considered;
and what Instruments are most proper for the performance hereof: for some parts
of the body are of a speedy flux, and upon the slight touch of a thin and small
Instrument shows it self, as Veins and Arteries, the which are not readily
obstructed or stopped: these parts require small incisions, and for this use
the Lancet or Incision Knife are the best Instruments. In places which are not
so perilous, where the vessels lie deep, and the blood not so apparently
contained, we may venture on larger Instruments. But of these afterward.

Cupping glasses.
And because Cupping-glasses are generally reckoned amongst the Surgeons
Instruments, I shall discourse of these here also. These although they operate
not as other Instruments do, yet in many cases they are of great use. These
are called Concave Instruments, generally used for Revulsion, to be applied
with, or without flame, by the benefit of which Instruments, the humor is
fetched from many parts of the body, and drawn to the part to which they are
applied, and so is drawn forth. These also are sometimes applied with or
without Scarification. When there is occasion to make use of Scarification,
begin your Incision*s from the lower parts, and so pass upward, for thus the
blood of every Scarified part will be apparent; the which on the contrary being
made first in the upper part, the blood thence issuing will choke and obscure
the small Incisions which are made downwards, toward the lower part of the
circle. Here also are we with Galen to consider the differences of Incisions,
thus properly to be made, for they ought to be either thin, superficial and
slender, or deep and large, or of a size between both. Now such as are made
superficial cannot draw from the remote parts: these are neither said to
revell nor derive, but do only extract that humor which is cutaneously lodged
within. Others that are made more long, do educe much humor, as Orobasius
witnesses of himself, who upon having his Thigh scarified when he lay sick of
the Pest, had drawn from thence by the benefit of the Cupping-glass near two
pounds of blood, for this fetched it from the remotest parts of his body, and at
length perfectly recovered him. Cupping-glasses very useful in three Respects.
And for these three causes they are accounted very useful Instruments, because
they do both Derive, Revell and Expurge the redundancy of humors which are
lodged in the body, and do discharge the same by the small Incisions opened by
the Circle of the Glass, the which does both distend them and force the blood
to run more freely.

And because Extraction of Weapons, Splinters, Arrowheads, Darts, Bullets,
superfluous Flesh, Rags and the like, are a very necessary point and Intention
in Surgery, especially in curing large and Gunshot Wounds, I shall in the
next place give you the names of such Instruments as are most in use with us
for the same purpose, (viz.) Crows Bills, Cranes Bills, Ducks Bills,
Terebellum, Forcipes, and the lile. But because these will appear more properly
in their places of Gunshot Wounds, where also their figures are presented, I
will speak no more of them, only here alluding this Caution, That there be not
used too much violence in Extraction of Observat.
these extraneous Bodies, and to give and grant a just time for the execution of
this Intention. Knowing that moderation is sometimes allowed as advantageous,
as remisness or inconsiderateness granted insuccessfull: and in some cases it
is not requisite to extract these bodies through the Wound, they being
sometimes fixed in a bone, or between bones; sometimes nature will lend her
assisting hand to your work, if you give her time; and this, various History
makes good, and both former ages and our latter times have experienced the
same. Albucasis writes of a Woman who having an Arrow History.
shot near her Belly, and lodged in her body, she recovered of her Wound.
Ofttimes, after they have been lodged for many years, they frame a way for
themselves and there discharge* by making Abscesses for their Exition: and this
you may see confirmed by these following Histories. Alsaharavius, Theoric.
Tract. 6. cap. 1. writes that he saw a Another.
man who had an Arrow shot into his Back, the which after seven years made its
way out. Gilbertus Anglicus lib. 5. Compend. writes of a man who having an
Arrow shot into his Guts, Another.
had it drawn forth with the Excrement, and that the man escaped: but of these
expect more plentifully, in Gunshot Wounds. Sometimes it is also requisite that
the Wound it self be dilated, for the more ready making way for its Exition:
and then if you perceive the Extraneous body which is to be Extracted to be
perfectly loose, you may remove it the first dressing. But if it be only loose
at one end, and fixed at the other, strive not too much for its removal, lest
hereby you purchase some ill accidents you cannot readily overcome and abate;
as such a flux of blood as is not speedily to be stopped, and therefore in such
cases are we to wait Natures leisure. Having thus shown you what large
Instruments are best and most in use in Gunshot Wounds, you will find it a
great advantage to gain the signs of these infixed Weapons; for those being
once known, there can be no place left of doubt which may terrify the Patient,
or question the Surgeon; for it is the true Knowledge of Signs which do
hasten and promote the cure. Here also is to be considered the frequent
differences of Weapons, and these are carefully to be observed, and with these
the variety of the parts into which they are infixed, for on these two does the
difficulty of the cure and Extraction chiefly depend, as shall elsewhere more
at large appear. Now the Differences of Weapons.
differences of Weapons are taken from their matter, being made either of Wood,
Glass, Iron, Steel, Brass, or the like; from their Figure, being either Round,
Triangular, Foursquare, having sharp Points, Bearded; from their Magnitude,
being either large, small, or of middle size; from their number, being either
one or many, Simple or Compound; from their habit, some of which being sharp
pointed with Iron heads, others Concave; some firmly fixed to the Wood, others
more loosely set; and lastly they differ much in their Quality and Vigor, some
being venomed, others not. As to the parts affected, these are evident enough
from the property of accidents, which they show: and where all these are found
out, the Cure goes on with speed and success; for Galens Proverb is very true,
Dimidium facti, qui been coepit, habet. And he that thus sows the seeds of
his Art may well expect to reap a plentiful Crop of Honor and advantage to
himself, as well as Ease and Comfort to his Patient.

And as touching proper Medicines required in curing Wounds; the times of
Purging and Diet required therein; of the diversity of Wounds, and variety of
Instruments, and Medicines, as he ought always to have about him, I shall in
their proper order set down. The Young The Surgeons Box thus to be furnished.
Surgeon should have his Box thus furnished with Instruments: with Sizzers to
cut, Forcipes to Extract, a Spatula to mix Unguents, and spread Emplasters. A
Spatula Linguae for depressing the Tongue. Incision Knife to make Fontinels,
and dilate any part. Probes to search the depth of Wounds. Uvula Spoon to melt
any Balsome, and also used in Relaxation of the Uvula, the which after its
being restored, is to be kept up by Restringent Powders being blown through
this thither. A Stitching Quill to keep his Needles. The upper part of his Box
being always furnished with Lint for making Tents, Dosils and Pledgets, and
the lower part to be armed with convenient Emplasters. In his Salvitory he
should have these Unguents in readiness. Unguent. Basilicon, In his Salvitory
these Unguents.
or Aureum or Fuscum to digest, Vnguentum Apostolorum to mundify, Unguent.
Dialthaeae to ease pain, Balsam. Lucatelli, or Linimentum Arcei to fill up with
flesh, Unguent. Desiccativum Rubrum, Diapompholigos, or Album Camphoratum to
skin, dry up, and ease pain. In his Lancet Case Lancet Case.
he should have several Lancets, a Capital Rasour, and an Incision Knife; all
these he ought at all times to be ready furnished with: besides these he should
have also a Set of large Instruments, amongst which may be reckoned these.
Crows Bills, Cranes Bills, Terebellum, Large Forcipes, Cutting Large
Instruments.
Forcipes for Extraction, Incision Sizzers, Probe Sizzers, Dismembring Knife,
Catlins, Dismembring Saw, Capital Saw; Trafines with heads for Incision and
Amputation; Probes of all sorts for Probation; Syringes for Injection;
Catheters, Wax-Candles for Examination; Cauterizing Buttons for prevention of
Haemorrhagy, and stopping of Fluxes; Splints and Junks for Fractures; Tape, Tow
and Sponges for their several uses.

Having thus given you an account of his Instruments, next we will proceed to
Emplasters: and there give you Of Emplasters.
a recital of their Virtues. Thus Empl. Diapalma or Diacalcitheos, has a
repelling faculty, is good against Inflammations, Heals, Dries, and procures
a Cicatrice. Oxycroceum, Emolliates, Discusses, Warms and Strengthens.
Diachylon magnum cum gummi, Emolliates, Concocts and Digests, Attracts and
Dissolves. Empl. de Mucilaginibus, this partly Mollifies, and partly Digests,
and in some measure does Suppurate, and is generally reckoned amongst the
Emollients and Suppuratives. Empl. de Betonica is generally used in Wounds of
the Head, it restores Flesh being lost, it Digesteth and Cicatrizeth. Empl. de
minio does the same things as Diapalma. Empl. ad Herniam does both Strengthen
and Constringe the loose parts, good in Obstructing of Fluxes, for Ruptures and
the like, for which reason it had given it the name of Rupture Plaster. Empl.
de Ranis cum, this is very resolving, being applied to venereal Buboes or
Nodes, it acts its part very well in discussing them. Empl. Stiptic. Paracelsi
an usual Emplaster, applied to Pains and Aches, Contusions and Colds: for it
warms and comforts.

Having given you thus a brief account of Emplasters: we arrive now to the
understanding of the appropriation of Medicines, and these for the most part do
fetch their names from the proper places to which they are to be applied, as
thus for Example.

The appropriation of Medicines.
Cephalicks, Being such Medicines as are usually applied to the Head, so called
from (...), Caput.

Pectorals, Such as are appropriated to the Breast or Lungs, and these regard
both the parts afflicted, and the matter afflicting.

Oreticks, These applied to the Stomach, the which having allowed a pleasant
sharpness may contract it, and by their delicate Taste delight and please it.

Hepaticks, Ordered to the Liver for Strengthening it, correcting its Vices,
Opening its Obstructions, and tempering its Inflammations.

Spleneticks, Properly prescribed for the Spleen, in order to help its
Infirmities and relieve its Oppressions.

Nephriticks, Such Medicines as are assigned to the Bladder and Kidneys.

Hystericks, These ordered and designed for the Womb.

Arthriticks, Such as appertain to the Joints. And having past these, I shall
next set down the several names of Medicines as they are entitled, and show
you the reasons of their being so called, from their several Operations. Thus,

Emollients, From their softning Quality which they have granted them.

Relaxers, Such so called, which are said to loosen any Part or Member.

Rarifyers, Being of thin and subtle Parts, can make Tough and Phlegmatic
humors rare and thin by their proper Qualities.

Aperitives, So nominated from Opening the mouths of the Vessels.

Attenuators, Such as by a gentle outting Quality, do loosen the Bowels and
open Obstructions.

Astringents, So called from their drying Quality, binding up the places where
they are applied, and knitting the parts.

Attractives, These professing the contrary Quality, do by their heat and
thinness draw humors to any part of the Body they are designed for.

Discussives, these gently do disperse Matter, and insensibly dissolve it.

Anodynes, By a gentle heat do ease Pain, and abate its fury.

Narcoticks, By their cold and stupifying Quality do ease pain also.

Carminatives, These Expel Wind by their anodyne Quality.

Diaphoreticks, These provoke Sweat, and do work by insensible Transpiration.

Pyroticks, By their heat and burning faculty do burn the Skin.

Suppuratives, By a Natural heat do bring Blood, raw and indigested Humors
into Matter, and ripeness.

Incarnatives or Epouloticks, Do generate new Flesh by changing Blood into
Flesh.

Agglutinatives, By their agglutinating Quality do join the Lips of Wounds
together.

Cicatrizers, by their drying and binding Quality do skin and cover the Flesh.

Inward Medicines are also very various, and have therefore diversity of names
given them according to the variety of their Operations, as for Example.

We call those Catharticks, which work downwards by Siege.

Emeticks, Those which contrariwise work upward by Vomit.

Diuretics, Those carrying on their designs by Urine.

Sudorificks, Those throwing forth the Excrements by Sweat.

Ptermicks or Sternutatories, Purging the Brain by Sneezing.

Salivaticks, Those cleansing the passages of the Brain and its glandules by
Spittle.

Having thus given you in this small draught all the Utensils properly
belonging to the Young Surgeon, with his Instruments and Medicines, and
showing you their true appropriation; and the reasons of most of their Names
why they should be so called:

I shall conclude these my Chirurgical Institutions with a brief and general
Division of Wounds according as they are offered by the best of Surgeons:
with their differences, and Names of Solution of Continuity as they are set
down by Galen lib. 4. Method. and thus they appear.

Trauma, The general Division of Wounds.
A Solution made by a Wound in the Fleshy parts. Vlcus, or (...) An Ulcer in
the Flesh. Catagma, A Fracture in the Bone. Spasma, A Convulsion or Distension
in a Nerve.

That is

Apospasma, Avulsion in Ligaments. Rhegma, Ruption in Muscles. Thlasma.
Collision or Contusion properly in Vessels.

These also do divide Union.
Ecchymosis, or Inhumoratio, Which is made when the Blood is poured forth under
the Skin, and Coagulates, happening by Contusions and Ruptions. Anastomosis,
[or Apertion of the Mouths of the Vessels. Diapedesis, or Transcolation, or
Exilition, The Coat of the Sanguinary Vessels being made thin, the Blood also
being attenuated. Anabrosis, or Diabrosis, or Erosion, The which is inwardly
incident to Veins and Arteries: bred out of some ill Juice which carries a
mordent Quality in it.

By Avicen, Fen. 2. Lib. 1.
The Differences of solution of Continuity are thus set down.
Excoriation and Scarification, in the Cutis.
A Wound or Cut, in the New and Cruent Flesh.
Vlcus or an Ulcer, in the Flesh with Matter.
Puncture or Prick, in a Nerve.
Incision or Section, in a Bone according to its breadth.
Apertion or Opening, in Veins and Arteries.
Scissure or Cleft, according to the length in a Bone.
Contusion or Bruise, a numerous solution of Continuity.
Attrition or Diminution, in the Extreme part of a Muscle.
Fracture or Division, in Bones.
Rupture or Burstness, in Pannicles, Diaphragma and the like.
The General Differences of New or fresh Wounds by Guido, and other Surgeons
of our Age are taken from these Three. (viz.)
1. From the nature of the parts in which they consist.

2. From the essence of Solution of Continuity it self.

3. From the proper Differences of the Solution it self excited out of the
Wound.

1. Differences of Wounds are taken from the nature of parts.
And herein a Wound may be said to be either in a Similar or Organick part.
A Wound in a Similar part may be either, soft, hard, or between both.

That is said to be in a soft Similar part, when it happens in Flesh or Fat.

That in a hard Similar part, when it falls on a Bone or Juncture.

That between both, when it happens in a Nerve, Ligament, Tendon, Vein or
Artery.

That Wound is said to happen in an Organick part, when it touches the
principal part: or such a part, as is subservient to it; or in a principal
part not subministring to it.

That is called a Wound in a Principal part which happens in the Heart, Brain,
or Liver.

That in a part subservient to these, when it happens in the Oesophagus,
Windpipe, or Bladder.

That a Wound not subservient to any Member in a Principal part, as a Wound in
the Nose, Ears, Eyes, Hand, or Foot.

The Differences of Wounds are also taken from the Essence of the Solution of
Continuity it self.
And here also we may properly call them either Simple or Compound Wounds.
That is said to be a Simple Wound, which has no other affect complicated.

That a Compound Wound, being consistent with many other complicated affects.

The Differences of Wounds are taken from their proper differences of Solution
of Continuity it self.
And herein also may a Wound be said to be either Great or Small, Short or
Long, Broad or Narrow, Superficial or deep, equal or unequal, right or
oblique, retort or crooked: according to the Space, Quantity, Figure or
Magnitude of the Division.

There are other Differences of Wounds, but these by Galen are taken for
Outward Accidents.
As first arising from the reason of their Generation.

Then from the site or place of the affected part.

Such differences of Wounds as are allowed to arise in respect of their
Generation, may be allowed to be Disruption, Incision, partly one, and partly
the other; as Puncture of a Nerve, Precision of a Nerve, and Precision of an
Artery.

Such differences of Wounds as arise from the Site of the affected part, are
either according to their Length, or Transversness, happening in the beginning,
middle, or tail of a Muscle.

There may be other Differences allowed by some, as such as happen from the
Complexion of the Wound, and the like; but these are improperly so called.

Having thus far set the Young Surgeon onwards in his Journey and Progress
toward our ensuing Discourse; (in which Tract I have shown him how he is to be
armed, and furnished with Instruments and Medicines:) we arrive now at the
Discourse it self of Wounds both General and Particular, the which I have
furnished and embroidered with variety of Historical Observations and Notes
worthy of his perusal. I shall not swell with too large a Preface, lest it
appear so monstrous as rather to affright than satisfy the Young Reader.
Concluding these Chirurgical Institutions with that Verse of the Poet:

Si mea displiceant, fac meliora precor.
A TREATISE OF Wounds in general.
CHAP. I.
Of the Definition of a Wound.
What a Wound is.
IT is and has been the current Opinion of all Ages, and amongst all Authors,
that a Wound does take its Definition from solution of Continuity or divorce of
Parts. And although by Quacks and ignorant men there is made no great
difference between a Simple and a Compound Wound yet that there is a very vast
difference, no man that ever practiced his Art with Judgment can deny. The
truth is, the Scale stands in this case, as in others, with such kind of
sluggish Droans and ignorant Pretenders, whose Cures may more properly be
called Corruptions, and whose pretended Judgments may as consentaneously be
owned only as Ignorance plumed out and set forth with the best advantage of
Impudence. But to leave those as Idle Companions, we fall to our present Task.

The true Definition of a Wound.
A wound is called a recent divorce, or solution of Unity; or a division of
Parts formerly united, without Matter. *Tagaultius offers it to be a new
Cruent Solution without Matter or Putridness, happening in the soft parts by
some outward cause. Haliabbas declares, that a Wound may be made by an animate
or inanimate Body. Pareus writes, that it may happen from a blow or a fall.
Aquapendens, by or from some outward Instrument: this offering it self with
some violence in the soft parts. But there are other Solutions in other parts
as well as in these soft parts, and every of these have allowed them their
proper Names; the which I have already set down in my general Discourse of
Wounds. And after these be pleased to take this as a true definition of a
Wound, That it is a Solution of Continuity bloody or cruent, and recent, made
newly in the Flesh by such an Instrument as has a power to occasion a divorce
of parts formerly united. There are several differences of Wounds, and these
are either taken from their causes by which they are occasioned, or from their
accidents wherein they are situated. The Causes may be allowed to be with, or
without life: with life, as occasioned by the biting of some venomous Beast, or
other such like Creature; without life, happening by some Sword, Stone, Blow,
Arrow or the like. The Situation does afford and allow various Differences, as
some Wounds happening in the Simple parts, others in the Organick. Under the
Simple parts may be reckoned both the Sanguine and Spermatick, and to these do
relate Muscles, Nerves, Veins and Arteries. Those we more properly call the
Organick parts, which are nearer related to the whole bulk. Others thereof
belonging more directly to some particular Member thereof. Now Wounds of the
whole Trunk are generally allowed these, (viz.) as being of the Head, Neck,
Breast and Belly. Wounds of the Articulations are those which are of the
Joints, or Shoulders, Arms, Thighs and Legs. But this you shall have more
largely set down in this following Chapter.

CHAP. II.
Of the Differences of Wounds.
GAlen, Avicen, Guido, and others when they write of the Differences of Wounds,
they either draw them from the Parts, and these are either Similar or Organick;
the Similar being either soft as Flesh and Glandules, or hard as Bones and
Cartilages; or between both, as Nerves, Veins, Ligaments and Arteries: those
called Organick, as being made in the Principal parts, as in the Head, Hand or
so forth; and of these some are Simple, others Compound; the first we have
already shown, the last may appear either mild or malign; the first being cured
with ease, as a small Wound happening in the Fleshy parts, the other being of
greater danger, being complicated with malignity, as occasioned by a venenate
Weapon, or poisonous Bite; and these are perilous, considering either their
Impression, Time, Figure, or Parts wherein they are made and fixed, as falling
in some noble part, being made either sooner or later; with, or without loss of
Substance; in a large, middle or small Figure and the like: these also are to
be discovered either by Sight or Probation.

The difference between a Wound and an Ulcer.
And having proceeded thus far: we next come to view the difference between a
Wound and an Ulcer. And that both Wounds and Ulcers may arise from External
and Interior Instruments, shall be made good in my following discourse.

A Wound, as is already laid down, is a Recent and cruent Solution without
Matter; an Ulcer has Matter joined to it: And as a Wound is occasioned by an
outward Instrument, having in it an Incisive power allowed to cause this
breach: so also is an Ulcer purchased by an inward Erosion or erosive Humor.
The Differences of Wounds, as Avicen offers in secund. Fenn. prim. Canon. are
taken from their varieties of Solution.

The Discriminances of Wounds are taken either from the respect of the Subject,
as Galen writes 3 Art. parv. as some Wounds happening in a Homogeneous, others
in a Heterogeneous part; or from the Essence, in which respect it is called a
Simple Wound; as he also observes Tertio Method. to which neither Disease nor
any other Symptom is complicated. On the contrary he allows that to be a
Compound, to which somewhat is connexed or adjoined: as you may see in 4
Method. Or they are taken from the quantity which is solved and divided: but of
these more at large in their proper places. Wounds also may be made either by
Puncture, Incision, Ruption, or Contusion. Those called Punctures, which are
made by Thrusts with Swords, Pikes, Knifes, Daggers, and such sharp pointed
Instruments. Those Incisions, which are made lengthwaies, either by Knifes or
Backswords: (the Rapier being a very proper Instrument for making Punctures) or
any other Instrument having a sharp cutting Edge. Those do cause Ruption, which
by an egregious and violent Motion, can devil and divide the parts. Those
allowed to Contuse, which are of a ponderous Existence: as Wood, Stone, Lead,
Iron, Steel, Brass, and the like.

The difference between a Wound and a Contusion.
I Will conclude this discourse with the difference between a Wound and a
Contusion: and thus as the first is occasioned by a sharp pointed or edged
Instrument, so the latter is framed by a blunt and obtuse Instrument; having in
it a violent Motion allowed it to separate the parts.

CHAP. III.
Of Judgments and Presages of Wounds.
WE arrive now to the Healthful or Lethall Symptoms of Wounds, wherein the
Surgeon should not only appear (...) but (...). And as it is one of his fair
Graces and Ornaments to know well and understand what Wounds are incurable: so
ought it also to be his greatest reason and prudence not to undertake such, as
he justly must acknowledge he has no Authority or encouragement from Art to be
concerned with: and were these much practiced, the Art of Surgery would not
fall to that low degree as it appears now in.

To know the events of Wounds, and to presage the good or bad tidings of the
Patient wounded, is a thing absolutely necessary for the Surgeon to
understand; for in this case does the life of Man very often consist and depend.
The Prognostic signs of these are taken either from the substance, use, and
action of any part; or from the proper essence of its disposition or effect:
thus Galen lib. 4 Therapeutic. does declare, that large and great Wounds bring
ofttimes much danger with them.

General Presages of Wounds.
Wounds made by three squared Weapons are also dangerous, considering either
the Excellency of the part afflicted, or the greatness of the affect, or the
form and shape of the Instrument afflicting and causing the Wound.

Of the Head and Thorax.
Wounds received in the Head, or Thorax, or penetrating the Peritonaeum do
bring danger with them, especially if any of the inward parts be Wounded.

Of Nerves and Sinews.
Such Surgeons who by Anatomy do well understand the parts, may well
conjecture, where Tendons or Nerves are pricked or cut, there follow Pains,
Convulsions, and fear of Delirium.

Of the Noble Parts.
Hippocrates tells us, when the Bladder, Brain, Heart, Diaphragma, small
Guts, Stomach or Liver are wounded, the Wound does generally prove Mortal.

In a bad Complexioned Member.
Every Wound happening in a Member of the Body which is not well complexioned,
and having a cacochymick habit, is not to be cured without difficulty; whereas
on the contrary happening in a Body of good Constitution it speedily is cured.

Every Wound continuing its superficial march from one part to another, cannot
be good, because in this case, Nature may be said not to have found a place to
begin her work.

Not past danger till the 7th Day be past.
Wounds are not past danger until the 7th Day be over, neither are they void
of accidents until the Matter be well digested.

No Tumor in large Wounds appearing is a bad sign. Happening in the ends of
Muscles worse then in their middle.
Wounds in the ends of the Muscles are more dangerous then if they were in the
middle: Nature having here planted Tendons and Nerves, the which do bring
Motion and Sense to the body of the Muscle.

Never expect to cure Wounds of the Bones, Nerves, Tendons, Veins, Arteries,
according to the first intention.

Close not up large Wounds by Suture, which are also deep, lest by your
inconsiderateness, and unadvisedness, you permit corrupt Matter, Excrements, or
other filth to lodge in the bottom.

Small Wounds sometimes do prove dangerous.
Superficial Wounds in some cases may prove dangerous; as Wounds happening in
the Brain: whilst others being more deeply made, prove not so perilous
happening in the fleshy parts.

Contused Wounds are Opposite to Healing, for before you begin your Art of
Healing you must produce the Contused part into Matter and Suppuration.

Wounds which are made round, or occasioned by a round Instrument, do require a
longer time of healing, then those which are made by a straight Instrument.

Recent or new Wounds are sooner healed then such which are of a longer
continuance.

Convulsion happening in Wounds is dangerous; for this declares the hurt of
some Nervous part.

A Tumor in large Wounds presages well, for this shows that Nature is at her
Expulsive Work, throwing forth the Excrements which lodged and were contained
in the parts, and discharging them from the part affected.

Presages of Mortal Wounds.
Organick parts once divided deny any other or further Union.

That we for the most part, and most generally do call a Mortal or Lethall
Wound, the which within the space of few hours does cause Death, and is not to
be retrieved by Art.

Wounds of the Heart.
Wounds penetrating the substance of the Heart, must of necessity be allowed
Mortal: for this being touched, the liveliest Coal of mankind is soon
extinguished; the whole Train of Blood making its speedy address hither, from
the Veins and Arteries as small Rivulets to the Ocean; this being its chief
Engine of Life and Motion, and emptying themselves thus of their warmth and
Spirits, every part does take its share of its ruin: and thus out of this
large profusion of Blood, there follows a resolution of Spirits, the which
brings a Chilliness upon all the Extreme parts, an extinction of Natures Heat,
Syncope of Spirits, Banishment of Life, and a speedy yielding to Death; for as
Avicen says, The Heart can never suffer a long Solution of Continuity, neither
endure an Aposteme with Life.

Wounds of the Brain.
These Wounds are for the most part accounted Mortal: but not every of these.
For daily Experience evinceth, that part of the Brain has been taken out, and
the Patient has recovered: and this you may see by Example in Wounds of the
Head, though the understanding of the Patient have been lost. Those therefore
are generally accounted Mortal, when a Nerve is hurt, when Blood, or other
Humors do obstruct the Origination of the Nerves; when within a small time the
putrefied Blood does produce a Fever and Delirium. The Membranes of the Brain
being wounded do occasion Sneezing, and Vomiting, bleeding at the Nose, and the
like; and if the substance of the Brain be wounded, there is perceived a
Bilious Vomiting, and Fever; the Understanding grows stupid, the Memory flags,
Sense and Reason bespeak new Quarters, and the whole Frame and Countenance do
agree to alteration; this being the Wellspring of the Animal faculty. A Fever
and Inflammation, two common Attendants on Wounds, happening in the basis of
the Brain do make the Wound incurable.

Of Wounds of the Liver.
Wounds of the Liver, if small, although dangerous, yet they admit of
Consolidation; the whole substance thereof being as it were made of grumous or
coagulated Blood: yet large Wounds happening here are very dangerous; because
by reason of the defect of its Nutrition, the Heart languisheth and flags: and
in large and deep Wounds of the Liver the Vena Porta being cut, the Patient so
wounded dies of a Flux of Blood.

Wounds of the Vena Cava.
Wounds received in the Vena Cava within the Abdomen or Thorax, are declared
Mortal; for that Blood which formerly used to repenish and furnish the whole
Body, is by reason hereof run into a confused mass; and is past the skill of a
Surgeon to cure by any Topicall applications.

Wounds of the Diaphragma.
Wounds received in the Fleshy parts of the Midriff may be curable, but
happening in the Nervous parts are generally mortally, because a Delirium goes
along with them, occasioned by Inflammations; and sometimes Convulsion, because
it is a nervous part, and without blood, and in continual motion. And for a
general Rule let it be taken, that nervous Bodies do never unite, being once
divided; especially here where they are in continual motion.

Wounds of the Lungs.
The Lungs being wounded, the Breathing is difficult, the Pipes and Organs are
out of tune, and a troublesome and incongruous music is made, with false
Respiration. They are generally mortal, if a large Vessel belonging to them
be divided. If any Wounds of the Lungs be cured, they commonly do prove so
mischievous as to turn into Fistula's, and so in length of time do spin a man's
life out by Marasme, and run him into a Consumption. And that which makes their
healing so difficult is, because in their motion they are always moved, and in
coughing they are lacerated.

Wounds of the Spleen.
Wounds of the Spleen, because it acts the part of a second Liver, and has a
common benefit allowed it, the which it distributeth to the whole Body, and
therefore is a necessary Instrument, are dangerous: and yet not so perilous as
the other Parts, which we have already discoursed of. And if these Wounds have
not a great Haemorrhagy joined to them, they are not so deadly, but they may be
cured.

Wounds of the Bladder of Gall.
Wounds here happening, although not on a sudden, yet in process of time do
assuredly bring Death with them, and so are not to be cured. For it is an
exsanguous and nervous part, and so denies Union; therefore can we no ways
apply convenient medicines to it. Besides which also, the Humors do corrupt
the parts unto which they are sent.

Wounds of the Ventricle.
The Stomach wounded brings much terror. The Wounds here generally do prove
mortal which do happen in its upper Orifice, or in the Nerves distributed on
the Stomach: for these do afford it that exquisite sense which it has, and
upon their incision, Syncope and Convulsions do frequently follow. If it be
wounded in the upper part, it may be cured, because in that part it has
allowed it a small part of Flesh.

Wounds of the Small guts.
Wounds happening in the Small guts are seldom cured, they being of a
membranous substance, and of an exquisite sense. Wounds of the Great guts admit
of a more easy Cure, being both more large and more thick.

Wounds of the Kidneys.
These are not mortal. If the Wound do penetrate into the Cavity it self, for
the most part an Ulcer follows, which consumes the whole Kidney.

Wounds of the Mesentery.
The Mesentery being wounded, inevitable Death must follow. For as there must
be a great Flux of blood ensue from the Veins inserted and planted therein; so
also must there needs be a great loss of Chyle, the milky Vessels being either
incised or lacerated.

Wounds of the Windpipe.
The Aspera Arteria being hurt may be cured. If the Cartilaginous Rings be hurt
or wounded, expect no cure thereof: for these little hard Cartilaginous bodies
being without blood, and always in motion, if they be wounded, the Breath which
passes through it is a great impediment to the Cure, and joining the lips of
the Wound together.

Wounds of the Spinall marrow.
Wounds of the Spinall marrow are always mortal which do happen in the Neck,
or near the Head: but those that happen under these are of less danger.

Wounds of the Bladder.
These are seldom perfectly cured, but there remains some gleeting. But those
that are made in the musculous part of the Bladder may be cured.

Wounds of the great Veins, Arteries and Nerves.
Wounds of the great Veins and Arteries are generally mortal, and Wounds of
the great Nerves are incurable. The Jugular Veins being wounded are seldom
cured, by reason of the great Flux of blood hereupon made, drawing forth Man's
vital spirits, and no proper method being found out to hinder this Flux,
without danger of suffocation.

Take care of cutting the Artery which passes through the forepart of any
Muscle, but shun it by Exploration of its Pulse, and keep the Vein if possible
inviolate. If the recurrent Nerves be divided or wounded, there follows loss of
Speech, Sense and Motion. Thus have I run through the Presages of Wounds
curable and incurable; in which the young Surgeon may plentifully satisfy
himself.

CHAP. IV.
Of Curing Wounds in General.
GAlen, lib. Art. medic. cap. 90. says, the common Intention required in the
Cure of Wounds is the Union of the Parts disunited: and this is performed by
Nature as the proper Agent, and the Cause effecting it, assisted by its
virtues, and a convenient Nutriment. And thus as Art does remove the
Impediments, Nature her self does assist toward the Cure of the Disease, which
of her self she cannot readily perform, where her native Heat is weak, the
Blood vitiated, or the Flux large; every of which are to be corrected and
amended. As the native General Rules.
Heat is to be preserved by a good Diet, and well ordering the Body. Where the
Blood is vitiated, this is to be amended and corrected by Purging. Where it
flows too much, this is to be repelled, revelled, or derived, and the like.

Hippocrates his difference between a Simple and a Compound wound.
Hippocrates does propose two sorts of Wounds: the one he calls Simple, the
other Compound. The Simple he calls Solution of Continuity, having no other
Affect joined to it, perplexed with no Fluxion, not abounding with any ill
Juice, or undermined with any Intemperies, without any apparent Cavity or Loss
of flesh. A Compound Wound, on the contrary, has the repute of Loss of flesh,
an adjunct Cause, Affect, or Symptom. A Simple wound taken therefore in its
prime sense does only require Desiccation. A Compound, to which may be annexed
Contusion, has also a mixture of Inflammation; and this hinders Union and
Agglutination. In this case therefore the Surgeon is first to cure the
Inflammation, then to proceed to the Wound. Green wounds, and their
neighboring Parts, are but smally inflamed, if Matter may be procured: for
Wounds do only then inflame, when they do not suppurate. For they suppurate by
a strange Blood, and Heat, until the putrefying Wound occasioneth another
Matter. And if Exition be not made for this Matter, it being suppressed, it
excites Inflammation about the wounded part, and breeds and begets an ill Habit
therein, and renders both the Wound and its neighboring parts sordid and
corrupt.

The chief Intention in curing a Simple wound is Desiccation, this being most
proper for the purpose: and whereas the whole Body does abound with moist
Humors, these also in some measure are to be dried up by Abstinence, and a
thin Diet. Where any part of the Cutis is incised, no Oleaginous medicine can
take place: for this easily penetrates and enters the Pores of the skin, and
does there create a Moisture, in stead of Desiccation or Dryness; and may
therefore be allowed rather to hinder then set forward the Cure. But this
chiefly belongs to a Simple wound, and such as is superficial: but our
Discourse does mostly tend to other Wounds, where the chief Scope and Intention
is to unite those Parts which are divided; which thing is performed by these
six Intentions: (viz.) by Stopping the Flux of blood, and hindering Inflammation
thereby; Removing all strange and extraneous Bodies; Bringing the Lips of the
Wound together; Maintaining their Union; Keeping their Substance and Temper
entire; and Preventing all future Accidents. Every of which expect to meet in
their Order.

CHAP. V.
Of Stopping an immoderate Flux.
AS the Heart is the chief Watch of man's Life, whose pulsefying wheels do give
motion, life and vigor to it, by having adjoined and allowed it its main
Spring of Blood which is given it from the Arteries, which Spirits thence
ensuing do operate as the chief Workman therein, and without which Man would
soon run into dissolution; and as the Blood is the Treasure of Nature, without
which Life appears but as a dead clod: so ought we to study its continuance
with us, and in large Fluxes occasioned either by Incision, Ruption, or
Division of any large Vessel, with care and diligence to study its speedy
reserve, by applying such Medicines as may command a quick obstruction of this
Haemorrhagy. The Wound which we intend to treat of in this place is not of the
large Vessels, being either incised or lacerated: but when the smaller Veins
are incised, this Flux is to be speedily stopped, unless it spontaneously and
timely do restrain and check it self.

To consider two things in* stopping of Fluxes.
And in obstructing or calling back this Flux, we ought to consider these two
things: (viz.) How much the part may be suffered to bleed, before it be
stopped; and then, How this Obstructing operation is to be performed.

And as touching the First; The Temper, Constitution, Time, Complexion and
Habit are to be considered. For if the Patient be of a Sanguine Complexion,
corpulent Habit, having large Vessels, and it be Summertime, here the Patient
may be permitted to bleed plentifully, both for preventing Inflammation, and
Fluxion, and Fever. And if you meet with a Patient of contrary Qualities,
diversify your Intentions, according to such Rules as you have prescribed,
contrary to the former.

Eight methods in stopping of a Flux.
As touching the Second; There are offered Eight methods of stopping this Flux
of blood prescribed by Dr. Alexander Read, the which I shall here briefly set
down.

1.
The First is performed by Pledgets, Buttons, Dossills, Tents, and the like,
being armed with some Restrictive, that is, moistened in the Whites of eggs,
Vinegar, and Water, etc. to which also may be added a little Bolearmeniack:
these to be applied warm; for nothing does greater injuries to Wounds then Cold.

2.
The Second is Deligation of the Vessel which sends forth the blood. But
this ofttimes proves troublesome Note.
and uncertain. And where you intend to use this method, separate the Nerve from
the Vein; for they generally keep company together throughout the whole Body;
lest by unadvised neglect of this, you do deprive the Nerve both of its motion
and sense, and hereby purchase great pain to your Patient. Take care also that
the Ligature be not made too strict; for this is a ready way to cut and divide
the Vessels asunder, and hereby create a new Flux.

3.
A Third method is performed by Sarcoticks or Incarnative medicines, such as
are Myrrh, Aloes, Frankincense, Dragons blood, Mastick, Amber, Olibanum,
Bolearmeniack, Powder of Hares hair, and the like, mixed with the White of an
egg, Vinegar and Water, and thus made into a good Consistence, and so to be
applied to the affected part. Before which application cleanse the Wound from
all grumous and clotted blood, and every other excrementitious matter; and with
a Sponge being dipped in some Restringent Liquour moisten the parts: then may you
apply your Restrictives. Over which apply convenient Boulsters and Rowlers.
Ever observing to begin your Ligature or Ligation in the lower part, making it
ascend upwards, and so to pass above the Wound; both for stopping the Flux of
Humors coming to the Wound, and also for compression of the Coagulated blood
to the Wound it self, for its Exition.

4.
A Fourth method is performed by Restrictive Injections: these to be used when
the wounded Vessels ly low or deep, so as we cannot reach them with our
fingers. And for this use these are proper, Bolearmen. Plantane, Comfrey,
Knot-grass, Yarrow, Shepheards-pouch, Red roses, Balaustians,
Pomegranate-rindes, Oaken leaves and cups, Myrtills, and the powder of a dried
Toad burnt in an earthen vessel, having allowed it a strong restringent
quality. These and the like may be made into Decoctions, being boiled in some
restringent Wine, or some convenient Liquour.

5.
The Fifth is acted by a transverse Incision; for this procures a gathering up
or shrivelling of the Vessels toward their Originations. This by Galen's
advice is to be attached by the Hook, and then the Vessel to be twisted.

6.
The Sixth is performed by Caustic, and this either actual or potentiall.
This for the most part is requisite in Amputation, and not to be used upon
every trivial occasion: for as it brings fear to the Coward, so also its
effects are not always certain. And before you use these, be sure to cleanse
the Vessels from all grumous blood, that you may perfectly see to what parts
you apply them. For by an unadvised mistake of putting this into memory, and so
into action, you only cauterize the coagulated blood, the which falling off,
there is made a fair way for a new Flux.

7.
The Seventh is performed by Revulsion, as by Frictions, Opening of a vein,
Ligatures, and Cupping-glasses: these being applied to the opposite parts, if
need require are to be repeated.

8.
The Last is to cool the whole Body, and hereby thicken the Blood, and make it
less apt to flow, by inward using and taking of Rice, Lentills, Astringents,
Astringent Fruits, and sharp Wines.

CHAP. VI.
Of Removing extraneous Bodies.
THE next duty and Intention of a Surgeon is to remove all extraneous
Bodies, which may be allowed to hinder Union and Conjunction of the parts
disjoined. And that every thing herein may be acted according to Reason,
Judgment and Art, we are first to enquire into the Shape and form of the
Instrument which is thus lodged: and this may be collected and gathered from
the Contemplation of the nature and diversity both of the hurt Parts, and also
of the Matters therein fixed. And these two being considerately weighed and
understood, the third thing, which next does offer it self, is the true method
of Extracting these. And because the Matter and Substances hereof may be
various, as being made either of Wood, Iron, Glass, Bone, Brass, Lead, or the
like; and their Figures as diverse, being said to be either Long, Round,
Square, or Flat; and whereas their Number is different, being One or Many,
Simple or Compound; and their Magnitude is various, being Greater or Smaller;
besides these, their Habits being as strange, some Arrows made with sharp Iron
heads fixed to them, others concave Instruments, and these also differing in
their vigor and faculty, some being sent with, others without poison: These
and every of these ought to be well considered. But expect more hereof in
Gunshot-wounds.

Hippocrates lays this down as a Maxim, That he who would deal with Wounds
aright, ought well to understand the Diagnostick part of his Art, before he
undertakes the Therapeutick; and also to be well skilled in the nature of the
Parts, before he prescribes a Reason for a Cure: it being one of his greatest
Ornaments, to understand which Wounds are curable, which are incurable, and
which are difficult to cure. I shall show the Instruments, and farther
discourse of them, at the end of this Chapter; and proceed for the benefit of
the young Surgeon.

He is to observe and take notice, that in Extraction of extraneous Bodies, he
well consider the Shape and figure of the Instrument or other Body which is to
be extracted, and how deep it has penetrated; and being well skilled in
Anatomy, he may easily understand the frame of the Parts wherein the Weapon is
infixed: that hereby he may with more pleasantness, and less fear, wisely
undertake the Patient, to his own credit, and the Patient's ease and comfort.
And to every of these he is to understand that he has these four things
adjoined: as first, to know when it is most fit to extract these Bodies; next,
what way is the best for their Extraction; then, what Figure is most proper;
and then, what Instruments most requisite for the performing of these. I shall
enlarge a little upon each of these, they being very material for the young
Surgeon.

If the pain be intolerable, and the infixed Weapon may commodiously and with
safety be drawn forth, if it be so loosely fixed as by a small moving it will
separate from the Part, draw this forth at the first, for hereby you will both
ease pain, and procure rest to your Patient. If the Weapon be poisoned, defer
not Extraction, for this brings the whole Bulk into dissolution: and
therefore though you are forced through Nerves, Veins, or Arteries, to cut your
way, yet this is not to be delayed. And that the young Surgeon may not
mistake herein, he may know the Flesh poisoned by a Weapon thus; it is of a
strange color, it appears pale, sublivid, and as it were dead: in these cases
he ought to scarify until he meets with fresh blood; and this he is to do
until the Poison be removed. After which he is to apply a Cupping-glass, which
is the best Instrument for the calling of this forth. Besides the former token,
you will find it attended and accompanied with extraordinary Pains, with
Inflammations and pungent Girdings, especially about the wounded parts, with a
Heaviness and Torpor of the whole Body, and with Syncope and Alienation of
mind. And besides these, the Wound has an odd Smell with it: and the Weapon
that was infixed, (if poisoned) when drawn forth, and after cast into the fire,
does upon its burning turn black, and send forth a foetid Smell. And therefore
in these cases, where Danger of life is so much threatened, we ought to use all
our Experience and Reason to storm the force of this Enemy, and batter down and
overcome with convenient Medicines the vigor of its virulency. But of this
expect more also in Gunshot-Wounds. Besides this also, in the case of a large
Flux of blood, which may also put the life of man into jeopardy, here are we to
stop our hands: if horrible Pain, Syncope or Convulsion appear, delay your
Extraction.

As touching the way and method how to do and perform all these; That in the
eye of all men must be allowed to be transacted the best, which is done with
most ease.

And as to the Figure; If possible, gain the true figure of its Entrance, for
this does make the Extraction more easy.

These and such other matters as may more advantageously be here presented
shall appear in Gunshot-Wounds.

And since I have already declared to you how the Body of man may be variously
assaulted by diversity of Instruments, I have here also expressed in this
following Figure how his Parts may be contused, punged, incised and lacerated,
by Clubs, Stones, Swords, Pikes, Faulchions, Arrows, Shot, and the like:
against which, on the contrary side, I have also delineated such commodious
Instruments, as are and have been allowed as most proper for the Extraction and
discharging of the same out of the wounded parts. And that every thing may be
done and performed according to Reason and Art, as touching the Extraction of
Weapons or any other extraneous Bodies out of the Body; We are first to enquire
after the Instruments which are to execute this: and these ought to be
accommodated to the Part, the which does require their aptness for the
occasion, both as touching their Figure and Shape. And because, as we have
already noted, it is requisite for these Instruments to be of various and
sundry Shapes, we ought to study a most exact Form of them for completing this
Intention. And here amongst the rest I shall present you with these following,
whereof in the next Leaf you have the true Shapes and Forms. And the first
which does offer it self is Terebellum, this being an Instrument, as you may
see, let into another, the which having a thin and pointed Screw at its end,
may take hold of a Bullet, Splinter of Wood, Bone, or the like; and having once
entered it, it brings it away with it. This is marked at the Letter A. The
second is a Hook to draw forth any Matter or Bone which lies superficially.
This is marked at B. The third is a large pair of Forcipes with Teeth, hollowed
in the middle, the more apt for catching hold of any Bullet, Shot, or any other
superfluous matter. This is marked with C. The other pair of Forcipes are made
without Teeth, but hollow also; and this is a very ready Instrument for laying
hold of a Bullet, having both allowed them strong Shoulders, for the more
prompt extraction of any Body. And this is marked with D. The last is called a
pair of dented Cranes-bills, being bent or bowed, accommodated chiefly for deep
Wounds; and being more slender then the former, may with more ease enter into
the Orifice of the Wound. And this is marked at the Letter E.

The Weapon being extracted, what your next Intention is, shall be more at
large declared in my Discourse of Gunshot-wounds, this being but as a part and
abstract thereof.

And having thus shown you how to remove extraneous Bodies, my next Intention
shall be, to declare how Parts which are thus separated are to be joined, and
how the Divorce of Parts thus made is to be brought into a mutual Contacture,
according to Art.

CHAP. VII.
Of Joining of Parts separated.
OUR next Intention is, the Uniting and Joining of the separated and divorced
Parts: and this is performed by bringing the Lips of the Wound together, which
were formerly disunited. If it happens to be a simple Wound made in the flesh,
with which neither Symptom or any other evil Accident or Affect is
complicated, this may be united by Ligature, leaving the rest to Nature. But if
the Wound be so large, as that it is not to be brought to Union by Ligature,
here are required agglutinative Assistents, the which are to have in them a
drying quality, hereby consuming and drying the moist Excrements and
Humidities, and prohibiting their Influxions. And therefore in this case give
me leave to premise, that in large Wounds, Purgation is very proper, and that
in these three respects; both as touching the Excellency of the Part, the
greatness of the Affect, and the Malignity of the matter, as Hippocrates
writes. Oil here ought not to be applied to these Wounds, for it does both
humect and relax: Sarcoticks and Driers being most proper Medicines here to be
used. Besides this, Oil renders the Wound more sordid and putrid. After this,
we are to study the natural Temper of the Part; and where it is once estranged
by Air, Meats, Drinks, Evacuation and Retention, Sleepings and Watchings, and
the like, these are to be corrected and amended. As for example, if a Wound do
prove very moist and sordid, and sends forth much Matter, here are we to
study its Alteration, drying this up by a slender Diet, Purging, and the like.

To this also belong the diversity of Excrements which do usually accompany
Wounds; and these are of three R. White sculp

sorts, (viz.) Ichor, Pus, Sordes. Ichor is a thin indigested Three sorts of
Excrements of Wounds.
Lympha: and this issues either from the Veins, or the wounded Part. If from
the Veins, it is thin and waterish, and has no bad Smell; and according to its
Color you may guess of what Humor it does proceed. If it arifeth from the
wounded Part, its Smell is unpleasant, and this is called Sanies: and according
to the degrees of its Corruption, it sends forth a greater or lesser quantity
of its ill smell and savor. The second is called Sordes, being a viscous
Excrement firmly adhering to a Wound: and the cause of this thickness is
assigned to a dry Constitution of body; sometimes to the error of the
Surgeon; sometimes also to the Air. The third is called Pus. This is
generally smooth, white, equal, having no ill Smell, as Hippocrates describes
it. The causes which generate these three are held to be the natural or
unnatural Heat; the first being the cause of Digestion, whereby a laudable
Matter is generated, the unnatural heat working up moisture with it, so
causes Putrefaction, and that ill smell we generally do perceive.

And having thus described to you the unnatural and unkind Substances which do
hinder Union, I next proceed to Pain and Fainting: the first being purchased in
the most slender Wound, the Skin being the Instrument of Touching: and as for
Fainting, this is as common in compound Wounds, and frequent in simple Wounds.
And that this is true, how often have we seen your delicate Ladies faint at the
cut of a Finger or the like, and the sturdy Plow-jogger to faint at Bleeding?
But of these in their proper places: and to our present Task, as touching the
Uniting of Wounds disjoined.

As touching Ligature.
This may be performed by Ligature, or Suture, or Dry stitch. Ligature is most
proper in Wounds made lengthwaies, being superficial. And this ought not too
strictly to be applied, nor yet too loosely; making them of a convenient
breadth to take in the whole Wound. Suture As touching Suture.
is performed by Needles, or a Dry stitch: and the Stitching-needle is as
convenient an Instrument as any the Surgeon does carry in his Plaister-box:
for with it he may ease Pains, free the Wound from Inflammation, and himself
from Inconveniences. In the use hereof, care is to be taken that the Lips of
the Wound be brought to an equal distance, not violently, but gently bringing
them together, not extending one more then another, equally to answer each
other in its superficies. The Dry stitch is mostly used when exterior Beauty
does seem to be impaired; As touching the Dry stitch three things to be
observed.
as a Wound happening in the Face, etc. And herein are we advised, according to
Ambrose Parrey, to observe three things; as the Preparation of the Cloth, the
Method which makes the Wound join, and then the Form. As to the first, the
pieces of Cloth must be strong, answering each other alike, hemmed about the
Wound, and loose at the other sides. It is Emplasticks which makes them
agglutinative. As for their Forms, they are to answer the Shapes of the Wounds,
most fit for the bringing them close together. Now if the Wound be deep, you
are to take up a pretty quantity of flesh with the Needle; and if in this case
you should make a superficial apprehension, and the Wound hereby be
superficially agglutinated, in the bottom of the Wound may be left remaining
such a Sanies or Collection of Matter, which may frame an Abscess or hollow
Ulcer.

Guido's three sorts of Sutures.
Guido proposes three kinds of Suture. The first he calls the Agglutinative
Suture, commonly called the Incarnative Suture, the which does make best for
our present purpose. Suppression of the blood, which is done by the Needle
drawn through either Lip in form of a Glover's Suture, is by some called Sutura
continuata: by this the Blood is easily depressed. This is generally used in
Wounds of the Guts, or when any large Vessel is wounded. The third is called
the Retentive Suture, the which is most proper in lacerated Wounds in which the
Flesh is lost.

Guido's five methods of Suture.
Of the Incarnative Suture Guido proposes 5 kinds. The First is done by the
Needle being drawn through each Lip by the right hand, holding and placing the
stitching Quill with the left, hereby making the Lips of the Wound equal. The
Second is performed by taking diverse Stitches, some distance from each other,
through the length of the Wound, bringing the Wound to a proportionate
evenness: and in every of these Stitches the ends of the Thread are to be cut
off near to the Knots. The Third species is performed by drawing the Needles
through each Lip, and then by the same Orifice drawing them back again, and so
by degrees bringing the Lips of the Wound closer, by annexing them to some
small substance, the which by twisting the Silk thereon may by degrees close up
the Lips of the Wound. But this is the worst of the rest. And in all Sutures
take this Observation with you, that before you make any Suture, Observar.
you do deterge all the concreted Blood in the Wound, both for preventing
Inflammation, and furthering Agglutination. The time of leaving the Sutures
off, is, when Union is perfected, or Agglutination made: the which do vary,
according to the largeness of the Wound, and in respect of the Habit of the
body. In great and transverse Wounds they are generally kept for eight days; in
small Wounds, not above three in some.

I will conclude this Chapter, with acquainting you of the three Uses of
Suture. For it is used either for Agglutination of Wounds; and this is called
the Incarnative Suture: or to keep the superficial parts of the Wounds in a
reasonable distance from each other; and this is called the Retentive Suture:
or to stop the Flux of blood; and this is termed the Suppressive Suture. Thus
have I enlarged upon the Joining of the Parts separated and divorced. We next
proceed to the Eighth Chapter.

CHAP. VIII.
Of keeping the Parts joined, and preserving their Substance entire.
WE come now to the Fourth and Fifth Intentions: and because it often falls out
that some Heterogene Substance does happen within the Lips of the Wound, as
Hair, Dirt, Oil, and the like, the which do hinder Agglutination, this with
care is to be prevented; and that we may truly study the defense of the wounded
Part, and keep it from harms, there is required much care and industry. For we
may wish Union in Wounds, which is Nature's work; but may miss of our aim, if
the Temper of the Part be not sound. The Body also being weak, Nature does very
readily throw down her Excrements to the wounded Part; whence does arise a
Dyscrasy both of temper and humor. Besides which, the Part being it self much
weakened, there cannot in any reason be expected a good Nutriment, and hence
must follow Excrements, the which not being well driven out from the affected
Part, there must consequently be created a moist Intempereity therein. And
besides these, by reason of this Intempereity, expect no fair closure of the
Lips of the Wound, this Matter inwardly lodged creating a repletion of Sanies,
which has force and vigor enough to create a Dyscrasy.

And that we may therefore be armed against all these troubles, these Sarcotick
and Incarnative Medicines should be of a cold faculty, that they may repel the
Matter which flows; also drying, and that in the second degree, to suck up
these inward Humidities; and also stiptick, for strengthening the weak parts.
And here Guido, after his Sutures made, does sprinkle this Powder on the
wounded Part: Pulv. Thur. ij. Sangu. Dracon. j. Bol. armen. iij. Powder.
mix them, and apply them either in powder, or made into a Cataplasm, by mixing
them with the White of an egg, a little Vinegar, and powder of Bean-meal. And
this he orders to remain on for four days. We of late, according to a more
modern practice, do use this method after the Suture, first sprinkling on the
restrictive Powders, then covering them with some drying and agglutinative
Empl. as Diapalma, De minio, and the like: upon which we apply convenient
Boulsters, and conclude the dressing with convenient Rowlers.

Now of this sort of Colletick Medicines we have very many, both simple and
compound, set down for our advantage. Amongst the Simple may be reckoned these,
having in them a drying and binding quality, and void of all sharpness: (viz.)
Bolearmen. Red roses, Mastick, Olibanum, Sanicle, Plantane, Betony, Agrimony,
Scabious, Veronica, Gum. Elemn. Sage, Lap. calaminar. Lap. Pompholyx. Amongst
the Compound are Empl. Stipticum Paracels. Balsam. Peruvian. Unguent.
Basilicon, Aureum, Fuscum, Nicotian. De Panac. Colon. Linimentum Arcaei,
Desiccativum rubrum, Diapompholygos: all these generally allowed Sarcoticks.
And how much their drying quality is required, is to be collected from the time
of the year, and the strength and constitution of the Patient. Thus a Simple
wound does only require a superficial Dressing; whereas a Compound and deep
wound does as necessarily request the use of Tents and Dossils, to be armed
with some of the former Medicines.

Three things to be observed in the use of Tents and Dossils.
Three things are to be observed in the use of these, as for Pledgets, they are
to be applied larger then the Wound; these to be armed with such Medicines as
have an agglutinative quality in them, which can stop Pain, assuage
Inflammation, and repel the Humors. Of A Digestive of the Author's.
which sort may be reckoned this; Terebinth. lot. in aqu. Plantag. jss. Mel.
opt. depurat. j. Unguent. Basilic. ij. Vitell. ovor. no. ij. misce ad ignem,
fine addendo Pulv. Myrrh. Another.
Alo. an. j. Croc. j. misce pro Linimento, Or this; Ol. Hyperic. cum gum. Ol.
catellor. an. ij. Gum. Elemn. ss. Pulv. Veronic. Salv. Myrrh. an. j. Tereb.
Venet. vel Cupress. jss. misce. Neither are we to study the filling up with
Flesh only, but to prevent every Hypersarcosis, by the application of some
Cathaeretical medicine, as dried Lint, burnt Allome, Verdegreece, Praecipitate,
calcined Vitriol, or the like. These to be sprinkled in Powder, or applied in
form of an Unguent, by mixing therewith Vnguentum Rosatum, Pomatum, or the like.

The Wound being digested, mundified, and brought to a good pass by Sarcoticks;
nothing now remains but to procure an even Closure or Cover, which is to be
done by Epuloticks. And here also are we to consider what Cicatrice may herein
be allowed as best. Where we may affirm, that that Cicatrice is the best and
fairest, which does represent the natural color of the Cutis; where we may see
Nature at work to help forward in the progress by her effecting cause, which
is resident in the true and sound Skin, expanding from thence a small and thin
veil here, as she does in Fractures, allowing there a Callus to fall from the
ends of each Bone for the Unition and complete Conjunction. Now her adjutant
causes which promote this work are Epulotick medicines: and these also are
either simple, or compound. Amongst the Simple are reckoned Comfrey,
Tormentill, Sanicle, Betony, St. John's Wort, Golden Rod, Plantane,
Shepherds-Pouch, Red roses, Balauftians, Bolearmeniack, Sanders, Dragons blood,
Mastick, Olibanum, Amber, Lead, Litharge, Tutty, the Pompholyx Stone, and many
others. Amongst the Compound are Vnguentum Tut. Album Camphorat. Rosatum,
Populeon, Desiccativum rubrum, Diapompholygos, Diapalma, De minio, Sacchar.
Saturni, with many others, variety of which are to be found in the
Dispensatories.

CHAP. IX.
Of Removing of Symptoms and Accidents.
WE are now come to the last Intention, which is the Correction of Accidents:
and these are very various, and do as diversely happen in large and deep Wounds,
and do keep up Solution of Continuity. And these are allowed to be nine in
number: as Pain, Inflammation, Haemorrhagy, Delirium, Fainting, Fever, Crudity,
Palsy, and Convulsion. And these as they are Symptoms in respect of their
greatness and vehemence, so also in many cases do they threaten Death. The
Correction of these Symptoms is to be as much regarded as the Cure of the Wound.

I. Pain.
And First therefore, as touching Pain, this by Galen, 2. Aphor. 12. Meth. is
allowed to be a sad and heavy sense of change, following a Disease as a shadow
does a substance. This most generally is the cause of Fluxion, overthrowing the
Faculties, be the temper and habit of the Body formerly never so good: it being
Pain's chief property, to attract Inflammation, by stirring the Humors into a
Combustion: and it falls here as in other cases, the weakest is seen to go by
the wall. For generally the wounded Part is forced to see whatsoever Pain puts
to it. And therefore is it accounted a great Intention in the Surgeon, to
allay the fury of this Enemy, and quell this troublesome author of Fluxion.
And here ought he also to remove his Medicines very often, lest by their too
long stay Pain be excited. Then is he to enquire into the cause and occasion of
this Pain; and the Species and way of the Humor by which it passes, and which
way Nature intends it; and here with her to join his adjutant helps for its
remove.

2. Inflammation.
The Second enemy we meet with is Inflammation: and this ofttimes is occasioned
by Pain, and sometimes by the Unadvisedness, Neglect and Ignorance of the
Surgeon, when by too strict Ligatures he makes a great attraction of Pain,
creating an interception of Spirits, and an extinction of native Heat,
purchasing hereby a fair way for a Gangrene and Sphacelus. Inflammation also is
mostly to be feared in Wounds of the Nerves, Cartilages, and the like; or where
but a small Flux of blood does follow the Wound. In which cases the Surgeon
is to breath a Vein, and to take away a plentiful quantity of Blood: for
hereby he does repress the Heat, and extinguish the Flame. If Cacochymy offend,
correct and amend this by convenient Purgings, and lenifying Medicines, a good
order of Diet, and such as may temper the Blood, ordering your Patient to shun
all manner of Perturbations, which may create or stir up any Passions within
him. If Inflammation happen by the puncture of a Nerve, or an incision thereof,
wholly divide it; for it is better that Part should lose its motion, then that
the whole Body should be robbed of its life, as well as of its sense and motion.

3. Haemorrhagy.
I have been very plentiful in the Third already, and shall therefore remit
you thither for this. Save only by the way, when you come to Wounds of the
Veins and Arteries, I shall there enlarge somewhat more thereon.

4. Fainting.
As touching Syncope or Lipothymia, Galen, 12. Meth. cap. 5. does thus define
it; that it is a principal Lapse of all the Spirits, happening by some hurt of
the Heart, or injury done to it, when it is quiet in its procreation and
distribution of its vital Spirits. For then, as Gordonius does express it,
both sense and motion are taken from the whole Body, the Pulse becomes flat and
dull, and Death appears in the face. And in these cases the Patients are seen
to fall down without either sense or motion. This Syncope which does most
commonly intervene in Wounds is for the most part from an Haemorrhagiall cause,
the which does make this dissipation of Spirits; or Fear, the which does make a
speedy revocation of the Spirits to the Heart, whence follows that every Part
is forced to leave work, whilst this Disturbance is thus in action. A Syncope
does ofttimes happen, as Galen does observe, from a venenate and putrid Vapor
passing to the Heart through the Arteries, and to the Brain by its Nerves. And
hence by most Authors are granted these three causes of Syncope. The first is
made by the dissipation of the Spirits and native Heat, as in a large
Haemorrhagy: then by oppression or obstruction of these Spirits, as in Fear;
for thus the Spirits are called back from the Circumference to the Center: and
thirdly by Corruption, as in Cacochymick bodies, and venenate Wounds. The first
of these are cured, if convenient Medicines be speedily applied and
administered; as by sprinkling cold water on the face, laying him on his back,
and stopping his Flux. The second by good Cordialls, by cherishing and reviving
his Spirits, by clapping sweet Smells to his nostrills, frictions of his
Temples. But if a venenate Quality does occasion this, cure this by Mithridate,
Venice Treacle, Actual Cauteries, application of live Pigeons cut in the
middle, Cupping-glasses, for derivation and interception of this Matter which
is to be fetched out.

5. Delirium.
Neither is Delirium in Wounds less dangerous, which is a perilous Affect
arising from some principal or noble Part, as the Nerves, Brain, Heart,
Diaphragma, and the like, these, or any of these, being wounded. For this
Delirium is nothing else but a deprivation of Motion, and an alienation of
Sense, contained in the wounded Brain by essence or consent. Hence is it, that
we so often see in such as are bit by a mad Dog, that venomous Vapors do ascend
upwards into their Heads, and fill the porosities of the Brains, which makes
them so frantic and idle. It does arise from a vehement Pain and Inflammation;
and therefore such Medicines as may cure Pain and Inflammation are very proper
here. If it arises from Poison, Alexipharmicks are the best engines to remove
it. For derivation and interception of the matter which does excite this
Delirium, alterant and evacuating Clysters are here proper. Phlebotomy,
Cupping-glasses, Actual and Potentiall Cauteries are here most requisite.
Setons and Fontinells are fair Orifices for letting out its venom. Cordialls,
Emulsions and good Decoctions may defend it from the Heart. Hordeaceous and
Papaverall Decoctions may banish it, by procuring Rest. And as it is a
deprivation of the principal faculty of Motion, so are we to take care of it.

6. Fever.
But because this more properly does belong to a Physician to examine and
advise about, I shall briefly shut up this Symptom, only acquainting you,
that Avicen, fen. 1. does call that a Fever, which is an extraneous,
adventitious, accensive heat in our Heart, by which the Veins and Arteries
therewith sharing, it is carried through the circuit of our whole Body, and
hurts its actions. Neither is there any Fever allowed where the Heart is not
affected, either primarily, or secondarily, being a Disease in Intempereity.

But to come to that which more properly does relate to large Wounds: and here,
as Hippocrates offers, until a good Digestion be procured, both Fever, Pain
and Inflammation do attend the Part: for whilst the Matter is making, the Heat
does increase. Sometimes a Fever does arise from the Bite of a venomous
creature; and therefore as it does carry this poisonous quality to the Heart,
there endeavoring to infect its Spirits, it very readily runs into a Fever and
Inflammation. Now where this happens, cool the body by Phlebotomy: if ill
Humous do join in the combat, dispatch these by convenient Catharticks. And in
respect of the Poison, you must use Alexipharmicks: for the Pain and
Inflammation, prepare Anodynes; shunning all things which may procure a
vehement motion, disturbance and perturbations of the mind; and use your
greatest industry to bring every part to its due order, temper and habit.

7. Crudity.
Crudity also is a great enemy to the healing of Wounds; for it does afford no
laudable Matter, without which expect no good new Flesh. And this by many
Authors is allowed to happen by these six means: by a continual Six things
causing Crudity.
Flux of blood, where no good Digestion is; by an Instrument contusing the Part,
as happens in Gunshot-wounds; by the nature of the Part, such as deep Wounds in
the Joints; by coldness of the Air; by applying of unfit Medicines; and lastly,
by too strict Ligature. As for the first, this you have already shown. The
second is to be digested as contused Wounds. Astringent Medicines are to be
applied to the Articulations, to preserve their Temper. The Air is to be
corrected; the Part to be furnished with convenient Medicines; and the strict
Ligature to be relaxed. And thus may you cure these six Causes of Crudity. The
other two remaining Symptoms I shall speak of a little more largely, they being
of great consequence.

CHAP. X.
Of Palsy.
A Palsy by the general Consent of Authors is allowed to be a Resolution or
Relaxation of the Nervous parts, with Deprivation both of Sense and Motion, on
either side, or both sides of the Body, or in some part thereof. And this most
properly is called a Palsy. Now the Nervous bodies are resolved, in that the
animal Spirits do not act in them, neither are they filled or enlightened with
vigor and briskness. The causes whereof are referred to the Obstruction of the
passages, the which does hinder their Transpiration. In a Palsy, Motion, or
Sense, only, or both may be hurt together. And this may be acted either by
Completion, Compression, or Solution of Continuity. For either their Ductures
are filled up with some extraordinary Matter impacted in them, or compressed by
extravased Blood or some Tumor, or Solution of Continuity made by some Wound
or Concussion: and every of these may imprint their several reasons and causes
for a Palsy. And as our Countryman Dr. Willis does observe, as often as an
universal Palsy or Hemiplexia does succeed a Lethargy, a Caros, or Apoplexy,
it is very easy to conceive that this change of the Disease does happen from a
Metastasis or Transposition of the morbifick matter. And if it may be enquired
why that Sense and Motion are not always equally inhibited in a Palsy, either
of these is perfected in their proper Nerves and Fibers, and either Faculty is
as the aversion of each other. Just as the Light casts its beams through a
Glass, when the Wind is excluded: so ofttimes Motion is abolished, the Sense
remaining safe and sound. For Sense is as a Passion, a sensible impression, the
which by the continuity of the Nervous process is carried from the Organ to the
common Sensory; without which the faculty of the Spirits is propagated by
course and strength. Now Motion is a laborious and difficult action, to the
which is required the expansion or explosion of Spirits, not only in the
motionall Organs, but chiefly in the Parts where the beginning of Motion and
its first affection does draw its Origination. For from hence flows its whole
conduct of its explosive endeavors, the which it acts through all its
Nervous parts. In the Spinall marrow an Interception of the Spirits, or
Cohibition thereof, making a Palsy, very often does happen, by reason of
Compression, or Solution of Continuity. The extravased Blood, or Matter passing
forth from the disrupted Abscess, does very often shut up and obscure the
passages of the Spirits. Hence Wounds of the Head, Concussions or Incisions do
not only frequently pervert or lacerate the Medullary tracts, but also by
their coldness do constipate and bind up their spiritual passages.

The next thing we propose is, whether this Disease be accidental, or
habitual. The first may be said to come from an evident cause, as being
procured by Wounds, Incisions, Concussions, Excess of cold or heat: besides
which it has no other then a Compression and Solution of Continuity. An
habitual Palsy has its dependence from a procatarctick cause, the which is
an extraneous Matter, and as it were vitriolized, suffused into the Organs of
Sense and Motion, profligating the Spirits by contaction. A Palsy does much
differ from a Convulsion, in that in the The difference between a Palsy and a
Convulsion* Causes of a Palsy.
first, Resolution and Relaxation is its proper quality; in the latter,
Contention and Contraction.

We come now to the Causes of this Palsy, which are generally allowed to be
both inward and outward. The inward obstructing the Ventricles of the Brain, so
as the animal Spirit, which should be conveyed to the Nerves of Sense and
Motion, is wholly abolished. The external Causes being Wounds, Concussions,
Percussions, Incisions, Compressions, or Constrictions, or violent Colds
occluding the Spirits. From what Humor a Palsy may be said to proceed, is
hard to tell. For Melancholy drying the Nerves cannot be the Humor. Choler,
having allowed it a drying quality also, and having an acrimony joined to it,
may rather be allowed to create Convulsion, by contracting and convelling the
Nerves. And therefore it must either proceed from the Blood, or Phlegm. It very
rarely happens from Blood alone, unless by accident. It Is therefore granted by
a general consent, that it is bred from thick Phlegm, bordering upon the
Nerves. But I rather presume that it happens from thin Phlegm, which flows from
the Brain, and therein does create an Obstruction through its whole substance,
making it more soft, out of which softness there follows an explosion of the
Nerves. A substance very contrary to its natural Construction, the which does
wholly abolish the motion of the Nerves where it is inserted. Thus if the whole
spinall Marrow be affected, there does succeed a Resolution of the whole from
the Head; if only one part, that part only bears the loss. Thus have we given
a brief discourse of the Palsy, and its inward and outward causes: let us now
come more closely to that which chiefly does belong to our present discourse.

When therefore a Nerve is wounded or amputated, there must necessarily follow
a Palsy upon the part, because both Sense and Motion in the action are lost
and banished; and being thus divided, it is impossible to fetch them again: for
being once cut, they do gather toward their Originalls. Therefore when any
Nerve is either incised, cut or punctured, Pain being hereupon a very ready
attendant, Anodynes are here most proper, defending the Wound from cold and all
sharp things, and use comfortable and strengthening Medicines. But of these
more afterward.

Signs of a Palsy, and Causes.
Galen does give all good Surgeons this Caution, that he ought to understand
the primary Affect hereof and its place, and from whence this mischief arises,
and its disposition. And he who is ignorant of these, may not be allowed
skillful enough to cure those Parts whose Sense and Motion are vitiated. The
first we do fetch from Anatomy, which is an excellent Schoolmaster, the which
perfectly learneth us how to know the Nerves which are sprinkled about the
Face, sent thither from the Brain. If some of these with the whole Body be
resolved, it cannot in reason be allowed, that this disposition of Resolution
should consist in the Brain it self, whereas the parts belonging to the Face do
remain unhurt and safe. If all the parts of the Head being sound, either of its
sides be correpted with a Paralysis, the cause is in one of the sides of the
spinall Marrow. If the Arms be only paralytick, the cause is in the fifth,
sixth, or seventh Vertebra of the Neck. If the Legs, draw the cause from the Os
Sacrum, and its Vertebrae.

Presages.
To presage and judge of a Palsy, and every occasion which may cause and
produce it, and every affect of the Nerves, as touching their sicknesses or
cures, this most properly does belong to the Prognostic part. And thus
according to Hipp. we may presage that a Palsy is hard to cure in old men,
because their native Heat is almost extinguished. And Galen does affirm, if
Fever and Trembling have supervened a Palsy, it is a good sign: for Fevers do
partly dissolve the superfluous Humors which are in Resolution of the Nerves,
and do partly digest their coldness. A Solution of the Nerves, as Galen does
worthily declare, is never perfectly cured. A Palsy proceeding from an inward
cause is not easily found out, or easily cured. A Palsy following an Apoplexy
is scarce curable, the cause being vehement, and the Parts weak. Where Sense
and Motion do appear to be both lost, this does prove very dangerous. If the
Paralised member do change its color, expect no Cure, for the native Heat is
extinguished, and the animal Spirits abolished. If it happen from an evident
cause, as by a Blow, a Wound, or the like, if it do not quickly amend, or give
way to Medicines, it does prove for the most part incurable. Such as are once
cured of a Palsy arising from an evident cause, are not readily troubled
therewith a second time. And to conclude the Presages, if Palseys happen in
Aged people, or in Cacochymick or Scorbutic bodies, and in Intempereities,
these are very hard to remove.

Cure.
And since, as I have already proposed, we see that a Palsy does consist of
manifold Types and diverse Causes, its Cure is also to be performed after a
various manner, instituting a proper method to every species of the Disease.
And as there are generally allowed three kinds or sorts hereof, so should there
be proposed three kinds of Cure. First, for Resolution, this being the main
Agent, this is to be cured, Secondly, if it happen by Wound, Incision,
excessive Cold, or a Fall from a high place, this also must have allowed it its
way of Cure. Thirdly, as it is a procatarctick and primary Disease of it self.
I must leave the first and third, and only take the second for our present
discourse.

And whereas we here do grant, that this Palsy does happen by some Accident,
produced by some vehement Hurt, there will not be required many Intentions for
this, save only the Conformity of the hurt Part to be made into its pristine
frame. And that no Affect, as Blood or affluent Humors, may bring detriment to
the affected Part, Phlebotomy in this case is very speedily to be made use of,
if nothing hinders it; and the Body is to be kept open by lenifying Purgings,
and a good order of Diet, keeping your Patient in a moderate Sweat in his bed,
so as all Superfluities may be exhaled and called back from the hurt Part. And
for this Use Pulvis ad Casum is granted a good Medicine, to be given in White
wine, to the quantity of a Dram or a Dram and a half. A common Decoction of
Guaiacum is also much commended here, for this does both digest and discuss the
Matter and Cause. To this may be added many other Cephalic herbs and flowers,
to be bruised, and boiled in Beer, for the Patient to drink either at meals, or
morning and evening. And these are to have in them such faculties as may
strengthen the Nerves. Such as are Cowslip-flowers, Betony flowers,
Rosemary-flowers, Stoechades, Calamint, Mint, Lavender-flowers, Marjoram,
Germander, Groundpine, Elecampane, Calamus Aromaticus, Cinnamon, Hyssop* Thyme,
Cloves, Nutmegs. With these or the like may be made excellent good Mead, by
adding Honey thereto. His Diet should be light of digestion; as, Rabbits,
Chickens, Phesants, Partridge, Black-birds, and the like, Electuaries, and
Conserves of Rosemary-flowers, Betony, Sage, and the like. To which may be
added some Cordial species made up with Syrup of Cowslips, of which the
Patient may take several times in a day.

Pills.
Pills to help to evacuate and discharge these Humors may be such as these:
Pil. foetid. ijss. Agaric. Troch. j. Troch. Alhandul. gr. ij. Castor. gr. iiij.
cum Mel. scillit. q. s. siant Pil. no. 10. deaurentur, quarum sumat ij. omni
mane. Or this Decoction; Rasur. Guaiac. vj. Sarsaparil. Decoction.
Sassafr. an. iiij. Santal. omn. Rasur. Ebor. Corn. C. an. ss. infunde, and
coque in aqu. fontan. lbxvj. ad medietatem, addendo sub finem Rad. Calam.
aromatic. Galang. an. ss. Irid. Florentin. j. Cardamom* vj. Sem. Anis. Coriand.
Foenicul. an. ss. Dactyl. no. 10. hujus sumat pro potu ordinario. In this case
also Elixar Proprietatis taken to the quantity of ten or twelve drops, in a
glass of good old Canary, is very good. Coffee is also allowed very good to dry
up this moisture: or this Digestive; Oxymel. simpl. Sir. de Digestive.
Stoechad. an. j. Sir. de Betonic. vj. Aqu. Salv. Betonic. an. jv. Spir.
vitriol. gutt. 6. cum Syrup. Cinnamom. q. s. fiat Julapium, sumat mane. Then
order these Pills: Pil. Pills.
Coch. ij. Sine quibus j. Pulv. Nuc. Moschat. gr. 5. Ol. Succin. gutt. iij.
Diagrid. gr. ij. cum Oxymel. q. f. fiant Pilulae. Electuary.
An Electuary to be taken in the morning may be this; Mithridat. Theriac.
Andromach. an. iij. Castor. elect. ss. Spir. vitriol. gutt. 6. Spir. Poeon. j.
cum Sir. Stoechad. Pills.
fiat mixtura. Pills for the same: Pil. Foetid. ij. Coch. j. Pulv. nuc.
moschat. gr. iiij. Ol. nuc. moschat. gr. ij. Cambog. A medicate Wine.
gr. ij. cum aqu. Betonic. fiant Pil. This following Medicate Wine is much
praised in the Palsy: Herb. Chameder. Chamaepit. an. m. j. Fl. Primul. ver. m.
ss. Rorismarin. Salv. Fl. Anth. an. pug. ij. Rad. Imperator. Angelic. Irid.
Florentin. Ellebor. nigr. Sem. Cartham. an. iij. Agaric. alb. iij. Cardomom.
Cubeb. an. ij. Sal. Tartar. jss. concis. and crasse contus. insuantur sacculo
cum Vini albi lbvj. fiat Vinum medicatum, hujus sumat iiij. quibus add Spir.
Sal. Ammoniac. gutt. viij.

As touching the Cure of a Resolution of the Nerves happening by a Wound, or
any other outward cause, the whole Body being well ordered, wecome next to
Topics. And as touching the local parts of application, here are we first to
examine well the affected Part, the which is properly collected and known by
the Hurt affecting the Part, and partly by the Members resolved. And if in this
case any Part be out of order, you are to reduce it into its pristine place by
your care and skill. If Tumor, Contusion or Wound be here excited, these are
to be dressed, corrected and amended, by Balsams, Liniments, Fomentations,
Oils, Cataplasms, Emplasters, or the like; beginning and proceeding in your
Operation with mildness, maintaining and preserving the moderate Heat. Such
Medicines as these following are very excellent in the Palsy, observing a due
order in their application. And here Oils for this use should be hot and
drying, and by their thin parts digesting.

In applying of Unguents we are to begin with weak Medicines: of which kind may
be allowed these. Ol. Cham. ij. Lilior. alb. jss. Laurin. vj. Pingued. Anat.
Gallin. Unguent.
an. ij. make it into an Unguent. Vnguentum Martiatum and Aregon will make it
stronger, if it be desired. Another.
Or for the same take this: Ol. Petrol. Hyperic. cum gummi, an. j. Pulv.
Euphorb. Castor. an. j. Costin. jss. Martiat. Aregon, an. ss. fine addendo Aqu.
vit. j. fiat Vnguentum. Or this: Ol. Vulpin. Lumbricor. Chamomel. Another.
Rut. an. ss. Castor. Spic. an. iij. Ol. Succin. Salv. an. j. misce. Leonellus
Faventinus does much glory in this his Unguent: Ol. Laurin. Terebinth. an. jss.
Ol. Nardin. Petrol. an. ss. Another.
Vini Malvat. ij. Aqu. vit. j. Pyreth. Piper. Sinap. granor. Juniper. gum.
Heder. Anacardin. Labdan. an. vj. terantur and misceantur omnia, cum oleis and
vino coquantur ad vini consumption. in duplo vase, fact a forti expressione,
add Galban. Bdell. Euphorb. Myrrh. Castor. Adip. Vrsin. Anat. an. ij. fiat
Linimentum, fine addendo parum cerae.

All natural Baths are good here; or artificial Fomentations: of which sort
take this as an Example; Rad. Fomentation.
Alth. m. ij. Sem. Lin. Foenugraec. an. m. ij. Salv. Lavendul. Majoran.
Chamaepit. Ivae Arthritic. an. m. jss. Herb. Betonic. Absinth. Rosar. rub.
Hyperic. Stoechad. an. m. jss. Aneth. Menth. an. m. j. Chamomel. Melilot. Rut.
an. m. j. coquantur omnia in aqua and vino simul mixed. and fiat Fomentum: with
which let the Paralised parts be fomented by dipping Stupes therein, and so
applying them warm to the affected Part. After which application you may
embrocate the Parts with this following Mixture: Summit at. Mixtute.
Rorismar. Salv. Lavendul. Rut. Chamaepit. Majoran. an. m. j. coquantur in. s.
q. vini albi, ad hujus colaturae iiij. add Spir. Vini rectificat. iiij.
Spirit. Juniper. j. Aqu. Salv. Rorismar. Lavendul. an. j. Ol. Salv. Succin. an.
j. Styrac. liquid. j. Styrac. liquid. j. misce.

History.
I conclude this Chapter with this History of a young Gentleman, who being of a
sanguine Constitution, after eating a large Supper, did drink very plentifully
of Wine. As he sat in his chair, he was suddenly surprised with a Stupidity in
his Right hand, so that the Glove which did cover his hand did involuntarily
fall of. He endeavoring to arise thence and walk, did perceive a Resolution in
his Thigh and Leg on the same side. A small while after, falling into a
Drowziness of mind, and a Sleepiness, without an Apoplexy, being asked several
questions, he very aptly answered them, yet slowly, and as it were disturbed. A
worthy Physician being sent for, Phlebotomy, Purging and Vomiting being in
their orders used, and Cupping-glasses, Frictions, Scarifications and Liniments
being with care administered, yet the Palsy did creep so fast on that side, that
the Member had almost wholly lost its motion: with which he lost the sight of
his Eye on that side. And all proper Medicines taking no place, the animal
Faculties daily decayed; so that about the seventh or eighth day falling into a
Delirium, and afterward into a Convulsion, he was within a short while forced
to shut up his last minute, his Spirits being dissolved. The dead Corpse being
opened, the anteriour Cavity of the Brain was seen filled partly with an
Ichorous, partly with a concrete and grumous Blood, accompanied with plenty of
Serum. Hence (as Dr. Willis does conjecture, who was the Author of this
History) in respect of this Illuvies compressing one Striated body, and
constringing its pores and passages, it hindered the afflux of Spirits passing
into the Nervous appendix of that side; and hereby a Resolution being excited
in the respective Members, and also a Compression, by reason of the Thalamus
Opticus to which the Striated body is inserted, the sight of the Eye on this
side was wholly divided.

CHAP. XI.
Of Convulsion.
AMongst all the preternaturall Affects which are consistent in Solution of
Continuity, and which do bring danger of Inflammations, Watchings, Delirium,
and Convulsion, Wounds of the Nerves and Nervous parts are most dangerous: for
these seldom do go without their Symptoms. This Convulsion in Wounds is a
direful Symptom, for it is an involuntary Contraction of the Parts toward
their Original, prosternating their Faculties by Pain, abolishing all
voluntary Motion, without which Life is but a troublesome thing. And that it is
a morbifick cause may from hence be collected, in that it does deprive the
Parts of their proper Motion. For as when Deglutition is hindered, there does
follow an Inanition in all parts, so consequently a Consumption. Even thus
while the Urine or Excrements are detained, Diseases are made in the Cavities:
and also in Intempereity, Magnitude, and Solution of Continuity.

What a Convulsion is.
The Nature therefore of a Convulsion is diligently and carefully to be minded
and considered, and its Causes, that we may better find out the way of its thus
happening in Wounds. We allow therefore that a Spasm is a depraved Motion
happening in the voluntary moving Faculty, and is a nervous Distempereity, by
which contraction of the Muscles they are altogether made incapable of
extention; and it is a principal affection of the Nerves, which do obey a
voluntary command. And that this description may the better be understood, we
may much enlarge in our knowledge hereof by Anatomy. All Motions being
procurated and procured by the animal Faculty, which are exercised and
performed by the Muscles and their Tendons, as by their proper Instruments;
whilst these Muscles do contract their Beginning and Radix toward their End,
they also do draw with them their annexed Members, as Nerves, Tendons, and
Ligaments. For no proper animal Motion can be made in any living creature
without Muscles, and these do take their moving Faculty from the Brain. For
although the Brain it self be not fibrous, the body of its Nerves is fibrous:
and these are the messengers which do convey this Spirit into the Muscles, and
through them, which do give them both their sense and motion. Now therefore,
when by any preternaturall affect the Nerves or Tendons are pricked, inflamed,
or otherwise hurt, they do recede from their pristine vigor, and do prove
incapable Instruments: and hence follows Convulsion, or that contractive motion
we call a Spasm. Gal. 6. Aphor. 39. writes, a Convulsion to be a hurting of the
voluntary Function, because herein the moving quality is as it were tied up
from acting in its proper sphere; and thus Motion is hindered, the Instrument
thereof not being wanting, but hindered in its action by being girt up by the
Distempereity of the Instrument. And therefore Spasm or Convulsion by Johan.
Andr. a Cruce is described as a Symptom of a Disease, not of a Faculty.

The differences of Convulsion.
There are allowed generally to be three species of a Spasm. If the Affect do
arise in the Anteriour part, this Convulsion by the Greeks is called
Emprosthotonos: (...) is all one with ante in Latin. By some it is called
Convulsio domesticalis. This is made, when not only the Neck but the other
Parts of the body are drawn forwards. If it possess the Back-part, it is called
Opisthotonos, from the Greek word (...), which is the same to retro in Latin.
And this happens when the Muscles which do inflect the Body are hurt backwards.
By some this is called Convulsio Scapulosa. The third is Tetanos, or Totum
extensum: and this Convulsion is made, when all the fore and back Parts of the
body are equally contracted, keeping them as it were at a stay, and making them
very stiff. Celsus does declare, that there is no Disease more outrageous,
cruel, and acute, then that which by a Rigor or Stiffness of the Nerves and
Sinews does annex the Head to the Scapula's, the Chin to the Breast, and makes
the Neck right and immovable. In which Discourse he has both briefly and
elegantly set down the three differences of Spasm, which we have been
discoursing of. He has also a fourth Species there of a Spasm, which he calls
Spasmus Cynicus; as when the Mouth is pulled awry, or one or both Hands be
contracted.

All the chief causes which do produce these Convulsions are by him reckoned as
three: (viz.) Plethory, Inanition, and Sympathy. Of these in their Orders.

Plethory.
I begin with Plethory, so called from its copiousness and plenitude of diverse
Humidities, the which do replete and possess the Instruments of voluntary
Motion; as the Body being thick and fleshy, the Vessels full, the Pulse
strong, the Age ripe, the Complexion sanguine, and the like. Thus by Plethory
or Plenitude Convulsion may be said to be made, when the Nervous bodies and
their Fibers are nourished with thick and glutinous Matter, and are therewith
also repleted: by which Repletion they are distended; and hence, as they fill
out in bulk, they do shorten in their length: hence do they become contracted
and abbreviated, and so are they run into Convulsion.

Inanition.
The Second is Inanition: and this is made for want of natural Moisture; the
Nerves being hereof destitute, do soon grow dry and short. For they must needs
grow shorter, as does a Cord, when once being wet, and dried again, it shrinks
and shrivells up: so also do the Nerves being corrugated. The Disease therefore
which does follow a Convulsion is a perverse figure of the Muscles, in which
they are made shorter by Inanition as well as Repletion. Thus every humourall
Matter which may be said to fill the Fibers, may also be allowed to create a
Convulsion. And this may be confirmed of Inanition, that every thing which has
power to make this, has also strength enough in it to frame a Spasm. And hence
sometimes immoderate Evacuations or Vomitings, which are allowed to dry very
much, do so ofttimes bid fair to a Convulsion.

Sympathy or Consent.
A Third Cause is called Sympathy: and this is said to happen by malign Vapors
offending the Originations of the Nerves, as it is ofttimes seen in poisoned
Wounds. Another is said to be made by Pain attracting the Nerves from their
Originations. A third which may offer it self is from immoderate Cold, causing
in them a great Stiffness.

What remains in the Causes of Convulsion is, to show how this may be made in
Wounds. And here may we see how this may be made out of Plethory, the Nerves
being filled with purulent Matter, or other Excrements, generated either in the
wounded Part, or sent thither from other Parts, and so sucked up by the Nerves;
as it often happens when a Nerve is half divided or cut: or by reason of
Inflammation, the Part being filled with a large Flux of blood, and so
distending the Nervous parts; especially if this Disaffection be communicated
to the Original of them, or the Nerve it self be primarily offended. And
hereby the Muscles become shorter, and so forced to contract toward their
Original, neither by Heat alone, but also by immoderate Cold in Wounds of the
Nerves and Nervous parts, hereby suffering Convulsion, this prohibiting the
Excretion of Excrements, and shutting up and condensing the Porous bodies. Out
of Inanition may also be made Convulsion, and this also by Inflammation: and
this most generally happens in Wounds of the Nervous parts. For thus the
inflamed Part is convelled, and answers directly to Convulsion, and hence it
communicates it self to some principal Part, the which being there received,
does communicate of its Distempereity through the whole Body. Convulsion does
ofttimes happen in Wounds of the Nervous parts, in respect of exsolution of the
wounded Part, which does send forth its ill habits to the Brain, the
Origination of them, by which the Brain it self is vellicated and irritated:
and being thus concussed, that it may clear it self from the mischief this
portends it, and give a quietus to this unhappy companion, there must
necessarily follow Convulsion upon this combat in the subject Parts. But such
motions as these do prove generally universal, even as the spirituous quality
is carried to the Brain through the affected Nerve, being either pricked, cut,
or hurt, containing a putredness in it. So also of Cold may follow Spasm, being
a great enemy to the Nerves.

Signs of Convulsion.
The Signs of a Convulsion are readily to be discerned, for the Part is drawn
toward its Origination, and there it does create such a Stiffness, that it is
not easily to be extended. Galen, 1. Proret. cap. 2. Tract. 20. says that it
is an Affect full of Pain. The greater is the Pain when made by Repletion: and
this Affect hereby is soon procured, when it is communicated to a principal
Part. This you may collect from these Signs: in that the Throat is narrowed,
the Teeth constringed, the Mouth is not to be opened, the Lips contracted, the
Neck and Back pained, the Eyes and whole Face perverted; and after these the
Patient does breath with difficulty, and his Breath being intercepted, he parts
speedily from his Life. If by reason of a Wound Tetanos or Distention does
happen, the Patient's Mandibles are conglutinated, he cannot open his Mouth,
his Eyes are filled with tears and contracted, his posteriour Parts are
convelled, and his Body is bent backwards. Hence do arise vehement Pains, and
sometimes the Patient cannot either contract his Thighs, or extend his Hands.
In Emprosthotonos the Body bends altogether forwards, and the Parts are
contrarily disposed to the former. And this is to be understood of those Parts
which could bend either way. The Leg cannot be bent forwards, or the Thigh
backwards.

Presages.
Hippocrates says that Convulsion happening upon a Wound is mortal. A Spasm
also happening upon a large Flux is ill. Aphorism. 3. Such as are taken with a
Tetanos do commonly die within four days; and if they escape these, they are
past the worst of danger. Aph. 6. Such as die of a Convulsion do continue their
Heat a long while, they dying suffocated, the Muscles of Respiration being
convelled, and those of the Neck distended. Such as have Convulsions, a Fever
happening, are freed hereby from their Convulsions. Every Convulsion may be
said to come from Repletion, because it is cured by Evacuation. A Convulsion
bred out of Inanition is both sharp and cruel. If it do communicate its hurt
to the Muscles moving the Thorax, it does threaten Death. That Convulsion is
much to be dreaded which closes the Lips, and lets fall the Mandible.

Cure of a Convulsion caused by Plenitude.
As other Passions, Accidents, or Symptoms, which are wont to arise from a
copiousness or plenitude of Humors, are to be cured by opportune Evacuations;
thus also is a humid Convulsion to be treated, by ordering a good Diet, and
application of convenient Topics, the which should not only contain in them a
drying and discussing faculty, but also eradicate and extirpate the whole
Affect. The wounded Patient is therefore to be placed in a Room where the Air
is hot and dry, or so made by Art. Frictions of the extreme Parts are
beneficial. Let his Diet be thin, for Inanition in this case is an excellent
Remedy, for it dries the Body. Let his Bread be well baked, and his Diet be of
a light Digestion. Breath a Vein where blood is much abounding, or Inflammation
offers it self; for this is a ready remedy to prevent Convulsion. Both Galen
and Celsus do declare, that in a Cynick Convulsion to breath a Vein is very
proper. And this is to be ordered and prescribed according to the strength and
Constitution of the Patient. Purge frequently with Hier. picr. Pil. Coch. Pil.
Aggregativ. De Agaric. Extr. Rud. cum Merc. dulci, etc.

Outward Medicines for the wounded Part may be thus ordered. If the whole Nerve
be incised, there is scarce any Motion left perceivable. If the head of the
Muscle be pricked, occasioning Convulsion, and cannot be remitted by any force
of Medicine, by cutting the whole Muscles transversely you cure the Convulsion.
But you must hereby expect to lose part of its Motion. The Ancients concluded
this Operation with an actual Cautery, after which was applied this Medicine;
Ol. Hyperic. Mastich. an. jss. Terebinth. Oleum.
Venet. Resin. Pin. an. iij. Sulphur. viv. j. Croc. ss. misce, parum bulliant:
over which to apply this Cataplasm; Pulv. Catapl.
Fl. Cham. Melilot. Fol. Betonic. Laur. Bacc. an. j. Farin. Hord. Fabar. an.
ij. Ol. Lilior. albor. Sem. Lin. an. jss. fiat Cataplasma: or this; Spir.
Lavendul. ij. Spir. vini jv. Another mixture.
Ol. Succin. j. Ol. Hyperic. Magistral. jss. Terebinth. Spic. an. ij. misce;
and with this anoint the convelled Parts: or this; Axung. Human. Anser. Vrsin.
Ol. Vulpin. an. j. Unguent. Another.
Dialth. Martiat. Aregon. an. j. Ol. Hyperic. cum gummi ij. Ol. Lilior. Castor.
an. jss. misce, fiat Linimentum. Another for the same use may be this; Ol.
Spic. Terebinth. Another.
Petrol. an. j. Axung. Human. ij. Martiat. jss. Ol. Salv. Nuc. Moschat. an. j.
Succin. ss. misce. Fomentations here also may be with profit used, such as are
made of Scordium, Sage, Wormwood, Lavender, Rue, Chamomill, Dill, Marjoram,
Rosemary-flowers, Red roses, Betony, Cowslips, Tansey, St. John's Wort,
Scabious, and the like, being boiled in water and milk. After the application
of which, be sure to keep the Parts very warm.

An History.
To conclude this; take this History of a corpulent man, over-filled with wine
and beer, so that by a general opinion he was reputed intoxicated. Being in
this condition carried in a Coach to his house, he fell down upon his back, and
was left so sleeping in the Coach until he got to his own house. But coming
thither, being much stirred, and asked several questions, he gave no answer to
any; and being carried mute into his house, he still remained in his sleeping
posture, and within a short while died of a Convulsion, before any Physician
could arrive at him. It was generally conjectured, the Wine he drank hastened
his death by suffocation, being thus carried so strangely in the Coach lying
all the while on his back in a sleepy condition.

Cure of a Convulsion arising from Inanition.
We come to the Second kind, the which although it be accounted lethall, yet
where any hopes of cure may offer, we are thus to begin with the convelled
Parts. The Patient's Diet therefore is to be of good Juices, as Broaths and
Decoctions, to be made with Capons, Chickens, and Veal-broath, and the like,
wherein may be boiled the Leaves of Mallows, Lettice, Purslane, Violets,
Buglossflowers, and the like, and such things as may strengthen and confirm the
Parts, and create a moist habit in them. Of these and the like may also be made
Conserves, Juleps, Electuaries, and Decoctions, by adding Sugar and convenient
Liquours and Syrups. Purging is very improper here. Lenifying Clysters are very
convenient Medicines. Emollent Liniments and Baths are here mostly required; An
Unguent.
of which sort may be reckoned these. Butyr. Maial. Axung. Porcin. an. jss. Ol.
Lilior. Violar. Amygdal. dulc. Another.
an. jss. Axung. Human. j. misce: or this; Axung. Porcin. Pomat. an. j. Ol.
Olivar. Lumbricor. an. jss. Ol. Violar. Cydonior. an. ij. Cer. q. s. fiat
Unguent. or this; Another.
Ol. Viol. Amygdal. dulc. Pingued. Gallin. Vitulin. an. ij. coquantur simul in
decocto Malv. Alth. and Sem. Cydonior. colaturae add Cerae q. s. pro Vnguento.
As for Fomentations, you may boil here Calves Feet or a Sheeps Head and Feet in
milk and water mixed together, and to these add Mallows, Marshmallows,
Violets, Linseed, Fengreek-seed, Chamomile-flowers, and Melilot-flowers: and
with these and the like the convelled Parts are to be fomented.

History.
Hercules Saxoniae writes, that Convulsion made by Inanition may be cured. He
does propose the case of a Reverend General of Cassina: a speedy Effusion of
blood out of the Haemorrhoidall veins caused not only a Syncope, but also a
Convulsion to seize on him, the which by Divine assistance he was perfectly
cured of.

Now albeit Hippocrates says, A Wound being received in the large Veins where
much blood is spilt and scattered, ofttimes Convulsion and Syncope is seen to
succeed, which is direful, as he has it Aph. 3. lib. 5. yet Hollerius writes,
that the Patient does seldom die of this Disease. And hence Dovinaetus, lib.
1. cap. 3. writes, that he saw a man fifty years old which fell into a
Convulsion and Syncope occasioned by a great Effusion of blood, who by the
benefit of Cupping-glasses and Bleeding was perfectly cured.

Of curing a Convulsion happening by Sympathy or Consent.
If Convulsion do arise by Consent or Sympathy, the cause hereof is speedily to
be inquired into: the which if it prove procatarctick, this is to be removed;
if sharp and painful, this is to be assuaged; if it proceed from Cold causing
a Numness in the Nervous parts, and making them stiff, this is to be amended.
Now if a malign Vapor do offend the Origination of the Nerves, in this case
the Wound is to be dilated for discharging of the peccant and venomous Matter.
Flatulencies also may create many species of a Spasm, not only seizing the
extreme Parts, but also forcing themselves into others: first taking the Head
by advantage of surprise; hence working into other Parts, and undermining them
by the sense of Cold, throwing it self between the Scapula's, disturbing the
Body in its entire Senses with an Opisthotonos, executing its vigorous
influences of mischief in one side, firmly contracting it, and girting it up
from acting or performing any of its Functions. From whence may be collected,
that its chief Cause is not an Humor, but some cold and thick Vapor, the
which by some inclining advantage does dissipate the whole; whose chief Agent
in this cause does lodge in the Head, as Fernelius does observe, lib. 5. cap.
3. Patholog.

The Medicines most properly here to be applied ought to be of a liquid
substance, and such as may penetrate into the bottom of the Wounds: and these
ought both to dry, and digest, resolve, and attract this virulent Matter. And
for this Use Venice-Treacle, Mithridate, Myrrh and Aloes, dissolved in
Treacle-water, are very prevalent. Elixar Proprietat. its drops put into Sack
is an excellent Medicine here. Now as touching Cold and Pain, I remit you to
their proper places, where I have already enlarged. I conclude this with some
remarkable Historical Observations.

History.
Platerus writes, in Obs. suis, lib. 1. fol. 120. of a young Maiden, who
falling from her horse by hearing unexpectedly a Pistol discharged, had
hereupon a Resolution in her lower parts of her body, in that nature that she
could not stir her hands or feet, neither had she any sense. Being carried in
this condition to her Father's house, he viewed the Wound, which was almost in
the middle of her Back, to which he applied himself; the which he conjectured
was occasioned by her Fall. Upon examination of her upper parts, finding no
harm or defect there, the lower parts remaining stupid, dull and resolved, the
Surgeon immediately did apply hot Stupes to her feet, by which was
suscitated somewhat of Heat. He being called in to advise, examined the whole
occasion of this mischief, and inquired into its cause from the Patient. She
replied, the hearing a Pistol shot off unawares by one riding by her in the
road so affrighted her, that she fell from her horse; upon receiving of which
Fall she felt a grievous Pain in her Back: growing faint herewith, and coming
to her self, she complained of her Back being wounded and resolved. Upon
examining the Wound, which was on the right side of her Back, near the eighth
and ninth Ribs, coming downwards obliquely toward the Spine, he found it
exactly round: and whereas in its Circumference there appeared no sign of
Contusion, suspecting it to have happened by the force of the Shot, he ordered
her Clothes to be examined, in which he also found a hole made by the Bullet;
upon which he fairly conjectured, that this Wound was made by this Shot, and
that it had penetrated the Spinall marrow. Diverse Surgeons being called into
Consultation, they all did judge the same, and by a general consent, a Probe
being sent into the Wound, part of the Vertebrae was found to be lacerated. Ten
days being expired since the hurt, she grew worse, and troubled with Vomiting
and a great Heat in the upper part of her Spine, with pain of her Head, and
Spasm about her Neck. Medicines being applied to these with small success, at
the twentieth day she departed the world. And because a great dispute did arise
at her death, what might be the occasion thereof, whether the Fall or the Shot,
upon Dissection, and by dilating of the Wound, some part of the Spine being
removed, the leaden Bullet did show it self lodged, the which had lacerated the
Spinall marrow.

Another.
Another is of Camerarius, de Observe. Johan. Hessii, who writes there of
Christopher Albertus, Son to an Apothecary, a young man of about twenty years
of age, that he grew very melancholic, and by using of a cold Diet, and such
things as were hard of concoction, did fall into an Abdominall Suppression,
accompanied as it were with Colick-pains, in which happened this Convulsion
called Opisthotonos. Diverse strong Medicines being prescribed him, he took them
without any effect. Afterward having several Clysters administered to him, by
them he seemed to receive some relief; but in the interim, as often as he covered
the Stool to void his Excrements, this Paroxysm invaded him. And upon second
thoughts, consultation being had why milder Medicines might not work better and
more kindly, a more temperate Clyster was administered, made only of Milk and
Honey, adding to a pound of Milk four ounces of Honey: the which wrought very
kindly, and caused the Fits somewhat to abate. But whenever the Paroxysm seized
him, three or four men could scarce keep him in his bed: and these sometimes
happened three or four times in a day. Considering these Symptoms, it was
generally agreed, that this Disease was an Opisthotonall Convulsion, made by
Coagulation in the Vena Cava, the which does abound ofttimes with thick and
viscous Humors. His Drink for the Cure hereof was a Decoction of Sarsaparilla
and Sassafras, and every fourth or fifth day he had administered a Decoction of
Milk and Honey: by which method the Fits began to abate, and on the 28th day of
his Distemper he fell into a breathing Sweat, after which the Spasm began to
vanish. But after this a Tremor did possess his whole Body, but chiefly his
Thighs; for which his whole Spine was anointed, and by these he speedily
amended.

History of Tetanos.
Another young Gallant of twenty years of age, being of a thin Body, and
perplexed with this Disease, was thus cured. Jason. cap. 21. de morb. Cerebr.
ex Vesalio, thus writes it. He spilt upon the Patients head almost twenty
pitchers of water, four men holding the Patient upright, so as the liquour
might descend upon all his lower Parts. This being done, he ordered the Patient
to be speedily put to bed: within an hour after which the Patient was anointed
from the Neck to the lowermost Spondyl, with his Arms and Legs, with Unguent.
Aregon, Martiatum, Dialth. Agripp. and Ol. Castor. and some Chicken-broath
prescribed for his Diet; and by this method he perfectly recovered. Fabritius
Hildanus has a very excellent Observation of a Cynick Spasm, fol. 37. Centur.
5. to which I recommend you.

And thus have I given you a full account of the direful Symptoms which do
attend deep and large Wounds: we come next to Wounds themselves.

CHAP. XII.
Of a Compound Wound of the Flesh, or a Hollow Wound.
WE ought to deal with all Wounds so as they may answer expectation: and now
coming to Cavernous Wounds, we may as readily account that a Hollow Wound,
which has not only lost a part of its Flesh, but that also which happens by
a simple Incision, without loss of Flesh, the Lips of which Wound, by reason of
the greatness and large distance, cannot be aptly united in the bottom, whence
there does remain a Cavity therein. And as for the Cure hereof, we are first to
mind the Flux, for avoiding of Inflammation. And if occasion serve, and the
time of the year does require it, we may breath a Vein, and prescribe cooling
Syrups and Decoctions, and order Purgations, and such a thin Diet as may keep
the Body in good temper. And because in such large and hollow Wounds there is
generally seen some preternaturall Matter to lodge in their bottomes, the which
the Part of it self is not capable to discharge; we here ought in the first
place to use Digestives, hereby to digest the Matter, and to bring it into a
laudable substance, that is, such a Matter as is both white, smooth, equal,
and void of all bad smell. And these are to be applied no longer, then while
this laudable Matter is made, and all Excrements be removed, keeping and
preserving the natural Temper of the Parts. And herein Nature is very ready to
assist in this Operation: for as the Part is fleshy, this is suddenly renewed,
and restored by Blood lodged in the Muscles, out of which is generated a new
Flesh. With Digestives may also be admixed Detersives: for as the first are
proper in the beginning, so the latter are as requisite in the following part.
Examples of which I shall set down thus.

Digestive.
Unguent. Basilic. Aurei, Terebinth. Venet. lot. an. j. Another.
Vitell. Ovor. no. ij. Croc. ss. misce. Or this: Bals. Peruvian. j. Ol.
Catellor. Hyperic. gummat. an. j. Terebinth. Another.
Venet. j. Vitel. Ov. no. j. Or this: Ol. Vitell. Ovor. ij. Terebinth. Venet.
iij. Myrt. ij. Resin. Pin. Colophon. an. j Thur. in pulv. jss. Sang. Dracon.
vj. Cer. parum, fiat Another.
Linimentum. Another for the same: Thur. Myrrh. an. ss. Sang. Dracon. j. Pic.
Graec. and naval. an. ij. Pulv. Centaur. j. Terebinth. Venet. Resin. Pin. an.
j. Sep. Vaccin. Digestive and Detersive.
j. Cer. ij. misce. Digestives and Detersives together may be allowed these.
Mel. j. Terebinth. ss. Basilic. Aur. an. ss. Ol. Hyperic. cum gum. j. Vitel.
Ov. Another.
no. j. Croc. j. misce. Another: Succ. Apii ij. Mel. jss. Pulv. Veronic.
Hyperic. an. j. Farin. Fabar. ss. Or this: Another.
Succ. Apii, Scord. Arnogloss. Rut. an. j. Mel. Rosar. jv. coque ad Syrupum,
huic add Farin. Lupinor. Pulv. Aristoloch. rot. Angelic. an. ij. Aqu. vit. ss.
misce. In these Medicines being made warm may you dip your Tents and Dossills
or Pledgets, and so apply them to the bottom of the wounded Part.

The Wound being hereby digested and mundified, Satcoticks.
next are we to fill up with Flesh by Sarcoticks: and these are to be drying and
deterging in respect of the Excrements. Of which sort may be reckoned Unguent.
Aegyptiacum, Apostolorum, Basilicon, Aureum, Fuscum, Balsam. Peruvian. Unguent.
de Betonic. or the like. For this Use also this Powder sprinkled upon the Wound
is much commended: Rad. Irid. Florent. Aristoloch. rot. Angelic. Powder.
an. ij. Fol. Scord. ss. Oliban. Mastich. an. ij. Croc. j. C. C. ust. and
praeparat. j. misce, fiat Pulvis subtilissimus. Or if you please, by adding a
little Turpentine hereto, you may make it into the form of an Unguent, by
adding to it also a little Oil of Roses and Wax.

The last Intention is made good by Epuloticks; these to have in them a
Skinning quality: and of this sort are Unguent. Desiccat. rubrum,
Diapompholygos, Unguent. album Camphoratum, Empl. Diapalm. De minio, etc.
making your Cicatrizes of a good temper and color.

History.
I conclude this with an History of Fracazinus, which Alexandrinus does write
of lib. 7. De Simpl. med. facult. of one who received a Wound long and sinuous,
reaching from his Shoulders even to his Buttocks, in which part it was open:
the exterior Vessels did send forth much of a certain Sanies; neither was it
very deep, not penetrating much deeper then the Membrana Carnosa: the which
could not be consolidated with many Medicines, but by the application of
Cabbage-leaves boiled in black Wine was dried up, and the Patient speedily
cured.

CHAP. XIII.
Of a Contused Wound.
WE have already shown how a Simple wound is to be cured; but when any other
Affect is joined to it, this Affect is first to be cured, and then the Wound.
Galen does advise, if any Phlegmon, Contusion, Ecchymosis, Erysipelas, or the
like, should happen upon a Wound, these are first to be removed; for they only
do add fuel to the fire. And this is held a certain rule amongst all
Authors, that we must never expect to cure a Wound, until we have conquered
the Symptoms. For as the Wound of it self does only require Desiccation; so
having Contusion joined to it, this is readily to be turned into Putrefaction,
and that to be converted into laudable Matter. And because the ordinary
entrance upon the Cure of this Wound is ofttimes intercepted by the importunity
of Accidents, let it be your first care to repress these, and then proceed to
the Cure it self. If the Accident be Pain or Tumor, allay the Pain by some
Anodyne Medicine; of which sort are Ol. Aneth. Chamomel. Lilior. Rosarum,
Crocus, and the like. Abate the Tumor by removing both its antecedent and
conjunct Cause; the first being the Humor first flowing, the latter being that
part of Humor which has already made its flux. As to the first, if it proceed
of Blood occasioning Fluxion, this is to be let out or discharged by the place
from whence it flows, or by the place to which it flows. This Passion is
curbed and bridled by Phlebotomy, and a cooling Diet: and to keep it from
flowing further, Revulsion and Repulsion are two proper engines to effect this;
the first withdrawing and courting the Humor into another part, the other
repelling it when it is once sent. If other Humors do occasion this Fluxion,
then discharge these by Catharticks, and such as may answer the nature of the
Humor.

We come next to the Wound it self: and here are we chiefly to consider these
two Intentions, (viz.) to procure Suppuration, and then to generate a new
Flesh. And because, as Galen prescribes, every Suppuration is to be procured by
Putrefaction, and every thing that putrefies is affected with a hot and moist
Humor, the chief Intention therefore here is, to apply such Medicines as may
both heat and moisten; such as are Mallows, Marshmallows, Barley-meal,
Chamomile-flowers, Melilot-flowers, and the like. As for example; Fol. Malv.
Fl. Dialth. Catapl.
Absinth. an. m. j. Rad. Alth. jv. coquantur in aqu. fontana, postea in
mortario subigantur, his add Pulv. fl. Cham. Melilot. Rosar. rub. an. iij.
Farin. Hord. Fabar. an. iij. cum Decocto antescripto fiat Catapl. fine addendo
Ol. Chamomel. Another.
ij. Or this; Rad. Alth. lbss. Malv. Violar. an. m. j. coquantur and colentur,
colaturae add Butyr. Ol. Rosar. an. iij. Vitell. Ovor. no. iij. Croc. j.
misce. Or this; Another.
Pulv. Rosar. rubr. Fol. and Bacc. Myrtillor. an. ij. Farin. Hord. Fabar. an.
j. Absinth. Betonic. an. ss. Sem. Cumin. ij. Mel. ij. cum Vino austero q. s.
fiat Cataplasma, fine addendo Ol. Rosar. Chamomel. an. j. To the wounded Part
are we to apply a Digestive made either of Turpentine, Basilicon, and Honey
mixed together; or this: Mel. Digestive.
Rosar. Succ. Apii, an. ij. Vitell. Ovor. no. ij. Terebinth. Venet. j. Unguent.
Aurei ss. Pulv. Myrrh. Alo. an. j. misce. In these cases also Vnguentum
Apostolorum and Aegyptiacum, especially when the bottom of the Wound is foul,
may be applied; thus ordering it until it be perfectly mundified; the which
being done, fill it up with Flesh by Sarcoticks: and this will be done by
Unguent. Basilicon, Aureum, Balsamum Peruvian. or Lucatelli. It being brought
up to an equalness, skin it with Diapompholygos, or Desiccativum rubrum. But if
the Contused flesh will not be brought to Suppuration by these, but dots rather
seem to threaten a Gangrene, here are you to use strong Lixiviums and powerful
drying Medicines, having in them power to resist Putrefaction; such as are
Unguent. Aegyptiacum, Mercurius Praecipitatus, and the like, of which I have
been very plentiful in my discourse of a Gangrene. If any other Symptoms do
happen, study their speedy overthrow, by using such methods and Medicines as
may bring the Part into a better Temper. And if the Wound be so large that
there is necessarily required a Suture, let this be done very loosely; for it
is enough, if by the benefit thereof you can bring the Lips of the Wound
together.

History.
To conclude; A certain Gentleman having received a Contused wound in his
Thigh, occasioned by a Shot, the Surgeon anointed the places which were
contused with Oil of Roses, and for this purpose amongst the rest Unguent.
did use this Unguent; Ol. Rosar. jv. Ol. ex Vitell. Ovor. j. Pulv. Vitriol.
alb. j. Cer. alb. vj. Cort. med. Sambuc. mss. coquantur simul and colentur.
With this Unguent were anointed all the contused Parts, which has a secret
faculty of removing all evil Symptoms: and as to the Wound, he followed the
method which we have already shown, by the benefit of which the Patient
perfectly recovered.

CHAP. XIV.
Of Ecchymosis, or Contusion.
ECchymosis, or an Effusion of blood coagulated under the Skin, is allowed a
Solution of Continuity, the which is generally accompanied with some Contusion
and Ruption. The Causes of which, whether procured by some Fall, Stroke, or
other Accident, you will best understand by the Patient's own discourse. This
Ecchymosis does sometimes happen by the Apertion of the mouth of some Vessel,
and then this is called Anastomosis: the which is procured in respect of the
Weakness of some Vessel in that part where this plenty of blood is scattered;
or by some inward sharp Matter which is allowed to have an incisive quality; or
by Diapedesis, the which is a Transcolation or Exilition; this also arising
from the Coat of the Vessel being made rare and thin, and the Blood being also
thin. But our present discourse does only reach that which is made by
Contusion.

This therefore is allowed a Solution of Continuity; and in respect of its
profusion of blood it produces Pain, and hence sometimes do follow Abscesses,
the which by Transpiration are to be digested. A large Contusion is not without
danger, for this does very often not only procure Corruption of the Part it
self, but also of the whole Body. This is generally reputed an Ecchymosis, The
true definition of an Ecchymosis.
in the which there is both a separation and dilaceration of the Musculous
parts, whilst Attrition is allowed to be in the head and tail of the Muscle. It
takes its diversity of figure from its variety of cause: the Parts about it
are black, the Blood being shut up therein, and cannot be discharged by
insensible or sensible Transpiration, but by Suppuration. According to the
greatness of the hurt may you judge of the danger; for great Contusions
accompanying large Wounds do run the Part into Corruption.

Now whereas Hippocrates says, that obtuse Instruments are the most proper
engines for Contusion and Laceration, the most proper Medicine for the cure of
this should be (...), or Suppurativum: the which ought to be temperate in heat
and humor, Emplastick, and obstructing the Pores, and such as may generate
Matter. It ought also to second the nature and substance of the native Heat,
and by degrees to increase it. Hence is it, that in creating of Matter the
Humor is somewhat altered: and if this Contusion does happen in any Musculous
parts, that Part only does maintain the Bruise which received the Blow or
Hurt, whilst the circumjacent Parts do retain their own proper nature. For the
Blood being out of its proper Cavity, does force it self into some other; and
being in its motion hindered, does change its first rudiment. And hence was it
that Philalethus says, that Blood, Seed, and Milk, being out of their proper
places, do soon run into knotty lumps and putrefy. Now in Conversion of this
Blood into Matter, there is made a Pulsation in the Arteries lodging in the
Flesh, the which Pulsation the sound man does not perceive, it lying there
without Pain; and also in respect of the great space which is allowed them for
their operation. But where there does arise Inflammation, Ecchymosis,
Erysipelas, or Abscess, with Pain, the Wounds are also inflamed, when they tend
to Suppuration; because this putrefying Blood does soon grow hot and fiery, and
in this Ebullition and Fervor of the Blood Vapors are raised, the which also
are communicated to the neighboring Parts, and therein do also generate an
Inflammation. And this is done by Consent of Parts. The Heart taking its share
of this Inflammation does create a Fever, as Hippocrates offers, cap. 47.
lib. 2. Whilst Matter is making, it occasioneth more Pain, and does more
readily subject the Patient to Fevers, more then when it is accomplished. The
generation of this Matter does fetch its origination from strange Blood,
overheated, until putrefying it is turned into another substance.

Three Changes of Substances.
Now there are allowed three (...) or changes hereof, which are made in the
Bodies of Animalls. The first is natural, as the receiving the Meat into the
Stomach, which is there digested and concocted. The second is preternaturall,
or Putredness. The third is bred out of a mixture of the former, and this is
called Suppuration. The first is made by a familiar Matter, and primogene Heat:
the second is made by an exterious Heat, and strange Matter: the third is
framed by an inbred Heat, but this not chiefly governing, neither benign in
Matter, not yet altogether estranged from it. These Rules and Precepts, being
worth a Chirurgeon's taking notice of, have I here presented from Hippocrates.

In an Ecchymosis therefore are we speedily to procure Suppuration: and whereas
Fluxion is chiefly to be relieved, study its Evacuation, by diminishing its
store which maintains it, by Phlebotomy, if nothing may hinder it, by Revulsion
to change its course; and then secure this concreted Blood, the which if it be
in the Body, is to be scattered by inward Medicines, by such as can both
dissolve the concreted Blood, and also strengthen the Parts. And for this Use
Sperma Ceti, black Beer, Pulv. ad Casum, and the like, being taken inwardly,
are good and proper. Or this Bolus; Pulv. Rhabarb. ss. Bolus.
Mumm. j. Rub. Tinctor. ss. Sperm. Cet. gr. vj. make it into a Bolus with a
little Dioscord. Or this; Pulv. Powder.
Symphyt. Terr. Sigillat. Rub. Tinctor. Mumm. an. j. Pulv. Rhabarb. gr. xv.
misce, sumat in haustu Vini generosi. The Skin of a Lamb newly plucked off, and
having Salt finely powdered sprinkled thereon, with fine Powder of Scordium,
Wormwood and Rue, is an excellent Medicine for a large Contusion, it being
applied warm to the contused Part, and there permitted for some time to remain
on. Here also are you to consider, if the Ecchymosis do happen only in one
Part, whether it be most apt for Resolution, or tend to Suppuration. That way
which it enclineth to, you are to follow. If it tends to Resolution, apply
Resolving medicines, to help forward its design: if to Suppuration, procure
issue, and mundify the Ulcer. And as in all other cases we observe as a
general Maxim, that in the beginning we apply Restringents, to which somewhat
of Discussive medicines may be adjoined; so in the end we generally ought to
use Discussive medicines: and for this purpose take these few. As, Far. Fabar.
jv. Sal. marin. jss. Pulv. Summitat. Catapl.
Absinth. Scord. Rut. an. j. coquantur in Oxymelit. q. s. ad Catapl. formam,
fine addendo Pulv. Myrrh. Aloes, Another.
an. j. Another for the same; Farin. Hord. ij. Pulv. Rosar. rub. Myrtill.
Foenugraec. an. ss. Pulv. Scord. Rut. an. ij. Pulv. Salv. Veronic. Hyperic.
Agrimon. an. j. coquantur in Vino rubro ad Catapl. formam, huic addendo Croc.
j. Ol. Rosar. Myrtillor. an. j. de Vitell. Ovor. ss. Another.
misce, fiat Cataplasma. Another may be this: Farin. Hord. Fabar. an. jv. Bol.
Armen. ij. Pulv. Gallar. virid. iss. Camphor. j. cum Oxymelit. q. s. fiat
Cataplasma. If by these and the like you cannot resolve it, but it still does
rather incline to Suppuration, bring it to Suppuration, and discharge the
Matter by cleansing the Ulcer: and to the discolored Parts you are to begin
with comfortable Fomentations, which have in them a power to warm, strengthen,
and run the Part into Maturation; such as may be made of Wormwood, Sage, Rue,
Scordium, Centaury, St. John's Wort, Scabious, Veronica, Chamomile-flowers,
Melilot-flowers, Cumine, and the like, boiled in water and wine mixed together:
whereinto are to be dipped Woollen clothes, and these to be applied warm to the
affected Parts. After this anoint them with some convenient Oils, as Oil of
Roses, Earthworms, St. Johnswort, and the like.

I conclude this Chapter with these two Histories. History.
The first whereof shall be of a Gentleman, who upon endeavoring to strike his
Dog with his foot, did fall upon his Hip; with which Fall, being a very
corpulent man, he felt a great Pain, happening by the Contusion he got by his
Fall. The Contused place was well anointed with Oil of Roses and Myrtills, by
which the Pain ceased, and no other Symptom or Inflammation followed the
Contusion; by which only he was perfectly cured.

Another.
The second is of a young Child of three years old, who falling down upon
earnest pursuit after two little Dogs, received a Contusion in the hinder part
of his Head, not without much Pain, and Vomiting, with Spasm in both of his
Arms and Hands, so as he was generally reputed to be beyond all hopes of Cure.
Forestus being consulted herein, (who is the Author of this Story) by
anointing the Contused part with Oil of Roses, and the nuch of his Neck with
Oil of Earthworms, and making Frictions in the extreme Parts, the Child
somewhat recovered, and was freed of his Spasm. For his common Drink, was
prescribed green Betony to be boiled in Ale, of which he generally did drink.
And the Contused place being anointed afterward with Unguent. Alabastrinum, by
these he was perfectly cured, and restored to his former health.

CHAP. XV.
Of Wounds made by the Biting of mad Dogs.
WE arrive now at such Wounds as do happen by the Biting of mad Dogs, and of
other venomous creatures: and although other creatures, as Wolves, Cats, Foxes,
and the like, may be mad; yet most who have writ of this subject do give the
first denomination to the Dog, as Antiochus, Paulus Aegineta, Oribasius,
Cornelius Celsus, and others. The general repute of the Biting of Animalls is
allowed to come under a double difference; for some are venenate in their
proper nature, and others are less venenate. Those are reputed venenate, which
are lodged in venenate and virulent Beasts; and amongst these are reckoned the
mad Dog, Serpents, Adders, Scorpions, Basilisks, Vipers, Wasps, and the like.
Others are said to be less venenate, which have not in them this virulent
spirit; of which sort may be reckoned Man, a Dog that is tame, a Monkey,
Horses, Swine, and the like. The Signs of either do declare their nature. Those
which are venomous are most dangerous, and great care not being had, they do
commit their Venom to some noble Part, and there implanting the poison, do
soon cause a speedy Death. Gordonius reports, that the Biting of a mad Dog is
most dangerous; for although the Patient do not feel it at present, yet this
lurking Poison some while after makes its appearance. I have read of a Boy, who
being bit by a mad Dog, and being well after it for six weeks, after this died
of the Bite he received.

Seeing the danger is great, and how it aims at the Principalls of life, let us
consult a while the reason of this Poison, and how it does communicate it self.
Read tells us it is communicated these two ways; by Biting and Slaver, and by
Slaver without Biting. This is sometimes received by the thick Skin of any
Part. And this Matthaeus makes good, Cons. 82. where he affirms of one putting
his hand into a mad Dog's mouth, that within few days after he became mad
himself. It sooner seizes on some Parts then on others, and is also more
readily taken by some Persons then others. For it has shown its rage in some
speedily, whilst in others it has had many days and weeks to act its envy and
malicious terror. And hence may we collect, that this Spittle is pernicious
which is contained in the Mouth, and thus agitated, rendered and elaborated into
the form of Froath, the which does carry an acrimony and venenosity with it, by
reason of Choler which moves it, and this Tyrant does make this ebullition; the
which being once made, is sent into the Wounds by the Teeth; by which
impression it is carried into the Body and its circumstantiall Parts; the which
if they happen to be nervous, these are presently stimulated by the venenosity
of the Humor, and hereby ofttimes a Spasm and Convulsive motions are created.
If it enters either the Veins or Arteries, it speedily does send its venenate
Vapor through these to the Heart, and does there tyrannize, stirring up
Fevers, and exciting Syncope's, sometimes running the Part into a Gangrene and
Sphacelus, by overcoming the natural Heat by its venomous extraneous spirit.

Now as touching the knowledge of the Dog, whether mad or not, you may well
guess at it by the Wound: for, as Avicen and Rhasis write, if we rub the Wound
with a piece of Bread, so as it may suck up the Blood and Matter which comes
out of the Wound, this being offered to a Dog, if he refuse to eat it, or to
smell to it, it declares much of the Dog's being mad. Let these Signs serve for
Madness confirmed; the Patient becomes Signs of a mad Dog's Bite.
troublesome, and foameth at his Mouth, he hates water and all liquid things,
these being the cause and occasion of his Madness, his Pulse is small and
inordinate, his Members dull and heavy, his Voice hoarse, and his Breathing
difficult. If he dies of his Bite, he is troubled with Syncope's, and a little
before his departure you will meet him Convulsive.

Cure.
As to the Cure, these Intentions are here chiefly required. First, to expel
the Poison from the Wound, then to strengthen the principal Parts, and defend
them from it, and then to overthrow its malignity. The first is to be performed
by Alexipharmick Defensatives, the which should contain in them Bol. Armen.
Terr. Sigillat. Sang. Defensative.
Dracon. an. ij. Pulv. Rut. Scord. Salv. Absinth. an. j. Farin. Fabar. ij.
Hord. j. cum Album. Ovor. fiat Defensativum: or this; Spir. Vini rectificat.
ij. Succ. Emplast.
Rut. j. Extr. Scord. Theriac. an. ij. C. C. ust. and praeparat. Bol. Armen.
an. j. Lap. Bezoard. j. misce, fiat Emplast. An Oil for the same: Ol.
Lumbricor. Flor. Slotan. Oil.
an. j. Spir. Vini ij. Theriac. j. misce. And over these apply this Cataplasme:
Farin. Fabar. jv. Pulv. Sem. Catapl.
Cydonior. ss. coquantur in aqua, cum pauc. Ol. Lumbricor. tunc add Pulv. Fl.
Chamomel. Melilot. Rosar. rubr. an. j. misce, fiat Cataplasma, sub finem
addendo Croc. ss. If these work not to any effect, apply Cupping-glasses and
Ventoses to the grieved Part, with much flame; and make good Scarification: and
if you cannot here well use a Cupping-glass, yet you may scarify and wash the
Incisions with Spirit of wine wherein has been dissolved Treacle, or Oxycrate
warm, or the like; and then in other cases may you use Chickens, Rabbets,
Pigeons, Whelps, or the like, cut in the middle, and so applied hot to the
Parts, these having power enough in them to Emplast.
call forth the Poison. These following Emplasters are very beneficial in these
cases. Caepar. aliquantul. coct. sub prun. Ferment. Farin. Sinap. an. j.
Theriac. Andromach. ss. Fol. Rut. Scord. an. mss. misce in Mortario, addendo
parum Mell. fiat Empl. Fallopius does much commend Another.
this: Pic. naval. j. Sal. Nitr. ss. Sem. Sinap. ij. Caepar. Allii sub prun.
coct. an. iij. Assaefoetid. Sagapen. an. ij. Stercor. Columb. jss. Aristoloch.
rot. Dictamn. Cretens. Another.
an. j. Ol. Lilior. alb. ss. misce pro Empl. Or this; Galban. Sagapen.
Opopanac. Assaefoetid. Myrrh. Piper. Sulphur. an. ss. Stercor. Columbin.
Caprar. Anat. an. jss. Calaminth. Mentastr. an. ss. solventur Gummi in Vino,
his addendo Mel. opt. q. s. pro Emplast. These are to be used while the whole
Poison is extracted. Phlebotomy here is altogether useless, for this does
rather add then extinguish the Flame: neither is Purging proper in the
beginning. Keep the Wound open at least for forty days: if it be but small,
dilate it, for the more ready discharge of this venenate Matter. Endeavor to
strengthen the Parts inwardly by prescribing a dram or two of Mithridate in a
morning, Venice-Treacle, Orviatan, Elixar proprietatis, this in ten or twelve
drops; or by giving your Patient of Pil. Ruff. or Electuar. de Ov. j. in a
morning. In Bitings which are less venomous, we may apply hot Oil of Elder, the
Yolk of an egg mixed with some Butter and Saffron to ease pain, and over these
this Cataplasme: Rad. Alth. Malv. Violar. Absinth. an. m. j. coquantur in
Catapl.
vino and aqua, colaturae add Pulv. fl. Chamomel. Melilot. Rosar. rubr. Farin.
Tritic. an. j. his addendo Vitell. Ov. no. j. Croc. j. Ol. Rosar. Chamomel. an.
q. s. fiat Cataplasma. After these we must come to Suppuratives, because of the
Contusion; and for this Use Basilicon and Fuscum, or my former Digestive are
proper. Then to deterge, fill up with Flesh, and skin the Wound. Fabritius
Hildanus is very plentiful in Histories of these sorts of Wounds, to whom I
commend you, and shall conclude with these Histories, which are both rare and
strange.

History.
Fracastorius writes of a Lad, who after eight months having been bitten by a
mad Dog, the Poison began to appear, and then it vanished; in the interim there
was not any Fever perceived, or any other ill Symptom appeared. The Patient not
understanding where this and how perniciously it lodged, it at length made way
to his Heart; the which when it had seized, it there fixed its most implacable
impresses of sorrow and pain, so as he could neither stand, go, or lie in
quiet, but like one distracted steered a very disorderly course, growing very
thirsty: and that which heightened and added to the mischief, he could not
endure the sight of any liquid things, and had rather yield to death then to
take any Cordialls or Juleps, were they never so advantageous. Hence did arise
a foaming at his mouth, his eyes being strangely fixed; and within a few days
after these direful Symptoms made him yield to the grave.

Another.
Cardanus, 9. Tract. 5. lib. 2. writes of Alexander Brascaeus, who was bitten
by a mad Dog, and having many Physicians in Consultation, they enquiring the
cause hereof, found that he had kissed a mad Dog; and the day following, as
they presaged, he died. Hence therefore may we see, that the Spittle of a mad
Dog is the worst of Poisons; for being thus inwardly taken by a Kiss, the Dog
did bite him, upon which Bite he died. Nicolaus writes, that the Son of a
Painter in Venice being bitten by a mad Dog, and cured by his Physicians, had
not the signs of one bitten by a mad Dog until eight months after. And Amatus
Lusitanus, Cent. 7. testifies, that he saw a man of Thessalonica, the third
year after his being bitten with a mad Dog, to have run mad himself.

CHAP. XVI.
Of Wounds made by the Bite of an Adder, or any other venomous Creature.
THese may be properly called Stinging Bites; and these came into the world
soon after Man's Fall, and have continued ever since, for the punishment of
sinful Man. I shall begin this Discourse with the Bite of an Adder, which by
some is called Coluber, quia colit umbras, or a Lubricis tractibus, as
Oribasius observes; that is, because it haunteth Shadowy and grovy places, or
from her winding Paths. When this Animal does bite a man, the Part becomes of
a leaden color, and very painful. If not presently cured, foetid and black
Matter does issue from the Sore.

hs Cure.
As touching the Cure hereof, you may use those which are prescribed in the
foregoing Chapter. Dress the Wound with Treacle dissolved in the Oil of
Scorpions, inwardly giving your Patient Treacle-water, or Aqua Scordii
composit. to which may be added a little Vinegar, Carduus-water, Rue-water, and
the like.

History.
Paraeus, lib. 20. cap. 23. shows how he cured a Cook bitten with an Adder,
upon gathering of wild Hops from a hedge. So soon as he was bitten in the Hand,
he sucked the Wound with his lips, hereby thinking to mitigate the pain, and
extract the poison: but so soon as his tongue had touched the Wound, it swelled
so big, that it hindered his speech; besides which, his Arm even to his Shoulder
so tumefied, and caused such sharp pains, that he twice fainted away. In this
miserable condition being undertaken by him, he washed his Mouth with Treacle
dissolved in White wine, adding to it Aqua vitae; the Arm was scarified with
many and deep Scarifications; and the Blood, which was both waterish and full
of Serum, was permitted to flow plentifully from the incised Parts, the which
were afterward well washed with Mithridate and Treacle dissolved in Aqua
vitae. The Patient was after this committed to his warm bed, and there caused
to sweat, not to sleep, lest hereby the Poison might be drawn to the inward
Parts. By this method all the malign Symptoms ceased, and the Wound was kept
open for a long while, for the discharge of the peccant Matter, and washed with
Treacle and Wine: and within a small while after he recovered. (By the way,
such people who do make it their trade to catch Adders, do apply the Powder of
them to the affected Part, if they be bitten, and do take the same inwardly.)

Bitings of Toads.
To these I shall add Toads, for these two are the most venomous creatures we
have in England. And what a Toad is, is so well known, that it will be needless
to set down its description. This only I shall assert, it leapeth not as do
Frogs, but creeps slowly; partly by reason of its short legs, and partly in
respect of its dull body. If it be stirred, it swells, and looks very ugly with
its flaming eyes. It infecteth by its venomous Spittle or Slaver, and whom it
thus infecteth it does inflict in them most of these following Symptoms: it
generally does change the Color of the body, the Patient does find difficulty
of breathing, is perplexed with troublesome Syncope's, with blackness of Lips
and Tongue, Raving, cold Sweat, and the like.

As touching the Cure hereof, Treacle, Mithridate, Orviatan, Electuar. de Ovo,
Aqu. Theriacal. Bezoard. mineral. Hartshorn, Terra Lemnia, and the like, are
good; and to the wounded Part use strong Lixivium's, such as I have set down in
the Curing of a Gangrene, being made of Scordium, Rue, Angelica, Wormwood,
Sage, Bays, and the like.

I will conclude this with two remarkable Histories. History.
The first is of Johannes Boccatius, who while he was sporting with his Beloved
in his Garden near a bed of Sage, by rubbing his Teeth and Gums with some of
the Sage-leaves, he speedily died. His Wife was called before a Judge, who
enquiring of her how her Husband became poisoned, she carried with her some of
the same Sage-leaves to show him, and tasting thereof in his presence, died
also, to the great admiration of all the Bystanders. The wise Judge considering
of which, did much suspect this Sage, and ordered it to be plucked up from the
roots, and commanded it to be committed to a workman's care to clear the
ground: upon the doing of which, there appeared a great black Toad, which had
harbored at the bottom of the Sage, the which by its poisonous Vapor and
tabifick Illuvies did infect the whole Plant with its venomous Saliva or
Slaver; these two taking whereof, it did occasion the loss of both their Lives.
And hence may be collected, although Toads have no Teeth, yet have they heard
Gums, and the parts to which they adhere they do so closely constringe and
close, that they compel and force their whole Poison into the whole part, and
thereby do infect the whole Body by their fastening.

Another.
I have also read from a very Worthy Friend, of two Merchants, who while Dinner
was providing, took a few turns about the Garden which belonged to the House,
wherein they delighted themselves with the beauty and shape of the Sage-leaf;
of which they plucked some, and these being unwasht they put them into a Glass
of Wine. They had scarce dined, but by drinking of this Wine they were taken
with a Vertigo, all things seeming to their view to turn round: and being thus
blinded, they both fell into a Syncope, and were speedily afterward overtaken
with Convulsion; their Tongues and Lips grew black, with a horrid Aspect,
accompanied with cold Sweats, and their whole Bodies were raised into a Tumor
by this Venom; whereupon both very suddenly died. It being generally reported
that they were both poisoned, the man of the house and his servants were all
convened before a Judge, for suspicion of poisoning these two Gentlemen; who
upon their Examination declared by a general consent, that themselves putting
some Sageleaves into their Wine were herewith poisoned. The Judge hereupon
sending for a Physician, and enquiring of him whether Sage might be infected
with Poison, he presently asserted it might. He further enquired of the Master
of the Garden, whether any virulent Slaver, Froath, or Matter, was upon the
Sage. To which they all readily answered, There was. And upon making a Cavity
at the bottom of the Sage-bed, there was found a great Toad, the which then
was conjectured to poison the Plant at the root by its Slaver and venenate
Liquor. And hence may we collect how imprudent all such men are, who do readily
eat Herbs and Fruits newly plucked, without being either washed or wiped.

CHAP. XVII.
Of Wounds made by Poisoned Weapons.
IF any Wound be tinged with Poison, we are to hasten its extirpation by
Alexipharmicks: and because this Poison does consist of very subtle parts,
whose envious qualities it chiefly does study to fix and hindge upon the Heart;
and whereas this ill-conditioned Poison does corrupt the Body, and turns it
into its nature, and is not here at quiet, until it does reach the Fountain of
life, there creating a change in the principal Faculty, and there getting
conquest does speedily dispatch and demolish the whole natural Faculty; let us
enquire into its nature, and see what forms and shapes it does carry. Hippoc.
6. Epid. Text. 6. calls it (...), or Maleficum; the Greeks call it (...) or
Corruptorium. And hence Virgil, Aeneid. 9. has this verse, Vngere Tela manu,
ferrumque armare veneno:
and Homer, Odyss. 1. has this, (...)
(...)
that is, Pharmacum homicidum quaerens, ut ei esset unde sagittas oblineret.
But as touching Poison it self, it is generally allowed a compound substance,
not natural, the Heart's great enemy, and that treacherous Invader which does
corrupt the whole Body, and does overthrow the natural Temper thereof. And as
touching this, there are various Opinions extant: for some there are who write,
that it may be so made, that it cannot inflict its cruelty in some in a month;
in others in the space of a year, in some in a greater time. And that it may be
so made, as to kill sooner or later, is out of doubt. Now that which it chiefly
aims at is the destruction of the native Heat and radical Moisture,
endeavoring both to extinguish and corrupt them. It has various subjects on
which it has its dependence, as a Vapor, Juice, or a terrestrial substance:
and these three do comprehend all.

Theophrastus, lib. Plant. 9. cap. 15. writes, that the Aethiopians did anoint
their Arrows with a pestiferous Root. Lead also is very ready to take the
impress of Poison: for both Nature and Experience do make good, that as Metalls
are purged by the Fire, and so forced to leave their terrene and faeculent
substance and impurities; so although the Fire does perform this very exactly,
yet these Metalls may imbibe a strange substance by their nature. As for
example, take Vinegar, Soot, Salt, and the Juice of Horse-Radish-root, and mix
them together, and let them dry, and you will find them make the substance of
Iron. And Iron it self, being ofttimes infused herein, will soon harden at that
rate, that unless you have experienced the same, you can scarce give credit to
it: and on the contrary, being often extinguished in the Juice of Hemlock, Soap,
and Marshmallows, it will speedily grow soft. Tin and Lead being ofttimes
extinguished in the Juice of Squills, do so affect these, that they do uncloath
their outward coat, whilst the other thereby is made black and soft. The which
could not be, if they retained not in them some of its spirit and virtue. And
although the Fire does dismiss and purge these, yet they may be granted with
ease to imbibe another kind of substance. Thus how often have we seen Copper
tinged and grow yellow by applying to it spirit of Lapis Calaminaris, and
Tutty; and again to grow white, by the spirit of Arsenick, Orpiment, and the
like? Whence we may infer, that Metalls, out of which these Instruments of
mischief are made, as Shot, Bullets, and the like, may receive a spirituous
substance answering their nature, out of which, as out of so many various
mercuriall, foetid and lethiferous waters, they seem to be framed, by
adhibiting the Juice of Wolfsbane, Squills, Apium Risus, or Herba Sardonica,
and the like, and of venomous Beasts, which by reason of their contrariety of
substance do hurt and corrupt our substance.

As thus, for example: Apium Risus does infect by Laughing; of which Apuleius
says, that if one take thereof in the morning fasting, it kills him with
Laughing. Tragus, lib. 1. cap. 159. writes of a Woman gathering an Hemlock-root
amongst Parsnips, and boiling them together, and eating thereof, that it made
her as it were so intoxicated, that she endeavored to climb up the house, and
did think she could fly. But by taking a draught of Vinegar she was recovered
hereof. A man having the Juice of Wolfsbane mixed with his Bread died the third
day, with a great company of formidable Symptoms which attended him. This is
reputed to have in it that venom that is scarce to be overcome by the best of
Alexipharmicks. Nightshade also has allowed a venenisick quality, as Tragus
affirms, Histor. Stirp. lib. 3. cap. 43. Mercurialis. writes, that the
Mandrake-apple, called by some Bella Donna, being eaten by some Children,
allured to feed on it by its fair and beautiful looks, it has speedily killed
them. Lemnius declares, Herb. bib. cap. 12. that having in Summertime
carelessly gathered a Mandrake-apple, he did hang this fair and specious fruit
in his Closet, where sitting a while he grew so sleepy, that he could scarce
shake it off, forgetting his Apple did hang over his Head. Waking on a sudden,
and consulting with himself what was or might be the cause of this his
Sleepiness, and casting his eyes upwards, he espied this Apple hanging over his
Head, and removed it: the which being removed, he began speedily to grow fresh
and brisk again. Ponzettus, lib. 6. cap. 32. de Veneno, writes, that he saw a
man, who had taken a dram and a half of Hellebore, to die presently.
Matthiolus, lib. 4. cap. 141. writes, that a present Poison being made out of
the Juice of white Hellebore, and Arrows or Shot being herein macerated and
illinated, they do cause speedy death to that person wherein they are lodged,
or in those Parts through which they do pass.

Thus have I shown you, that a venenate Mixture being made of any of these, and
Weapons made either of Wood or Iron macerated therein, and then sent into the
musculous Parts, they do there speedily show their venomous qualities; the
which if they be not speedily fetched out, they do leave their pernicious marks
of Venom, which does prove a perfect destroyer of the whole. And as daily
experience does teach us, many pestiferous and venenate Mixtures are and have
been of late invented and found out. And if Bullets or the like Instruments be
herein dipped, tempered, and tinged, and shot into any Part, occasion a Wound,
although it be not adherent, yet in its quick passage this Poison has that
subtle, nimble and pestiferous quality, that it does speedily creep from the
small Vessels to the greater, until it has got advantage of the principal
Parts; and having once got footing therein, it speedily does there exercise
that furiousness, that it does contract the Life of man into a small compass of
warmth and heat. And hence let no man doubt, that Wounds thus made by Shot, or
any other kinds of Instruments which have power enough in them to receive
Poison, but that they may be made poisonous. And by how much these are made of
very subtle parts, by so much the readier may they penetrate: and their malign
Vapors being sent through the Veins, Nerves and Arteries, do at once infect
both the natural, animal, and vital Faculties, in which conflict they do
suffocate by their contrary preternaturall mixtures. As often therefore as any
thing of Poison is dreaded in a Wound, we are chiefly to have a respect to its
dangerous attempts: and because such Wounds as are made by poisoned Weapons are
for the most part mortal, not so much in respect of the quality of the Wound,
as in respect of the quality of the Poison; we are therefore first to lessen
its vigor, and that because it aims altogether at the Heart, the Fountain of
Life.

Cure. Two Intentions.
In this Cure these two Intentions do chiefly offer themselves; first, that we
strengthen the Heart against its fury, and that we speedily draw forth the
Venom the same way and by the same Orifice it was taken in. And though in
other Wounds Solution of Continuity does only require Union; yet here, having
Poison adjoined, as a grand enemy to our Nature, this is first to be extracted
and discharged. And this is to be done by keeping the Wound open. In other
Wounds indeed it must be our greatest care, to avert Fluxion and all other
Symptoms from the affected Parts by Purging and Phlebotomy: but in poisoned
Wounds, so long as the Poison urges, we are here contrarily to endeavor the
Attraction of this Poison to the affected Part, and by that to discharge it.

And here, that we may not run our selves upon the rocks of Mistake and
Unadvisedness, we are first to consider in what part this Wound happens. For
if it has happened in the Nervous parts, it is very dangerous: for hereupon by
applying of sharp and biting Medicines or Cauteries, Convulsion does ofttimes
arise. If the Wound happens in that Part where we may not with safety
searify, nor apply these sharp Medicines, we must here apply such Medicines as
may fetch forth this Poison by their own propriety and substance. We are with
all speed to fetch out the Poison, and to lessen its vigor. Thus if the Flesh
of the Wound be livid, and its color contrary to that of other Parts,
accompanied with extraordinary Pains, Inflammations, and Debilitation of the
whole Body, or Alienation of the Mind, and these happen without any manifest
cause, these in every respect do declare Poison to be present.

In these cases the Surgeon is to arm himself with Bole-Armeniack, Smaragd.
Bezoar. Scorzonary roots, Scord. Rue, Angelica, Gentian, Tormentill, Bistort,
Balm, Veronica, St. John's Wort, and the like, being made either into
Decoctions, Syrupes, or the like. Amongst Compounds may be reckoned Orviatan,
Theriac. Andromach. Mithridat. Electuar. de Ovo, Diatesseron, Confect. de
Hyacinth. Aqua Theriacal. Scord. compostt. Tinctur. Croc. Elixar Proprietat.
and the like. As to the affected Part, this may be evocated either by
Cupping-glasses with much flame, if to be permitted, or to scarify the Part so
as the blood may come out plentifully. After this it is to be washed with warm
Vinegar, in which Mithridate or Venice Treacle has been dissolved. For this
purpose Chalk also mixed with Honey and Treacle is very good. Garlic and
Onions beaten with some Carduus benedictus is by some much commended. For this
also the Actual Cautery is useful, if it may with safety be applied. To the
wounded Part may this be applied; Terebinth. Venet. ij. Ol. Hyperic. j.
Theriac. Andromach. ss. Euphorb. recent. Terr. Sigillat. an. ij. parum
coquantur simul, and apply it. In this case also Praecipitate, or Aegyptiacum
to which some Mithridate is added, is very proper. Avicen for this Use does
much commend this following Emplast. Ferment. acr. Mell. opt. an. lbjss. Visc.
Emplast.
Quercin. jv. ex quibus fiat Emplast. Or for this purpose take these following.
Ammoniac. Galban. Bdell. an. ss. Another.
Styrac. liquid. iij. Sulphur. ign. non expert. Myrrh. an. ij. Euphrob.
Praecipitat. an. j. Ol. Mattheol. Terebinth. an. ij. dissolventur Gummi Aceto
Scillitico, and cum caeteris misceantur, and cum Pic. naval. q. s. fiat
Emplast. Or this: Summitat. Hyperic. m. ij. Cardu. benedict. Scord. Tabac.
Another.
Vincetox. an. m. j. Rut. ij. Rad. Serpentin. ij. Absinth. ss. contundantur,
and modo Emplastri admoveatur. This also is much commended by Quercetan, both
for attracting the Poison, and also for drawing forth the Bullet, or the like:
Another.
Ammoniac. Bdell. solut. in Acet. rosat. ij. Galban. ss. Mumm. Thur. Mastich.
an. iij. Camphor. ij. Coral. utriusque, Magnet. praeparat. Asphalt. Carab. an.
ss. Rad. Aristoloch. rot. Serpentin. Arundin. an. ijss. Cer. Pic. naval. an.
iij. Alabastr. iij. Ol. Terebinth. Ovor. an. q. s. fiat Emplast. This Cataplasm
does much good, being applied to the Defensative.
whole affected Member: Fl. Verbasc. Hyperic. Rosar. rubr. an. pug. ij. Fol.
Rut. and Hyoscyam. an. m. j. Camphor. ss. coquantur cum Aceto in Cataplasmatis
formam. This does both ease Pain, and prevent Inflammation.

When the Poison is all drawn forth, fill up the Wound being well digested and
deterged. And here, according to Celsus order, are we to make a good Bandage
over the Part, but not too strict. And if the Poison have only seized some
small extreme Part, if there be no good to be done at the first, amputate the
Member; for delays do here prove very dangerous: hereby taking care that the
Venom do not spread any further, for this remaining makes the best of
Medicines of small effect. In other cases digest, mundify, incarn, and skin, as
you do in other Wounds.

History.
To conclude; Ctesias, an old Author, in lib. de Rebus Persicis, writes of a
Woman who through her whole lifetime dreaded Poison, and made it her greatest
care to escape it. She invited another woman to dinner; who seeing her Knife
lie on the Table, the which she for many years before never parted from her
side but at dinnertime, took up this Knife, and poisoned it at the end. She
cutting her victuals therewith was soon dispatched of her life. The other
parts of the meat which were untouched by the Knife were void of all Poison.
Hence also may we learn, that all such people as do dread Poison must not let
other people be their Carvers. For Mercurialis writes, lib. de Venenis, that
this Woman under pretense of kindness carved for the other which dreaded the
Poison, who dreamed not of any poisonous quality to be shrouded by her; which
yet proved the loss of her Life.

Another.
A Captain being wounded by a poisoned Bullet, was by this following method
cured. The Wound being scarified, then the Actual Cautery was applied, and
afterward this following Medicine used; Ol. Sambuc. Mixture.
j. Ol. Myrrh. ij. Sulphur. iij. Spir. vini q. s. fiat mixtura: above which was
applied Theriaca Andromachi, and this Cordial Potion ordered him; Aqu. Acetos.
iij. Mithridat. Cordial.
ss. Sir. Limon. jss. Dioscord. j. Terr. Lemn. ij. misce. The fifth day was
applied this following Unguent; Cer. Citrin. Pic. naval. Seb. Ovin. Ol. Antiqu.
Unguent.
an. ij. Galban. ss. misce: and with this sometimes was mixed Aegyptiacum. The
Wound being hereby digested and mundified, it was filled up and skinned as
other Wounds.

The Spaniards do generally poison their Weapons with the Juice of white
Hellebore, which Weapons thus poisoned if they happen to touch the Veins, so as
the least part of the Blood be therewith affected, they soon die who are hurt
hereby. Those Compositions also made of Arsenick, Sublimate, Cinnaber, Realger,
and the like, how apt they may be made for this use, no knowing man will deny.
But to treat further hereof would be too tedious: I therefore do recommend you
to Schenckius, Parrey, and other such Authors, which have writ fully of these
things.

CHAP. XVIII.
Of Gunshot-Wounds.
SUch Masters of Art who have dwelt many years in the Wars, and have hazarded
their Lives as well as their Fortunes with their experience therein, will
currantly grant, that every young Surgeon, who intends to do his King
service and his Country a kindness, his Art right, and his Patients pleasure,
ought well to understand the Therapeutick part of his Art, before he enters
upon the Practick. And when they enter the stage of Gunshot-Wounds, they ought
so readily to be prepared with the Knowledge of them, and the Instruments which
do occasion them, that they may make their speedy address to their Entrance,
Form and Shape, and from thence derive their first Intention. This part of
Surgery does not so particularly belong to the City-Chirurgeon or Country
Practicioner, Domestic Wars not being so frequent: yet to every one it is very
useful and profitable, as upon Accidents, or Duells, and the like. But as to
these Wounds, as they are artificial, so should they meet with a man of Art to
undertake them. For hereto do belong many weighty Considerations; as the
Difference of these Weapons, and the Places whereinto they penetrate. And out
of these two do arise two Intentions, (viz.) of Cure, and Extraction. The
Weapons Shapes, Form, and Make, are also to be considered; and their substance
of which they are made, being either of Wood, Iron, Steel, Lead, Brass, Glass,
or Bone; with the variety of their Forms, being either long, triangular,
quadrangular, round, obtuse, sharp, and the like; these also being either
large, or small: respect also is to be had to their Number, being one, or more.
And having of every of these given you a slight draught, being conducted by
Hippocrates, the Master of the Ceremony, I here do commend you to the Figure,
which does relate how the humane Body may receive the impress of many kinds of
warlike Instruments, no Part being shot-free from the Head to the Foot. The
Figure is presented you before, near the beginning of my discourse of Wounds in
general; and also in that of particular Wounds.

Before I enter upon the general Treatise of Gunshot-Wounds, let us take a
small view, and see what Gunpowder and Shot are made of. And here may we find,
that a Franciscan Friar, called Bartholdus, Anno 1380. being an Alchymist, was
the first that found out the true Composition of Gunpowder, which is now in
use. Roger Bacon 1284. does make mention of Gunpowder, with several others
before him; but it never came at its due perfection of Composition till the
time of the aforesaid Friar. Which Composition we may find framed out of The
Composition of Gunpowder not venomous.
these Simples, Saltpeter, Sallow or Willow-coal, Sulphur, and Aqua vitae. This
therefore in its essence must not be allowed venenate, daily experience
evincing the contrary, by showing and declaring the contrary effects. Thus
Sulphur (which is the first) is so far from Poison, that it is accounted a most
excellent Medicine for Affects of the Lungs, and not for these alone, as Galen
says, 9. Simpl. 36. It is an admirable Medicine against the Itch, and a thing
at this day used much for the same. Its Spirit is ofttimes inwardly prescribed
in Juleps for the allaying of Fevers. And in this place, being of an Oleaginous
substance, it retains the fire longer then the Coal being once kindled.
Saltpeter is also used in Burning-fevers, cooling and allaying the Patient's
thirst. And as all Salts have a Communion with each other; so this, being of
thin and subtle parts, is very free from any Venom. For take it from its
Habitation, where you may see for the most part how and where it dwells, it
cannot be allowed to have any dealings with Poison; for it is made out of a
fatty Substance, forcing it self through the Walls of some old and cold
Cellars. As to Sallow or Charcoal, which is the third Ingredient, the which
does speedily take fire, this also is void of all Poison. And for the Wine or
Aqua vitae, how far this is different from Poison, every boon Companion and
Good fellow will sufficiently acquaint you. Thus have I presented you with a
brief description of Gunpowder, and its essence, and touching its transmutation
into a fiery quality. Experience and reason will fairly contradict its having
any commerce with Poison. And if any be desirous to know the reason, why Wounds
made by Gunshot do generally look black; I answer them, that it is not the
effect of Heat brought with the Bullet, but the force of Contusion, which does
discolor the flesh. The which I am sufficiently satisfied in, being made an
Example of the same in the Dutch Wars 1665. and 66. where being Surgeon of
one of his Majesty's Ships, I was wounded by the wind of a 24 pound Bullet, by
which my Arm was miserably fractured and contused. But to proceed; this
Contusion cannot but be great in respect of its violence it is sent with.

And this brings me to the second thing, the Shot or Bullet: and these are made
of Lead for the most part in pitched Battles ashore, as in Armies; although at
Sea chiefly of Iron. This is very current also, that these of their own nature
do carry no Poison in them. For Lead being beaten to powder is good for old
Ulcers; and applied in its own metallic form and beaten thin, it does depress
the lips of old sordid Ulcers, and stop the increase of Scirrhous Tumors.
Besides this, have we not seen many Bullets shot into the Body, and there to
have remained for several years, without any hurt or detriment to the Patient?
Lead therefore of its own simple quality we ground to be void of all Poison:
but how ready this may be made to take its impress, we have already declared.

As touching the Differences of Gunshot-Wounds.
We now therefore come to the Wound it self. And he that will accurately
understand the difference of these Wounds, must well consider the Nature of the
Parts which are thus wounded, their substance, use, action, position, sense,
and figure; the essence of the Division or Solution of Continuity, and its
proper differences: all which are the true rules which must direct him to his
curative method. To this knowledge also does conduce the right understanding of
their proper differences, being either large or small, superficial or deep,
long or short, thick or thin, and the like. Some of which are most proper for
destruction of the whole Body, others more apt for taking off a Part; some most
fit for passing through the Center, others only lacerating the Nervous and
Musculous parts; some having in them power to break Bones, others warrant only
to lacerate and contuse the Flesh; some of these made of their own metalls,
others having added to them strange bodies: every of which carry with them
force enough to cause Solution of Continuity.

Signs of a Gunshot-Wound.
The Signs of these Wounds are also taken from their Figure, or Color, for
they are generally round, and of a livid Color; from the Sense being there
inflicted, making or causing an obtuse sense in the Part, or Contusion, the
Part chiefly suffering an Ecchymosis by reason of the Bullet. If these appear,
they declare a Gunshot-Wound.

Presage.
Come we next to the Judgment and Presage hereof. These are generally allowed
dangerous for three several reasons, regarding either the Excellency of the
Part affected, the Hurt and the vehemence occasioned by the greatness of the
Weapon, and then its Malignity. Thus if the principal Parts, as the Brain and
its substance, be wounded, we do judge the Wound to be lethiferous. If the
Lungs, Diaphragma, Ventricle, Spleen or Kidneys be hurt by shot, every of these
assuming the names of principal Parts from their Office, they are for the most
part deadly. Of the same kind may be reckoned Wounds received in the Intestines
or Bladder; these being Spermatick and Membranous parts, denying Agglutination.
If the Fleshy parts only be wounded, and the Constitution good, these may with
ease be cured. Wounds of this kind are harder of cure then others, by reason of
the Contusion. Wounds by how much the larger and deeper they are made, with
dilaceration of the Nerves and Nervous parts, and fracture of the Bones, are
accounted the more dangerous. Wounds also in the Joints have their variety of
Symptoms, the which they do fetch from their greatness. Those Wounds which have
Venom complicated with them are very dangerous. In the most desperate cases we
are not perfectly to despair, for Nature does sometimes play that happy part
which Art could never expect. And hence Cornelius Celsus does advise, to use
our best skill and judgment even in the most desperate case, rather then to
leave the Patient void of all help.

Cure.
As touching the Cure of these Wounds, because they are complicated with
various Indispositions, they do require Five Intentions requited.
a diversity of Intentions. And hence, as a general Maxim, are we to take our
First Intention from that Symptom which is most direful and urgent, not
neglecting the Wound. Hence therefore, if any preternaturall body, as Bullet,
Arrow, Splinter, or the like, do accompany this Wound, this is first to be
extracted, as being its chief Cause; the which being removed, the Affect does
cease: and without a regard to which, the Wound is not to be cured. For this
does bring Pain and Inflammation with it, the which are first to be corrected
and abated. The Second is, to ease and assuage Pain, which is a great enemy to
these Wounds; for Fluxion does proceed hereby, and this does raise the Wound
into a Tumor, the which is known by its color, heat, and dimension. The Third
is, to bring the Contused and Wounded parts into a fair Digestion. The Fourth
is, to mundify and cleanse the Wound from all filth and excrements, and to fill
it up with Flesh, and skin it. And the Last is, to correct all Symptoms which
may happen. Of each of these in their order.

First Intention.
And first, as touching the First Intention, of this I have already
sufficiently enlarged; where also I have given you a view of those Instruments
which are very proper for performing of this Operation: I shall therefore not
charge you here with any further discourse hereof.

Second Intention.
Come we therefore to the Second, as touching the asswaging of Pain: and of
this also I have fairly touched. But because in these Wounds there is generally
a vehement Pain attendant on them, which does weaken the Patient, hinders
Nature, causes Fluxion, prosternateth the Faculties, and produces the most
direful Symptoms, I must here a little enlarge thereof. For if this be not
removed, expect no happy proceeding as to your Cure. To this Symptom ought we
to make a speedy application for its overthrow, by changing the Temper of the
whole Body, and making use of such Topics as may challenge its removal.
Amongst such Engines may be accounted Cataplasms and the like, such as may both
abate Pain, and intercept Fluxion: and these may be made of Beanmeal,
Barley-meal, with Powder of Roses, Myrtills, Mallows, and the like, boiled in
Milk. To which may be added Ol. Rosar. Axung. etc. And for allaying and
quieting hereof, take these following Medicines. Ol. Sambuc. Oil.
ij. Sulphur. viv. ij. parum coquantur, and utere. Oil of Turpentine with
Hyperic. cum Sulphur are excellent Medicines here. Pain being bred by ill
Humors or Cacochymy, these are to be removed by right ordering of the whole
Body: (but this more properly belonging to the Physician, I leave it to him:)
then proceed to the affected Part. And for our Use we may meet with several
Cataplasms, Unguents, Oils, Fomentations, Emplasters, and the like, for easing
of Pain in these cases. To begin Catapl.
with Cataplasms: Rad. Alth. Consolid. major. an. j. Fl. Chamomel. Melilot.
Rosar. Hyperic. an. mss. Summitat. Absinth. pug. ij. his addendo Farin. Fabar.
Hord. Rad. Alth. in pulv. an. jss. fiat Catapl. cum Lacte. Or this: Another.
Farin. Hord. Fabar. an. jv. Pulv. Myrtillor. j. Pimpinell. Consolid. major.
Hyperic. an. ss. coquantur in aqu. and vino rubro q. s. cui add Ol. Sambucin.
Rosar. an. jss. Vitell. Ovor. no. ij. misce. As for Fomentations, take Fomentat.
these. Fol. visc. Pomor. minutim concis. cum fruct. m. iij. Rad. Alth. cum
foliis Malv. Violar. an. m. ij. Lin. Foenugraec. an. ij. Fl. Cham. Melilot.
Rosar. an. pug. ij. Fl. Sambuc. mss. coquantur cum Lacte pro Fotu. This does
admirably abate Inflammations, assuage Pain, and does very speedily run the
Part into Suppuration. A Defensative Defensative.
for the same. Pulv. Rosar. rubr. Myrtillor. an. j. Bol. Armen. Terr. Sigillat.
an. vj. Succ. Plantag. Solatr. an. j. Acet. Rosat. ij. Ol. Rosar. Myrtin. an.
ij. Cer. ij. misce pro Defensativo. Ambrose Parry in this case does much
commmend Ol. Catellorum or Oil of Whelps, being Defensative.
of great Virtue in Gunshot-Wounds. Oil of Roses, Vinegar, and the Whites of
Eggs beaten together, with a little Powder of Bol. Armen. and Sang. Dracon. and
laid over the Part, will do very well. In these Wounds we are also to respect
Ligature, being neither to be applied too strict nor too loose: the first
occasioning Pain and Fluxion, and so Inflammation; the latter making a ready
way for the falling off of the Dressings. And if there be fear of Inflammation,
which does generally attend till the seventh day, use the same Remedies, and
change them twice in a day. The Tents or Pledgets to be applied to these Wounds
should be dipped in Oil of Turpentine, St. John's Wort, and a little Aqua vitae
mixed together: and use these until the Inflammation be past.

Third Intention.
The Third Intention is satisfied by Suppuration, that is, by such Medicines
which by their innate Heat can purchase Matter, or bring the Wound to
Digestion. And this ought to be done speedily also, lest the excrementitious
and foul Matter lodged in the Wound, and not speedily fetched out by
Suppuration, do procure Fevers, Pains, and other horrid Symptoms. And these are
allowed their several orders. For the first you may order this: Ol. Rosar.
iij. Vitell. Ov. no. j. misce. A second Digestives.
may be this: Ol. Rosar. ij. Vitell. Ovor. no. ij. Croc. parum. A third is of
this sort: Terebinth. jv. Cort. Thur. Mastich. an. iij. Ol. Rosar. Hyperic. an.
j. Vitell. Ovor. no. ij. Croc. parum, misce. Quercetan does commend this;
Unguent. Basilicon ij. Butyr. recent. j. Another.
Praecipitat. jss. misce. Or for the same Use take this; Cer. nov. Resin. Pin.
Pic. naval. an. jv. Sep. Hircin. Another.
Medul. erur. Vitulin. an. ij. Oesyp. humid. j. Ol. Lin. lbj. liquefactis
omnibus and transcolatis, fiat Vnguentum, cujus sum ij. and his add
Praecipat. ij. This is accounted a most excellent Medicine in this case.

Fourth Intention.
The Fourth Intention is, to mundify, and generate Flesh where it is lost. And
these are performed by Mundificatives, Sarcoticks, and Epuloticks. And for this
Unguent. ex Apio, Apostolor. AEgyptiacum, or Honey of Roses, with Turpentine
and Juice of Smallage mixed together, are good. And these and the like are to be
used after a Digestion has appeared, Pain and Inflammation being vanished, and
all other Symptoms abated. And for this Use these Medicines are proper. Mel.
jv. Farin. Detersive.
Orob. ij. Oliban. Ireos, an. j. Succ. Ap. jv. misce. Another for the same:
Mel. v. Farin. Lupinor. Hord. Another.
an. ss. Myrrh. ij. Succ. Ap. Absinth. an. jss. Terebinth. Venet. jss. bulliant
Succi cum Farinis, and postea add Pulveres, and fiat Vnguentum. If a great
quantity of Sanies Unguent.
or Excrements does appear in the Wound, you may order this; Terebinth. clar.
Succ. Ap. an. ij. Farin. Orob. j. Aegyptiac. ss. plus vel minus: or this;
Terebinth. iij. Vitell. Ovor. no. ij. Aegyptiac. j. misce. To digest and fill
up with Flesh, these following are most useful: as, Unguent. Aurei ij.
Basilic. Fusc. an. j. Terebinth. Mel. Rosar. an. ss. Farin. Fabar. iij. Pulv.
Praecipitat. iij. misce. Injection.
An Injection for the same may be this, if the Wound be very hollow; Fol.
Veronic. Betonic. Scabios. Agrimon. Hyperic. Centaur. Virg. aur. an. m. j.
Aristoloch. rotund. Irid. an. j. coquantur in aqua and vino simul mixed. his
colatis add Mel. Rosar. jv. ad lbj. Decoct. antescript. Myrrh. Alo. an. j.
Spir. vini jv. The Wound being thus mundified from its Excrements, a filling up
with Flesh will easily follow, by shortning your Tents; and when it has
arrived at this, Nature, like a good Nurse, does help forward toward the
performing the rest, being assisted by the application of Basilicon, Fuscum, or
the Powder.
Use of this Catagmatick Powder: Rad. Irid. Aristoloch. rot. Angelic. an. j.
Oliban. Mastich. an. ij. Croc. j. C. C. ust. and praeparat. j. misce, fiat
Pulvis. To this, if you intend to have it more drying, add Pulv. Tuth. Ceruss.
Litharg. Lap. Calaminar. or Alum. ust. and the like. The Wound being repleted
with Flesh, a Cicatrice is to be ordered, drying up the Superficies of the
Flesh, and framing it into the substance of a Skin. For which Use this is much
commended: Pulv. Calc. testar. Ovor. optime calcinat. ss. Borac. Alum. ust. an.
j. Croc. Mart. j. fiat Pulvis. Or in stead hereof use Desiccativum rubrum,
Diapompholyg. Diapalma, and the like.

Fifth Intention.
As to the last Intention, which is Correction of Symptoms, I have thereof very
much enlarged already; and these, if they do happen, we must endeavor to
conquer, and, if possible, prevent them before they arrive. I have already
presented such Instruments as are necessary for Extraction of Weapons, and
given you both their Names and Figures, and shall not therefore need to repeat
them again. In the adjoining leaf you have described the Manner of Extracting a
Bullet out of a man's Breast. Where we are to observe, if possible, that we
gain the true Posture of the Shot's entrance, for the more ready Extraction
thereof. We also show you the true Use of the Terebellum, how used in the
taking forth of a Bullet from the Thigh, with what Assistents are thereto
required: and shall conclude this Discourse of Gunshot-Wounds with some
Historical Observations, very useful and advantageous to the young Surgeon.

History.
A Merchant was desperately wounded at Sea, and shot into the upper part of his
Breast, which passed to the lower part of his Scapula. Being hereupon much
tormented with Pain, and other evil Accidents, upon viewing thereof an
Incision was made for the Exition of the Bullet; the which being extracted, the
greatest danger was over. In the whole time of his Cure he took this following
Apozeme of Arcaeus: Hord. mund. contus. Apozeme.
Passular. enucleat. an. iij. Rad. Bugloss. contus. iij. Liquirit. ras. jss.
Sem. Cumin. ij. Jujub. no. 20. Prunor. no. 15. Rad. Petroselin. contus. m. j.
coquantur omnia in aqu. fontan. lbxjv. ad 3. part. consumption. colaturae add
Pened. iij. Sir. Rosar. de Quinque Radic. an. iij. Sacchar. alb. lbss. Pulv.
Cinnamom. j. fiat Apozema. To the Wound was applied this Digestive; Terebinth.
Venet. Digestive.
lot. in Aqu. vit. jv. Vitell. Ovor. no. ij. Ol. Rosar. ss. Praecipit.
praeparat. j. Croc. j. With this being digested, it was thus mundified;
Terebinth. Venet. lot. jv. Mel. Detersive.
Rosar. ij. Vitell. Ovor. no. ij. Farin. Orob. iij. Pulv. Thur. Mastich. Aloes,
an. ss. Peucedan. j. misce. With these the Cure was perfectly performed.

Another.
Another shall be of a Captain, being a man of a Choleric disposition, and a
strong Constitution, who received a Gunshot-wound about the middle of his Thigh
which passed through it, not touching the Bone, accompanied with a large Flux
of blood, the which being stopped, his whole Thigh was anointed with Ol.
Rosarum, over which was applied Emplast. Diapalm. cum succis. Digestive.
To the Wound was applied this Digestive: Terebinth. lot. j. Ol. Rosar. Unguent.
Dialth. de Peto, an. iij. Thur. j. Vitell. Ov. no. j. Croc. j. Over which was
applied Catapl.
this Cataplasm: Fol. Violar. m. j. Summitat. Absinth. Rosar. rubr. an. mss. Fl.
Cham. Melilot. Scord. an. put. iij. Farin. Hord. Fabar. an. ij. Tritic. j. cum
Vini rubri q. s. fiat Catapl. fine addendo Ol. Chamomel. jss. Rosar. vj. Croc.
j. misce. With the Digestive the Tents were armed, and applied until the Wound
was perfectly digested, and the Eschar removed by applying Unguent. Aegyptiac.
jss. And this method was observed until the seventh day: the Wound being kept
from Accidents by ordering a good Diet, and well regulating of the Body. And
the Eschar being removed, this following Injection was made use of, both for
Mundifying and Incarning the Part: Hord. been mund. mss. bulliat in q. s. aqu.
ad lbj. cui add Sanicul. Consolid. Saracen. an. pug. ij. Fl. Hyperic. Rosar.
rubr. an. pug. iij. fact a alter a ebullitione cola, and colaturae add Sir. de
succ. Nicotian. j. Mel. Rosar. Sir. de Ros. sicc. an. jss. misce. The Tents
were armed with an Incarnative medicine, and every other day lessened and made
shorter, and the Cataplasm left off; but the Parts comforted with Stupes dipped
in this following Fomentation: Fomentat.
Herb. Absinth. Hyperic. Salv. Betonic. Agrimon. Scabies. Rosar. rubr. Fl.
Cham. Melilot. an. mss. coquantur in Vino rubro. The Wound with these was well
consolidated, and perfectly cured.

Another* History.
A Soldier also being shot into his Thigh about its middle, upon search by the
Probe for the Bullet, it was found to lodge upon the Thigh Bone. The Terebellum
being applied before any Tumor appeared, the Instrument catching hold thereof
drew it forth; and by following the same method which I have set down in the
former History, the Patient was perfectly cured.

Hence may the young Surgeon collect, that in any Wound made either by Shot,
Splinter, or Bullet, if any part thereof do remain in the Wound, this is to be
speedily extracted, while the Parts seem as if they were stupefied or benumbed,
no Inflammation at present appearing: for should this be deferred for some
days, we may well fear a new Inflammation, Pain, or Haemorrhagy to supervene.
And let him observe (by Celsus and Hippocrates direction) that he gain the same
Posture of the Patient, if possible, as he was in when he received the Wound.

Sometimes Arrows, Splints or Bullets may be left remaining in the Body for
some season, without doing much detriment thereto. As Albucasis writes of a
Woman, that having an Arrow shot near her Belly, and lodged in her Body, she
recovered of her Wound, and performed all her functions very readily without
any interruption.

Sometimes it has been seen, after many years being lodged, that they do make
a way out for themselves, by framing Abscesses for their Exition: as we may see
by these following Histories.

Several Histories.
Alsaharavius, Theoric. Tract. 16. cap. 1. writes, that he saw a man who had an
Arrow shot into his Back, the which after seven years made its way out with
odor. Gilbertus Anglicus, lib. 15. Compend. writes of a man, who having an
Arrow shot into his Guts, had it drawn forth with Excrements, and yet he
escaped. Paraeus writes of a Soldier, who received a Gunshot-wound in his
Belly, between his Navell and his Loins, and the Shot remaining therein not
extracted, (because, although the greatest care was used, yet the Bullet could
not be found out) hence the Patient began to be afflicted with intolerable
Pains. At the ninth day he was discharged of his Shot by Siege, and within
three weeks after he became well. We ought to know, as I have already shown,
that if Extraction of Weapons cannot be performed* with ease, that we are not
to attempt it, if we judge the Patient may live without it. And therefore
should a man have very many Shot lodged in his body, you are never to attempt
their Extraction: for how many hundreds are there in health at this day which
have them remaining in them? Histories.
Fallopius, lib. de Vuln. cap. 22. writes, that he extracted a Leaden Bullet,
which was received in the Groyn, five years after its reception, in which time
it had fallen near the Knee, at which place it was drawn forth. Another Example
he has of a Noble Gentlewoman, out of whom was drawn a piece of Iron, which
lodged in the Cavity of her Thorax for the space of nine months. And to
conclude, Camerarius, cap. 45. writes of a Countryman, who finding a broken
piece of a Knife, did thrust it so forceably between the right Clavicle into
the Breast, that the domestic Surgeons could not draw it forth. Within a
few days the man grew well, and the Wound was healed, and he thus lived some
years without Pain; save only a dry Cough perplexed him, and between times a
small Pain about the affected Part. After fourteen years he felt a pricking
Pain reaching from the hurt place to the Scapula, and this for some time
together did every day increase, until a Tumor appeared, which was afterward
turned into an Abscess, the which being opened, this piece of old Iron was
extracted: after which the Wound was consolidated, and the Patient recovered;
and the piece of Iron Camerarius writes he has in his Closet. Whence we may
learn, if Wounds are inclinable to heal, we are to study their healing without
Extraction.

Thus have I run through the general Symptoms and Discourse of Wounds in
General. My next Task will be, to usher you in my remaining Discourse, how to
deal with Particular Wounds: wherein I shall satisfy the ingenuous Reader
touching every of the Parts as they do arise by Anatomy; and then, if they be
wounded, show how they are to be cured.

CHAP. XIX.
The General Discourse of Wounds of the Head.
THE Head is such an admirable Syntax of diversity of Works, made and framed
out of strange pieces, that he who undertakes to sail through all its Parts,
Tempers, and Qualities, had need to be a good Pilot, who besides his knowledge
of well Trimming his Vessel, ought to have annexed an exact acquaintance with
the Condition, Site, and Connection of its Parts, to defend him from the Rocks
and Shelves of Error and Ignominy; and may well account himself happy, if
while he endeavors to shun Scylla, he falls not upon Charybdis, and so
miscarries before he arrives at his intended Port or Haven. For here he must
expect many Reaches to tack about, before he may be said to make any fresh way,
and will be very subject to run aground, unless he keeps Sounding with the
Plummet of Reason, and steers by the Compass of Judgment and Experience. And
because Man was created for Judgment, Understanding, and Reason's sake, fit to
receive the Impresses of sensible things, and to apply himself to the diversity
of Objects, he stands much in need of Local motion. And had this been framed
of one continued Bone, nothing might he appear more like to, then a Trunk of
Wood, or Lump of Clay. Nature therefore, the good and kind Mistress of Form and
Beauty, studying how to accomplish him for transaction of the variety of his
upper Motions, has with wonder framed his Cranium; it being appointed as the
Guard and Defense of the Soul, the Tower and strong Arch of the Brain, the
outward Guard, Palace, and Helmet of the Animal Faculties: which we may see
framed of variety of Bones, discriminated and distinguished with a strange
appearance of Sutures, the which receiving through them the ends of the Dura
Matter, do form and establish a thin Investure, with which the Skull is clothed
and furnished. By the advantages of which, although one part of the Cranium
should be fractured, yet it should not pass through the whole. And because this
Part of my Book is chiefly designed and dedicated to men of Knowledge, whose
Conversation is taken form Learning, and dwells upon the Study of doing public
good and service, whose Heads are furnished with natural Wit, and endowed with
a great quantity of Sense and Reason; not to the Ignorant, who consider little,
and understand less; That I may quit this Discourse freely, and free it from
off the Stage fairly, before it acts its Tragic part in the Scene of Wounds,
I shall presume to present all the Parts of the Head in their proper order,
which does chiefly belong to our present Task: both because the Knowledge of
the Parts affected is very necessary for the understanding of the Affects,
Presages, and Cure, we being by Hippocrates commanded first to gain an exact
Knowledge of these; and also in respect of the great Advantage and Light they
bring to those who well do understand them. And since I have entered the
discourse of this noble and beautiful Subject, I could willingly wish my poor
Genius might herein answer a general expectation: and since this is a
difficult Task which I have undertaken, as touching the variety of Wounds both
Simple and Compound, be pleased to accept my kind votes, where my abilities may
seem wanting, and dress with kindness every lapse of Pen, and deficiency of
Judgment. But to quit this, being already assured of having our Sails filled
with the gentle Gales of our Friends and all kind Artists, we intend to steer
the Vessel of our present Discourse by the Microscope of Anatomy, which will
give us the true resemblance of every Part as it lies in its order. In which
place we first meet with a Membrana Carnosa, or Hairy Scalp; under it planted
two thin and membranous Coats; and then shall we arrive at the Cranium it self.

CHAP. XX.
Of the Hairy Scalp, and Pericrane.
AND first, as touching the Hairy Scalp; here we may find, although the Skin of
Man is allowed in all other parts to be very thin, yet upon comparing this of
the Head with that of the other Parts, we shall, I say, find it much thicker
then that of the Thorax or Abdomen. And as this is the thickest of the rest, so
Galen writes, lib. De Temperament. it is also by so much the drier, by how much
it is the harder. It has Veins allowed it from the exterior Branch of the
external Jugulars, the which do variously expand themselves on both sides, and
are united in the front: and these do bring its nutriment. Arteries also has
it from the exterior Branch of the Carotides, derived to the roots of the Ears
and Temples: and these do bring it its vital Spirits. It receives some ends
of Nerves from the first and second Conjugation of the Neck, to give it Sense,
having no proper Nerve allowed Its Use.
it, as have other Muscles. Its Use is, as we see, to invest and cover the
Skull. If this be only wounded, this Wound requires only Desiccation, as
other simple Wounds.

Pericrane.
Next come we to the Pericrane; and this is held by some to be as a Periosteum
to other Bones. This arises from several Processes of the Dura Matter, like
thin Ligaments, the which in process of time, by their expansion, do meet with
and unite to one another; and these are so firmly tied together that they form
this Membrane, which is thin, soft, firm, and endued with an excellent Sense
allowed it from the Nerves, dispersed through it to the Occiput and Temples.
Lindanus and some others will have it to arise from the Tendons of the Muscles
of the Front, Temples and Occiput, being variously expanded Periosteum.
over the Cranium. To this is generally allowed and granted as annexed a
Periosteum, being a most thin Membrane, of a quick sense, by the benefit of
which the Head is said to feel, its roots being herein implanted. And this is
so closely annexed to the Cranium, and so exactly on the other side joined to
the Pericrane, that it appears but as one: which made Fallopius mistake, when
he thought that only one Pericrane covered the Cranium: but upon a curious
search you will find it double, investing the Head. To these Exterior
Membranes the blood is conveyed for their nutrition from the small
Ramifications of the outward Jugulars, and the Spirits which they receive they
have from the external Branch of the Carotidall Arteries.

Three things worthy note*
These being wounded are thus to be treated: because they adhere closely to the
Cranium, being divided or lacerated, the Skull it self hereby must suffer
detriment in some measure; and in this case the Cranium is to be deraded*
Secondly, the Pericrane being incised, the Bone is made bare, and may speedily
be altered by the air, and therefore to be suspected. Thirdly, if the Bone be
not hereupon rased, no good Flesh can be made to generate, or adhere, the which
upon its derasion does speedily grow: for thus the mouths of the small Vessels
are opened, and the Blood which issues thence is a very proper Instrument to
set forward the Cure, by being readily brought to Suppuration for the
generation of Flesh.

Cure.
In Simple Wounds of the Head, we may cure with Catagmatick and Cephalic
Medicines, being by Hippocrates advised to apply no moist Medicines here; but
rather, by how much the Skull and its parts are drier then others, by so much
are we directed to use a more drying method. The most proper Medicines here to
be used are to be of Detersive, Digestive and Drying Qualities. Of this sort
may be reckoned Myrrh, Aloes, Ireos, Gentian, Frankincense, Comfrey, Powder of
red Roses, Mastick, Sarcocolla, Dragons blood, Bolearmeniack, and the like: and
of these, or any of them, may be made Powders which are to be sprinkled into
Wounds. Wine also for Of Wine in Wounds.
Wounds is an excellent Medicine, as Galen, lib. 3. Method. cap. 4. writes. And
as a Wound does chiefly require Drying medicines, Black wine for this purpose
is a most excellent Receipt; for it dries both of it self and per accidens, and
of its own natural quality does dry up by Repulsion: and the Humors being
repelled, the Part affected is half cured. And whereas also a Simple Wound does
require Agglutination, Wine for this also is the best (...), for by its
Astrigency it does join and unite the disjoined Parts. And if you be to procure
a new Flesh, here first procure a good Digestion, either with Resina Terebinth.
ij. Vitell. Ov. no. j. misce; or in Wintertime with this, Terebinth. Venet. vj.
Ol. Hyperic. iij. Pulv. Thur. j. Vitell. Ov. no. j. The Matter being digested,
mundisy it, by adding to some of the former some Honey of Roses; then fill up
with Flesh by Basilicon, Linimentum Arcaei, and the like, and skin it with
Desiccativum rubrum.

CHAP. XXI.
Of the Head it self, and of its Sutures.
WE come next to the Cranium it self; where we may find with what Art it is
made and contrived. It is made of several Bones, as you shall see expressed in
the next Chapter. The Greek word for Bone is (...), quasi (...), ab adjuncto
proprio; or (...), ab officio. I shall pretermit the general discourse of
other Bones, my present Task confining me to the Head. And here may The Temper
of Bones.
we consider of their Temper. For in Children we shall daily find in their primo
Intuitu, these are more cartilaginous then boney, and it is only time and age
that gives and bequeaths them their solidness and dryness: and although they
may come under the name of Simple Parts, having no proper Figure allowed them,
as have the Organicks; yet consider the rare Use appointed them, their
particular Shapes and Forms; and in these also, were not a certain Articulation
and Commissure granted them, all Animal motion must necessarily perish. Some
of these we meet with accompanied with Protuberancies; others are like Valleys,
giving way and shrouded under them: and hence do they assume their variety of
names. And here also may we see how Nature, the rare Mistress of Curiosity and
Art, endeavors to keep this Fabric entire and trim, who, by her kind
Invention and curious Cunning, has to these hard Substances added a middle
matter, both for their better motion, and action. And since also this Queen of
Order and Form has granted Man the Divine sparks of Reason and Action, and
allowed him the Majesty of Government, she has not narrowly confined his
Animal faculties to a strict Room, but has allotted him a large Compass to
exercise the same; and to guard these has appointed this Cranium, as their
best defense and security: and this brings me to the Discourse it self. And
because Infants and young Babes, who have not arrived at a good age, cannot be
granted to have in them a true and just Symmetry and Proportion of Bones, these
I at present pretermit, and shall only treat of such who have gained these.

As touching the Head.
And here we do grant, and generally allow, and account that the Head, which is
set and fixed upon the Vertebrae of the Neck, does divide it self into a
Cranium and a Face; the Head being that Part which contains the Brain, as we
have already shown. It is called Cranium or (...), Galea. As touching its
Figure and Use, more afterward. In young people it is seen to consist of
fourteen Bones, some of which are particularly proper to it, others common. The
proper are the Frontall bone, two of the Sinciput, one of the Occiput, two
Temple-bones, in each Ear planted, three Bones named Incus, Stapes, Malleus.
The common are, Os Cuneiforme, and Spongiosum, and two of the Mandibles,
besides the Teeth. But to pass these at present, we shall particularly treat of
those of the Skull, which are properly thereto belonging, and its Sutures. And
here, as the Brain is the most noble Vessel of all others in the Body, Nature
has placed this on the Top, being as the Prince of the rest, and covered it
with a Skull, for keeping in its own dominion the Seat of Reason, the Treasure
of Judgment, the Register of Memory, the Shop of Sense and Motion, and the
Royal Order of Contrivance and Execution. This being planted as the Angelical
part of the World, having allowed it Reason to invent, Memory to retain,
Judgment to execute, and Counsel to advise. Neither has she framed these
alone with Curiosity; but viewing its Front and exterior Vesture, we must
grant that she has so wonderfully locked up this Treasury under the particular
Keys of her Connexions, that it is past the proudest Judgments of men to frame
any one thing to compare with it. And considering its Sphaericall Figure, and
the Connection of parts, it might well make poor Man fall into an humble
adoration of his Maker, who has thus guarded this Treasury, which contains in
it the whole Life, Sense, and Reason of mankind. It is not made of one Bone,
but framed of many; which may be accounted an admirable piece of Contrivance:
and so strangely fashioned, that no other Part of the Body dares compare with
it.

And that it may not glory or boast of its fair and strong Its Use.
Structure, embracing only the name of a Helmet of defense, you may find that
it is allowed a proper Office granted it by the Divine Artificer. For you may
see it ordained as a strong foundation for the maintaining, keeping and
propagating the interest and privileges of other Bodies, planted both in it,
and under it. Thus the Brain, by the benefit of its Sutures, tying its
Membranes to this Skull, is kept in a fair Aequilibrium: and had it not been
thus fashioned, those frequent Concussions or violent Motions occasioned by
jumpings or leapings would herein soon create a great disturbance.

Of the Sutures, and their Uses.
The Sutures also are of much benefit to the Brain: for as it is placed in the
upper house, many Fumes and Vapors do ascend hither from the Kitchen of the
Body, which are not speedily to be dispatched by these. What an ill condition
are those poor people in, what storms of troubles and tempests of distempers
are such people assaulted with, who have these wanting in them? Hence is it,
that those that want these are so frequently accompanied with Pains of the
Head, and other Perplexities; which trouble not such as have these expulsive
Passages. Another benefit hereof is, that one of these being obstructed, the
other do supply its place: and though in this case it is not capable to give so
quick a dispatch, yet by degrees it performs its office very promptly.

As touching its Substance.
The Substance of the Skull does vary much in respect of age, being in an
infant Membranous, and in one of riper years of a more Boney substance. It has
not a like Its Figure.
Figure in all men, containing in it both the Cerebrum and Cerebellum. And this
variety or dissimilitude is not so much inconsistent with the Eyes, Nose, Ears,
and the lineaments of the Face, as in the Bones and Sutures. And the cause
hereof is generally referred to the strength or weakness of the Formative
faculty, plenty or scarcity of Matter, or its goodness or illness, as Galen
declares.

Four Figures of the Head set down by Hippocrates.
Hippocrates does set down four Figures of the Head; two of which he says are
preternaturall. For in one hereof there is found no Prominency in the Occiput,
and then there remain two Sutures, the Coronall, and Right; the Lambdoidall
vanishing. In the other there is no Projecture about the Front, and then only
these appear, viz. the Lambdoides, and Recta; and the Coronall is extinct. And
these two Figures in their Sutures do form the Letter T. The third is natural,
and is of a Sphaericall Roundness, carrying with it the natural Idea and
Resemblance of the Head: but this being depressed, it expresses an anteriour
and posteriour prominent part; and being on either side depressed, these three
Sutures do remain in the form and constitution of the Head, (viz.) Coronalis,
Recta, Lambdoides, and being placed together exactly do make H. The fourth
Figure is, when either Prominency is lost, which is contrary to the natural
figure of the Head; then the Sutures do thus appear, X, and the Head is very
round and sphaericall.

Its Superficies.
The Cranium is light both outward and inwards, that it may neither seem
troublesome to the Pericrane, nor Dura Matter. It has and must have allowed it
its Inequalities, framed according to the bodies of the two Brains. It is
framed of two Bones, thin, but hard, the one inward, the other outward, not
much unresembling a Pumice-stone: and these by Anatomists are called Laminae
Calvariae, or the two Tables of the Skull; the outward hereof being more thick
and hard, the inward more thin and soft: and hence is it, that the outward, by
stout and hard blows being given it, suffers not much; whilst the inward may be
rent and divided. And because also man's Head is very various, as touching both
the number and position of its Bones, in their thickness and thinness, hardness
and softness, density and rarity, equality and inequality; and because of the
Veins and Arteries allowed them, for conveying their nutriment and sustenance,
passing between these; I shall afterward enlarge on these for our better
knowledge, and at present shut up this Chapter with a brief discourse of the
Sutures.

The true definition of Sutures, and why so called.
A Suture therefore is the perfect draught and resemblance of things sown
together. This I call a Composition, which may thus be understood. For that it
is not (...) an Union, but a certain Articulation made (...), is thus best
explained, in that it takes its proper name from the resemblance of Cloth
which is sown together. Of their Differences.
And of these Sutures there are two kinds; the one proper to the Head, the other
common to it with the upper Three proper Sutures.
Jaw and Os Cuneiforme. These proper are either true, or false; the true being
in number three, the false 1. Coronalis.
five; the first being single, the other double. The first are the Coronall,
Sagittall, and Lambdoidall Sutures; the latter having Companions annexed to
them, as one on the right side, another on the left. The First of these is
called (...) Coronalis, from the Ancients, whose custom was to wear Garlands
in that place. Our persons of Honor at this day here do place their hairy
Towers. And this does distinguish the Frontall bone from that of the Sinciput.
The Second is called Lambdoides, 2. Lambdoides.
from the resemblance it has with the Greek A. It is also called the Occipitall
Suture, from its site, it being placed in the back-part of the Head, separating
the Occipitall bone from the Sincipitall bone. This Suture is seen sometimes
double, containing in its middle a Bone with three corners, from whence it is
called Triangularis. The Coronalis does resemble a Semicircle, crossing the
Front as far as the Scaly Agglutinations, and does there separate the Frontall
bones from those of the Sinciput. Sagittalis, the Third Suture, is placed
between these, and 3. Sagittalis.
is a direct Suture, and divides the Bones of the Sinciput, sometimes
descending even to the Nose. There are besides these four Bastard Sutures, but
not so conspicuous as Four Bastard* Sutures.
the former. The first two are planted above the Ears, one on either side, above
the Petrosa; these rather deserve to be nominated Scaly Agglutinations: the
other two belonging to the Os Sphenoides, on its anteriour and posteriour part.
Besdies these there are five Commissures Five Commissures.
belonging to the Cranium, and to the upper Mandible, by some called Harmoniall
Sutures. The first is made in the right Orbit of the Eye, proceeding outwardly
from the end of the fifth Suture, and is common to the first Bone of the Front,
and upper Mandible. The second appears in the lower and laterall seat of the
Eye. The third ascends outward to the uppermost part of the Nose obliquely
from the inward side of the Eye. The fourth proceeds obliquely through the
middle of the Jugal bone, and joins to the Temporal bone. The fifth is in the
breadth of the Nose, and in the amplitude of the Nostrills, and the bridge of
the Nose. All these are ordained by Nature Their Uses.
to be as Vents and Discharges to send forth and dispatch both Fumes, Vapors,
and Excrements: framed also for the ingress and engress of the Vessels, which
are procured for the nourishing of the Brain. And hence may we well admire the
true Judgment of Hippocrates, who writes, that such people who have most
Sutures in their Head are Three Reasons not to make any Incision into the
Sutures, given by Hippocrates.
most healthful. We are advised by him also, in Sutures not to make any
Incision, for these three Reasons. 1. Because they are weak and easily
perforated by the Saw, and thus the Brain and its Membranes hurt. 2. Because
through these Sutures both the Veins and Arteries do pass, and these being
touched with any iron Instrument, it may perhaps or by chance reach the
Membranes. 3. Because Callosities being here contracted they do much hinder
Transpiration.

CHAP. XXII.
Of the Cranium and its Bones.
THE Bones of the Head are of two sorts, some peculiarly proper to the Cranium,
others chiefly belonging Six proper Bones.
to the upper Jaw. Those properly belonging to the Skull are Six.

Frontall.
Of which the first is called Os Frontis, by some Os Puppis, having allowed it
a vast magnitude, in its upper part, being in Children of a soft substance and
double. It constituteth the whole Front, and the more elate part of the
Eyelids. Its figure is semicircular. In Children it appears double, but in
Aged people this is worn into one: and is circumscribed with a transverse
Suture. In this Bone is to be observed a large Cavity, being between either
side of the Nose, from whence are expanded two Cavities to the Cavity of the
Nose.

Two Sincipitalls.
The Bones of the Sinciput or Vertex are placed in the upper part of the Head,
square in figure, only somewhat extended in length, not plain, but concave, so
framed by reason of the sphaericall figure of the Head to which they are
accommodated. They are joined to the forward lines of the Frontall bone,
Coronall Suture, and to the back-part of the Occipitall bone, and Lambdoidall
Suture. Their substance being in young people hard, but softer then other Bones
and thinner, both for the more speedy and easy transition of Vapors: and hence
were they made with many small Cavities on the inside, with many Inscriptions
where the Vessels run: and these especially in young Children, by reason of
their great plenty of moisture, are rather soft and membranous: and as they
creep up to a riper age, these also do exceed both in their dryness and
hardness: and, as Pliny says, these seldom begin to harden until Children do
begin to speak. The outward Superficies is thin and slender, inwardly asperate
and rough, through whose passages some Ramifications of the Jugular veins are
inserted. And hence may the young Surgeon Note.
learn, that he do not lacerate the Veins when he uses the Trapan or Trafine.
These Bones were framed for discharge of viscous and tough Humors, which are
generally redundant in Infants Brains.

By Galen it is called Os Occipitis, (...) Os Occipitis.
quod ibi fibrae nerveae oriantur. By the Arabians it is held to be the seat of
Memory, and does shut up and close the back-part of the Head. It is also called
Basilare, and Os Pyxidis, or the Nowl-bone, constituting the posteriour and
lower part of the Head. It has a Triangular figure, inwardly concave,
outwardly unequal. It is of a hard, thick and dense substance, stronger then any
of the other Bones of the Cranium, the better and more ready to defend any
Backblows, and such Hurts as may happen in the back-part of the Head. It is
connexed to the Bones of the Sinciput and Temples, and sometimes to the
Sphenoides. It has two large Processes at the side of the Medullary passage,
which do receive the Cerebellum, planted at the Basis thereof, which are
articulated to the first Vertebrae of the Neck, and do serve for the motion of
the Head, and for its flexion and extention. It has a round Cavity placed
between these two Protuberancies in its Basis, through which the Medulla does
descend from the Head to the Back. This is an excellent guard against all
injuries and assaults which may be inflicted on the back-part Note.
of the Head. And it is a principal Maxim, in Wounds of the Head, to prohibit
Inflammation: which is chiefly occasioned by the Vessels being lacerated, and
the Blood thence issuing, and there corrupting, by whose corruption the Parts
also are corrupted; and hence comes Pain, and a superfluous Heat, out of which
two is framed Inflammation: and therefore we are to procure a speedy
Suppuration. And Wounds happening in these Parts are of greater danger then
those happening on the Fore-parts, and more ready to putrefy in the Summer then
in the Winter, the Cold not so readily being capable to cause Putrefaction.
Wherefore the young Surgeon ought to have regard to these Observations.

Two Temple Bones.
But to the next, which are the Temporal Bones, by some called the Temple
Bones, by the Greeks named (...), being received on either side of the Head, or
possessing the laterall Region thereof: these are the smallest of all the Bones
of the Head. In the upper part they are almost semicircular; but in their lower
parts, by reason of their inequall Asperities and Extuberancies, with their
Processes subsistent with their Cavities, they do carry a manifold figure and
form. There are two Cavities worthy our observation in this Bone. The greater
is accompanied with a Cartilage, between the Auditory passage, and the Process
of the Jugal bone, the which does receive the head of the lower Mandible. The
inward is less, and common to the Occipitall bone, seated at the same Process
backwards. And in this Part Observer.
also it is worthy observation, that the Muscles peculiarly appropriated to
these Bones are covered with the Pericrane, and the subjacent Bones are also
destitute thereof; no other part of the Body being thus strangely framed.

The chief of the Bones I have already named; the other two are Sphenoides, and
Ethmoides. The former Os Cuneforme.
Bone is by the Greeks called (...), or the Wedgebone, which it much resembles.
It obtains a various figure; and by some it is called Os Basilare. In Infants
it consists of many Bones united together by a Cartilage, and these generally
are in them allowed to be four. The first thereof does scarce recede the
latitude of a finger from the fore-parts of the Occiput. The second comprehends
the Sella Equina, and the Processes appointed for the Visive nerves. The third
and fourth are plain Processes. In Children if this Bone be carefully examined,
you will find it consist of three Bones; one constituting its Basis, which does
frame the Sella Equina, and does expand it self forwards toward the sides like
two Wings; and the other like lesser joined to these: all which in process do
run into one. It is seated in the middle of the Head, encompassing and
enwrapping the proper Bones of the Cranium, and sometimes the Bones of the
upper Mandible every way, thereto annexed by the mendose Sutures, the which are
altogether obliterated by age and growth. It is allowed both outward and inward
Processes: four outward, two placed forwards near the seventh of the Bones of
the Nostrills and Palate, in which cohering with the upper Mandible, and from
their resemblance called Aliformes; two also appearing backwards, protended
with a double mitre toward the Styloides. Such as have a further desire
hereof, let them frequent Anatomicall Lectures, and read Anatomicall Authors,
and they will find their time will not be spent in idleness or frivolously.

Os Ethmoides.
The last is called Os Ethmoides, Spongiosum, and Cribrosum, somewhat
resembling a Sponge, and planted in the middle Basis of the Front, sited in the
unequal part, between either Eye, to the second of the Mandibles, and
Sphenoides, per Harmoniam; the which age does also wear out. This is boared
with very many small Cavities, much like a Sieve, amongst which those are the
largest which are nighest the Crista Galli. It is covered with the Dura Menynx,
the which in this part is very porous and perviated with many Foraminula's,
through which does issue out that tough and viscous Phlegm which does descend
from the Ventricles of the Brain. And as you Its Uses.
see the Parts of this Bone are various, so also are its Uses. One Part makes
way for Air and Odor, for the refreshing of the Brain, this being breathed
into it for the generation of animal Spirits. And hence is it, that those that
be troubled with a Coryza (the which we commonly call a Pose) cannot smell,
because these Perforations are stopped up with Rheum. Galen and Laurentius do
add this farther Use thereof, that by these Perforations, when need requires,
a plenty of Excrements may be speedily and together discharged. But others on
the contrary do write, that nothing can this way be brought to the Brain,
because these spongious Fleshes are so placed, that nothing can penetrate
through them from the Nostrills to these little Pipes, much less be conveyed
this way to the Brain it self.

Thus have I given you an account of all the proper Bones of the Cranium: I
shall here present you with a Figure of the Head, how it may variously be
wounded; and on the other side you may see a Scheme of all these Bones, first
as they are placed in their natural Figures with their Sutures, and then may
you view them apart with their names under them. This I have thus delineated
for the better satisfaction of the young Surgeon. In the First you have the
Figure of the whole Head with its Face, known by these Letters, A. B. C. D. E.
F. G. H. In the Second, the Bones of the Vertex with the rest, thus also noted,
A. B. C. D. E. F. G. H.

The First Figure.
A. The Bone of the Vertex. B. The Frontall Bone. C. The Temporal Bone. D. Os
Sphenoides, or the Wedge-Bone. E. The first of the Bones of the Mandible. F.
The second of them. G. The third of them. H. The Mandible it self.
The Second Figure.
A. The Bones of the Vertex. B. The Frontall Bone. C. The Occipitall Bone. D.
The Temple Bones. E. The Coronary Suture. F. The Sagittall Suture. G. The
Lambdoidall Suture. H. The Squamose Suture of the Temples.
The Third, Fourth, and Fifth Figures, showing,
1. The Bones of the Vertex joined together by the Sagittall Suture. 2. The
right Bone of the Vertex from its outward face. 3. The left Bone of the Vertex
inwards.
The Sixth, Seventh, and Eighth Figures represent the Frontall Bone, in its
site, outward, and upwards, and inwards.
A. A Cavity which penetrates from the Cavity of the Bone through the Frontall
Bone. B. The Back-part which is committed with the Bones of the Vertex. C. The
Forepart committed with the Bones of the Mandibles. D. The Sides by which it
is joined with the Sphenoides; and the two Occipitalls by themselves, at the
Ninth and Tenth Figures.
The Ninth and Tenth Figures show all the Bones of the Occiput, thus marked.
A A. The heads by which they are connexed to the first Vertebra. B B. The
Cavity in which the duplicated Membrane of the Brain makes the Front. C C. A
hollow Insculpture framed for the Vessels and Eminencies of the Brain. D D.
The common Cavity of the six Pair of Nerves of the Brain, with the Temporal
Bones, through which does pass the greater Branch of the inward Fugular Vein. E
E. The Cavity of the seventh Pair of the Nerves of the Brain. F F. The small
Cavity of either side of the great Cavity, which arises from the Original of
the Dura Matter, and penetrates to the Cavity of the Neck. G G. The Cavity
through which does pass the Spina medullaris, and the first Artery enters the
Brain. H. The upper part of the Occipitall Bone, committed with the Bones of
the Vertex. I. The lower part committed with Os Sphenoides. L L. The Sides by
which it is joined with the Temporal Bones.
Having thus presented you with the Scheme and Figure of the Head, and of the
variety of its Bones, their Nature, Site, Temper, and Connexions, with their
Uses, and the like; we arrive now at the discourse of Wounds in general, where
we may meet both with Simple, and Compound: the first of which I have already
passed; the latter remains. And herein also are we advised by wise Hippocrates,
the Father and Patron of Reason and Experience, that we do well understand the
Disease, and the Praesage thereof, before we undertake the Cure: and this more
particularly in Wounds of the Head, where no evident Signs are made apparent,
in the first days, of danger; which whilst they appear under mean shapes to
the ignorant Surgeon and as Trifles, are speedily undertaken by him; but
within few days they procure such a Troup of bad Symptoms, as often hurry the
poor Patient and dispatch him into another world. And although of the Brain and
Heart the Heart is counted the most noble; yet its Thorax being wounded, by
which it is guarded and defended, even into the Cavity thereof, the Heart it
self being kept inviolable, or not touched therewith, the Patient thus wounded,
if skilfully dealth with, is scarce seen to come under the verge of danger:
whereas we see by daily experience, Wounds happening in the Head, although the
Brain be not touched, or its Membranes, do very often occasion Death. And hence
is it, that he in the beginning of his Book De Vulnerib. Capit. does advise the
Surgeon, not to contemn or scorn the least Wound happening in the Head, but
advisedly to undertake it with Art; lest by an inconsiderate dressing, (as too
often happens by the illiterate Practiser) for want of well expurging the Matter
which is inwardly lodged, there follow a sordid Ulcer. And in many cases the
best of Surgeons, without a due respect and inquiry, may herein fail. And
because the differences of Wounds are generally taken from their Causes, being
either Pungent, Contusing, Lacerating, or Incising; every of these have their
proper Instruments to perform or effect their designs: as Swords and Rapiers to
prick or stab; obtuse Instruments, as a Stone, Club, Fall from a high place,
and the like, for lacerating; and for incising, Knifes, Daggers, Faulchions and
the like Instruments. But because you may in very many Authors meet with
Discourses hereof, as in Andr. a Crew. Caesar. Marcell. Read, and several
others, I pretermit them, and come to the Signs of Wounds of the Head in
general.

CHAP. XXIII.
Of the General Signs of Wounds of the Head.
WE are by Hippocrates Authority not to depend or build our faith upon one Sign
in Wounds of the Head, nor yet to be satisfied with a few, in cases of great
danger; for it is these only which do bring the Surgeon into the knowledge
and acquaintance of his business, and direct him the more readily to execute
his Office and show his Art.

Incision a Fracture.
And because Incision is a Solution of Continuity happening in the Cranium by
some incising Instrument, so far as it has touched the Bone, it ought to be
reckoned a Fracture. But this takes its name from its Cause.

Perforation.
Perforation is also made by a Sword, Arrow, or the like; and this is called a
Solution of Continuity: and this draws its name from its Cause also.

General Signs of a Compound Fracture.
If Dimness of sight or a Cloudiness appears, Vertigo, Vomiting, Bleeding, at
nose, mouth, and ears, the Patient mute, and suddenly falling to the ground,
and hence issue Fever, Convulsion and Delirium, these are general Signs of a
Compound Fracture.

Wounds in a Cacochymick body.
Wounds of the Head received in a distempered person, or such a man who is of a
Cacochymick body, are the hardest to cure, the Blood being altogether improper
for uniting of Parts.

Wounds in Children.
Wounds in the Heads of Children ofttimes prove unhappy, they being of a hot
and moist Constitution, and this not so apt for the admittance of Putrefaction.

Wounds in Times.
In Summertime the Patient lives a shorter time then in the Winter, for in
this time the unnatural Heat is not procured for Putrefaction, as Hippocrates
observes.

Contused Wounds.
Contused Wounds are more slowly cured then Incised Wounds, for these require a
greater time for Suppuration, as Hippocrates sets down, lib. De Vulner. Capitis.

Tumor in Wounds.
If a Tumor accompanies a Wound in the Head, and shows well, but suddenly
vanishes without discharge of the Matter which was contained in this Bulk, it
is of ill consequence.

Fever upon a Wound.
If a Fever happens before the seventh day, it is of less danger then appearing
after, this generally being accounted the time by Masters of Art for the
ceasing and abolishment of Accidents.

The Lips of Wounds livid.
Hippocrates writes, it is an ill sign, if the Lips of the Wound do look livid,
for this is a great sign of the Decay of natural Heat, as he has it Sect. 7.
Aph. 2.

Wounds in the forepart and in the hinder-part of the Head.
Wounds happening in the forepart of the Head are more dangerous then those of
the hinder-part, because as herein is contained the greater quantity of Brain,
so also are its parts both thinner and lighter: and hence is it, that such as
receive Wounds in these parts do sooner die then such as do receive them in the
hinder part thereof, because of its Sutures, as Hippocrates also writes cap. 7.
and 8. lib. de Vuln. Cap.

Wounds of the Sutures.
Wounds in the Sutures are very dangerous, as I have already shown you, for
three especial reasons already prescribed, as Hippocrates writes lib. de Vuln.
Capit.

Wounds of the Temples.
The Temples being wounded are very dangerous, the Articulation of the lower
Mandible upon eating or drinking does hinder Union, herein also being planted
the Auditory passages, and the Jugular veins and Soporall Arteries are here
much distributed, and the like, as Fallopius writes in Hippocrat. lib. de Cap.
Vulnerib. cap. 9.

Ill Symptoms in Wounds.
Blackness in the neighboring Parts appearing near the Wound, Convulsion,
Palsy, Ravings, and a Chilliness over the Body, are here very ill Symptoms.

Good Signs in Wounds.
These are reputed good Signs in Wounds of the Head, when the Patient has no
Fever, keeps his Senses, sleeps well, his Body is soluble, the Wound looks
well, and yields a laudable Matter.

In Compound Wounds.
In Compound Wounds with a Fracture, expect not to have the danger all past
until the hundred days be expired.

Wounds to be searched by the Probe.
Hippocrates does advise, if we cannot find out Fractures joined with Wounds by
the Finger, to use the Probe: and if hereby you meet with any Asperity or
Inequality in the Skull, you are to suspect a Fracture. Yet he farther adds,
that in all Parts this is not to be credited; for if the Sutures be wounded,
these may deceive you, as he writes, Sect. 6. de Vulnerib. Cap.

The general Symptoms attending Compound Wounds.
Hippocrates also, lib. de Vulnerib. Capitis cap. 18. writes, that these
Symptoms do generally attend Compound Wounds; viz. a Singing noise in the ears
upon the receiving the Wound, falling after the blow, Syncope, a Dullness and
heaviness possessing the Patient after the Wound received, Dazzling of the eyes,
a Giddiness of the brain, an issuing of Blood both from the ears, nose, eyes,
and mouth, Vomiting, and the like. Of which expect their Causes and Reasons in
the Presages.

Other Symptoms.
And to these are joined and added by him, cap. 45. de Vulnerib. Capit. a
constant Pain of the wounded Part, the Patient's mind much inclining his Hand
to lie upon it, a vomiting of Choler, with Fever, Convulsion, Palsy, Delirium,
Dullness of speech, Deafuess, loss of Memory, Judgment, and Understanding.

Other Signs
And after all these, as he farther prescribes, if the Hair be cut asunder and
stick up in the Wound, it is a perfect Sign of a Fracture in Cranio, Hippoc. c.
18. lib. de Vulnerib. Cap.

CHAP. XXIV.
Of the Presages of Wounds of the Head.
WE arrive now at the laudable part of practice, wherein is shown the
excellency or weakness of the Surgeon: and therefore let all young Students
in Surgery know, they ought to be very cautious in their Presages, for the
least hurt here is not void of suspicion. And therefore he who understands
aright the Presages of Distempers, may well be compared to a skillful Pilot,
who can foretell a Storm before it happens, and hereby can also lessen the
danger which threatens, upon its appearance. Even thus ought he to be so
studious, as to tell the event which is like to ensue upon a Fracture made in
the Skull.

1.
Wounds therefore are most lethall which happen in the Forepart of the Head,
the Back-part being defended with a thick Occiput, a good Safeguard to defend a
back-blow; and also because herein lies the smallest part of the Brain.

2.
Wounds of the Head being received in the Winter do suffer the Patient to live
longer then those made in the Summer, for herein the native Heat is most
copious and strong: and why the natural Heat is herein more intense, Galen
shows out of Aristotle, because by reason of external Cold it does gather
together its Spirits inwards and toward the inward Parts; on the contrary, in
Summer the natural Heat is expanded and exploded to the external Parts, and
is as it were there dissolved and dissipated, the which in Winter is contracted
and cohibited.

3.
Large and deep Wounds are by Albucasis advice not to be relinquished, because
sometimes they are seen to be cured beyond hopes, having a respect to their
Accidents.

4.
Proceed according to Art in all such Wounds as you have any hopes of cure or
recovery.

5.
If a Patient have received a Fracture in the Skull, pronounce not all danger
to be past until the hundred days be expired; for many have died about this
time, as Hippocrates writes, cap. 48. in lib. de Vulnerib. Cap.

6.
If the Wound in the Head accompanied with a Fracture have no fearful Symptoms
go along with it, yet it is not void of danger.

7.
If a Fever and other bad Symptoms follow a Wound, and the Lips thereof at the
second dressing look black or livid, and grow flat, it is a bad Sign.

8.
If in a Wound or Percussion of the Head Stupor and Idleness happen, it is of
ill consequence, for none of these appear without hurt of the Brain; and they
bring Death, if they be powerful and great.

9.
The Memory being impaired, the Eyes growing dim, the Tongue failing, the Ears
growing deaf, the Patient accompanied with Fever, Delirium, his Tongue black,
the Wound growing dry or livid, and Convulsion, Palsy, or Apoplexy following,
these are the forerunners of Death.

Wounds and Contusions penetrating and not penetrating the Cranium without hurt
of the Brain, may with care be cured: but the Brain being hurt, it ofttimes
proves mortal.

10.
If the Bone do appear black, and this Blackness is not to be removed by the
Actual Cautery, this does argue bad Matter to be lodged under the Cranium, the
which if it corrupts the Bone upwards, does also corrupt the Membranes
inwards, it being more easy to corrupt the Membrane then the Bone: and in this
case it is more safe to open until you come to the Bone, that it may be
removed; and so to remove, if possible, the Cause of its Blackness.

11.
If the Cranium be fractured, the Parts above must suffer Solution of
Continuity, except it happens in a Contrafissure or Countercleft.

12.
If the Flesh about the fractured Skull appears of a Leady color, it is ill, as
Hippocrates writes, Aphor. 2.

13.
If it appears black and dry, it is a sign of Mortification of the Part.

The differences of the Parts wounded do presage either the escape or death of
the party wounded, some of these being strong, others more weak, some of a
quick sense, others of a more dull feeling: and this Hippocrates shows by
many Examples, in lib. de Cap. Vuln. cap. 2.

14.
And as touching the Symptoms of Wounds, he writes them in this order. Whereas
Pain is generally occasioned by Solution of Continuity, after this follows
Watching, Loss of Appetite, and an Affluxion of Humors; these procure
Inflammation, and this entertains Fever, sometimes Convulsions, Gangrene, and
Mortification, if not by Art prevented.

15.
It is a great sign of Death in an ill-cured Wound of the Head, if a Fever does
supervene in Winter before the fourteenth day, or in Summer after the seventh;
for it is generally to come at first, or happen in the first days, brought
hither by Pain, Inflammation, or Suppuration.

16.
If after the seventh in Summer and fourteenth in Winter a Fever happens upon a
Wound of the Head, it behooves the Surgeon to be fearful of his Patient, for
he is not void of suspicion of danger; this Fever for the most part being
excited by Corruption of the Brain, its Membranes, or Cranium.

17.
The Bone of it self being light and equal, but being Carized it appears
asperate and rugged.

18.
The Bone appears white, because Inflammation does draw forth the Blood, just
as Fire does the moisture from Wood; the which being altogether extracted,
leaves only a Cinder, which has in it a kind of a whitish ashey color.

19.
In large Wounds of the Head, a peculiar Symptom is Convulsion; and this Spasm
being in one part of the Body, does corrupt many. And it is the thoughts of
some Authors, that Convulsion is made in the sound Parts by Inanition and
penury of Humors and Spirits; whenas in the hurt Part there is felt a most
sharp Pain, the Humors thither posting themselves, do gather and unite
together, and by this conflux the sound Part is exhausted, and therefore forced
to yield to Convulsion. And these Convulsions here happening are a sure sign of
Death, sending their ill Matter to the Bone, and a corrupt and malign Vapor
from the affected Part into the sound Part.

20.
Wounds in the Temples are most dangerous, they being thin and weak; and
because remarkable Veins, Nerves and Arteries border upon them; because also
the Pericrane does cover their Muscles.

Thus having for your benefit set down very many Presages and Symptoms which
follow Wounds of the Head, chiefly collected from Hippocrates, the Father of
good Authorities; I shall also leave with you his blessing and advice, That in
every point of your Art you carry your self wisely, and chiefly in this of
Presages: that if you predict according to the event, your Patients may admire
and honor you; but unadvisedly to err herein, you will as readily be
accounted amongst the number of fools by them. Of which sort of people I am
afraid we have too many at this day in our Nation; and it were to be wished our
renowned Art might not be rent into so many pieces by them, and divided into
more parts then ever I believe God Almighty intended. But Vix ea nostra voco.
Paulo majora canamns. The Chaldaeans did exceed others in Knowledge, as
Diodorus does report; their Children learned the Rules of Knowledge and
Philosophy in their Infancy from their Parents, and so continued the
propagation of the same to their Successors. This I may and must confidently
say for the Honor of our Nation, that Surgery may boast in this, that it
has very honorable and eminent Patrons scattered about; but these are not
very frequent; such Sons of Learning, as well as Art, as can vindicate its
Rights and Privileges. Yet this I must allow, that it is crept into
acquaintance with such strange Creatures, and owned in its profession by such
mean Spirits, that Hippocrates saying may readily be confirmed for a truth,
that the Name with the Name is no false Heraldry; but the Name amongst these
with the Art is but small and little.

CHAP. XXV.
Of Incision of the Hairy Scalpe, and Opening the Skull.
WE come now to the Operative part of Surgery required in the cases of
Wounds of the Head; And because the heads of Children are tender, loose, soft,
and thin, having in them much blood, not hard, thick, and firm; and because
also a more speedy Purulency of matter happens in these more than in such who
have arrived at a greater Age and stronger Constitution: These being, like soft
Wax, very capable to receive the Impressions which any Instrument may inflict.
These Bones also in these young Children, in relation to their plenty of Heat
and Moisture allowed them, are very subject to receive Putrefaction.
Considering also their Imbecility and Rareness, with the weight of the
instrument hurting, and capable to occasion herein a Wound and Fracture, and
how speedily it may communicate its affects hence to the Brain and its
Membranes, and where either a Fissure, Collision, or Seeds is here made, how
careful ought we to be, and well to consider and cautelously to weigh how we
are with these to deal: Some of these in respect of the largeness of the wound,
and Concussion of the Brain, do soon and speedily dispatch the Patient of its
life. Others not imprinting their Cruel Darts until the 4th or the 7th day.

Four Kinds of ill Symptoms pronounced by Hippocrates.
Hippocrates like a Wise Judge does pronounce these are Four dangerous
Sentences in Wounds of the Head happening in Children or Men: As first, Wounds
of the head being neglected, or slenderly examined, do ofttimes bring an
unexpected Death, there being no good respect or care taken in the right
ordering the Body: Thus by the employ of ignorant Pretenders to the practice of
this Art, too often are the King's Liege People Cheated of their Lives, by
procuring mischiefs to the subjacent Membranes, applying of a Trepan to the
Sutures, and sharp Medicines hereupon: These being more proper for exciting of
pain, and this drawing inflammation with it; who like people half distracted are
at their Wits ends, fearing the Coldness of the Air, but not understanding how
to temper or correct it, who upon endeavoring to eschew the danger of the one,
make nothing to split themselves upon the Rock of Unadvisedness in the other. A
Third also Hippocrates brings in small and slender Wounds, the which not being
at first well treated, prove suspicious beyond the expectation of their narrow
Genius; who by ordering their Patients thin Broaths, Ptisans, and the like, do
give way for their Patients to drink Wine, to eat and drink at pleasure, and if
possible to any Exercise, not forbidding Venery, although the greatest enemy to
Wounds in the Head, nor prohibiting any passion, all which to a Judicious man
appears as idle as any one thing in the World, Knowing that these will create
Choler in the body, and raise feuds in the humors, causing that Intemperiety
which in time committing and communicating it self to the head, hereby
inflameth the Animal spirits. A Fourth may be attributed to such, who are so
unhappy as at the first view to pronounce speedy Death, acquainting both
Patient and Relations that there are no hopes left either of Cure or Life. And
what power; force, and vigor this may have have in any man, no Judicious or
Ingenious man is ignorant of: For if by Hippocrates his Rules and Aphorism we
are Ordered to hope well, and to think the best, and give comfortable
assurances to the wounded Patient, this being as an Exact Rule and Maxim as
touching Health; so on the Contrary to create Despair, and discompose the
Patient with the unhappy thoughts of a sudden Surprizal and a speedy Change,
must as consequently make dull and flat the musical strings which are the
vigorous and nimble Instruments of Man's Life, Sense, and Motion. And to
conclude this Discourse, how often have we seen men dye of small and slight
Wounds in their Heads, not by reason of the Brain being hurt, or the Skull
suffering a fracture, or the like, but chiefly by hidden causes happening
either by Accident or Nature, having their Bodies overcharged with bad humors,
macerated by Venery, swelled up by Dropsies, and according to other inward
Dispositions and Tempers: Several also are the Intentions of diverse Authors as
touching Solution of Continuity in the Head, but these do not make much for the
relief of the Patient.

A Wound with a Fracture in Childrens Heads.
But to proceed; Franciscus Arcaeus advises us, That when a Wound happens
with a Fracture in Childrens heads, without any bad Symptom attending it, not
to remove any Bone if the parts of it cleave together; but only to be anointed
with his Liniment which he has Christened by his own name, by having some small
Feathers dipped therein, and so applying it warm to the part affected. But if any
bad Symptom appear, as Convulsion, Vomiting of Choler, Fever, or Palsy, and
the like, then to dilate the Skull as Hippocrates does order, Cap. 47. lib. de
cap. Vulnerib. And being once opened, they are to be dressed as we dress other
men. But let this serve for Advice. We come next to the person affected, who is
the Object of our present Discourse, in whom both occasion and necessity
commands the Use of the Instrument. And here are we to consider, that we make
an Artificial separation of the soft parts about the Skull, having hereby a
more ready way made for our dressing. After this are we to prevent all
Accidents, and to remove all evil Symptoms; and then to consider whether it
ought to be done, and might be performed with safety, and what parts it is to
be made in, and what is to be performed after this; all these being as the
general Rules and Maxims which are to be observed as touching the Operation.
Hippocrates lib. 1. de Vulnerib. Capit. teaches us it is to be done both by
Authority, and upon Necessity, and then in that daily Experience declaring for
want and Omission of these Operations, the Death of sundry People have
followed, which by a timely use hereof might have been prevented.

Where Section may be made, and where not.
Next by Hippocrates's Rules also, Section may be made in any part of the hairy
Scalp, except the Sutures and Temporal Muscles; the Reasons for either of which
I have already shown. The Incision being transversly made, you are to separate
the Pericrane from the Cranium in every part, insomuch that it be cleared on
every side both for Prevention of Fever, Inflammation, and the like; as
Hippocrates writes, Cap. 38. lib. de Cap. Vuln. This being done, the Wound is
to be kept open by applying Dossills and Pledgets to be put therein made of
fine Lint, these to be armed with a Restrictive if a large Flux appear, or with
the white and yolk of an Egg beaten up together, to assuage pain; as he also
directs, Cap. 29. lib. de Vuln. Cap. and this so to be kept for 24 hours.
Thus having shown the things that are to be done, we are in the next place to
give you the Reason of its doing, and this may contain in it these In 4 cases
the Head to be Opened.
Heads: That the pieces of Skull or Weapon may from thence be removed, or that a
depressed part of the Skull may be reduced into its proper place; That Matter
or coagulated Blood collected between this and the Membrane Dura Matter may be
discharged; And that we may apply proper Medicines for the Wound and Fracture:
All which Hippocrates directs in Cap. 31. lib. de Vuln. Cap. The time also of
its apertion is set down by him, Cap. 34. it being to be done before the fourth
day, and may be done after this too, if bad Symptoms command it; and so the
seventh or ninth day may serve. We next are to show you how this is to be done,
and with what Instruments; and amongst these may be reckoned the Capital Saw,
Raspatories, Levatories, Trepan 4 Instruments required in Trepanning.
and Heads. The Figures of which you shall have exactly delineated at the end of
this Chapter.

I will only touch upon the use of every of these, and shall come to the
Trepanning it self.

Thus the Rasp is generally used in a Fissure, and Foul Bone, and when you use
them, place your Patient in a good posture, let him have his Ears stopped with
wool, cover the Wound with Linen Cloth, that the Patient may not have the
lips thereof touched therewith. The next is Levatories, these used chiefly for
the raising up of a depressed Skull; when you use these, take care that an even
hand be kept. Thirdly, we come to the Capital Saw, this chiefly used in a
depression or Fracture on one side of the Bone, used also to remove away the
distance of the Cranium, left after the application of the Trepan, and this
brings me to the Trepan it self; wherein we may enquire its use, and in what Of
the Trepan and its use.
places it is to be applied, and what method used after it. Of each in their
order:

And because Perforation, Trepanning or Trafining is of great use when the
Bones are extremely foul, but of most use in these Diseases of Fissures,
Fractures and Contusions of the Cranium; and since the Use hereof is of great
moment, and the Operation of great danger, how much should the young Surgeon
make trial of his Art upon dead Skulls, which is a ready way to bring his hand
in ure to practice upon the living? Wherein he ought also to be very cautious
in what cases he is to apply this; for neither a Fissure or Fracture do
absolutely require this Instrument, as without which they were not to be cured:
And Nature, we may see in many cases in slight Contusions, uses her endeavors
very happily for the discussing of the extravased Blood, without the assistance
hereof; except the innate heat be much lessened by extreme cold. But indeed in
such cases as where the extravasion of the Blood does occasion Putrefaction,
this is to be applied with all speed; for this Putrefaction does bring a great
company of ill Symptoms with it, and oft-times Death it self. It helps to raise
the depressed Bones from the two Membranes, and helps all those Inconveniences
as Splints and the like, by making way for their exition; and hereby also have
we brought a fair method to give us to see our work before us: This is not to
be applied upon the Fracture if the bones be severed; not upon a Suture,
because hence the Nerves, Veins and Arteries by which the Dura Matter is annexed
to the Pericrane, might hereby be lacerated: Neither is it to be applied to the
Temples, both in respect of the Temporal Muscle, and also of the Squammose
Suture.

The manner of Trepanning.
These being premised, the hair being shaved, and the Skin and Pericrane
divided in form of a Cross, and the Cranium made bare and fit for your
Operation, let the Patient be well placed, and his head firmly held, his Ears
being stopped with Cotton, then set on the Trepan with a Pin, which I have
already acquainted you must neither be upon the Fracture or Suture. The
Surgeon holding the Instrument in his left hand, and with his right gently
turning about the same until he have fixed it; this once being fixed, let him
take out the Pin, and apply the Trepan again without it, still keeping it in
its motion, and if you perceive any small filings of the Skull appear, remove
your Trepan, and wipe them away; this Trepan is sometimes to be dipped in Oil,
both for its more ready and easy performing its Office, and sometimes in Water
that it grow not hot. If any Blood appear, it is a certain sign that it has
penetrated the first Table, and this directs you to be very careful how you
proceed, lest you hurt and wound the Meninges by an unhappy slip, being a very
great cause of Death. When you perceive the piece of Bone is loosed by the
Trepan, you may with a fine Levatory or small Instrument free it by degrees
from the other parts of the Cranium, so as you may without danger take it up
with your Forcipes, if any ragged pieces appear, which may hurt the Meninges,
you are to remove them; all being removed, apply a piece of white Taffaty or
Satin dipped in Mel Rosarum and Oleum Rosarum until the 7th day, after which use
the Oil of Roses and Ol. Hyperici together, anointing the Head round about the
wounded part with Linimentum Arcaei, and fill up the Cavity with Dossils and
Pledgets armed herewith, if any Scales remain, Arcaeus reports by the benefit
of his Liniment they will fall away within Twenty or five and twenty days.
Continue your digesting Medicines whilst the matter appears (as we have shown
in simple Wounds, then Sarcoticks; and in this case this Powder being sprinkled
upon the part, is much commended, Pulv. Ireos. A Sarcotick Powder.
Alo. Thur. Mirrh. Aristoloch. ana j, misce. Or this, Sang. Dracon. C. C. an.
jss Mirrh. ss Thur. Irid. an Another.
j, misce, fiat pulvis Subtilissimus. These to be sprinkled upon the Bone that
is decaded, and the other vacant place. If the wounded Cutis be not much, you
may use Unguents, as Unguentum de Betonica, Linimentum Arcaei, and the like;
then procure a Cicatrice with Epoluticks. And thus have I given you the true
method of Trepanning the Skull: Its figures here to be used, are or may be
reckoned an Incision-Knife, a Rasor, a Capital Saw, a Trafine or Trepan with
heads, a Levatory, a Rasperatory. Each of which you have fairly delineated in
this following Figure; and on the other side, you have presented a Figure of
the true manner of its operation, and how it is to be placed upon the Cranium.
And before I conclude this Chapter, to make good Hippocrates's Authority, I
shall present these two Histories: in the first you may see how Passion can
alter both Scene and Actor; and in the next, how upon very small and slight
Wounds Death may follow. 1 History.
In the 19th Observation of Fabritius Hildanus Cent. you may Read of a young Man
who being of a strong and Choleric constitution, having received a Wound in
his left Bregina with Fracture of the Bone, the Wound being dilated, and
brought to Suppuration, the pain ceased; and the Bones extracted, the Wound
mundified and began to fill up with flesh, and all appearances of Symptoms
banished, and it was near covered with a Cicatrice; upon exercising himself in
Venerial Celebrations with a common Strumpet, within few hours after, he fell
into a Fever, and intolerable pain of his Head, the Opposite side grew
resolute, the arm in the hurt side correpted with a Spasme, and being
acquainted with these Symptoms, these not giving way nor yielding to any
Medicine, at the fourth day shut up the last hour of his life.

2 History.
The second is of a Noble Virgin, who being hot in Dancing, by mischance
falling upon the back part of her Head, she there received a slight Wound,
scarce perceiveable, accompanied with no pain or inflammation; The first and
second day this being neglected, it began the third day to seem painful; upon
which, sending for a Barber, he shaved her Head, and he scarce perceived any
appearance of a Wound, insomuch that he thought she sent for him to laugh at
him; the fourth day after, she was correpted with a sad pain in her Head, and
Fever: Hildanus being called for the sixth day, he found her deliriated, her
Face and Eyes inflamed, her Tongue growing black; and the day following she
poured forth the last sand of her life.



CHAP. XXVI.
Of Contusion.
AS our Discourse has hitherto guided us to the Knowledge of Signs, and
Praesages in Wounds of the Head, and has also shown what Instruments are
necessary in order to the Cure of Fractures of the Skull: Our next intent will
be to show you the variety of Fractures, which may be said to possess the
Skull, and of these there is great difference allowed amongst their numbers.
Hippocrates only naming five, viz. Fissura, Contusio, Effractura, Seeds, and
Resonitus.

Galen on the contrary nominates eight, and thus calls them, (...). And these
are the differences of Fractures which are of the Head, some of which are
accounted simple Fractures, as these three, Contusio, Rima, Seeds; others more
compound, as these 3, Depressio, Cameratio, Excisio; the other two being
Collisio and Contrafissura or Resonitus, of each of these in their Contusion a
simple Fracture.
order; in which I begin with Contusio. This Species of a Fracture is called in
Greek (...), or (...), or Contusion, and this is a proper name given to every
Solution of the Muscles and fleshy parts; but here it is more properly termed
an Impulsion in the Cranium, occasioned by the weight or violence of some
ponderous and external Instrument, much expressing Instruments of Tin or Brass,
the which being smote or struck by any hard or heavy Instrument, do occasion an
inward bent and swelling. Paulus lib. 6. c. 90. denies Contusion to be any
Fracture, when as only in it is made a Dent in the Bone, the continuity of the
Skull being altogether entire.

2 Differencies of Contusion.
In Contusion, these two Differences are generally observeable, the Bone being
either wholly contused, so as that the Dura Matter is forced to flee from the
Cranium; or, not wholly Contused, but Superficially. These do generally happen
in Children, whose Skulls are thin, and more properly allowed to be
Cartilaginous than Boney. Suddenly after the blow is given, or hurt occasioning
this Contusion, it does not appear; nor yet the hurt which is contracted in the
Bone: but within a few days after, the color of the Cranium changes, and will
appear whitish without redness; and if it be carious, it will appear livid or
blackish; and where this appears, you are by your Raspe or Scraping Instrument
to take away so much of the Bone until the blackness is quite extirpated, and
then to heal the Wound by Incarnatives. And because it oft-times happens that
Children and Infants by reason of the weakness of their Heads and Legs are often
subject to fall from high places, being left alone, and hereby do receive very
sad and miserable Contusions in their Heads. And here according to
Hippocrates's Aphorism, the Blood being praeternaturally transfused into some
Cavity, does there corrupt: That we may prescribe a right Curative method, we
are to take notice, that this putrefying Blood be not permitted to descend to
the Dura Matter: And therefore sometimes opening the Cutis for the discharge of
this matter, the Patient is brought into great danger. And that this effect may
more accurately be treated, we are to abstain from Section or Incision; for by
the reason of this copious efflux of Blood, the Spirits become resolved, and
Fluxion excited by occasion of this Incision; and Children hereupon also being
disturbed and vexed, by crying, and the like, the Veins of the Head become
tumified, and Inflammation follows, and very often Death it self: And therefore
for a more safe method to be used, Take this:

A most exact way to Cure a Contusion in the Cranium.
The Head being shaved, apply thereto Bolsters made of linen Cloth or Tow
dipped in the Whites of Eggs, Vinegar, and Oil of Roses together; and let these
thus mixed be kept on for a whole day, to be framed in that consistence that it
do not grow dry; in Summer time to be applied cold, in Winter hot: For hereby
the flux of humors is prohibited, and in some measure Resolved; The day
following apply this Cataplasme, Pulv. Catapl.
Rosar. Rubr. fol. et Flor. Myrtill. an. ij. Farin. Hord. Fabar. an. j. pulv.
Absynth. Betonic. an. ss. Mel. ij. cum vino austero fiat Cataplasma, fine
addendo Ol Rosar. Chamomel. an. j. Cer. q. s. fiat Cataplasma. This is to be
applied twice in a day, so as it may comprehend both the Contusion and its
neighboring parts; and this continue until the 9th or 11th day, in the which
time you will find the Contused blood to be resolved, and the Cranium to be
brought to its former habit. The 11th day being past, by Galen's advice we may
apply Empl. Diapalma to be thin spread, and this to be changed every third day.
After the 20th day, for absuming the humors and restoring the collised Cranium
into its proper place. Empl. de Betonica is to be applied. Ambrose Parrey
advises this Emplaster, Farin. Tritic. j. Ichthyocoll. in aqu. Empl.
Betonic. et salv. solut. ss. Pulv. Mastich, Thur. Farin. Volital. Sang. Drac.
Gyps. an. j. ss. misc e, coquantur in aqu. Betonic. and salv. ad justam
consistentiam. Particalide admoveatur.

Cupping-Glasses.
In these cases also Cupping-Glasses are very much commended, but in young
Children they are not very proper; for by kind means used you will find Nature
run through a great part of your work. But I will not deny but they may be very
useful in some who are grown to a pretty age, as we may see in this Story of a
Boy, History.
who falling from a Horse upon the ground, had his right Bregma struck by one of
the horses feet, the which did both depress and contuse his Skull, of which
blow he lay as dead without sense or motion, with his Eyes closed up, the blood
coming through his Ears and Nostrils, who by the benefit of a Cupping-Glass
applied to the part with much flame, within 17 days without any Incision of
the Cranium, he was restored to his former health.

History.
Another History I shall here write also, to show of what strength Passion is
in young Children. A Lad of 15 years of age having received a Contused Wound
about his Bregma, with Fracture, the Wound being at first dilated, and the
pieces of bones extracted, it was brought to a happy suppuration, and all evil
Symptoms disappeared. The Eleventh day being past, the Child being vexed, and
moved to Anger, suddenly fell into a Fever, and Frenzy, so that in four
days after he dyed: he being dissected, the Membranes of the Brain were found
inflamed, and both the Ramifications of Veins and Arteries much tumified with
blood.

Another History.
I will conclude this with that Remarkable History of Hugo Blotius, who writes
of Charles Nephew to Charles the 5th of Spain, who after having been troubled
with a Quartan Ague, was by his Physicians directed to walk and refresh himself
in the Air; As he was going out of his Chamber door, and seeing a Maid of
Honor making of Garlands, made haste to her; she hereupon being surprised,
making haste away, fell against the bar of her Chamber door; the Young
Gentleman being herewith vexed, that he should be the Occasion of this
mischief, in a fury going to his Chamber, meets with an unhappy Fall, which
caused a wound in his head, coming from her Chamber: The Chirurgions hereupon
being called, they presently rolled it up, and intended to consolidate the
Wound, neglecting the efflux of matter, insomuch that his head speedily
tumified, and this Young Gentleman lay as if he were in an Apoplexy. Andraeas
Vesalius, an Expert Anatomist, and well skilled in Surgery, being sent for,
affirmed, That the chief method which must give any hopes of life, must be the
opening of the Pericrane. The which by general consent being allowed, no sooner
was this done, but a faetid matter came forth: The young man soon recovered
himself, and by the benefit hereof, as one restored from the Grave, he was
raised from this deep sleep.

CHAP. XXVII.
Of Rima or Fisure.
Second Fissure.
THE Second Kind of these simple Fractures is called (...), or Fissura, or
Rima; and by Paulus is described a superficial or profound Division of the
Skull, and hence is by him called (...), or Rima Superficialis; and this by its
not appearance is a very frequent occasion of death. This may be said to pass
through either one or both tables, if it superficially pass no further than the
spongious bone between both the Tables it is thus far dilated; if it pass
between both, it is especially to be dilated thorough the first if not both,
making a way through the second, leaving a competent Apertion for the discharge
of the coagulated bloody matter. Hippocrates declares that there is no Fissure
without a Contusion; and does further add, That this for the most part is made
by a ponderous Contusing Instrument, as a Stone, Wood, Iron, falls from a high
place upon some sharp hard body: And when either of these or the like do
happen, they do cause a Fissure in, or cleave the Cranium: Just as an Earthen
Vessel receiving a crack upon falling on a hard body.

Differences of Fissures.
Of these many differences arise, some of these being thick, others thin,
others very thin, and these chiefly at the beginning before they have
contracted Matter, for the Knowledge of which there is required a Judicious and
Artificial Conjecture to be taken from the Instrument hurting, the occasion,
the age of the Patient, and the Temper of the affected part, and other
Symptoms which may be taken from the hurt; for these do declare the most
inconspicuous signs of the Fissure: as some being short, others long; some
broad, others narrow: some straight, others crooked, according to the
Instrument hurting. Some of these wholly passing through the Cranium, others
superficially only entering it. But where a Fissure has been made through
either Table, and passed to the Dura Matter, and hence by consequence made it to
flee from the Cranium, and by this division the mouths of the Vessels laid
open, so as that they pour forth their blood which was collected and inserted
under the Skull, which Vessels conveighing this blood to the Brain arising from
the inward Jugulars, and so passing upwards, and there expanding themselves
very plentifully about the Dura Matter, are by Concussion very easily lacerated
and broken, and the blood herein being collected, unless a speedy way be found
out for its Expurgation, we may well guess of the Patient's miscarriage. And if
any man neglect to raze these Fissures at the first, although there be no need
appear of his dilatation, he may for a few days find that the Cure may succeed
according to expectation, but shall as readily meet, that to take heed and
beware hereof is the master event of Fools, who by unadvisedness meet Accidents
followingwhich will much cross their Expectation. For when this has arrived at
the Eleventh or Twelfth day, either sooner or later, Matter then beginning to
putrify between each Table, and that this putrefaction will communicate its
self to the Membranes of the Brain, and the Brain its self; and hence will
follow Fevers, with inordinate Stiffnesses, Watchings, Vomiting, Delirium,
Troubles, and Inquietudes; and if the Wound do happen near the Eye, the other
Eye does appear to be inflamed; and after these the Patient is surprised with
Singultus, and resolution in the opposite side: And as touching the Wound you
will see the Lips fall, a small Matter appear, and this is crude and
indigested, intemperate, and of a bad smell; showing and declaring its want of
native heat, and when the Patient leaves the world, his last minute is shut up,
in an appearance of blew or dry, or pale and dry. But when we have any command
from hope to proceed here according to Art in others who have their Skulls
Fissured; if it be not to be discerned by the Eye, cause the said Patients
breath to be stopped; after which done, if you meet with a thin humor, or
bloody Matter, it portends a good sign. But if this way fail, then apply Ink
which is thin and may penetrate, and let the affected part be dressed with
this, and let this serve for the first dressing. The next dressing with a
Sponge being wet, wash off the Ink from the Cranium; and if you see any entered
in, follow this tract until you have wholly obliterated it; and for this Use,
the Trepan is not so proper an Instrument as is the Raspar, or the thin
Instrument most useful for this work. It being dilated, dress the Wound as I
have already directed you, after the application of the Trepan.

History.
And because I intend a little to enlarge upon these Fractures, I shall here
produce several Histories, which will be of great benefit to the Young
Surgeon. And the first shall be of a Fissure only penetrating the first
Table; the second of a Rima, penetrating both Tables; and the third of a Wound
in the right part of the Head with Contusion and Fissure of the Cranium.

As touching the first, and this, Glandorp writes of in his Speculum
Chirurgorum, fol. 43. of a man Forty years of age, being of a Phlegmatic and
Cacochymick habit and Constitution of body, being too much intoxicated with
Wine, and endeavoring to climb a Ladder, fell down backwards, whereby he had
a Contusion not far distant from the Lambdoidal Suture; hence did arise pain,
and inquietude of his body, and from his Nostrils did flow forth much blood.
For this, because it only appeared as an Ecchymosis, the Cutis being entire,
his head being shaven, this Cataplasme was applied; As. Summitat. Absynth.
Meth, an. pug. iiij. pulv. fl. Chamomel. Melilot. an. pug. iij. Rosar. Rubr.
Cheiri an. pug. ij. Farin. Cicer. Fabar. an. j. Hord. vj. Cum vini Q. S. fiat
Cataplasma, in fine addendo Ol. Rosar. j. ss. misce. The pain not herewith
being assuaged, it was begun to be suspected, whether either the Pericrane
alone, or the Cranium with it was hurt also. Hereupon a Cross Incision being
made, there was found Matter to lodge between the Cranium and Pericrane, the
bone appearing black, and a Fissure only seen to penetrate the first Table:
which blackness was wholly rased out even to the second Table, after which was
applied and sprinkled a Catagmatick Powder, and to the Wound was applied a
Digestive, by which the hurt and contused parts, and the effused blood might be
both digested, putrify and be mundified. And for this purpose, this of Gal. 3.
and 4. Method. Med. was used: Unguent.
. Terebynth. Lot. in aqu. Malvar. j. Unguent. Dialth. cum Gum. iij. Mirrh ij.
Unguent. Aegyptiac. j. ss. Vitell. Ov. Q. S. misce. The contused flesh being
ablated, a new flesh was generated by the above-written Balsome, and in the
interim the other parts of the Cranium were sprinkled with the Powders until
they had procured a new flesh, and a Cicatrice was obduced by Empl. or
Unguentum Diapompholigos.

Another History.
The Second is of a Youth of 14 years of age, who climbing a Tree and a bough
breaking, he fell down, whereby he received a very large Wound, Vomited, was
deliriated and convelled; the flux of blood which followed was speedily
stopped, his head shaved, and the depth of the Wound searched into. The cleft
through which bubbles, Wind and Matter (his Nose and Mouth being shut and
stopped) was seen to pass; because he grew deliriated, and his spirits drooped,
such Medicines as ease Pain were applied: The next day he beginning somewhat to
come to himself, was acquainted, that without a speedy application of the
Trepan, he must be pronounced to be in danger of loss of life; and being
provided for the performance of the same, he had a Cordial prescribed him, his
Body kept soluble by Clyster, and his Head Trepanned a little under the hurt,
and an exquisite and convenient Diet being prescribed him, the Wound was
afterward Cured, as we have already shown in the former History.

A Third History.
The Third was performed by the most Excellent Anatomist Adrianus Spegelius,
Ordinary Professor of Anatomy and Surgery; and this was of a man seven times
Trepanned in one part of the head, and yet recovered; who having received a
Wound in the right part of his head with Contusion and Fissure of his Cranium:
here it being much dreaded that Matter or collected blood might lodge under his
Cranium, his body being made soluble by Clysters, and a good Order of Diet
prescribed, that the Trepan might be applied with more freedom: The Pericrane
was dilated in form of an X, and the flux of the blood being stopped, it was
after the first day, Trepanned the third day, then two days after that again,
and few days after this he was Trepanned again; and thus so often until he had
suffered seven times being Trepanned in one part of his head, (viz.) in the
scincipital part thereof: insomuch that a great part of the Skull was exempted
in that side; after which the Wound was thus handled: Upon the Dura Matter was
first sprinkled this Powder;. Cort. Thur j. ss. Rad. Aristoloch. Rotund. Irid.
Pucedan. an. j. misce, fiat Pulvis. And this is to be sprinkled upon the Part,
over which is to be put a piece of Silk or fine Linen Cloth dipped in Oil of
Roses, the Cranium also being to be sprinkled with the same Powders, and to the
lips of the Wound Unguent.
to be applied this Digestive,. Terebinth. Venet. lot. in aqu. Veronic. j.
Mastich. j. Ol. Rosar. ij. Vitell. Ovor. q. s. fiat Digestivum. Over this to be
applied Diapalma, the Head being to be anointed with Ol. Rosar. et Cheirin. And
Clothes dipped in Red Wine in which have been boiled some Capital Herbs, to be
applied thereto. After which let it be rolled up, every other day the Medicines
to be renewed; The eminencies of the bone, and the blackness to be scaled off,
the Wound being absterged and mundified, it is to be incarnated with Unguentum
de Betonica; This not to be done until all scales be removed, and then
Cicatrized: And this Man to admiration, without any Fever and Pain, or other
Symptom, perfectly Recovered.

CHAP. XXVIII.
Of Seeds or a Fracture, showing the place of the Instrument where it was
impacted.
(...), or Seeds, this is the third Species of a Simple Fracture; so properly
called, when as the Bone remaining in its natural state, makes the place
conspicuous where the Weapon had been infixed. It Is called a Solution of
Continuity in the Bone of the Head, made by a sharp cutting Instrument, leaving
its print in the Cranium, remaining in its natural state, not broken inwards.
Paulus does give us these two Species hereof, the first whereof he calls (...),
which is by him held to be a division in the Cranium with eversion or elation
of the offended Bone. The other he also calls (...), as when the fractured Bone
of the Skull does recede from the other Bone, even as we see a Chip fall from
the Body of the Tree when it is hewed or chopped from it; and hence called the
Ablation of the bone. A third Species hereof is named by Hippocrates, and by
him called (...), and this is a large and deep Cut penetrating the Cranium, as
Philotheus explains it, Comment. Aphorism. 16. Cap. Lib. 6. (...), or
Divisionem Profundam. There are several differences allowed hereof by
Hippocrates. It being sometimes simple without Fissure, Collision, and
Effracture; and this he has in his 10th Sentence. Sometimes with Fissure and
Contusion, and sometimes only joined with Contusion. Sometimes this happens in
a direct line; otherwhiles in an oblique. And here also Hippocrates advises,
That that Wound which is obliquely made in the Cranium is less terrible, than
that which is made directly; for in an oblique Wound the subject parts are less
Concussed. Out of this simple Seeds are also framed these Compounds, both in
regard of the Weapons which do variously afflict the Cranium, and also in
respect of the Bones themselves; some of which are solid, others more soft. And
hence is it if a Weapon having a blunt edge, seize on a solid part of the
Cranium, besides this Incision, it also makes a Fissure; and where it happens
in a part of a middle substance between both hard and soft, this is partly
fissured, partly collised by reason of the Seeds. He therefore who will
undertake the Cure of any of these three forecited Fractures, ought well to
understand their several and distinct Species, before he applies his hand, and
not too rashly speed himself upon these dangerous Cures which are of so great
import as touching the life or decay of Mankind. Without the great care in
minding and observing of which, or temerariously neglecting hereof, the Old
Proverb may in such be well verified, Caecus Caesum ducens, etc. And having
thus given you the general Directions here very apposite for this part and
species: To conclude this, if it pass through both Tables, and there do remain
no frustulaes of the Bone bordering upon the Dura Matter, and room enough left
for the discharge of the Matter occasioned by the largeness of the Wound,
Dilate no further, but observe the method already described in my general
Discourse of Wounds of the Head; but should any small pieces or splints of the
Bone offend the Dura Matter, and the passage not wide enough for the discharge
of the Matter, then may you come to the use of the Trepan; if it only pass
into the first Table treat it as you are directed in a Fissure, and afterward
dress it with Unguent. de Betonic. or Linimentum Arcaei.

History.
Falloppius in Comment. de vulnerib. Capit. Hipp. 16. writes, That he saw in a
Scholar being wounded in the back part of his Head by a weighty Sword, wherein
the place of the Sword was apparent; the Bone being scaled, and neither finding
Fissure or Contusion, not finding or knowing how this happened, upon a further
search, he came to the second Table, and in this he found a large Fissure: and
the reason of his proceeding after this manner was, the outward part being
Contused, this Contusion was communicated to the second Table, and whereas the
outward could not fall into its self, nor the inward Table into its self,
hereby it suffered this Fissure, the which he evidently found out: And
therefore in all such cases we are directed by Fulloppius his Advice, to abrade
the Cranium even to the lower plate.

CHAP. XXIX.
Of Excision.
HAving dispatched these three Simple Fractures in Cranio, we next come to
three Compound Fractures; and these are called Excisio, Depressio, and
Concameratio; of each of these in their order, and to begin with Excision: And
this Species of a Fracture is called (...) or (...), and this happens, when
the substance of the Bone is amputated, or the Cranium so wounded, that it
separates from the Hole. If the Frustula or Sliver cut away thus, adhere to the
Cutis Musculosa, and the Wound penetrates no further than the first Table, this
is to be separated from it, and the Cranium to be smoothed with the Raspatory;
but if both the Tables adhere to the Membrana Carnosa, they are not to be
removed, but to be reduced to their proper places, the Wound being mundified
and deterged with White Wind, or Spirit of Wine mixed with Mel Rosarum; then
adjoyn the Cutis Musculosa to the other with convenient Stitches, as Ambrose
Parrey advises; who also does order, that if any part of a Bone should be cut
out, accompanied with a large Wound, or severed from any other part of the
Cranium and do only adhere to the Pericrane, and Musculous Cutis, it is not
from thence to be removed. And although this may appear as a superfluous and
superficial Caution, and look as an useless Maxim, yet it is not to be
contradicted; for a Callus will hereupon generate speedily, the which by the
strength of Nature will be soon procured as Celsus observes.

History.
The truth of which, certain Experience makes good; as he also shows in a
Captain, who having received a very large Wound upon his Coronal Bone, which
equaled the breadth of three Fingers, occasioned by a large and strong Sword,
so as that it separated each part from the other, so as that the neighboring
Bones did not cohere; but scarce adhering to the Pericrane and hairy Scalp, he
fell with his Face forward upon the ground, and had some part of his Dura Matter
hanging over his Eyes. Ambrose Parrey being consulted about this his Cure, does
speedily reduce the Dura Matter into its proper place, by removing it from the
Cutis of his Face, observing Hippocrates's Rules, not to leave the Brain
unarmed naked: Wherefore the Blood being deterged, which was fallen upon the
Dura Matter, and the prostrated Bone reduced into its true place, and with a
Suture made with three Stitches in the upper part, he closed up the Wound, and
ordered that the Matter remaining might be discharged, by the vacant spaces
between the Sutures or Stitches; and hence between these vacancies were put in
small Tents and Dosils, by the which the Parts were kept open, and the Matter
discharged: And although the Body was stabbed through in several other places
at this time, occasioning many Wounds, by God's Mercy he recovered, without any
loss of Pericrane or Cranium, but what necessity compelled to be taken away.

CHAP. XXX.
Of Effractura or Depression.
THis Species of a Fracture is called (...), Effractura, Depressio; and by
Paulus Aeginetta, Desessio and Introcessio: And this is framed both of
Contusion and Fissure, under which are contained (...), or Appropinquation of
Bodies, and (...), or Concameration, and (...), Effractio: All the which by
Paulus are allowed as so many various Species of Fractures, the first of which
by him is owned to be a division of the Bone, in which the hurt Bone falls
downwards toward the Dura Matter, out of its natural place, and therefore it is
so called, (...), or prope. Camarosis is a division of the Cranium with its
Exaltation, the Bone advancing upwards. Galen does thus distinguish them, Lib.
6. Meth. Medend. (...) by him being called a Fracture, whose Bone happens upon
the Dura Matter upon its depression; (...) that which has the Bone exalted. But
this Species of a Fracture does much differ from a Fissure, because in this is
an Introcession, but none to be found in a Fissure, the Bone in that remaining
in its proper state and nature: from a Contusion also; for although the Bone do
introceed in it, yet the Continuity thereof is not solved; whereas in a
Depression or Introcession, the Bone is fractured into many shivers. And here
also Hippocrates his observation may be well applied; as we daily see, hard
things do rather break than bend, whereas soft things we see do more readily
bend than break: But in a Wound happening with a depression of the Skull, we
see apparently, that there is not only made a Divorce of Parts in the Cranium,
but fractures them so, that they are seen to lodge upon the Dura Matter, there
compressing it, the which lacerated Parts here thus happening, do hinder the
motion of the Brain, and are oft-times seen to appear fixed, like so many
Splints or Shivers upon its Membrane, terrifying and perplexing it. And the
case lies here parallel with the Heart; for as the body of the Heart does
attract and expel its Substances, by its extending and contracting Quality in
its proper times and circuits, so also does the Brain, in which is seated the
animal Spirit contained in its Ventricles, transmit the same to every Part,
being thereto incited by a fit and proper motion, and thereby does distribute
and elaborate the same. But when this motion is intercepted by a compression of
the Bones and Splints, and the like falling thence, this distribution and
elaboration must necessarily be violated, which motion does evidently appear in
wounded people, whose Heads are detected, and in new born Children. Without
doubt therefore the Parts being thus fractured, the Membranes must hereby
receive much prejudice; and in these dangerous cases, the Surgeon has left
him but small ground to build any hopes for a Cure. In such matters therefore
which carry such evident peril with them, the business is chiefly to be left to
Nature, the best and most safe Mistress for preserving her Parts in form, save
only we are to assist her with our best skill and endeavor, to prevent all
evil Accidents and Symptoms, which may intervene before the fourth day, if you
come at the first, and so from the fourth to the seventh.

And as to the Cure hereof; Those Splints or Shivers which are quite loose,
raise up with your Elevatory, and take them away: But if you meet with a
Fracture, that is only loose at one end in the Bone, adhering in the other,
here are you to use the Trepan, to be applied as near to the fractured Part as
may be, and then to take away a small part of the Cranium with it; and if you
cannot reduce the depressed Bones to their proper places, separate and take
them out by Art, and use that care, that you may happily conclude your Cure
without any danger to the Dura Matter, or its subjacent Parts.

History.
Fabritius Hildanus, Obs. 3. Cent. 2. does write of one of forty years old, in
the Bishopric of Colen, who was smitten in his Head with an Iron Bullet, which
weighed a pound and a half, causing a large Depression and Fracture in the left
Bregma; upon the receiving of which, he fell upon the ground like a dead Man,
with the loss both of speech, sight and hearing; besides which, he was
correpted with a Palsy in the opposite side: the Cranium being in few days
elevated, and reduced into its natural site, he recovered his speech, and the
Symptoms began to grow remiss; and at length was restored to his pristine
health.

2 History.
On the contrary also he writes of a young Man of fourteen years of Age, who
falling from his Horse backwards, was so smitten by him, that it occasioned an
Impression in his Skull; but in respect little or nothing of evil Symptoms
appeared at the first, the Wound also being but small, the Patient was
neglected, who within a small time after, being beyond expectation surprised
with terrible Symptoms, beyond all methods and applications, he was correpted
with a Fever, pain of his Head, and inquietude of his whole Body; the Wound
grew inflamed, sinuous and full of Matter, and the Cranium found to be
depressed, and in few days he ended his Life.

By these two Examples we may apparently find, how necessary it is at the first
to reduce the depressed Cranium into its natural site, and how dangerous in the
contrary the Neglect hereof may prove, as we see in the latter of these two
Histories; for in small and slender Depressions of the Cranium, the motion of
the Brain may be hindered, and especially if they happen upon or near the
Sutures. How to elevate the depressed Skull, you are directed in Fabrit.
Hildan. Observe. 6. Cent. 2. to which I recommend you.

CHAP. XXXI.
Of Concameration.
IN the last Chapter I have in part shown you what (...) is; it is made, when
one part of the Head is smitten with a Lance or any such like Instrument, and
upon endeavoring to extract this, it so closely adheres to the edges of the
Cranium, that it forces the Skull up with it; and this is called Concameratio,
much resembling an Arch or Ridge ascending, but leaving a vacuity underneath:
if it only pass the first Table, smooth the Skull with a fine Raspe, and then
heal it as you do other Fractures in Cranio; but if it pass through both, you
must lay Open the Skull with the Trepan in the depending part, for the more
ready discharge of the Matter lodged within, which oft-times is not to be
emptied out by the wounded part. If by accident any piece of the Skull fall off
here upon the Dura Matter, you are to make so large a Dilatation as that you may
come at this splint to remove it; and so to Cure this Wound as you are already
shown how to cure the former. This Species of a Fracture happens so seldom,
that it is not so much as mentioned by Hippocrates. I shall conclude this
Chapter with two Histories.

1 History.
Valleriola, lib. 5. Obs. 9. writes of a Shoemaker who having received a large
Wound in his Head, occasioned by a Spear or Lance, with a Fracture of his Skull
reaching the Dura Matter, was seized with Resolution and Convulsion after the
7th day, and did continue speechless all the seven days, yet with great care
and pains he was recovered.

2 History.
The Second is of Vertunianus Comment. ad Libr. Hipp. de vulnerib. cap. who
writes of one who received three desperate Wounds in his Head; The first
happening in his Front, two transverse fingers above the eye, passing thence to
the Zygoma, dividing the Eye in its middle; the second in the left Bregma,
entering even to the Dura Matter, two fingers in length, and one finger in
breadth; The third, the worst of the rest and most dangerous, happening in the
Occiput; this being four fingers long, and two fingers wide: hence followed
very direful Symptoms, on the seventh day a Fever seized him, with a strange
numbness and stupidity; his courage failed, with loss of Memory, an involuntary
intestinal Flux seconded these, no Matter issuing from any part of the three
Wounds, the Dura Matter appeared immovable and black, all which did attend him
even to the 30th day, so as there was little hopes left of any recovery, yet he
was perfectly Cured. This History which he sets down, he received from Dr.
Pigraeus, Chief Surgeon to the King, who was a Man of great Worth and
Repute; whence younger Surgeons may learn, That Patients oft-times
pronounced irrecoverable, beyond hopes or expectation, have been seen to be
cured, and to have lived beyond the mortiferous Signs of Hippocrates. Such
Wounds therefore are not to be neglected or disregarded, so long as Life gives
any hopes to continue.

CHAP. XXXII.
Of Collision.
THis Species of a Fracture is called (...), or Collisio; neither does the
Cranium altogether suffer Fractures, but a Suture also may endure a Collision,
and receive a Solution of Continuity, both by Separation, Depression, and
Collision. The first two whereof we have already treated on. We come now to the
third. And here may we premise, That Fractures happening upon the Sutures, are
harder to cure than to find out: For here are we neither to Derade or Open with
a Trepan, by reason of the Dura Matter, which upholds the Brain, being tied to
these parts also, upon every slight occasion being subject to Inflammation; but
how few daily study these Precepts, and bear them in their Memories! And as I
have already shown in my Discourse of Sutures, no Incision is to be made here,
they being both weak, and easily perforated, hereby subjecting the Brain to
mischiefs: Because also through these the Veins and Membranes do pass, the
which being but lightly touched by any sharp Instrument, are made speedily to
flee thence. And then thirdly, because a Callus being here contracted, does
hinder Transpiration. Hence also Worthy Hippocrates writes, That there is
nothing more difficult in the undertaking of Wounds of the Head, than first to
prescribe a true Method as touching Section or Incision, when, and where to be
made or done, neither superficially nor diminutely. And because he would not
pretermit those places which are dangerous and will not admit Incision, here as
he proposes the Temporal Muscles, so also does he bring in the Sutures, to be
dangerous places to make any Incision in. Yet because it so happens, that a
Collision does happen in the brims of a Suture, and the Dura Matter which
passes through it occasioned by a violent Compression, suffers detriment in
these direful cases, where a Troop of fearful Symptoms does accompany them, as
Fever, Vomiting, Convulsion, and the like, and having no other hopes of saving
your Patient but by your use of the Trepan, you are advised upon this necessary
Point to apply your Trepan on either side of the Suture so carefully, that your
Instruments do not touch it; hereby preventing those horrible Symptoms which
happen on the contrary.

History.
To Conclude this, Valleriola, Observe. 10. Lib. 4. writes of Claudius Allobrox,
who being wounded in his Head with a great Military Sword, according to the
Petrose Sutures, his Skull being variously cut and depressed even to the
Lambdoidal Suture; and which was a strange Wonder, he all this while was not
correpted with any Fever or other evil Symptom supervening; the which are
generally seen as common attendants on such large Wounds; the depressed and
effracted bones being Extracted, the Man was perfectly Recovered by the benefit
of Mel. Rosarum, a Cephalic Powder, and Empl. de Bettonica, within the space
of two Months.

CHAP. XXXIII.
Of Contrafissure.
WE arrive now at the 8th and last Species of a Fracture in Cranio, and this by
the Greeks is called (...), Quasi ab Echo Responsionem; some call it (...),
Quasi Resonitus, or as an Echo answering any sound. Paulus Aeginetta will not
grant this to be any Species of a Fracture, Lib. 6. and does own, that they are
mistaken who write, That upon a Blow being given on one side, a Fracture should
appear on the other: And do further allude, That it is not in men's Heads as it
is in Glasses; for they being empty are soon broken, the Skull of Man being
both solid and full, and therefore not so easily fractured. Soranus who does
defend the contrary, takes up this opinion as his Buckler. That in all glassen
Bodies or Vessels which are hollow, being smitten in one part, they generally
do crack or break in the other; and this may as well happen in the Head, as in
any other Part: And the Reasons which he brings are these; The Air contained in
these glassen Bodies which do receive the Blow, being hereby contused and
illised, does carry the same to the Back-part, and there force a division. And
why the Air has force enough also to do this, is sufficiently evident, whenas
we see it has vigor and strength enough to divide Mountains, and separate
Hills; and hence may it be granted much more readily, to have power enough in
it to break a Glass in the contrary side; and when this Fracture does happen by
reason of any included Air, the Greeks do call this Apochema.

But to enlarge a little further; In every Percussion which is made in the
Body, is there perceived or felt an Impetuosity and Agitation in the Spirits
contained therein; and this is a spirituous Substance, which does exhale
continually from the Body: And hence is it that Bodies in Exhalation are
dissipated; and this does inhabit in the inward Parts of the Body; and
therefore in every Percussion we shall meet with a spirituous Habit agitated.

Again, Many have been seen to have their Heads fractured in the back-part of
their Skulls, and yet by a large Flux of Blood through their Nostrils hereupon
happening, have been perfectly cured and recovered; and whence should this
Blood flow but from the lacerated and disrupted Vessels? but you read not of
many cured, who being smitten on the forepart of their Heads, have their
Vessels rent in the back-part thereof, because the Blood here has not any
passage allowed it for its discharge. This Fracture is sometimes seen to happen
on the same Bone, and then this falls out either to be laterally or
perpendicularly, the first having in it a Wound given in the right side, and a
Fracture hereby purchased in the left; or from the upper Part to the lower, and
here both Tables are generally allowed to be fractured. Or it happens in many
Bones, and these also do communicate the Blow to the opposite Part, where
meeting the Cranium in its violent motion; as two Men readily upon a quick
motion meeting each other, does make them give way and fall back: Thus the
Skull receiving a Blow, does communicate the same very speedily to the other
Part thereof, and there does frame a Fracture, being denied a speedy passage
through it.

Hippocrates in these kinds of Fractures, will admit of no Remedies, or the
undertaking of their Cure, the affected Part not being easily found out: Yet he
further advises us, That where any suspicion of a Fracture does offer,
although it be a matter of difficulty to find it out; yet he lays down this as
a Method for undertaking the same, especially if the common Signs do appear, as
Fever, Vomiting, Bleeding, and the like; and no Fissure hereupon being found in
the wounded Part, we are to examine the opposite, and if any Tumor or softness
do there appear, you may presage a Fracture in the Skull, subjacent to that
Part; or as he directs, Fol. 325. de Vulnerib. Capit. to have the Head shaved,
and then to apply Empl.
this following Emplastre: Pic. Naval. Cer. an. iij. Terebynth. Venet. j. Pulv.
Mastich. Irid. an. ij. misce, fiat Empl. spread it upon Leather, and apply it
to the opposite Part, and let it lie thereon for 24 hours; and if after its
removal, the Cutis Musculosa in any place do appear moist, soft, and tumified,
more than the other Parts, it yields a certain sign of a Fracture. Caesar
Arantius in lib. de Vulnerib. Cap. does call this Infortunium, here being in it
the worst of Accidents; and that which makes it of great danger, is the
hardness of finding the place out. And since this is so difficult, the Fissure
lying obscure under the Cutis, and without any notice thereof being taken, at
first how cautelously and considerately had a Surgeon undertaken such a
matter of danger, wherein he is advised both by Rule and Authority to gain its
true knowledge, before he undertake any Cure: For having attained its
artificial conjecture, upon dilating the sound Part the Patient does oft-times
miscarry, and what miserable calumny this may bring upon his head, any rational
Creature may easily judge. And as Hippocrates allows, may well be called
Infortunium; for on the contrary side, if Section and Incision be not made in
this case, the Part affected runs into an Abscess; and this also is ascribed
to the Chirurgeon's negligence; so as we may behold, being concerned herewith,
how subject he is to Calumny and misfortune, and an unkind apprehension. And
since as Hippocrates writes, we cannot arrive here at the true place, and so
thence discharge the Matter inwardly lodged; for want hereof the Part suddenly
does suppurate and inflame, and hence throwing it self upon the Dura Matter,
through the Fissure, does at length reach the Brain it self. And hence are we
by his Directions either not at all to undertake this Cure, or be therewith
concerned; or if being thereto allured by persuasion of Friends, we are to use
our greatest endeavor to gain its Knowledge; the which once having arrived at,
you are, if the second Table be fractured, the first remaining whole, come to
the application of your Trepan, both for the discharge of Splints and Matter.
And if upon acting your part with Judgment added to your Art, it so happens
your Patient miscarry or die, you shall have these four Excuses to defend you:
As the Cranium being depressed by a violent Contusion, and then does presently
return to its proper place; if the Fissure be only Capillary and Superficial,
and hard to be found out; when the second Table is fractured, the first
remaining entire; and when a Fissure on Fracture does happen in an opposite
Part to that which was wounded; any of these four being capable to deceive the
best and most wise of Surgeons. And because this is a hard matter to cure,
or undertake the Cure hereof, I shall enlarge somewhat herein both by Example
and History, for the benefit of young Surgeons.

1 History.
Ambrose Parrey writes of one, who having received a small Wound in his right
Bregma, occasioned by the fall of a Stone thereon, the which made both a large
Contusion and Tumor; and that it might more certainly appear, that if any hurt
might happen to the Bone, the concrete Blood was forthwith cleansed and
expressed, and the Wound laid bare by Theodoricus, an excellent Surgeon, and
a Man of a good repute in his Art, who omitted nothing in this case his Art and
Judgment could afford. Upon a fair Dilatation being made upon the Cranium, the
Bone was found entire, yet a Fracture was much suspected by him; upon the
receiving of which Blow, the Patient suddenly fell to the ground, and vomited,
and had all the other Symptoms which attended Fractures in Cranio. Parrey being
sent for, examining the cause of his Fall, upon a division of the Pericrane on
the contrary side, and with the capital Saw being applied to the opposie part
of the Wound, there was found a great quantity of Matter to issue forth,
falling also upon the Dura Matter, and making an Abscess in the body of the
Brain it self; he had no Suture besides the two squammose Sutures: And hence
therefore by Hippocrates's Authority, confirmed both by Reason and Experience,
one Part may be fissured, whilst the opposite Part is only wounded.

2 History.
Nicolaus Florentinus 7 Sum. secund. Tract. 4. Cap. 1. does affirm, That he was
an Eyewitness of this following History, which was of a certain Artificer, who
being at his Work, was smitten with a Key in his right Temple, the which
occasioned both a Contusion and a small Wound in that Part which was smote
therewith, without any Cleft or Fissure. The Wound being dilated, nothing of
Matter did appear; at the 20th day a great horror and Fever did invade him;
and on the 23d day a Livor and Gangrene seized him in his left Temple; the
mortified Flesh being wholly separated even to the Cranium, the Cranium it self
was found fractured in the same place.

3 History.
Falloppius also cap. 14. Com. lib. Hipp. de Vulnerib. Cap. writes, That he
oft-times has found by Experience in dead Bodies, who have died of Wounds
received in their Heads, who in the wounded Part have had no Fracture, and upon
opening the contrary side, he has found a plentiful collection of Matter, and
a large Contusion.

4 History.
And in Com. cap. 13. Hipp. de Vuln. Cap. he writes, That he saw in a Noble
Scholar, who being wounded in the back-part of his Head by a weighty Weapon,
where the mark of the Weapon was apparent, the Bone being deraded, so as there
was neither seen either Cleft or Contusion. Upon further enquiry hereinto, the
upper Table being entirely abraded, and coming to the second, there was found a
great and large Fissure: And in all such cases he advises, where any such
large Wounds may or shall offer themselves, to abrade even to the inward Table.

And Petrus Spererius does write of Rinaldus Cortesius, who had in his Study or
Closet a Cranium, in which the lower Table of the Cranium was rent and
lacerated, without any apparent or evident sign of Rupture or Laceration. The
Fractures are thus set down: At A. Contusio; at B. Fissura; at C. Teli Seeds;
at D. Excisio; at E. Depressio; at F. Concameratio; at G. Collisio; at H.
Contrafissura: And because both sides cannot be expressed by any Figure, where
the Wound was given, and where the Fissure happened, I have in this last only
expressed the Rima or Cleft.

CHAP. XXXIV.
Of Wounds of the two Meninges.
THE Cranium being ablated, and its diversity of Fractures discoursed of, we
may find the Brain covered with two Membranes, endued with an exquisite sense:
These by the Greeks being called Meninges; by the Arabians Matres. And as we
find the lower Belly clothed with a Peritonaeum, and the middle with a Pleura,
so also may we see the Brain covered with two Membranes, stretched over the
Cavities of the Cranium, Nature having formed these for the better conservation
of the Brain, they being constituted of Spermatick parts.

Of the Dura Matter.
The first of these immediately planted under the Cranium is the Dura Matter,
the which by Falloppius, Bauhine, and many other accurate Anatomists, is said
to be framed of two Membranes; it receives into it Veins, and a few Arteries,
these being constituted not only for the safety of the Brain and its Nerves,
but also for the supporting of the two Brains, dividing also the medullous
Matter into a right and a left side, and into an anteriour and posteriour
Brain, the one being properly called Cerebrum, the other Cerebellum, the two
sides thereof being divided by a Falx, the which has allowed it four Cavities
for the transition of its Vessels. The whole Brain is supported in that good
order by this, and planted with that difference from the Cranium, that it may
exercise its proper and free motion; and where occasion serves, it may be
allowed to yield so fairly, that upon the application of the Trepan, it may
with safety be allowed and performed by a dexterous hand, being guided by a
solid judgment. Inwardly this Coat is light and lubricous, perfused with a
waterish Humidity: Outwardly it is asperate and hard, enwrapping the Cranium
and its Cavities, and adhering thereto by many small Fibers, sent through the
serrated Sutures, out of which being expanded about the Cranium is framed the
Pericrane. It receives its Arteries from the Carotides, and does send forth a
plenty of Ramifications of Veins, which it takes from the inward Jugular Vein;
it is seen doubled in the Vertical part of the Brain, descending inwards.

Of the Pia Matter.
This being artificially removed, we next meet with a Pia Matter; and this is a
very thin Membrane, by Galen called (...), the which he had from Hippocrates in
lib. Epileps. where he says, That (...) does divide the Brain in the middle;
it arises from the first scatterings of the Sperm, and does immediately adhere
to the Brain, containing the Veins and Arteries of the Brain in it; it is
substance is thin and soft, framed thin, that it may with ease insinuate it
self into the Brain and its Cavities, and that it may expand its Vessels
through its Body; it is soft and of exquisite sense, because it communicates a
tactive virtue to the Brain and its Nerves. Nature placed this, as Galen
writes, 8 lib. de Usu part. between the Brain and Dura Matter, lest the Brain
might be offended by so hard a Neighbor; and as Plato writes, even as a Medium
between Fire and Earth; these being of a contrary Quality, the Almighty has
interposed Water and Air. Even thus the Brain and the Cranium being of a
different nature, mould and substance, Nature has put these two Membranes
between; and that we may admire the sagacious foresight of Nature in her
operations, we may see how admirably she has wrapped up the Brain in this Pia
Matter, and how she has encompassed this with a thicker Membrane.

And having thus given you the brief Discourse of the Anatomy of these two
parts, we are now to enquire into what prejudices these may be brought, for
they may suffer both Pain, Inflammation, Apostemation, Blackness, and the like.

Where therefore the Membranes of the Brain are hurt, there generally attend
thereon great Pain, after which follows a Vomiting, sometimes Delirium,
Convulsion, Redness of the Eyes and Face, and as Galen writes, the Stomach does
share with the Head in its griefs, and the Head with the Stomach, by a consent
of the descendent Nerves being placed at its mouth; and hence does follow a
loss of Appetite, and a weakness both of the digestive and expulsive Faculty; a
redness of the Eyes must follow, for their Coats have their Originations from
the Membranes of the Brain; a Fever also succeeds, by reason of the exagitation
of the animal Spirits lodged in the Brain, and these accidents are greater or
smaller, according to the greatness or parvity of the hurt. And because the Pia
Matter is seldom hurt alone, but the Brain does share and communicate with it in
its harms, hence does oft-times follow an Apoplexy, loss of Voice and Reason;
for the Pia Matter being hurt, the Brain it self does soon decay, it being
chiefly made of Veins and Arteries, through which are carried the vital Spirits
prepared in the Rete Mirabile, or according to those which are made animal; and
these do not only cover the Brain, and nourish it, but also pass into its
Venters, and by or through its Orifices are its vital Spirits conducted into
the body of the Brain; and hence happens loss both of Speech and Reason.

If therefore you perceive that there is an immoderate Flux of Blood upon the
Membrane's being wounded, you are speedily to prohibit it, that you may come to
the Membrane it self. And because Pain is here a very troublesome Companion,
allay and abate this next, both for prevention of Inflammation and Convulsion:
And for this may you use Oil of Roses, Oil of St. John's Wort, Oil of Myrtils;
these or any thereof to be applied warm to the Membrane. Forestus does order,
That in Wounds of the Dura Matter, for the first 4 or 6 days the whole Head is
to be anointed with Oil of Roses, and after that time to apply Unguentum
Matrisilvae, thus made: Unguent.
Terebinth. venet. Resin. pin. Cer. nov. an. iiij. Ol. Rosar. lbss. pulv.
Mastich. Thur. an. j. gum. Elemni ij. pulv. Matrisilv. Betonic. an. iij.
Matrisilv. and Betonic. imponentur in infusione in Vin. opt. lbx. per diem:
postea add caetera exceptis gum. Elemn. Mastich. Thur. and coquantur fortiter
ad Vini medii consumptionem, ut mixtura sit coloris viridis, and tunc coletur,
and demittatur coagulari, sepera coagulum a Vino, and totum coagulum accipe.
and iterum in cacabo impone, and coquantur ad Vini consumpt. hoc peracto iterum
cola, cui colaturae add Gummi semper agitando dum optime incorporentur. This
is to be applied for 9 or 10 days; after which time lessen the quantity of the
Oil, and increase the quantity of Mel Rosarum; so as about the 14th day this is
altogether to be used, and then with astringent Lotions and Powders complete
the Cure.

Galen's Restringent Powder.
In a large Flux of Blood Galen's Restringent Powder may here safely be used:
Alo. j. Thur. ij. pulverisentur subtilissime ovique albumine subacta pulv.
Leporin. excipiantur and imponentur. After which may be applied this Dressing:
Colophon. iij. Myrrh. Alo. Mastich. Sangu. Dracon. an. j. Croc. j. Sarcocoll.
ss. misce, fiat pulvis; mix this with Syrup of Roses, and apply it to the
divided Membrane, over which apply Empl. Diapalma. The Matter being well
digested, this is to be expurged and deterged either with Mel Rosarum, or
Syrup. e Rosis siccis. Or in this case may you use this of Ambrose Parrey: Mel
Rosar. ij. farin. Hord. pulv. Alo. Mastich. Ireos, an. ss. Aqu. vit. parum,
fiat mixtura. In this case also may this be safely used: As to take Oil of
Turpentine with Aqua-vitae, and Powder of Aloes, and a little Saffron; this
being accounted an excellent Medicine for drawing forth any Matter.

Inflammation of the Dura Matter.
The Dura Matter being inflamed, you may use this: Sem. Lin. Psyll. Rosar. Rubr.
an. j. Solan. Plantagin. an. M. j. coquantur in aqua fontin. and fiat fotus.

For Grumous Blood.
Where any grumous or clotted Blood appears, this is accounted very good:
Spirit. Vini ij. pulv. gran. Tinctor. ijss. Croc. j. Mel Rosar. iss. Sarcocoll.
iij. coquantur omnia leviter, and colatura infundatur super Membranam donec
nigrities obliterata fuerit. And for cleansing the Membranes if they putrify,
use Aqua vitae, with Mel Rosarum. Or if this be not strong enough, add hereto
Syrup. Absinth. with a little fine Powder of Myrrh and Aloes. Galen does
prescribe as an excellent Medicine the Juice of Calamint, for the uniting of a
divided Membrane, sprinkling hereupon a little Farin. Milij, this moderating
the heat of the Juice. And because Wounds of the Pia Matter do generally prove
mortal, the Brain hereby being brought into trouble, being exposed to the Air,
this easily corrupting it by external cold, extinguishing the heat of the
Brain: And yet because these Wounds are sometimes cured, you are also here
ordered, if any large Flux follow hereupon, to stop it with the aforesaid
Powder, and then to dry up the Wound by Sarcoticks and Epolonticks.

I shall end these two with some Historical Observations.

The First shall be of Matter collected or gathered between the Dura and Pia
Matter: And this was of one, who having part of his Cranium cut, so as that the
Cutis and Flesh did closely adhere to the Bone, his Head being shaved, and
convenient Remedies being prescribed, part of the Bone being laid bare, was
sprinkled with Cephalic Powders, the Wound followed with Digestives, and a
convenient Diet ordered. On the third day an intolerable Pain seized him, with
Vomiting, Convulsion, and a redness of his Eyes and Face: Hence was suspected
Matter to be contained between the Cranium and Dura Matter, or between that and
the Pia Matter. Wherefore the Cutis and the Pericrane being separated from the
Cranium, with the capital Saw some part of the Bone was taken out, so much as
necessity required; the Cranium was dilated (not with the Trepan, because the
Wound and Fracture happened near the Sutures) and nothing of hopes of any
recovery appeared; but the Dura Matter seemed to be elated into a Tumor, the
which with a dextrous hand, and a crooked Incision-Knife, was dilated, not
hurting the Pia Matter. Which done, much Matter issued out, which was inwardly
collected, and to the Part affected was applied this following Medicine: Sir.
Rosar. siccar. ss. de succ. Bettonic. vj. Ol. Rosar. complet. j. pulv. Sang.
Dracon. Mastich. an. j. misce; the which was continued, until the Matter was
wholly discharged, both out of the capacity of the Cranium, and also out of the
lips of the Wound: Then by applying Incarnatives and Epolonticks, he was
perfectly recovered.

1 History.
Dodonaeus writes of one, who having received a Wound in the upper part of his
Head, in the left side thereof, by a retuse Instrument of small weight, and no
ways suspected to be dangerous, the Cranium being supposed to be whole, and no
ways violated, and so negligently cured; the Distemper increasing on him,
within a few days after was seized with a stupidity and his Pulse grew very
small and quick, he not being very capable to give a good answer to a question,
and in a small while the right side of his Head became resolute, the left
receiving the Wound. Hence followed a pernicious sopor and stupidity; the
Cranium being sublated, the Dura Matter was found livid in the left side, and
the Brain in that Part sphacelated, the right side of the Brain being scarce
hurt or injured, the whole Head having in it neither Fissure nor Cleft.

2 History.
Amatus Lusitanus Cent. 2. Cur. 83. has a remarkable History; which is of two
young stout Men, who fighting a Duel out of the City of Rome, the one stabbed
the other through his Forehead, of which Wound he fell down to the ground, and
there was left as a dead Man; being found thus by Spectators, that he might
escape if possible with these Wounds, from the jaws of death, although small
hopes were given hereof by the consent of Surgeons, who were engaged upon
consultation about him, presaging that there were but a few hours between him
and the Grave, the Wound being both a horrible and penetrating Wound, and
generally believed that it had penetrated the substance of the Brain. But
contrary to their verdict and presage, without any ill Symptom happening,
within 50 days the Patient was cured; and although the Wound had penetrated
between the Ventricles of the Brain, yet they might remain unhurt, and the
substance of the Brain not much injured hereby, although it had passed either
Membrane, as it did this Patient's.

Note.
Hence therefore may all young Surgeons note, who have the humane Body to
practice on, that they be well skilled in Anatomy and knowledge of the Parts,
lest for want hereof, they be like a blind Man shooting at a mark; and if they
guess aright, it is as uncertain to the one as the other* none indeed which
practice so blindly, deserving the Name of a Surgeon, nor may the Patient
expect to receive any comfort or help by them or their pretenses.

CHAP. XXXV.
Of Wounds of the Brain.
WE come now to the body of the Brain it self* the which also we shall first
consider by an Anatomical examination, before we treat of its hurts. And here
may we with Aristole premise, in Lib. 2. de partib. Animal. cap. 7. That all
such Creatures as have Blood in them, have also a Brain allowed them. It is
called (...), because it is contained (...), in the Head. It is generally
allowed the principal part of the Body, proved both by its situation, figure,
and defenses; and also in respect of its uses. As to the three first of these,
I have already discoursed; and as to its use it is most excellent: For as
Varolius says, The Soul of Man being not tied to any bodily Instrument, cannot
apprehend those outward things which are without it self, unless it be by the
mediation of a Corporeal Organ, into which the Species of forms of material
substances may be transmitted, by which afterward they may be exhibited, and
in which place they may both be apprehended and contemplated. Hence therefore
who will deny that the Brain is the most noble of all the Members, seeing it is
the Seat of all the Animal Faculties, Imagination, Sense, Discourse, Reason,
and Memory? And hence Aphrodisaeus calls it (...), the Organe of Wisdom. Homer
calls it (...), the Heaven; hence coming all Sense and Motion which is bestowed
on the subjacent parts. It is situated in the Head as in its Castle; and in the
Upper part as being the Palace of the Soul. As to its Magnitude and Connection,
it is generally found in Man of a great quantity, because it being the
Instrument of his Reason, it is necessary it should require and contain in it a
plenty of spirits: It Is knit to the Cranium by Veins, Arteries and Nerves, with
the rest of its parts: As to its Substance, it is made of Sperme and the
maternal Blood; and out of these two is generated this glandulous matter. It is
generally white from its spermatick matter furnished with many spirits: It is
soft, being the Original of the soft Nerves; in its Cerebellum it is not so
soft, this being the Origination of Nerves which are more hard: It is of a cold
and moist temper; and Hippocrates in his Book de Carnibus, calls it (...), or
the chief Seat of cold and glutinous moisture, framed thus to hold and contain
the subtle animal spirits; and cold, for tempering their heat. I shall
pretermit the divisions of the Brain, and its Coats, and come to its inward
parts, where we may meet with it furnished with a callous body, two striated
bodies, a Thalamus Opticus Nervorum, Natiformal Prominencies, Medullary
Processes, Glandula Pinealis, Orbicular Protuberances, called Nates, and
Testes, an Infundibulum, and a Cerebellam with its substance and subtracted
Cavities. All which may be seen at large in Dr. Tho. Willis, in his Book De
Anima Brutorum: To which I recommend you.

We come now to those hurts which the Brain may receive: And they may be said
to come under these heads, as Wounds, Apostemations, Putrefaction, Syderation
or Sphacelation, Concussion, and Tumor; and of each of these in their Order;
premising first the true Signs and Symptoms which may direct us to the
Diagnosis and Prognosis of the Brains being thus disaffected: And being guided
herein by Hippocrates's Rule, my best and thy safest authority, as he has it
in Aphor. 50. lib. 6. Signs of a Brain wounded
if any have their Brains wounded, they must have herewith accompanied both
Fever, and Vomiting of Choler; And in Lib. 8. Cap. 4. with these a loss of
Speech: And such as have suffered Concussion, became Dumb, as he writes, Sect.
7. Aphor. 58. Then also are they generally senseless, and deliriated, and have
a loss of their Sight, as he has it, Lib. de Vuln. capit. thus expressing it,
If the Brain be wounded, the reason grows weak, and other ill symptoms
increase; and sometimes part of the Brain comes forth with danger of loss of
life. And besides these, if the Brain be wounded, the Matter which comes forth
will be thick, round, and of a marrowy substance. And as Hippocrates has it,
Aphor. 18. lib. 6. Wounds of the Brain if they have not reached the Ventricles,
they are curable, although the substance of the brain it self be wounded; but
these being wounded, the case will be dangerous. Besides these, upon the brain
being wounded, you will find your Patient have a foaming at his mouth, a
cloudiness overcasting his sight, a Delirium accompanying these, with a
Convulsion, Fever, Vomiting of Choler, loss of Reason, Dumbness, a Palsy, and
lastly see him correpted with an Apoplexy.

Presages.
As to the Presages of Wounds of the Brain, the least is not seen to want
danger, considering either the nobleness of the part, and its necessity of
motion, with its moist nature, and the consent of the Nerves which it brings
into misery and calamity with it. All these being considered with the not easy
passage or entrance of Medicines to Wounds here received, may well grant these
Wounds not easily to be Cured, nor yet to go without danger. Yet History makes
good, that large Wounds sometimes being here inflicted, have been cured, as you
shall see more at large at the end of this Chapter; and that chiefly in these
three cases; As when they happen in a sound and strong body, meeting with an
artificial dressing of this Wound; and lastly to the true Providence of the
Almighty, who can as well lengthen the Lives of some, as shorten the same of
others. And because my first Discourse is of Wounds of the Brain, by Joan.
Andreas a Cruc. as he has it, Lib. 1. Cap. 14. he will have the Wound washed
with a Decoction of Roses, Myrtils, and Bettony* and if pain appear, to apply
either warm milk, or else the lukewarm blood of a Pidgeon, or Aqua Pimpinella,
and then until the 14th day be past to dress it with Oil of Turpentine and the
spirit of Wine. The Oil of Turpentine he thus does order to be made, Oil of
Turpentine.
, Terebinth. clar. lb iij. arenae fluvior. depurat. lot. et sicc. lb i ss.
Omnia in curva boccia cum suo recipiente ponantur, and boccia in vase terreo,
inter quod and Bocciam cinis in ea adsit copia, quod nullo modo tangi possint,
and lento igne fiat elambicatio, and quod primo distillat aqueum est, and
nullius momenti, secundo coloris aurei ac densioris substantiae and optimum est
pro usu. Also thus he orders it to be made,. Terebinth. clar. lb ij. Later.
recent. lb ss. Mastich. Styrac. an. j. Lateres igniti Oleo extinguantur, and
fracti reliquis Misceantur, and per Alembicum excipiuntur tres liquores, quorum
secundus and tertius sunt Optimi. Or he does advise instead of using of
Turpentine and Spirit of Wine, this;. Terebinth. aqu. consolid. lot. ij. aqu.
vit. Sir. Rosar. an. j. pulv. Oliban, Mastich, Myrrh* an. ij. Mum. gran.
Hyperic. Sangu. Dracon. an. j. misce and fiat medicamentum, and apply it; over
it to be applied Empl. de Betonica, anointing the whole Head over either with
Oil of Roses, or Oil of Roses and Oil of Myrtils mixed together; and this use
for 7 days; and if no Matter or Digestion then appear, then with warm Water,
Rhodomel, Myrrh and Aloes we are to dress the Parts, ever observing these Rules
in Wounds of the Brain:

As touching Topical Medicines, that we have more regard to the Membranes, than
to the Brain it self and hence are we directed to apply more drying Medicines,
for the affected Parts do require the same, they being both of a moist, soft,
and dissoluble substance and temper, and hence the more easily corrupted; and
in these also are we not to proceed violently but gently, assisting Nature in
the rectification of these noble Parts.

In these cases he also does much commend this following Decoction.
Medicine: Vin. Montan. xx. succ. Betonic. iiij. succ. Calamenth. ij. Myrrh.
Oliban. Alo. Mastich. Sang. Drac. Centaur. minor. sem. Hyperic. an. j.
contundend. contusis macerentur omnia in vase probe occluso, tum lento and
claro igne exhalet tertia pars ac coletur decoctum, cui add Spirit. Vini ij.
Ol. Terebinth. iiij. reponatur Decoctum in vase vitreo optime clauso; and above
this Liquor to apply Avicen 's Cephalic Powder, and to cover it with Empl. de
Betonica, or the like.

Falloppius in these cases, as you may see Com. Hipp. de Vulner. Capit. c. 45.
does order Oil of Roses, and Oil of Turpentine, to be used together in Wounds
of the Brain; for as the one eases Pain, so does the other dry up the
Humidities; and this to be applied till the 7th day be past.

And to prevent all Putrefaction, and to dry up all Humidities, Read does much
praise this: Vernic. alb. Balsam. nigr. Ol. Hyperic. optim. an. ss. misce.

And to conclude this, Take some of these Observations, where we may see a
great part of the Brain to come forth, occasioned by a Wound, and yet the
Patients recovered.

And here may we meet with plentiful historical Observations; and the first
Fabritius Hildanus has, who 1 History.
being called to one John Hortsman's Sister, who having received a contused
Wound in the right Bregma, with a Fracture and Impression of the Cranium, she
presently hereupon vomited Choler, and indigested meat; the left side was
resolute, having Convulsions in her right; her Head being shaved, several
pieces of Bones came out, and others, much resembling a small Vetch, were drawn
out of the substance of the Brain. The day following Slotanus his Master coming
with him to view the Wound, upon dilating the Wound, were drawn forth many and
small splints of Bones, and a part of the Brain, the bigness of a Hasel Nut;
and thus was a small part of the Brain extracted at several times, yet the
Patient recovered.

2 History.
Another of his is of a Countreyman, who having received a great Fracture on
his Head, by the occasion of a small apparent Wound, being slenderly dressed he
fell into a Fever, and grew delirious, the Cutis being incised in form of a Y;
there was presently extracted three splints of Bones; and upon further search
he found in the Wound a part of the Brain, the bigness of a Nut. His former
Surgeon seeing this, despaired of his recovery; yet being assured, that
great Wounds of the Brain have been cured by a diligent hand* by a care and
true method, his Fever abated, and his Delirium vanished, and his relaxed side
was cured.

3 History.
Glandorp. Obs. 5. writes of a Man, who had a great part of his Brain ablated,
yet he recovered: And thus he has it; A Countreyman being much wounded in the
anterior part of his Head, out of which his Father in the first days had drawn
forth many great pieces of Bones, and such a part of the Brain, as is scarce to
be contained in an Egg, in its middle. Hereto having applied convenient
Remedies, he was surprised with Convulsions, the which the 7th day had almost
overcome him, and was correpted with a Palsy in his opposite side; yet he was
cured of his Wound, and two years after died of the Pest, but scarce could
endure the noise of Drums, Trumpets, or Guns.

4 History.
Nicolus. Ser. 7. Tract. 4. Sum. 2. Cap. 91. writes of a Man wounded in his
Head with a Sword, which Wound passed even into the substance of the Brain,
upon the Vertex, in the fore part of the Front, even to the middle of the Head.
The day following he fell into a Palsy, and sent forth the superfluity of the
first and second Digestion insensibly, and eat nothing for 6 days, and drank
only cold Water with Syrup of Roses; and after the 6th day he desired Victuals,
and did eat, and by a regular order and method he recovered.

And Carpus writes in Tract. aureo. that he was an Eyewitness of six Men, from
whom a great quantity of the Brain came forth, and that were cured; of which,
two were much taken with a Palsy on one side, yet lived two years, and the
other he both saw and cured.

Brasavolus, Com. ad Aph. 18. Lib. 6. Hipp. writes, that he has seen most
strange Wounds of the Brain cured: In one especially he saw taken out as much
of the Brain, as would fill a Pullets Egg, and yet the Patient recovered, but
could scarce speak well, and grew afterward stupid.

Another he writes of, who had almost half of his Head ablated, with a part of
the Brain, and yet recovered; but at length grew so stupid, that he could not
speak, nor understand.

5 History.
And to conclude this: Horat. Augenius Lib. 9. Epist. 2. writes, that he saw
the whole substance of the Brain wounded, and its Ventricles dissected, and
some part of the Brain came forth out of the Wound, and yet the Patient
recovered. And these may be sufficient Authorities to confirm, that large
Wounds of the Brain have been cured, being undertaken by a judicious hand.

CHAP. XXXVI.
Of an Abscess of the Brain.
THis is the Second Mischief which may happen to the Brain; yet many there are
who deny any Abscesses can or may be made in the body of the Brain; and thus
endeavoring to prop up their Opinions, do strive to bring many others into
their Opinion and Error.

But these both Authority and Experience do easily confute and contradict: For
here first Hippocrates writes, If either Matter, Water or Blood, do flow
through the Nostrils, Mouth or Ears, of any which is troubled with Pain in his
Head, these will soon discharge it. And Galen, Avicen, and Rhasis do affirm,
That Nature has found out these as its most proper Channels, to empty and
discharge its Excrements, and hereby to exonerate the Matter which is bred in
the Brain.

History.
And although this Event is by many Authors proposed desperate, yet Franciscus
Arcaeus Lib. 1. Cap. 6. does relate some Stories, wherein he has cured some
People hereof, and does bring in an Example of one who received a hurt at the
City of Valuerda, ten miles from the Town of Llerena; (such a History he writes
is not extant) who by the Divine Assistance, who gives the chief blessing to
the means, was perfectly recovered: And thus it was; While some Workmen were at
their Labors, about building a Tower in that City, a Stone falling from the
rest, which was a Cubit inlength and breadth, and 12 inches in thickness, and
in weight 24 pounds: This Stone falling from the others, as it was hoisting up,
fell down, and bruised, depressed, and shivered his Skull. Hereupon the Patient
fell to the ground, and there lay near half an hour, and was given over for a
dead man, being senseless, and was thence carried to his House; and hence
followed commotion of his Brain, and for three whole days he not only lost his
Speech, but Motion too; a great part of his bones of his Head were depressed,
and laid upon the Brain, and blood flew both out of his Eyes and Ears; his Head
and Neck was tumified, and looked of a black color. After the 8th day, the
Head opened spontaneously, both from the Sinciput and Occiput, and also in
either side; and then three Apostemes brake forth, the Bones being restored to
the proper places. The 3d day following his Speech came to him, although
imperfectly, and his Eyes opened; and the 20th day following he began to see,
and recover his senses, and within the space of four months he was perfectly
cured, and being a young man was afterward married.

And because Putrefaction and Sphacelus of the Brain are deadly Symptoms, and
not to be found out by the opening of the Skull after the Party be dead, I
shall not enlarge on these, save only I will conclude this Chapter with that of
Coiter. Lib. Observat. Anatom. and Chirurg. who writes of having dissected many
Heads which have been wounded, in which he has found more than half of the
Brain putrified, and the Ventricle on the same side to be accompanied with a
fetid, green, and thick Matter, and to have seen in the Cerebellary Substance
very putrid Apostemes.

CHAP. XXXVII.
Of Concussion of the Brain.
NExt follows a Concussion or Commotion of the Brain, occasioned by some
outward violent cause invading the Brain, happening either by a Fall from a
high place upon a hard part, being either stoney or rockey; or may be
occasioned by a Shot, Lance, Bullet, Key, or the like: Hence also by this
violent blow, or other the like Accident, the Veins and Arteries by this
Concussion may be lacerated, and not only those which do pass the Sutures, but
also those which are sprinkled between the two Tables to the Diplois; hence
also the efflux of blood running between the Cranium and the Membranes, or
between the Membranes and the Brain, being there concreted, do occasion many
dreadful Pains, and cause a blindness and a cloudiness over the sight, and
Vomiting, occasioned by the upper Orifice of the Ventricle, being hereby
affected by the Nerves of the 6th Conjugation, the which do pass from the Brain
into it, and thence effused into the whole Capacity of the Stomach; and hence
also are the other parts drawn into consent herewith: Occasioning vomiting of
Choler, the Bilis in this case being more active, and increasing in plenty; and
this generally attends Concussion of the Brain. Then meet we with Inflammation
correpting the Brain it self, the which the corrupted and putrid blood does
excite, drawn forth from the Lacerated Vessels by the violence of the accident,
and effused through the whole substance of the Brain; and this kind of
Inflammation does procure a Fever by communicating it self to the Heart and to
the whole body; and if it proves vehement, it proves both dangerous and mortal;
if the commotion be violent, it causes a dumbness and loss of speech in the
Party. And as Hippocrates writes, Lib. 7. Aph. 78. They who have endured a long
Concussion of the Brain, must of necessity become dumb. And if to these Evils a
Sphacelus and corruption should succeed, with a difficulty of breathing
occasioned by an Impediment of the Animal Faculty, Death does suddenly follow.

Having given you the chief Signs and Notations of a Concussion, as touching
its Cure, we are ordered (because in a Concussion of the Brain the Vessels are
seen to be Lacerated under the Cranium) to breathe the Cephalic Vein, and to
take away a plentiful quantity of blood, and to order a good and thin Diet; and
as touching the affected part, the Head being shaved, there may be applied
according to Ambrose Parrey's direction, a Cataplasme made of Bean-Meal and
Barley-Meal, with Oil of Roses and Oxymel. Not to apply any cooling restringent
Medicines here, these hindering the breathing forth of the fuliginous vapors by
the Sutures, the body is to be kept open by sharp Clysters to prevent the
ascent of fumes and vapors up the Brain. And if the Patient be of a Plethorick
Constitution, to repeat Phlebotomy, by breathing either the frontal vein, or
that under the Tongue. Cupping-Glasses are here also very necessary
Instruments, being applied to the Scapulaes. Repulsives are here to be used to
the 4th day, then to use Discussives, beginning with such as are mild, and
Decoction.
of a gentle nature, as is this Decoction, Rad. Alth. vj. Ireos Cyper. Calam.
aromatic. an. ij. fol. salv. Beton. Marjoran. Melilot. Rosar. Rubr. Staechad.
an. M. ss. Sal. commun. iij coquantur omnia simul. S. A. in vino Rubro and aqu.
fabror. fiat Decoctum. With this the head is to be fomented twice in a day, by
dipping a Sponge herein, and applying it to the affected part. But this is to
be premised, That we be sure not to apply any thing too hot here, lest hereby
we purchase Pain and Inflammation.

Vigoes Plaster.
Then to apply Vigo's Cerote thus made;. Furfur. been triturat. iij. farin.
Lent. ij. Rosar. Myrtillor. fol. et gran. ejusd. an. j. Calam. Aromatic. j.
Chamomel. Melilot. M. ss. Nuc. Cupress. No. 6. Ol. Rosar. Chamomel. an. ij.
Cer. alb. ij. ss. Thur. Mastich. an. iij. Myrrh. ij. pulverisentur, et
liquefactis Oleis cum Cer. misce Omnia simul in formam Empl.

A Cataplasme of the Author's.
I cannot let that most Admirable Medicine pass, for its worth, which has for
many years been experienced by my Honored Uncle Cropp, and his Ancestors; a
most true and happy Composition in these direful cases; of which I have with
admirable Success had the advantage to speak the truth of it. And indeed I dare
boldly assert, there cannot be a better extant in all Fractures of the Head,
and Concussions of the Brain, being thus both rightly made and applied; The
Composition of which is this;. Farin. Fabar. Furfur. an. iiij. fol. Rosar.
Rubr. fol. and Bacc. Myrtillor. an. ss. Squinanth. Staechad. an. pug. j. fl.
Chamomel. Melilot. an. M. ss. Sem. Coriand. Anis. an. iij. fl. Betonic.
Matricar. Aneth. an. pug. j. Summitat. Absinth. M. j. pulverisentur omnia et
misceantur cum vino malvatico lb j. ad Catapl. formam; in fine ebullitionis
add Ol. Chamomel. Aneth. Myrtin. an. j. Cer. flav. j. Croc. j. pulv. Calam.
Aromatic. ss. misce; fiat Cataplasma. Before the application of which, the
Wound is to be dressed, and the Head to be anointed all abo t the affected
parts with Oil of Roses, Oil of Dill, and Oil of Myrtles; then to be covered
over the woundedpart with Empl. de Betonica; and then apply over all this
Cataplasme.

Histories.
I shall add here some Histories of Note; and here first we may see Dodonaeus
writing, Cap. 1. Observe. Medicinal. of one who having received a blow on his
lest part of his head with a thick Club or Staff, the Cutis being whole, and no
sign of hurt appearing, the Petrose bone underneath being fissured, and having
a long cleft, hence followed a stupidity, but not so deeply but upon being
called he could stir himself, but suddenly fell into a slumber again with
his Eyes being shut; and until the 14th day was past, his stupidness increased
so as that he could not stir, after which Death seized him, his head being
opened, the Dura Matter was seen altogether suffused with blood under the Os
Petrosum, and a purulent Matter about the Brain it self.

Another.
Fabritius Hildanus is very plentiful in Histories of the Brain being
Concussed, amongst which he has these, Observe. 13. Lib. 1. The first is of a
Gentleman, who being smitten in the right part of his head fell upon the
ground, vomited, lost his Speech, and bled both at his Ears and Nostrils, who
being carefully handled, was perfectly recovered, and his speech in few days
returned to him.

Another.
The Second is of a Huntsman, who falling from a Tree upon the ground,
presently vomited, and cast forth much blood both through his Ears, Mouth,
Nostrils and Palate; hereupon he grew dumb, and was Apoplectick without sense
or motion even to the 11th day; his head being shaved, and anointed with Oil of
Roses and Oil of Myrtils, and a Vein opened in his Arm, with sharp Clysters
being administered, and the like proper Remedies, by God's assistance and his
diligence, to admiration he recovered.

Another.
And to Conclude, Alexander Benedictus, Lib. 1. Cap. 5. De Medend. Morb.
writes, That if we may believe Experiments, the Leaves of Ground Ivy put
between the Membranes of the Brain, do ease pain, if they be soft, mixed with a
little Vinegar and a Decoction of Roses. Hence some of our late Writers do
order a Cerote Empl.
made of Gum. Hedetae, whereof this is the Receipt;. Gum. Heder. iij. Resin.
purgat. ss. Cer. iij. Ol. Rosar. ij ss. Ammoniac. ij. Terebinth. Venet. iij.
Succ. Corymbar. Heder. iiij. Farin. Fabar. Q. S. fiat Empl. And this has been
approved to be excellent in Wounds and Fractures of the Head, especially in an
Old Man of Eighty years of age, who being smitten by the Beam of a house
falling upon his head, he hereupon grew speechless, he being forthwith let
blood, and this Plaster applied to his Bregma, he lived without Wine and
Flesh, and subsisted with Ptysan and broken bread, without any Liquor or Water;
for he loved none: And thus for 15 days was his life conducted; with loss of
Speech: The 16th day he began to speak, and within few days after was
perfectly cured of his violent Concussion, beyond all hopes.

CHAP. XXXVIII.
Of a Fungus of the Brain.
THis Fungus is a Tumor of the Brain much resembling a Mushroom; of which sort
some are seen to be hard and bloodless, accompanied but with small Sense:
Others more soft, and endued with an exquisite Sense, being of an ill Smell,
broad above, and narrow beneath, bred of glutinous and thick humors, being
half rotted; so made either by the Air, or coldness of the Skull, it being
opened, and the Brain wounded. These also are reported to be of a very speedy
growth, much like Mushrooms, having their increase from a plenty of thick
humors issuing from the affected parts. In these cases we are advised, if it
grows above the Cranium, to keep it down by a strong Ligature, and to consume
the remaining part, taking care that we in these cases do not use too strong
Cathartick Medicaments.

And because Gulielmus Fabritius, a man of excellency in his Art, and a Master
to be followed, has given a lively Example of the curing of these Fungosities,
I shall commend you to his Method, and for satisfaction shall present the whole
History, as he has it in Observe. 15. Cent. 1. of one of 14 years of age, who
received a Wound in his Right Bregma, with a large Fracture of his Cranium by
the Fall of a Stone from a high place, which weighed Twelve pounds ten ounces;
he being thitherto called, he finds the Boy speechless, blind and deaf, with a
vehement Vomiting, and a continual throwing forth of blood both by his Mouth,
Ears and Nostrils, his head being shaved, and the Wound dilated, the Cranium
was seen to penetrate deeply into the substance of the Brain, and the Dura
Matter much rent: The Splints that Night being taken out, the Cure was treated
with art; and although the Symptoms were so direful, that there was but small
hopes of his recovery, yet within 20 days these vanished, and the part of the
Dura Matter rent by the depressed Skull did fall out by Nature and the benefit
of Medicines, which gave encouragement of danger being past. But the 21th day a
new Evil attended him, which was a large Fungus arising from the Wound; the
which so increased in Twenty four hours, that it exceeded the bigness of a Hens
egg; the which was cured by these following Medicines: Ordering him this
Clyster in the beginning every day, afterward every second or third day;. Rad.
et fol. Alth. Malv. Parietar. Mercurial. fl. Cham. Melil. fol. et flor.
Betonic. an. M. ss. Sem. Fenugraec. Anis. Lin. an. ss. coquantur in aqu. ad
consumpt. 3. partis in lb j. colaturae salvae Benedict. Laxat. and spec. Hier.
Picr. an. iij. Vitell. Ov. j. Sal. pug. j. Ol. Camomel. ij. M. fiat Clyster.

Fomentation.
Then was applied this Fomentation twice a day to the Wound; Fol. et Fl.
Betonic. Salv. Camomil. Melilot. Rosar. Summitat. Marjoran. Rorismar. an. M. j.
Sem. Anis. Faenugraec. an. j. incidantur et contundantur pro fotu.

After this let the Head be cleaned with warm clothes, after which let the
Fungus be all over it sprinkled with this following Powder, and also the Wound;
Rad. Powder.
Caryophyllat. Angelic. Calam. Aromatic. an. ss. Rad. Aristoloch. Rot. Irid.
florent. Lign. Guaiac. an. ij. fl. Salv. Summitat. Marjoran. Rorismarin. an.
pug. j. fiat pulvis. Over which was applied this Emplaister,. Empl.
Empl. de Betonic. iiij. Gum. Elemn. Solut. in Ol. Rosar. j. pull. Rosar.
Myrtillor. an. j. Mastich. Calam. Aromatic. an. j. ss. cum q. s. Ol. Rosar.
fiat Empl. With these the Fungus vanished in 14 days, and within 10 Weeks the
Patient was perfectly recovered.

Another.
Cornarius Emblemat. 71. ad lib. 4. Dioscord. writes of a Citizen who before he
arrived at 40 years of age, had his Skull in the public Market chopped edged
ways, and his Membrane hurt; and he carried 6 Fungosities in his head for a
long while after, the bigness of so many great Nuts as we call Chessnuts, the
which within some while afterward fell away of their own accord.

Johannes Schenkius writes, that he remembers a Boy who falling from a Ladder,
upon his head, received thereon a large Wound in the left part thereof. An
ignorant Quack being sent for, not examining the hurt of his head thoroughly,
hastened the Wound to agglutination, whence happened, that between times for
some years afterward the Boy felt a pain in his head, as if he had been
smitten with a Key, and within some time afterward out of the same part did
grow a Fungus equalling the bigness of a Chestnut; hence followed a violent
Fever, and an intolerable pain of his head; the skin of the head of its own
accord being disrupted, the whole Tumor without any difficulty, and as it were
cut off with a Knife, opened, appearing as it were of a horney substance,
coagmentated in several coats, and incrusted much like the stone in the
Bladder, generally believed to be occasioned by the Fall upon the head, and of
the hurt of its subtracted Membranes.

Thus have I ended the whole Discourse of the Head, with its Membranes, and
those diversities of evil Symptoms which do attend the Brain. And although
Wounds of the Nerves might by some look better in other places, and more aptly
be placed according to the places where they are most generally injured; yet
because they have their Origination from hence as their Fountain, I shall
discourse of them here, and also show you how Nerves punctured, contused or
incised, are to be Cured, intending to join Wounds of the Arteries with those
of the Heart; and Wounds of the Veins with those of the Liver. These being as
their chief Oceans from whence they fetch both their Vital and Natural Blood
and Spirits.

CHAP. XXXIX.
Of Wounds of the Nerves, made by Puncture.
ANd because these Nervous Bodies are Parts of great worth and use in us, whose
hurts and mischiefs, without a true method ordered and prescribed, do yield
most horrid Symptoms, how well ought the Surgeon to examine and know their
Nature, Temper and Fabric, that has to deal with them, being either
punctured, incised, or contused?

And that I may bring in this Discourse with the best advantage to the young
Surgeon, I shall first show by the Glass of Anatomy what a Nerve is; how it
differs from a Tendon and a Ligament; for what use it was framed, and to what
end it was constituted; how it is planted into the Muscle, and there does
exercise its moving Faculty: And then having given you its view, you may
consequently judge how careful and active you ought to be, in the treating its
harms and hurts.

But to show what a Nerve is.

What a Nerve is.
A Nerve in general is called (...), slectere, by some called (...), tendere,
being planted at the end of the Muscle, both for its extention and contraction.

Of these Nervous Bodies are reckoned by Galen three kinds (viz.) Nerves,
Tendons, and Ligaments. Of each of these in their order.

An Organick Part.
It Is called an Organick Part, being an Organ conveying animal Spirits; it is
made of a white Substance, spun and wrought out of many small spermatick
Fibers, constituted with most subtle Pores, for transition of the animal
Spirits; it is made of a threefold Substance; the first being medullary and
white, arising from the marrow of the Brain; the second and third gives it its
double Membrane, investing this Substance: And considering all Nerves do take
their Originations of and from the Brain, and as Picolhominus, Bauhine, and
other expert Anatomists do write that from the medullary Part hereof, does pass
hence through the Cavities of the Cranium and Vertebres, and so descending
forwards. And as also some of these Nerves are soft and others hard, as I have
already shown, some being most necessary for conveying of the animal Spirits,
so by their ordinary Influx a Nutrition does follow, and by this Influx the
Parts ordained for sense and motion may the better be moved, and more
exquisitely be allowed to receive their sense. And because they are the proper
Trunks and Channels, by which the animal Spirits are carried and conducted to
the instruments of voluntary sense and motion, their Membranes being the
instruments of these senses, the which by how much they receive a greater
quantity of Nerves, and so consequently animal Spirits, they most exactly and
exquisitely receive and obtain a more liberal plenty and freedom of motion and
sense.

What a Tendon is.
Caspar Bauhinus will have a Tendon to be a similar Part, continued from the
beginning to the ending of a Muscle, being of the same kind and nature with
that of the Nerves, and bred out of seed, as are the other spermatick Parts,
which opinion is continued by many at this day.

Andraeas Laurentius, with Galen, and others, are of a contrary opinion,
allowing this to be a dissimilar Part, framed and intertexed out of the
concourse of most thin Fibers, Ligaments and Nerves interwoven together; it
assuming its greatest bulk from Ligaments, and a lesser from the Nerves and
their Fibers. And because provident Nature being careful to leave no empty
space between these Fibers, she has planted a fleshy Substance between their
Series, where we may meet with its empty spaces filled and stuffed up therewith.

To conclude this, A Tendon is nothing else than the fibrillous Substances of
Nerves expanded and exploded, made and framed much in form of your Indian
Hammocks, which are interwoven of fine Thread or Silk, whose middle Part
although expanded and filled up by the intertexture of their woollen Parts, yet
are contracted in either end, and brought into a smaller and slenderer
Substance, by the advantage of so many fine Chords interwoven and brought to
one point.

What a Ligament is.
A Ligament is the 3d; and this by the Greeks is called (...), or Vinculum,
both by Hippocrates and Aristotle; from its figure and color it is called
Nervus, it being a cold, dry, firm, and similar Part, yet loose and flexible,
collected out of many Parts; it gains its Substance from the seed, as do the
two former, bred between a Membrane and a Cartilage; harder than a Membrane,
that it may not easily break, and softer than a Cartilage, for a more prompt
motion of the Muscles; it is not nourished by Marrow, as Columbus conjectured,
but with blood passing through the capillary Arteries, this being either large,
narrow, plain, long, or short, in figure according to the variety of the Parts;
it arises from the Bone, and is inserted therein; its Uses are chiefly two,
that hereby the Members may obtain a good and proper motion, and also in their
motions that they do not recede from their places, or that in a violent motion
they may be kept in their proper places.

And since we have presented a short view of these three, we may fairly by a
brief Discourse express their annexions: For as every Muscle has allowed it a
Nerve, some having more, as the Diaphragma, and the temporal Muscle three.
Galen therefore does nominate that Part wherein the Nerve is inserted, the Head
of the Muscle; the middle Venture is the fleshy Part thereof, distinguished into
many tendinous Intersections, the Tail thereof being tendinous, annexed to the
moving Part thereof, the which do much vary, according to the strength or small
motion of the Parts, both in Form and Magnitude, being either narrow or broad,
long or short, thick or thin.

Now as touching the Hurts of these Parts; and these are generally accounted
Four, as Puncture, Incision, Contusion and Distortion.

Puncture of a Nerve.
We begin first with a Puncture of the Nerve: And here may we see these little
Bodies, being endued with an exquisite sense, they being hurt, must necessarily
Presages.
threaten danger; for slight and slender Hurts here do produce Spasmes; and
these happen by Pain, the which does lead the whole Body into intemperiety and
passion. Fissures of the Nerves are hard to cure, by reason of their cold
nature, being in substance both cold and exsanguial, their Humidities admitting
no digestion. Such as are transversly wounded, are more dangerous than those
which are hurt in a direct line; for hereby both Sense and Motion are destroyed
at once, and therefore are to be suspected. Contusion happening here does
produce its effects also, by reason of its thick and viscous humor, which does
replenish them, and makes them fit for putrefaction, they being denied their
native heat; and hence follows Inflammation and Putrefaction at the beginning.

Cure of Nerves in general.
As to the Cure of Nerves in general* here is chiefly to be studied the removal
of Pain and Inflammation: And for these a good order of Diet, a substraction of
the antecedent Matter, that it flow no further to the affected Part, and
application of convenient Topics for asswaging of Pain, educing of Excrements,
and vindicating of the Parts from Convulsion; these are good and proper Engines
to work with.

But to come to each in their order; and to begin with a Puncture of the Nerves.

The wounded Nerves do require very drying Medicines, having an attractive
quality in them, being of thin Parts. Now whereas this is an accident, which
does most commonly happen to them, by the ignorance of the Surgeon
sometimes, as well as by the assault of some violent Thrust, Puncture, or the
like; here are two scopes to be prescribed: The first of which touches the
Part affected, which is to be treated with strong drying Medicines, and such as
may ease Pain; and the second to hinder Inflammation. The Nerve therefore is to
be opened, and its thin and humid Substances to be dried up, which do procure
the inward injury; and for this Use you are to apply hot Medicines, for the
educeing these Vapors, attracting of the Humidities about the affected Part.
And here be sure before you undertake any application, that you remove and
extract all extraneous Bodies, which may lodge in the wounded Part, if any
remain therein, as Needles, Glass, Bone, Splints of Wood, or the like, hereby
taking care that we add no affliction to the afflicted Part. Hence are we by
Galen's Authority here directed for Women, Children, and the like persons who
are tender and soft, to use Turpentine by it self, or to mix therewith Sulphur
or Euphorbium. And to hinder Inflammation, is a great intention in Punctures of
the Nerve; and this is to be conquered by Phlebotomy, once or more times to be
made use of, as occasion may require, hereby to discharge a good quantity of
the Blood, both for prevention of Fever and Inflammation.

Next may we storm this by Catharticks, which have power to banish it by siege,
by first preparing the Body with Mel Rosarum, Sir. de Betonic. Oxymel, or the
like; then to prescribe a convenient Cathartick, made either of Cassia, Manna,
Rhubarb, Senna, Confectio Hamech. Diacatholicon, Elect. e succ. Rosar. Pil.
Coch. Rudii, or the like. And here also as to the affected Part, we are here to
consider both the breadth and narrowness of the affected Part, and its Wound;
for if the Wound be so narrow, as that the Matter cannot have vent for its
exition, and the strength and force of the Medicine cannot reach the Puncture,
here are we to dilate, and make the Wound wider, by cutting it so wide, as the
Nerve may well appear; if the Wound be large enough, we are here to view the
Symptoms which attend and offend; and here if Pain offers, this is to be
abated: And for this purpose Galen proposes Oil warmed, and with this to
foment the Part; and hence is it also that we always use hot Oils in Punctures
of the Nerves, for this does speedily make Pain cease and vanish. But some may
seem here to quarrel with Hippocrates, who writes, That Oil is humecting and
mollifying, and so an enemy consequently to the Nerves, which do require drying
Medicines, and therefore how to be approved of in these cases? It Is true it is
softning and humective; yet we find that a punctured Nerve being kept for 2 or
3 days in Oil, has not received any injury thereby, but has hereby rather
gained a large mitigation of Pain, and therefore in respect of the Symptoms is
advantagiously here to be used, the Pain being abated. Next indeed in respect
of the nervous Substance being cold and dry, we are authorized to use hot and
dry Medicines; dry, that they may keep up and maintain the proper temper of the
Nerves; and hot, that they may take off all cold from them; the true temper of
these Medicines are to be very drying, and moderately hot. In a punctured Nerve
we may also note, That the Nerve which is thus punctured, can endure the most
hot Oil, which the Finger cannot. Whence I collect, That a Nerve has not in it
a most exquisite sense, but only an exquisite sense; and therefore all such
Medicines which are here to be applied, should be freed of all asperity and
sharpness; and the substance of the Nerve being hard, the temper of the
Medicine should be thin and penetrating.

Note.
Another thing herein worthy note, which I must not pretermit, is, That if any
Matter remain at the bottom of the wounded Nerve, it is as bad as poison,
executing there its traitorous venomous qualities, procuring for its companion,
Pain.

Wherefore we are further to note, That the proper Medicines which are here to
be used and applied, ought not only to be hot and drying, but to have in them
an educeing and extracting quality. And these Medicines are either simple or
compound; amongst the Simples may be reckoned Rosine of the Fir Tree,
Turpentine, Gum Elemni, Oil of Turpentine, and Oil of Fir; these being both
thin bodied, and having in them an educeing and extracting quality, to fetch
every ichorous Matter from the bottom of the Wound. Stronger than these may be
reckoned Liquid Pitch, Ol. Petrol. Sagapen. Opoponax, Sulphur vivum,
Euphorbium, and the like.

Note.
Another thing remarkable in these Wounds, is, That no Lint is here to be
applied, for this does choke up the Matter, and hinder its exition, and hence
follows intolerable pain.

Falloppius does much commend Euphorbium, as the best and chiefest of Medicines
for these kind of Wounds, and calls it his Sacra Anchora, it never deceiving
him that uses it, but does further answer expectation; yet he makes a vast
difference between Euphorbium, the best being newest, and appearing like black
Resin at its ends; the old is yellow and reddish.

Unguent.
Now having shown the Simples, it is time to come to Compounds, of which take
these; Sagapen. Opopanac. an. ij. Tereb. V. ij. Ol. vetust. ss. misce; or if
you desire a stronger, take this; Assae faetid. j. Ol. vetust. Another.
Pic. naval. Cer. an. ss. misce pro Linimento. To this also may be added Ol.
Sambuc. Sulphur viv. an. j. misce ad mellis spissitudinem.

Ol. Hyperic. Fallop.
Falloppius in these cases does highly commend the magisterial Oil of Hyperici
thus made; Terebinth. clar. ij Ol. Terebinth. j ss. Rosar. Complet. iiij. Verm.
terrestr. lot. in vino j ss. Rubr. Tinctor. iij. Sem. and fl. Hyperic. M. j.
Rorismar. Millesol. Centaur. maj. an. M. ss. Sulphur viv. ss. tritis terendis
incisisque incidendis misceantur addito vino malvatico, ac parum coquantur,
deinde add sem. and flor. Hyperic. and coquantur ad vini consumpt. tunc
exprimantur, and in vas reponantur, and serva ad usum vase been clauso. And
when he uses it in Punctures of the Nerves, he follows Galen 's advice, Lib.
6. Meth. cap. 2. thus prescribing it: Euphorb. j. Ol. ante script. xij. Cer.
iij. misce pro Unguento; this is to be applied until all pain does cease; this
also increases new Flesh, and does produce a Cicatrice, and so does perform
all intentions. Or in the like cases may these be used: Tereb. clar. Ol.
Hyperic. Resin. Pin. an. iij. Sulphur. ign. non expert. j. Croc. ss. misce, and
lento igne bulliant. Or this also of Galen: Cer. non. j. Terebinth. pie. graec.
an. ss. Euphorb. ij. misce.

History.
To conclude this Chapter, be pleased to take these few Histories. The first
shall be of Glandorp in his 41 Observation, of One whose Nerve was pricked
instead of a Vein; whence followed direful Symptoms, the which was cured as
follows: A Woman in the Month of June desiring to have a Vein breathed,
happening to go to an unskilful Surgeon, who scarce knew the difference
between a Nerve and a Vein, pricked the Nerve instead of her Vein; hence did
arise great Pain, and a large Tumor in the affected part; the
Barber-Chirurgeon applies to the part Oil of white Lillies, with which he
anointed the part, and afterward directed this Cataplasme made of Mallow
leaves, and Violets, with Bran; these rather increased the pain, and the hand
began to look livid, his Father being sent for, seeing the parts began to run
into a Gangrene, first prescribed this Cataplasme; Catapl.
. Pan. tritic. Siligin. lb ss. Furfur. subtiliss. pulv. ij. Pub. Rad. Acir. j.
pulv. Scord. ss. fl. Melilot. Chamomel. Rosar. Rubr. an. pug. 3. Farin. Orob.
ij. cum Oxymelit. q. s. fiat Catapl. The Wrist and whole Arm was anointed even
to the Nuch of the Neck with these Unguents,. Ol. Rosar. Lumbricor. Camomel.
an. ss. Vulpin. Olea.
Scorpionium an. iij. misce. The Night following, both Delirium, Fever and
Convulsion seized her; and for this was prescribed a Cordial, wherein was Aqu.
Langij and fl. Tiliae, and over the whole hand and arm was applied the
aforesaid Cataplasme; the Wound being dilated, was afterward dressed with this;.
Terebinth. Unguent.
Venet. lot. in vino albo j. Mel. Rosat. Colat. ij. Myrrh. ij. pulv. Scord. j.
Lumbricor. terrestr. praeparat. j ss. misce. The Gangrenated parts within a few
days began to separate, and by the application of these Medicines, stopped; the
eschar of which being removed, under this was the Nerve, or rather the Tendon
seen to look black; the which was amputated, and extracted: After this was
applied an Incarnative Medicine, and at length the part was cicatrised. The
Elbow and the whole Hand was immovable; for which, with great Success, were
applied these following Medicines,. Ol. Lumbricor. Rosar. an. ss. Vulpin.
Lilior. albor. an. iij. Chamomel. Liniment.
Unguent. Dialth. cum Gum. Auxung. Human. an. ij. misce pro Linimento. With
this was embrocated his hand and his whole arm, it being first fomented with
this*. Rad. Alth. recent. Consolid. Major. an. j ss. Herb. Fomentation.
Alth. Malvar. Violar. an. M. j. Salv. Marjoran. an. M. ss. Haeder. Terrestr.
Absinth. Summitat. Hyperic. an. p. iij. Coquantur in aqua fontana, ad fomentum.
The parts being thus fomented and embrocated, lastly was applied this
Emplaister spread upon Leather,. Auxung. Porcin. j. Oxycroc. ss. Empl. de
Melilot. de Mucilagin. an. vj. Misce. With these dressings she perfectly
recovered and gained the motion of all her hand and arm, save only the Thumb.

Another.
Forestus, Observat. 20. fol. 183. writes of a Woman, who pricking her little
finger with a Needle, had the 4th day after a great Tumor thereon, and the
whole hand appeared as if it had been correpted with a Phlegmone; but it tended
not to suppuration, the natural heat not being diminished; and hence followed
somewhat of an oedematous Inflammation, for which this Medicine of Euphorbium
was applied, anointing the fingers therewith,. Cer. Resin. Pic. an. iiij.
Euphorb. j. Terebinth Ol. Commun. an. ss. misce. And for the Inflammation was
applied Unguent. de Cinerib. Solitum. by which the flux of humors was stopped.
In the interim was applied an Emplaister made of Resolvers and Strengtheners;
after which was fomented the parts with a Decoction made of Wine, wherein were
boiled Wormwood, Camomile and Salt; by this the Inflammation was wholly abated:
then was the finger anointed with Unguent. Dialth. bathing the head with the
broth made of Sheeps Guts; And thus at length was she recovered.

Horatius Augenius, lib. 9. Epist. 2. writes of a Tailor, who receiving a prick
by his Needle between his nail and the flesh of his right Thumb, dyed thereof,
and writes that Ludovicus was witness thereof.

To conclude this, take that of Amatus, 1. Curat. 38. Punctura acus in Digito,
thus writing of an Old Gentlewoman threescore years of age, who pricked her
Thumb with a Needle near the nail thereof, the which grew very painful, so that
12 days she could scarce rest; he being sent for to her, and examining the
matter, found about the juncture near the nail a small collection of matter,
the which being let out, and anointing the hand with Oil of Roses, she was
within two hours freed of her pain, and in few days after perfectly cured.

CHAP. XL.
Of Transverse Incision of the Nerves.
THis by the Arabians is called Gauziratus; and here we may behold it either
wholly cut, or cut in part; if it be wholly cut, it occasions a weakness of the
part only; but if it be but cut in part or half way, it declares the same by a
great Fever, and fear of Convulsion, and hence ought we to breathe a vein, and
to strengthen the affected parts, by removing its ill temper if any have
appeared. In this case where the nerve is thus cut, the Wound must necessarily
be large; and in this Wound this method is to be followed, if pain be present,
foment the affected part with hot Oil; but if neither Spasme nor pain appear,
there needs no use thereof. If any humors have flowed, these are to be
discussed; as. Ol. Rosar. Myrtin. Mastich. an. j ss. Succ. Plantag. Centinod.
an. j. Acet. alb. ss. Verm. Terrest. lot. in vino albo j. Coquantur ad vini
consumpt. et aceti and Succorum, tunc add. Bol. armen. Terr. sigillat. Santal.
Rubr. an. iij. iterum parum bulliant, and addito parum cerae fiat Linimentum:
The Wound to be filled up with Turpentine or Spirit of Turpentine. If any
ichorous Matter do supervene, we are to use stronger Desiccatives, and such as
may force the humidities out; as. Terebinth. venet. ij. Ol. Hyperic. j. pulv.
Subtiliss. Sulphur. Unguent.
vin. ij. misce. et aliquantulum bulliant. Or this,. Terebinth. V..j. Ol.
Aneth. j. Sulphur. preparat. ut ante ij. misce. Or,. Ol. Terebinth. Mastich.
Lumbricor. an. ij. Euphorb. recent. pulv. ss. Croc. ss. misce. Or this,. Ol.
abietin. Hyperic. Magistral. Fallop. Mastich: Lumbricor. an. j. Resin. Pin. ss.
Sulphur. vin. Euphorb. an. ij. Croc. parum misce, lento igne parum coquantur.
Cataplasmes also in these cases which have in them a drying, strengthening and
prohibiting faculty, operating without much Stipticity, may be of great use
here; and for this use does Galen propose many Simples, of which these may be
made, as Dittany, Feverfue, Camypitheos, both the Centauries, Stoechas,
Comfrey, Ivey, Betony, Turpentine, Earthworms, Bean-meal, Lupines, Fenugreek,
Oil of Mastich, Camomile, and the like. If Inflammation does appear here in the
beginning, we may use this, Catapl.
. Fol. Rosar. Rub. Myrtin. an. M. j. Beton. Camomil. an. M. ss. Coquantur vino
nigro austero et pistentur, tunc add Farin. Fabar. j. ss. Hord. iij. Ol.
Rosar. Mastich. an. j. Lixivij tenuior. q. s. misce. And with this proced to
the 7th day, and when a good digestion appears, and all evil Symptoms be
removed, you may deterge the Wound Unguent.
with this,. Litharg. Aur. Vino Lot. ij. Ol. Mastich. Cer. Mell. an. j. misce:
This being done, unite the parts Powder.
with this Powder,. Pulv. Verm. Terrestr. preparat. gran. Tinctor. Equiset.
Oliban. Aristoloch. rot. an. ij. misce, fiat Alcotiol. per petiam transmissus.

History.
Glandorp. Obs. 42. fol. 103. writes of a Young Man, who being of a Plethorick
Constitution, received a Wound, with which was hurt also a Nerve, but its
Fibers were not wholly cut or divided, hence issued great Pain, Fever,
Delirium; and the third day after followed Convulsion, a Vein being breathed,
and a good Diet prescribed, the Symptoms not by these being conquered, the
Nerve was wholly divided: After which it was thus Digestivum.
dressed,. Pull. Rosat. Colat. vj. Terebinth. Lot. in vino Rubro ss. Ol.
Lumbricor. ij. Pulv. Lumbricor. Terrestr. Mastich. an. j ss. Vitell. Ov. q. s.
misce. The Symptoms being lessened, was applied this Cataplasme;. Farin.
Fabar. Lupinor. Orol. an. ij. ss. Pulv. Scord. Catapl.
Tapsibarbat. Rosar. Rub. an. pug. j. Pulv. Lumbric. Terrest. ij. cum Oxymel.
q. s. fiat Catapl. By these and the like dressings he perfectly recovered.

Another.
He produces another History worthy Note, of a Nobleman, who being of a
Cacochymick habit, and affected with a Lues Venerea, who in a Duel being
wounded, had an oblique Incision into one of his Nerves, and so as the Nerve
was not wholly divided; hence followed Fevers, Deliriums, and great pains, the
affected parts being embrocated, and Anodine Cataplasmes applied, and no ease
by these received, a division of the Nerve was proposed, which would be the
readiest way to prevent Convulsion and all other evil accidents, he not
permitting this to be done, there did arise an Emprosthotonos, in which he
miserably dyed.

CHAP. XLI.
Of a Contused Nerve.
AND here may we meet with a Tumor and an intolerable pain, arising from the
Blood percolated per Anastomosin, from the small veins, and see the affected
place begin to grow livid, having an affinity with an Ecchymosis; and the flesh
hereupon being contused is speedily to be suppurated, and the Contusion
dispatched without much pain: And because in Galen's time these Contusions were
very frequent, and he very happy in their recovery, we shall follow his method
and example, who advises us in every attrition of the Nerves or Contusion
thereof, that we speedily make evacuation. And because in these Contusions the
first intention is to well order and dispose the body, Phlebotomy and Pharmacy,
with a thin Order of Diet, is to be prescribed, both for stoppage and
prevention of pains and fluxions: And to the affected parts apply Bean-meal and
Oxymel mixed together, this both attenuating and digesting the egressed blood.
Sometimes we may use Farina Orobi. cum Oxymeleti, adding hereto Powder of
Ireos. But because Galen does direct us in these cases to astringe, he orders
Red Wine to be mixed with the former. In these cases also Unguent. Alabastrinum
is also good, if the Cutis be rent and exulcerated, those Medicines Note.
are here best which can dry up most: And hence Avicen says, If a Wound happens
with a Contusion, the proper Medicines here are to be Dryers, which may unite
the parts, assuage pain, and hinder Inflammation; And for this purpose Ol.
Terebinth. Hyperic. with Powder of Earth Worms, Mastich, and complete Oil are
good. And for the asswaging pain, Order this,. Unguent. Alabastrin. Farin.
Fabar. Pulv. Lumbricor. praeparat. et cum pauco vini et Oxymelit. fiat. Empl.
And if any putridness appear, this is to be removed with Honey.

History.
To conclude this whole Discourse, take these few Histories. The first whereof
Forestus in Lib. 6. Observat. Chirurg. Observe. 40. writes, of One whose Nerve
was contrited and attrited with a small contusion of the Cutis, to which was
applied a Cataplasme made of Beanmeal with Honey and Vinegar mixed together, and
in the punctured obcerated Nerve, the Moss which grows upon stones, being mixed
with Sulphur Wine and Vinegar upon a red hot Tile, and afterward applied, did
wonderfully assuage his pain, and did resolve the Matter which was collected in
the Nerve; and for the Tumor thereof, Ol. Terebinth. with a little Salt being
boiled together was applied with good success, and without any other Medicine,
Ol. Irini being only applied to the Contused Nerve, perfectly cured it. And
because Distention Distention and Distortion of the Nerves.
of the Nerves which is the 4th Passion that they may endure, or a Distortion
may happen by a full, extraordinary motion, or other violent external cause
which may hinder and molest the motion of the part; In this case we are to
apply either Empl. Diachylon cum Gummi, or De Mucilaginibus, or a Cataplasme
made of new Marsh-Mallow Roots, Lillies, with Bean-Meal and Faenugraek seed and
the like boiled together. Besides also, in a contused or distorted Nerve
sometimes a hardness remains, as oft-times it happens by reason of the access
of thick and viscid humors, whence a dullness does seize the part, Emollients
and Digestives are here to be applied, such as are Bdellium, Ammoniacum,
Galbanum, Diachylon magnum, with liquid Storax, Oil of Lillies, Dill,
Goose-grease, and the like. If the Tendons Wounds of the Tendons.
be hurt, they must be cured as you cure those of the Nerves, but the Medicines
which are here to be used ought to be more strong and dry. If the Ligaments be
Wounds of the Ligaments.
hurt, these require still stronger Medicines; for as these have but small sense
of feeling, so they require stronger Medicines, not communicating with the
Brains, they arising from the Bones, and ending therein also; so any drying
Medicine may be used without offense, therefore fill up the flesh and
consolidate those Wounds as you do others.

History.
I conclude the whole with a very Worthy Story of a Soldier, who being wounded
about his Neck, and the Nerve lying bare and unharmed, was cured exactly with
this method;. Terebinth. lot. in aqu. Salv. Mel. dispumat. an. ss. Farin. Orob.
ij. Pulv. Lumbricor. Terrestr. j. Ol. Rosar. Lumbricor. ij. misce. Let these
and every thing that you apply to the Nerves or nervous parts be Note.
applied warm; For according to Hippocrates's, Aphorism. 5. 17. cold things do
here create Convulsions, Distentions, Livors, Rigors, and Fevers, as well as in
Ulcers, it hardens the skin, and creates insupportable pain; over the dressing
apply Empl. Diapalma, anointing the Circumjacent parts with Oil of Roses and of
Earthworms, dipping your Stupes in Red Wine, and the intected Nerve being
covered with flesh, was afterward Cicatrized, and the Patient cured.

Thus have I sailed through the general Coast of Wounds. My next Task shall be
to Treat of Particular Wounds as they fall in their Order, beginning from the
Upper Parts, and ending at the Foot.

OF Wounds in Particular,
CHAP. XLII.
Of Wounds of the Forehead.
HAving run through all the Wounds of the Head, We next come to those which may
happen to the Front or Forehead, called Frons a ferendo, because it carries in
it the lively resemblance of Heaviness, Cheerfulness, Sadness or Moroseness:
And that which makes it so moveable, is the two Muscles of which it is
composed; the which Riolanus does call the Membranous fleshy Muscle, it begins
from the Eyelids, and ends where the hair begins; it consists of a Cuticula,
Cutis, a little fat, and a Membrana Carnosa; it has two sorts of Fibers
allowed it, for helping forwards the elevation of the Eyelids. If a Wound
happens here, and that with hurt of the frontal Bone, here are we to study
security of the parts, more than their beauty, because these Wounds are
dangerous; for here the Wound is to be dilated, and the Bone to be deraded, and
the same method to be used as I have already shown you in Wounds of the Skull:
But where Wounds happen here without any hurt to the Bone, here are we to study
their Cure to be performed with the least of Scarr or Deformity: And as a Wound
may happen here, without loss of substance, here are we to Cure as we do other
Wounds; yet with this respect to regard the habit of the Body. Hence also if a
Flux of Blood be present which may hinder union, this is first to be minded,
then are we to proceed to the uniting of the parts. And because Sutures here do
leave their marks, we are to abstain from these, and to apply such Medicines as
may unite the Lips of the Wound; the which being conjoined are so to be kept:
and for this use a small and narrow Ligature is very proper, applying some
agglutinative Medicine to the Wound before you use the Ligature: As hereto
adding the white of an Egg well beaten, to which may be added Dragons blood,
Mastich, Frankincense, Sarcocolla, and the like, to be made into the
Consistence of Honey; this way may you prevent an ill Cicatrice. In a
transverse Wound of the Forehead, no Ligature is proper; but here we are
advised to come to the stitch, and the second dressing to cut off the stitches,
and to apply some agglutinative Medicine; these only to be used also where the
lips of the Wound are at much variance, the which are by Suture to be brought
to a mutual Contacture: For agglutination, Empl. Barbarum is very good, and
Diapalma will do it; and where a good union is purchased, the place is to be
anointed with Axungia Humana, the which by its natural property does effect a
fair Cicatrice. In these cases, where you intend to procure a Cicatrice,
Unguent. Tuthiae is very good, or Unguent. Cerussae in Summer time. And thus
much of these Wounds.

To conclude this, take these Two Historical Observations; The first of
Glandorp, fol. 91. Observe. 13. who writes of a Lady, who falling several times
in one and the same place, purchased hereby a large Contusion in her Forehead
with an Ecchymosis. Upon which followed Delirium and Vomiting, Nature
endeavors to suppurate the matter, and to assist her, was applied this
Cataplasme,. Medull. Pan. Tritic. iij. fol. Malv. recent. M. S. Betonic. p.
iiij. Farin. Tritic. j. cum s. q. Lact. Vaccin. fiat Catapl. fine addendo Ol.
Lilior. j. Axung. Suill. ss. Croc. ss. Vitell. ovi no. j. fiat Catapl. The
Tumor being enlarged, and the matter ripe, let a right Incision be made (which
in these cases are generally thus to be made, it being constituted of right
Fibers) in the lower part upwards both for the better absterging and expurging
of the Matter, a Ligature being applied on the lower part for prevention of its
descent, being dipped in Wine and pressed out, the Matter was at length wholly
discharged, and by prescribing a good Diet, and procuring Incarnation, the
Wound was Cicatrized and Cured.

Dodonaeus fol. 267. writes of an Old Man, who having received a Wound in his
Forehead, was freed from blindness: And he further annotes of a Woman of Fifty
years of age, who by falling from a high place had her frontal Vein wounded,
much blood issuing thence, she suddenly did speak, and that impediment of her
Tongue was loosned, which for some Months had been tied up by an Apoplexy.

CHAP. XLIII.
Of Wounds of the Eyelids.
THe Eyelids being appointed by Nature as the drawbridges to lift the Eye up
and down, are sometimes wounded: These are framed for keeping out dirt and ill
vapors from the Eye, and keep back all injuries from assaulting or coming near
the Eye; they consist of a thin Cutis, having no fat allowed them; inwardly
wrapped up with a thin and light Pericrane, for the more easy motion: each Eye
has two, one whereof we call the lower, in man not of much use, the other the
upper, being of great service to Mankind, endued with two Muscles, the first
being right, seated in the upper region of the Orbit, within the Thalamus of
the Eye: the other said to be Orbicular; but this by Riolan. and Spigelius is
taken for two: Julius Casserius, Sect. 1. de Orig. Vis. Cap. 18. writes, That
hence may be taken these Indications, such as have an elated upper Eyelid, are
proud and fierce; and such as have them depressed, are humble and mild. But to
come to their Wounds: If the Ligaments of the Muscles be not dissected, use no
Suture; for this does bring intolerable pain and abscess: but if these be
incised, stitch them up with a deep and firm stitch. Now a Wound of the Eyelid
may happen either by a simple Incision, or with Incision with loss of some of
the substance. In case of a Wound caused by a simple Incision lengthwayes made,
according to the Series of the Fibers, here are we to use Cephalic and
Agglutinative Powders, such as have no sharp quality in them. If the Incision
be transverse without loss of substance, here procure an exact agglutination,
so as the lips of the Wound may fairly and evenly answer each other: The
Sutures or Stitches that you make here must be deep, for taking fast hold. If a
Wound happens here with loss of Substance, study the discharge of Matter, and
procure a good Consolidation; and for this Use Sarcoticks are the best
Medicines, as Balsam. Lucatell. Liniment. Arcaei, and the like. As for
Sarcotical and Agglutinative Medicines here to be used, this Powder of Galen is
very excellent; Bol. armon. Terr. sigillat. Sang. Drac. Sarcocoll. an. j.
misce; or if you please, to 2 drams of the first two you may add a dram of the
last two; above the Powders being very finely beaten, is to be applied a piece
of fine and softlinnen Cloth, dipped in the white of an Egg and Rosewater beaten
up together; for this does hinder Inflammation, and over these apply convenient
Bolsters.

To conclude this Chapter, I shall end with this observable History; the first
whereof shall be of a young History.
Man, who looking upwards, had a small Stone fell down upon the upper Eyelid,
the which did both hurt it and its Cartilage, and dissolved its Continuity. A
Suture being presently made, and the Parts enclosed by a Needle, the Cartilage
remaining unhurt, there did arise a great Inflammation both of the Adnata and
Eyelid, with pain; to the Wound was applied an agglutinative Medicine, with
Empl. Diapalma; into the Eye was injected a Collyrium; a Vein was breathed; a
good order of Diet prescribed; and this Collyrium ordered: Sem. Melon* recent.
excorticat. ss. Aqu. Rosar. Euphrag. Plantag. an* vj. Contundantur semina in
mortario marmorio cum q s. aquar. supradict. and cola, colature add Terr.
sigillat. opt. Tuth. praeparat. an. ij. the which are to be bound up in a piece
of linen Cloth, and so put into it. And because his Body was very Cacochymick,
he was ordered these Pills: Pil. Luc. Major. ss. Pil. Coch. ss. Diagr. Pill.
gr.ij. cum Ol. Anis. q s. fiant Pil. no. 5. deaureantur. These being
administered, the Inflammation ceased, and the other Symptoms vanished; the
Wound was Cicatrized with Diapompholigos, and the Patient cured without any
blemish.

CHAP. XLIV.
Of Wounds of the Eyes.
I Shall continue my Discourses with a brief Anatomy of the Parts, as I treat
of them, being very advantageous to the young Surgeon, to direct him in his
handling of them, if wounded. And in this place of worth we must make a stop,
to admire the wonderful Fabric of the Eye, of what Parts it consists, and how
variously these may be hurt and wounded.

But to begin with the Ancients: See how Laurentius and Spigelius, and Bauhine
speak of it. That whereas the Soul of Man, although it be simple, (...), yet it
cannot make its entrance into the Ergastulum of the Body, or arrive at
understanding, reasoning, and speculation into Fancies, without the help of
Senses. As therefore the Head is the Seat of Senses, and House of Reason, so
also are these Senses as Guardsmen to the Soul, and are planted as Internuntij
in its Region. And although there are allowed 5 Senses, yet the chiefest and
principal of the rest is Seeing, and that in these three respects; for this
declares and shows to us the variety of Objects, and their differences. 2dly,
Their ways and methods of operation are most noble, and do exceed the rest, for
vision is made in an instant. It Is these that give us our sight and light also,
the which the ancient Stoics called the Divine Vision; Hesichias calls them
(...), Solis Portas; the Latins call them Oculi, ab oculendo: They are lodged
under the Eyelids as under a Veil; they are the two Lights of our Microcosm,
appearing as our bright Stars, being as the Indexes of the Mind, and most
inducing to sweetness and comfort of Life: to pass their admirable figure,
site, connection and temper, we come to its rare composition. And thus may we
see it framed of six Muscles, thus called, Superbus, Humilis, Bibatorius,
Indignatorius, Amatorij, or two circular Muscles; having these common Membranes
allowed it, the which I shall only name, Adnata, Innominata, Cornea, Sclirotis,
Uvea, Choroides, Arena, Retiformis. It has also these 3 Humors, as a
Waterish, Vitreous, and Crystalline Humor granted it, with an Optic Nerve,
Veins, Arteries, Fat, and Glandules: Of each of these you may read more at
large in Laurentius Spegelius, and Demerbroke.

Having thus shown how the Eyes are the Organs of Sight, we may also see how
they may be affected, wounded, punctured; and these Parts having their Nerves
and Membranes immediately arising from the Brain, this declares them to be of
an exquisite sense, whose Coats are very thin, and perpetually in motion; hence
are hereby Fluxions easily received into them; and these do require both an
artificial and careful method to be used. In these Parts we are also advised by
Galen, That we abstain Note.
from all oleaginous things, these here both inflaming and causing Pain: 2ly, To
keep the Eye from the light, for this weakens it. And to cure a simple Wound
happening here, these three Intentions are required; To prevent Inflammation,
and stop all flux of Humors, Inflammation.
to mitigate Pain, and to unite the separated Parts. Of each of these in their
order.

And first of preventing Inflammation: And for performing this, Breathing of a
Vein, ordering a thin Diet, applying repelling Medicines to the Front, are good
and necessary, made of the whites of Eggs, Rose Water, Bol. armeny, powder of
fine Tutthy; into the Eye may be put too of Troch. alb. Rhasis fine Opto in
fine powder, with Plantain-water; if the right side be affected, let the
Patient lie on his left. Of this instead of the former may Collyrium.
be used; Troch. alb. Rhas. ij. Aqu. Plantag. Rosar. alb. an. ij. Tutth.
praeparat. j. misceantur in Mortario and Unguent.
fiat Collyrium: Or this, pulv. Lap. Haematit. praeparat. ij. Camphor. Alo.
lot. an. ij. Tutth. praeparat. Seiph. alb. an. ss. misce in Mortario plumbeo
and fiat Linimentum. If the Wound has Inflammation adjoined, we are to mind
this, not neglecting the Wound; and for dissolving and discussing the concrete
Blood occasioned by Contusion, or the Laceration of its Coats, into the Wound
is to be instilled Pigeons blood lukewarm, or Woman's milk, over which is to be
applied a Cataplasme made of white Bread, powder of Wormwood beaten with the
white of an Egg, at night fomenting the Eye with a Decoction made with Troch.
alb. Rhas. the Mucilage of Quinch-seed extracted in Rose Water, and a little
prepared Tutthy.

To assuage Pain.
The second is to assuage Pain, and repel the defluxion of Humors: These
following may be directed; as, Fol. Plantag. Rosar. Rubr. fl. Melilot. Camomel.
an. m. s. Decoction.
Sem Faenugraec. ter lot. ss. Alo. Myrrh. Thur. an. j. Croc. gr. iiij. Tutth.
praeparat. Pompholig. praeparat. Ceruss. lot. an. ij. Troch. alb. Rhas. cum
Opio j. Aqu. Rosar. Faenicul. an. q. s. fiat Decoctum, with which the Eye is to
be washed oft-times in a day.

Powder.
A Powder for the same is this: Troch alb. Rhas. cum Op. pulv. Tutth. Opt.
praeparat. Pompholig. praeparat. lap. Haematit. Gum. Arabic. Tragag. Alo. an.
j. Croc. ss. misce, fiat pulvis tennissimus. This is to be used to the 4th or
7th day.

Empl.
Falloppius does much commend this Plaster for asswaging Pain: Carn. pomor.
dulc. sub prun. coct. ij. fol. papaver. alb. coct. sub prunis Hyosciam. ita
coct. an. j ss. Croc. j. farin. Faenugraec. ij. lact. Muliebr. Ol. Rosar. an.
q. s. fiat Emplastrum, extendatur super petiam, and imponatur super oculi
clausi palpebram.

Uniting the divided Parts.
The third Intention, which is the uniting of the separated Parts, will be made
evident in the ensuing Discourse. If therefore the Wound be a simple Wound,
only penetrating and incising the Cornea or Conjunctura, and this happens,
without any exition of its interior Body or Humor, this is to be united. And
for the performance hereof, we must be very careful and have regard to the Eye,
for it is irritated by every small thing; hence therefore if Pain afflicts it,
remove it by Revulsion; if the Wound be deep, the weapon which occasioned it,
must pass through the broad and long chink about the Orbits: If the Wound pass
into the Brain, it is mortal; if it reaches not so far, but only does enter
the aqueous Humor, and makes that fly out, or the vitreous or Crystalline
Humors; in these cases Sarcoticks are most proper, and these are to be used in
very fine Powders, of which I have been very plentiful, they being made of
Terra sigillata, Bol. armen. Sang. Dracon. Sarcocoll. Lap. Calaminar. and the
like. And because it sometimes falls out, that part of the wounding
Instrument does stick in the Eye, if it sticks so fast, as that it may not
easily be removed, without effusion of some of the Humors, and that it does
not prick the Eyelids, this is best to be kept in, and to dress the Wound with
anodine Medicines until the 7th day, as Fallopius advises, and then to use
Agglutinatives. But if the piece does cause pain, and a continual gleeting, and
hurts the Eyelids, this is thus to be dressed with Unguent. de Betonica, with
which the Tent is to be armed, over which may be applied Oxelaeum: Or for the
same Use this is excellent; Ol. Vitell. Ovor. ss. Abietin. Unguent.
ij. Croc. gr. iiij. misce in oculum infundendum; and this to be used until the
7th or 9th day.

To conclude this with some Historical Observations, History.
Glandorp fol. 98. Obs. 15. writes of a Nobleman, who being challenged by
another to fight a Duel, was wounded by his Antagonist in that part of the
Cornea which is Diaphanous: The waterish Humor passed out here; he felt
intolerable pains; a Vein being opened (viz.) the Cephalic Vein, and 6 ounces
of Blood extracted, to the Eye for the present was put Aqu. Rosarum nothing
being more ready, and so was it rouled up. In the interim this following
Emplaister was applied to the Nuch Vesicator.
of his Neck: Carn. bovin. salit. and in fumo exsiccat. ij. Ferment. recent.
jss. Smegm. com. ss. Sal. ij. incidatur caro subtilissime and simul misceantur
and cum q. s. Aceti fiat Collyrium.
pasta. The 2d day was ordered this Collyrium: Aqu. Rosar. j. Euphrag.
Faenicul. an. vj. pulv. Mirabol. Citrin. j. lap. Calam. praeparat. ij. Troch.
alb. Rhas. cum Opio j. pulveres liquentur in petia and in aquis supradictis
suspendantur; of which every four hours was instilled some very warm. Oft-times
to make his Body soluble, he was ordered Cassia, a thin Diet being prescribed,
and such as was cooling; he took afterward these Pills: Pil. Coch. Aurear. an.
ss. Mastich. gr. vj. cum vino malvatico fiant Pillulae: Hereby he was perfectly
recovered without scarce any scar, and recovered his sight.

Another.
Another he has of a young Man of scarce 16 years of age, who having his Eye
hurt, the waterish humor with part of the vitreous humor flowed out; for
which Efflux, the first day a Vein in his Arm was opened, from whence was drawn
forth 5 ounces of blood, to the Nuch of his Neck was applied the former
Vesicatory; hence followed great Inflammation and Pain, for the asswaging of
which Woman's milk was prescribed; Catapl.
then was applied this following Cataplasme: Sem. Cydonior. iij. aqu. Rosar.
iij. and fiat Mucilago, coletur, colaturae add Carn. pomor. odorif. coct. ij.
farin. Hord. subtilis. pulv. q. s. misce, fiat Cataplasma. The Inflammation not
being stopped by these, Cupping-glasses were applied to his Scapulaes, with much
flame and scarrification, and Vesicatories applied behind his ears, out of
which issued much water; the Pain not yet abating, he had an Issue made in his
Neck, from whence within few days after a great plenty of Matter was
discharged, and hereby the Inflammation ceased, and the pain began to be
mitigated. For consolidating the Coat of the Cornea, A consolidating Collyrium.
and the separated Lips, was used this Collyrium:. Aqu. Rosar. Euphrag.
Faenicul. an. jss. Cort. granator. jss. fl. Balaust. Rosar. Rubr. an. pug. j.
Mirabol. Citrin. Nuc. Cupress. an. j. These being cut and bruised, let them
stand in infusion in the Waters for 8 hours, then boil them, and to the
strained Liquor add these following Ingredients, being tied up in a fine piece
of Cloth: Cort. mirabol. Citrin. levigat. cum aqu. supradict. ij. Troch. alb.
sine Op. j. Tuth. Lapid: Calamin. praeparat. an. ss. Cerus. lot. ij. his
addendo Sir. Rosar. sicc. j. with which Collyrium the Eye was washed 3 times in
a day; this being used, the lips of the Wound was joined, and for procuring A
skinning Collyrium.
a Cicatrice here, the Part was washed with this following:. Aqu. Faenicul. Rut.
Celidon. major. an. jss. succ. Faenicul. jss. Tartar. praeparat. gr. vj.
Sacchar. albiss. iij. Sacchar. Saturn. vel. Sal. ejusd. gr. iiij. Troch. alb.
cum Opio j. Tie up the Tartar and the Salt of Lead in a fine Cloth, and let
them hang in the aforesaid Waters; with which was procured a good Cicatrice.

Another.
Solonander Sect. 5. Cons. 15. writes of a Woman, who cutting of Wood, had a
sliver thereof fell into her Eye; she presently taking the yolk of an Egg, with
Ceruss and Oil of Roses beaten together, and applying it to the whole Orbit of
the Eye, instead of a defensative, and inwardly putting into the Eye the white
of an Egg, mixed with Woman's milk and Rose Water, was perfectly cured.

CHAP. XLV.
Of Wounds of the Face.
IN the foregoing Chapters I have shown you the upper Parts of the Head, and
those Parts which are covered with long Hairs: We come now to that Part which
by some is called Vultus, a voluntatis Indicio, it being turned every way
forwards and to the sides according to our wills: It is also called Facies,
because it makes the difference between Man and Beast. And here might we look
into its Beauty, and consider in every respect its fair composition: We may
well admire its Maker; for although the treasuries and storehouses of
Judgment, Sense and Reason, are placed in other Parts, yet for Beauty this does
surpass them: For in this may be easily seen the storms and tempests of Anger
and Passion, the silver streams of Love, the signs of Health, and the attempts
of Death: Here may we lively see represented the Idea's of Joy, Anger, Sadness,
Melancholy, representing the obscure Parts of Man, as by a glass; some of its
Parts are containing, others contained. The Cutis hereof has in it this one
remarkable thing, the which as it is variously perforated in the Eyes,
Nostrils, Ears and Mouth; as it is wholly nervous in the other Parts of the
Body, in this it is musculous and fleshy. And because I intend to treat of all
its Parts in their several orders, I shall not give you any further trouble to
read more hereof, but fall upon its Discourse of being wounded.

And here although such Medicines as are already set down, may serve for the
curing of Wounds of the Face, yet because it is the comely Part of the Body, and
beauty of its Front, affording a wonder to its Spectators, here ought it to be
our greatest care that we leave no scars, or foul Cicatrice. If the soft Parts
be only wounded, close the lips of the Wound with evenness, by a fair Ligature,
and agglutinative Medicines; and herein are we directed to make use of narrow
Rowlers, these being most proper for performing this Intention. As for
agglutinative Medicines, I have already presented you with a plentiful
quantity; these may be made of Frankincense, Bol. armoni. Terra sigillata,
Dragons blood, Beanmeal, with the white of an Egg beaten up with Rosewater, or
the like. If the Wound be large and wide, you must come to the use of the dry
Stitch, the which I have already shown in my Discourse of Sutures* and Ambrose
Parrey is very full hereof, expressing both way and method, and therefore in
this case I do recommend you to him. In these cases Linimentum Arcaei, and
Balsamum Lucatelli are good, over which may be applied this Cataplasme:. Bol.
Armon. ij. Thur. Mastich. Sarcocoll. an. ss. Myrrh. Aloes an. j. Sangu. Dracon.
ss. Farin. Hord. Fabar. an. j. misce, and cum albumine Ovi mist. cum aqu.
Rosarum q. s. fiat Cataplasma. Before the application of which, the aforesaid
Liniment or Balsom is to be anointed all over the wounded Part, and the lips of
the Wound to be touched therewith.

Arcaeus lib. 1. fol. 68. de Curand. Vulner. has these two Histories: The
first of which is of a Man who was desperately wounded, from his Eyelid and
Nose to the lowest Lip, so as the Nose with the upper Mandible and Teeth fell
down upon the Chin; the Wound being stitcht up, and the Mandible and its Bones
being reposed into their proper places, it was afterward rolled up with a Tape
a fingers broad about his Forehead, from below upwards, and there sown up; and
in form of a Cross was another Rowler stitcht to the former, from one Ear to
the other, and by applications of good and proper Medicines the Wound was
healed, and the Patient restored to his former health.

He writes another Story of the same Man, who being smitten under the Chin even
to the upper Mandible by a Bull's Horn, opened part of the Face therewith, and
dis-joyned his left Eye from the Nose with the end thereof; the place being
stitcht up with a Needle, the Mandible was restored as you see in the former,
and he perfectly was cured; his Mouth was inwardly washed with a Decoction of
Barley, Roses, Balaustians, and honey of Roses; and thus he was in a short time
recovered, many pieces of Bones coming forth by his Palate, which were broken
by the Horn, and left remaining in the Cavity of the Palate.

CHAP. XLVI.
Of Wounds of the Temples.
THE Temporal Muscles being very strong, are by the Greeks called Crotaphites,
whose Fibers, by how much they do recede from their middle, they are so much
the more obliquely carried with a Tendon. They do receive in each of them 3
Nerves, the first arising from the 3d pair, the 2d from the 4th, and the 3d
from the 5th pair; in which respect this Muscle being either contused or
punctured, great danger of Convulsion and death approaches.

Another thing worthy note in this Muscle is, That it is covered with the
Pericrane, by which the subjacent Temporal Bones are destitute thereof.
Hippocrates does advise in Wounds which happen here, by reason of the direful
Symptoms which they do produce, the Patient does not continue long. And for the
confirming of this, Jacotius Com. 1. Aph. Lib. 1. Sect. 3. Coac. Hipp. writes,
That he has oft-times seen Convulsive motions happen here by a light hurt in
these Parts. And Brasavolus ad Aph. 9. lib. 7. writes, Upon some of the
Temporal Veins being wounded, a mortal Convulsion has followed, without any
help or stoppage of the Flux. Yet Ambrose Parrey writes, Lest any Surgeon
might be afraid of cutting the Temporal Muscle, where occasion does require the
exemption of the Bone by the Trepan, he does here produce a History of an
Experiment of his own, which he practiced on one in the War of Henry the II.
who being smitten with a Stone, with that violence that it fractured the Os
Petrosum, and very much contused the Temporal Muscle, without any apparent
Wound: To the which he being called into consultation with many other
Physicians and Surgeons, it was generally agreed that the contused Flesh
should be dilated, for the better coming at the Bone: The day following the
Flesh was dilated, and the day following, which was the 3d day, a Trepan was
applied; the which being done, some small frustula's of Bones were taken away,
and putting in a leaden Pipe into the Part through which passed much Matter,
the Patient was ordered to shut his Nostrils, and Ears and Mouth, and force it
through here, the which passed from between the Dura and Pia Matter; the rest of
the Matter was forced out by a Syringe, with which was injected a Traumatick
and deterging Decoction, and the Patient was at length recovered.

And for satisfying of this Point, you may read of Glandorp in his Specul.
Chirurg. Obs. 9. fol. 82. of a Child of 12 years of age, who having dashed the
left part of his Head against an obtuse piece of Wood, did hereby contuse his
Temporal Muscle on the same side: He hereupon presently grew immovable,
vomited blood, and lost his speech; the hairs being shaved, it was anointed
with Ol. Rosarum, and covered with Melilot Empl. until a Cataplasme could be
made; the which being applied, the motion returned again, and the Imagination
still Catapl.
seemed somewhat hurt. The Cataplasme was this:. Betonic. salv. Marjoran. an. P.
iij. Rosar. Rubr. Primul. ver. Lillior. convall. an. P. iiij. pulv. fl. Cham.
Melilot. an. pug. ij. Farin. Hord. Fabar. an. ij. Orob. j. cum Lact. vaccin. q.
s. fiat Cataplasma, fine addendo Ol. Violar. jss. Vitell. Ovor. no. j. Croc. j.
misce; the which being so rouled up as to keep it on, about the middle of the
night he began to rest; the morning following he returned better answers to
questions proposed, and began to perceive great pains of his Head, and griping
of his Belly; Clyster.
for which was ordered this Clyster:. Violar. Malvar. an. M. j. Alth. Betonic.
Verban. salv. Rorismar. an. pug. iiij. Rad. Alth. j. sem. Lin. Faenugr. an. vj.
Anis. Coriander. an. iij. coquantur in s. q. aq. fontin. ad xvij. colaturae,
add Elect. Diacath. vj. Ol. Rosar. Aneth. an. j. Sacchar. Rubr. colat. x.
misce, fiat Enema. the which he retained for half an hour after its injection,
whereby he received much ease, and the pains did begin to grow remiss, and the
3d day he walked about. But because a flatulent Tumor appeared in the Muscle,
this following Decoction was prescribed for it, in which a Sponge being dipped,
was applied, being well pressed, to the affected Part: ^^coction.
. fol. Betonic. M. ss. fl. Camomel. Aneth. Melilot. Rosar. an. pug. ij. Sem.
Anis. iij. Aqu. fontin. vin. optim. an. lbj. coquantur adtertias; the which
being used for some days, the wind was discussed; and over the Part was applied
Empl.
this mixture:. Empl. Diapalm. ss. Melilot. iij. Ol. Camomel. q. s. fiat Empl.
These being ordered, and a convenient Diet prescribed, he was restored to his
health.

He has another History in his 12th Observation hereof; but because I would
not be too tedious, I commend you thither.

CHAP. XLVII.
Of Wounds of the Nose.
THis, as it is the instrument of Smelling, carries with it according to
Laurentius, both Beauty and Majesty. Hence did the Egyptians in their
Hieroglyphics, signify a wise Man by his Nose, who could thereby smell other
men's politic stratagems. Aristotle does call it (...), in 11. Cap. Histor.
Animal. the word taking its derivation from (...), because through its nostrils
do pass the Excrements of the Brain. Cicero writes, that it is placed above,
for the better reception of Odours, and Nature placed it in a straight line,
that Respiration may not be interrupted, but pass freely. It is divided into
two Cavities by a partition, the odoriferous Spirits, or Air, do generally swim
in them. This division also is generally believed was thus made, for the more
perfect receipt of the Sense of Smelling; for we smell even in our breathing.
It consists of a Cuticula, Cutis, Muscles, Bones, Cartilages, and an inward
Coat, all which have their proper actions.

But because many worthy Authors of Anatomy have fully and plentifully enlarged
on these, I shall not trouble you further therein, but fall to our present
task, where we may meet with it wounded either in its soft Parts only, or also
in its hard Parts. We shall first begin with its soft Parts.

Where by the way we are to note, That as the Nose is Boney in the upper part,
so is it Cartilaginous in the lower part. If the Cutis be only wounded, a dry
Stitch may serve, not to come to Suture, but rather to use agglutinative
Medicines, endeavoring to our utmost to procure a fair and even Cicatrice. A
small skar here very evidently appearing, hence ought we to study to preserve
its Beauty, by curiously joining the lips of the Wound together. In these cases
such Medicines which are here to be used, are to be of a soft consistence, and
yet having in them an astringent and drying quality, hereby closing the lips of
the Wound with that advantage, that scarce any mark may be seen; and for this
Use Unguent. Deficcativum Rubrum, Album Camphoratum, and such as I have already
mentioned, may do well here.

Wounds of the Bone of the Nose.
The second sort of Wounds which may be allowed to happen here, must either
reach the upper and boney parts, or the lower and Cartilaginous parts. Now if
the upper part be wounded so as the Bone be fractured, the first Intention here
is to reduce the Fracture, then join and unite the Wound: And for the
performance of this, according to Aquapendens his advice, cap. 29. de Vuln.
fol. 895. we are to put into the Nose a fit piece of Wood, wrapped about with
soft linen Cloth, so as it may easily enter thereinto, outwardly ordering the
Nose with your fingers, for the true confirmation of it; this being done, we
are to put in a Quill or small Pipe into the Nose, made of Reed, or the like,
these not being exquisitely round, but somewhat sharp above and flat below, to
preserve its natural figure: For this Pipe has these 3 Faculties allowed it;
as that it keeps the conformation of the Part, and does hinder the falling of
any of the Bones into the Nostrils; then it makes a free passage for breathing,
keeping the Nostrils open* and lastly, makes the way free for the discharge of
all Excrements from the Brain; here also take notice, that this Pipe be not put
too high, lest it does occasion sternutation, and hereby do disorder the
reduced Fracture, and consolidation of the Wound.

The Bones being thus reduced, we next come to the uniting of the separated
Parts; which may be done by the dry Stitch or Agglutinatives; and as to say,
Epolonticks, Bol* armeny, Dragons blood, Terrasigillata, and the like, being
beaten into fine powder, and mixed with the white of an Egg, to the consistence
of Honey, is very good.

Of a Transverse Wound.
If a transverse Wound happens here, you are to apply to each side of the
Nostrils a fine linen Boulster, moistened in red Wine, and pressed out, over
which to apply a Rowler, having a hole made in the middle thereof, for a more
free breathing, sowing this to the backpart of the Head.

Of a Wound of the Cartilage of the Nose.
The Iower and Cartilaginous part of the Nose being wounded, the same Pipe is
here again required; then the lips of the Wound to be united, and brought
together by Ligatures, and the same Medicines to be used, as I have already
shown. If the Cartilaginous part of the Nose be wholly cut off* this Wound is
incurable: But that the beauty of the Face may not be thus deformed, you may
frame a new Nose for it out of the skin of the Arm, or any other Part; but this
is both a laborious, difficult, and long Work; it is made by scarrifying the pin
of the Nose, and cutting the skin of the Arm, answering that part of the Nose
which is lost; and the skin being thereto applied, and sown with the scarrified
part of the Nose, the Arm is afterward to be tied to the Head, so as it be not
any ways moved, for this would hinder Agglutination: Agglutination being made,
the Nose is to be scarrified with deep Scarrifications, so as the flesh appear
red; then the neighboring part of the Arm is to be cut, and put to the Nose,
and sown; and this is so often to be repeated, until the whole Nose be cut out,
and the skin of the whole Arm be almost ablated, and agglutinated to the Nose.
But to conclude this:

History.
We read of two Mariners, cutting one another with their Knives: The one cut
the other so, as that he had the Cartilaginous part of his Nose as it were cut
off; it was stitcht up with 3 stitches in a good form, two at the sides being
made, and the 3d in the middle, yet so Liniment.
as the Cartilage might not be damaged; after which was applied this Mundifier
and Incarnative:. Ol. Rosar. Compl. iiij. Succ. Nicotian. Apij an. jss.
coquantur ad Succorum consumpt. and colature add Resin. Terebinth. j. ij.
Virid. Aer. j. Cer. q. s. fiat Linimentum. With this was anointed the
Dressings, with which the parties were dressed; and over them was applied Empl.
Diapalm. In the inward part, lest superfluous flesh should grow therein, was
applied a hollowed Tent, armed with Diapompholigos; and that the mucous
Substance may be derived from the Nostrils to the Palate, he used this
Apophlegmatisme:. Cubebar. j. Pyreth. Staphisacr. Agaric. Crud. an. j. Pulp.
Passular. ij. Sacchar. in s. q. aqu. Salv. Solut. q. s. fiant Troch. the which
being aright applied and ordered, he was perfectly recovered, without any
impediment of Speech.

CHAP. XLVIII.
Of Wounds of the Ears.
It Is called Auris, ab Hauriendo, the Air being drawn in thereby. Aristotle
calls these Parts, Sensus Disoipunae, they being created for Understanding;
these are framed with no less Art than the former. They are by the Greeks
called (...), in English, Ears, from Hearing. They are framed of many Parts,
the which do as well serve for the reception of found, as also for the
intension thereof. They are the instruments of Hearing, but not the principal
Organs; for if these be lost, as we see it inflicted as a punishment upon
perjured persons, yet the Sense of Hearing does continue, as well as the Sense
of Smelling, if the Nose be amputated. These Senses being lodged within the
Cranium, they gain a semicircular shape; on the inside excavated, Nature has
made them two, that one being injured the other may perform the Work. Vesalius
compares the whole Ear to a Fan. Gaza calls this Pinna, being much like a broad
Cartilage, or Fin of a Fish. By some it is called a Wing, broad, for the better
embracing the sound, which afterward does descend by the inward Compass unto
the arched Cavity that guides it to the Head. The outward Circumference is
called (...), the inward called (...).

But as touching the outward parts of the Ear, these being the proper Subjects
of our present Discourse: And here may we see a Cuticula, as the common
covering of this part as well as of the rest; next a Skin, enwrapping both the
outside and inside of the Ear; it has Veins dispersed on either side from the
external Jugulars; Arteries it has from the inward Carotides, which do pass to
the backside of the Ear; two small Nerves it has backward, and two from the
sides of the 2d Conjugation; they have both proper and common Muscles allowed
them, found out by Ealloppius; two others they have also; in all, four. The
outward substance of the Ear is neither boney nor fleshy, but moderately hard,
yielding a sound, an Echo being as it were framed without, and so carried
inwards* its Cartilage arises as it were out of the Temples; it is tied to the
petrose Bone by a Ligament, which is strong. There are many other parts
belonging to the inward Ear, but Anatomy does sufficiently show these,
therefore I pretermit them. If the Ears be hurt by outward Causes, the danger
is not great; yet if part thereof be quite cut off here, it never grows
again; and if they are only wounded, they require a right Suture, and
agglutinative Medicines; and as Hippocrates writes, the dryer any part is, the
more drying Medicines does it require. If the Wound be to be stitched up, here
are two things to be observed: That you only bring together the parts of the
Skin on each side of the Ear, without touching or hurting the Cartilage: And
then 2dly, If the Wound does reach to that Cavity we call commonly Meatus
Anditorius, you are to keep a spongy Tent in it, to prevent the growth of a
spongy flesh, and that no Matter may fall into it, which may exulcerate the
inward parts; both which are set down for our instruction by Aqua pendens, fol.
904. cap. 33.

The Wound being either stitcht up, or joined together, we are to use drying
Agglutinatives, such as are powder of Bol. armen. Dragons blood, Mastich. Red
Roses, Balaust. to be mixed either with the white of an Egg well beaten with
Rose Water, or to be sprinkled in the lips of the Wound; over which is to be
applied Empl. Barbarum* or Diapalma, or the like; the which Empl. Barbarum is
thus to be made: Bitumin* Judaiac. Pic. Arid. Resin. Cer. an. xij. Terebinth.
Thur. Opoponac. Ceruss. an. ij. Litharg. aur. j. Ol. Myrtin. iij. acet. q. s.
fiat Empl. It the Cartilage be rent, Celsus does highly commend this
following:. Ras. Aerugin. xij. Spum. argent. xxx. Alumin. Picis arid. Pineae
an. xij. Ol. Myrtin. Acet. an. q. s. fiat Empl.

History.
To conclude: A Soldier being shot through in the middle of his Ear, it being
much wounded, the Wounds were stitched up, the Cartilage was not hurt; and
because he bled much at the Wound, this was presently applied:. pulv. Lap.
Haematit. ij. Bol. armen. jss. Ceruss. j. misce, fiat pulvis; over which was
applied Empl. Diapalma; afterward it was rouled up, some parts of the
Cartilage laid bare, over which was sprinkled some of the aforesaid Powder,
stopping the Ear inwardly with Cotton or Wool, and the Wound being mundified
was soon healed and skinned.

CHAP. XLIX.
Of Wounds of the Lips.
THese by Cicero are called Labra a Lambendo, of licking, they are two in
number, being both fleshy, fungous and moveable; and as they are outwardly
covered with a skin, so inwardly are they invested with a Membrane coming to
the Stomach and Mouth: and hence is it that the Skin is seen to shake and
tremble upon Vomiting. They are of great Use to Man, to help forward his
speech, to void his spattle, and to defend his Teeth from cold Air; they have
both proper and common Muscles allowed them, and these are held Six in number;
two moving them upwards, two downwards, and the other to either side of the
Mouth. These are generally wounded lengthwayes: if the Lip be cut above or
below, it is presently to be stitcht up; for whilst the Patient moves his
Mouth, he does hinder Consolidation. Some are born with Lips divided, but these
are to be cured by Needles, hereby joining the diverted parts. Outwardly may be
applied agglutinative Medicines; inwardly more properly Syrups, to be ordered.

And for further appearance how you are to act here, History.
take these one or two Histories.

The first shall be of a Scholar which Glandorp mentions, who falling upon a
Door in a dark Night, fell upon a Stone which cut his Lip, and brake two Teeth
of his upper Mandible; and here because there was a separation of the parts, an
actual and deep Suture was made, and the Teeth reduced into their places; the
Wound was filled with Detersives and Digestives, which were outwardly applied:
Inwardly the part was touched and Unguent.
anointed with this:. Sir. de. Ros. Sicc. j. de Succ. Nicotian. Mirtin. an. ss.
Unguent. Aegyptiac. j. misce. Over this was applied a part of this Plaster,.
Ol. Rosar. Litharg. aur. an. iij. A^ung. Porcin. ij. Vitriol. alb. ij. ss.
misce. When it was well mundified, and began to heal, this was next ordered,.
Tutth. praeparat. Lap. Calamin. j. Corn. Cerv. Ust. ss. Alo. gr. vj. With which
was generated a new flesh and a new Cicatrice: And for confirming the loose
Teeth, this following Decoction, Decoction.
. Herb. Hyperic. Hypocyst. fol. Ros. Rubr. Balnust. asp. iij. Cort. Granator.
j. fol. et Fruct. Myrt. ar^ Pug. ij. Nuc. Cupress. ss. coque simul in aqu.
Hordeat. Chalybeat. colaturam serva adusum.

CHAP. L.
Of Wounds of the Tongue.
WE are come now to speak of our good or bad Friend, called by the Greeks
(...), being tied within the pale of the Teeth, or imprisoned between the two
bars of the Teeth and the Lips. It Is the notable Instrument both of Taste and
Voice; its Basis does rest upon the Bone Hyois; in Man it is somewhat long, and
sometimes seen to be longer in some Men than in others. It is soft, broad, and
loose, that it may be conveyed, dilated and variously disposed; it is tied to
the Larynx, and to the Os Hyoidis, upon which its Roots do rest. It Is made of
proper flesh, a coat, Nerves, Veins, Arteries, Muscles, and a Ligament; and
this is very strong, membranous and broad: and so had it need, for the keeping
up of the Tongue sometimes, and is as the bridle of the Tongue sometimes to
curb its unruliness. It receives its Coat from that which does also invest the
Mouth, Palate, Aesophagos and Larynx. It Is spun and made of fine and thin
Fibers, for the better reception of savours. Its substance is soft and rare,
much like a sponge, for the more speedy moystning with the humor which does
carry this sapor in it; its fibers are expanded through the length of its
muscles: Which is not so in the Tongue it self, It receives two Nerves from
the third and fourth Conjugations. It has two Veins called Raninae, issuing
out of the inward branch of the external Jugular Veins. It does receive its
Arteries from the sleepy Arteries; it is framed of many Muscles, and has many
Muscles allowed it at its thick end, and these do help forward its functions of
speaking, and rolling of the meat, and its tasting. Its muscles are in number
five pair, thus called, Styloglossi, Myloglossi, Geneoglossi, Ypsioglossi, and
Ceratoglossi. And this Tongue, although it be but a little member thus
furnished, is of great use, Expressing our Minds, and yielding us our tasting
quality, being as Hippocrates writes, the messenger of the Brain; and is also
very useful as touching life, for this helps forward Mastication or chewing,
assisting also deglutition, by turning the meat over it, toward the Gullet:
all which good turns it does to Mankind.

Now as touching its Wounds. The Tongue being thus guarded with a Set of
Teeth, and lodged within the Mouth, might seem to be defended against all
outward Injuries, yet this is sometimes seen wounded: for when the Cheeks and
the Jaws are wounded, the Tongue also may take share of the Wounds. And it may
be so wounded, that even a part of it may be cut off, and here the loss is
irreparable: If a part hereof does adhere to the sound part, here it is not to
be cut away, but rather to be stitched up. Wounds happening here are dangerous
for these two cases, because here we can neither use dry stitch nor Ligature;
and then because Emplastick Topics have no power to hold on here. In every
Wound of the Tongue, in which the sound part is cut or divided, the Lips are to
be adjoined; and this is to be performed by Suture, as Aquapendens teaches it:
which is thus to be performed; The Tongue is to be drawn forth out of the
Mouth, being holden by the Hand by a piece of Cloth between, you are to make
so many and so deep stitches as are to be taken, for the true unition of the
divided parts. The Wound being well stitcht up, we are to cut off the thread
near the Knot.

Next are we to use agglutinative Medicines, which may be made into Powders to
be sprinkled into the Wound: Such as are Bol. armony, Dragons Blood, Myrtils,
Balaustians, and the like, being finely powdered for this purpose, this
Decoction is very good,. fol. and fl. Decoction.
Ligustr. Plantag. Rosar. Rubr. an. M. j. Cort. Granator. Balaust. an. ss.
Coquentur in aqu. Chalybeat. lb ij. ad 3. part. consumpt. in Colatura solve
Acat. ij. Sir. de Bos. Sisc. iij. misce pro Decocto. To this also may be added
a little Allom, and let the Tongue and Mouth be washed therewith. If pain be
present, Almond milk is good to wash it; let his Diet be cooling, and he
nourished with liquid things, as Ptysan, Barley-Waters, Julep of Roses, and the
like.

History.
And as there is scarce a member or part of the Body which moves more, and is
so moist and loose, so if this part be wounded transversely, it is altogether
incurable; yet if it be not wholly cut off, it is not to be accounted incurable,
as may appear by this following History of a Maid, who falling upon the Ground,
having her Tongue extended, that part which was between her Teeth was almost
cut off, and remained on only that space where she wanted two of her Teeth.
Hildanus being called to her, who is the Author of this History, he tried to
Cure her this way and method, with the aforegoing Gargarisme or Decoction, with
which the Tongue was washed oft-times in a day; after she held in her mouth
Syrup of dried Roses of Quinces, of Ribes, and the like, she drank nothing but
thin Barley-Broaths, Almond-milk, and the like; and by these she was perfectly
cured: neither was her speech any ways hurt, after which she lived for 12 whole
years.

CHAP. LI.
Of Wounds of the Neck.
HAving run through all the Parts of the Head, We come next to the Neck, where
we may meet with that part so properly called the Rock, which lies just under
the Head and Face, and upon the Breast. It obtains a round Figure, and because
in these parts are found various bodies, and this wrought out of their
diversity of works, these may show diversity of Species in these Wounds. For
besides its Muscles and Cutis, which it has bestowed on it, in its forepart it
has planted the Aspera Arteria, or Windpipe, under which is placed the
Aesophagus or Gullet. At its Sides are put both the Jugular Veins and Arteries;
in its back-part may we see the Spine; forwards and upwards the Throat and
Larynx; under it the Jugulars.

It shall therefore be Our present Task to Treat of these in their Order. And
as from the Heart the great Artery, and from the Liver does arise the great
Vein, so from the Brain is produced a great Trunk extended through the whole
Spine, which may either be called Spinal, Dorsal, Cervical or Lumbary Marrow.
And hence the Neck, being as the Vicar of the Brain, or the Medulla, which is
kept in the Spine, if this be cut or wounded in the middle, the Nerves are soon
resolved and distended, the senses flagg, and the Sensifying Quality does
perish: and hence we do see the Patient to avoid both Urine, Seed, and
Excrement voluntarily.

These Wounds are to be treated with the same Care as those of the Brain; for a
deep and penetrating wound happening here, does produce direful Symptoms,
causing hereby both loss of Sense and Motion. Now if the Neck be wounded in the
forepart, the Aspera Arteria and Gullet can only be hurt; if in the forepart
above the Larynx, the Jugular Veins and Arteries; if in the back-part, the
Spinal Marrow; and if none of these be hurt, no Wound here happening can be
allowed dangerous.

And in all these cases we are to stop first the Flux of Blood, then to bring
the Wound to a good digestion with this,. Terebinth. Lot. ij. vel ejus loco Ol.
ejusd. Digestivism.
ij. Ol. Rosar. j. Aqu. Ardent. ss. misce. And inject this hot into the Wound,
and over it apply Empl. de Betonic. or Diapalma. If herein there be required
Sarcoticks and Epolonticks, I have already given you a plentiful Collection of
those which may be here used.

CHAP. LII.
Of Wounds of the Throat, Larynx, and Windpipe.
IF a Wound does happen in these Parts, as in the Throat or Larynx, these are
the Signs; the upper part of the Neck, loss of Voice and Air happens: But when
it reaches the Windpipe, it is more dangerous, both in respect of the
exquisite sense wherewith these Parts are endued, the Aesophagus hereupon
tumifying, and so hindering Deglutition: Hence follows a decay of Nutriment, and
danger of Suffocation; and also in respect of the Veins and Arteries herein
lodged and inserted, and their perpetual motions; for it is hereby that the Air
is conducted into the Ventricle, the which being hindered in its inspiration,
does soon occasion an exspiration. Hence therefore may we account these Wounds
dangerous, and yet not to be left unattempted without help, the Windpipe being
the proper Instrument for Voice, outwardly being Cartilaginous, and inwardly
Membranous and fleshy. When this is wounded, it is generally known by the
Senses; oft-times the Wound is occult, and the rather because here is no large
Flux of blood follows these Wounds, but sometimes Pain, sometimes there is
perceived a stinking Breath, hoarseness of Voice, a dryness of the Fauces, and
in process of time the Patient does become Empyemated. When Wounds only reach
the outward Parts, these may easily be cured; but when the Cartilages are
divided, these are rarely cured, these Parts being both hard and exsanguial,
and continually in motion, and accompanied with frequent Distillations, these
being sufficient impediments to hinder Agglutination. Besides which also, if
any Humor do accompany this Wound, it shuts the passage, and does make a fair
way for Suffocation, the Oesophagus being hereby compressed. But to treat of
every of these a part, beginning first with those of the Throat. Cure of Wounds
of the Throat.


If any one be stabbed with a sharp-pointed Instrument, as by a Penknife,
Dagger, or the like, and the Wound has not touched the Windpipe, you are
here, if a large Flux of blood follow, to stop this by such proper Medicines,
as I have already proposed for performing the same. The next Dressing may you
apply to the wounded Part, a mixture of Myrrh and Aloes dissolved in
Brandy-wine, with which the Part wounded is to be dressed; after this digest,
incarne, and procure a Cicatrice, as you have Directions in the former Cures.

As for the Cure of Wounds of the Larynx or Windpipe, Cure of Wounds of the
Larynx and Windpipe.
if the Wounds be made transversly, let the Patient bend himself forwards; if it
be straight, according to the length of the Pipe, here the Patient is to hold
up his Head, hereby bringing the lips of the Wound together; then stitch up the
Wound artificially; and for this Use, such Pins as you use in the Cure of hair
Lips are best here. This being done, agglutinative Medicines are most useful,
such as is Linimentum Arcaei, Balsamum Peru. Balsam. Lucatell. and that
Unguentum Hispanicum which Aquapendens writes of in lib. de Vulnerib. lib. 2.
fol. 805. above which may be applied Empl. Diapalm. de Minio, de Betonica, or
the like. In these Wounds are you to take especial care, that none of your
Medicines do touch the Windpipe so as to enter it, for hereby may you procure
Suffocation. Inwardly here also may you order the Patient to drink warm Milk by
degrees, or some magisterial chalybeated Decoction, adding hereto Comfrey,
Centaury, Betony, or the like; Eclegma.
or such an Eclegma as this:. Rad. Consolid. major. sub prun. coct. iij. Pulv.
Tragag. Arabic. an. ij. Bol. armon. j. Spec. Diatrag. frigid. jss. Sir. Rosar.
sice. Myrtin. an. q. s. fiat Eclegma; and let the Patient keep this in his
mouth. If the Wound be large, narrow it with a Stitching, or part thereof, and
with a deep Suture, applying over it Empl. Barbarum; or this Medicine:.
Terebinth. lot. in aqu. Consolid. major. ss. Vitell. Ov. no. j. Mastich. Cort.
Thur. an. j. Croc. ss. misce. And this procuring a fair Cicatrice, next apply a
Sarcotick Powder, which is to be sprinkled upon the Wound, for filling it up
with flesh. Hippocrates does write, That the Greater Centaury and Terra
Sigillata are of great virtue, being inwardly prescribed, in these Wounds.

To conclude this, take these Examples:

History.
Benedictus Bonacursius says, That he cured one who being in Prison, wounded
himself with a sharp Knife in the Throat, which Wound penetrated the Windpipe,
so large that one might put his Finger into the Wound, so as both his Nutriment
which he took, and the Medicines which he received, came out by the Wound, and
yet this Man was in few days recovered.

Another.
I in this City cured an old Woman, who in a melancholic and desperate humor
was resolved to cut her own Throat; and for completing this, having a
Penknife by her, sending her Daughter out, without mistrusting any such
matter, she continued some while abroad before she returned; her Daughter being
gone, she shut the Door, and stabbed her self so in the Throat, that the
Windpipe was penetrated; she bled very much: I being sent for, seeing her
bleed very plentifully, I stopped the Flux; and the second Dressing I dressed her
with a Digestive, much according to that which I have already set down; then I
filled the Wound up with flesh, and skinned it up; applying a Candle to the
Wound, you might easily see its flame to yield to the wind which came from the
wounded Part.

Another.
And this is worthy note which Bodinus in Theatro Naturae mentions lib. 4.
page 460. why such who have their Larynx wounded, do both lose their Taste and
Speech; where he writes, That Gulielmus Prince of Orange, having received a
Wound in his Neck, had lost the Sense of Tasting; and that a French Soldier by
the like Wound became mute. There is a double Nerve inserted in the Larynx,
which arises from the 3d Conjugation, one part whereof does make the Tongue
apt for Speech, the other part for perception of Smelling or Sapour.

Another.
Another having received a Wound in the Aspera Arteria, the Wound being
obliquely made, divided 3 Cartilages, insomuch as the Patient could hardly make
a noise or speak; the Wound was stitcht up, and then was applied this following
Medicine:. Thur. Mastich. Pulvis.
an. j. Bol. armen. ij. Farin. volatile. ss. misce. These being beaten up with
the white of an Egg, and made into the form of a soft Cataplasme, was applied
to the wounded Part with convenient Ligatures. Inwardly was prescribed him some
Lohoc Sanum, and he left it the 3d day, in which time did arise a most intense
Fever, and a great Inflammation of the Fauces, and when the Parts were
unrouled, they were seen correpted with a Gangrene and Sphacelus, and in that
day about night the Patient shut up his last minute.

I shall not add to this Discourse, Wounds either of Veins or Arteries, but
shall rather desire you to cast your eye on my Treatise next to Wounds of the
Heart; for as the Arteries have their Originations from the Heart, I shall
refer you thither for the Cure of these, that being their Origination, this
place as others but their Insertions, and the Cure of any of these not
differing, be they wounded in what part of the Body soever.

CHAP. LIII.
Of Wounds of the Oesophagus.
WE come next to the Oesophagus or Gullet, called by the Greeks (...), from
(...), which signifies to carry Meat. The Arabians call it Meri and vescet; the
Latins, Gula, being as the common road, or as we have it in our English
Proverb, Gutterlane, to conduct Victuals from the Mouth into the Stomach. It
begins at the lowermost Cavity of the Throat, at the Roots of the Orifice of
the Stomach; it marches in a direct Line along the 5th Spondyl of the Breast,
Its Connection.
somewhat inclining to the right side. In its Origination it is tied to the
Throat, by that Coat which incompasseth the Mouth, to the Ventricle by its
Continuation, to the Bodies of the Spondyls, to the Weazon and adjacent Parts
by the help of Membranes. Its Figure is Its Figure and Substance.
round and long. Its Substance is of a middle substance between Flesh and
Nerves. It has allowed it 3 Coats, one common, and two proper: The first is
bred out of Its 3 Coats.
Ligaments, made as its Case for the two proper Coats: The 2d is fleshy and
thick, looking toward the Neck, having in it only transverse Fibers: The 3d is
of a dissimilar Substance, within whose inward Superficies is superstrated a
smooth and oleaginous Veil, having in it right and slender Fibers, to draw
nourishment after the Mouth has received it. The act of Deglutition is helped
by its Muscles, but these are accounted amongst the Muscles of the Larynx. Its
Cavity is always kept moist by its Glandules called Tonsillae. It has but few
Veins and Arteries. Its Nerves are notable, coming from the 6th pair, and these
at length are fastened into the Stomach. It Is of great Use, being as a Tunnel to
let through both Its Use.
Meat and Drink.

Thus have I shown you how the Oesophagos is placed between the Fauces and the
Os Ventriculi, being as its general Receiver, being framed both of a nervous
and fleshy Substance; nervous, that it may extend it self upon occasion; and
fleshy, that it may fall again.

Wounds happening here are very perilous, because both Meat and Drink do pass
through it, which do hinder Agglutination.

Wounds here happening may be known by their Site, sometimes by the Sense of
Feeling; for this is carried in a direct and strait Line all along, under or
beneath the Windpipe, and when this is wounded, either Blood or Matter is
vomited, and the indigested Nutriment does sometimes pass through the Wound.
When the Patient lies down, he feels much pain between his Scapula's, but
upon straightning his Neck he feels some ease. When any Tumor does arise here,
it does narrow the passage, and does occasion a Fever, and a great sense of
Inflammation. Hence therefore in these dangerous cases Celsus advises the
Surgeon, to study and consider which of these Wounds are curable, which hard
to cure, and which are incurable; and not to undertake the last, but with
honesty to acquaint the Patient's Relations and Friends of the desperateness of
the Hurt, left he by his improvidence and inconsiderateness gain the discredit
of being either ignorant or deceitful.

Cure.
These Wounds sometimes do prove lethal, the meat and drink passing hereby,
hindering agglutination; and although the best which happens here may not be
reckoned without hazard and danger, yet being by daily Experience satisfied,
that many here wounded have been cured, is encouragement enough for us to
declare the method here to be used. And here by Hippocrates's authority we are
to prescribe inwardly a gentle and thin Diet, this by degrees to be taken; here
therefore the Patient is to lie downwards, holding the Medicine in his mouth as
long as he can; for a perpetual Mastication in the mouth does much detard
Agglutination. Let his Diet be liquid, and nourishing, if it might happen here
to you as it has to some others, that deglutition is altogether ablated, that
nothing may descend this way into the Stomach, in these cases that the Patients
may not famish, we ought to inject nourishing Clysters according to the advice
of Oribasius and Aetius: if need requires your assistance of prohibiting the
flux of Blood which may happen here, in this case may you safely use Troch. de
Spod. or Terr. Lemn. attenuated with a little Purslane-water, or Spawn-water.
Or if these be not in readiness, to take some Chalybeated Water, which is to be
used as the other.

If here we should come to Deterging, we may safely Decoction.
use Hydromel or Julap. Rosar. Or this Decoction,. Herb. Sanicul. Centaur.
Minor. Equiset. an. iij. Hord. Mundat. M. ij. Passular. Jujubar. Liquirit. an.
vj. Coquantur Omnia in aqua Chalybeata and vino simul mixed. ad Tert. part.
consumpt. colaturae add Sir. Rosar. iij. Mel. Rosar. ij. iterum parum
ebulliant and cola. But where you use Honey, Galen advises not to boil this,
but rather to add it in the end; for boiling of it does make it more rancid.
When you would use Incarnatives or Sarcoticks, then are we here to add
Agglutinatives. And in Unguent.
this case Empl. Sanctum is admirable, formerly shown you: Or in the want
thereof, to use this,. Terebinth. Clar. aqu. Consolid. lot. iij. Pulv. Myrrh.
Thur. Alo. Bol. armen. an. ss. misce and fiat Unguent. Or this,. Thur. Another.
Myrrh. Terr. Lemn. Galban. an. iij. Chalcit. Alumin. Roch. Spum. Argent. an.
ij. Resin. Terebinth. x. Ol. Myrtin. j. Cer. flav. q. s. fiat Unguent. These to
be applied without Tents or Lint, over which may be applied Empl. Diapalma de
Betonica, or the like.

Another.
To conclude this, A Saylor being wounded by a broad Knife in the 5th Vertebre,
vomited a great Quantity of blood, and in his Vomiting some part of the Chyle
which was contained in his Stomach passed out of the Wound, whence was
suspected that the Oesophagos was hurt; it being examined by the Probe, did
evince the same. For which was prescribed this Medicine,. Terebinth. aliquot.
lot. in aqu. Malv. j. Sir. de Ros. sicc. iij. Digestivism.
Bol. armen. j. Sang. Dracon. Mastich. Farin. Volatile. an. j. Med. Vitell.
Ovor. misce. Tents being herewith armed, were put into the Wound, over which
was applied Empl. Diapalma, inwardly did he take this following Lohoc,. Sir. de
Ros. Sicc. Cydonior. an. j. Myrtin. vj. Lohoc.
Pulv. Sang. Dracon. iij. Bol. armen. j. misce. After which was ordered this
following Decoction,. Hord. A Consolidating Decoction.
mundat. M. j. Bulliant in s. q. aqu. ad Crepat. add. Herb. Hyper. Pilosell.
Alchymil. an* p. iij. Pirol. Consol. Sarracen. an. pug. ij. Cort. Granator. j
ss. Rad. Pentaphyl. Tormentil. an. ij. Sem. Coriandr. praeparat. Anis. an. ij.
Cinamom. iij. Coquantur omnia simul, and colaturam serva ad usum. Of which
Decoctionhe took 3 ounces a day with the aforesaid Syrups: Part of which was
injected into the Wound by a Syringe; in the interim he was perplexed with much
Pain and Inflammation, an Inunction being made of the Oil of Roses, over which
was applied a Cataplasme made of the Crumbs of Bread with milk, the yolk of an
Egg and the like; this to be used to the 14th day: The meat and drink which he
took inwardly was thin, and flowed out of the Wound; and the 15th day being
expired, no further Matter past out: hence the Oesophagus being judged to be
consolidated and agglutinated, the Tent from that time being made shorter, was
at length covered with an Incarnative, and the Wound in 24 days perfectly
Cured and Cicatriced.

CHAP. LIVE.
Of Wounds of the Spine.
NExt arrive we to Wounds of the Spine, or the Backbone seated in the back-part
of the Neck; if the Wound do not pass the Spine, it then does divide the
Muscles, and in this case are you to dress this Wound as you do those of the
fleshy parts, as Aquapendens orders, fol. 913. De Vuln. If the Bone be injured
by the Wound, dress this as you do a Fracture in Cranio. If the Spinalis
Medulla be wounded, it is either wholly or in part divided. Presage.
If it be wholly divided, it occasions a perfect resolution of the Body, causing
here a deprivation both of Sense and Motion: If it be but cut or divided in
part, hence follows Convulsion, and oft-times death. In these cases therefore
are to be applied such Medicines as may ease Pain, stop or prevent Convulsion,
and cure the Patient. Wounds here happening, are of no less danger than those
of the Brain; for the Spinal Marrow has its Origination from thence, and has
its Coats covered with the same Membranes as do cover the body of the Brain. It
has Nerves allowed it for yielding it much Sense; and its Motion and Sense it
has from the same Principals: And since Topics can scarce reach it, and the
direful Symptoms which attend these Wounds, as Palsy, Convulsion, Deprivation
of Sense and Motion, and the like, these Wounds may be well reckoned dangerous.

Hippocrates does reckon them Lethal, yet that such have been cured, Experience
does evince: And how to cut this part, be pleased to take with you these
Directions: In all desperate cases of this sort, our later Practitioners, the
Blood being stopped, do use hot and dry Medicines, being of thin parts, that they
may the better penetrate into the depth of the Wound; and therefore in these
cases we are to use such Medicines as be of a thin, liquid, and moist
substance; of which sort are Ol. Hyperic. Ol. Lumbricor. and the like. Or here
also may be used Ol. Chamomil. Vulpin. Ovor. Mastichin. Terebinth. or the like.
Or. Ol. Hyperic. Ovor. an. j. Terebinth. ss. Theriac. Andromach. ij. misce. Or.
Ol. Vulpin. Lumbricor. Terebinth. an. ss. pulv. Mastich. ss. misce. Turpentine
here is a very good Medicine, being well washed, adding to it the yolk of an
Egg, a little fine Powder of Frankincense and Saffron, the which may be used to
the 4th day, anointing all the circumjacent parts with Oil of Roses, Chamomile
and Mastich. The 4th day being past, add to these some Syrup of dry Roses,
Myrrh, and Aloes, in that body and thickness as they cause no pain in the Wound
by their asperity; the which being done, leave out the Turpentine: the pain
being assuaged, cover the Wound either with Aureum or Basilicon, or the like,
applying over it Empl. De Betonica or Diapalma, and then procure a Cicatrice.

Forest. fol. 18. lib. 6. Obs. Chir. writes, That if the Spinal Marrow be
wounded about its beginning, death must necessarily follow, because a
Convulsion of the whole Body does succeed: but if it be wounded in the lower
part, this is not so deadly, unless the Wound be large, or made by apuncture,
although Convulsion does succeed it.

Forestus, Obs. 46. lib. 6. fol. 230. writes of one being History.
wounded under the Scapula in the Back, the Wound penetrating the Thorax and
Spine; at the which time a Wound happened in the flexure of the Cubit of his
Arm; hence he spit much blood, which denoted that the Wound had penetrated the
Thorax in its back-part, and he threw forth concrete blood downwards. He being
called to this Patient, for diversion sake in the Arm of the contrary side
breathes a vein, and the Wounds were thus handled by Petrus a Surgeon of
Delph, and Gerard the Younger: Presently after the breathing of his Basilick
Decoction.
Vein, this Decoction was prescribed him;. Caul. Bab. Scabios. Veronic. Cap.
Vener. Polytric. Ungul. Caballin. an. M. j. Hord. mundat. pug. j. Rasur.
Liquirit. vj. Uvar. passul. enucl. j. Jujub. Sebast. an. no. 5. Coquantur in
aqu. Com. ad lb j. Colaturae Sir. Cap. vener. j ss. Violar. Jujub. an. ss.
misce pro Apozemate, to be taken twice in a day. Eclegma.
For his Cough he was Ordered this Eclegma, as also for his spitting of blood;.
Cons. Borag. Diatrag. frigid. an. iij. Sir. Cap. Vener. j. Sir. Violar. Jujub.
an. ss. misce. This he took oft-times with the end of a Lyquirice-stick well
beaten and bruised: after this he began to grow Feverish, and therefore his
Breast was embrocated, not only for removing the pain, but also for
dispatohing this Unguent.
febrile heat, with this following Unguent;. Unguent. Decoct.
Resumptio. j. Afterward he took of this following Decoction at his pleasure,.
Hord. Commun. M. j. Liquirit. Ras. ss. Cap. Vener. Uvar. passar. an. M. ss.
Sem. 4. frigid. Major. an. ss. Cicer. Rubr. j. Coquantur in aqu. com. ad lb j.
Colatur. addendo Sir. ex infus. Rosar. Violar. an. ss. pro Julapio. With these
and the like inward Decoctions, the Patient recovered of his deplorable
Condition, and was cured of his 3 Wounds: And for the mundifying and incarning
thereof, this was used,. Mel. Rosat. Empl. Lanfranci.
Colat. iiij. Farin. Hord. ss. Terebinth. iij. Cer. Resin. an. ij. Thur.
Mastich. an. j. Myrrh. Sarcocoll. Mum. an. ss. Ol. Mastich. iij. M. fiat Empl.
Thus have I run through all the Wounds which do or may happen in the upper
Region; We descend now to the middle Venture, where we shall Express all the
Parts, their Wounds, Signs, Presages and Cures.

CHAP. LV.
Of Wounds of the Thorax.
HAving already finished the first Part of my Discourse, which treats of the
Upper Parts, let me in this bring in an Anatomical Discourse of this middle
Region of Life, and that with a more cheerful spirit, by how much it is more
noble and excellent than the former. For as Cosmographers do in a small Map
comprehend the Circuits, Regions, Islands, Promontories, Fields and Valleys of
the World, so may we in this our second Discourse, comprehend the Greatness,
Structure, Site, Figure, and all exterior and interior Parts, contained and
containing in this Region, the which Region does come under the Name of Thorax;
so called either (...), which is Salio, the Heart herein being always in a
leaping motion; or as the Stoics affirm it, (...), Quod mentem Divinam animi
partem denotat. This describes the whole Trunk of the Body, and whatsoever is
extended from the Jugulars to the Xyphoidal Cartilage and Diaphragma, comes
under the Name of the Thorax. It is circumscribed in its upper parts with
Clavicles, in its lower part with a Diaphragma, in its forepart with a
Sternon, in its back-part with the Vertebres of the Back, in its right and left
side with 12 Ribs. Its Figure is beautiful and capacious, partly boney, partly
fleshy; boney, for the strengthening of its most noble vessel the Heart;
fleshy, for the more easy motion of its Diastole and Systole. It obtains a
Cavity between the upper and lower middle Region, for the more equal diffusion
of its native heat into all the simple parts. It Is framed of parts containing
and contained; the containing parts are some of them Proper, others Common: The
Common are 5, Cuticula, Cutis, Membrana Carnosa, Adeps, and Nervosus
Panniculus. The Proper are brought under these 3 heads or distinctions, as some
being soft and fleshy, others boney and Cartilaginous, and the third
Membranous. In this are locked up the vital Instruments and Wheels of Life, the
rare Organs of Music, whereby the Voice is so diversified, called by
Hippocrates (...), a Cittern, making here its Music. Here may we see the Heart
display and communicate its vital spirits; how these do quicken and strengthen
the natural heat of the whole Body; how the Lungs as fresh Fans do cool its
heat, and by their motions as Bellows blow it up again, if occasion requires.

But to fall upon its harms; before we enter upon the Discourse whereof, be
pleased to consider what noble Parts it contains in it, and enwraps. It Is
outwardly guarded with* Intercostal Muscles, interwoven between the Ribs, and
filling up the Distances between them; and these by some are reckoned to be in
all 44, these also being of great use, being formed obliquely; for we generally
see that they help Dilatation; for every thing retcheth which is obliquely made
or obliquely drawn; these Muscles, by the general opinion and consent of all
Anatomists, do serve for Constriction and Dilatation of the Thorax. Next may we
meet here with a Diaphragma, which signifies to distinguish, this
distinguishing the Instruments of Nourishment, from those of Life and
Respiration, or is as an overthwart partition. After this appears a Pleura, so
called from the Ribs, which by the Greeks are called (...), this being
stretched under them all, excepting the 12th. This Membrane does enclose the
whole Cavity of the Thorax, and does answer its Figure and Magnitude. This is
all over double, partly because of the hardness of the Bones, and partly
because betwixt both the Membranes, the Intercostal Vessels might more safely
pass. Next this is Mediastinum, so called from dividing the Chest in the
middle. Columbus does call it Intersepimentum, being as a Hedge dividing two
Pastures. This holds up the Heart, and serves as a security for the passage of
the Vessels. After this may we see the Pericardium, by the Latins called
Capsula Cordis, enwrapping the Heart, and carrying in it its Pyramidal Figure,
arising from its Basis, produced from the Coats which the Pleura does afford
the four Vessels, which do issue out of the Heart. Its contained Parts are
double, as Vessels and Bowels: The Bowels are two, the Heart and the Lungs: The
Vessels are the Branches of the great Vein, and the great Artery, born up into
the hollow part of the Throat with a glandulous Body called Thymus.

But because I intend not to trouble you with these twice over, I shall as I
discourse of these Parts being wounded, give you a brief Desciption of every of
them as they fall in their Order.

And first as touching Wounds which may happen in the outward part of the
Thorax.

Wounds here happening are either allowed to penetrate or not penetrate the
Thorax; and such as do penetrate, may either be made with or without offense;
and this offense may be manifold, as either wounding the Heart, Lungs,
Pericardium, Diaphragma, great Artery, or ascendent Vein.

Signs.
To know a penetrating Wound may be by these Signs manifested: If the Wound
penetrates far, the sending in your Probe or searching Candle will give some
satisfaction hereof; or if it penetrates* Cotton or Wool being put to the
Wound, you shall see it give way to the Breath which comes out of the Wound. If
the Patient does shut his Mouth and keep in his Breath, the Wind will break
through the Wound with a noise, so as a Candle being applied to the Orifice,
the Wind will dissipate the flame of the Candle. Yet sometimes if the Wound
happens near the Mouth of the Breast, Air may come forth, and the Probe may pass
a great way in respect of the great space and Cavity, which makes the
intersepient Membranes, separating and distinguishing the Cavity of the Thorax.

Presage.
Wounds happening in the back-part of the Thorax, are most dangerous, because
in this Part are planted most Nerves and Tendons; and as Hippocrates writes,
Every Wound of the Thorax goes not without danger, in respect of the Matter
which falls down into the Cavity thereof. If the Heart be wounded, the case is
desperate; or if the Diaphragma in its nervose Part, or if the Lungs be largely
wounded, or the Pericardium. But more of these in their proper places.

Arcaus cap. 1. de Curand. Vuln. fol. 71. writes, That he has seen many
pretend the curing penetrating Wounds of the Thorax, the which they either
scarce obtained, or else speedily after procured the death of their Patients,
although these Wounds were not of their own nature lethal. And whereas it is
the general opinion of all Authors, Wounds deeply penetrating the Breast, are
for the most part incurable, and that such who have gained ground of these
Wounds, do generally labor under a Phthysis, or a perpetual Fistula; yet some
have been cured hereof without either of these. And for curing these Wounds,
let this be your Method: In not penetrating Wounds, the same Cure is to be used
here as you are directed in a simple Wound. In a penetrating Wound the ordering
of the whole Body is to be regarded, both for the evacuating and discharging of
Blood, Humors, Matter, or Excrements, which may fall from the wounded Part
into the Cavity of the Thorax, lest being therein left, they corrupt and
putrify, and so bring death in the end: And these may be 3 ways discharged; as
either by the Orifice of the Wound, by the Mouth and Coughing, or by Urine. Now
when Blood or Matter is coacervated in the Cavity of the Thorax, it is attended
with pains of the Sides, and a heaviness about the false Ribs, accompanied with
purulent Spattles, a fetid Breath, and a troublesome Cough, and a Fever
molesting the Patient. And hence because the outward Air being altogether
unprepared, does rush and pass hither, it does much offend the inward Parts,
and the inward Air passing out hereby, does both weaken, hurt and dissolve the
strength and vigor of the Parts. And another ill Symptom which attends these
Wounds, is, they cannot outwardly or conveniently be deterged, and hence they
degenerate into Fistula's and Empyema's, exciting there their purulent
Collections, and hence death follows. And such who upon receiving a Wound here,
have annexed therewith a Vomiting and Syncope, or Looseness, death is sure to
catch hold of these.

But to return to the 3 former proposed Intentions, beginning first with the
discharge by Urine. And in these The First.
cases the Medicines here to be used are called Diuretics: And Gal. lib. 5. de
Loc. affect. writes and affirms, That those things which are lodged in the
Thorax, are to be carried off and expurged by Urine. And hence he supposes
that the Matter is first carried into the Branches of the Vena Azygos, hence
into the Vena Cava, to the right Ventricle of the Heart, and passing thence
downwards from the descending Trunk of the Cava to the Liver, to come to the
Emulgents. But this is a great way about. But Nicol. Novocomensis an excellent
Physician says, That it passes from the Vena sine Pari near the Diaphragma,
and is carried by a direct ducture through the Spine to the Emulgents, and does
give us this History, for the better crediting of the former:

History.
Of a Friend of his which received a Wound in his Thorax: The Wound was not by
the Physicians found penetrating, because in respect of the narrowness of the
Orifice, no great part of the Probe did enter into the Wound; the flesh also
stopped the Cavity thereof, so as neither spirit or breathing might pass through
it; yet out of the supervening accidents the Wound was conjectured to be
penetrant; for above the Diaphragma was felt a heaviness, he spit blood, with
Coughing, accompanied with Fever, Watchings, and sometimes the Part appeared
bluish about the Ribs, wherein was contained Matter. And for this discharge,
they consulted to open the Thorax between the 6th and 7th Rib; the day before
which this should have been done, it happened, that the Patient let forth about
an ounce and a half of bloody Matter, by which he was freed from all his pain,
Fever, and other Symptoms; in which cases were used these Diuretics. These
being present, was prescribed him a Decoction made of Maidenhair, Parsly-roots
and Betony; and if no Fever was present, to the former was added Smallage and
Fennel. In his Diet is to be observed, That in these Wounds all Inflammation be
abated, and for this was given him Ptysan, with cold Seeds.

The 2d Way.
The 2d way is the discharge of this Matter by the Mouth; and for this Use
Posca being taken lukewarm, is good; Vinegar does wonderfully discuss and
dissolve the concrete Blood; and Galen orders to obtund its Acrimony, by
adding much Water to it; in this case cooling Syrups do well, and do work by
Urine. Here also are we advised to observe, That if the Patient do cough much,
to make it more easy to him, we may order him Syrup of Lyquirice, Oxymel, or
Syrup of Vinegar.

The 3d Way.
The 3d is performed by the Orifice of the Wound, the which some will have
speedily to be shut up, lest hereby the vital spirit might expire and spend it
self, and the outward Air passing in at the Wound may corrupt the inward Parts.
Yet this is contrary to Sense, Reason and Experience; for the Wound is to be
kept open, for this Matter is not easily or readily to be discharged by Urine,
nor yet emptied out by the Mouth, the Orifice of the Wound being the best and
most ready way to discharge the same; and this is to be performed by Tents or
Pipes.

Intentions.
But to come close to the genuine Intentions herein required, and afterward
show you how this is to be treated:

And herein are 6 Intentions which offer themselves: As first, To stop the Flux
of Blood. 2dly, To prevent all Fluxion. 3dly, To discharge the contained
Matter. 4thly, To deterge and dry up the Wound. 5thly, To order the inward
Parts aright. And then lastly, To prevent all other Accidents.

As for the first, I have sufficiently already enlarged. But because here some
of the concrete Blood may be lodged in the Cavity of the Thorax, this is both
necessarily and speedily to be suppurated. And hence therefore Wounds of the
Thorax are presently to be agglutinated, or kept open, being consentaneous in a
Cut where the great Veins and Arteries are untoucht, and when no Flux of Blood
does appear here to speed Agglutination, either by Suture or Ligature, or any
other ingenious method; for thus the Parts may be united, and the innate Heat
preserved, and the Matter discharged by the Mouth. But if there be any
suspicion of coagulated or concreted Blood, the Wound is to be kept open, for
the discharge of all Matter and Excrements: And for this Use some do make use
of leaden Pipes, which they have made for the same purpose, to convey and draw
forth this Matter, called by the Greeks Piuleus, or Eductorium; the Matter
being discharged, the Parts are to be united and dried up.

But a little further, as touching the coagulated Blood, it being a matter of
great concern in this place: Here are we not to study too speedy an unition of
the Parts, until every ill Juice or Matter be expurged and discharged. The
Wound therefore, as I formerly have writ, is to be kept open by Tents, both for
the preserving the noble and ignoble Parts entire. Hence ought the careful
Surgeon to examine well the affected Parts, and then to the discharge of the
Matter; this is to be done by its proper places; the Blood being suppressed,
the Wound is to be roul'd up.

The 2d Intention.
The next Intention here required, is, in great and deep Wounds to hinder all
Humidities or Humors, coming from any other Part of the Body to the affected
Part; and this is to be performed by breathing a Vein, and Purgation,
Cupping-glasses, Ligatures, and the like, as I have already shown.

The 3d Intention.
The 3d Intention is the discharge of Humors and Matter lodged in the Cavity
of the Thorax; and for this Use take this:. Resin. Pin. Visc. Querein. Mel.
Ammoniac. Galban. an. ij. Cer. ij. liquescat Cera, postea Resina, tunc add
pulv. Aristoloch, Rot, Rad. Consolid. major. an. Unguent.
ss. and fiat Unguent. Or. Ferment. acr. Axung. Porc. Empl. Another. Empl.
Sanctum.
an. ij. passular, enucleat, j. Terebinth. venet. iij. Ammoniac. Galban. an. ss.
Cor. q. s. fiat Empl. Or this Unguentum Sanctum, so much esteemed for its
admirable qualities which it shows in this Cure, for it does excellently digest
and strengthen the Parts, and discharge every Excrement safely from the very
bottom. This is its Composition:. Resin. Pin. recent. clar. and odorat. xij.
Ol. Laurin. opt. Terebinth. venet. an. ij. Gum. Elemni iiij. misceantur Resina
and Gummi simul, and lento igne liquefiant semper agitando cum Spatha, tunc
add Ol. Laurini and Terebinth. and iterum parum bulliant, semper movendo ad
Empl. formam. And when you apply this to the wounded Part, let it be spread all
over the circumjacent Parts.

In some cases Injections are also very beneficial; neither are externals, but
internals also very requisite. I have already enlarged on this subject in my
Treatise of Tumors, there discoursing of Empyemaes; and therefore shall
abbreviate here. The Matter being discharged, the place is to be mundified with
Mellicrate; and if you desire a greater dryer, add hereto Agrimony, Centaury,
Adders Tongue, Betony, in Wine adding to the strained Decoction a little Honey;
this to be injected into the part. If a plenty of Matter appear, and these be
too weak, we are to give inward Potions and Decoctions, as this; Decoction.
. Caryophylat. Rad. Arthemes. Pimpinell. Pentaphyll. Violar. Caul. Rub. an. j.
Rub. Tinctor. caeter. quantitas Coquantur in vino.

Theophrastus does much commend these, as Sanicle, Avens, Perwinckle, Trefol.
and Ground Ivy, being boiled in white Wine, adding to the clear Decoction a
little Honey; and of this let the Patient drink 4 ounces three times in a day
warm.

There was an Old Emprick who in all Chronick Distempers and old fistulated
Wounds used this Decoction; Decoction.
. Cinnamon. Zinz. Caryoph. Piper. an. iij. Coquantur contus. in mensur. 6 vini
albi usque ad 3tiae partis consumpt. coletur and servetur. tune Recipe
Caryophylat. Valerian. Pilosell. Centaur. minor. Rub. Tinctor. Arthemes.
Pimpinel. an. M. ss. Exsiccantur and fiat omnium pulvis subtilissimus, accipe
hujus Pulveris ij. Decoct. praedict. vj. to be taken the first thing every
morning; And by this method he cured very many of these Wounds without any
other help.

Powder.
This Powder used for the same effect is very admirable;. Caul. Rub. sem.
Cunap. consolid. minor. Caryophylat. Pilosell. an. M. j. Rub. Tinctor. M. ij.
misce, fiat pulvis subtilissimus dos. j. in vino albo. While these are inwardly
taken, the outward Wound is to be brought to digestion by Turpentine, the yolk
of an Egg, a little Frankincense, Basilicon, and a little Powder of Saffron;
and if you intend to mundifie, add a little Honey and mix with the former; then
fill up with Unguent. Aureum or Fuscum, and skin with Diapalma or Desiccativum
Rubrum. Having thus run through all the general Parts and Intentions of Wounds
of the Thorax, give me leave a little further to show how the Patient is to be
placed, the Patient being laid in his bed, stretched out to his full length,
and the Orifice of the Wound downwards, let him thus continue until the
Surgeons dressings be all ready, hereby endeavoring to discharge all
contained blood by Coughing or the like. Then put into the Wound a Flamula or
Silver Pipe, such as are used in a Paracenthesis, dipped in the white of an Egg,
having a stay on both sides hollowed to receive a thread; and this is to be
used until the Matter does abate: when this affords but a small quantity,
procure a speedy Consolidation either with Linimentum Arcaei, who is the Author
and Director of this method, or Balsam. Peruvian. or any other the like
Consolidating Medicine, over which apply Diapalma: These things being done, you
may, if occasion require, breathe a Vein, and then administer Potion.
this Vulnerary Potion;. Rhubarb. ss. Rub. Tinctor. Mum. an. j. Terr. Sgillat.
ss. Aqu. Scabios. Bugloss. and Decoction.
Succ. granator. an. j. After this he advises this Decoction;. Hord. mundat.
iiij. Passular. enucleat. iij. Rad. Bugloss. iij. Liquirit. contus. iij. Jujub.
no. 20. prunor. no. 15. Rad. Petrosilin. contus. M. j. fiat Decoct. in aqu.
Pluvial. lb 14. ad Consumpt. tertiae partis. Aromatizetur decoctum cum Cinamom.
iij. et Coletur. in Colatura solve Penid. iij. Sir. Rosar. Simpl. de 2. Radic.
sine acet. an. ij. Sacchar. condit. iiij. of which the Patient is to take 6
ounces every 4th hour, he being ordered to take no other food for 3 days. And
to conclude this Discourse, when the Patient does breathe freely, finds
little pain, and no weight about his Midriff, and the Quitture be small and
laudible, then is it time to shut up. And I with it shall shut up this
Discourse with some Historical Observations.

History.
The first is of a Gentleman, who having received 3 large Wounds, but the
chiefest of which happened under his right Breast, penetrating deeply between
the space of the Thorax, whence happened a large Flux of Blood into the
Diaphragma, upon which succeeded a Fever and vehement Coughing, with a sharp
pain in the wounded Side. I being called, I ordered the Patient to lie with his
Head downwards, and to shut both his Mouth, Eyes and Ears, hereby forcing the
Lungs to send forth the contained blood by the Wounds. After this I put my
finger into the Wound for the better educing of this blood, the Patient being
laid into his Bed again, I injected frequently into his Wound a Decoction made
of French Barley, Honey of Roses, and Red Sugar at first; afterward I added
more of deterging Medicines, as Wormwood, Centaury and the like: but these,
because of their bitterness were soon left off.

Another.
Glandorp, fol. 139. in his Book named Specul. Chirurgor. Observe. 26. relates
of a Young Man, who being wounded between the 6th and 7th Rib, out of which
issued much blood, and a Pungetive pain followed in the same Side, Sarcoticks
being hereto applied, Matter was generated, the which at the 12th day was not
discharged out of the Wound: The 14th, 15th and 16th days he made no water;
the day following he made Urine with pain, in which was seen Sanguinolent
Matter. Whence was conjectured, That Nature had found out a new way, Diuretics
being given him, and an opening Diet prescribed, this Matter past by the Urine
to the 8th day; the which appearing no further, the Wound was Consolidated, and
the Patient Cured.

Another.
Forestus, fol. 76. Obser. Chir. Obs. 16. writes of a Young Man of 16 years of
age, who having a naked Knife in a Bagg held under his Coat, and not remembering
it, wrestling with another Boy, wounded himself, by receiving a Fall from him,
in his Breast; whence issued a very large Flux of Blood: Having drank this
following Potion.
Potion he began to amend;. fol. Colluteae iij. infunde in aqu. Plantagin.
Ungul. Caballin. Semel. Ebulliendo, et forti expressioni add Electuar. de
Succ. Rosar. ij. Pulv. Rhubarb. Nuc. Moschat. Mum. an. ss. Mel. Rosar. Colat.
ss. misce, fiat Potio. After the taking of which, the Wound in a short time
Consolidated. This Potion is very admirable for the dissolving and expelling of
concrete blood. If you desire to satisfy your self further hereof, Franciscus
Arcaeus will give you many other Histories of these Wounds and their Cure, in
his Book De Vulneribus Capit. fol. 71. 85. and so on: The which I commit you
to, desiring not to fill up this Treatise of Wounds with too many Histories.

CHAP. LVI.
Of Wounds of the Diaphragma.
THis by Plato is called (...), of a word which does signify to distinguish by
some Septum transversum. It is a Muscle serving for Respiration, and does
differ from all the Muscles of the Body in its excellency, site, figure, and
action. It is seated in the Cavity of the Body, being o'rethwart and oblique;
it is Nervous in the midst, and that partly for the more security that it may
perform its various motions without hurt; and partly that the Vena Cava, and
Oesophagus which do pass through it might not be straightened, and so the course
of meat and blood hindered. It is united to two of the muscles of the Abdomen,
the Oblique Ascendent, and Transverse; Its figure is almost Circular. It has
Veins, Nerves and Arteries allowed it. It is of much use, for it ventilates the
Hypochondria, helps forwards Expulsion, and does distinguish the noble from the
ignoble parts; and that which is observed by some, in single Combats of
Gladiators, some have been seen to dye laughing, being wounded in this part,
and seeing we have already shown you how it is, a round and capacious Muscle,
subtended to the inward side of the Ribs, tied to them, being in the upper part
fleshy, and in the lower part membranous and spermatique, receiving a Wound
hereupon being the Instrument of breathing, it sends forth froathy blood, a
thin spirit, the Spine mourns hereat, and the principal bowels are drawn
upwards; if the Wound be large, running the part into Inflammation, the
breathing is very dull, accompanied with pain through all the parts of the
Shoulder, a great Cough succeeds with noise and pain, the spattle looks livid,
a vomiting and spitting of froathy blood follows: And they which are thus
troubled do eat with great difficulty: The neighboring parts sharing of these
evil excrementitious juices and humidities are attracted hereby, hence
disturbing the whole frame of the Mind, hence follows Delirium; and for this
very reason the Ancients called this part Phrenes: hereupon happening a violent
Fever arising by the great consent of the Heart, Wounds here happening, if they
penetrate not too far, are with great Care and Difficulty to be Cured, not
hindering its motion. If it happen in the Nervous parts that a Wound falls
hereon, here may you declare the Cure either hopeless or helpless; these are
the general Signs and Presages which do attend these Wounds. If the fleshy part
of the Diaphragma, as we have already offered, be wounded, it may be cured with
care; and here are we first to stop the Flux of blood, and to prevent
Inflammation by well regulating the whole Body, and to agglutinate the Wound
with all convenient speed; yet not until all Blood and Matter be discharged;
hence breathing of a Vein for Revulsion is proper. As touching Topics, we may
here use the same Medicines as are directed in Wounds of the Thorax, such as
may stop a Flux of blood, prevent Inflammation, and agglutinate; the Orifice to
be kept open by a Tent or a Silver Pipe, as is already directed; and the same
Intentions and Medicines which are already prescribed.

And for further satisfaction, I will here present you with the Method how to
Cure these, being directed by Glandorp, who is the Author of this following
History.

History.
A Saylor receiving a Wound in the fleshy part of his Diaphragma, in the left
part thereof, about the end of the 11th Rib of the Thorax, within few days he
was perplexed with great pains of his head, and of the wounded side, neither
could he breathe freely; its depth was searched by the Probe, and it was
conjectured that the Wound did penetrate; A Vein in the same Side was Breathed,
and a convenient Diet prescribed, and Unguent.
this following Unguent was prescribed for his Side;. Unguent. Pectoral. ss.
Dialth. cum gum. Ol. Rosar. an. iij. Croc. ss. misce, into the Wound was put a
long Tent armed with a Digestive, and over this was applied Empl. Diapalmae.
Inwardly did he take this Vulnerary Decoction.
Decoction;. Herb. Sanicul. Veronis. Pirol. an. P. iiij. Consolid. Saracenn.
Botrys Trichoman. an. pug. ij. Fl. Borag. Bugloss. an. P. j. Sem. anis.
Eoenicul. an. ij. Cinamom. iij. Fujub. no. 6. Dactyl. no. 4. Coquantur in aqua
Hordei q. s. Of which he took 3 ounces with 2 scruples of Powder of Crabs eyes,
the Body being bound, sometimes the Patient received a Suppository, sometimes
he took a Lenient by his mouth. Matter being generated hereby, and the Wound
being mundified, the Tents were shortened and armed with an Incarnative, and in
a short time afterward it was perfectly skinned up.

Another.
The Second is of a Wound which happened in the membranous part of the
Diaphragma, but this brought Death with it. A Soldier thrusting his Rapier a
little under the Xyphoidal Cartilage, hence did arise Pain, and a great Flux of
blood, with Syncope, and difficulty of breathing, with pains in his lower Belly
about the Pubes, the parts much tumifying above the Navel, and about the
Thorax; his Speech failed, and in this Syncope he dyed. The Body being opened,
the Orifice of the Stomach, and its left part, and part of the Duodenum, and
part of the Colon were found wounded to the Thorax; and the lower Belly,
especially about the Pubes, did abound with grumous blood.

Another.
Ambrose Parrey, fol. 230. writes of a Captain, who being wounded by a Bullet,
passing by the ends of the Sternon near the Xyphoidal Cartilage, entering
through the fleshy part of the Diaphragma, and through the Interstitium which
lies between the 5th and 6th Ribs, the Wound being Cicatrized outward, yet
there remained a weakness of the Stomach, and a pain of the Guts, much like the
Colic pain; and Eight months after the pain grew very violent, and within a
while after he dies: The Body being opened by Guillemau, the Colic Gut was
seen much distended with Wind; and that this hence did make its passage into
the Thorax by the Wound of the Diaphragma, and yet the Wound scarce equalled
the bigness of a Man's little Finger.

Another.
Hollerius Com. ad Aphorism. 16. lib. 6. pronounces, The Septum Transversum or
Midriff being wounded in its Membranous Part, may not be cured, but in its
fleshy Part it is cured with ease.

Alexander Benedictus remembers a certain Soldier, who being here wounded, was
perfectly recovered.

And Hollerius writes, That he observed in a Man which was hanged, and was
afterward dissected in the Physick-Schools, that he had had a Wound in the
fleshy Part of the Diaphragma Cicatrized.

CHAP. LVII.
Of the Lungs Wounded.
THese being the Instruments both of Voice and Breathing, are by the Greeks
called Pneumones, upon reception of the Air, which they call Pneuma. And
although these in most Creatures do hang loose, that they may move more freely,
yet by the mediation of the Vessels of the Weazon, they are hung to the Neck,
and tied forwards to the Brest-Bone, and backwards to the Spine. And Nature
taking care to maintain this Motion, she has united them to the Pleura, that
so by this connection they might follow the Dilatation of the Chest, though it
were perforated. They adhere to the Heart by the Pulmoniack Vein, or Arteria
Venosa, and the Vena Arteriosa. Their Figure they gain according to the
proportion of the Parts of the Chest, being both gibbous and swelling. They are
divided by a Mediastinum into a right and left, that one Part being hurt, the
other might work for both. Their Substance is loose, spongey and rare, made as
it were of frothy Blood. They have allowed them a Membrane bred out of the
Pleura. They have 3 Vessels deseminated through them; it receives 2 from the
Heart, and these according to the opinion of some, are to be moved according to
the motion of the Lungs, others according to the Heart. Their use is to air
the Heart in its dilatation, moderately cooling and tempering the heat of the
Heart, for want of which the natural heat grows weak. These being framed for
fanning the Heart, upon being wounded they occasion a difficulty of Breathing;
the Blood which here comes forth is spumous or frothy. Sometimes there is
perceived a noise or murmuration, the Neck of the Patient is convelled, the
Face inflamed, and then afterward grows white, and many Changes in a small
time act their Parts here. If the Lungs be inwardly wounded, the Tongue has a
change in its color, they breathe short, and cough frequently, the Wound
small, but affording much Matter, they live a good while, but pine away into a
Consumption or Myasme; for the incised Lungs do beget ill Tempers and
Inflammations, the which having once obtained, they leave small hopes of
Agglutination; for upon expiration or inspiration somewhat of Air is received,
by which the hurt Parts are offended; and at best, if Medicines might be
allowed a fair reception into the Lungs, yet they must be moved by inspiration
and respiration, and lacerated by Coughs. And where the Vessels are wounded
which are lodged herein, or the Substance of the Lungs wounded, these are
generally accounted lethal for several Reasons, they being in continual motion,
moist, and subject to Inflammation, no Medicines easily reaching them, a large
Flux of Blood attending these Wounds, and a great part of this Blood must
necessarily fall into the Thorax, he which by its weight falling upon the
Diaphragma, does cause shortness of Breath; and after all, the Heart must
consequently share with them in their mischiess, the Lungs having their Vessels
from thence; yet dangerous Wounds here, have been cured; as we shall afterward
show by example. But to proceed:

Wounds of the Lungs are known by their proper Symptoms. Evacuations being
premised, breathing of a Vein is here requisite, and Cupping glasses and
Ligatures for revulsion of Humors. As to the superfluities of the Lungs, these
are to be carried off by Purgation, good Diet, and Medicines. And as to
Topics, whether either inwardly administered, or outwardly applied, they ought
to be of a drying quality, and of that agglutinative faculty, as may both act
its own Part, and yet not prove mordacious. And here may we observe, That all
Metals or Medicines having a saline quality in them, are not to be used here,
these being not to be ruled and governed according to the native heat of the
Part; such as are Verdegrease, Burnt Brass, Lead, Cadmia, Ceruss, Litharge,
Chalcit. Pompholix, and the like. But these following may safely inwardly be
taken, as Succ. Hyppo cyst. Balaust. Malicor. Mastich. Gallar. Acac. Terr.
Lemn. Bol. armen. Gum. Arabic. Tragag. Centaur. majus, and the like; these or
any of them to be boiled in restringent wine. Andhere by Hippocrates we are
advised, That in these Wounds, and Wounds of the Thorax, we order no Medicine
without Honey in it; for this makes its way through, cleanses the Breast,
facilitates the Spattle, and brings no hurt to the affected Parts. Troch.
Diacod. Tabulat. Rosatum, and the like, are very good in these cases. Potion.
Or this admirable Potion:. Caryophylat. Rad. Arthemes. Pimpinell. Camom.
Pentaphyll. violar. Caul. Rub. Consolid. major. Cimar. Rub. Centaur. minor.
Pilosell. Fragror. Consolid. minor. fol. Olivar. Verban. Tormentill. Millefol.
an. M. j. Rub. Tinctor. Quant. Caeterum coquantur omnia in vino Montan. lb 60.
ad med. consumpt. colaturae add Mel. lbij. of which let the Patient drink
morning and night. Troch.
Trochiscus for the same:. Sem. Caul. Rub. Sem. Cannab. Tanacet. Rub. Tinctor.
Consolid. major. an. part. aequal. pulverisentur and in vino odorifero and
Sacchar. albissim q s. fiant Trochisci. Of which let the Patient take j. or ij.
morning and evening, which are very beneficial in these cases. Outwardly may be
applied this Unguent:. Minij. xxiv. Pic. naval. iv. Ol. Rosar. xx. misce and
coquantur Mnguent.
ad Unguenti formam, tunc add Terebinth. venet. ij. misce, fiat Unguentum. In
these Wounds also these are very proper:. Caryophylat. Sanicul. Pimpinell. Rub.
Pilosell. Tormentill. Consolid. utriusque Centaur. an. M. ss. Coquantur in vino
and aqu. Plantag. simul mixed. and colaturae add Sir. Myrtin. or Sir. de Ros.
sicc. And this way of Cure is to be used until all Symptoms disappear, and the
Thorax well mundified, and to proceed according to Art gently, for abstergeing,
consolidating, and cicatriceing the Wound.

Matthaeas Glandorp. fol. 130. Obs. 24. has this Observation of a noble
Soldier of 27 years old, being of a sanguine Complexion, and a strong habit of
Body, who received a Wound between the 6th and 7th Rib of his Thorax, in the
left side thereof; hence issued much spumous Blood, with Wind and Air; from
hence did arise also a Fever and great pain. The Lungs being hurt, and in
respect of the Pleura being wounded, he being of a Plethorick Constitution, had
the median Vein opened in the same side, and 3 hours after was injected this
following Clyster:. Rad. alth. j. Mercurial. Violar. Malvar. an. M. j. Botrys.
Pulmonar. Farfar. an. pug. iij Sem. Lin. Faenugraec. an. ss. Anis. Foenicul.
an. iij. fl. Cham. Melilot. an. pug. ij. coquantur in aqu. commun. q. s. ut
colaturam redeat; ad ix. his add Elect. Lenitivum. j. Diaphoenic. ss. Sacchar.
x. Ol. Rosar. Violar. an. j ss. misce. The 2d day did arise a great Cough, but
without any spitting of Matter, with pain of the Side, for which was prescribed
this Liniment:. Unguent. Resumpt. ss. Dialth. Liniment.
Pectoral. Ol. Amygdal. dulc. an. ij. Croc. ss. misce: With which was anointed
the whole Thorax. For his Cough was ordered Troch. Bechic. And for the wounded
part of the Lungs was directed this Lohoc:. Lohoc. Lohoc.
Pulmon. Vulp. san. and expert. an. vj. Sir. de Farfar. de Hyssop. Rosar.
siccar. an. j. Pulv. fol. Hyssop. j ss. fl. Sulphur* been expurg. iij. Troch.
de spod. pulv. ss. misce, detur cum Baculo Liquirit. of which he took several
times in a day. For his Drink he took Barley-water, and sometimes 4 ounces of
this vulnerary Potion:. Hord. A vulnerary Decoction.
mundat. M. j. bulliat in aqu. ad Crepituram, tunc add Farfar. Scabios.
Pulmonar. maculosae an. pug. iij. Sem. Anis. Foenicul. an. j ss. Cinam. iij.
Injub. no. vj. Uvar. passar. enucleat* in vino ablut. ss. Liquirit. pro
dulcorat. q. s. and serva ad usum. The Wound being narrow was dilated with a
crooked Incision-Knife the 4th day, where was seen part of the Lungs hurt; for
the which was ordered this Powder:. Pulv. Rad. Tormentill. Bistort. Pimpinell.
an. j. Sang. Dracon. ij. Bol. armen. j ss. Troch. de Carab. j. fiat omnium
pulvis subtilissimus, which is to be sprinkled into the Wound. In the interim a
bloody Matter began to flow forth, and the 19th day was prescribed Potio
purgans.
this Lenient:. Mann. Elect. j. Diaphoenic. ss. Sir. ex Infus. Rosar. vj.
Decoct. pectoral. q. s. fiat Potio. The pain of the Side began in a short time
to abate, the Efflux of the Matter stopped, the Cough abated, the Wound
consolidated, and the Patient perfectly recovered.

Another.
Gemma lib. 1. Cosmocrit. Cap. 6. writes, That he saw the Fibers of the Lungs
ablated both by Abscesses and Wounds, and yet the Patients lived.

And Falloppius writes, That he has seen Inflations of the Lungs cured, and
others to have dyed of the same: Wherefore the Lungs, as he says, have their
equal fates, as he writes de Vulnerib. cap. 12.

Many other good Authors have Rare Histories of Wounds here happening, the
which I must pretermit, as you may read in Horstius lib. 3. Observe. De Morb.
Pector. Observe. 11. Arcaeus, lib. 2. cap. 1. Gulielmus Fabritius, Centur. 3.
Obs. 36. And Johannes Schenkius in his Book de Observat. lib. 2. de Vulnerib.
Pulmonum. To which I recommend the Ingenious Reader. Next come we to Wounds of
the Heart. Beginning with those which may happen in its Pericardium.

CHAP. LVIII.
Of Wounds of the Pericardium.
I Shall here also continue my former Custom, in giving you a short Survey of
this Membrane, and its Uses, and then fall to its Wounds and Curative Method.
It is a Membrane enwrapping the Heart swimming in it, and defending it from
Injuries, so far distant from it as its pulsifying actions do require: It
arises at the basis of the Heart, from the common disruptions of the Pleura,
outwardly covering the Vessels of the Heart. Riolanus will have it a double
Membrane; it outwardly adheres to the Mediastinum, in the lower part to the
Center of the Diaphragma; it has small Arteries given it for its nutrition,
small branches of Nerves it sends forth to the Axillaries, and does receive
small Nerves from the left recurrent, and the 6th pair passing toward the
Heart. It contains in it a liquor, the which does keep the Heart moist, making
its motion more facile, and prohibiting its dryness. It has been observed by
Practitioners, That this part being wounded, the liquor has passed out; but
the Wound being Cicatrized, the Patients have been recovered, and this has
renewed its growth again. This Pannicle thus covering the Heart, by some being
called Capsula Cordis, being alone hurt is not very dangerous, being by Galen
reckoned as an ignoble part; and hence he produces a Story of Marulus the Son
of Mimographus, who although his Heart did lie bare and uncovered, and the
Pericardium corrupted, yet he recovered. This Membrane is so much softer than a
Bone, as it is softer than the Lungs, and being as the Hearts Marsupium, it
being wounded, it loses its store of Serum, whereby the Heart is kept moist;
hence follows sometimes Syncope, Fever, and Cardialgia, or Palpitation of the
Heart. Wounds happening here are to be dressed as you do those of the Diaphragma
and other parts of the Thorax; and therefore I shall not insist hereon, but
give further satisfaction as touching some Historical Observations hereof.

History.
And the first is of Benivenius, Cap. 42. de Abditis, who writes in cutting off
an Abscess which grew upon the 7th Vertebre, the which had eroded the inward
Membrane by its Matter, a little part of the Heart lay bare to sight, yet this
Man by great Care and Diligence being used, was Cured hereof and recovered.

Another.
And Cardanus, Comment. ad Aphor. 18. lib. 6. Aphorism. Hipp. writes, That in
Antonius Algiate he saw part of the Pericardium ablated, and the Man cured; but
somewhat of suspicion remained, for he lived not many years: And hence indeed
Petrus Salius de Curat. Morborum page 256. cap. 7. writes, That these Affects
of the Pericardium do generally bring a Consumption in the end, and hereupon
happening a Hectic Fever, to which oft-times a Syncope is connexed, the
Patients die hereof.

CHAP. LIX.
Of Wounds of the Heart.
WE arrive now at the Prince of the middle Region, the great Master of life,
and the Fountain of Arterial blood. And as the Soul of man is by it self
individual and simple, the which Hip. calls (...) natura inaspectabilis,
although it be individual in the whole, yet it is said to be manifold in
respect of its variety of faculties, and dissimilar structure of Organs. Of the
upper we have already discoursed, we come now to the second and middle, where
we may see the Heart as Plato calls it the seat (...), because (...), by
Physicians it is said to be the house of the vital faculty, or (...) the
principle of life, and first author of pulsation, which flourishing all parts
do exhilarate, this languishing they pine away, and this perishing they decay.
The Philosopher writes that this contains in it the artificial fire of Zeno,
herein being contained the divine and celestial heat, the which former times
feigned, fetched its heat from Heaven, hereby giving life to man. It Is a Bowel
carries in it much dignity, for it is not to be long corrupted with injuries,
neither does it spin out its grievous punishments of life, for being once hurt
it brings present death. It Is called by the Greeks (...), (...), which is
Vibrare. Its figure is Pyramidal. It Is seated in the middle of the Thorax,
circumscribed in its forepart with the Sternon, in its backpart with the
vertebrae of the Back, in its upper with the Clavicles, in its lower with the
Diaphragma, in its right and left sides with twelve ribs. In its Temper it is
the hottest of the bowels. In its passive qualities more moist than the cutis.
Its whole structure is framed of Flesh, Fat, Veins, Arteries and Nerves. Its
Flesh is interwoven with three kind of fibers, right fibers from its basis to
the end of its sharp point; then oblique, which are obliquely produced
according to its length, and lastly transverse for orbiculating the heart,
passing through its ventricles. The heart draws blood by the help of the right
in its Diastole through the Venacava into the right, and Air by the Venous
Artery into the left Cavity. It enjoyes its attraction by the help of the
Oblique, and by the transverse it contracts and straitens, and hereby expulsion
is here made. Its Vein is called (...) or Coronaria, encompassing the whole
basis of the heart like a Crown. It has often times two coronary Arteries also
running through its whole Arteries. Its small Nerves it has from the sixth
Conjugation. I shall not enlarge any further upon its Anatomical discourse,
although I might here bring in its Ears, its Ventricles, Valves, and Divisions,
but shall rather desire you to look into Laurentius Bauhine, Deemerbrooke and
the like, who are full enough in every one of these. We come now to the
substance and body of the Heart it self as touching our discourse of Wounds,
and here may we see, the heart being struck, much black and thick blood to
issue thence, especially if its right ventricle or side be wounded; and
hereupon we shall see the face soon grow pale, cold sweats attend the body, and
a strange smell accompany the whole man. Just under the right or left breast
the wound is made, the pulse does much vary and act its changes, the extreme
parts grow cold, the mind troubled, and death follows. If the left ventricle of
the heart be wounded, the blood is of a more rosy color, more spirituous,
spinning out. And in these direful cases we generally meet with Syncopes, cold
Sweats and Chilliness. The heart being so noble and generous a part cannot
endure a divorce in it without death, for it is the beginning of life, and
elaboratory of the vital Spirit, being in continual motion, full of blood, and
this ofttimes emptying it self into the cavity of the Thorax, there threatening
suffocation, as I have already said. If it happens in any of the Ventricles,
this wound must necessarily be lethal, by reason of the great expense of blood
which is made and lost. Another ill affect here may be the Air, the which
passing into the wound does ofttimes occasion death. If the wound do happen in
the substance of the heart, and do not reach any of its Ventricles, the Patient
may live for two or three days but not much longer. The prince of life being
corrupted, does soon distribute and share of its hurts to all its subject
parts, and these of necessity must contract by their Rivulets from the Fountain
of its hurts and mischiefs, it being as the Radix or Ocean both of Veins and
Arteries, it being as Aristotle writes the best of all bowels, distributing to,
and not receiving from any part, giving life and motion unto others, and
diffusing its proper virtues as it pleases it self, and exposing its griefs
and sorrows to other parts according as it thinks fit. Hip. Aphor. 6. affirms
that wounds of the heart are lethal, especially if they be large, and penetrate
its ventricles. Superficial wounds here happening may be cured. But these
wounds whatsoever are so rarely cured, that you shall scarce read of any one
man here being wounded to have recovered, but in the space of two or three
hours to have yielded up his last breath. For as Fallopius writes, should we
either consider the excellency of the heart, or its substance, death must
necessarily follow, its substance being hard and not to be agglutinated. And if
we regard its perpetual Motion also and Temper, we may soon see it inflamed;
and if to these we add the greatness of the wound, we may find it time lost in
expecting ever to gain cure here. And for the proving of this I shall produce
some worthy Historical Observations. Galen lib. 5. Cap. 1. de loc. affect.
pronounces, that if any wound do reach the Ventricle of the Heart, and there
follow a large flux of blood, the party must necessarily die. And that
especially if the left Ventricle be wounded. Yet if the wound have only
penetrated the substance of the heart, and not reached its Ventricles, these
may live that day or the next, but seldom any longer, for inflammation hence
arising it soon puts out the light of his life.

History.
Cyriacus Lucius de suis observat* writes that for resolving the Question,
about the seats of the principal faculties, and their originations amongst
Physicians, it was not of little weight to produce the History of one who being
hurt in the left part of his Thorax, the wound penetrating the substance of the
heart, and either Ventricle thereof, being made transversely, fell hereupon as
it were void both of his senses and reason for almost the space of a whole
hour, he soon dying of this wound. His body being opened, all the spectators
might see and understand the shape of the Instrument which made the wound into
his heart, and might very well judge of its form and fashion. And to conclude
this discourse, Ambrose Pary lib. 9. cap. 30. writes that he saw a Noble man
who fighting a Duel with another received a wound under the left breast, which
penetrated the substance of the heart, its Fibers being transversely incised,
and hereupon after walking a matter of two hundred paces fell down dead. The
dead body being opened, the wound might easily be seen to pass into the
substance of the heart, the bigness of a finger, hence was also seen a great
and plentiful effusion of blood in the Diaphragma.

CHAP. LX.
Of Wounds of the Arteries and Veins, and of the Vena Cava and Great Artery.
Of the Vena Cava.
THE blood being purged from all its bitter and lutulent excrements, does show
it self more pure, red and sincere in this its large vessel, the which shall in
this place offer it self. And this Vein by the Ancients was called (...), that
is large and hollow, this being the fountain of humane nature, and the
floodgate of our Microcosm, and the common mother of the rest, except the
Umbilical and Port-vein. It is bred out of the Gibbous part of the Liver, it is
seated according to the length of the back, and runs directly through both
Venters, hereby conveying of its blood to all parts. It is divided by
Anatomists into an upper and lower Trunk, the upper penetrating through the
Diaphragma and ascending upwards does distribute many of its branches into all
the upper parts; the descending Trunk lesser than the former adheres to the
Spine on the right side, and does disperse several of its branches through the
Liver.

Of the Great Artery.
The Great Artery is exceeding large at the left ventricle of the Heart from
whence it arises, and for this reason all Anatomists do allow the Heart the
Origination of Arteries. And before this do fall out from the Pericardium above
the valves it does afford, are sometimes two Coronary Arteries, the which like
a Crown do encompass the Basis of the Heart, and a little under the great Vein,
or Arteria venosa, it arises upwards and penetrates the Pericardium, and is
divided into two equal parts, the one called the ascendent, the other the
descendent Trunk. This Trunk does very fitly answer the body of a Tree, and
does incline to the 5th Spondyl of the Thorax, and somewhat declining toward
the left gives way unto the Vena Cana. From this Trunk are branches dispersed,
which do accompany the ramifications of the Port and hollow Veins into the
whole body. Thus have we given you a short survey of these two great Trunks by
Anatomy.

Signs of the Vena Cava wounded.
If the hollow Vein be wounded, a Flux of black Blood succeeds, the wound
happens in the right side, the Veins do speedily empty and flag, the face looks
pale, and the extreme parts do grow cold, the faculties wax weak, and soon
after these the Patient's life is taken from him.

Signs of the Great Artery wounded.
If the Great Artery be wounded, arising from the left ventricle of the Heart,
distributing its vital Spirit through the whole Man, and tempering his native
heat by a Systole and Diastole, the flux of Blood appears florid, and the
wound must be in the left side, the motion of the Arteries do vary and change,
the extreme parts grow chilly, and a perturbation of mind does cloud the animal
faculties, a Fever follows and creates a preternatural heat in the parts, a
Palpitation of the Heart follows, after which you may suddenly see the Heart it
self yield. For wounds happening in either of these two must consequently
procure death by reason of the quick and plentiful discharge both of Blood and
Spirit, hence following an interception both of the faculties and functions
both of Heart and Lungs.

CHAP. LXI.
Of Wounds of the Veins and Arteries.
WE come now to the general discourse of the Veins and Arteries, where we may
see how they vary by Anatomy. A Vein is by the Greeks called What a Vein is,
and how made.
(...) abundare, because a plenty of Blood does abound in it. This is an
Organick similar part, membranous, long, thin, hollow, containing Blood in it,
and carrying the same to the Heart. It Is said to be Organick in respect of its
action or use, for conveying the Blood. It has a membranous substance,
moderately soft, the better for distension; it has one proper coat, intertexed
with a threefold kind of Fibers, the which is manifestly apparent in varices,
the which when its transverse and oblique Fibers have been rent, the coat of
the Vein seems loose, neither is it to be ever restored to its former natural
state. It Is nourished with the Blood which passes through it, it is nourished
as are the Arteries. The Veins are inwardly furnished with valves for admitting
the reception of the Blood, and making a free passage for its address to the
Heart, and hindering its reflux from it. They take their material Origination
from the seed, but whether they take their first Origination from the Liver by
the Vena Cava and Porta, or from the Heart is yet much disputable.

What an Artery is, and* how made.
An Artery by the Greeks is called (...) being generally in motion, or (...)
because it keeps air or spirit in it. It Is an Organick, similar, long, round,
and hollow part, ordained for conveying the spirituous Blood. Organick in
respect of its action or use, the Blood being herein contained, being much like
the distillation of Wine, the which being the oftener distilled does yield a
more pure and subtle spirit. Thus the Blood, the oftener it is dilated in the
Heart, its spirituous particles are the better dissolved from its thick mass,
and are the better attenuated. The substance of an Artery is membranous, so
framed for its better dilatation and constriction. It consists of a double
proper coat outward and inward. The outward whereof is soft and thin; endowed
with many right, few oblique Fibers: the inward is more hard and thick. And it
is very necessary that it should be so, especially about the Heart which does
receive the warm Blood falling from the Heart. This coat has in it many
transverse Fibers, few oblique and right, the better for constriction; for
should the Arteries not be made firm by these transverse Fibers, by their great
pulsations they would be dilated, and so remain. For this Cause of Aneurism.
is the cause of Aneurism: This coat being rent with its Fibers, the Blood does
soon make its entry and passage into the first soft coat, the which by reason
of its softness is soon extended, and hence does arise a Tumor in the part.
They are nourished with spirituous Blood which does pass through them, in which
because there are in it many saline particles, a good part of which comes to
the coats, it makes their substance both more firm and thick.

Having thus given you a brief Anatomical discourse of these parts, we are next
to look into their wounds, and here are we to enquire whether this Wound was
given by a Sword, or Shaft, or occasioned by a fall upon a sharp Stone, or
inwardly by some salt and corroding humor. All these are to be collected
either from the Patient, or by their proper signs. That there is a breach of
some vessel profusion of blood is certificate enough, herein comprehending the
place by the glass of Anatomy, considering the largeness of the wound, and
impetuosity of the Blood flowing. Now whether it flows from a Vein, or an
Artery, may be collected from these signs. As first, the Arterial Blood being
both rosy and florid, also passes out with leaping, spinning forth in its
dilatation Secondly, this Blood is more thin and fluid than that of the Veins.
And thirdly, as this is florid and rosy, so the venal blood is black and
thick. Again, the Arterial Blood is more hot than the Venal, neither has the
Venal Blood such Spirit allowed it.

Presages.
Because Blood is the treasure of life, if this flux be not immediately stopped,
it brings a dissolution of the whole man. For in these great fluxes we
generally see Convulsion, Syncope, Singultus and the like, as continual
attendants hereupon. The cure of an Artery cut is much more difficult than that
of a Vein, because the Arterial Blood is more fluxile, and its body more hard
and always in motion. An Artery cut overthwart, is sooner healed than that
which is incised longwise.

Cure.
As to the Cure, we are advised by Galen to cause a speedy stop to this flux,
and then to cure the wound. And this is to be done either by aversion or
derivation, or making the matter more firm that it make no further address, by
obstructing the mouths of the Vessels, either by joining the lips of the wound
together, or by obturation of the Vessels by compressing them together with the
fingers, and keeping them so compressed until the blood do become grumous. I
have already in the beginning of my discourse shown eight several ways of
stanching of blood, and this may be done either by a certain regulation of the
whole body, or well ordering of the affected part. The Diet here ought to be
thin, cold and of substance thickning, somewhat restringent, so as it may both
cool and thicken the blood; and for this use Lentils, Rice, Jujubes, Quinces,
Medlers, Pomegranates, Prunes and the like are proper here. Let his drink be
either cold water or chalybeated water or Posca, Barley-water, of Julip of
Roses, Plantain-water, Spawn-water or the like. The part affected ought also to
be cooled, and hence repercussives are proper whereby to repel the blood from
the affected part. Hereupon both upon the part and its origination is to be
assused Posca, Blackwine, Juice of Nightshade, Lettice, Plantain and the like.
The flux is to be averted either by revulsion or derivation; for revulsion
Phlebotomy is to be instituted, if the flux be large, and the spirits will
allow it. For this use also Cupping-glasses either without or with
scarrification are proper engines here, as also Ligatures, Frictions, Unctions,
Fomentations and the like, all which are to be applied to the contrary part.
Now come we to the Vessel it self which is wounded, and here are we to observe,
that the lips of the Vessels are to be shut up; and here if an Artery be
dissected, we first apply our thumb and finger upon the Vessel for its
compression, after which the wound is to be washed with Posca for the
expurgation of the concreted blood. The blood being cleansed and the wound
dried up, we are to sprinkle some restrictive powders into it, over these to
apply a convenient liniment upon the present removal of the finger, after the
application of which, to apply the finger upon it again. And when you take off
your dressings, you are to take them singly off, with a due observation of
keeping your finger on until you have wholly removed all your dressings. The
wound being expleted, its superficies is to be sprinkled with restrictive
powder, then covered over with a rowler, which was dipped in sharp Wine and oil
of Roses. And here are we to observe that we do make three or four ligations
upon the wound, and so to mount your ligatures upwards toward the originations
of the Vessels, so as the blood may be retracted from the affected part. Then
remove your ligature the third day, changing also your dressings, in which time
you may safely proceed in this operation. The Surgeon ought to be well
skilled in Anatomy, for Nature has planted and mixed Nerves with Arteries as
cold bodies that by their heat they may be cherished: for if in these cases the
Surgeon do not separate the Nerve from the Artery by a small hook, he will
bind up both parts, and if the Nerve be compressed, it speedily is deprived
both of its sense and motion, and hence does follow a stupidity of the whole
member. In these cases therefore the Nerve is to be separated from the Artery,
and then the Artery to be bound up. And in our ligations we are to take care
that they be not made too strict. Fallopius fol. 211. writes of an infirm
Mechanic who received a wound in his Vena Poplitis, in which wound it behoved
the part to be rolled up without which he must necessarily have perished; the
wound was rolled up although the Artery was cut, yet within the space of a year
after the man perceived a pulse in the Artery of the Malleolus. For which
reason he thinks in such a process of time that the Orifices of the Arteries do
meet together again and conjugate; but this is not always approved of, neither
does use of ligatures always appear here proper. For in some cases the Artery
is to be transversly incised: for this is the proper nature of the Vessel upon
such an incision, to make toward its Original, and to shroud it self under the
Muscles, and with ease join their Orifices with them. And Gal. lib. 5. Meth.
teaches us this way of dissection of an Artery, as first, to lift it up with a
hook, then to separate it from the Vein and Nerve, and then to divide it; the
which being done, the Artery is to be tied up or twisted by the hook, for
hereby the Orifices of the Vessels are completely obstructed. But if the wound
be so deep and do penetrate so far as that we cannot come at it, in these cases
Ustion is most proper, for hereby the flux of blood is stopped by cringing the
mouth of the Vessel and at its ends procuring an Eschar or crust; but this very
seldom does happen. And here I do advise with all imaginable caution that you
take care of the Vessel that it be kept from being burnt up, because this
action is both painful, cruel and difficult, and we proceeding here as it were
hood-winkt; besides all which if this crust or eschar should fall off, it would
subject the part to a new flux, the which is seldom conquered by the best of
medicines. In these desperate cases these things are to be observed, That you
first make this with a red hot Iron, taking care that the concreted blood be
not cauterized in the wound, but this first to be expurged with Posca. A second
caution is, That we make not too much adustion, but only so far as to cause a
corrugation of the vessel, by the first or second application of the actual
Cautery. And sometimes a potential as well as an actual Cautery may here
properly be used, and for this some do prescribe Soot as the best of medicines
both for procuring an eschar and also for suppression of the blood. But this is
not to be used in all places, as the face or eyes or the like, for it always
does leave its mark of blackness. We in these cases do generally use
Calcanthum, or calcined Vitriol. Some do use oil of Vitriol or Sulphur, others
for the same effect do prescribe Troch. de Minio, but it is a mischievous
medicine in these cases, for that besides its exciting of pain, it does also
increase the same. Having by these or the like medicines granted that the flux
of blood is stopped, our next intention is the agglutinating of the wound. And
here because there is an eschar to be removed, emollient and digesting
medicines are here to be applied, as Unguent. Dialth. Basilicon, fresh butter,
Axungia Porcina, or the like. Then is the wound if deep to be filled up with
flesh by Sarcoticks, and skinned by Epouloticks. And here by the way according
to Galens advice lib. 5. Method. we are to apply to wounded Arteries so much
the more drying medicines than to Veins, by how much they are of drier bodies:
wherefore a Vein wounded without loss of substance is to be cured as you do
wounds of the flesh. And Gal. lib. 5. Meth. cap. 7. relates that Arteries may
also be consolidated, for he says that he has seen them agglutinated in Women
and Children, and to be every way covered with flesh, and that both in the
Forehead, Ancles, and Arms; and brings in this Story of a young Surgeon not
much skilled in his art, who was about by a Physicians order to breath a Vein
in the Arm, but cut the Artery instead of the Vein; the blood which issued out
was yellowish, thin, and full of spirit, coming out with leaping. He being
called to this Patient with some other Physicians, a Plaster being made ready
for the suppression of the blood he joined the Artery, and applied over it the
Medicine, and bound a soft Sponge over all; unrowling of the dressings the
fourth day the incised Artery was apparently seen to be conglutinated, after
which were applied the same Medicines again, and so for some days to be
continued, and within a small while his Artery was perfectly cured.

History of Arteries wounded.
Dodonaeus Medicin. Observe. Cap. 49. writes of a Spaniard who falling upon his
face, cut an Artery, and the Cutis being rent herewith the blood issued out
very plentifully; many Medicines being tried in vain, his friends desired him
to stop this Flux if possible. Coming to him, and viewing the wound, he could
find no better Medicine than an actual Cautery to perform this, hence with all
diligence he cauterized the incised Artery, and presently suppressed the flux
of blood, the which being stopped, the remainer of the cure was performed with
ease, and the Patient speedily recovered his pristine health.

Another.
Forestus lib. 6. Observe. Chirurg. Obs. 35. writes of a young man in Delph
whose Artery of his thigh being wounded, was not to be conquered by any
Medicines, or its flux of blood intercepted by astringents; yet by the benefit
of the actual Cautery he was presently freed from death. Benivenius cap. 49. de
Abditis has another Story hereof after the same manner of one whose Artery was
cut, and not to be cured without an actual Cautery. Fabritius Hildan. obs. 18.
writes of a man of 40. years of age, who being of a choleric and angry
disposition, and being wounded in the head, the left soporal Branch of the
Artery which lies under the Temporal Muscle was incised; the flux being stopped
by the application of his restrictive Powder at first, he brought the wound to
digestion the Fifth day after his hurt received; he that gave the wound
unhappily comes unawares into his Chamber, the wounded man not knowing of his
coming, and being troubled and vexed at the sight of him, upon this passion the
Artery opened and divided it self again, hence issued such a flux of Blood that
it could scarce be stopped, yet this man at last grew well, and recovered.
Hereby may we see what influence Anger has over us, it being the most terrible
of all passions, and the most fertile mother of infinite evils.

Of Veins wounded.
Dodonaeus sol. 267. med. obs. writes that in his time a Barber endeavoring to
pluck out the hair from a man's nostrils, did unhappily cut the small Vein which
is within them planted, hence followed such a flux of blood that many
Physicians could not find any way to stop it, but the poor man miserably ended
his life.

Thus have I run through all the parts of the middle Venture, and the chief
parts which are most subject to be wounded, we proceed to the third and last.

CHAP. LXII.
Of Wounds of the Abdomen.
HAving in my former discourses shown the upper and middle Regions, wherein we
have dismantled every of the parts, we come now to Natures workhouse, wherein
we may see her nutritive Engines by which she does sustain the whole family.
This being as the Kitchen of the Body, guarded with an outward armor of
Muscles, then wrapped about with a fine spermatick Peritoneum, inwardly may we
first view its fatty Kell framed with curled veins, and crisped fat, being as a
warm rugg keeping warm the Stomach and Guts. Next these the admirable series of
Intestines, in whose midst is planted the Mesentery staying them in their
proper places, and conveighing to them the meseraick Veins, by which the
aliment is conveyed unto the gate of the Liver. After this appears a Pancreas,
the Liver, bladder of Gall, Spleen, Ventricle, Bladder, Ureters, Kidneys and
the like. But of each of these in their order.

We begin with wounds of the Abdomen, and here we may meet with two sorts
hereof, the one being simple and not penetrating, the other being more compound
and penetrating. And before we concern our selves with the cure hereof, let us
see the signs by which we may know these. And these again may be seen to
penetrate with, or without the excision of any part, with or without hurt of
the same. A penetrating wound we may find either by the probe or searching
candle; for if a great way in, it is a sign of a penetrating wound, observing
Signs of a penetrating* wound.
here also that the wound be made directly. For if the wound be made obliquely,
you may put your Probe or Candle a great way in between the Muscles, and the
wound notwithstanding not penetrate. Again if you make any injection of Wine
and do inject it into the wound well warmed, if the wound penetrateth, it will
remain and lodge in the Cavity. If not, it will make its speedy exit. If the
Omentum or Intestines come out of the wound, these are evident testimonies of
its penetration. Presages.
As for such wounds as do not penetrate they are void of danger unless they be
very large; and that is worse which is made in the middle part than in the
sides, for the middle part is more nervous, and more difficult to stitch up;
besides the guts do more easily pass out here than at the sides and so do
hinder agglutination. And as Celsus faith, all penetrating wounds are accounted
dangerous, because they are most commonly large and always deep, because the
air which passes into the wound does hurt the guts, and likewise also because
the matter ofttimes does fall into the Capacity thereof. And he further notes,
that as he cannot escape who is wounded in the body of the Brain, Stomach, in
the Gate Vein of the Liver, or whose spinal marrow is smitten; so also may he
not be said to be cured, to whom the middle of the Lungs, Jejune, small Guts,
Kidneys or Bladder are wounded. In these wounds these Intentions are required.
If any part comes out, to repose this, then to stitch up the wound, to apply
agglutinative Medicines, and to remove all evil Symptoms. We shall treat of the
parts by themselves. And here by way of Caution as touching our future herein
required, we are to consider how much of the part we are to take up to stitch
with the Needle, for if here we take up but a small part, the thread will cut
it through, if too great a part, we shall occasion pain. Secondly, that we make
convenient spaces between our stitches for a better exition of the matter. And
then that we consider the depth of placing our Needles, and that our thread or
Silk be of a good size. Here also are we to note that the stitches are not to
be cut off the fourth day, but to remain on until the ninth or longer, for
wounds here are not suddenly consolidated. Over the stitches may be applied
some of the agglutinative Medicines which I have already proposed, being made
of Turpentine, Frankincense, Bolarmenick, Dragons-blood, or the like. If to
this wound inflammation be adjoined, the wound not being neglected, the
inflammation is to be minded, the which does sufficiently declare it self by
its color, touch, and sense of the affected part. And this is to be speedily
abated and all other symptoms, as pain, intemperiety, and the like. To conclude
this.

History.
A very worthy Gentleman of our country falling down upon his side, the point
of his Knife being put into his pocket upwards, by the fall struck into his
lower parts and left side of his body, the which being examined it was found
both very large and deep, whence issued a great quantity of blood. The bloody
flux being stopped, and the concreet blood cleansed, the wound was stitcht up
with convenient spaces for the discharge of the matter. The matter being
digested, the wound was healed, and he perfectly recovered, and was with me
when I writ this.

CHAP. LXII.
Of the Abdomen wounded with Exition of the Intestines or Omentum.
IF the case be, that the Intestines or Omentum do come out of the wound, these
with all speed are to be restored. But if they have been out long, and the
orifice of the wound be small, and by reason of the cold air these parts are
filled with flatuosity, so as that they cannot be reduced, you are in this case
according to Celsus's advice first to make an incarnative fomentation to
disperse this wind, and then to try the reposition of the parts. The
fomentation may be made of Camomile, Spicknard, Squinanth, Melilot, Dill,
Pennyroyal, Wormwood, Mints, Balm, Lavender, and all the carminative seeds and
berries boiled in Wine, in which is to be dipped a sponge, and so to apply it
warm to the affected part. Rhasis for this purpose does apply the Lungs of
Animals hot hereto. The flations being thus dissipated, the Intestines are to
be reduced with your fingers. If the Omentum do come forth at the wound, and by
reason of cold it has got a strange color, and purchased an unnatural
hardness in it, so far as the part is corrupt, this is to be cut away: but if
it carries its native color, and no change do appear in it, this are we to
repose into its proper place; and if the wound be so small as we cannot get it
in with our fingers, we are advised by a searching candle to repose it, this
being dipped in some Traumatick decoction. Some there are who for this use do use
a Golden wire, and hereby do cut away all the putrefied part. The next
intention after this is to stitch the wound up by Gastroraphia. By Aquapendens
there are set down 3 forts of these stitches: the first performed by thrusting
the needle through the skin and the Muscles, even to the Peritonaeum not
touching it; then from within outward the Peritonaeum is to be thrust through
and the Muscles of the opposite side by the needle; then within the distance of
an inch the needle is to be thrust through the Muscles of the same side,
leaving the Peritonaeum: and thus are you to proceed until you have stitcht up
the wound. The second is done by stitching the Muscles together and the sides
of the Peritonaeum together. The third differs not from the stitch which is
used in other parts of the body. These being done, the next Intention is to
apply agglutinative emplasters or powders, of which I have already directed
sufficiently; over which may be applied Empl. Diapalma, de Betonica, Barbarum
Stipticum, or the like. Galen proposes the fourth scope is to prevent the
hurting of any noble parts; and this may be occasioned either by pain, or a
collection of matter or blood in the cavity of the Abdomen. Gal. for the first,
6. Meth. cap. 4. advises to embrocate all the parts from the Armpits to the
Inguens with Olive-oyl warmed; or oil of Camomile, Dialthaea or Roses for this
use is better. And as to the second accident, matter and blood may well fall
from the lips of the wound into the Abdomen, and may not only offend the Guts
but also all the other contained parts, for hereby sometimes a Tumor is
caused, sometimes a Dropsy generated. And these signs do certify their being
inwardly contained; as first, the weight shows the same with pain and tension
of the part; 2. if upon depression of the belly you find the matter make its
passage from one part to another: hence are we by Galen directed to order such
medicines as may rarifie the parts, both dissipate and draw forth the matter.

To conclude this, I shall present you with some remarkable History.
histories worthy our observation as touching this Chapter. Albucasis lib. 2.
cap. 58. Meth. Med. writes of a wound happening in the belly which was made by
a small Knife, it was the breadth of a hand lacerated, and the Intestines came
out the breadth of two hands, the Intestines were restored, and the wound in
24. hours consolidated, and the wound in the space of 15. days was recovered,
upon which wound was put old wool, washing it twice a day with Aqua Mellis
until it was healed.

Another.
Another shall be of the Omentum, the which falling out of a wound, the Abdomen
being cut and wounded, the Patient recovered, and this is of Galen de usu part.
lib. 4. cap. 9. That the Omentum was framed for warmths sake is sufficiently
evident, although in those who have been wounded in their Abdomen, in which
wounds this has fallen out, being hereby made livid, this compells the
Surgeon to cut off the hurt part. All such therefore do find their stomachs
cold, and do not well digest their victuals, and do furnish themselves with
many outward coverings, especially when a great part of this is taken away, as
it happened once to a Fencer where we were forced to cut it almost all quite
off, yet this man recovered, yet he the remainder of his life was ever hurt by
any outward cold, and was not able to endure a naked belly, but ever did wear a
quilt well thickened with Cotton over his belly.

CHAP. LXIII.
Of Wounds of the Omentum.
THE Kell by the Greeks is called (...) of (...) to swim, in Latin Omentum,
this swimming upon the bottom of the Stomach and the uppermost Guts. The
Arabians do call it Zirbus, being as the mop of the belly sweeping up its
superfluities. It is a large membrane, situated upon the bottom of the
Stomach, and downwards over the Guts unto the Navel. It Is fastened to the
Stomach, Spleen, and Colon. Its form is like a purse-net or Faulkners-bag,
consisting of a double membrane knit together at the bottom. Its membranes are
two lying one upon the top of another. It has many Veins arising from the
Port-vein. It has its Arteries from the Celiacal and Mesenterical branches.
The fat is very plentiful about these Vessels. Its uses are to keep the guts
moist, and it warms and comforts the Stomach, and in time of Famine it supplies
a kind of subsidiary nourishment to the natural heat. Having given you the
abstract of the Anatomy of the Kell, whereas I have already shown in some
measure how it is to be dealt with if it comes out the Abdomen being wounded;
here shall we briefly show how to cure any part thereof which is either cut, or
hanging a long while out of the wound, easily causing it to putrify and
gangrenate. If any part therefore of the Omentum comes out, and by reason of
cold or the air is too much cooled, which you may discern by its unnatural
hardness, or if it be black or livid, then is this to be bound up near to the
warm and sound part, and the corrupt part must be cut away, letting the thread
hang out of the wound until the corrupt part does separate from the whole, then
draw the thread wholly out of the wound. If the Omentum be nothing altered in
its color, let it be restored and reduced into its proper place, and be
ordered as I have already directed in the foregoing Chapter. In these kind of
wounds because the fleshy parts are generally hurt, digestives, mundificatives,
incarnatives and cicatrizing medicines are required. All which I will show you
in this ensuing discourse. Of a wound of the Omentum not being well handled
whence did arise a gangrene, Glandorp has it in Obs. 29. lib. spec. Chirurg.
the which I shall set down here for thy better management if occasion does or
may History.
require. The History is of a Nobleman who challenged a Scholar into the field
to fight, the which being met, the Scholar wounded the Nobleman a little under
the Navel the length of 6 fingers, out of which came forth part of the Omentum,
with some of the Guts, yet unhurt. The Surgeon which was employed neglects
this wound of the Omentum, and does repose the cold parts, and stitcheth up the
wound, whence in the seventh day when the putrified matter could not obtain an
evacuation, a Fever did hereupon arise, with frequent perturbations of the
mind. Glandorps Father being consulted, seeing the wound so strictly stitcht
up, presently did cut them open, hence followed out at the wound a great plenty
of matter; and having more diligently examined the wound, and cleansed it with
Wool or Lint, he sees the Omentum turning black, as you see in the beginning
of a gangrene; the part of the Omentum was drawn forth, and tied in the upper
part, and part thereof was taken off, which was the quantity of three
transverse fingers, and having prescribed him a good order of diet especially
in respect of his Fever which was Clyster.
very hot and afflicting, he had afterward this Clyster administered. fol. malv.
alth. violar. an. M. i. scord. hyperic. an. M. ss. fl. Cham. Melilot. an. p.
iij. sem. anis. faenicul. an. iij. Lin. Foenugraec. an. vi. Caricar. ping. ij.
coquantur in q. s. aqu. font. ad ix. his add Benedict. laxat. vi. Ol. Amygdal.
dulc. iss. Ol. violar. vi. Sacchar. rubr. colat. i. misce. Afterward was
ordered this Cordial. Aqu. Theriacal. Cinamom. an. ss. Borag. Cordial.
bugloss. Cardu. an. ss. Rosar. vj. Sacchar. Perlat. iij. Conf. Alkerm. i.
misce; of which let him take a spoonful now and then. The Tents were armed with
this Digestive, over which was applied Empl. Diapalma. Terebinth. lot. in aqu.
Veronic. i. Ol. Rosar. Lumbricor. Digestive.
an. iij. Cort. Thur. Mastich. an. ss. Mel. Rosar. ss. vitell. Ov. n. j. misce.
The circumjacent parts were anointed with Ol. Cham. Viol. Rosar. and Lumbricor.
and because pain much grieved the parts, over these were applied this Catapl.
fol. violar. M. ss. Scord. pug. iij. Catapl.
summit. Absynth. Abrotan. Rosar. rubr. an. pug. ij. fl. Cham. Mclilot. an.
pug. j. farin. Hord. Fabar. an iss. Lupinor. i. cum Lact. vacc. q. s. fiat
Cataplasma, fine addendo Ol. Rosar. i. violar. ss. vitell. Ovor. n. j. misoe.
Hence was generated good and laudable matter. In the interim he complained of
pain of his Stomach, for which in some mornings he took Cassia for loosening
his belly, and for his weakness of the Stomach was this ordered. Cons. Rosar.
rubr. i. Absynth. Roman. vi. spec. Diarrhod. Abbat. ii. Rad. Enul. camp. cond.
iss. Ol. Cinamom. gut. iij. misce. By these means the inflammation, and a flux
of humors to the affected part, and the Fever with the other symptoms, did
within few days vanish. To the wound were applied mundifiers, incarnatives and
agglutinatives, with a fair cicatrice, that the man recovered to his pristine
health.

CHAP. LXIV.
Of Wounds of the Guts.
THE Intestines are called by the Greek (...), in Latin Intestina, being
placed in the inmost part of the body; these are wrapped up into many folds, they
are knit together by the benefit of the Mesentery, they are long bodies, hollow
but not of a like bore; they are continued with the Stomach at the Pylorus, but
their substance is thinner than that of the Stomach, and they have almost
innumerable Veins. The small Guts are in number three, Duodenum, Jejunum,
Ilion, the which although they have almost one capacity, yet they are easily
distinguished by their site, length, and by the Meseraick Veins. The great or
thick Guts are of the same number, called Caecum, Colon, and Rectum, all
differing in site, Figure, and Magnitude. You may find in all Authors of
Anatomy their true insertion, site and length, we shall therefore pass to the
three coats, one of which is common to them all, having its origination from
the Peritonaeum, this is made as a guard for their defense. They have also two
proper coats, partly as Galen shows, that their expelling faculty might be
strong, and partly also for security. They have all kinds of fibers, the inward
being oblique that they might retain, the middle transverse more proper for
expulsion, the right being in the small Guts fewer than in the great. They have
their Vessels from the Port Vein, Arteries from the Coeliacal and Mesenterical
Branches, they have Nerves from the sixth pair. The use of the small Guts is as
the proper conveighing instruments of nutriment, distributing the same, and for
this reason has Nature drawn the Guts out to a length, so as she may in each
of them lodge a little quantity, fit to be sucked up by the Meseraicks. The use
of the great Guts is to contain the excrements in them, with choler which is
afforded them from the bladder of gall having a passage which enters the
Duodenum.

We come now to the discourse of these being wounded, and here are we well to
consider whether the small or great Guts be thus wounded. If the small be
wounded, Signs of the small and great Guts being wounded.
the Chyle is seen to pass through the Orifice, the Hipps do tumify and grow
hard, or Choler is seen to come this way, especially if the Duodenum or Jejunum
be wounded, sometimes meat and drink do pass through the wound. There Is little
hopes of cure if the Jejunum be wounded, because it is exanguial, and does
receive a great Quantity of vessels, its coats being very thin and nervous:
besides, the choler which descends from the bladder of gall on one side, and
the pancreatick juice which passes into these Guts on the other does much
hinder Consolidation. And although these reasons are true, yet that these being
wounded have been cured, Example and History makes good; and therefore in these
cases by Hippocrates order we are not to leave the Patient in misery without
help. Wounds of the great Guts are more fleshy, and therefore may be allowed
more readily and with less trouble and difficulty to be cured. If these be
wounded, the excrement does pass out by the wound; yet if a great and
transverse wound does happen here, it ofttimes does threaten death: but if the
wound be small and made directly, it may be cured, and yet must not be allowed
void of danger, because the external part of the Abdomen is divided. If
inflammation adjoins with this wound, and causes a fever, and this increases,
the Patient must necessarily die.

In curing of these wounds five Intentions are required. First therefore the
lips of the wound are to be brought 5 Intentions required as to the cure.
together; secondly the Gut is to be reduced into its proper place; thirdly
convenient Medicines are to be applied; fourthly to prevent any excrements
coming to the affected part; and lastly the penetrating wound of the Abdomen is
to be cured.

1 Intention.
The first intention is performed by future: but here may we note that there
are several ways set down by Authors about this future. Some of which do take
an Elder pith, and through this they put the needle into the cavity of the
Guts, and then they sow the Abdomen and Intestine together; but this way in
common sense is out of the way: others there are who do take a dry Gut of
another animal, and this being extended do put it about the wound; but this
also is not to be followed, because this dried Gut will soon fall from the
moist, and therefore necessarily it must be improper. Another sort there are
who apply to these wounds the wings and bodies of Ants, and with their fingers
do compress them in, but this way is also idle. The best and most safe way
therefore is to sow up these wounds as women do sow cloth, or to stitch up the
brims of the wound with the Glovers stitch.

2 Intention.
The quantity of the Gut which is to be taken up should neither be too great
nor too small, but in a moderate quantity, for the intestines are extended in
their proper motions, and therefore if a greater part be taken up than what is
necessary, the Intestine is easily obstructed, and its Cavity rendered too
strict, and hence come great pains, and the Gut is made subject to the Iliaca
passio. The future being made, the remaining part of the thread is to be left
hanging out of the wound; here advising before we begin any future, that we
ought to apply some agglutinative Medicine into the inward part of the
Intestine, and for this use the powder of Myrrh, Aloes and Frankincense is very
good: but here we must note that these powders are to be applied before the
suppression of the blood; but if you in this case may fear the sharpness of
Aloes, you may add the powder of Comfry root, and then to take one part of
Aloes, two of Frankincense, and one of Comfrey, and these to be sprinkled both
upon and into the wound. Some for this use do much commend the Juice of
Pilosella, Pentaphyl. and Tormentil. others do use the Juice of Elm, and do
account this as an excellent Medicine. They do take the bladders out of the
Tree which grow in the month of May, and out of those they take a liquour
contained in them, and this they use as a most admirable Remedy. Fallopius
writes that he saw an Empirick who sold this Oil for agglutinations of wounds,
and this being applied to the deepest stabs, within the space of twenty four
hours it cures infallibly.

3 Intention.
Thus have we shown the first two Intentions, the third is to reduce the Gut
into its proper place, and a future to be made in the Abdomen, it being first
Fomented with some warm restringent Wine, over which also may be applied of the
former restringent powder.

4 Intention.
Fourthly, no excrements are to be suffered to pass to the wounded part. Hence
a respect is to be had to the order of diet, and well regulating of the whole
body. In this case also may you prescribe the Patient emollient Clysters with
some of the aforesaid Powders: inwardly by the Mouth may he take some vulnerary
decoctions, such as I have prescribed in wounds of the Thorax.

5 Intention.
And the last Intention is to close up the lips of the wounded Abdomen, as I
have already shown.

History.
To conclude all with some Historical Observations. Glandorp obs. 32. writes of
a Woman who being desperately tempted by the Devil, wounded her self a little
under her Navel, and also wounded the Ilion, both Chyle and Choler which did
formerly flow out of the wounds of the thin Guts were purged out, the wound
stitcht up, and washed, and over these was applied a restrictive and
agglutinative Powder, but all in vain, for inflammation, and gangreen seized
the parts, and the fourth day she died.

Hollerius, obs. 17. libello proprio writes of one whose venture being
perforated with a sharp Sword, the small Guts were hereby wounded with a part
of the great, both Guts and excrement passed through the wound, yet after a
long time the Patient was recovered.

Another.
Jacotius Com. 2. ad. Aphor. 17. lib. 1. sect. 3. Coac. Hipp. page 1002. writes
that the Jejunum being the thinnest of all the Guts is held to be incurable
being wounded, in respect of the largeness of its Vessels, thinness of its
coat, and nervous nature, bordering upon the Liver; yet this has been seen
cured, and is agglutinated with a more easy agglutination.

Histories of wounds of the great Guts.
Paraeus l. 9. c. 33. writes that he has cured many who have been wounded with
transverse wounds in the belly, the which have recovered, the first of which he
mentions of a Portugal who being wounded with a Sword, cutting the whole body
transversely, so as the Intestines being wounded, a great plenty of excrements
fell out of the wound, yet he recovered. The second is of Aegidius a Nobleman,
who being wounded in the middle of his body* so as that for many days the blood
came out by his Mouth and Anus, whence might be collected that the Guts were
wounded, yet in twenty three days he was cured.

Another.
To end this, Glandorp. cap. 36. writes of a young man of eighteen years of
age, of a good habit of body, who received a wound above his navel three
fingers long, out of which did hang part of the Omentum with part of the Colon,
the Colon was also seen wounded, for excrements came from it by the wound: this
Intestine was presently stitched up with the Glovers stitch, afterward was
washed with warm sharp restringent Wine, then was sprinkled this Powder. Powder.
Bol. armen. iij. sang. Dracon. Myrrh. Mastich. an j. far. volatile. ij. Rad.
Tormentil. Pentaphyll. an. ij. misce. The wound was handled as that it might be
covered with flesh, the circumjacent parts were anointed with Oils, and an
anodyne Cataplasm prescribed for easing of pains, he being well defended from
cold and air, beyond all expectation of many he recovered.

CHAP. LXV.
Of Wounds of the Liver.
WE come next to discourse of the Liver, being in Latin called Jecur, quasi
Juxta Cor, being a large bowel seated in the right Hypochondry under the
Diaphragma, round and smooth in its unequal part, and in its lower part concave.
Its substance is soft and red, much resembling concrete blood. Malpighius who
by Microscopes has most accurately viewed its substance and inwards parts,
has herein observed many things unknown to former ages. As first, the
substance hereof in Man is contexed of Lobes, and these framed out of the
Glandules, the which affording a heap of small Ramifications, are invested with
a proper circumscribing membrane. And that the whole mass of the Liver does
consist of rough Glandules, and diverse Ramifications of Vessels, and hence is
it, that they should work together, Nature has necessarily interceded a
commerce between these Vessels and those Glandules. Thirdly that the Vessels of
the Port, hollow, and biliary ductus, do run through all the branches into
these little Lobes in an equal number, and that the branches of the Gate Vein
do carry the power of the Arteries, and that there is such a commerce and
society between the Gate-vein and biliary ductus, that both their ramifications
are strongly knit by one and the same knot. The ramifications of these Vessels
are not joined together by Anastomosis, but these rough Glandules constitute
the chief part of the Liver, and so they order some of these for conveying
others for receiving into the same. Hence may be conjectured that the Liver is
a conglomerated glandule, straining the Bilis. And hence may we well contradict
the opinion of the Ancients, who did ascribe to the Liver the principal faculty
of sanguification; for we evidently see that it is but as a colature for the
Bilis. It Is covered with a small membrane adhering to its Parenchyma, and from
this do many small watery bladders arise, from whence comes the Dropsy
hereof, as Platerus observes. It Is tied by three ligaments, to the Abdomen by
the umbilical Vein; secondly to the Diaphragma upwards from the right part, by
a large thin membranous ligament taken from the Peritonaeum called
Suspensorium; the third upwards also to the Diaphragma. It Is made of a
Parenchymatous substance, much resembling the substance of a Bullocks Liver;
the uses of which Parenchyma are very considerable, showing it self to be the
principal part of the Liver, the other parts being but as subservients to it,
for the ligaments do strengthen its site, a coat covers it, the Gate-vein
brings it blood, the common Capsula administreth to it, the Artery and Hepatick
Nerve do pay their service partly to the Port-vein, partly to the common
Capsula and biliary pore, the small branches of the Vena Cava and Hepatick
Ductus do take hence their blood, it separates the Bilis from the blood, and is
as a colature here ordained by Nature for performing this office. But not to
dwell too long here, we pass to its color, and this is somewhat reddish, in
sickly people it is seen to look pale. The Vessels in the Liver are the roots
of the two great Veins the Cava and Porta. The Vessels in the Liver are
accounted seven in number, as the branches of the Porta, of the Cava, of the
bladder of Gall, the Capsule of the great vein, the Hepatick Artery, Hepatick
Nerve, and Hepatick Lympheducts. To which also may be added the Umbilical
Veins. Having thus given you an account of the Liver, its passages, uses, site,
connection, and Vessels, we come now to its Wounds. And here they happen either
superficially, or penetrating even its Trunks.

Signs.
Celsus lib. 5. cap. 26. gives us these as Signs of a wounded Liver, viz. a
great flux of blood in the right side, the sides all drawn up toward the
spine, the Patient does delight to lie upon his Belly, sometimes vomiting of
Choler does happen, the blood which issues out is thick, the Pulse is hereby
depressed, the Patient looks of a white and ashey color, accompanied with
Cough and Fever, their water is bloody, and by their siege they are seen to
discharge both bloody and purulent matter. The wound happens in the right side,
and under the spurious ribs in that side, at the hurt hereof the Heart is much
concerned.

Presages.
Superficial wounds here happening may admit cure, but large and deep wounds
(Hipp. Abh. 18. lib. 6.) admit no cure. If cold sweats attend the Patient, and
he is very subject to faint, if the extreme parts grow chilly, these declare
death near. If inflammation seconds the wound, hence certainly follows Fever
and Syncope, a troubled urine, and corrupt excrements, all which are Harbingers
of death.

Cure.
If the wound be deep and large, penetrating the substance of the Liver and
dividing some of its great branches, this cure is rather to be committed to the
Minister than to the Surgeon: but where any hopes may offer of cure, where
no great flux of blood does follow the wound, nor any Ichor flows hence, when
the Liver is lightly wounded, here may we attempt its cure, by prescribing a
cooling diet, and such as is of an agglutinative quality; and for this purpose,
Rice and Barleywater are good, adding hereto Borage-leaves, Plantain, or
Panadoes, or Milk, all these to be used until all danger of inflammation be
over. For this use also Phlebotomy is very proper, or he may drink Wine mixed
and allayed with water, wherein may be boiled Jujubes and Cichory. And if
herein evacuation be required, here may be safely prescribed Cassia, Manna,
Diacatholicon, Lenitivum, or Rhubarb, all which are very good medicines to be
taken in a morning. Keep the Body so open that the Patient may have the benefit
of nature every or every other day. In these wounds the flux of blood is to be
stopped, then apply Turpentine to the wound, adding the fourth day thereto Bol.
Armen. and Mummy, and lastly, Mastick, Frankincense, and Tragacanth, anointing
all its circumjacent parts with oil of Roses. Outwardly may be injected of this
into the wound, both for strengthening the dissected Fibers, and also for their
agglutination. Succ. Equiset. Pentaphyl. Pilosell. Polygon. Decoction.
Thur. Mum. Rhabarb. opt. Rad. Centaur. major. Sang. Dracon. in gutt. an. q. s.
fiat mixtura. This to be injected into the wound two or three times in a day. A
large wound here received is to be stitched up, leaving an Orifice in its
bottom for the discharge of the matter and all other superfluities; over which
is to be applied Diapalma or any other agglutinative Empl. not leaving any
patient which is deeply wounded without help, for a doubtful hope is better
than a resolved despair, as Hipp. writes.

To conclude, Glandorp. obs. 33. fol. 166. writes of a young man who being of a
good habit of body received a wound in his right side at the end of the three
bastard Ribs, in which a great part of the Liver was wounded also. The wound
was eight fingers broad, and yet not penetrating all over the Abdomen. Hence
followed a great quantity of blood. The Liver Vein of the right Arm was
breathed, from whence was drawn four ounces of blood. The lips of the wound in
the places where it had not penetrated were sown up, and to the Liver was
applied this following Powder. Terr. Lemn. Powder.
Bol. Armen. an. j. Troch. de Carab. Terr. sigillat. an. ij. Lap. Haematit.
iss. farin. volatile. iij. misce fiat pulvis subtilissimus. To the wound was
applied unguent. alb. Camphorat. for asswaging of pain and Inflammation, and
Liniment.
this Liniment with the following Cataplasm. Ol. Ros. ss Violar. iij. unguent.
Santal. ij. misce. Herb. Violar. Catapl.
Cichor. Endiv. recent. an. pug. iij. sum. Aneth. Scord. Hyporic. Centaur. n.
p. ij. Flor. Cham. Melil. Rosar. an. pug. j. Farin. Hord. Fabar. an. iss. Orob.
j. cum Vini rubri q. s. fiat Catapl. fine addendo ol. violar. iss. Axung.
Gallin. ss. Vitell. Ov. n. j. To the lips of the wounds were put Tents and
dosills armed with a digestive. For his drink he was ordered this following.
Medicate Barley water.
Hord. been mundat. M. j. coque in f. q. aqu. pluvial. ad lbiiij. colaturae
add Fol. Taraxac. Endiv. an. M. ss. sem. anis. iij. Cinamomi ss. War.
passular. ablut. j. colaturam serva ad usum. Ofttimes did he drink whey.
Sometimes in a morning was given him an ounce of Syrup of Cichory with Rhubarb.
And that which was very strange, he had no fever till the twenty first day.
The which then happened with watchings and great pain, for which was prescribed
this Clyster. Rad. Alth. recent. Consolid. major. an. ss. Herb. Malv. Alth.
violar. an. Clyster.
M. j. Taraxac. Sonch. Cichor. an. p. iij. fl. Cham. Meliot. Scord. Hyperic.
an. pug. ij. sem. Anis. Foenicul. an. iij. Lin. soenngraec. an. ss coquantur in
s. q. aq ad ix. colaturae add Electuar. de Bacc. Laur. vj. Ol. Sanicul.
Lilior. alb. an. j. Succ. Epatic. ss Butyr. recent. vj. Vitell. Ovor. n. j.
misce. With this he was somewhat refreshed. After which was prescribed an
Emulsion, and to the Region Epitheme.
of the heart was applied this Epitheme. R. Aqu. Nymph. Lactuc. Borag. Rosar.
an. vj. Spec. tr. Santal. j. Cordial. temperat. j. misce. His spirits beginning
to renew beyond hopes or expectation, he was ordered these Troches.
comfortable Troches. R. Spec. Aromatic. Rosat. Dialacc. an. ss de Gemm.
Diacorall. an. j. Margarit. praescript. ss. Sacchar. albissim. q. s. solut. in
aqu. Cichor. ij. fiant Tabelli, fine addendo Ol. Anis. gutt. iiij. The wound of
the Liver began to consolidate, and incarne, and at length was produced a fair
Cicatrice, and with admiration of all he was restored to his former health.

Another.
Forestus, Obs. 3. lib. 6. Obs. Chirurg. writes of one who who being wounded in
the Liver, out of the orifice of which would did hang a piece of the Liver,
Carpus in his first visit reposed it, the which part Nature afterward
separated. The day following in the morning was this prescribed. Rhabarb. opt.
j. Mum. gr. 10. Rub. Tinct. j. Potion.
cumpauco vini rubri fiat potio. His diet was bread dipped in water, afterward
was ordered him bread put into chalybeated water, in which was boiled a bagg
which contained these things in powder. R. Mastich. Tragac. Gum Arabic. Thur.
sem. Plantag. an. ss. and this boiled bread he eat of until the flux of blood
was stopped. The third day and also the fourth, fifth, sixth and seventh day he
took of this following Syrup. R. Sir. Myrtin. j. Endiv. ss. Syrup.
Aqu. Endiv. Plantag. an jss. Misce. The eighth day was prescribed him this
following. R. Rhubarb. elect. iiij. Potion.
Scoenanth. gr. vij. Mann. elect. ij. cum. Aqu. Endiv. Chamomel. q. s. fiat
potio. His wound was thus dealt with in the second visit, the blood being
cleansed a Tent was armed with this composition and applied. R. Sang. Dracon.
in gutt. Myrtill. Bol. Armen. an. ij. Rosar. rubr. M. ij. powder them all
finely, and with adding hereto the white of an egg make a mixture. The
circumjacent parts were anointed with Ol. Rosar. and powder of Dragons blood
was sprinkled upon the part, over which was applied a bowlster or stuph dipped in
vinegar and so pressed out, over which was comprehended the rowler; and the part
being thus bound up so remained for four days. The dressings being removed, a
new Tent armed with Oil of Turpentine and Roses was put into the wound,
sprinkling upon it of the former powder. Afterward was applied this Sarcotick
or Incarnative. R. Ol. Abietin. Myrtin. an. ij. Cer. j. Thur. Unguent.
Sang. Dracon. an. ss. misce, fiat Vnguentum. Afterward with Basilicon and
other convenient Medicines he was soon healed and cured.

CHAP. LXVI.
Of Wounds of the Ventricle.
HAving drawn all the other parts out by Anatomy, we come next to the Ventricle
which is accounted Natures Workhouse, the Kitchen of the body, wherein are
shown the Organs and Instruments that both maintain the family of the body, and
its spirits. And seeing the life-tide of every creature is inconstant, and does
quickly post away, Nature does endeavor by reason of the continual expense of
his threefold substance whereof he consists, to conclude the breach by
respiration and nutriment. This Ventricle is an Organick part placed in the
lower Venture, and is the Instrument of chylfication. It lies under the
Diaphragma as it were hanging in the middle of the body; its left part is
largest and more round toward the bottom, and is placed in the left
Hypochondry, giving way to the Liver in its right. It has two Orifices, and
both in its upper part, the left of which is generally called the upper mouth
of the Stomach. It has allowed it circular Fibers that it may shut its
Orifice. It Is by this Orifice that we let down our meat and drink, it is placed
in the Epigastrical Region. Its right Orifice commonly called its lower part,
does much differ from the other, for it is narrow, and does remain shut until
an absolute concoction be made of the meat. The Chyle passes by this Pylorus
or Janitor. This Pylorus by Helmontius is held to be the moderator of
digestion. It has three sorts of Fibers allowed it, right, oblique and
transverse, and to these some grant these three operations, retention,
attraction, and expulsion. It has three sorts of coats or membranes, the first
arising from the Peritonaeum and is the thickest, the second more fleshy, the
third nervous, into which the vessels and coats of the Oesophagus, Mouth, and
Lips are terminated. And hence is it that we perceive when there is any choler
in our Stomachs that we do find a bitterness in our mouths. Its substance is
membranous and cold, its figure is round and somewhat long, much resembling a
Bagpipe, it is smaller in Women than in Men, its vessels it has many from the
Spleen. Conringius, Horstius and others do defend that it takes its Veins from
the Gate-vein, its Arteries it has from the Coeliaca. Its Nerves arise from
the sixth pair.

Signs and Presages.
Now as touching its wounds. When the Ventricle is wounded there generally does
happen a Singultus, and a vomiting of choler does succeed, and whatever is
taken in of meat or drink at the mouth does make its quick passage hither. Here
follows no great flux of blood, for the Veins belonging hereto are but small,
save only in its bottom. It Is suddenly stirred up with pains, and hence is
speedily inflamed, the motions of its Veins do languish, thin sweats do arise,
and hence the extreme parts do grow cold, sometimes both chyle and indigested
victuals do pass out of the wound, spitting of blood does attend these, and
cruel pains of the Heart does seem to be herewith concerned, at length this
noble part does grow hard, being deprived of its natural sustenance. And the
wound is made under the Sternon in the middle Region. This being cut, death
soon follows. For it is the instrument of the first concoction, and does receive
and elaborate what is received into it, and what it finds unnecessary or
useless it throws out by its Pylorus. Its outward part if only wounded may be
cured having in it a fleshy intertexture spun of transverse Fibers, but its
domestic or nervous part is either very rarely or never consolidated if
wounded, being generally replenished with humors and liquors, and hence follow
Fevers, Vertigo, Syncope, Singultus, vomitings, and other evil symptoms, the
which do post away to the Heart, and make it share and communicate of its
direful accidents.

Cure.
When the Ventricle is wounded, we are to enquire into these its proper signs,
and if possibly, to gain the true place of the wound; the which having once
purchased, we are to see how far it penetrates. In these wounds all fatty and
oleaginous meats are to be shunned, and such as are Euchymick and easy of
digestion are to be here elected. Let the Patient eat and drink very sparingly.
Outwardly may be applied a Decoction made of chalybeated water wherein have
been boiled Comfrey roots, Sumach, Myrtills, Cicers, and Pimpinel. The common
and general Intention of the inward parts is, that all such things are here to
be prescribed which are most familiar to the nature and constitution of the
Patient, and such as may most properly be allowed for his nourishment, such as
are Partridge, Pheasant, Rabets, Blackbirds, Plover and the like. If the body
be plethorique breath a Vein. If cacochymick discharge the peccant humor with
some convenient Cathartick. These rather to be given Clysterwise than by the
mouth. This he may take every morning by his mouth, as Syrup of Myrtills, of
dried Roses mixed with the decoction of Centaury, Comfrey and Betony, to which
may be added a little powder of the Troch. de Carabe or Spod. j. in these cases
also Saccharum Rosatum is good And because agglutination is the greatest
intention in these wounds, you may order your Patient to take every morning of
Electuar. Diaspermat. j. dissolved in the decoction of Comfrey or Betony or
Cinquefoil, and this to be taken every morning and at four in the afternoon.
The wound if it be large is to be stitcht up, which is very rarely done, or
first to be covered with Turpentine, anointing all its circumjacent parts with
oil of Roses, Camomile, Mastick, and the like, and fill up with Basilicon, and
skin with Diapalma, leaving the rest to Nature to perform. If the wound be so
large that it cannot be stitcht up, then are we to dilate the wound of the
Abdomen, and hereby enquire whether the Chyle does pass out of the wounded
Ventricle, and falls into the cavity of the Abdomen; in this case the wound
is not to be stitcht up, for the Chyle thus passing among the Guts does corrupt
them; and hence the wound is to be kept open, prescribing inwardly such
medicines for the Patient as have both an astringent and agglutinative quality.
In these cases Troch. de Spod. de Terr. Lemn. de Carab. and Diaspermat. as I
have already shown are very good and proper. Outwardly may be injected into the
wound two or three drops of this following medicine. R. Ol. Mastich. j.
Abietin. j. Thur. ij. pull. Tormentil. vel Chamomel. fl. hyperic. rad. Consolid.
major. an. j. verm. Terrestr. n. 5. Croe. j. vini nigr. ij. misce, coquantur ad
vini consumpt. postea cola, and dip your Tents and pledgets herein and apply
them to the wounded parts. And here in all wounds of the Abdomen are we to
observe that we defend them from pain and inflammation by anointing the
circumjacent parts of the wound with oil of Roses mixed with White Wind.
Glandorp has a remarkable History, History.
which indeed ought to be communicated to posterity, of a Countryman of Prague
thirty years of age, who swallowed a Knife which was nine transverse fingers
long, being constituted or brought hereby into an inexplicable narrowness,
which no art could possibly be thought to remove or extract; yet by Gods mercy
in this desperate case it was conjectured that the Loadstone, and other
attractive Instruments might work somewhat herein: hence attractive medicines
are applied which made the end of the Knife to appear upwards above the upper
mouth of the Stomach, where in such a desperate case, no more proper way could
be found than Section which was performed by Florianus Matthisius of
Brandenburgh. Thus the Knife which was for seven weeks and two days lodged in
the upper part of the Ventricle, and had contracted a strange color, was taken
out by him, the wound being made by incision, proper medicines being applied
the Patient recovered, and by his Wisdom, Industry and Art he was perfectly
cured.

Another.
Fallopius de vuln. cap. c. 12. writes that he cured both a Woman and a Man
from whom both chyle and meat did pass. He cured a Woman, who being shot by a
leaden bullet from the fore and back part, or quite through, perfectly
recovered. But if a great wound do happen in the mouth of the Stomach, it
brings speedy death with it because of the excellency of this part, and its
consent it has with the Heart.

Another.
Jac. Orthaeus lib. Obs. prop. writes that in the City of Fuldana two
industrious and judicious Surgeons affirmed to him that they had a Soldier
a strong man and one of a good courage in hand, who was wounded by a
Countreyman about the left Hypochondry, the which wound when they had well
examined, and inquired into its depth, it was found that the Stomach was
wounded in its right side, and so perforated, that the meat and drink which the
Patient took in by his mouth threw it self soon out by the Orifice of the
wound, the finger being put over it, it did more evidently appear. The event
hereof being conjectured to be ill both by these Surgeons and such as were
spectators, it was consented that this wounded part of the Ventricle should be
brought outward to the lips of the wound and that the wounded Stomach and the
lips of the wounded Cutis should be sown together, although this operation was
conjectured not to be void both of pain and danger; but the thing was done, so
as the wound being conglutinated, no further danger ensued, but the wounded man
was restored to his pristine health.

CHAP. LXVII.
Of Wounds of the Spleen.
THE Spleen is an Organick bowel seated in the left Hypochondry, between the
Ventricle and Ribs. In man this is generally one, and very rarely exceeds this
number. In its unequal part it is tied to the Diaphragma superficially, its
Fibers do arise from the Peritonaeum. Its blunt part adheres to the Omentum and
its neighboring parts. Its magnitude is various in men, according to their
variety of constitution and bodies. Spigelius does observe that those that have
large Veins have also a large Spleen. Its figure is long; its color is
sublivid or of a leady color. It Is covered with a double membrane, the outward
arising from the Peritonaeum, the other is its proper coat, between either of
which is inserted a plenty of Lympheducts endowed with many valves. It has
innumerable thin and strong Fibers framed out of Filaments intertexed with
admirable art. Besides these Lymphatick vessels, it receives other vessels as
Veins, Nerves, Arteries. Its Arteries arising from the left branch of the
Caeliaca, it sends forth the splenetick branch out of its blunt part. Its
Nerves it does receive from the sixth pair. Its office is to make a subacid
matter out of the arterious blood. We come now to its being wounded, where we
may by these signs collect its hurt. This part being well replenished with
Arteries, being of a spungy and loose substance, framed and nourished as it
were by a thick, black and melancholic blood, when this part is wounded there
follows inflammation; yet when it is lightly wounded, these wounds are of no
great moment, for inward medicines may with ease reach this part. these wounds
are collected from their site also happening in the left Hypochondry by the
blood issuing thence. These wounds are to be cured as you do cure wounds of the
Liver, and therefore I shall not here trouble you with repetitions.

History.
Forest. Obs. 2. writes of a Soldier being wounded in the Spleen, for which
Carpus prescribed this following Potion.
Syrup. R. Sir. Rosar. iss. aqu. Cichor. caud. equin. Consolid. major. an. j.
misce, and with Troch. de Carab. j. let it be aromatized. To the wound was
applied small Tents infused or dipped in oil of Hypericon, Rosar. and Abietin. of
each equal parts, the which was thus followed for some days; in the second day
over these was applied Empl.
this Empl. R. Vin. opt. iiij. Acet. j. and cum far. fabar. q. s. fiat Empl.
After this was applied an Incarnative Unguent, and then a cicatrizing medicine.
In the beginning breathing of a Vein was prescribed, and this Potion directed
Potion.
after the Syrup. R. Cass. novit. extr. vj. Diaprun. salutiv. j. Rhabarb. ij.
Spic. gr. vj. cum decoct. commun. fiat potio, and after this method was he
recovered.

CHAP. LXVIII.
Of Wounds of the Kidneys.
THese parts by the Greeks are called (...) which signifies to rain, or (...)
from a defluxion of humors. They are in number two, that the one coming to a
mischance the other may act for both. They are planted between the two
Membranes of the Peritonaeum at the sides of the Cava and Aorta, the right
being somewhat lower than the left. Their magnitude is much alike, their length
is commonly three vertebres, sometimes four. Their figure does somewhat
resemble an expanded Asarum leaf, outwardly gibbous and recurvated, inwardly
somewhat concave. They are covered with two membranes, the outward of which is
common and arising from the Peritonaeum is called Adiposa, into this does pass
Arteria adiposa. And out of this does pass Vena adiposa. This membrane does
annex either Kidney to the Loins and Diaphragma, the right also to the Caecum,
the left to the Spleen and Colon, its inward coat it gets from the outward coat
of the vessels. Either Kidney has allowed it two large sanguiferous vessels,
an Artery, and an emulgent Vein. In the inward part of the Kidney is framed a
Pelvis or Infundibulum, being a membranous cavity, it appears of a fibrous
substance. The use or action is to separate and discharge the redundant serose
humidity from the blood, which is brought thither by the emulgent Arteries, of
which blood in its transition through the Kidneys glandules, venary fibers, and
papillary caruncles, a good part of this serum is separated and distilled into
this Pelvis, and thence being carried into the ureters is sent by them into the
Bladder. As to its wounds

Signs.
Cells. lib. 5. cap. 26. writes, if the Kidneys be wounded to the Pelvis, clots
of blood will come forth with the urine, causing a great pain in the wounded
part, and this reaching the Groin and Testicle. These wounds are known by their
site and symptoms, for hence do follow suppression of Urine, or change of its
color, Presages.
the patient does tumify. If the wound be made by the back and the Kidney
penetrated this way, the patient cannot escape, for in this case the wound must
pierce the Psoas. If the wound be made by the side, and does but only penetrate
the papillary Caruncles, it may be cured with difficulty. If the wound
penetrates the Pelvis it must necessarily be lethal, in that the drain of the
Serum from the Veins and Arteries is hindered. Then because its substance does
not without difficulty yield consolidation. If its Vein and Artery be wounded,
here flatter not your self with any hope of cure: besides they are always
nourished with waterish blood, and almost continually in motion, and being
planted so near the Vena Cava, wounds here happening cannot be void of danger.
You seeing this cure very dangerous to undertake, should not be very forward to
be concerned Cure.
therewith, but according to Hipp. rule, because a doubtful hope is better than
a resolved despair, you are here to use the same outward method which has been
already prescribed in penetrating wounds of the Abdomen. Inwardly are you to
begin here with a good order of diet, then an adequation of humors, the which
sometimes is made by Phlebotomy, or by Solution of the thin humors, or by a
speedy evacuation. If a great plenty of thin and crude humors do appear,
vomiting in this case is good, for it both does deterge, evacuate and revel
fluxions. Let his diet be of good Juice, as Phesant, Partridge and the like,
rear Eggs and Panado is good here, ordering him to drink but little, for this
does both disturb and hinder the best of Medicines from curing. And rest here
is a great advantage from these. If much blood flow from the wounded Kidney
breath a Vein in the Arm, and this repeat as often as need requires. And then
order such Medicines as may stop this flux. Into the wound may be injected a
Traumatick decoction made of Comfrey roots, Tragacant. dissolved in Wine, or
Polygonum and Juice of Plantain with Posca. Over which may outwardly be applied
a Cataplasm made of Palms, Acacia, Hypocistis boiled in red Wine. Such
sanative injections, and vulnerary potions as I have already set down in Wounds
of the Liver and Thorax, may here with great advatage be made use of.

History.
A Soldier being wounded, in which wound the right Kidney was also wounded,
was thus cured by taking every morning of Terr. sigillat. j. Terebinth.
Cupress. j. these being mixed together. After which he took a little draught of
white Wine, which Wine presently did come through the wound a little tinged.
Outwardly was applied Vnguentum Sanctum, already shown you in Wounds of the
Thorax, by which in a short time he was recovered.

Fallop. lib. de vuln. cap. 12. writes that he saw the left Kidney pricked and
wounded, because the Parenchyma, like thick blood concreted into flesh.

Dodonaeus in Schol. ad cap. 22. writes of a Woman which was by a Dagger
wounded in the Loins, upon which she ejected bloody and purulent Urine, until
both the wound and the Kidney was cured.

CHAP. LXIX.
Of Wounds of the Bladder.
THE urinary Bladder is a membranous part of the lower belly, the which
receiving the Serum from the Kidneys does retain it in it for a while. It is
seated in the Hypogastrium between two coats of the Peritonaeum, in the cavity
which is efformed by the bones of the Os Sacrum, Coxendix and Pubis. It
consists of a threefold membrane. It has a longish and globous or pyramidal
figure. It has one cavity perviated with three Foramens, two at its neck, and
one at the end of the Ureter entering it. It receives its Arteries from the
Hypogastrical Arteries passing into the sides of its neck, carrying blood to it
for its nutriment. It admits Nerves from the sixth pair, and the marrow of the
Spina Dorsi. It Is divided into a neck and a bottom, its bottom lies upwards,
its neck downwards, and is the lower and narrower part thereof. Its neck is
constituted of many Fibers chiefly transverse and orbicular encompassing the
whole body of the bladder here constituting a Sphincter Muscle, constringing
the neck of the bladder, so as the urine might not involuntarily fall out.
Having given you this short draught of the bladder by Anatomy, we are next to
enquire into its wounds, where first we are to enquire of the signs hereof.

Signs and Presages.
Celsus lib. 5. cap. 26. writes these as Signs hereof, the urine does come
bloody and sparingly. If the body of the bladder be wounded, the urine does
fall into the cavity of the Abdomen, and the pain will communicate it self to
the Testicles and Inguens. The Stomach is herewith affected, a vehement pain
does accompany the Chest, and anxiety with cold Convulsions and death follows.
Wounds happening in the neck of the bladder are to be cured as we see by daily
experience in Lithotomy, or extraction of the Stone from thence. Wounds also in
the lateral parts thereof happening about the Groin are also curable, in such
as are young and of a healthful constitution. Hipp. writes that wounds in the
membranous parts of the bladder are incurable, Aphor. 18. sect. 6.

Cure.
As to its cure. Things outwardly to be applied may properly be accounted
these. As, to three parts of Turpentine to add one of oil of St. John's Wort,
and over this to apply Empl. Diapalm. Cyprus Turpentine with the yolk of an Egg
mixed together with a little Vernish is also good here. In such wounds as happen
so opportunely that we may come at them, falling upon the fleshy part thereof,
you may here proceed by injections put through the urinary passage, such as are
these two Decoctions.. Hord. mundat. Rosar. rubr. Centaur. min. an. M. ss. vini
Decoction.
vigr. auster. q. s. pro Decocto. To which add in the end Rhodomel. ij. And use
this. Or R. Cydonior. incisor. n. A vulnerary potion.
iiij. Equiset. Sumach. Bacc. Myrtill. an. iij. Rosar. rubr. pug. ij. Balaust.
ss. coquantur in aqu. pluvial. lb 16. ad 3. partis consumpt. coletur, colatur^
solv. Sir. e Rosis sic. Mel. Rosar. an. vj. Sir. Myrtin. iij. Gum. Tragac. iij.
of which let him drink and nothing else for ten days. If you desire a more
drying injection take this. Rad. Consolid. major. Centuar. fol. Oliv. Injection.
Myrtillor. an. q. s. Amyl. iss. aqu. chalybeat. q. s. pro decocto, fine
addendo Mell. Rosar. ij. pro usu. If it be too sharp add a little milk hereto,
all these to be applied warm, and so as they may beget no wind.

History.
Glandorp. Obs. 38. fol. 176. writes of a Soldier who having received a wound
upon the Os Pubis, and being thrown backwards hereupon, the urine flew out
copiously. That night he was correpted with pain in his head. Convenient things
being ordered him, the third day he died, the body being opened the bladder was
seen wounded in that part in which the Urachus is inserted.

Another.
Riverius Obs. 5. morbor. infrequentium fol. 75. writes of one who being shot
by a bullet through the urinary passage, this wound penetrating the bladder,
and the right side of the Os sacrum, so that he urined by the back part of his
wound, the urinary passage being only hurt, yet he was restored to his former
health, first by applying a defensative, then with arming the Tents with
Basilicon mixed with the yolk of an Egg, afterward with Unguent. de Resina, and
lastly with Sarcoticks and Epouloticks.

Another.
Felix Wirtz Anno 1581. in the month of September, a Mariner, had a Knife
struck into the right side of his Abdomen four transverse fingers above the
Pudenda, so as the urine did wholly pass through the wound, the which
afterward was well cured, by prescribing Clysters first, then the wound was
not dressed with Tents armed, but applying over it a consolidating medicine,
over which was applied a gummy plaster. Inwardly did he daily twice in a day
take a decoction of Orpine, which is excellent here in these wounds, abstaining
from hot meats, contenting himself with little drink, and lying in his bed
downwards. By which observing he in three days had his urine flowed out by the
Urethra, and was afterward perfectly healed.

Another.
Casparus Bauhinus in Append. ad Rouset. de Partn Caesareo writes of a
Fisherman who had his urine speedily suppressed, the which would not by any
remedies or by the Catheter be removed, hence did arise a great Tumor of his
belly, and he was come even to the last of danger: he being advised with,
orders incision hereof whereby might be found out the cause of this his
suppression. When therefore Incision was first made in the Inguen, as there it
is their way of cutting, the Lithotomist in separating the carnosity which was
the more protense by reason of the bladder being thus distended by the urine,
did open it, and the wound was produced, and the urine spun out with a great
force, whereby the Patient was soon at ease. The Testicle in the same side
being takenout, the wound continued its passage by the wound. The wound being
healed, a Fistula remained in the region of the Groin, through which a short
Catheter being sent, the which he generally carried about him, within a small
while his water passed without any detriment, and no longer did he urine
through his yard. At this section Platerus and Bauhinus were present amongst
the rest.

CHAP. LXX.
Of Wounds of the Testicles and Penis.
WE come last of all to the parts appointed for procreation, being the Genital
parts, where we are to stay a while and view these parts by Anatomy. And first
to begin with the Testes or Testicles being proper parts hanging out beyond the
Abdomen and planted in the Scrotum, they are called Testes because they testify
a man's virility. They are in number two, partly that the seed may proceed more
happily; partly that one of these being taken away, it might be necessary for
the other to perform the office of both. They are placed at the root of the
Penis and hid up in a Scrotum. They much resemble a Pigeons Egg. They have a
peculiar substance the like of which is not to be seen in the whole body, white
and soft, being made of innumerable minute funicles of seminiferous vessels.
They are in a great error who do account these glandules, for they neither
have in them the temper, substance or use of glandules. They receivesmall
Arteries from the Spermaticks, and do send forth small Veins to the Cava and
left Emulgent. Its Nerves it receives from the sixth pair. The sanguiferous
Vessels do enter the substance of the Testicles, and whether they do end in the
albugineous coat, is a doubt not yet resolved. They are wrapped about with an
albugineous and vaginal coat. They have two Muscles allowed them, called
Cremasteres or Suspensorii. Outwardly they are covered with a Scrotum as with a
Purse or Bag. To these also do belong, Vasa deferentia, Vesiculae seminariae,
Prostatae, and the like, all which being at large discoursed of by Anatomists I
shall speak no further hereof. Now come we to the Penis, where also are we to
see how this virile member is framed and constituted. The Seed being made ready
in the former Vessels, does require a peculiar Instrument for its injection,
for the performance of which Nature has ordained that part which we call
Penis. This being an Organick part appointed for injection of the Sperm in
Vterum, and also for excretion of the Urin. It Is placed at the root of the Os
Pubis, it has a long and almost round figure, not being alike in all people.
It consists of a Cuticula, Cutis, Membrana Carnosa, and a proper substance,
wanting fat. The Vrethra or Urinary passage is placed in its lower part, which
inwardly is invested with a thin and sensible, outwardly with a fibrous and
cavernous membrane, continued all along its neck. It has a good large passage,
save only in its forepart where the Glans is joined to the nervous bodies. Its
use is to convey and conduct the seed through it, and also to let the Urin pass
through it, and hence Nature has appointed two small Cavities into it for the
letting the seed into it. In the upper part of the Vrethra lie two nervous
bodies, constituting the greatest part of the Yard. At the end of the Penis is
planted a glans, or by some called Caput Penis, in the which the two nervous
bodies do end with the Vrethra: it has a Turbinat Figure; its color is
somewhat sublivid, but tumefying it is red. It obtains a proper substance,
being fleshy, soft, spungious and of a quick sense invested witha thin
Membrane. Outwardly it is covered with a Praeputium which is framed of a
Cuticula and Cutis, in its lower part it is tied to the Glans by a Fraenum or
bridle. It takes its Arteries from the Hypogastricis sprinkled through its
nervous bodies running through its length, it sends forth Veins inwardly to the
Hypogastricis, outwardly to the Pudendis. It Is moved by four Muscles.

Thus have I given you an Anatomical description of these parts, we now proceed
to them being wounded. Signs.
Where first we are to inquire into the signs. And because these parts are
endowed with an exquisite sense, great care is to be had as touching their Cure
that they may not be vexed with pain or Inflammation, these parts being very
plentifully stored with Veins and Arteries. For as Paracelsus writes, wounds
happening in these parts are accompanied with great pain, and very subject are
they to inflammation. The whole body therefore being well ordered, and a good
diet prescribed, and Phlebotomy directed, we are next to come to the wounded
parts, where we are both to provide against pain and inflammation, for which
uses these are very proper Medicines. Against pain may be ordered such things
as may mitigate it, and for this, R. Malv. Violar. Solan. an. M. j. Furfur.
pug. ij. coquantur in Sapa, and apply it to the part. Oil of Roses, Chamomile
or Dill will do the same, anointing the circumjacent parts therewith. And for
Inflammation by Rondeletius we are advised to use Repellers and breath a Vein,
and for this use also may be applied a Cataplasm made of Bean Meal, Wine and
Vinegar boiled together to be applied warm and renewed until the pain remit. If
it cease not by these, you may add powder of Camomel flowers, Melilot flowers,
Red Roses, and Elder flowers, and make it into a Catapl. to the wounded part.
Oil of S. John's wort mixed with Turpentine is a good Medicine. If the wound be
large stitch it up, leaving an Orifice in its lower part for the discharge of
the matter, anointing the circumjacent parts with Oil or Unguent of Roses and
Oil of Mastich. Then the wound is to be deterged with honey of Roses, filled up
with Basilicon, and incarned with Diapompholigos and skinned with Diapalma.

History.
We shall conclude this with some Histories. I begin with that of Forestus
which he has Obs. 6. de Pen. and Virg. vitiis fol. 39. where he writes of a
Tailor who being vexed with an inflammation of his yard, which inflammation he
had contracted in the venerial embraces of a Woman, not much minding it at
first, having a Wife being a kind of a Doctress did acquaint her herewith, who
ordered him a strong Purge made with Electuar. e suc. Rosar. This inflammation
with inflation of his Penis, and tumor of his Scrotum and Testicles still
increasing, he required the help of another and better Surgeon, who by
applying very hot medicines hereto within three days had made an Esthiomenus.
The Surgeon having all his Instruments ready for taking off his yard, with
medicines before the operation, the Patients friends called Forestus into
consultation, and seeing that the Esthiomenus had not only possessed the whole
Penis but had also reached the Testicles, he conjectured that if the whole
members should be taken off the Patient would die under the Surgeons hands
in the operation; and because in one part hereof the Penis did appear black and
corrupted, and as if it were mortified and stinking, it was by general consent
agreed to have all this removed because they were not to be brought to their
former natural form. And this to be done with a hot Knife. Within a while the
whole member grew corrupted, whose corruption reached the Testicles, this
Surgeon would also have this amputated, but this was not agreed upon.
Another Surgeon being advised with, contrary to the former opinion would by
no means allow any further incision, but does order this following Catapl.
Farin. Catapl.
Hord. iss. Far. Fabar. j. coquantur cum lact. viij. his add succ. semperviv.
coque ad consumpt. Succi, tunc add pulv. Rosar. rubr. fl. Cham. an. ij. misce
pro Cataplasmate, by which Cataplasm both the inflammation and flation were
allayed in the part, but the member seemed still to putrify, and hereupon a
Fever to arise. Breathing of a Vein not being at first prescribed was not now
to be attempted by reason of his weakness. Wherefore was prescribed him this
Julep. Aqu. Fumar. Borag. Julep.
Cichor. Endiv. Lupul. an. iss. Sir. Acetos. Citr. de Fumar. Sir. Nenuphar. an.
j. Spec. arom. Triasantal. Emulsion.
an. ij fiat Julap. And because he could not rest, was ordered this Emulsion.
Hord. mund. pug. j. Amygdal. dulc. depilat. ij. sem. 4. frigid. major. sem.
Papaver. alb. an. j. fiat Hordeatum ad lbj. huic add sacchar. albiss. q. s. ad
emulsum. The remainer of the Esthiomenus was horrible in aspect, so as the
whole member seemed to be correpted with a black ulcer, passing into a
gangrene, putrefying the parts, and with that ill smell that no man could come
near him and this on a sudden. While therefore the Surgeon was cutting away
these putrified parts, the smell so increased that one could scarce remain in
the room. Hence the Fever increased, and out of this ill smell did arise
inflammation of his Throat, for which was ordered this Gargarism. Decoct. Hord.
Gargarism.
mundat. and Liquirit. lbj. Sir. violar. Ros. sicc. an. j. misce pro
Gargarismate. And for his drought was prescribed him this following. Sir.
violar. iss. Sir. granator. j. and this he took frequently. After this the
Fever began somewhat to abate, and the corrupt parts to be taken off by
degrees. The abovesaid Cataplasm was applied to the parts again. The
putrefaction was of that largeness that it proceeded even to the Testicles.
Over the Cataplasm was applied a double linen cloth dipped in Renish-wine. But
at last the Patient died. The Surgeon which only remained with Forestus
applied only this Digestive to the putrified cut parts. R. Tereb. Digestive.
select. lbj. vitell. Ovor. n. 6. Mell. Rosar. colat. ij. Ol. Ros. ij. Farin.
Hord. iiij. fiat Degestivum. Afterward he used this incarnative powder with
the Digestive. Powder.
R. Sang. Drac. iiij. Mastich. Thur. Myrrh an ij. Gum. Elem. Bol. Armen. Alumin.
ust. an. iij. misce, fiat Pulvis subt.

Another.
Another History we meet in Glandorp Obs. 37. fol. 179. who relates of a young
man who being about to take out his right Testicle, in his work he made the
Testicle to swell and increase into a great mass, hence succeeded a great
delirating pain. The inward Vein of the Talus being opened, and a Clyster
administered, the whole Scrotum with the Testicle and all its circumjacent parts
were anointed with oil of Roses, and above these was applied a digestive and
corroborating Cataplasm, the Tent being armed with mel Rosarum, over which was
applied Empl. Diapal. by which he was happily cured. We had two in this our
City of Norwich which endeavored to castrate themselves upon the very thoughts
of not marrying, mistrusting that if ever they should have any children, they
could not maintain them: The first of which had taken out and cut off both his
Testicles, but hereby occasioning such a flux of blood as was past his skill to
stop, he sends for a Surgeon of our Town who speedily stops this and heals
up the wound, and cures the Patient. The second not being so courageous, but
entering upon his intended operation, could not with such dexterity act his
part; but upon undertaking to take the first out, he occasions such a flux of
blood as he thought would speedily have rewarded his bold attempt with death.
Hence was forced to send for a Surgeon, who after having stopped the flux did
agglutinate the wound, and the Patient remains in very good health.

Another.
Benivenius cap. 68. de Abditis, writes of a Monk being cured, who by reason of
his zeal of chastity but yet indiscreet and less rational obsequiousness did
cut off his Penis; from which issued a great flux of blood, which required a
great care and industry to stop; For here it behooves every of the Veins to be
taken up and to be bound up, that their mouths might be stopped, the which being
done, the remainder of the cure was not very difficult until the wound was
almost quite cured, and he healed.

Another.
I have also read of a Baker who suspecting his Wife for Adultery, to be
avenged of her, does amputate his Testicles, who should she conceive, he was
resolved not to own it, making himself destitute for any such operation, by his
amputation, whence he should certainly know as he conjectured by this mad trick
(than which surely could never be a greater) whether his Wife was honest or
not. This story Acakia reports, Com. ad Art. parv. Galen. Thus have I run
through all the parts of the three Venters; if any more studious, and a greater
lover of Truth and Learning and Practice has had greater experience than what
herein is offered, I desire that he would please to lend some of his light. But
I proceed now to the extreme parts, where I shall briefly discourse of them,
and so conclude this my whole Treatise of Wounds both in General and Particular.

CHAP. LXXI.
Of Wounds of the Shoulder.
AMongst the Joints may be reckoned the Shoulders, Arms, Cubit, Wrist, Fingers,
Thigh, Leg, and Foot. We begin first with the Scapula's, where we may see the
Scapula moved by four Muscles, Serratus minor substrated to the Pectoral Muscle
from the four upper ribbs; Trapezius or Cucullaris, the which does carry the
resemblance of a Monks-hood; Rhomboides, being a large, broad, and square
muscle, and Levator Patientiae. Having given you the brief Anatomy of this
part, as to the cure of these being wounded, by reason of the many Tendons
implanted, here must necessarily be used care and industry, for these parts are
cold, and hence cold being their greatest enemy you are to defend them from it.
As to the Muscles being wounded, you are first to provide against all ill
symptoms by breathing of a Vein and a good order of diet, and by Catharticks.
And as touching the wounded part, here are we first to stop the flux, then to
bring the wound to a fair digestion by Turpentine, Basilicon, the Yolks of
Eggs, Saffron, and the like, then mundefie with honey of Roses, Juice of
Smallage, etc. Fill up with incarnatives, as Aureum, Fuscum, Balsam. Lucatell.
Arcae. and skin either with Diapalma, or Desiccativum Rubrum. If stitching be
here required, you are here to take deep stitches, and sow fast, lest through
the weight of the arm the wound may fly open again, hereby studying the keeping
of every Nerve or Tendon untouched; over this stitched part may you apply some
of the former agglutinative powders. And if you think it necessary, put in a
Tent at the bottom of the wound for the discharge of the matter; ever observing
to give every part its due motion, and therefore to place it in its right Orb.

History.
Forestus Obs. 24. fol. 109. lib. 6. writes of one being wounded from the upper
part of the back in the Muscles of the Scapula with a deep and occult wound,
not penetrating the inward parts, but lying hid under the Muscles, whence a
cavity was made in its bottom toward the lower part, and matter was collected,
and brought thence upwards. The Surgeon not being careful and diligent
enough, the lower part of the wound toward the Cutis did begin to extend it
self, the which gave some suspicion to the bystanders, which made them to
desire further help; he being hereto called for assistance, he ordered the
Surgeon to put a pipe into the wound, and into, that part to make an
incision; the which being done, the matter which was lodged was discharged, and
the wound being kept open by pledgets until this was wholly removed, it was
afterward with ease consolidated.

CHAP. LXXII.
Of Wounds of the Arm.
THE Arm has allowed it eight Muscles, as Deltois supraspinatus lifting it up,
Latissimus or Any scalptor, Rotundus major, these bringing it down; Pectoralis,
this bringing it forward, thence called the Boxing Muscle; Infra Spinatus,
Subscapularis, and Rotundus, these drawing it backwards. Wounds happening in
the bough of the Cubit are dangerous because of the great Veins. Wounds of the
Cubit are suspicious also in respect of Convulsion and Inflammations. The
German Surgeons are very scrupulous in meddling with wounds of the Biceps,
for that it has but a slender beginning and ending, but a thick fleshy belly:
but of this more in wounds of the Elbow. As to the Cure here, if either the
Veins, Nerves or Arteries be wounded, you have already methods shown how to
cure these. If any of the Muscles be wounded, to prevent pain and inflammation,
and stop the flux of blood, keep the body soluble and other parts in good
temper. If the wound happens according to the Fibers of the Muscles, a good
ligature goes a great way in the cure. If the wound be transverse, you are to
stitch this up, leaving a cavity in the bottom of the wound, into which you are
to put a Tent armed with a digestive to cleanse it inwardly. Outwardly may you
apply some restringent powder and such as may agglutinate, then perform the
rest of the intentions as I have already shown you.

History.
Alexander Benedictus de Curand. morb. lib. 1. cap. 47. writes that he saw a
young Nobleman cured of a wound in his arm, to which, for the present stoppage
of the flux of blood his friends put into the wound some small linen rags, the
which presently fell out again, by applying his finger to the wound: he knew
not what should make these to come off so, upon the endeavor of his friends to
stop this flux, in so much that he bled afresh, hereby the Patient was freed
from a Spasm, and the eighth day he walked through his Chamber.

CHAP. LXXIII.
Of Wounds of the Elbow or Cubit.
THIS part has four Muscles allowed it, as Biceps, Brachiaeus, Longus, Brevis.
Some ordained for its extension, others for its flexure. Biceps if it be
wounded is not to be concerned with without care and skill. The German
Surgeons do esteem wounds of this Muscle, which with Brachiaeus does bend
the Elbow, to be lethal. Wounds happening in its beginning are most dangerous,
these parts being Tendinous and so of an exquisite sense, being in its
beginning double. If the middle body thereof be wounded it carries less danger
because it is fleshy, yet hence may follow a flux of blood and great pain. The
cure hereof therefore does chiefly consist in stopping this flux of blood,
easing of pain, and in digesting, mundefying, incarning and cicatrizing the
wound, all which I have already shown how they are to be performed.

History.
I shall conclude this with a History out of Forest. Obs. 19. fol. 93. who
there writes of a Student who being wounded about the Cubit of his left arm, so
as its whole bone with its Nerves was cut, whence followed great suspicion of
Spasm, Carpus being hitherto called, reduced the bone to its proper site and
place, and the wound being stitcht up, and agglutinative medicines being
applied over these, a Vein in his arm was breathed. In the second visit Tents
dipped in Ol. Hyperic. were put into the wound, and then above the future was
applied this powder. R. Thur. Mum. Sangu. Dracon. Bol. Armen. Mastich. an.
parts aequales: afterward the whole arm was anointed with oil of Roses, and
lest a spasm might happen it was anointed with Ol. Lumbricor. after these was
prescribed this following Syrup. Sir. de Endiv. j. Sir. Rosar. ss. Aqu. Endiv
Cichor. Bugloss. an. j. misce. Every day he had administered the common Clyster,
his diet was thin, the fourth day were the Tents armed with a Digestive made of
oil of Turpentine and the yolk of an Potion.
Egg. The fifth day he took this medicine. Rhabarb. elect. iss. spic. gr. vj.
Cass. mundat. ss. Diaprun. solut. ss. Sir. violar. j. cum decoct. commun. fiat
potio. He washed the wound with Malvatick-wine. The seventh day Digestive.
he armed the Tents with this Digestive. Terebinth. iiij. Ol. Mastich. Myrtin.
an. iss. Cer. j. Thur. Mastich. Sandarach. an. vj. Sang. Dracon. j. misce.
Afterward were the dressings armed with this. Terebinth. Mell. Rosat. an. ij.
Myrrh. Sarcocoll. an. ij. farin. Hord. ss. misce. The eighth day he began to
eat some part of a Chicken. The time of consolidation drawing near, this
decoction was ordered wherein was dipped Scarlet clothes, and these were to be
applied warm to the parts. This was the decoction. R. Salv. Beton. Absynth. an.
M. J. nuc. Cupress. n. vj. Hyperic. M. jss. Caryophyl. ss. coquantur in vini
nigr. xij. ad quartae partis consumpt. After the wound was consolidated, this
Bath was ordered, with which for many days the arm was fomented both for the
strengthening of it, and also for its better motion. R. Beton. Hyperic. Salv.
Ivae an. M. ij. Stoechad. Absynth. an. M. j. Aneth. M. iij. Medul. Rad. Ebul.
M. j. ss. Capit. Castrati n. ij. coquantur in s. q. aqu. ad med. Consumpt. by
which method this Nobleman was perfectly cured. Horatius Augenins lib. 5.
Epist. 2. writes that Marcus Antonius died upon receiving a slight wound of his
Elbow.

CHAP. LXXIV.
Of Wounds of the Wrist.
THE Wrist is made of four Muscles, Cubitaei Interni, Radiaei Interni, Cubitaei
externi, Radiaei externi. The first two do contract the hand, the other two do
extend it. If the Wrist or joints of the fingers be wounded they must be kept
half shut moving a ball in the palm of the hand, for if they be kept extended,
they when they are healed will be found incapable to grasp any thing. In these
wounds you are to follow the same Intentions as are already shown. If any of
the bones of the Wrist be broken or luxated, they are to be restored, and you
are here to bring the parts to their site and natural conformation.

CHAP. LXXV.
Of Wounds of the Hand and Fingers.
COnsidering the admirable frame and structure of the hand being as the
Instrument of Instruments, and its proper action is apprehension, and this made
according to our will by its muscles, we here ought to enquire into its Muscles
which are of two sorts, some guiding the motion of the whole hand, others only
moving the fingers. In the whole, the Muscles which are allowed to belong to
the whole hand are accounted forty in number, four of the Wrist, four of the
Radius, three of the Palm of the hand, and twenty nine of the fingers. Of these
there are nine inflecters, two bending the fore-fingers and seven the thumb;
the extenders being twenty, sixteen extending the four fingers, in which number
are included Lumbricales, and Interossaei, the other four do extend the thumb.
Having given thus a brief discourse of the Muscles of the hand and its fingers,
here we are to note, that if any of its Tendons or Ligaments be wounded, that
you dress these in the same manner as I have already shown you to cure wounds
of the Nerves and Tendons. If any of its Veins be cut stop the flux and cure it
as you do wounds of the Veins and Arteries; and if only some of its Muscles be
wounded cure these wounds as I have directed you in wounds happening in the
fleshy parts.

History.
I shall conclude this with some remarkable Histories. The First is of Forest.
fol. 176. cap. 37. where he writes of a young man who received a wound in the
left hand transversly made by a sword by his Brother, which wound past through
the hollow of his hand even to his little finger. Insomuch as that all the
Nerves about that part and Tendons were transversly incised. The wound was
stitcht up in three places, putting tents between every future dipped in the
white of an Egg and Bol. Armeny for the stopping the flux of blood. But this
would not stop it, wherefore by the command of Forestus, who afterward was
called into consultation, was Tinder or burnt rags mixed with the bole and the
white of an Egg, after which the part being rolled up the flux was stopped.
These Topics were left on for near three days. The third day the restrictive
was removed, then was applied a digestive made of Turpentine, the yolk of an
Egg and a little Saffron, with which the Tents and Dosills were armed, they
first being dipped in Ol. Hyperic. Magistral. These being thus dressed the wounds
were bound up, and all the circumjacent parts were anointed with oil of Roses
for abating of pain and inflammation, and finding the fourth day a heat about
his hand, instead of this digestive the whole hand was anointed with Unguent.
Populeon. The fourth day he was purged with Manna or Cassia, the sixth day he
took a decoction of Senna and Rhubarb. The seventh day being past, when all
symptoms as Fever, Convulsion, inflammation and the like were no further
dreaded, he was not ordered such a thin diet. The eleventh day because the
wound did appear very sordid, and was not well purged, it was inwardly washed
with a decoction made of Rosemary flowers and Roses boiled in Rhenish-wine, the
which being done the abovesaid medicines were applied. The thirteenth day was
applied to the wound Unguent. Basilicon for filling it up with flesh, ordering
the Patient to keep a piece of wood in his hand; but because proud flesh did
arise about his little finger, this was taken down by the powder of burnt
Allome. The wound being filled with flesh it was skinned with Empl. Griseum and
Desiccativum.

I will conclude this with that remarkable story of the worthy Adrianus
Spigelius, who by a piece of glass wounded the fingers of his left hand, hence
followed inflammation, the which not only possessed his whole arm, but did also
occasion a large tumor under his arm-pit, the which was scarce suppurated, but
there flew out bloody and faetid matter; hereupon he somewhat amended: this
ceasing a Diarrhoea supervening, every thing turns to the worst, and at length
he dies Empyemated.

CHAP. LXXVI.
Of Wounds of the Thighs.
THE Thigh is moved by fourteen Muscles: Psoas Iliacus, these do bend it;
Glutaeus major, Glutaeus minor, Glutaeus minimus, these said to extend it;
Triceps taken for three, this does adduce it; Quadrigemini taken for four;
Obturatores these for two, abducing it. If the Articulation of the Hip be
wounded, the Thigh bone must be kept in its Cavity, which may be done by laying
the Patient on his back, and applying fit bolsters and rowlers. If the wound be
large and made directly, here are you to stop the flux, and then digest your
wound with Turpentine or the oil of Eggs with a little Saffron. Mundifie it
with Vnguentum ex Apio or Mel. Rosarum, fill up with Aureum or Basilicon, and
skin with Diapalma or Desiccativum Rubrum. If the wound be made transversely
and large, here are you to stitch up the wound, leaving an Orifice at the
bottom for the discharge of the matter; then apply agglutinative Medicines, and
proceed in this cure as I have already directed you in Wounds made in the
flesh. If a wound happens here with a fracture, I shall here produce you an
example of the like collected from Ambrose Parey, how you are here to deal, and
another from Glandorpe in his Spec. Chirurg. Obs. 49.

History.
The first of Parey is of a Noble man lib. 10. cap. 12. de vuln. Sclop. who
kept his bed for seven Months by reason of a wound which he received three
fingers above the Knee. With which he had these symptoms attending it. As
Intolerable pains, continual Fever, cold Sweats, Watchings, Excoriations of his
Coccyx, occasioned by his so long lying in his bed. He often times fell down like
an Epileptick man with vomiting and a continual Trembling, so as that he could
not bring his hand to his mouth without help. His thigh was fractured both
lengthways and transversely with many small pieces of bones, of which some came
forth, and others kept within, adhering to the Muscles of the thigh and of the
leg, which caused a very large cold pituitous and flatulent humor about the
parts, that they seemed as it were extinguished and robbed of their native
heat. All which being considered there was but little hopes left of any cure.
Yet confiding somewhat in the Patients age and strength, he first made two
incisions to discharge the matters, which did irrigate into the substance of
the Muscles circumposed to the bone. Which thing succeeded happily, for hereby
a great quantity of matter was discharged. Here was injected into these
incisions by a Syringe a good part of Aegyptiacum mixed with Wine and a little
Aqua vitae, whereby the matter was compressed and amended, and the soft, loose
and spongey flesh corrected, the Oedematous Tumor he resolved, the pain
abated, and the native heat which was oppressed by the weight of the
excrementitious humors was corroborated. He fomented the affected parts with
this following Decoction made of Sage, Rosemary, Fomentation.
Time, Lavender, Chamomile flowers, Melilot flowers, red Rose leaves, boiled in
Wine and in a lie made of Oaken Ashes, to which was added a little Salt and
Vinegar. This fomentation having in it an attenuating and exhaurient quality,
it was used for a long while. After this was made frictions with warm clothes
such as might cover the part in every place. For a short friction does draw
more of humor into the part, than it does resolve. These being to be applied
about the thigh, leg and foot, hot as they are taken from the fire and then
dipped in Vinegar with a little of Aqua vitae, by which the humors were stirred
up, and many waterish humidities were seen to run into sweats. The Tumor
abated, the native heat seemed somewhat hereby to be restored. After which were
applied Stuphes dipped in the aforesaid lie, in the which was boiled Sage,
Rosemary, Lavender, Salt, Aqua vitae* Cloves, and the like. Then were the parts
so artificially rolled up, that they did occasion no pain, and that with good
success. That if one day were herein neglected, the Tumor did arise into a
great Bulk. Thick doubled Linen bowlsters were applied to the sinuous Ulcers
by which the matter which was inwardly lodged was expressed. For the resolution
of the Tumor was applied this Cataplasme. Far. Hord. Fab. Orob. an. vj. Mel.
commun. Terebint. Catapl.
Venet. an. ij. fl. Cham. Melilot. Rosar. rub. an. ss. Pulv. rad. Irid. fl.
Cyper. Mastich. an. iij. Oxymel. simpl. q. s. fiat Catapl. Vigo's Empl. sine.
was also applied, by which the pain was wonderfully abated, and the Tumor
yielded hereto. Yet these were not applied until the parts were made warm both
by the bath and frictions; neither were Catagmatick powders omitted. For
fifteen days he took of a vulnerary potion, and besides these particular
frictions, the whole body was prescribed to be bathed, by which the blood was
drawn with its spirit to the parts. At length the Fever being abated, and the
pains lessened, he taking meat of good Juice for restoring of his lost spirits,
in a short time he was made better, and by Gods goodness was restored to his
former health, save only that he did not recover the perfect liberty of bending
his Knee. The second you may read in Matthew. Gland. Obs. 49. of one being
wounded with a bullet, whereby was made a penetrating wound with fracture of
the thigh bone: but this being long I rather commit you thither, than to fill
up my Book into a large Volume by Histories.

CHAP. LXXVII.
Of Wounds of the Legs and Feet.
BEfore I come to treat of these, it will be necessary to bring in the parts of
which they do consist, which is best done by Anatomy. And here may we see the
Leg framed with eleven Muscles, thus called. The first of which is
Seminervosus, 2. Gracilis, 3. Innominatus, 4. Biceps, these said to be made for
its flection. 5. Rectus, 6. Vastus externus, 7. Vastus internus, 8. Crureus,
these appointed for its extension. 9. Longus sutorius, 10. Poplitaeus, these
adducing it, and the last Membranosus abducing it. The Muscles of the Foot are
6. Tibiaeus Anticus, Peronaeus these bending it, Gemell. or Gastrochemii
externi and Interni, Soleus, and Plantaris. The Toes have allowed them 14.
Muscles. As thus, 1. Magnus or Profundus, 2. Sublimis, these bending them, the
3. and 4. extending them, the 5, 6, 7, 8. called Lumbricales adducing them, 9,
10, 11, 12, 13, 14. Interossaei these abducing them. The great Toe has four
allowed it. Having given you this brief survey of the parts of the Leg, Foot
and Toes by Anatomy, we proceed now to its wounds, where we may by advice
learn, that if the Knee be wounded, it must be kept extended, for otherwise
before the Patient be cured of his hurt, he may chance to meet with a
contraction. When the joints of the Toes are wounded they are to be kept in
their natural posture. Wounds happening upon the Knee or Leg are very
perilous, these parts being accompanied with many Nerves, Tendons and
Ligaments, and being planted by nature as the depending parts, they are the
more subject for reception of defluxions of humors. Prevent in these cases the
impendent symptoms by revulsives, bloodletting, cupping, ligatures, and
frictions, ordering your Patient a thin diet, keeping his body soluble and the
like. Here are you, as touching the affected part, to take the same directions
as are prescribed in wounds of the arm, making a repelling ligature to prevent
any fluxion of humors. If any Nerve be here wounded these you may know by the
pain and inflammation, or if any Tendon or Ligament be hurt, address your self
to my discourse of wounds happening in the Nerves, where you will meet with
sufficient directions and medicines, as may answer your expectation here. If a
large flux of blood succeeds upon the wound, stop it also, as you are directed
in wounds of the Veins. Keep your Patient in a good temper, and observe to
follow the former directions proposed, and with Gods blessing question not your
way of proceeding. But to conclude these parts, take these following historical
observations, the which may add to thy skill if the like accidents might happen
to thee in thy practice.

History.
The first is of Gulielm. Placentin. Prac. cap. 5. who writes that he saw one
who was wounded in the Leg upon the minor fossile, by an Arrow, which Arrow
reached to the superficies of the bone, and did not hurt it. The Surgeon
could not defend the place with all his instruments, but a stiffness seized the
part, and a Fever followed, and within less than a month the Patient died
hereof.

Another.
Another of the like examples Forestus brings in Obs. 49. lib. 6. fol. 255. of
one John Roan of Delph who had hurt his Leg against some hard matter, the which
did contuse it and transversely wounded it; this not being much regarded, he
applies a Woman's advice for eight days. But when his Foot was affected with
cold, the Leg began to grow stupid, and hence followed a great pain and Spasm,
the which accidents could no ways be removed; hence followed a Fever, no
medicines taking place, although six Surgeons were in consultation concerned
herein with a Physician. By this pain he became restless, the Fever increasing
upon him. In his Foot and whole Leg did a gangrene arise, the which not being
to be cured, and he being so weak that amputation could not safely be made,
died of this small wound.

Another.
He has another also of one who was wounded in his right Foot, so as the whole
Foot was cut off about the Malleolus. To the cure of which Carpus being
deputed, the blood he suppressed with the white of an Egg and a restrictive
powder. And as for asswaging the pain, which was vehement, and for the
prohibiting the Spasm, he anointed the whole Leg with hot oil of Roses, and the
Inguens with the same. Upon his thigh was applied a a defensative. In the
second and third visits he applied two pledgets dipped in Saliva, and sprinkled
with his restrictive powder, which were applied to the cut Veins and Arteries.
And above these two other bowlsters dipped in the oil of Hyperic. cum gum. then
he rolled up the part with convenient ligature, ordering the Patient a thin
diet. And for his Fever was prescribed this. Syrup. Potion.
End. j. Mel. Rosar. ss. Aqu. Endiv. Betonic. Cichor. an. j. misce. The next
dressing being the fifth day the pledgets were armed with Unguent. ex Cera,
Terebinth. ol. Rosar. Mastich. and Pulv. Lumbric. lot. in vino and praeparat.
then was administered a Clyster. Then Digestive.
was the wound dressed with this Digestive. Terebinth. ss. Mel. Rosar. iij.
Farin. Hord. ij. Myrrh. Sarcocoll. an. ss. cum vitello ovi fiat unguent.
Afterward he received a more thick diet. Then was the wound washed with
Malvatick wine, and after its thus being washed was it thus dressed with the
pledgets armed with this Unguent.
following. Terebinth. iiij. Ol. Myrtin ij. Cer. vernic. an. j. Sang. Dracon.
vj. Thur. Mastich. an. iij. fiat Unguent. Upon the pledgets was spread
Basilicon. And thus he proceeded for some days; the wound hereby being filled
with flesh, this cicatrizing Unguent was used. R. Ol. Ros. Sevi castrat. an
lbj. Terebinth. V. Cer. Litharg. aur. an. ij. Ceruss. iij. Thur. j. fiat
unguentum. Then the wound was washed with Allome wine, and there was used
unguent. de Calc. And above the wound was sprinkled a little powder of burnt
Allome, by which remedies he was perfectly cured.

History of a wound in the sole of the foot.
Obs. 50. Forest. lib. 6. we read of a man who after having washed his Feet,
with a Penknife studied to scrape off the callous on hard substance which grew
under the sole of his Foot, with which Knife he cut the part, the wound not
being great; but hereupon presently followed a Spasm before proper medicines
could be applied, whereof he presently died.

Another of the Toes.
Dodonaeus cap. 71. Abdit. writes of a Citizen of Florence, and many others who
having received any hurts here, within few days to have died: For upon here
receiving a wound or ulcer especially in old people, he found them to increase
and spread and grow of a livid color, and the Cutis of the part to be filled
with black Pustules, and then losing its sense to grow livid and black, neither
does it leave its spreading quality until it has reached the bones themselves
and infected them. And if any thing seem sharp, and you cut to prevent its
spreading, it still creeps further, these parts being far from the Fountain of
heat, and the heat which is in them being weak, and the parts very well
replenished with Nerves, the which being herewith infected do easily and
speedily communicate of their hurts to otherparts, whence it happens that these
being touched they do send forth the same so as until the whole member be
hereby miserably infected. The same accident happened to a Patient of mine here
in Norwich, an old Gentleman, of above seventy years of age, dwelling in
Suffolk, who having a Corn cut in his Toe, and neglecting it did not seek for
help very speedily, pains and inflammations seizing his Toe, did also bring the
whole Foot into consent; and hence caused an inflammation in that. Coming to
Norwich committing himself to my honored Uncle Cropps, and my cure, although
the best of remedies were prescribed, yet this turned into a gangrene; we using
the best of medicines to separate this, yet all availed nothing, for within
eighteen or twenty days he had his Foot and Leg so far spread therewith, that
it got upwards with that speed that it did in a very short time occasion his
death.

CHAP. LXXVIII.
Of Wounds of the Joints.
WE are now arrived at the last part of our discourse, which does treat of
Wounds of the Joints, that part being so most properly called which is framed
for the setting together of the bones for the performing of free motion. Now
wounds made here, are made either by puncture or incision, and these do reach
either the upper parts, or else do penetrate into the cavity thereof. All
wounds here happening are dangerous, according to Galens saying, they being
endowed with an exquisite sense by reason of the Nerves, Tendons, and Ligaments
wherewith they are covered, lined, and enwrapped. Hence therefore upon wounds
here received do generally arise an afflux of humors, occasioned here by pain.
Afterward inflammations, watchings, thirst, convulsions, weakness, and
sometimes death. Such wounds as do penetrate the Joint, by Celsus opinion must
of necessity be allowed dangerous, for hereby the moisture which kept between
the joints is let out, the which being dispatched, an excrementitious humor
does fall thereinto, being a thin ichorous substance much resembling that of
Meliceris according to his opinion.

Cure.
As touching its cure, if it be punctured, dress this wound as I have already
shown in puncture of the Nerves. Keep the parts from cold and defend them from
pain, for cold hardneth the skin, hinders suppuration, and does extinguish
the native heat as Hipp. writes. If the wound be made by incision, and this be
large, stitch it up, hereby not touching any of the membranous or tendinous
parts; leaving a small orifice in the depending part thereof, for the better
discharge of the matter. If the wound penetrates not the cavity of the
juncture, dress this with Linimentum Arcaei, adding hereto a little fine powder
of Frankincense, Dragons-blood, Myrrh and Aloes; and to an ounce of the former
Liniment add a dram of the said powders; above which may be applied an anodyne
Empl. or Cataplasm made of fl. Cham. Melilot. Rosar. rubr. Sambuci, farin.
Fabar. Hord. and the like; to which may be added some milk with a little Ol.
Myrtin. Rosar. and parum Croci, applying these, and all your other medicines
which are to be used, actually hot. If the wound does penetrate the Joint, you
are by Aquapendens's advice to apply a very drying medicine: these parts being
naturally very dry, and therefore requiring drying medicines: they being also
void of sense and feeling, and a great plenty of matter falling herein, ought
and do request very drying medicines. And for this use Balsam. Peruvian.
Liniment. Arcaei, Balsam. nostr. Balsam. Lucatell. cum Spir. Terebinth. are
very excellent medicines here; always observing to keep every member in its due
position: and when you see the wound does begin to unite, you may order your
Patient to use a moderate motion of the wounded part. To conclude, if you are
to Unguent.
digest, this is here very proper, R. Terebinth. lot. in aqu. salv. ss. mel.
opt. iij. farin. Hord. ij. Alo. Succotrin. iij. siat unguentum: or for the same
use may this be applied. Catapl.
Farin. sem. Lin. Hord. Orob. an. parts aequal. mel. q. s. ad Catapl.
spissitudinem, dein cum frigidum evaserit add Pulv. Myrrh. Alo. an. ss. misce
pro usu.

History.
I Will shut up all with the History of a man who being shot in the joint by a
bullet, the shot penetrating the joint of his right arm, and although searching
with my probe I soon found how it was lodged, yet by reason of the narrowness
of the orifice, and the many Tendons, branches of Veins and Arteries planted
thereabouts, I at first did not attempt the extraction of the same, yet very
speedily conjecturing how to prevent all pains, I dilated the wounded part and
extracted the shot, the which being attended with a large flux of blood, this
was speedily repressed by my restrictive powders, after which the wound was
digested with this following Unguent. Digestive.
R. Terebinth. Venet. lot. in aqu. Plantag. ij. Ol. Hyperic. magistral. j.
vitel. Ovor. n. j. Croc. ss. over which was applied a repelling Cataplasm made
of Bol. Armen. Sangu. Dracon. Myrrh. Mastich. Ol. Myrtin. Rosar. with a little
Acetum and Aqua Rosarum simul mixed. At the second dressing for ease of pain,
and allaying of inflammation, the circumjacent parts were embrocated with Ol.
Rosarum and Ol. Chamaemel. still continuing the former digestive until the part
afforded a laudable matter; then was it deterged with this following injection
which was injected into the wound by a Syringe, made of Sanicul. Hyperic.
Centaur. Absynth. Agrimon. Betonic. Veronic. Salv. and the like, adding to the
Decoction a piece of Roch Alome, in its boiling, and when colated annexing to
it some Mel. Rosar. The wound being thus deterged it was afterward filled up
with flesh by the benefit of Unguent. Aurei, Basilic. and Liniment. Arcaei
mixed all together, and by ordering the Patient a thin diet, keeping his body
soluble, and a good temper in his parts, and by the benefit of desiccativum
Rubrum his wound was cicatrized and the Patient perfectly recovered.

Thus have I sailed through the bloody Ocean of Wounds, wherein I have like a
faithful Pilot shown how the young Surgeon may steer his course in the
wounded Main, and how he may keep both himself and the vessel of his Art from
the Rocks and Shelves of ignominy and slander. To which also have I added the
variety of figures which show both his useful instruments and postures,
accompanying the discourses with the authority of historical observations. And
if any more studious, and a greater lover of Art, and master of Learning shall
be pleased to send forth a better light, I will soon call in mine; in the
interim accept with kindness that which is here afforded, and be not
dissatisfied with my method which is good, and capable enough of teaching every
young Artist, how to procure health to the wounded Patient, and to unite the
parts which are disjoined.

Sic Textor telam contexuit.
AN INDEX OF WOUNDS.
CHAP. 1. Of the Definition of a Wound Page 17 Chap. 2. Of the differences of
Wounds 19 Chap. 3. Of the Judgments and Presages of Wounds 21 Chap. 4. Of
curing of Wounds 27 Chap. 5. Of stopping an immoderate Flux 29 Chap. 6. Of
removing extraneous Bodies 32 Chap. 7. Of joining of parts separated 36 Chap.
8. Of Keeping the Parts joined and their substance 40 Chap. 9. Of removing of
Symptoms and Accidents 43 Chap. 10. Of Palsy 48 Chap. 11. Of Convulsion 57
Chap. 12. Of a compound Wound of the flesh or hollow Wound 69 Chap. 13. Of a
contused Wound 71 Chap. 14. Of Ecchymosis or Contusion 74 Chap. 15. Of Wounds
made by the bite of mad Dogs 79 Chap. 16. Of Wounds made by the bite of an
Adder or other Creature 84 Chap. 17. Of Wounds made by poisoned Weapons 88
Chap. 18. Of Gunshot Wounds 96 Chap. 19. Of Wounds of the Head 109 Chap. 20. Of
the hairy Scalp and Pericrane 111 Chap. 21. Of the Head it self and its Sutures
114 Chap. 22. Of the Cranium and its Bones 120 Chap. 23. Of the general signs
of wounds of the Head 128 Chap. 24. Of presages of Wounds of the Head 131 Chap.
25. Of Incision of the hairy Scalp and opening the Skull 137 Chap. 26. Of
Contusion of the Head 145 Chap. 27. Of Rima or Fissure 149 Chap. 28. Of Teli
seeds. 154 Chap. 29. Of Excision 157 Chap. 30. Of depression of the skull 158
Chap. 31. Of Concameration 162 Chap. 32. Of Collision 164 Chap. 33. Of
Contrafissure 166 Chap. 34. Of Wounds of the two Meninges 171 Chap. 35. Of
Wounds of the Brain 178 Chap. 36. Of an Abscesse of the Brain 185 Chap. 37. Of
Concussion of the Brain 187 Chap. 38. Of a Fungus of the Brain 191 Chap. 39. Of
Puncture of the Nerves 195 Chap. 40. Of a Transverse incision of the Nerves 205
Chap. 41. Of Contused Nerves 207 Chap. 42. Of Wounds of the Forehead 211 Chap.
43. Of Wounds of the Eyelids 214 Chap. 44. Of Wounds of the Eyes 216 Chap. 45.
Of Wounds of the Face 222 Chap. 46. Of Wounds of the Temples 224 Chap. 47. Of
Wounds of the Nose 227 Chap. 48. Of Wounds of the Ears 231 Chap. 49. Of Wounds
of the Lips 233 Chap. 50. Of Wounds of the Tongue 235 Chap. 51. Of Wounds of
the Neck 238 Chap. 52. Of Wounds of the Throat and Windpipe 240 Chap. 53. Of
Wounds of the Oesophagus or Gullet 244 Chap. 54. Of Wounds of the Spleen. 248
Chap. 55. Of Wounds of the Thorax 251 Chap. 56. Of Wounds of the Diaphragma 262
Chap. 57. Of Wounds of the Lungs 266 Chap. 58. Of Wounds of the Pericardium 271
Chap. 59. Of Wounds of the Heart 273 Chap. 60. Of Wounds of the great Arteries
and Veins 277 Chap. 61. Of Wounds of the Veins and Arteries 279 Chap. 62. Of
Wounds of the Abdomen 287 Chap. 62. Of the Abdomen wounded with the Intestines
290 Chap. 63. Of Wounds of the Omentum 293 Chap. 64. Of Wounds of the Guts 296
Chap. 65. Of Wounds of the Liver 302 Chap. 66. Of Wounds of the Ventricle 308
Chap. 67. Of Wounds of the Spleen 313 Chap. 68. Of Wounds of the Kidneys 315
Chap. 69. Of Wounds of the Bladder 318 Chap. 70. Of Wounds of the Testicles and
Penis 322 Chap. 71. Of Wounds of the Shoulder 329 Chap. 72. Of Wounds of the
Arm. 331 Chap. 73. Of Wounds of the Elbow 333 Chap. 74. Of Wounds of the Wrist
335 Chap. 75. Of Wounds of the Hand and Fingers. 336 Chap. 76. Of Wounds of the
Thighs 339 Chap. 77. Of Wounds of the Legs 342 Chap. 78. Of Wounds of the
Joints 347
FINIS.

