HYDRIOTAPHIA, URN-BURIAL; OR, A DISCOURSE of the Sepulchral Urns lately found
in NORFOLK. Together with THE GARDEN OF CYRUS; OR, THE QUINCUNCIAL LOZENGE, Or
Network Plantations of the Ancients, Artificially, Naturally, Mystically
considered: With sundry Observations.

By Thomas Brown, Dr of Physic.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Brom, at the Star in Little-Britain, 1669:

TO MY Worthy and Honored Friend, THOMAS Le GROS of Crostwick, Esquire.
WHen the Funeral Pyre was out, and the last Valediction over, men took a
lasting Adieu of their interred Friends, little expecting the curiosity of
future Ages should comment upon their Ashes, and having no old experience of
the duration of their Relics, held no opinion of such after-considerations.

But who knows the fate of his Bones, or how often he is to be buried? who has
the Oracle of his Ashes, or whether they are to be scattered? The Relics of
many lie, like the Ruins of Pompeios juvenes Asia atque Europa, sed ipsum
Terra tegit Libyes.
Pompey's, in all parts of the Earth: And when they arrive at your hands, these
may seem to have wandered far, who in a direct Little directly but Sea between
your house and Greenland.
and Meridian Travel have but few miles of known Earth between your self and
the Pole.

That the Bones of Theseus should be seen again Brought back by Cimon. Plutarch.
in Athens, was not beyond conjecture and hopeful expectation; but that these
should arise so opportunely to serve your self, was an hit of Fate, and honor
beyond prediction.

We cannot but wish these Urns might have the effect of Theatrical Vessels,
and the great The great Urns in the Hippodrome at Rome conceived to resound the
voices of people at their Shows.
Hippodrome-Urns in Rome, to resound the acclamations and honor due unto you.
But these are sad and sepulchral Pitchers, which have no joyful voices;
silently expressing old Mortality, the Ruins of forgotten times, and can only
speak with life, how long in this corruptible frame some parts may be
uncorrupted; yet able to out-last Bones long unborn, and the noblest Pyle
Worthily possessed by that true Gentleman Sir Horatio Townshend, my honored
Friend.
among us.

We present not these as any strange sight or spectacle unknown to your eyes,
who have beheld the best of Urns, and noblest variety of Ashes; who are your
self no slender Master of Antiquities, and can daily command the view of so
many Imperial Faces: which raises your thoughts unto old things, and
consideration of Times before you, when even living men were Antiquities; when
the living might exceed the dead, and to depart this world could not be
properly said to go unto the Abiit ad plures.
greater number; and so runs up your thoughts upon the Ancient of days, the
Antiquaries truest object, unto whom the eldest parcels are young, and Earth it
self an Infant, and without Which makes the world so many years old.
Egyptian Account makes but small noise in thousands.

We were hinted by the occasion, not catched the opportunity to write of old
things, or intrude upon the Antiquary. We are coldly drawn unto discourses of
Antiquities, who have scarce time before us to comprehend new things, or make
out learned Novelties. But seeing they arose as they lay, almost in silence
among us, at least in short account suddenly passed over; we were very
unwilling they should die again, and be buried twice among us.

Beside, to preserve the living, and make the dead to live, to keep men out of
their Urns, and discourse of humane Fragments in them, is not impertinent unto
our Profession; whose study is Life and Death, who daily behold examples of
Mortality, and of all men least need artificial Memento's, or Coffins by our
bedside, to mind us of our Graves.

It Is time to observe Occurrences, and let nothing remarkable escape us. The
Supinity of elder days has left so much in silence, or time has so martyred
the Records, that the most Wherein Mr. Dugdale has excellently well
endeavored, and is worthy to be countenanced by ingenuous and noble persons.
industrious Heads do find no easy work to erect a new Britannia.

It Is opportune to look back upon old Times, and contemplate our Forefathers.
Great examples grow thin, and are to be fetched from the passed world.
Simplicity flies away, and Iniquity comes at long strides upon us. We have
enough to do to make up our selves from present and passed Times, and the
whole stage of things scarce serves for our instruction. A complete piece of
Virtue must be made up from the Cento's of all Ages; as all the Beauties of
Greece could make but one handsome Venus.

When the Bones of King Arthur were dug up In the time of Henry the second.
Cambden.
, the old Race might think they beheld therein some Originals of themselves*
Unto these of our Urns none here can pretend relation; and can only behold the
Relics of those persons, who in their life giving the Laws unto their
predecessors, after long obscurity now lie at their mercies. But remembering the
early Civility they brought upon these Countries, and forgetting long-passed
mischiefs; we mercifully preserve their Bones, and piss not upon their Ashes.

In the offer of these Antiquities we drive not at ancient Families, so long
out-lasted by them; we are far from erecting your Worth upon the pillars of
your Forefathers, whose merits you illustrate. We honor your old Virtues,
conformable unto times before you, which are the noblest Armory. And having
long experience of your friendly Conversation, void of empty Formality, full of
Freedom, constant and generous Honesty, I look upon you as a Gemm of the
Adamas de rupe veteri praestantissimus.
old Rock, and must profess my self even to Urn and Ashes,

Your ever-faithfull Friend and Servant, Thomas Brown.
Norwich, May 1.
TO MY Worthy and Honored Friend, NICHOLAS BACON of Gillingham, Esquire.
HAd I not observed that Plempius, Cabeus, etc.
Purblinde men have discoursed well of Sight, and some Dr. Harvy.
without Issue excellently of Generation; I, that was never Master of any
considerable Garden, had not attempted this Subject. But the Earth is the
Garden of Nature, and each fruitful Country a Paradise. Dioscorides made most
of his Observations in his March about with Antonius; and Theophrastus raised
his Generalities chiefly from the Field.

Beside, we write no Herball, nor can this Volume deceive you, who have handled
the Besleri Hortus Eystetensis.
massiest thereof; who know that three Bauhini Theatrum Botanicum, etc.
Folio's are yet too little, and how New Herbals fly from America upon us: from
persevering Enquirers, and My worthy Friend M. Goodier, an ancient and learned
Botanist.
old in those singularities, we expect such Descriptions; wherein As in London
and diverse parts, whereof we mention none, left we seem to omit any.
England is now so exact, that it yields not to other Countries.

We pretend not to multiply vegetable divisions by Quincuncial and Reticulate
Plants, or erect a new Phytology. The Field of Knowledge has been so traced*
it is hard to spring any thing new. Of old things we write something new: if
Truth may receive addition, or Envy will have any thing new; since the Ancients
knew the late Anatomicall discoveries, and Hippocrates the Circulation.

You have been so long out of trite Learning, that it is hard to find a Subject
proper for you; and if you have met with a Sheet upon this, we have missed our
intention. In this multiplicity of writing, bye and barren Themes are best
fitted for Invention; Subjects so often discoursed confine the Imagination, and
fix our conceptions unto the Notions of Fore-writers. Beside, such Discourses
allow excursions, and venially admit of collateral Truths, though at some
distance from their principals. Wherein if we sometimes take wide liberty, we
are not single, but err by great Hippocrates de Superfoetatione, de Dentitione.
example.

He that will illustrate the excellency of this Order, may easily fail upon so
spruce a Subject, wherein we have not affrighted the common Reader with any
other Diagrammes then of it self, and have industriously declined illustrations
from rare and unknown Plants.

Tour discerning Judgment, so well acquainted with that Stdy, will expect
herein no Mathematical Truths, as well understanding how few Generalities and
Rules without exceptions.
U finita's there are in nature. How Scaliger has found exceptions in most
Vniversals of Aristotle and Theophrastus. Now Botanicall Maxims must have fair
allowance, and are tolerably current, if not intolerably over-balanced by
Exceptions.

You have wisely ordered your Vegetable delights beyond the reach of exception.
The Turks, who pass their days in Gardens here, will have Gardens also
hereafter, and delighting in Flowers on Earth, must have Lilies and Roses in
Heaven. In Garden-Delights it is not easy to hold a Mediocrity; that
insinuating pleasure is seldom without some extremity. The Ancients venially
delighted in flourishing Gardens; many were Florists that knew not the true use
of a Flower; and in Plinie's days none had directly treated of that Subject.
Some commendably affected Plantations of vertemous Vegetables, some confined
their delights unto single Plants, and Cato seemed to dote upon Cabbage: while
the ingenuous delight of Tulipists stands saluted with hard language, even by
their own Tulipomania, Narre^cruijd, Laurenberg. Pet. Hondius in live. Belg.
Professors.

That in this Garden-Discourse we range into extraneous things, and many parts
of Art and Nature, we follow herein the example of old and new Plantations;
wherein noble spirits contented not themselves with Trees, but by the
attendance of Aviaries, Fish Ponds, and all variety of Animals, they made their
Gardens the Epitome of the Earth, and some resemblance of the Secular Shows of
old.

That we conjoyn these parts of different Subjects, or that this should succeed
the other, your judgment will admit without impute of incongruity; since the
delightful World comes after Death, and Paradise succeeds the Grave; since the
verdant state of things is the Symbol of the Resurrection, and to flourish in
the state of Glory, we must first be sown in Corruption. Beside the ancient
practice of Noble Persons, to conclude in Garden-Graves, and Vrns themselves of
old, to be wrapped up in Flowers and Garlands.

Nullum sine venia placuisse eloquium, is more sensibly understood by Writers
then by Readers; nor well apprehended by either, till Works have hanged out
like Apelles his Pictures; wherein even common eyes will find something for
emendation.

To wish all Readers of your abilities, were unreasonably to multiply the
number of Scholars beyond the temper of these Times. But unto this ill-judging
Age, we charitably desire a portion of your Equity, Judgment, Candor, and
Ingenuity; wherein you are so rich, as not to lose by diffusion. And being a
flourishing Branch of that Of the most worthy Sr Edmund Bacon, prime Baronet,
my true and noble Friend.
Noble Family unto which we owe so much observance, you are not new set, but
long rooted in such Perfection; whereof having had so lasting confirmation in
your worthy Conversation, constant Amity and expression, and knowing you a
serious Student in the highest Arcana of Nature, with much excuse we bring
these low Delights and poor Maniples to your Treasury.

Your affectionate Friend and Servant, Thomas Brown.
Norwich, May 1.
En Sum quod digitis Quinque Levatur onus Propert:
HYDRIOTAPHIA, Urn-Burial; OR, A brief Discourse of the Sepulchral Urns lately
found in NORFOLK.
CHAP. I.
IN the deep discovery of the Subterranean world, a shallow part would satisfy
some Enquirers; who, if two or three yards were open about the Surface, would
not care to rack the Bowels of Potosi The rich Mountain of Pern.
, and the Regions toward the Center. Nature has furnished one part of the
Earth, and Man another. The Treasures of Time lie high, in Urns, Coyns, and
Monuments, scarce below the Roots of some Vegetables. Time has endless
Rarities, and Shows of all varieties; which reveals old things in Heaven, makes
new discoveries in Earth, and even Earth it self a discovery. That great
Antiquity America lay buried for a thousand years; and a large part of the
Earth is still in the Urn unto us.

Though if Adam were made out of an Extract of the Earth, all parts might
challenge a Restitution; yet few have returned their Bones far lower then they
might receive them; not affecting the graves of Giants under hilly and heavy
coverings, but, content with less then their own depth, have wished their Bones
might lie soft, and the earth be light upon them. Even such as hope to rise
again would not be content with central Interrment, or so desperately to place
their Relics as to lie beyond discovery, and in no way to be seen again:
which happy contrivance has made communication with our Forefathers, and left
unto our view some parts which they never beheld themselves.

Though Earth has engrossed the name, yet Water has proved the smartest
Grave, which in forty days swallowed almost Mankind and the living Creation;
Fishes not wholly escaping, except the salt Ocean were handsomely contempered by
a mixture of the fresh Element.

Many have taken voluminous pains to determine the state of the Soul upon
Disunion; but men have been most fantastical in the singular contrivances of
their Corporal dissolution: whilst the soberest Nations have rested in two
ways, of simple Inhumation, and Burning.

That carnal Interrment or Burying was of the elder date, the old examples of
Abraham and the Patriarchs are sufficient to illustrate; and it were without
competition, if it could be made out that Adam was buried near Damascus or
Mount Calvary, according to some Tradition. God himself, that buried but one,
was pleased to make choice of this way, as is collectible from
Scripture-expression, and the hot Contest between Satan and the Archangel
about discovering the Body of Moses. But the practice of Burning was also of
great Antiquity, and of no slender extent. For (not to derive the same from
Hercules) noble descriptions there are hereof in the Grecian Funerals of
Homer, in the formal Obsequies of Patroclus and Achilles; and somewhat elder in
the Theban War, and the solemn Combustion of Menoeceus and Archemorus,
contemporary unto Jair the eighth Judge of Israel. Confirmable also among the
Trojans, from the Funeral Pyre of Hector, burnt before the gates of Troy, and
the Q. Calaber lib. 1.
burning of Penthesilea the Amazonian Queen; and long continuance of that
practice in the inward Countries of Asia, while, as low as the Reign of Julian,
we find that the King of Chionia Ammianus Marcellinus. Gumbrates King of
Chionia, a Country near Persia.
burnt the Body of his Son, and interred the Ashes in a silver Urn.

The same practice extended also far West Arnold. Montan. Not. in Caes.
Commentar. L. Gyraldus, Kirckmannus.
, and besides Herulians, Getes and Thracians, was in use with most of the
Celtae, Sarmatians, Germans, Gauls, Danes, Swedes, Norwegians; not to omit some
use thereof among Carthaginians and Americans: Of greater antiquity among the
Romans then most opinion, or Pliny seems to allow, For (beside the old
Table-Laws of Burning 12 Tabul. part. 1. de Jure sacro. Hominem mortuum in urbe
ne sepelito, neve urito, tom. 2. Rogum ascia ne polito, tom. 4. Item Vigeneri
Annotat. in Livium, and Alex. ab Alex. cum Tiraquello, Roscinus cum Dempstero.
or Burying within the City, of making the Funeral-fire with plained wood, or
quenching the Fire with Wine) Manlius the Consul burnt the Body of his Son;
Numa, by special clause of his Will, was not burnt, but buried; and Remus was
solemnly buried, according to the description of Ovid Ultima prolato subdita
flamma rogo. Fast. lib. 4. cum Car. Neapol. anaptyxi.
.

Cornelius Sylla was not the first whose Body was burned in Rome, but of the
Cornelian Family, which being indifferently, not frequently, used before, from
that time spread and became the prevalent practice; not totally pursued in the
highest run of Cremation; for when even Crows were funerally burnt, Poppaea the
Wife of Nero found a peculiar Grave-interrment.

Now as all Customs were founded upon some bottom of Reason, so there wanted
not grounds for this; according to several apprehensions of the most rational
Dissolution. Some being of the opinion of Thales, that Water was the Original
of all things, thought it most equal to submit unto the Principle of
Putrefaction, and conclude in a moist Relentment. Others conceived it most
natural to end in Fire, as due unto the Master-principle in the Composition,
according to the doctrine of Heraclitus; and therefore heaped up large Piles,
more actively to waft them toward that Element, whereby they also declined a
visible degeneration into Worms, and left a lasting parcel of their Composition.

Some apprehended a purifying virtue in Fire, refining the grosser Commixture,
and firing out the Ethereal particles so deeply immersed in it. And such as by
Tradition or rational conjecture held any hint of the final Pyre of all things,
or that this Element at last must be too hard for all the rest, might conceive
most naturally of the Fiery dissolution. Others, pretending no natural grounds,
politickly declined the malice of Enemies upon their buried Bodies. Which
consideration led Sylla unto this practice, who having thus served the Body of
Marius, could not but fear a Retaliation upon his own; entertained after in the
Civil Wars and revengefull Contentions of Rome.

But as many Nations embraced, and many left it indifferent, so others too much
affected, or strictly declined this practice. The Indian Brachmans seemed too
great friends unto Fire, who burnt themselves alive, and thought it the noblest
way to end their days in Fire; according to the expression of the Indian
burning himself at Athens And therefore the Inscription of his Tomb was made
accordingly. Nic. Damasc.
, in his last words upon the Pyre unto the amazed Spectatours, Thus I make my
self immortal.

But the Chaldaeans, the great Idolaters of Fire, abhorred the Burning of their
Carcasses, as a pollution of that Deity. The Persian Magi declined it upon the
like scruple, and being only solicitous about their Bones, exposed their Flesh
to the prey of Birds and Dogs. And the Persees now in India, which expose their
Bodies unto Vultures, and endure not so much as Feretra or Beers of Wood, the
proper Fuel of Fire, are led on with such niceties. But whether the ancient
Germans, who buried their dead, held any such fear to pollute their Deity of
Herthus, or the Earth, we have no authentic conjecture.

The Egyptians were afraid of Fire, not as a Deity, but a devouring Element,
mercilesly consuming their Bodies, and leaving too little of them; and
therefore by precious Embalments, Depositure in dry earths, or handsome
enclosure in Glasses, contrived the notablest ways of integral Conservation.
And from such Egyptian scruples imbibed by Pythagoras, it may be conjectured
that Numa and the Pythagorical Sect first waved the fiery Solution.

The Scythians, who swore by Wind and Sword, that is, by Life and Death, were
so far from Burning their Bodies, that they declined all Interrment, and made
their Graves in the Air: And the Ichthyophagi, or fish-eating Nations about
Egypt, affected the Sea for their Grave; thereby declining visible corruption,
and restoring the debt of their Bodies. Whereas the old Heroes in Homer dreaded
nothing more then Water or Drowning; probably upon the old Opinion of the fiery
substance of the Soul, only extinguishable by that Element: And therefore the
Poet emphatically implies the total destruction in this kind of death which
happened to Ajax Oileus Which Magius reads (...).
.

The old Diodorus Siculus.
Baleareans had a peculiar mode, for they used great Urns and much Wood, but no
Fire, in their Burials; while they bruised the Flesh and Bones of the dead,
crowded them into Urns, and laid heaps of Wood upon them. And the Ramusius ia
Navigat.
Chinois, without Cremation or urnal Interrment of their Bodies, make use of
Trees and much burning, while they plant a Pine Tree by their Grave, and burn
great numbers of printed draughts of Slaves and Horses over it; civilly content
with their companies in effigy, which barbarous Nations exact unto reality.

Christians abhorred this way of Obsequies, and though they stick not to give
their Bodies to be burnt in their lives, detested that mode after death;
affecting rather a Depositure then Absumption, and properly submitting unto the
sentence of God, to return, not unto Ashes, but unto Dust again; conformable
unto the practice of the Patriarchs, the Interrment Martialis the Bishop,
Cyprian.
of our Savior, of Peter, Paul, and the ancient Martyrs; and so far at last
declining promiscuous Interrment with Pagans, that some have suffered
Ecclesiastical Censures for making no scruple thereof.

The Musselman-believers will never admit this Fiery resolution: For they hold
a present Trial from their black and white Angels in the Grave, which they must
have made so hollow, that they may rise upon their knees.

The Jewish Nation, though they entertained the old way of Inhumation, yet
sometimes admitted this practice, (for the men of Jabesh burnt the Body of
Saul:) and by no prohibited practice, to avoid Contagion or Pollution, in time
of Pestilence, burnt the Bodies of their Friends Amos 6. 10.
. And when they burnt not their dead Bodies, yet sometimes they used great
Burnings near and about them, as is deducible from the expressions concerning
Jehoram, Sedechias, and the sumptuous Pyre of Asa. And they were so little
averse from Sueton. in vita Jul. Caes.
Pagan Burning, that the Jews lamenting the death of Caesar their Friend, and
revenger on Pompey, frequented the place where his Body was burnt for many
nights together. And as they raised noble Monuments and Mausoleums for their
own Nation As that magnificent sepulchral Monument erected by Simon, 1 Macc.
13. 27, etc.
, so they were not scrupulous in erecting some for others; according to the
practice of Daniel, who left that lasting sepulchral Pyle in Ecbatana for the
Median and Persian Kings (...), whereof a Jewish Priest had always the custody
unto Josephus his days. Jos. lib. 10. Antiq.
.

But even in times of Subjection and hottest use they conformed not unto the
Roman practice of Burning; whereby the Prophecy was secured concerning the Body
of Christ, that it should not see corruption, or a Bone should not be broken;
(which we believe was also providentially prevented from the Soludiers Spear,
and Nails, that past by the little Bones both in his hands and feet: not of
ordinary contrivance, that it should not corrupt on the Cross, according to the
Law of Roman Crucifixion) or an hair of his head perish, though observable in
Jewish Customs, to cut the Hairs of Malefactors.

Nor in their long Co-habitation with the Egyptians, crept they into a custom
of their exact Embalming, wherein deeply slashing the Muscles, and taking out
the Brains and Entrails, they had broken the subject of so entire a
Resurrection, nor fully answered the Types of Enoch, Eliah, or Jonah; which yet
to prevent or restore was of equal facility unto that rising Power, able to
break the Fasciations and bands of death, to get clear out of the Cere-cloth
and an hundred pounds of ointment, and out of the Sepulcher before the stone
was rolled from it.

But though they embraced not this practice of Burning, yet entertained they
many Ceremonies agreeable unto Greek and Roman Obsequies. And he that observes
their Funeral-Feasts, their Lamentations at the Grave, their Music and weeping
Mourners, how they closed the eyes of their Friends, how they washed, anointed,
and kissed the dead; may easily conclude these were not mere Pagan Civilities.
But whether that mournfall burden and treble calling our after Absalom had any
reference to the last Conclamation and triple Valediction used by other
Nations, we hold but a wavering conjecture.

Civilians make Sepulture but of the Law of Nations: others do naturally found
it and discover it also in Animals. They that are so thick-skinned as still to
credit the story of the Phoenix, may say something for Animal-burning: More
serious conjectures find some examples of Sepulture in Elephants, Cranes, the
Sepulchral Cells of Pismires and practice of Bees; which civil Society carries
out their dead, and has Exequies, if not Interrments.

CHAP. II.
THE Solemnities, Ceremonies, Rites of their Cremation or Interrment, so
solemnly delivered by Authors, we shall not disparage our Reader to repeat.
Only the last and lasting part in their Urns, collected Bones and Ashes, we
cannot wholly omit, or decline that Subject which occasion lately presented in
some discovered among us.

In a Field of old Walsingham, not many months past, were dug up between
forty and fifty Urns, deposited in a dry and sandy soil, not a yard deep, not
far from one another; not all strictly of one Figure, but most answering these
described; some containing two pounds of Bones, distinguishable in Sculls,
Ribs, Jaws, Thigh-bones, and Teeth, with fresh impressions of their Combustion;
besides the extraneous substances, like pieces of small Boxes, Combs handsomely
wrought, Handles of small brass instruments, brazen Nippers, and in one some
kind of Opale In one sent me by my worthy Friend Dr. Thomas Whitherley of
Walsingham.
.

Near the same plot of ground, for about six yards compass were dug up Coals
and incinerated substances; which begat conjecture that this was the Ustrina or
place of Burning their Bodies, or some Sacrificing-place unto the Manes, which
was properly below the surface of the ground, as the Arae and Altars unto the
Gods and Heroes above it.

That these were the Urns of Romans, from the common custom and place where
they were found is no obscure Conjecture, not far from a Roman Garrison, and
but five mile from Brancaster, set down by ancient Record under the name of
Brannodunum; and where the adjoining Town, containing seven Parishes, in no
very different sound, but Saxon termination, still retains the name of Burnham:
which being an early Station, it is not improbable the neighbour-parts were
filled with Habitations either of Romans themselves, or Britans Romanized,
which observed the Roman Customs.

Nor is it improbable that the Romans early possessed this Country. For though
we meet not with such strict particulars of these parts before the new
Institution of Constantine, and military charge of the Count of the Saxon
shore, and that about the Saxon Invasions the Dalmatian Horsemen were in the
Garrison of Brancaster: yet in the time of Claudius, Vespasian and Severus, we
find no less then three Legions dispersed through the Province of Britain. And
as high as the Reign of Claudius, a great Overthrow was given unto the Iceni by
the Roman Lieutenant Ostorius. Not long after the Country was so molested, that
in hope of a better state Prasutagus bequeathed his Kingdom unto Nero and his
Daughters; and Boadicea his Queen fought the last decisive Battle with
Paulinus. After which time, and the Conquest of Agricola the Lieutenant of
Vespasian, probable it is they wholly possessed this Country, ordering it into
Garrisons or Habitations best suitable with their securities. And so some Roman
Habitations not improbable in these parts as high as the time of Vespasian,
where the Saxons after seated, in whose thin-fill'd Maps we yet find the Name
of Walsingham. Now if the Iceni were but Gammadims, Anconians, or men that
lived in an Angle, Wedge or Elbow of Britain, according to the original
Etymology; this Country will challenge the Emphatical appellation, as most
properly making the Elbow or Iken of Icenia.

That Britain was notably populous is undeniable, from that expression of
Caesar Hominum infinita multitudo est, creberrimaque aedificia, fere Gallicis
co^similia. Caes. de Bello Gal. l. 5.
. That the Romans themselves were early in no small numbers, Seventy thousand
with their Associats slain by Boadicea affords a sure account: And though many
Roman Habitations are not known; yet some by old Works, Rampires, Coyns and
Urns do testify their possessions. Some Urns have been found at Castor, some
also about Southcreeke, and not many years past no less then ten in a Field at
Buxtone In the ground of my worthy Friend Rob. Jegon Esquire wherein some things
contained were preserved by the most worthy Sir William Paston Bt.
, not near any recorded Garrison. Nor is it strange to find Roman Coyns of
Copper and Silver among us, of Vespasian, Trajan, Adrian, Commodus, Antoninus,
Severus, etc. but the greater number of Diocletian, Constantine, Constans,
Valens, with many of Victorinus, Posthumous, Tetricus, and the thirty Tyrants
in the Reign of Gallienus; and some as high as Adrianus have been found about
Thetford or Sitomagus, mentioned in the Itinerary of Antoninus, as the way from
Venta or Castor unto London From Castor to Thetford the Romans accounted thirty
two miles, and from thence observed not our common Road to London, but passed
by Combretonium, ad Ansam, Canonium, Caesaromagus, etc. by Bretenhum,
Goggeshall, Chelmsford, Burntwood, etc.
. But the most frequent discovery is made at the two Casters by Norwich and
Yarmouth Most at Caster by Yarmouth, found in a place called
East-blondy-burgh-furlong, belonging to Mr. Thomas Wood, a person of civility,
industry and knowledge in this way, who has made observations of remarkable
things about him, and from whom we have received diverse Silver and Copper Coyns.
, at Burgh-castle and Brancaster Belonging to that noble Gentleman and true
example of worth, Sir Ralph Hare, Barenet, my honored Friend.
.

Besides the Norman, Saxon and Danish pieces of Cuthred, Canutus, William,
Matilda A piece of Maud the Empress said to be found in Buckenham Castle with
this Inscription, Elle n'a elle.
, and others, some British Coyns of Gold have been dispersedly found; and no
small number of Silver-pieces At Thorpe.
near Norwich, with a rude Head upon the Obverse, and with an ill-formed Horse
on the Reverse, with Inscriptions Ic. Duro T. whether implying Iceni,
Durotriges, Tascia, or Trinobantes, we leave to higher conjecture. Vulgar
Chronology will have Norwich-Castle as old as Julius Caesar: but his distance
from these parts, and its Gothic form of Structure, abridgeth such Antiquity.
The British Coyns afford conjecture of early habitation in these parts, though
the City of Norwich arose from the Ruins of Venta, and, though perhaps not
without some Habitation before, was enlarged, builded and nominated by the
Saxons. In what bulk or populositie it stood in the old East-Angle Monarchy,
Tradition and History are silent. Considerable it was in the Danish Irruptions,
when Sueno burnt Thetford and Norwich Brampton, Abbas Jornallensis.
, and Ulfketel the Governor thereof was able to make some resistance, and
after endeavored to burn the Danish Navy.

HOW the Romans left so many Coyns in Countries of their Conquests seems of
hard resolution; except we consider how they buried them under ground, when
upon barbarous Invasions they were fain to desert their Habitations in most
part of their Empire, and the strictness of their Laws forbad to transfer them
to any other uses: wherein the Plut. in vila Lycurg.
Spartans were singular, who, to make their Copper-money useless, contempered
it with Vinegar. That the Britans left any, some wonder; since their Money was
Iron and Iron-rings before Caesar; and those of after-stamp by permission, and
but small in bulk and bigness: That so few of the Saxons remain, because
overcome by succeeding Conquerours upon the place, their Coyns by degrees
passed into other Stamps, and the marks of after-Ages.

Then the time of these Urns deposited, or precise Antiquity of these Relics,
nothing of more uncertainty. For since the Lieutenant of Claudius seems to have
the first progress into these parts, since Boadicea was overthrown by the
Forces of Nero, and Agricola put a full end to these Conquests; it is not
probable the Country was fully garrisoned or planted before; and therefore,
how-ever these Urns might be of later date, not likely of higher Antiquity.

And the succeeding Emperors desisted not from their Conquests in these and
other parts, as is testified by History and Medall-inscription yet extant; the
Province of Britain, in so divided a distance from Rome, beholding the faces of
many Imperial persons, and in large account, no fewer then Caesar, Claudius,
Britannicus, Vespasian, Titus, Adrian, Severus, Commodus, Geta, and Caracalla.

A great obscurity herein, because no Medall or Emperor's Coin enclosed,
Stow's Survey of London.
, which might denote the dates of their Interrments. Observable in many Urns,
and found in those of Spittle-Fields by London, which contained the Coyns of
Claudius, Vespasian, Commodus, Antoninus, attended with Lacrymatories, Lamps,
Bottles of Liquour, and other appurtenances of affectionate Superstition, which
in these rural Interrments were wanting.

Some uncertainty there is from the period or term of Burning, or the cessation
of that practice. Macrobius affirms it was disused in his days. But most
agree, though without authentic Record, that it ceased with the Antonini: most
safely to be understood after the Reign of those Emperors which assumed the
name of Antoninus, extending unto Heliogabalus; not strictly after Marcus; for
about fifty years later we find the magnificent Burning and Consecration of
Severus. And if we so six this period or cessation, these Urns will challenge
above thirteen hundred years.

But whether this practice was only then left by Emperors and great persons,
or generally about Rome, and not in other Provinces, we hold no authentic
account. For after Tertullian, in the days of Minucius, it was obviously
objected upon Christians, that they condemned the practice of Burning
Exsecrantur rogos, and damnant ignium scpulturam. Min. in Oct.
. And we find a passage in Sidonius Sidon. Apollinaris.
, which asserteth that practice in France unto a lower account. And perhaps
'twas not fully disused till Christianity fully established, which gave the
final extinction to these Sepulchral Bonefires.

Whether they were the Bones of Men, or Women, or Children, no authentic
decision from ancient Custom in distinct places of Burial. Although not
improbably conjectured, that the double Sepulture or Buryingplace of Abraham
had in it such intension. But from exility of Bones, thinness of Sculls,
smalness of Teeth, Ribs and Thigh-bones, it is not improbable that many there of
were persons of minor age, or Women. Confirmable also from things contained in
them: In most were found substances resembling Combs, Plates like Boxes
fastened with Iron pins, and handsomely over-wrought like the Necks or Bridges
of Musical Instruments, long brass Plates over-wrought like the Handles of neat
Implements, brazen Nippers to pull away Hair, and in one a kind of Opale, yet
maintaining a bluish color.

NOW that they accustomed to burn or bury with them things wherein they
excelled, delighted, or which were dear unto them, either as farewells unto all
Pleasure, or vain apprehension that they might use them in the other world, is
testified by all Antiquity. Observable from the Gemme or Beryll-Ring upon the
finger of Cynthia, the Mistress of Propertius, when after her Funeral Pyre her
Ghost appeared unto him. And notably illustrated from the Contents of that
Roman Urn preserved by Cardinal Farnese Vigeneri Annot. in 4. Live.
, wherein, besides great number of Gemms with Heads of Gods and Goddesses, were
found an Ape of Agath, a Grasshopper, an Elephant of Amber, a Crystal Ball,
three Glasses, two Spoons, and six Nuts of Crystal. And beyond the content of
Urns, in the Monument of Childerick the first Chiffler. in Anast. Childer.
, and fourth King from Pharamond, casually discovered three years past at
Tournay, restoring unto the world much Gold richly adorning his Sword, two
hundred Rubies, many hundred Imperial Coyns, three hundred Golden Bees, the
Bones and Horse-shoe of his Horse interred with him, according to the barbarous
magnificence of those days in their Sepulchral Obsequies. Although if we steer
by the conjecture of many, and Septuagint expression, some trace thereof may be
found even with the ancient Hebrews, not only from the Sepulchral Treasure of
David, but the Circumcision-knives which Josuah also buried.

Some men, considering the Contents of these Urns, lasting pieces and Toys
included in them, and the Custom of Burning with many other Nations, might
somewhat doubt whether all Urns found among us were properly Roman Relics, or
some not belonging unto our British, Saxon or Danish Forefathers.

In the form of Burial among the ancient Britans the large Discourses of
Caesar, Tacitus and Strabo are silent: For the discovery whereof, with other
particulars, we much deplore the loss of that Letter which Cicero expected or
received from his Brother Quintus, as a resolution of British Customs; or the
Account which might have been made by Scribonius Largus the Physician,
accompanying the Emperor Claudius, who might have also discovered that frugal
Bit Dionis excerpta per Xiphilin. in Severo.
of the Old Britans, which in the bigness of a Bean could satisfy their Thirst
and Hunger.

But that the Druids and ruling Priests used to burn and bury, is expressed by
Pomponius. That Bellinus, the Brother of Frennus, and King of Britans, was
burnt, is acknowledged by Polydorus, as also by Amandus Zierixensis in his
Historia, and Pineda in his Universa historia Spanish. That they held that
practice in Gallia, Caesar expressly delivers. Whether the Britans (probably
descended from them, of like Religion, Language and Manners) did not sometimes
make use of Burning, or whether at least such as were after civilized unto the
Roman life and manners conformed not unto this practice, we have no historical
assertion or denial. But since from the account of Tacitus the Romans early
wrought so much Civility upon the British Stock, that they brought them to
build Temples, to wear the Gown, and study the Roman Laws and Language; that
they conformed Roisold, Brendetiide, Ild tiide.
also unto their Religious Rites and Customs in Burials seems no improbable
conjecture.

That Burning the dead was used in Sarmatia, is affirmed by Gaguinus: that the
Sueons and Gothlanders used to burn their Princes and great persons, is
delivered by Saxo and Olaus: that this was the old German practice, is also
asserted by Tacitus. And though we are bare in historical particulars of such
Obsequies in this Island, or that the Saxons, Jutos and Angles burnt their
dead; yet came they from parts where 'twas of ancient practice; the Germans
using it, from whom they were descended. And even in Jutland and Sleswick, in
Anglia Cimbrica, Urns with Bones were found not many years before us.

But the Danish and Northern Nations have raised an Era or point of Compute
from their Custom of Burning their dead; some deriving it from Unguinus, some
from Frotho the Great, who ordained by Law, that Princes and chief Commanders
should be committed unto the Fire, thought the common sort had the common
Grave-interrment. So Starkatterus that old Hero was burnt, and Ringo royally
burnt the Body of Harald the King slain by him.

What time this Custom generally expired in that Nation, we discern no assured
period: whether it ceased before Christianity, or upon their Conversion by
Ausgarius the Gaul in the time of Ludovicus Plus, the Son of Charles the Great,
according to good Computes; or whether it might not be used by some persons,
while for a hundred and eighty years Paganism and Christianity were
promiscuously embraced among them, there is no assured conclusion. About which
times the Danes were busy in England, and particularly infested this Country;
where many Castles and strong Holds were built by them, or against them, and a
great number of Names and Families still derived from them. But since this
Custom was probably disused before their Invasion or Conquest, and the Romans
confessedly practiced the same since their possession of this Island, the most
assured account will fall upon the Romans, or Britans Romanized.

However certain it is that Urns, conceived of no Roman Original, are often
dug up both in Norway and Denmark, handsomely described and graphically
represented by the learned Physician Wormius Olai Wormii Monumenta and
Antiquitat. Dan.
; and in some parts of Denmark in no ordinary number, as stands delivered by
Authors exactly describing those Countries Adolphus Cyprius, in Annal.
Selswic. Urnis adeo abundabat collis, etc.
. And they contained not only Bones, but many other substances in them, as
Knives, pieces of Iron, Brass and Wood; and one of Norway a brass gilded
Jews-harp.

Nor were they confused or careless in disposing the Noblest sort, while they
placed large Stones in circle about the Urns or Bodies which they interred:
somewhat answerable unto the Monument of Rollrich-stones in England In
Oxfordshire. Cambden.
; or Sepulchral Monument probably erected by Rollo, who after conquered
Normandy; where it is not improbable somewhat might be discovered. Meanwhile to
what Nation or person belonged that large Urn found at Ashbury In Cheshire.
Twinus de rebus Albionicis.
, containing mighty Bones and a Buckler; what those large Urns found at little
Massingham In Norfolk. Hollingshead,
; or why the Anglesea Urns are placed with their mouths downward; remains yet
undiscovered.

CHAP. III.
PLaistered and whited Sepulchers were anciently affected in cadaverous and
corruptive Burials; and the rigid Jews were wont to Matt. 23. 29.
garnish the Sepulchers of the righteous. Ulysses in Hecuba Euripides.
cared not how meanly he lived, so he might find a noble Tomb after death.
Great Princes affected great Monuments, and the fair and larger Urns contained
no vulgar Ashes; which makes that disparity in those which time discovers
among us. The present Urns were not of one Capacity, the largest containing
above a Gallon, some not much above half that measure; nor all of one Figure,
wherein there is no strict conformity in the same or different Countries;
observable from those represented by Casalius, Bosio, and others, though all
found in Italy: while many have Handles, Ears, and long Necks, but most imitate
a Circular figure, in a spherical and round composure; whether from any
mystery, best duration, or capacity, were but a conjecture. But the common form
with Necks was a proper figure, making our last Bed like our first, nor much
unlike the Urns of our Nativity, while we lay in the nether part of the earth
Psalm. 139. 15.
, and inward vault of our Microcosm. Many Urns are red, these but of a black
color, somewhat smooth, and dully sounding; which begat some doubt whether
they were burnt, or only baked in Oven or Sun; according to the ancient way in
many Bricks, Tiles, Pots, and testaceous works; and as the word Testa is
properly to be taken, when occurring without addition; and chiefly intended by
Pliny, when he commends Bricks and Tiles of two years old, and to make them
in the Spring. Nor only these concealed pieces, but the open magnificence of
Antiquity ran much in the Artifice of Clay. Hereof the House of Mausolus was
built; thus old Jupiter stood in the Capitol; and the Statua of Hercules, made
in the Reign of Tarquinius Priscus, was extant in Pliny's days. And such as
declined Burning or Funeral Urns, affected Coffins of Clay, according to the
mode of Pythagoras, a way preferred by Varro. But the spirit of great ones was
above these circumscriptions, affecting Copper, Silver, Gold, and Porphyrie
Urns, wherein Severus lay, after a serious view and sentence on that which
should contain him (...). Dion.
. Some of these Urns were thought to have been silvered over, from sparklings
in several Pots with small Tinsel parcells; uncertain whether from the Earth,
or the first mixture in them.

Among these Urns we could obtain no good account of their Coverings; only one
seemed arched over with some kind of Brick-work. Of those found at Buxton some
were covered with Flints, some in other parts with Tiles; those at Yarmouth
Caster were closed with Roman Bricks. And some have proper Earthen Covers
adapted and fitted to them. But in the Homerical Urn of Patroclus, whatever
was the solid Tegument, we find the immediate Covering to be a purple piece of
Silk. And such as had no Covers might have the Earth closely pressed into them;
after which disposure were probably some of these, wherein we found the Bones
and Ashes half mortered unto the Sand and sides of the Urn, and some long roots
of Quich or Dogs-grass wreathed about the Bones.

No Lamps, included Liquours, Lacrymatories or Tear-Bottles attended these
rural Urns, either as sacred unto the Manes, or passionate expressions of their
surviving Friends; while with rich Flames and hired Tears they solemnized their
Obsequies, and in the most lamented Monuments made one part of their
Inscriptions Cum lacrymis posuere.
. Some find Sepulchral Vessels containing Liquours, which time has
incrassated into Jellies. For beside these Lacrymatories, notable Lamps, with
Vessels of Oils and Aromatical Liquours, attended noble Ossuaries; and some yet
retaining a Lazius.
Vinosity and Spirit in them, which if any have tasted they have far exceeded
the Palates of Antiquity. Liquours not to be computed by years of annual
Magistrates, but by great Conjunctions and the fatal periods of Kingdoms About
five hundred years. Plato.
. The draughts of Consulary date were but crude unto these, and Opimian Vinam
Opimianum annorum centum. Petron.
Wine but in the must unto them.

In sundry Graves and Sepulchers we meet with Rings, Coyns, and Chalices:
Ancient Frugality was so severe, that they allowed no Gold to attend the Corpse,
but only that which served to fasten their Teeth 12 Tabul. l. xi. de Jure
sacro. Neve aurum addito, ast quoi auro dentes vincti erunt, im cum illo
sepelire and urere se fraud esto.
. Whether the Opaline Stone in this Urn were burnt upon the Finger of the dead,
or cast into the Fire by some affectionate Friend, it will consist with either
Custom. But other incinerable substances were found so fresh, that they could
feel no sindge from Fire. These upon view were judged to be Wood, but sinking
in water and tried by the fire we found them to be Bone or Ivory. In their
hardness and yellow color they most resembled Box, which in old expressions
found the Epithete Plin. l. 16. Inter (...) numera: Theophrast.
of Eternal, and perhaps in such Conservatories might have passed uncorrupted.

That Bay Leaves were found green in the Tomb of S. Humbert Surius.
, after an hundred and fifty years, was looked upon as miraculous. Remarkable
it was unto old Spectators, that the Cypress of the Temple of Diana lasted so
many hundred years. The Wood of the Ark and Olive-rod of Aaron were older at
the Captivity. But the Cypress of the Ark of Noah was the greatest vegetable
Antiquity, if Josephus were not deceived by some Fragments of it in his days.
To omit the Moor-logs and Firretrees found under ground in many parts of
England, the undated ruins of Winds, Floods or Earthquakes; and which in
Flanders still show from what Quarter they fell, as generally lying in the
North-East position Gorop. Becanus, in Niloscopio.
.

But though we found not these pieces to be Wood, according to first
apprehension, yet we missed not altogether of some woody substance; for the
Bones were not so clearly picked, but some Coals were found amongst them. A way
to make Wood perpetual, and a fit associate for Metal, whereon was laid the
foundation of the great Ephesian Temple, and which were made the lasting Tests
of old Boundaries and Landmarks. Whilst we look on these, we admire not
observations of Coals found fresh after four hundred years Of Beringuccio,
nelta Pyrotechnia.
. In a long-deserted habitation At Elmcham.
* even Egg-shels have been found fresh, not tending to corruption.

In the Monument of King Childerick, the iron Relics were found all rusty and
crumbling into pieces. But our little Iron-pins, which fastened the ivory works,
held well together, and lost not their Magneticall quality, though wanting a
tenacious moisture for the firmer union of parts: although it be hardly drawn
into Fusion, yet that metal soon submits unto rust and dissolution. In the
Brazen pieces we admired not the duration, but the freedom from rust and ill
savor upon the hardest attrition: but now exposed unto the piercing Atoms of
Air, in the space of a few months they begin to spot and betray their green
Entrals. We conceive not these Urns to have descended thus naked as they
appear, or to have entered their Graves without the old habit of Flowers. The
Urn of Philopoemen was so laden with Flowers and Ribbands, that it afforded no
sight of it self. The rigid Lycurgus allowed Olive and Myrtle. The Athenians
might fairly except against the practice of Democritus, to be buried up in
Honey, as fearing to imbezzle a great Commodity of their Country, and the best
of that kind in Europe. But Plato seemed too frugally politic, who allowed no
larger Monument then would contain four Heroic verses, and designed the most
barren ground for Sepulture. Though we cannot commend the goodness of that
Sepulchral ground which was set at no higher rate then the mean Salary of
Judas. Though the Earth had confounded the Ashes of these Ossuaries, yet the
Bones were so smartly burnt, that some thin Plates of Brass were found half
melted among them: whereby we apprehended they were not of the meanest
Carcasses, perfunctorily fired, as sometimes in military, and commonly in
Pestilence-Burnings; or after the manner of abject Corpse huddled forth and
carelessly burnt without the Esquiline Port at Rome: which was an Affront
continued upon Tiberius, while they but half burnt his Body Sueton. in vita
Tib. and in Amphitheatro semiustulandum. Not. Casaub.
, and in the Amphitheater, according to the custom in notable Malefactors:
whereas Nero seemed not so much to fear his Death, as that his Head should be
cut off, and his Body not burnt entire.

Some, finding many fragments of Sculls in these Urns, suspected a mixture of
Bones. In none we searched was there cause of such conjecture, though sometimes
they declined not that practice. The Ashes of Sueton. in vita Domitian.
Domitian were mingled with those of Julia; of Achilles with those of
Patroclus: All Urns contained not single Ashes; without confused Burnings they
affectionately compounded their Bones, passionately endeavoring to continue
their living Unions. And when distance of death denied such Conjunctions,
unsatisfied affections conceived some satisfaction to be neighbors in the
Grave, to lie Urn by Urn, and touch but in their names. And many were so
curious to continue their living Relations, that they contrived large and
Family-Urns, wherein the Ashes of their nearest Friends and Kindred might
successively be received So the most learned and worthy Mr. M. Casaubon upon
Antoninus.
, at least some parcels thereof, while their collateral memorials lay in minor
Vessels about them.

Antiquity held too light thoughts from Objects of Mortality, while some drew
provocatives of Mirth from Anatomies Sic erimus cuncti, etc. Ergo dum vivimus,
vivamus.
, and Jugglers showed tricks with Skeletons: when Fiddlers made not so pleasant
mirth as Fencers, and men could sit with quiet stomachs while (...). A
barbarous Pastime at Feasts, when men stood upon a rolling Globe, with their
Necks in a Rope, and a Knife in their hands, ready to cut it when the Stone was
rolled away, wherein if they failed, they lost their lives, to the Laughter of
their Spectators. Atheuaeus.
Hanging was played before them. Old considerations made few Memento's by Sculls
and Bones upon their Monuments. In the Egyptian Obelisks and Hieroglyphical
Figures it is not easy to meet with Bones. The Sepulchral Lamps speak nothing
less then Sepulture; and in their literal draughts prove often obscene and
antic pieces. Where we find D. M. Diis Manibus.
it is obvious to meet with sacrificing Patera's and Vessels of Libation upon
old Sepulchral Monuments. In the Jewish Hypogaeum Bosio.
and subterranean Cell at Rome was little observable beside the variety of
Lamps, and frequent draughts of the holy Candlestick. In authentic draughts of
Antony and Jerome, we meet with Thigh-bones and Death's-heads: but the
coemeterial Cells of ancient Christians and Martyrs were filled with draughts
of Scripture-Stories; not declining the Flourishes of Cypress, Palms and Olive,
and the mystical Figures of Peacocks, Doves and Cocks; but iterately affecting
the Pourtraicts of Enoch, Lazarus, Jonas, and the Vision of Ezekiel, as
hopeful draughts, and hinting imagery of the Resurrection, which is the life
of the Grave, and sweetens our habitations in the Land of Moles and Pismires.

Gentile Inscriptions precisely delivered the extent of men's Lives, seldom the
manner of their Deaths, which History it self so often leaves obscure in the
Records of memorable persons. There is scarce any Philosopher but dies twice or
thrice in Laertius; nor almost any Life without two or three Deaths in
Plutarch: which makes the tragical Ends of noble Persons more favorably
resented by compassionate Readers, who find some relief in the Election of
such differences.

The certainty of Death is attended with uncertainties in Time, Manner, Places.
The variety of Monuments has often obscured true Graves, and Cenotaphs
confounded Sepulchers. For beside their real Tombs, many have found honorary
and empty Sepulchers. The variety of Homer's Monuments made him of various
Countries. Euripides Pausan. in Atticis.
had his Tomb in Africa, but his Sepulture in Macedonia. And Severus Lamprid.
in vit. Alexand. Severi.
found his real Sepulcher in Rome, but his empty Grave in Gallia.

He that lay in a golden Urn Trajanus. Dion.
eminently above the Earth was not like to find the quiet of these Bones. Many
of these Urns were broke by a vulgar discoverer in hope of enclosed Treasure.
The Ashes of Marcellus Plut. in vit. Marcelli. The Commission of the Gothish
King Theodoric for finding out Sepulchral Treasure, Cassiodor. Var. 1. 4.
were lost above-ground, upon the like account. Where Profit has prompted, no
Age has wanted such Miners: For which the most barbarous Expilators found the
most civil Rhetoric. Gold once out of the Earth is no more due unto it; what
was unreasonably committed to the ground is reasonably resumed from it. Let
Monuments and rich Fabrics, not Riches, adorn men's Ashes. The Commerce of the
living is not to be transferred unto the dead. It is not injustice to take that
which none complains to lose; and no man is wronged where no man is Possessour.

What virtue yet sleeps in this Terra damnata and aged Cinders, were petty
Magic to experiment: These crumbling Relics and long-fired particles
superannuate such expectations. Bones, Hairs, Nails and Teeth of the dead were
the treasures of old Sorcerers. In vain we revive such practices. Present
Superstition too visibly perpetuates the folly of our Forefathers, wherein
unto Britannia body came attonite celebrat tantis Ceremoniis, ut dedisse Persis
videri possit. Plin. l. 29.
old Observation this Island was so complete, that it might have instructed
Persin.

Plato's Historian of the other world lies twelve days incorrupted, while his
Soul was viewing the large stations of the Dead. How to keep the Corpse seven
days from Corruption by Anointing and Washing, without Exenteration, were an
hazardable piece of art in our choicest practice. How they made distict
Separation of Bones and Ashes from fiery admixture, has found no historical
solution; though they seemed to make a distict Collection, and overlooked not
Pyrrhus his Toe. Some provision they might make by fictile Vessels, Coverings,
Tiles, or flat Stones, upon and about the Body; and in the same Field, not far
from these Urns, many Stones were found under ground: as also by careful
separation of extraneous matter, composing and raking up the burnt Bones with
Forks, observable in that notable Lump of Galuanus Martianus Topographia Roman.
ex Martiano. Erat and vas ustrinum appellatum, quod in co cadavera
comburerentur. Cap. de Campo Esquilino.
, who had the sight of that Vas ustrinum, or Vessel wherein they burnt the
dead, found in the Esquiline Field at Rome, which might have afforded clearer
solution. But their insatisfaction herein begat that remarkable invention in
the Funeral Pyres of some Princes, by incombustible Sheets made with a texture
of Asbestos, incremable Flax, or Salamander's wool, which preserved their Bones
and Ashes To be seen in Licet. de reconditis veterum lucernis.
incommixed.

How the bulk of a man should sink into so few pounds of Bones and Ashes may
seem strange unto any who considers not its Constitution, and how slender a
mass will remain, upon an open and urging Fire, of the carnal composition. Even
Bones themselves reduced into Ashes do abate a notable proportion; and,
consisting much of a volatile Salt, when that is fired out, make a light kind
of Cinders: although their bulk be disproportionable to their weight, when the
heavy principle of Salt is fired out, and the Earth almost only remains;
observable in Sallow, which makes more Ashes then Oak, and discovers the common
Fraud of selling Ashes by measure, and not by ponderation.

Some Bones make best Skeletons Old Bones, according to Lyserus. Those of young
persons not tall nor fat, according to Columbus.
, some Bodies quick and speediest Ashes. Who would expect a quick flame from
Hydropical Heraclitus? The poisoned Souldien, when his Belly brake, put out two
Pyres, in Plutarch In vita Gracc.
. But in the Plague of Athens Thucydides.
one private Pyre served two or three Intruders; and the Saracens burnt in
large heaps by the King of Castile Laurent. Valla.
showed how little Fuel suffices. Though the Funeral Pyre of Patroclus took
up an hundred foot (...)
, a piece of an old Boat burnt Pompey. And if the burden of Isaac were
sufficient for an Holocaust, a man may carry his own Pyre.

From Animals are drawn good burning Lights, and good medicines Speran. Alb.
ovor.
against Burning. Though the seminal humor seems of a contrary nature to Fire,
yet the Body completed proves a combustible lump, wherein Fire finds flame
even from Bones, and some fuel almost from all parts; though the The Brain.
Hippocrates.
Metropolis of Humidity seems least disposed to it, which might render the
Sculls of these Urns less burned then other Bones. But all flies or sinks
before fire almost in all Bodies: When the common Ligament is dissolved, the
attenuable parts ascend, the rest subside in Coal, Calx, or Ashes.

To burn the Bones of the King of Amos 2. 1.
Edom for Lime, seems no irrational Ferity: But to drink of the Ashes of dead
Relations As Artemisia of her Husband Mansolus.
, a passionate Prodigality. He that has the Ashes of his Friend has an
everlasting Treasure. Where Fire takes leave, Corruption slowly enters. In
Bones well burnt, Fire makes a Wall against it self; experimented in Copels and
Tests of Metalls, which consist of such ingredients. What the Sun compoundeth,
Fire analyseth, not transmuteth. That devouring Agent leaves almost always a
morsel for the Earth, whereof all things are but a Colony; and which, if time
permits, the Mother-Element will have in their primitive mass again.

He that looks for Urns and old Sepulchral Relics, must not seek them in the
Ruins of Temples, where no Religion anciently placed them. These were found in
a Field, according to ancient Custom, in noble or private Burial; the old
practice of the Canaanites, the Family of Abraham, and the Burying-place of
Josua, in the Borders of his possessions: and also agreeable unto Roman
practice to bury by Highways, whereby their Monuments were under eye,
Memorials of themselves, and Memento's of Mortality unto living Passengers;
whom the Epitaphs of Great ones were fain to beg to stay and look upon them. A
language though sometimes used, not so proper in Church-Inscriptions Siste,
viator.
. The sensible Rhetoric of the dead to Exemplarity of good life first admitted
the Bones of pious men and Martyrs within Church-walls, which in suceeding Ages
crept into promiscuous practice; while Constantine was peculiarly favored to
be admitted unto the Church Porch, and the first thus buried in England was in
the days of Cuthred.

Kirckmannus de Funer.
Christians dispute how their Bodies should lie in the Grave. In Urnal
Interrment they clearly escaped this Controversy. Though we decline the
Religious consideration, yet in coemeterial and narrower Burying-places, to
avoid confusion and cross position, a certain posture were to be admitted;
which even Pagan civility observed. The Persians lay North and South; the
Megareans and Phoenicians placed their Heads to the East; the Athenians, some
think, toward the West, which Christians still retain. And Beda will have it
to be the posture of our Savior. That he was crucified with his face toward
the West, we will not contend with Tradition, and probable account: But we
applaud not the hand of the Painter, in exalting his Cross so high above those
on either side; since hereof we find no authentic account in History, and
even the Crosses found by Helena pretend no such distinction from longitude or
dimension.

To be knav'd out of our Graves, to have our Sculls made Drinkingbowls and our
Bones turned into Pipes, to delight and sport our Enemies, are Tragical
Abominations, escaped in burning Burials.

Urnal Interrments and burnt Relics lie not in fear of Worms, or to be an
Heritage for Serpents: In carnal Sepulture Corruptions seem peculiar unto
parts, and some speak of Snakes out of the Spinal Marrow. But while we suppose
common Worms in Graves, it is not easy to find any there; few in Churchyards
above a foot deep, fewer or none in Churches, though in fresh-decayed Bodies.
Teeth, Bones and Hair give the most lasting defiance to Corruption. In an
Hydropical Body ten years buried in a Churchyard we met with a fat concretion,
where the Nitre of the Earth and the salt and lixivious Liquour of the Body had
coagulated large lumps of Fat into the consistence of the hardest Castlesoap;
whereof part remains with us. After a Battle with the Persians, the Roman
Corpse decayed in few days, while the Persian Bodies remained dry and
uncorrupted. Bodies in the same ground do not uniformly dissolve, nor Bones
equally moulder; whereof in the opprobrious Disease we expect no long duration.
The Body of the Marquess of Dorset seemed sound and handsomely Cereclothed,
that after seventy eight years was found uncorrupted Of Thomas Marquess of
Dorset, whose Body being buried 1530, was 1608 upon the cutting open of the
Cerecloth found perfect, and nothing corrupted, the Flesh not hardened, but in
color, proportion and softness like an ordinary Corpse newly to be interred.
Rurton's Descript. of Leicestershire.
. Common Tombs preserve not beyond Powder: A firmer consistence and compage of
parts might be expected from Arefaction, deep Burial, or Charcoal. The greatest
Antiquities of mortal Bodies may remain in petrified Bones; whereof, though we
take not in the Pillar of Lot's wife, or Metamorphosis of Ortelius In his Map
of Russia.
, some may be older then Pyramids, in the petrified Relics of the general
Inundation. When Alexander opened the Tomb of Cyrus, the remaining Bones
discovered his proportion; whereof Urnal Fragments afford but a bad conjecture,
and have this disadvantage of Grave-Interrments, that they leave us ignorant of
most personal discoveries. For since Bones afford not only Rectitude and
Stability, but Figure, unto the Body; it is no impossible Physiognomy to
conjecture at fleshly Appendences, and after what shape the Muscles and Carnous
parts might hang in their full consistences. A fullspred Cariola shows a
well-shaped Horse behind; handsome-formed Sculls give some Analogy of
Flesh-resemblance; a critical view of Bones makes a good distinction of Sexes.
Even Color is not beyond conjecture; since it is hard to be deceived in the
distinction of Negro's Sculls. The Poet Dante, in his view of Purgatory, found
Gluttons so meagre and extenuated, that he conceited them to have been in the
Siege of Jerusalem, and that it was easy to have discovered Homo or Omo in
their Faces: M being made by the two lines of their Cheeks, arching over the
Eyebrows to the Nose, and their sunk eyes making O O, which makes up Omo.
Parean gliocchiaie, anella senza gemme, Che nel viso de gli huomini leg
huomo; Ben havria quivi conosciuto lemme.
Dante's Characters are to be found in Sculls as well as Faces. Hercules is not
only known by his Foot: Other parts make out their comproportions, and
inferences upon whole or parts. And since the dimensions of the Head measure
the whole Body, and the Figure thereof gives conjecture of the principal
Faculties; Physiognomy out-lives our selves, and ends not in our Graves.

Severe Contemplators, observing these lasting Relics, may think them good
Monuments of persons past, little advantage to future beings; and considering
that Power which subdueth all things unto it self, that can resame the
scattered Atoms, or identifie out of any thing, conceive it superfluous to
expect a Resurrection out of Relics. But the Soul subsisting, other matter
clothed with due accidents may salve the Individuality. Yet the Saints, we
observe, arose from Graves and Monuments about the holy City. Some think the
ancient Patriarchs so earnestly desired to lay their Bones in Canaan, as hoping
to make a part of that Resurrection, and though thirty miles from Mount
Calvary, at least to lie in that Region which should produce the first fruits
of the dead. And if, according to learned conjecture, the Bodies of men shall
rise where their greatest Relics, remain, many are not like to err in the
Topography of their Resurrection, though their Bones or Bodies be after
translated by Angels Tirin. in Ezekiel.
into the field of Ezekiel's Vision, or, as some will order it, into the Valley
of Judgment, or Jehosaphat.

CHAP. IV.
CHristians have handsomely glossed the deformity of Death, by careful
consideration of the Body, and civil Rites, which take off brutal terminations:
and though they conceived all repairable by a Resurrection, cast not off all
care of Interrment. And since the Ashes of Sacrifices burnt upon the Altar of
God were carefully carried out by the Priests, and deposed in a clean field;
since they acknowledged their Bodies to be the Lodging of Christ and Temples of
the Holy Ghost; they devolved not all upon the sufficiency of Soul-existence:
and therefore with long Services and full Solemnities concluded their last
Exequies, wherein Rituale Graecum opera J. Goar, in officio Excquiarum.
to all distinctions the Greek Devotion seems most pathetically ceremonious.

Christian invention has chiefly driven at Rites which speak hopes of another
life, and hints of a Resurrection. And if the ancient Gentiles held not the
Immortality of their better part, and some subsistence after Death; in several
Rites, Customs, actions and expressions, they contradicted their own Opinions:
wherein Democritus went high, even to the thought of a Resurrection Similis
reviviscendi promissa Democrito vanitas, qui non revixit ipse. Quae (malum!)
ista dementia est, iterari vitam mortc? Plin. l. 7. c. 55.
, as is scoffingly recorded by Pliny. What can be more express then the
expression of Phocylides (...), and deinceps.
? Or who would expect from Lucretius Cedit enim retro de terra quod fuit ante
In terram, etc. Lucret.
a sentence of Ecclesiastes? Before Plato could speak, the Soul had wings in
Homer, which fell not, but flew out of the Body into the mansions of the dead:
he also observed that handsome distinction of Demas and Soma, for the Body
conjoined to the Soul and the Body separated from it. Lucian spoke much truth
in jest, when he said, that part of Hercules which proceeded from Alcmena
perished, that from Jupiter remained immortal. Thus Plato in Phaed.
Socrates was content that his Friends should bury his Body, so they would not
think they buried Socrates; and regarding only his immortal part, was
indifferent to be burnt or buried. From such considerations Diogenes might
contemn Sepulture, and, being satisfied that the Soul could not perish, grow
careless of corporal Interrment. The Stoics, who thought the Souls of wise men
had their habitation about the Moon, might make slight account of subterraneous
deposition: whereas the Pythagoreans and transcorporating Philosophers, who
were to be often buried, held great care of their Interrment. And the
Platonicks rejected not a due care of the Grave, though they put their Ashes to
unreasonable expectations in their tedious term of Return and long-set
Revolution.

Men have lost their Reason in nothing so much as their Religion, wherein
Stones and Clouts make Martyrs; and since the Religion of one seems Madness
unto another, to afford an account or rational of old Rites requires no rigid
Reader. That they kindled the Pyre aversely, or turning their face from it, was
an handsome Symbol of unwilling Ministration. That they washed their Bones with
Wine and Milk; that the Mother wrapped them in Linen, and dried them in her
Bosom, the first fostering part and place of their Nourishment; that they
opened their eyes toward Heaven before they kindled the Fire, as the place of
their hopes or original; were no improper Ceremonies. Their last Valediction
Vale, vale, vale, nos te ordiae quo Natura permittet sequemur.
thrice uttered by the Attendants was also very solemn, and somewhat answered
by Christians, who thought it too little, if they threw not the earth thrice
upon the interred Body. That in strewing their Tombs the Romans affected the
Rose, the Greeks Amaranthus and Myrtle; that the Funeral Pyre consisted of
sweet fuel, Cypress, Fur, Larix, Yew, and Trees perpetually verdant; lay
silent expressions of their surviving Hopes: wherein Christians, which deck
their Coffins with Bays, have found a more elegant Emblem. For that Tree,
seeming dead, will restore it self from the Root, and its dry and exsuccous
Leaves resume their verdure again; which, if we mistake not, we have also
observed in Furze. Whether the planting of Yew in Churchyards hold not its
original from ancient Funeral-Rites, or as an Emblem of Resurrection from its
perpetual Verdure, may also admit conjecture.

They made use of Music to excite or quiet the Affections of their Friends,
according to different Harmonies. But the secret and symbolical hint was the
Harmonical nature of the Soul, which delivered from the Body went again to
enjoy the primitive Harmony of Heaven, from whence it first descended; which,
according to its progress traced by Antiquity, came down by Cancer, and
ascended by Capricornus.

They burnt not Children before their Teeth appeared, as apprehending their
Bodies too tender a morsel for Fire, and that their gristly Bones would scarce
leave separable Relics after the pyral Combustion. That they kindled not Fire
in their houses for some days after, was a strict memorial of the late
afflicting Fire. And mourning without hope, they had an happy fraud against
excessive Lamentation, by a common opinion, that deep Sorrows disturbed their
Ghosts Tu manes ^e laede meos.
.

That they buried their dead on their Backs, or in a supine position, seems
agreeable unto profound Sleep and common posture of dying, contrary to the most
natural way of Birth; nor unlike our pendulous posture in the doubtful state of
the Womb. Diogenes was singular, who preferred a prone situation in the Grave:
and some Christians Russianus, etc.
like neither, who declined the figure of Rest, and made choice of an erect
posture.

That they carried them out of the world with their Feet forward, was not
inconsonant unto Reason; as contrary unto the native posture of Man, and his
production first into it; and also agreeable unto their Opinions, while they
bid adieu unto the world, not to look again upon it: whereas Mahometans, who
think to return to a delightful life again, are carried forth with their Heads
forward, and looking toward their houses.

They closed their Eyes, as parts which first die, or first discover the sad
effects of Death. But their iterated Clamations to excitate their dying or dead
Friends, or revoke them unto life again, was a vanity of Affection; as not
presumably ignorant of the critical Tests of Death by apposition of Feathers,
Glasses, and reflection of Figures, which dead Eyes represent not, which
how-ever not strictly verifiable in fresh and warm Cadavers, could hardly elude
the Test in Corpse of four or five days.

That they sucked in the last Breath of their expiring Friends, was surely a
practice of no medical Institution, but a loose opinion that the Soul passed
out that way, and a fondness of Affection from some Francesco Perucei, Pomp
funebri*
Pythagorical foundation, that the Spirit of one Body passed into another:
which they wished might be their own.

That they poured Oil upon the Pyre, was a tolerable practice, while the
intention rested in facilitating the Ascension: But to place good Omens in the
quick and speedy Burning, to sacrifice unto the Winds for a dispatch in this
office, was a low form of Superstition.

The Archimime or Jester attending the Funeral Train, and imitating the
speeches, gesture and manners of the deceased, was too light for such
Solemnities, contradicting their funeral Orations, and doleful Rites of the
Grave.

That they buried a piece of Money with them, as a Fee of the Elysian Ferryman,
was a practice full of folly. But the ancient custom of placing Coyns in
considerable Urns, and the present practice of burying Medals in the noble
Foundations of Europe, are laudable ways of Historical discoveries in Actions,
Persons, Chronologies; and posterity will applaud them.

We examine not the old Laws of Sepulture, exempting certain persons from
Burial or Burning: But hereby we apprehend that these were not the Bones of
persons Planet-struck or burnt with fire from Heaven; no Relics of Traitors
to their Country, Self-killers, or Sacrilegious malefactors; persons in old
apprehension unworthy of the Earth, condemned unto the Tartarus of Hell, and
bottomless pit of Pluto, from whence there was no redemption.

Nor were only many Customs questionable in order to their Obsequies, but
also sundry Practices, Fictions, and Conceptions, discordant or obscure, of
their state and future beings. Whether unto eight or ten Bodies of Men to add
one of a Woman, as being more inflammable, and unctuously constituted for the
better pyrall Combustion, were any rational practice; or whether the complaint
of Periander's Wife be tolerable, that wanting her Funeral Burning she suffered
intolerable cold in Hell, according to the constitution of the Infernal house
of Pluto, wherein Cold makes a great part of their Tortures; it cannot pass
without some question.

Why the Female-Ghosts appear unto Ulysses before the Heroes and masculine
spirits; why the Psyche or Soul of Tiresias is of the masculine gender, who
being blind on Earth sees more then all the rest in Hell; why the Funeral
Suppers consisted of Eggs, Beans, Smallage and Lettuce, since the dead are made
to eat Asphodels about the Elysian meadows; why, since there is no Sacrifice
acceptable, nor any Propitiation for the Covenant of the Grave, men set up the
Deity of Morta, and fruitlesly adored Divinites without Ears; it cannot escape
some doubt.

The dead seem all alive in the humane Hades of Homer; yet cannot they speak,
prophecy, or know the living, except they drink Blood, wherein is the Life of
man. And therefore the Souls of Penelope's Paramours conducted by Mercury
chirped like Bats, and those which followed Hercules made a noise but like a
flock of Birds.

The departed Spirits know things past and to come, yet are ignorant of things
present. Agamemnon foretells what should happen unto Ulysses, yet ignorantly
enquires what is become of his own Son. The Ghosts are afraid of Swords in
Homer; yet Sibylla tells Aeneas in Virgil, the thin habit of Spirits was beyond
the force of Weapons. The Spirits put off their Malice with their Bodies, and
Caesar and Pompey accord in Latin Hell; yet Ajax in Homer endures not a
Conference with Ulysses. And Deiphobus appears all mangled in Virgil's Ghosts,
yet we meet with perfect Shadows among the wounded Ghosts of Homer.

Since Charon in Lucian applauds his condition among the dead, whether is it
handsomely said of Achilles, that living contemner of Death, that he had rather
be a Plowman's servant then Emperor of the dead? How is Hercules his Soul in
Hell, and yet in Heaven, and Julius his Soul in a Star, yet seen by Aeneas in
Hell? except the Ghosts were but Images and Shadows of the Soul, received in
higher mansions, according to the ancient division of Body, Soul, and Image or
Simulachrum of them both. The particulars of future Beings must needs be dark
unto ancient Theories, which Christian Philosophy yet determines but in a Cloud
of Opinions. A Dialogue between two Infants in the womb concerning the state of
this world might handsomely illustrate our ignorance of the next, whereof
methinks we yet discourse in Plato's Den, and are but Embryon Philosophers.

Pythagoras escape in the fabulous Hell of Dante ( Del Inferno, ca^t. 4.
) among that swarm of Philosophers, wherein whilst we meet with Plato and
Socrates, Cato is to be found in no lower place then Purgatory. Among all the
set, Epicurus is most considerable, whom men make honest without an Elysium,
who contemned life without encouragement of Immortality, and making nothing
after Death, yet made nothing of the King of terrors.

Were the Happiness of the next World as closely apprehended as the Felicities
of this, it were a Martyrdom to live; and unto such as consider none
hereafter, it must be more then Death to die: which makes us amazed at those
Audacities that durst be Nothing, and return into their Chaos again. Certainly
such spirits as could contemn Death when they expected no better Being after,
would have scorned to live had they known any. And therefore we applaud not the
judgment of Machiavel, that Christianity makes men Cowards, or that with the
confidence of bat half dying, the despised Virtues of Patience and Humility
have abased the spirits of men, which Pagan Principles exalted; but rather it
has regulated the wildness of Audacities in the attempts, grounds, and eternal
sequels of Death, wherein men of the boldest spirits are often prodigiously
temerarious. Nor can we extenuate the Valor of ancient Martyrs, who contemned
Death in the uncomfortable scene of their lives, and in their decrepit
Martyrdomes did probably lose not many months of their days, or parted with
Life when it was scarce worth the living. For (beside that long time past holds
no consideration unto a slender time to come) they had no small disadvantage
from the constitution of Old age, which naturally makes men fearful, and
complexionally superannuated from the bold and courageous thoughts of Youth and
fervent years. But the contempt of Death from corporal animosity promoteth not
our Felicity. They may sit in the Orchestra and noblest Seats of Heaven, who
have held up shaking hands in the Fire, and humanely contended for Glory.

Meanwhile Epicurus lies deep in Dante's Hell, wherein we meet with Tombs
enclosing Souls which denied their Immortalities. But whether the virtuous
Heathen, who lived better then he spoke, or erring in the Principles of
himself, yet lived above Philosophers of more specious Maxims, lie so deep as
he is placed, at least so low as not to rise against Christians, who, believing
or knowing that Truth, have lastingly denied it in their practice and
conversation, were a Quere too sad to insist on.

But all or most apprehensions rested in Opinions of some future Being, which
ignorantly or coldly believed beget those perverted Conceptions, Ceremonies,
Sayings, which Christians pity or laugh at, Happy are they which live not in
that disadvantage of time, when men could say little for Futurity but from
Reason; whereby the noblest minds fell often upon doubtful Deaths and
melancholic Dissolutions. With these hopes Socrates warmed his doubtful
spirits against that cold Potion; and Cato, before he durst give the fatal
stroke, spent part of the night in reading the Immortality of Plato, thereby
confirming his wavering hand unto the animosity of that attempt.

It is the heaviest stone that Melancholy can throw at a man, to tell him he is
at the end of his Nature; or that there is no farther State to come, unto which
this seems progressional, and otherwise made in vain. Without this
accomplishment the natural expectation and desire of such a State were but a
fallacy in nature: unsatisfied Considerators would quarrel the justice of their
Constitutions, and rest content that Adam had fallen lower, whereby, by knowing
no other Original and deeper Ignorance of themselves, they might have enjoyed
the Happiness of inferior Creatures; who in tranquillity possess their
Constitutions, as having not the apprehension to deplore their own Natures; and
being framed below the circumference of these Hopes, or cognition of better
being, the Wisdom of God has necessitated their contentment. But the
superior ingredient and obscured part of our selves, whereunto all present
Felicities afford no resting contentment, will be able at last to tell us we
are more then our present selves, and evacuate such Hopes in the fruition of
their own Accomplishments.

CHAP. V.
NOW since these dead Bones have already out-lasted the living ones of
Methuselah, and in a yard under Ground and thin walls of Clay outworn all the
strong and specious Buildings above it, and quietly rested under the Drums and
Tramplings of three Conquests; what Prince can promise such diuturnity unto his
Relics, or might not gladly say, Tibullus.
Sic ego componi versus in oss a velim?

Time, which antiquates Antiquities, and has an Art to make Dust of all
things, has yet spared these minor Monuments. In vain we hope to be known by
open and visible Conservatories, when to be unknown was the means of their
Continuation, and obscurity their Protection. If they died by violent hands,
and were thrust into their Urns, these Bones became considerable, and some old
Philosophers would honor Oracula Chaldaica cum Scholiis Pselli and Plethonis.
(...). Vi corpus relinquentium animae purissimae.
them, whose Souls they conceived most pure, which were thus snatched from
their Bodies, and to retain a stronger propension unto them: whereas they
weariedly left alanguishing Corpse, and with faint desires of Reunion. If they
fell by long and aged decay, yet wrapped up in the bundle of Time they fell into
indistinction, and made but one blot with Infants. If we begin to die when we
live, and long life be but a prolongation of death, our Life is a sad
composition; we live with Death, and die not in a moment. How many Pulses made
up the life of Methuselah, were work for Archimedes: Common Counters sum up the
life of Moses his name In the Psalm of Moses.
. Our days become considerable like petty sums by minute accumulations; where
numerous Fractions make up but small round Numbers, and our days of a Span long
make not one little Finger According to the ancient Arithmetic of the Hand,
wherein the little Finger of the right Hand contracted signified an Hundred.
Pierius in Hieroglyph.
.

If the nearness of our last necessity brought a nearer conformity unto it,
there were a happiness in Hoary hairs, and no calamity in Half senses. But the
long habit of living indisposeth us for dying; when Avarice makes us the sport
of Death; when David grew politickly Cruel, and Solomon could hardly be said to
be the Wisest of men. But many are too early old, and before the date of age.
Adversity stretches our days, Misery makes One night as long as three.
Almena's nights, and Time has no wings unto it. But the most tedious being is
that which can unwish it self, content to be nothing, or never to have been;
which was beyond the Malcontent of Job, who cursed not the day of his Life,
but his Nativity; content to have so far been, as to have a title to future
being; although he had lived here but in an hidden state of life, and as it
were an Abortion.

The puzzling Questions or Tiberius unto Grammarians. Marcel. Donatus in Suet.
What Song the Sirens sang, or what name Achilles assumed when he hid himself
among Women, though puzzling Questions, are not beyond all conjecture. What
time the persons of these Ossuaries entered the (...), Hom. Job.
famous Nations of the dead, and slept with Princes and Counselors, might
admit a wide Solution. But who were the proprietaries of these Bones, or what
Bodies these Ashes made up, were a question above Antiquarism, not to be
resolved by man, nor easily perhaps by Spirits, except we consult the
Provincial Guardians, or Tutelary Observators. Had they made as good provision
for their Names as they have done for their Relics, they had not so grossly
erred in the art of Perpetuation. But to subsist in Bones, and be but
pyramidally extant, is a fallacy in Duration. Vain Ashes, which, in the
oblivion of Names, Persons, Times and Sexes, have found unto themselves a
fruitless Continuation, and only arise unto late Posterity as Emblems of
mortal Vanities, Antidotes against Pride, Vainglory, and madding Vices! Pagan
Vain-glories, which thought the World might last for ever, had encouragement
for Ambition, and finding no Atropos unto the immortality of their Names, were
never dampt with the necessity of Oblivion. Even old Ambitions had the
advantage of ours in the attempts of their Vain-glories, who acting early, and
before the probable Meridian of Time, have by this time found great
accomplishment of their Designs, whereby the ancient Heroes have already
out-lasted their Monuments and Mechanical Preservations. But in this latter
Scene of Time we cannot expect such Mummies unto our Memories, when Ambition
may fear the Prophecy of Elias That the world may last but six thousand years.
; and Charles the fifth can never hope to live within two Methuselah's of
Hector Hector's fame lasting above two lives of Methuselah before that famous
Prince was extant.
.

And therefore restless inquietude for the diuturnity of our Memories unto
present considerations seems a Vanity almost out of date, and a superannuated
piece of Folly. We cannot hope to live so long in our names as some have done
in their persons: one Face of Janus holds no proportion to the other. It Is too
late to be Ambitious. The great Mutations of the World are acted, or time may
be too short for our Designs. To extend our Memories by Monuments, whose death
we daily pray for, and whose duration we cannot hope without injury to our
expectations in the advent of the last Day, were a contradiction to our
Beliefs. We, whose Generations are ordained in this setting part of Time, are
providentially taken off from such imaginations; and, being necessitated to eye
the remaining particle of Futurity, are naturally constituted unto thoughts of
the next World, and cannot excusably decline the consideration of that Duration
which makes Pyramids Pillars of snow, and all that is past a Moment.

Circles and Right lines limit and close all Bodies, and the mortal rightlined
Circle ( TH The character of Death.
) must conclude and shut up all. There is no Antidote against the Opium of
Time, which temporally considers all things. Our Fathers find their Graves
in our short Memories, and sadly tell us how we may be buried in our Survivors.
Grave-stones tell truth scarce forty years ( Old ones being taken up, and other
Bodies laid under them.
). Generations pass while some Trees stand, and old Families last not three
Oaks. To be read by bare Inscriptions, like many in Gruter ( Gruteri
Inscriptiones antiquae.
), to hope for Eternity by AEnigmatical Epithets or first letters of our Names,
to be studied by Antiquaries who we were, and have new Names given us like many
of the Mummies, are cold Consolations unto the Students of Perpetuity, even by
everlasting Languages.

To be content that Times to come should only know there was such a man, not
caring whether they knew more of him, was a frigid Ambition in Cardan ( Cuperem
notum essc quod sim, non opto ut sciatur qualis sim. Card. in vita propria.
), disparaging his horoscopal inclination and judgment of himself. Who cares
to subsist like Hippocrates's Patients, or Achilles's Horses in Homer, under
naked Nominations, without Deserts and noble acts, which are the balsame of our
Memories, the Entelechia and Soul of our Subsistences. To be nameless in worthy
deed exceeds an infamous History. The Canaanitish woman lives more happily
without a name, then Herodias with one. And who had not rather have been the
good Thief, then Pilate?

But the iniquity of Oblivion blindly scatters her Poppy, and deals with the
Memory of men without distinction to merit of Perpetuity. Who can but pity the
Founder of the Pyramids? Herostratus lives that burnt the Temple of Diana; he
is almost lost that built it. Time has spared the Epitaph of Adrian's Horse,
confounded that of himself. In vain we compute our Felicities by the advantage
of our good Names, since bad have equal durations; and Thersites is like to
live as long as Agamemnon, without the favor of the everlasting Register. Who
knows whether the best of men be known? or whether there be not more remarkable
persons forgot, then any that stand remembered in the known account of Time? The
first man had been as unknown as the last, and Methuselah's long life had been
his only Chronicle.

Oblivion is not to be hired: The greater part must be content to be as though
they had not been, to be found in the Register of God, not in the Record of
Man. Twenty seven names make up the first Story, and the recorded names ever
since contain not one living Century. The number of the dead long exceeds all
that shall live. The Night of Time far surpasses the Day, and who knows when
was the Aequinox? Every hour adds unto that current Arithmetic, which scarce
stands one moment. And since Death must be the Lucina of Life, and even Pagans
could doubt whether thus to live were to die; since our longest Sun sets at
right descensions, and makes but Winter Arches, and therefore it cannot be long
before we lie down in Darkness, and have our light in Ashes; since the Brother
of Death daily haunts us with dying Memento's, and Time, that grows old it
self, bids us hope no long Duration: Diuturnity is a Dream and folly of
expectation.

Darkness and Light divide the course of Time, and Oblivion shares with Memory
a great part even of our living Beings; we slightly remember our Felicities,
and the smartest strokes of Affliction leave but short smart upon us. Sense
endures no extremities, and Sorrows destroy us or themselves. To weep into
Stones are Fables. Afflictions induce callosities, Miseries are slippery, or
fall like Snow upon us, which notwithstanding is no Stupiditie. To be ignorant
of evils to come, and forgetful of evils past, is merciful provision in
Nature, whereby we digest the mixture of our few and evil days, and our
delivered Senses not relapsing into cutting remembrances, our Sorrows are not
kept raw by the edge of repetitions. A great part of Antiquity contented their
hopes of subsistency with a Transmigration of their Souls. A good way to
continue their Memories, while having the advantage of plural successions, they
could not but act something remarkable in such variety of Beings, and enjoying
the fame of their passed selves, make accumulation of glory unto their last
Durations. Others, rather then be lost in the uncomfortable night of Nothing,
were content to recede into the common Being, and make one particle of the
public Soul of all things, which was no more then to return into their unknown
and divine Original again. Agyptian ingenuity was more unsatisfied, contriving
their Bodies in sweet Consistences to attend the return of their Souls. But all
was vanity, feeding Omnia vanitas and pastio venti, (...), ut olim Aquila and
Symmachus. V. Drus. Ecc'es.
the wind, and folly. The Egyptian Mummies, which Cambyses or Time has
spared, Avarice now consumes. Mummie is become Merchandise, Mizraim cures
Wounds, and Pharaoh is sold for Balsams.

In vain do Individuals hope for Immortality, or any patent from Oblivion, in
preservations below the Moon: Men have been deceived even in their flatteries
above the Sun, and studied conceits to perpetuate their names in Heaven. The
various Cosmographie of that part has already varied the names of contrived
Constellations; Nimrod is lost in Orion, and Osiris in the Dog Star. While we
look for incorruption in the Heavens, we find they are but like the Earth;
durable in their main Bodies, alterable in their Parts: whereof, beside Comets
and new Stars, Perspectives begin to tell tales; and the Spots that wander
about the Sun, with Phaethon's favor, would make clear conviction.

There is nothing strictly immortal but Immortality; whatever has no
Beginning may be confident of no End: (all others have a dependent Being, and
within the reach of destruction) which is the peculiar of that necessary
Essence that cannot destroy it self; and the highest strain of Omnipotency, to
be so powerfully constituted, as not to suffer even from the power of it self.
But the sufficiency of Christian Immortality frustrates all earthly glory, and
the quality of either state after death makes a folly of posthumous memory.
God, who can only destroy our Souls, and has assured our Resurrection, either
of our Bodies or Names has directly promised no duration; wherein there is so
much of Chance, that the boldest expectants have found unhappy frustration; and
to hold long subsistence, seems but a escape in Oblivion. But man is a noble
Animal, splendid in Ashes, and pompous in the Grave, solemnizing Nativities and
Deaths with equal Iustre, nor omitting Ceremonies of Bravery in the infamy of
his nature.

Life is a pure Flame, and we live by an invisible Sun within us. A small Fire
suffices for life, great Flames seemed too little after death, while men
vainly affected precious Pyres, and to burn like Sardanapalus. But the wisdom
of Funeral Laws found the folly of prodigal Blazes, and reduced undoing Fires
unto the rule of sober Obsequies, wherein few could be so mean as not to
provide Wood, Pitch, a Mourner, and an Urn.

Five Languages secured not the Epitaph of Gordianus. The man of God lives
longer without a Tomb then any by one, invisibly interred by Angels, and
adjudged to obscurity, though not without some marks directing humane
discovery. Enoch and Elias, without either Tomb or Burial, in an anomalous
state of being, are the great examples of Perpetuity in their long and living
Memory, in strict account being still on this side Death, and having a late
Part yet to act upon this Stage of Earth. If in the decretory term of the world
we shall not all die, but be changed, according to received Translation, the
last Day will make but few Graves; at least quick Resurrections will anticipate
lasting Sepultures: Some Graves will be opened before they be quite closed, and
Lazarus be no wonder, when many that feared to die shall groan that they can
die but once. The dismal state is the second and living Death, when Life puts
despair on the damned; when men shall wish the coverings of Mountains, not of
Monuments, and Annihilation shall be courted.

While some have studied Monuments, others have studiously declined them; and
some have been so vainly boisterous, that they durst not acknowledge their
Graves: wherein Jornandes de rebus Geticis.
Alaricus seems most subtle, who had a River turned to hide his Bones at the
bottom. Even Sylla, that thought himself safe in his Urn, could not prevent
revenging Tongues, and Stones thrown at his Monument. Happy are they whom
Privacy makes innocent; who deal so with men in this world, that they are not
afraid to meet them in the next; who, when they die, make no commotion among
the dead, and are not touched with that poetical taunt of Isaiah Isa. 14. 9.
.

Pyramids, Arches, Obelisks, were but the irregularities of Vainglory, and
wild enormities of ancient Magnanimity. But the most magnanimous resolution
rests in the Christian Religion, which trampleth upon Pride, and sits on the
neck of Ambition, humbly pursuing that infallible Perpetuity unto which all
others must diminish their Diameters, and be poorly seen in Angles of
contingency Angulus eortingentiae the least of Angles.
.

Pious spirts, who pass their days in raptures of Futurity, made little more of
this world then the world that was before it, while they lay obscure in the
Chaos of Preordination, and night of their Fore-beings. And if any have been so
happy as truly to understand Christian Annihilation, Ecstasis, Exsolution,
Liquefaction, Transformation, the Kiss of the Spouse, Gustation of God, and
Ingression into the Divine shadow, they have already had an handsome
anticipation of Heaven; the glory of the World is surely over, and the Earth in
Ashes unto them.

To subsist in lasting Monuments, to live in their productions, to exist in
their Names, and predicament of Chimera's, was large satisfaction unto old
expectations, and made one part of their Elyziums. But all this is nothing in
the Metaphysics of true Belief. To live indeed is to be again our selves,
which being not only an hope, but an evidence, in noble Believers, it is all
one to lie in St. Innocent's In Paris, where Bodies soon consume.
Churchyard, as in the Sands of Egypt; ready to be any thing, in the ecstasie
of being ever, and as content with six foot as the Moles of Adrianus A stately
Mausoleum or sepulchral Pile built by Adrianus in Rome, where now stands the
Castle of St. Angelo.
.

Lucan. -- Tabesne cadavera solvat,
An rogus, haud refert. --
THE Garden of Cyrus; OR, THE QUINCUNCIAL LOZENGE, OR Network Plantations of
the ANCIENTS, Artificially, Naturally, Mystically considered.

By THO. BROWN D. of Physic.

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1668.

Quid Quincunce speciosius, qui, in quam cunque partem spectaueris, rectus est:
Quintilian;

THE Garden of Cyrus, OR, THE QUINCUNCIAL LOZENGE, OR Network Plantations of
the Ancients, Artificially, Naturally, Mystically considered.
CHAP. I.
THAT Vulcan gave Arrows unto Apollo and Diana the fourth day after their
Nativities, according to Gentile Theology, may pass for no blind apprehension
of the Creation of the Sun and Moon in the work of the fourth day; when the
diffased Light contracted into the Orbs and shooting Rays of those Luminaries.
Plainer Descriptions there are from Pagan pens of the creatures of the Fourth
day: While the Plato in Timaeo.
divine Philosopher unhappily omitteth the noblest part of the Third; and Ovid,
(whom many conceive to have borrowed his Description from Moses) coldly
deserting the remarkable account of the Text, in three words Fronde tegi sylvas.
describes this work of the Third day, the Vegetable creation, and first
ornamental Scene of Nature, the primitive Food of Animals, and first story of
Physic, in Dietetical conservation.

For though Physic may plead high, from the medicall act of God in casting so
deep a Sleep upon our first Parent; and Surgery (...), in opening the Flesh;
(...), in taking out the Rib; (...), in closing up the part again.
find its whole Art in that one passage concerning the Rib of Adam: yet is
there no rivality with Garden-contrivance and Herbary. For if Paradise were
planted the third day of the Creation, as wiser divinity concludes, the
Nativity thereof was too early for Horoscopie; Gardens were before Gardiners,
and but some hours after the Earth.

Of deeper doubt is its Topography and Local designation: yet being the
primitive Garden, and without much For some there is from the ambiguity of the
word Mikkedem, whether ab orient, or a principio.
controversy seated in the East; it is more then probable the first Curiosity
and Cultivation of Plants most flourished in those quarters. And since the Ark
of Noah first touched upon some Mountains of Armenia, the Planting Art arose
again in the East, and found its Revolution not far from the place of its
Nativity, about the Plains of those Regions. And if Zoroaster were either Cham,
Chus, or Mizraim, they were early Proficients therein, who left (as Pliny
delivers) a work of Agriculture.

However, the account of the pensil or hanging Gardens of Babylon, if made by
Semiramis, the third or fourth from Nimrod, is of no slender antiquity; which
being not framed upon ordinary level of ground, but raised upon Pillars
admitting under-passages, we cannot accept as the first Babylonian Gardens, but
a more eminent progress and advancement in that Art then any that went before
it; somewhat answering or hinting the old Opinion concerning Paradise it self,
which many conceptions elevated above the plane of the Earth.

Nabuchodonosor, whom some will have to be the famous Syrian King of Diodorus,
beautifully repaired that City, and so magnificently built his Josephus.
hanging Gardens, that from succeeding Writers he had the honor of the first
Author. From whence over-looking Babylon, and all the Region about it, he
found no circumscription to the eye of his Ambition, till over-delighted with
the Bravery of this Paradise, in his melancholic Metamorphosis he found the
folly of that Delight, and a proper punishment in the contrary habitation, in
wild Plantations and Wanderings of the Fields.

The Persian Gallants, who destroyed this Monarchy, maintained their Botanicall
Bravery. Unto whom we owe the very name of Paradise: where with we meet not in
Scripture before the time of Solomon, and it is conceived originally Persian.
The word for that disputed Garden expressing in the Hebrew no more then a Field
enclosed, which from the same Root is content to derive a Garden and a Buckler.

Cyrus the elder, brought up in Woods and Mountains, when time and power
enabled, pursued the dictate of his Education, and brought the Treasures of the
Field into Rule and circumscription; so nobly beautifying the hanging Gardens
of Babylon, that he was also thought to be the Author thereof.

Ahasuerus (whom many conceive to have been Artaxerxes Longimanus) in the
Sushan in Susiana. Plutarch in the life of Artaxerxes.
Country and City of Flowers, and in an open Garden, entertained his Princes
and people; while Vasthi more modestly treated the Ladies within the Palace
thereof.

But if (as some opinion) King Ahasuerus were Artaxerxes Mnemon, that found a
Life and Reign answerable unto his great Memory, our magnified Cyrus was his
second Brother; who gave the occasion of that memorable work, and almost
miraculous Retreat of Xenophon. A person of high spirit and honor, naturally a
King, though fatally prevented by the harmless chance of Post-geniture: not
only a Lord of Gardens, but a manual Planter thereof, disposing his Trees,
like his Armies, in regular ordination. So that while old Laertes has found a
name in Homer for pruning Hedges, and clearing away Thorns and Briars; while
King Attalus lives for his poisonous plantations of Aconites, Henbane,
Hellebore, and Plants hardly admitted within the walls of Paradise; while many
of the Ancients do poorly live in the single names of Vegetables; all Stories
do look upon Cyrus as the splendid and regular Planter.

According whereto Xenophon describes his gallant Plantation at Sardis, thus
rendered by Strebaeus; Xenophon in Oeconomico, (...).
Arbores pari intervallo sitas, rectos ordines, and omnia perpulchre in
Quincuncem directa. Which we shall take for granted, as being accordingly
rendered by the most elegant of the Cicero in Cat. major.
Latins, and by no made term, but in use before by Varro. That is, The Rows
and Orders so handsomely disposed, or five Trees so set together, that a
regular Angularity and through Prospect was left on every side. Owing this name
not only to the quintuple number of Trees, but the Figure declaring that
number, which being doubled at the Angle makes up the Letter ch, that is the
emphatical Decussation, or fundamental Figure.

Now though in some ancient and modern practice the Area or decussated Plot
might be a perfect Square, answerable to a Tuscan Pedestal, and the Quinquernio
or Cinque-point of a Die, wherein by Diagonal lines the Intersection was
regular, accommodable unto Plantations of large-growing Trees, and we must not
deny our selves the advantage of this Order; yet shall we chiefly insist upon
that of Benedict. Curtius de Horti^. Bapt. Port. in vi. la.
Curtius and Porta, in their brief description hereof, wherein the Decussis is
made within a longilateral Square, with opposite Angles acute and obtuse at the
Intersection, and so upon progression making a Rhombus or Lozenge figuration,
which seems very agreeable unto the original Figure: Answerable whereunto we
observe the decussated characters in many Consulary Coins, and even in those of
Constantine and his Sons, which pretend their pattern in the Sky; the
crucigerous Ensign carried this Figure, not transversly or rectangularly
intersected, but in a Decussation, after the form of an Andrean or Burgundian
Cross, which answers this description.

Where by the way we shall decline the old Theme, so traced by Antiquity, of
Crosses and Crucifixion; whereof some being right, and of one single piece,
without Traversion or Transome, do little advantage our subject. Nor shall we
take in the mystical Tau, or the Cross of our Blessed Savior, which, having in
some descriptions an Empedon or crossing Footstay, made not one single
Transversion. And since the learned Lipsius has made some doubt even of the
Cross of St. Andrew, since some Martyrological Histories deliver his death by
the general name of a Cross, and Hippolytus will have him suffer by the Sword;
we should have enough to make out the received Cross of that Martyr. Nor shall
we urge the Labarum and famous Standard of Constantine, or make farther use
thereof, then as the first letters in the Name of our Savior Christ, in use
among Christians before the days of Constantine, to be observed in Of Marius,
Alexander. Roma Sotterranea.
Sepulchral Monuments of Martyrs in the Reigns of Adrian and Antoninus, and to
be found in the Antiquities of the Gentiles before the Advent of Christ, as in
the Medal of King Ptolemy signed with the same Characters, and might be the
beginning of some word or name which Antiquaries have not hit on.

We will not revive the mysterious Crosses of Egypt, with Circles on their
heads, in the Breast of Serapis, and the hands of their Genial spirits, not
unlike the Character of Venus, and looked on by ancient Christians with
relation unto Christ: since, how-ever they first began, the Egyptians thereby
expressed the process and motion of the Spirit of the World, and the diffusion
thereof upon the Celestial and Elemental nature, implied by a Circle and
right-lined Intersection; a Secret in their Telesms and magical Characters
among them. Though he that considers the Wherein the lower part is somewhat
longer, as defined by Upton, De studio militari, and Johannes de Bado Aureo,
cum Comment. clariss. and doctiss. Bissaei.
plain Cross upon the head of the Owl in the Laterane Obelisk, or the Casal. de
Ritibus. Bosio nel^a Trio^fante Croce.
Cross erected upon a Pitcher diffusing streams of water into Basins with
sprinkling Branches in them, and all described upon a two-footed Altar, as in
the Hieroglyphics of the brazen Table of Bembus, will hardly decline all
thought of Christian signality in them.

We shall not call in the Hebrew Tenapha, or ceremony of their Oblations waved
by the Priest unto the four Quarters of the World, after the form of a Cross;
as in the Peace Offerings. And if it were clearly made out, what is remarkably
delivered from the Traditions of the Rabbis, that as the Oil was poured
coronally or circularly upon the head of Kings, so the High Priest was anointed
decussatively or in the form of an X; though it could not escape a typical
thought of Christ from mystical Consideratours, yet being the conceit is
Hebrew, we should rather expect its verification from Analogy in that Language,
then to confine the same unto the unconcerned Letters of Greece, or make it out
by the characters of Cadmus or Palamedes.

Of this Quincuncial Ordination the Ancients practiced much, discoursed little;
and the Moderns have nothing enlarged: which he that more nearly considers in
the form of its square Rhombus and Decussation, with the several commodities,
mysteries, parallelisms and resemblances both in Art and Nature, shall easily
discern the elegancy of this Order.

That this was in some ways of practice in diverse and distant Nations, hints or
deliveries there are from no slender Antiquity. In the hanging-Gardens of
Babylon, from Abydenus, Eusebius, and others, Decussatio ipsa jucundum ac
peramoenum conspectum praebuit. Curt. Hort. l. 6.
Curtius describes this rule of Decussation. In the memorable Garden of
Alcinous, anciently conceived an original fancy from Paradise, mention there
is of well-contrived Order; for so have Didymus and Eustathius expounded the
emphatical word. Diomedes, describing the rural possessions of his Father,
gives account in the same Language of Trees orderly planted. And Ulysses being
a Boy was promised by his Father forty Fig Trees, and fifty (...). Phavorinus.
Philoxenus.
Rows of Vines producing all kind of grapes.

That the Eastern Inhabitants of India made use of such Order, even in open
Plantations, is deducible from Theophrastus; who, describing the Trees whereof
they made their Garments, plainly delivers that they were planted (...), and
in such order that at a distance men would mistake them for Vineyards. The same
seems confirmed in Greece from a singular expression in (...). Polit. 7.
Aristotle concerning the Order of Vines, delivered by a military term
representing the Orders of Soldiers; which also confirms the antiquity of
this form yet used in Vineal plantations.

That the same was used in Latin Plantations is plainly confirmed from the
commending pen of Varro, Quintilian, and handsome Description of Indulge
ordinibus; nec secins omnis in unguem, Arboribus positis, secto via limite
quadret. Georg. 2.
Virgil.

That the first Plantations not long after the Flood were disposed after this
manner, the generality and antiquity of this Order observed in Vine-yards and
Vine-plantations affords some conjecture. And since, from judicious enquiry,
Saturn* who divided the world between his three Sons, who bears a Sickle in
his hand, who taught the Plantations of Vines, the setting, grafting of Trees,
and the best part of Agriculture, is discovered to be Noah; whether this
early-dispersed Husbandry in Vineyards had not its Original in that Patriarch,
is no such Paralogical doubt.

And if it were clear that this was used by Noah after the Flood, I could
easily believe it was in use before it; not willing to fix such ancient
inventions to higher original then Noah; nor readily conceiving those aged
Heroes, whose diet was vegetable, and only or chiefly consisted in the Fruits
of the earth, were much deficient in their splendid Cultivations, or after the
experience of fifteen hundred years left much for future discovery in Botanical
Agriculture; nor fully persuaded that Wine was the invention of Noah; that
fermented Liquours, which often make themselves, so long escaped their Luxury
or experience; that the first sin of the new world was no sin of the old; that
Cain and Abel were the first that offered Sacrifice; or, because the Scripture
is silent, that Adam or Isaac offered none at all.

Whether Abraham, brought up in the first planting Country, observed not some
rule hereof when he planted a Grove at Beer-sheba, or whether at least a like
Ordination were not in the Garden of Solomon, probability may contest;
answerably unto the wisdom of that eminent Botanologer, and orderly disposer
of all his other works: especialy since this was one piece of* Gallantry
wherein he pursued the specious part of Felicity, according to his own
description; I made me Gardens and Orchards, Eccles. 2.
and planted Trees in them of all kinds of fruit. I made me Pools of water, to
water therewith the wood that brings forth Trees; which was no ordinary
Plantation, if, according to the Targum, or Chaldee Paraphrase, it contained
all kinds of Plants, and some fetched as far as India, and the extent thereof
were from the wall of Jerusalem unto the water of Siloah.

And if Jordan were but Jaar Eden, that is, the River of Eden, Genesar but
Gansar, or the prince of Gardens; and it could be made out, that the Plain of
Jordan were watered not comparatively, but causally, and because it was the
Paradise of God, as the learned Vet. Testamenti Pharus.
Abramas hinteth; he was not far from the Prototype and original of
Plantations. And since even in Paradise itself the Tree of Knowledge was placed
in the middle of the Garden, whatever was the ambient Figure, there wanted not
a Center and rule of Decussation. Whether the Groves and sacred Plantations of
Antiquity were not thus orderly placed, either by Quaternio's or quintuple
Ordinations, may favorably be doubted. For since they were so methodical in
the constitutions of their Temples, as to observe the due situation, aspect,
manner, form and order in Architectonical relations, whether they were not as
distinct in their Groves and Plantations about them in form and species
respectively unto their Deities, is not without probability of conjecture. And
in their Groves of the Sun this was a fit number, by multiplication to denote
the Days of the Year; and might hieroglyphically speak as much as the mystical
Statua of Which King Numa set up with his Fingers so disposed, that they
numerically denoted 365. Pliny.
Janus in the Language of his Fingers. And since they were so critical in the
number of his Horses, the strings of his Harp, and Rays about his Head,
denoting the Orbs of Heaven, the Seasons and Months of the Year; witty Idolatry
would hardly be flat in other appropriations.

CHAP. II.
NOR was this only a form of practice in Plantations, but found imitation from
high Antiquity in sundry Artificial Contrivances and manual Operations. For, to
omit the position of Squared Stones cuneatim or wedge-wise in the Walls of
Roman and Gothic Buildings, and the Lithostrota or figured Pavements of the
Ancients, which consisted not all of Square stones, but were divided into
triquetrous Segments, Honey-combs, and sexangular Figures, according to
Vitruvius; the squared Stones and Bricks in ancient Fabrics were placed after
this order, and two above or below conjoined by a middle-stone or Plinthus,
observable in the Ruins of Forum Nervae, the Mausoleum of Augustus, the Pyramid
of Cestius, and the sculpture-draughts of the larger Pyramids of Egypt. And
therefore in the draughts of eminent Fabrics Painters do commonly imitate this
Order in the lines of their description.

In the Laureat draughts of Sculpture and Picture the Leaves and foliate works
are commonly thus contrived, which is but in imitation of the Pulvinaria and
ancient Pillow-work, observable in Ionick pieces about Columns, Temples and
Altars. To omit other Analogies in Architectonical Draughts; which Art it self
is founded upon Of a Structure five parts, Fundamentum, Parietes, Aperturae,
Compartitio, Tectum, Leo Alberti: Five Columns, Tuscan, Dorick, Ionick,
Coriathian, Compound: Five different Intercolumniations, Pycnostylos,
Diastylos, Systylos, Araeostylos, Enstylos. Vitruv.
Fives, as having its Subject and most graceful pieces divided by this Number.

The Triumphal, Oval, and Civical Crowns of Laurel, Oak, and Myrtle, when fully
made, were plaited after this order. And, to omit the Crossed Crowns of
Christian Princes, of what figure that was which Anastasius described upon the
Head of Leo the third, or who first brought in the Arched Crown; that of
Charles the Great (which seems the first remarkably-closed Crown) was framed
after this Uti constat ex pergamena apud Chiffler. in B. R. Brurellis, and
Icon. Fam. Stradae.
manner, with an Intersection in the middle from the main crossing Bars, and
the Interspaces unto the Frontal circle continued by handsome Network-plaits,
much after this order. Whereon we shall not insist, because from greater
Antiquity, and practice of Consecration, we meet with the Radiated and Starry
Crown upon the Head of Augustus, and many succeeding Emperors; since the
Armenians and Parthians had a peculiar Royal Cap, and the Graecians from
Alexander another kind of Diadem. And even Diadems themselves were but
Fasciations and handsome Ligatures about the Heads of Princes; not wholly
omitted in the Mitral Crown, which common Picture seems to set too upright and
forward upon the Head of Aaron; worn sometimes singly or doubly by Princes,
according to their Kingdoms, and no more to be expected from two Crowns at
once upon the Head of Ptolemy. And so easily made out when Historians tell us,
some bound up wounds, some hanged themselves with Diadems.

The Beds of the Ancients were corded somewhat after this fashion; that is, not
directly, as ours at present, but obliquely, from side to side, and after the
manner of Network; whereby they strengthened the Spondae or Bedsides, and spent
less Cord in the work, as is demonstrated by Ariston Mechan. quaest.
Blancanus.

And as they lay in crossed Beds, so they sat upon seeming crosse-legg'd Seats;
in which form the noblest thereof were framed; observable in the Triumphal
Seats, the Sella Curulis or Aedile Chair, in the Coins of Cestius, Sylla, and
Julius. That they sat also crosse-legg'd many noble Draughts declare; and in
this figure the sitting Gods and Goddesses are drawn in Medalls and Medallions.
And beside this kind of work in Retiarie and hanging Tectures, in Embroideries
and eminent Needle-works, the like is obvious unto every eye in Glass-windows:
nor only in Glassie contrivances, but also in Lattice and Stone-work,
conceived in the Temple of Solomon, wherein the Windows are termed Fenestrae
reticulatae, or Lights (...)
framed like Nets; and agreeable unto the Greek expression concerning Christ in
the Cant. 2. 9.
Canticles looking through the Nets, which ours has rendered, He looks forth
at the windows, showing himself through the Lattesse, that is, partly seen and
unseen, according to the visible and invisible side of his nature. To omit the
noble Reticulate work in the Chapiters of the Pillars of Solomon, with Lillies
and Pomegranates upon a Network-ground; and the Craticula or Grate through
which the Ashes fell in the Altar of Burnt-offerings.

That the Networks and Nets of Antiquity were little different in the from from
ours at present, is confirmable from the Nets in the hands of the Retiarie
Gladiators, the proper Combatants with the Secutores. To omit the ancient
Conopeion or Gnat-net of the Egyptians, the inventers of that Artifice; the
rushy Labyrinths of Theocritus; the Nosegay-nets, which hung from the Head
under the Nostrils of Princes; and that uneasy metaphor of Reticulum Jecoris,
which some expound the Lobe, we the Caul above the Liver. As for that famous
Network of Vulcan, which enclosed (...)
Mars and Venus, and caused that unextinguishable Laugh in Heaven; since the
Gods themselves could not discern it, we shall not pry into it: although why
Vulcan bound them, Neptune loosed them, and Apollo should first discover them,
might afford no vulgar Mythologie. Heralds De Armis scaccatis, masculatis,
invectis, fuselatis, vide Spelm. Aspilog. and Upton. cum crudit. Bissaeo.
have not omitted this Order or imitation thereof, whiles they symbolically
adorn their Scutcheons with Mascles, Fusils and Saltirs, and while they dispose
the figures of Ermins and varied Coats in this Quincuncial method.

The same is not forgot by Lapidaries, while they cut their Gemms pyramidally,
or by aequicrural Triangles. Perspective Pictures, in their Base, Horizon, and
lines of Distances, cannot escape these Rhomboidal Decussations. Sculptors in
their strongest Shadows after this order do draw their double Haches: And the
very Americans do naturally fall upon it in their neat and curious Textures,
which is also observed in the elegant Artifices of Europe. But this is no law
unto the Woof of the neat Retiarie Spider, which seems to weave without
Transversion, and by the union of As in the contention between Minerva and
Arachne.
Right lines to make out a continued Surface; which is beyond the common Art of
Textury, and may still nettle Minerva, the Goddess of that Mystery. And he
that shall hatch the little Seeds, either found in small Webs or white round
Eggs carried under the bellies of some Spiders, and behold how at their first
production in Boxes they will presently fill the same with their Webs, may
observe the early and untaught finger of Nature, and how they are natively
provided with a stock sufficient for such Texture.

The rural Charm against Dodder, Tetter, and strangling Weeds, was contrived
after this Order, while they placed a chalked Tile at the four corners, and one
in the middle of their Fields; which though ridiculous in the intention, was
rational in the contrivance, and a good way to diffuse the Magic through all
parts of the Area.

Somewhat after this manner they ordered the little Stones in the old Game of
Pentalithismus, or casting up five Stones to catch them on the back of their
hand. And with some resemblance hereof the Proci or prodigal Paramours disposed
their men, when they played In Eustathius.
Penelope: For being themselves an hundred and eight, they set fifty four
Stones on either side, and one in the middle, which they called Penelope, which
he that hit was Master of the Game.

In Chesse-boards and Tables we yet find Pyramids and Squares: I wish we had
their true and ancient description, far different from ours, or the Chec-mate
of the Persians, and might continue some elegant remarkables, as being an
invention as high as Hermes the Secretary of Osiris, figuring Plato.
the whole World, the Motion of the Planets, with Eclipses of Sun and Moon.

Physicians are not without the use of this Decussation in several Operations,
in Ligatures and Union of dissolved Continuities. Mechanics make use hereof in
forcipal Organs and Instruments of Incision: wherein who can but magnify the
power of Decussation, inservient to contrary ends, Solution and Consolidation,
Union and Division, illustrable from Aristotle in the old Nucifragium or
Nut-cracker, and the Instruments of Evulsion, Compression or Incision; which
consisting of two Vectes or Arms converted toward each other, the innitency
and stress being made upon the Hypomochlion or Fulciment in the Decussation,
the greater Compression is made by the Union of two Impulsors?

The Roman In the disposure of the Legions in the Wars of the Republic, before
the division of the Legion into ten Cohorts by the Emperors. Salmas. in his
Epistle a Monsieur de Peiresc, de Re militari Romanorum.
Battalia was ordered after this manner, whereof, as sufficiently known, Virgil
has left but an hint and obscure intimation. For thus were the Maniples and
Cohorts of the Hastati, Principes and Triarii placed in their Bodies, wherein
consisted the strength of the Roman Battle. By this Ordination they readily
fell into each other: the Hastati being pressed, handsomely retired into the
Intervalls of the Principes, these into that of the Triarii; which making as it
were a new Body, might jointly renew the Battle, wherein consisted the secret
of their Successes. And therefore it was remarkably Polybius. Appianus.
singular in the Battle of Africa, that Scipio, fearing a Rout from the
Elephants of the Enemy, left not the Principes in their alternate distances,
whereby the Elephants passing the Vacuities of the Hastati might have run upon
them, but drew his Battle into right order, and leaving the passages bare,
defeated the mischief intended by the Elephants. Out of this Figure were made
two remarkable forms of Battle, the Cuneus and Forceps, or the Shear and
Wedge-Battels, each made of half a Rhombus, and but differenced by position.
The Wedge invented to break or work into a Body, the Forceps to environ and
defeat the power thereof, composed out of the selectest Soldiery, and disposed
into the form of an V, wherein receiving the Wedge, it enclosed it on both
sides. After this form the famous Agathias* Ammianus.
Narses ordered his Battle against the Franks; and by this Figure the Almans
were enclosed, and cut in pieces.

The Rhombus or Lozenge-figure, so visible in this Order, was also a remarkable
form of Battle in the Grecian Aelian. Tact.
Cavalry, observed by the Thessalians and Philip King of Macedon, and
frequently by the Parthians, as being most ready to turn every way, and best to
be commanded, as having its Ductors or Commanders at each Angle.

The Macedonian Phalanx (a long time thought invincible) consisted of a long
Square. For though they might be sixteen in rank and file, yet when they shut
close, so that the sixth Pike advanced before the first, though the number
might be square, the Figure was oblong, answerable unto the Quincuncial
Quadrate of Curtius. According to this Square Thucydides delivers the Athenians
disposed their Battle against the Lacedaemonians, (...)
Brick-wise; and by the same word the learned Gnellius expounds the Quadrat
of Secto via limite quadret* Comment. in Virg.
Virgil, after the form of a Brick or Tile.

And as the first Station and position of Trees, so was the first Habitation of
men, not in round Cities, as of later foundation; for the form of Babylon, the
first City, was square, and so shall also be the last, according to the
description of the Holy City in the Apocalypse. The famous Pillars of Seth
before the Flood had also the like Foundation, if they were but Antidiluvian
Obelisks, and such as Cham and his Agyptian race imitated after the Flood.

But Ninive, which Authors acknowledge to have exceeded Babylon, was of a
Diod. Sic.
longilateral Figure, ninety five Furlongs broad, and an hundred and fifty
long, and so making about sixty miles in circuit, which is the measure of three
days journey, according unto military Marches, or castrensial Mansions. So that
if Jonas entered at the narrower side, he found enough for one day's walk to
attain the Heart of the City, to make his Proclamation. And if we imagine a
City extending from Ware to London, the expression will be moderate of sixscore
thousand Infants, although we allow Vacuities, Fields, and Intervalls of
habitation; as there needs must be, when the Monument of Ninus took up no less
then ten Furlongs.

And though none of the seven Wonders, yet a noble piece of Antiquity, and made
by a Copy exceeding all the rest, had its principal parts disposed after this
manner, that is, the Labyrinth of Crete, built upon a long Quadrate, containing
five large Squares, communicating by right Inflexions terminating in the Center
of the middle Square and Lodging of the Minotaur, if we conform unto the
description of the elegant Medal thereof in Antonio Agostino detle Medaglie.
Agostino. And though in many accounts we reckon grossly by the Square, yet is
that very often to be accepted as a long-sided Quadrate; which was the figure
of the Ark of the Covenant, the Table of the Shewbread, and the Stone wherein
the names of the twelve Tribes were engraved, that is, three in a row,
naturally making a longilateral Figure, the perfect Quadrate being made by nine.

What Figure the Stones themselves maintained, Tradition and Scripture are
silent; yet Lapidaries in precious Stones affect a Table or long Square, and in
such proportion, that the two lateral and also the three inferior Tables are
equal unto the superior, and the Angles of the lateral Tables contain and
constitute the Hypotenusae or broader sides subtending.

That the Tables of the Law were of this Figure, general imitation and
Tradition has confirmed: yet are we unwilling to load the shoulders of Moses
with such massy Stones as some Pictures lay upon them, since it is plainly
delivered that he came down with them in his hand; since the word strictly
taken implies no such massy hewing, but cutting and fashioning of them into
shape and surface; since some will have them Emeralds, and if they were made of
the materials of Mount Sina, it is not improbable that they were Marble; since
the Words were not many, the Letters short of five hundred, and the Tables
written on both sides required no such capacity.

The Beds of the Ancients were different from ours at present, which are almost
square, being framed oblong, and about a double unto their breadth; not much
unlike the Area or Bed of this Quincuncial Quadrate. The single Beds of Greece
were Aristot. Mcchan.
six foot and a little more in length, three in breadth. The Giant-like Bed of
Og, which had four Cubits of breadth, nine and a half in length, varied not
much from this proportion. The Funeral-Bed of King Cheops, in the greater
Pyramid, which holds seven in length, and four foot in breadth, had no great
difformity from this measure: And whatsoever were the breadth, the length could
hardly be less of the tyrannical Bed of Procrustes, since in a shorter measure
he had not been fitted with persons for his cruelty of Extension. But the old
Sepulchral Bed or Amazonian Plut. in vita These.
Tomb in the Marketplace of Megara was in the form of a Lozenge, readily made
out by the composure of the Body. For the Arms not lying fasciated or wrapped up
after the Grecian manner, but in a middle distension, the including lines will
strictly make out that Figure.

CHAP. III.
NOW although this elegant ordination of Vegetables has found coincidence or
imitation in sundry works of Art; yet is it not also destitute of Natural
examples, and, though overlooked by all, was elegantly observable in several
works of Nature.

Could we satisfy our selves in the position of the Lights above, or discover
the wisdom of that Order so invariably maintained in the fixed Stars of
Heaven; could we have any light, why the Stellary part of the first Mass
separated into this Order, that the Girdle of Orion should ever maintain its
line, and the two Stars in Charles's Wain never leave pointing at the
Pole Star; we might abate the Pythagorical Music of the Spheres, the sevenfold
Pipe of Pan, and the strange Cryptography of Gaffarel in his Starry Book of
Heaven.

But not to look so high as Heaven, or the single Quincunx of the Hyades upon
the neck of Taurus, the Triangle and remarkable Crusero about the foot of the
Centaur; observable rudiments there are hereof in subterraneous Concretions and
Bodies in the earth; in the Gypsum or Taleum Rhomboides, in the Favaginites or
Honey-comb-stone, in the Asteria and Astroites, and in the crucigerous Stone of
S. Jago of Gallicia.

The same is observably effected in the Iulus, Catkins, or pendulous
Excrescencies of several Trees, of Walnuts, Alders and Hazels, which hanging
all the Winter, and maintaining their Network close, by the expansion thereof
are the early foretellers of the Spring; discoverable also in long Pepper, and
elegantly in the Iulus of Calamus aromaticus, so plentifully growing with us in
the first Palms of Willows, and in the Flowers of Sycamore, Petasites,
Asphodelus, and Blattaria, before explication* After such order stand the
flowery Branches in our best-spread Verbascum, and the Seeds about the spicous
head or torch of Tapsus barbatus, in as Capitula squamata Querc. Bauhini,
whereof though he says perraro reperiuntur, his tantum invenimus, yet we find
them commonly with us, and in great numbers.
fair a regularity as the circular and wreathed order will admit, which
advances one side of the Square, and makes the same Rhomboidal.

In the squamous Heads of Scabious, Knapweed, and the elegant Jacea Pinan, and
in the scaly composure of the Oak-rose, which some years most abounds. After
this Order has Nature planted the Leaves in the head of the common and
prickled Artichoak, wherein the black and shining Flies do shelter themselves,
when they retire from the purple Flower about it. The same is also found in the
Pricks, Sockets and impressions of the Seeds, in the Pulp or bottom thereof;
wherein do elegantly stick the Fathers of their Mother. To omit the Quincuncial
Specks on the top of the Miscle-berry, especially that which grows upon the
Tilia or Lime-Tree; and the remarkable disposure of those yellow Fringes
Anthol. Graec. inter Epigrammata (...). Especially the Porus cervinus Imperati,
Sporosa, Alga (...) Bauhini.
about the purple Pestill of Aron, and elegant clusters of Dragons, so
peculiarly secured by Nature with an Umbrella or skreening Leaf about them.

The spongy Leaves of some Sea-wrecks, Fucus, Oaks in their several kinds,
found about the Shore with ejectments of the Sea, are overwrought with Network
elegantly containing this Order; which plainly declares the naturality of this
Texture, and how the Needle of Nature delights to work even in low and
doubtful Vegetations.

The Arbustetum or Thicket on the head of the Teazil may be observed in this
Order: And he that considers that Fabric so regularly palisado'd and stemmed
with Flowers of the royal color, in the house of the solitary Maggot may find
the Seraglio of Solomon; and contemplating the calicular Shafts and uncoas
disposure of their extremities, so accommodable unto the office of Abstersion,
not condemn as wholly improbable the conceit of those who accept it for the
herb Jer. 2. 22.
Borith. Where by the way we could with much inquiry never discover any
transfiguration in this abstemious Insect, although we have kept them long in
their proper Houses and Boxes, where some, wrapped up in their Webs, have lived
upon their own Bowels from September unto July.

In such a Grove do walk the little Creepers about the head of the Burre. And
such an order is observed in the aculeous prickly Plantation upon the heads of
several common Thistles, remarkably in the notable Palisadoes about the flower
of the Milk-thistle: And he that inquireth into the little bottom of the
Globe-thistle, may find that gallant Bush arise from a Scalp of like disposure.

The white Umbrella or medicall bush of Elder is an Epitome of this Order,
arising from five main Stemms Quincuncially disposed, and tolerably maintained
in their subdivisions. To omit the lower observations in the seminal Spike of
Mercury wild and Plantane.

Thus has Nature ranged the Flowers of Santfoyn and French Honysuckle; and
somewhat after this manner has ordered the bush in Jupiter's Beard, or
House-leek, which old Superstition set on the tops of houses as a defensative
against Lightning and Thunder. The like in Fenny Seagreen, or the Water-
Stratiotes.
Soldier; which, though a military name from Greece, makes out the Roman Order.

A like ordination there is in the favaginous Sockets and Lozenge-seeds of the
noble Flower of the Sun, wherein in Lozenge-figured Boxes Nature shuts up the
Seeds and Balsame which is about them.

But the Fur and Pine Tree from their Fruits do naturally dictate this
position: the Rhomboidal protuberances in Pine-apples maintaining this
Quincuncial Order unto each other, and each Rhombus in it self. Thus are also
disposed the triangular Foliations in the conicall Fruit of the Firretree,
orderly shadowing and protecting the winged Seeds below them.

The like so often occurreth to the curiosity of Observers, especially in
spicated Seeds and Flowers, that we shall not need to take in the single
Quincunx of Fuchsius in the growth of the male Fern, the seedy disposure of
Gramen Ischaemon, and the Trunk or neat Reticulate work in the Cod of the
Sachell-palm.

For even in very many round-stalked Plants the Leaves are set after a
quintuple Ordination, the first Leaf answering the fifth in lateral
disposition; wherein the Leaves successively rounding the Stalk, in four at the
farthest the Compass is absolved, and the fifth Leaf or Sprout returns to the
position of the other fifth before it; as in accounting upward is often
observable in furre-Pelitory, Ragweed, the Sprouts of Oaks, and Thorns upon
Pollards, and very remarkable in the regular disposure of the rugged
excrescencies in the yearly Shoots of the Pine.

But in square-stalked Plants the Leaves stand respectively unto each other,
either in cross or decussation to those above or below them, arising at cross
positions; whereby they shadow not each other, and better resist the force of
Winds, which in a parallel situation and upon square Stalks would more forcibly
beat upon them.

And to omit, how Leaves and Sprouts which compass not the Stalk are often set
in a Rhomboides, and, making long and short Diagonals, do stand like the Legs
of Quadrupedes when they go; nor to urge the thwart enclosure and furdling of
Flowers and Blossoms before explication, as in the multiplied Leaves of
Pionie; and the Chiasmus in five-leaved Flowers, while one lies wrapped about the
staminous Beards, the other four obliquely shutting and closing upon each
other; and how even Flowers which consist of four Leaves stand not ordinarily
in three and one, but two and two cross-wise unto the Stylus: even the Autumnal
Buds, which await the return of the Sun, do after the Winter Solstice multiply
their calicular Leaves, making little Rhombus's and Network-figures, as in the
Sycamore and Lilac.

The like is discoverable in the original production of Plants, which first
putting forth two Leaves, those which succeed bear not over each other, but
shoot obliquely or cross-wise, until the Stalk appears, which sends not
forth its first Leaves without all order unto them: and he that from hence can
discover in what position the two first Leaves did arise, is no ordinary
Observator.

Where, by the way, he that observes the rudimental Spring of Seeds, shall
find strict rule, although not after this order. How little is required unto
effectual Generation, and in what diminutives the Plastic Principle lodges,
is exemplified in Seeds, wherein the greater mass affords so little
comproduction. In Beans the Leaf and Root sprout from the Germen, the main
sides split and lie by; and in some pulled up near the time of Blooming we have
found the pulpous sides entire or little wasted. In Acorns the Neb dilating
splitteth the two sides, which sometimes lie whole when the Oak is sprouted two
handfuls. In Lupins these pulpy sides do sometimes arise with the Stalk in a
resemblance of two fat Leaves. Wheat and Rye will grow up, if, after they have
shot some tender Roots, the adhering Pulp be taken from them. Beans will
prosper though a part be cut away, and so much set as suffices to contain and
keep the Germen close. From this superfluous Pulp, in unkindly and wet years,
may arise that multiplicity of little Insects which infest the Roots and
Sprouts of tender Grains and Pulses.

In the little Neb or fructifying principle the motion is regular, and not
transvertible, as to make that ever the Leaf which Nature intends the Root;
observable from their Conversion until they attain their right position, if
Seeds be set inversedly.

In vain we expect the production of Plants from different parts of the Seed;
from the same Corculum or little original proceed both Germinations: and in the
power of this slender particle lie many Roots, that though the same be pulled
away, the generative particle will renew them again, and proceed to a perfect
Plant: And Malt may be observed to grow, though the Cooms be fallen from it.

The Seminal Neb has a defined and single place, and not extended unto both
extremes. And therefore many too vulgarly conceive that Barley and Oats grow at
both ends; for they arise from one punctilio or generative Neb, and the Spear,
sliding under the Husk, first appears nigh the top. But in Wheat and Rye,
being bare, the Sprouts are seen together. If Barley unhulled would grow, both
would appear at once. But in this and Oat-meal the Neb is broken away; which
makes them the milder food, and less apt to raise Fermentation in Decoctions.

Men taking notice of what is outwardly visible, conceive a sensible priority
in the Root. But as they begin from one part, so they seem to start and set out
upon one signal of Nature. In Beans yet soft, in Pease while they adhere unto
the Cod, the rudimental Leaf and Root are discoverable. In the Seeds of Rocket
and Mustard, sprouting in Glasses of water, when the one is manifest, the other
is also perceptible. In muddy waters, apt to breed Duck-weed and Perwinkles, if
the first and rudimental strokes of Duck-weed be observed, the Leaves and Root
anticipate not each other. But in the Date-stone the first Sprout is neither
Root nor Leaf distinctly, but both together: For the Germination being to pass
through the narrow Navel and hole about the midst of the Stone, the generative
Germ is fain to inlengthen it self, and shooting out about an inch, at that
distance divides into the ascending and descending portion.

And though it be generally thought that Seeds will root at that end where they
adhere to their Originals, and observable it is that the Neb sits most often
next the Stalk, as in Grains, Pulses, and most small Seeds; yet is it hardly
made out in many greater Plants. For in Acorns* Almonds, Pistachios, Walnuts,
and acuminated Shells, the Germ puts forth at the remotest part of the Pulp.
And therefore to set Seeds in that posture wherein the Leaf and Roots may shoot
right without contortion or forced circumvolution, which might render them
strongly rooted and straighter, were a Criticism in Agriculture. And Nature
seems to have made some provision hereof in many from their Figure, that as
they fall from the Tree they may lie in positions agreeable to such advantages.

Beside the open and visible Testicles of Plants, the seminal Pores lie ingreat
part invisible, while the Sun finds Polypody in Stone-walls, the little
stinging Nettle and Nightshade in barren sandy Highways, Scurvy Grass in
Greenland, and unknown Plants brought in earth from remote Countries. Beside
the known longevity of some Trees, what is the most lasting Herb or Seed seems
not easily determinable. Mandrakes upon known account have lived near an
hundred years. Seeds found in Wild-Fowls Gizzards have sprouted in the earth.
The Seeds of Marjoram and Stramonium, carelessly kept, have grown after seven
years. Even in Garden-plots longfallow, and dug up, the Seeds of Blattaria
and yellow Henbane after twelve years burial have produced themselves again.

That Bodies are first Spirits Paracelsus could affirm, which in the maturation
In met, cum Cabeo.
of Seeds and Fruits seems obscurely implied by Aristotle, when he delivers
that the spirituous parts are converted into Water, and the Water into Earth;
and attested by observation in the maturative progress of Seeds, wherein at
first may be discerned a flatuous distention of the Husk, afterward a thin
Liquour, which longer time digesteth into a Pulp or Kernel, observable in
Almonds and large Nuts; and someway answered in the progressionall perfection
of animal Semination, in its spermaticall maturation from crude pubescency unto
perfection. And even that Seeds themselves in their rudimentall discoveries
appear in foliaceous Surcles or Sprouts within their Coverings, in a diaphanous
Jellie, before deeper incrassation, is also visibly verified in Cherries,
Acorns, Plums.

From Seminal considerations, either in reference unto one another, or
distinction from animal production, the Holy Scripture describes the Vegetable
creation; and while it divides Plants but into Herb and Tree, though it
seems to make but an accidental Division from magnitude, it tacitly
contains the natural distinction of Vegetables observed by Herbarists, and
comprehending the four kinds. For since the most natural distinction is made
from the production of Leaf or Stalk, and Plants after the two first seminal
Leaves do either proceed to send forth more Leaves, or a Stalk; the folious and
stalky emission distinguishes Herbs and Trees, and stand authentically
differenced but from the accidents of the Stalk.

The equivocal production of things under undiscerned Principles makes a large
part of Generation, though they seem to hold a wide Univocacy in their set and
certain Originals, while almost every Plant breeds its peculiar Insect, most a
Butterfly, Moth or Fly; werein the Oak seems to contain the largest Seminality,
while the Iulus, Oak-Apple, Dill, woolly Tuft, foraminous Roundles upon the
Leaf, and Grapes under ground, make a Fly with some difference. The great
variety of Flies lies in the variety of their Originals. In the Seeds of
Caterpillars or Cankers there lies not only a Butterfly or Moth, but, if they
be steril or untimely cast, their production is often a Fly; which we have also
observed from corrupted and mouldred Eggs both of Hens and Fishes. To omit the
generation of Bees out of the Bodies of dead Heifers, or, what is strange, yet
well attested, the production of Eels in the backs of living Cods and Perches
Schoneveldus de Pisc.


The exiguity and smalness of some Seeds extending to large productions is one
of the Magnalities of Nature, somewhat illustrating the work of the Creation,
and vast production from Nothing. The true ( Doctissim. Laurenburg. Hort.
) Seeds of Cypress and Rampions are indistinguishable by old eyes. Of the Seeds
of Tobacco a thousand make not one grain. The disputed Seeds of Hart's-tongue
and Maidenhair require a greater number. From such undiscernible Seminalities
arise spontaneous Productions. He that would discern the rudimentall stroke of
a Plant, may behold it in the Original of Duckweed, at the bigness of a pin's
point, from convenient water in Glasses; wherein a watchful eye may also
discover the puncticular Originals of Perwincles and Gnats.

That Seeds of some Plants are less then any Animals seems of no clear
decision. That the biggest of Vegetables exceeds the biggest of Animals in
full bulk and all dimensions admits exception in the Whale, which in length and
above-ground measure will also contend with tall Oaks. That the richest Odor
of Plants surpasses that of Animals may seem of some doubt, since animal-Musk
seems to excel the vegetable, and we find so noble a sent in the Tulip-Fly
and ( The long and tender green Capricornus, rarely found: we could never meet
with but two.
) Goat-Beetle.

Now whether seminal Nebs hold any sure proportion unto seminal Enclosures, why
the form of the Germ does not answer the figure of the enclosing Pulp; why the
Neb is seated upon the solid and not the chanell'd side of the Seed, as in
Grains; why, since we often meet with two Yolks in one Shell, and sometimes one
Egg within another, we do not oftener meet with two Nebs in one distinct Seed;
why, since the Eggs of a Hen laid at one course do commonly outweigh the Bird,
and some Moths coming out of their Cases, without assistence of food, will lay
so many Eggs as to outweigh their Bodies, Trees rarely bear their Fruit in that
gravity or proportion; whether in the germination of Seeds, according to
Hippocrates, the lighter part ascends and makes the Sprout, the heaviest
tending downward frames the Root, since we observe that the first Shoot of
Seeds in water will sink or bow down at the upper and leafing end; whether it
be not more rational Epicurism to contrive whole dishes out of the Neb, and
spirited particles of Plants, then from the Gallatures and Treddles of Eggs,
since that part is found to hold no seminal share in Oval Generation: are
Quere's which might enlarge, but must conclude this Digression.

And though not in this Order, yet how Nature delights in this Number, and
what consent and coordination there is in the Leaves and parts of Flowers, it
cannot escape our observation in no small number of Plants. For the calicular
or supporting and closing Leaves do answer the number of the Flowers,
especially in such as exceed not the number of Swallows Eggs; as in Violets,
Stitchwort Blossoms: and Flowers of one Leaf have often five divisions,
answered by a like number of calicular Leaves; as Gentianella, Convolvulus,
Bell-flowers. In many the Flowers, Blades, or staminous Shoots and Leaves are
all equally five; as in Cockle, Mullein, and Blattaria, wherein the Flowers
before explication are pentagonally wrapped up, with some resemblance of the
Blatta or Moth, from whence it has its name. But the contrivance of Nature is
singular in the opening and shutting of Bindeweeds, performed by five
inflexures, distinguishable by pyramidicall figures and also different colors.

The Rose at first is thought to have been of five Leaves, as it yet grows
wild among us; but in the most luxuriant the calicular Leaves do still
maintain that number. But nothing is more admired then the five Brethren of the
Rose, and the strange disposure of the Appendices or Beards in the calicular
Leaves thereof; which, in despair of resolution, is tolerably salved from this
contrivance, best ordered and suited for the free closure of them before
explication. For those two which are smooth and of no Beard are contrived to
lie undermost, as without prominent parts, and fit to be smoothly covered; the
other two which are beset with Beards on either side stand outward and
uncovered; but the fifth or half-bearded Leaf is covered on the bare side, but
on the open side stands free, and bearded like the other.

Besides a large number of Leaves have five divisions, and may be circumscribed
by a Pentagon or figure of five Angles, made by right lines from the extremity
of their Leaves; as in Maple, Vine, Fig Tree. But five-leaved Flowers are
commonly disposed circularly about the Stylus; according to the higher Geometry
of Nature, dividing a Circle by five Radii, which concur not to make
Diameters, as in quadrilateral and sexangular Intersections.

Now the number of Five is remarkable in every Circle, not only as the first
spherical Number, but the measure of spherical Motion. For spherical Bodies
move by Fives; and every globular Figure, placed upon a Plane, in direct
volutation returns to the first point of Contaction in the first touch,
accounting by the Axes of the Diameters or Cardinal Points of the four quarters
thereof: and before it arriveth unto the same Point again, it makes five
Circles equal unto it self, in each progress from those quarters absolving an
equal Circle.

By the same Number does Nature divide the Circle of the Sea-star, and in that
order and number disposes those elegant Semi-circles or dental Sockets and
Eggs in the Sea-Hedge-hog. And no mean Observation hereof there is in the
Mathematics of the neatest Retiary Spider, which concluding in forty four
Circles, from five Semidiameters begins that elegant Texture.

And after this manner does lay the foundation of the circular Branches of the
Oak, which being five-cornered in the tender annual Sprouts, and manifesting
upon incision the signature of a Star, is after made circular, and swelled into
a round Body. Which practice of Nature is become a point of Art, and makes two
Problems in Euclide. But the Briar, which sends Elem. li. 4*
forth Shoots and Prickles from its Angles, maintains its pentagonal Figure,
and the unobserved signature of a handsome Porch within it. To omit the five
small Buttons dividing the Circle of the Ivy-berry, and the five characters in
the Winter-stalk of the Wall-nut, with many other Observables, which cannot
escape the eyes of signal Discerners; such as know where to find Ajax his name
in Gallitricum, or Aaron's Mitre in Henbane.

Quincuncial forms and Ordinations are also observable in Animal Figurations.
For to omit the Hyoides or Throat-bone of Animals; the Furcula or Merry-thought
in Birds, which supporteth the Scapulae, affording a passage for the Winde-pipe
and the Gullet; the Wings of Flies, and disposure of their Legs in their first
formation from Maggots, and the position of their Horns, Wings and Legs in
their Aurelian Cases and Swadling-clouts: the back of the Cimex arboreus, found
often upon Trees and lesser Plants, does elegantly discover the Burgundian
Decussation. And the like is observable in the Belly of the Notonecton or
Water-Beetle, which swimmeth on its back; and the handsome Rhombus'es of the
Seapoult or Werrell, on either side the Spine.

The sexangular Cells in the Honey-combs of Bees are disposed after this Order.
Much there is not of wonder in the confused Houses of Pismires, though much in
their busy life and actions: more in the edificial Palaces of Bees those
Monarchical spirits, who make their Combs six-corner'd, declining a Circle,
whereof many stand not close together, and completely fill the Area of the
place; but rather affecting a six-sided Figure, whereby every Cell affords a
common side unto six more, and also a fit receptacle for the Be it self,
which, gathering into a Cylindrical Figure, aptly enters its sexangular house,
more nearly approaching a circular Figure then either does the Square or
Triangle. And the Combs themselves are so regularly contrived, that their
mutual Intersections make three Lozenges at the bottom of every Cell; which
severally regarded make three Rows of neat Rhomboidal Figures, connected at the
Angles, and so continue three several Chains throughout the whole Comb.

As for the Favago found commonly on the Sea-shoar, though named from an
Honeycomb, it but rudely makes out the resemblance, and better agrees with the
round Cells of Humble-bees. He that would exactly discern the shop of a Bee's
mouth needs observing eyes, and good augmenting-Glasses, wherein is
discoverable one of the neatest pieces in Nature; and must have a more piercing
eye then mine, who finds out the shape of Bull's heads in the Guts of Drones
pressed out behind, according Gom. de. Sale.
to the experiment of Gomesius; wherein notwithstanding there seems somewhat
which might incline a plain fancy to credulity of similitude.

A resemblance hereof there is in the orderly and rarely-disposed Cells made by
Flies and Insects, which we have often found fastened about small Sprigs; and
in those cottonary and woolly pillows which sometimes we meet with fastened
unto Leaves, there is included an elegant Network Texture, out of which come
many small Flies. And some resemblance there is of this Order in the Eggs of
some Butterflies and Moths, as they stick upon Leaves and other substances;
which being dropped from behind, nor directed by the eye, does neatly declare
how Nature Geometrizeth, and observes Order in all things.

A like correspondency in Figure is found in the Skins and outward Teguments of
Animals, whereof a regardable part are beautiful by this Texture. As the Backs
of several Snakes and Serpents, elegantly remarkable in the Aspis and the
Dart-snake, in the Chiasmus and larger Decussations upon the Back of the
Rattle-snake, and in the close and finer Texture of the Matter formicarum, or
Snake that delights in Ant-hils; whereby, upon approach of outward injuries,
they can raise a thicker Phalanx on their Backs, and handsomely contrive
themselves into all kinds of Flexures: whereas their Bellies are commonly
covered with smooth semicircular divisions, as best accommodable unto their
quick and gliding motion.

This way is followed by Nature in the peculiar and remarkable Tail of the
Bever, wherein the scaly particles are disposed somewhat after this order;
which is the plainest resolution of the wonder of Bellonius, while he says,
with incredible Artifice has Nature framed the Tail or Oar of the Bever. Where
by the way we cannot but wish a model of their Houses, so much extolled by some
Describers: wherein since they are so bold as to venture upon three Stages, we
might examine their Artifice in the Contignations, the rule and order in the
Compartitions; or whether that magnified Structure be any more then a rude
rectangular Pile or mere Hovel-building.

Thus works the hand of Nature in the feathery Plantation about Birds;
observable in the Skins of the Elegantly conspicuous on the inside of the
stripped Skins of Dive-Fowl, of the Cormorant, Goshonder, Weasell, Loon, etc.
Breast, Legs and Pinions of Turkies, Geese and Ducks, and the Oars or finny
Feet of Waterfowl; and such a natural Net as the scaly covering of Fishes, of
Mullets, Carps, Tenches, etc. even in such as are excoriable and consist of
smaller Scales, as Bretts, Soals, and Flounders. The like Reticulate grain is
observable in some Russia Leather. To omit the ruder Figures of the Ostracion,
the triangular or Cunny-fish, or the pricks of the Sea-Porcupine.

The same is also observable in some part of the Skin of Man, in Habits of neat
Texture, and therefore not unaptly compared unto a Net. We shall not affirm
that from such grounds the Egyptian Embalmers imitated this Texture: yet in
their linen folds the same is still observable among their neatest Mummies, in
the Figures of Isis and Osiris, and the Tutelary spirits in the Bembine Table.
Nor is it to be overlooked how Orus, the Hieroglyphick of the World, is
described in a Network covering from the shoulder to the foot. And (not to
enlarge upon the cruciated Character of Trismegistus, or handed Crosses so
often occurring in the Needles of Pharaoh and Obelisks of Antiquity) the
Statuae Isiacae, Teraphims and little Idols found about the Mummies, do make a
Decussation or Jacob's Cross with their Arms, like that on the head of Ephraim
and Manasses: and this Decussis is also graphically described between them.

This Reticulate or Network was also considerable in the inward parts of Man,
not only from the first Subtegmen or Warp of his formation, but in the netty
Fibers of the Veins and Vessels of life; wherein, according to common Anatomy,
the right and transverse Fibers are decussated by the oblique Fibers, and so
must frame a Reticulate and Quincuncial Figure by their Obliquations,
emphatically extending that Elegant expression of Scripture, Thou have
curiously embroidered me, thou have wrought me up after the finest way of
Texture, and as it were with a Needle.

Nor is the same observable only in some Parts, but in the whole Body of Man,
which upon the extension of Arms and Legs does make out a Square, whose
Intersection is at the Genitals. To omit the fantastical Quincunx in Plato of
the first Hermaphrodite or Double man, united at the Loins, which Jupiter after
divided.

A rudimental resemblance hereof there is in the cruciated and rugged folds of
the Reticulum or Net-like Ventricle of ruminating horned Animals, which is the
second in order, culinarily called the Honeycomb: for many divisions there are
in the Stomach of several Animals. What number they maintain in the Scurus and
ruminating Fish, common description or our own experiment has made no
discovery. But in the Ventricle of Porpusses there are three divisions; in many
Birds a Crop, Gizzard, and little Receptacle before it. But in Cornigerous
Animals, which chew the Cud, there are no less then four of distinct position
and office.

The Reticulum by these crossed Cells makes a farther Digestion in the dry and
exsuccous part of the Aliment received from the first Ventricle. For at the
bottom of the Gallet there is a double Orifice: What is first received at the
Mouth descends into the first and greater Stomach, from whence it is returned
into the Mouth again; and after a fuller Mastication and salivous mixture, what
part thereof descends again in a moist and succulent body, it slides down the
softer and more permeable Orifice into the Omasus or third Stomach; and from
thence conveyed into the fourth, receives its last Digestion. The other dry and
exsuccous part, after Rumination by the larger and stronger Orifice, bears
into the first Stomach, from thence into the Reticulum, and so progressively
into the other divisions. And therefore in Calves newly calved there is little
or no use of the two first Ventricles, for the milk and liquid aliment slippeth
down the softer Orifice into the third Stomach; where making little or no stay,
it passes into the fourth, the seat of the Coagulum or Runnet, or that
division of Stomach which seems to bear the name of the whole in the Greek
translation of the Priest's Fee in the Sacrifice of Peace Offerings.

As for those Rhomboidal Figures made by the Cartilagineous parts of the Wezon
in the Lungs of great Fishes and other Animals, as Rondeletius discovered, we
have not found them so to answer our Figure as to be drawn into illustration.
Something we expected in the more discernable texture of the Lungs of Frogs,
which notwithstanding being but two curious Bladders, not weighting above a
grain, we found interwoven with Veins, not observing any just order. More
orderly situated are those cretaceous and chalky Concretions found sometimes in
the bigness of a small Vetch on either side their Spine; which being not
agreeable unto our order, nor yet observed by any, we shall not here discourse
on.

But had we found a better account and tolerable Anatomy of that prominent Jowl
of the 1652. described in our Pseudo-Epidem. Edit. 3.
Sperma-Ceti-Whale, then questuary operation or the stench of the last cast
upon our Shore permitted; we might have perhaps discovered some handsome order
in those Net-like Seats and Sockets, made like Honey-combs, containing that
medicall matter.

Lastly, The Incession or Local motion of Animals is made with analogy unto
this Figure, by decussative Diametrals, Quincuncial Lines and Angles. For, to
omit the enquiry how Butterflies and Breezes move their four Wings, how Birds
and Fishes in air and water move by joint strokes of opposite Wings and Fins,
and how salient Animals in jumping forward seem to arise and fall upon a square
Base; as the Station of most Quadrupedes is made upon a long Square, so in
their Motion they make a Rhomboides, their common Progression being performed
diametrally by Decussation and cross advancement of their Legs; which not
observed, begot that remarkable absurdity in the position of the Legs of
Castor's Horse in the Capitol. The Snake, which moves circularly, makes his
Spires in like order, the unequal and concave Spirals answering each other at
alternate distances. In the motion of Man the Arms and Legs observe this
thwarting position; but the Legs alone do move Quincuncially by single Angles,
with some resemblance of an V, measured by successive advancement from each
Foot, and the Angle of Indenture great or less, according to the extent or
brevity of the Stride.

Studious Observators may discover more Analogies in the orderly Book of
Nature, and cannot escape the Elegancy of her hand in other Correspondencies.
The Figures of Nails and Crucifying appurtenances are but precariously made out
in the Granadilla or Flower of Christ's Passion; and we despair to behold in
these parts that handsome draught of Crucifixion in the fruit of the Barbado
Pine. The seminal Spike of Phalaris, or great Shaking-grass, more nearly
answers the Tail of a Rattle-Snake then many Resemblances in Porta: And if the
Orchis Anthropophora Fabii Columnae.
Man- Orchis of Columna be well made out, it excels all Analogies. In young
Walnuts cut athwart it is not hard to apprehend strange Characters; and in
those of somewhat elder growth, handsome ornamental draughts about a plain
Cross. In the Root of Osmond, or Water-fern, every eye may discern the form of
a Half Moon, Rainbow, or half the Character of Pisces. Some find Hebrew,
Arabic, Greek and Latin Characters in Plants: In a common one among us we
seem to read Acaia, Viviu, Lilil.

Right lines and Circles make out the bulk of Plants: In the parts thereof we
find Helicall or spiral Roundles, Voluta's, conicall Sections, circular
Pyramids and Frustums of Archimedes; and cannot overlook the orderly hand of
Nature, in the alternate succession of the flat and narrower sides in the
tender Shoots of the Ash, or the regular inequality of bigness in the
five-leaved Flowers of Henbane, and something like in the calicular Leaves of
Tutsan: How the Spots of Persicaria do manifest themselves between the sixth
and tenth Rib; how the triangular Cap in the Stem or Stylus of Tulips does
constantly point at three outward Leaves; that spicated Flowers do open first
at the Stalk; that white Flowers have yellow Thrums or Knops; that the Nebs of
Beans and Pease do all look downward, and so press not upon each other; and how
the Seeds of many pappous or downy Flowers locked up in Sockets, after a
Gomphosis or mortis-articulation diffuse themselves circularly into Branches of
rare order, observable in Tragopogon or Goat's-beard, conformable to the
Spider's web, and the Radii in like manner telarly interwoven.

And how in Animal natures even Colors hold correspondencies and mutual
correlations. That the color of the Caterpillar will show again in the
Butterfly, with some latitude is allowable. Though the regular Spots in their
Wings seem but a mealie adhesion, and such as may be wiped away; yet since they
come in this variety out of their Cases, there must be regular Pores in those
parts and Membranes defining such Exudations.

That Suet. in vit. Aug.
Augustus had native Notes on his Body and Belly, after the order and number in
the Star of Charles-wain, will not seem strange unto Astral Physiognomy, which
accordingly considers Moles in the Body of Man, or Physical Observators, who
from the position of Moles in the Face, reduce them to rule and correspondency
in other Parts. Whether after the like method medicall conjecture may not be
raised upon Parts inwardly affected, since parts about the Lips are the
critical seats of Pustules discharged in Agues, and scrophulous Tumors about
the Neck do so often speak the like about the Mesentery; may also be considered.

The russet Neck in young Lambs seems but adventitious, and may owe its
tincture to some contaction in the Womb: But that if Sheep have any black or
deep Russet in their Faces, they want not the same about their Legs and Feet;
that black Hounds have mealy Mouths and Feet; that black Cows, which have any
white in their Tails, should not miss of some in their Bellies; and if all
white in their Bodies, yet if black-mouthed, their Ears and Feet maintain the
same color: are correspondent Tinctures not ordinarily failing in Nature,
which easily unites the accidents of extremities, since in some Generations she
transmutes the Parts themselves, while in the Aurelian Metamorphosis the Head
of the Canker becomes the Tail of the Butterfly. Which is in some way not
beyond the contrivance of Art, in Submersions and Inlays inverting the extremes
of the Plant, and fetching the Root from the Top; and also imitated in handsome
Columnary work, in the inversion of the extremes, wherein the Capitle and the
Base hold such near correspondency.

In the Motive parts of Animals may be discovered mutual proportions; not only
in those of Quadrupedes, but in the Thigh Bone, Leg, Foot-bone, and Claws of
Birds. The Legs of Spiders are made after a sesquitertian proportion, and the
long Legs of some Locusts double unto some others. But the internodial parts of
Vegetables, or spaces between the Joints, are contrived with more uncertainty;
though the Joints themselves in many Plants maintain a regular Number.

In Vegetable Composure the unition of prominent parts seems most to answer the
Apophyses or Processes of Animal Bones, whereof they are the produced parts or
prominent Explantations. And though in the parts of Plants which are not
ordained for Motion we do not expect correspondent Articulations; yet in the
setting on of some Flowers and Seeds in their Sockets, and the lineal
commissure of the Pulp of several Seeds, may be observed some shadow of the
Harmony, some show of the Gomphosis or mortis-articulation.

As for the Diarthrosis or motive Articulation, there is expected little
Analogy: though long-stalked Leaves do move by long lines, and have observable
Motions; yet are they made by outward impulsion, like the motion of pendulous
Bodies, while the parts themselves are united by some kind of Symphysis unto
the Stock.

But standing Vegetables, void of motive Articulations, are not without many
Motions. For beside the motion of Vegetation upward, and of Radiation unto all
quarters, that of Contraction, Dilatation, Inclination and Contortion, is
discoverable in many Plants. To omit the Rose of Jericho, the ear of Rye which
moves with change of weather, and the Magical Spit, made of no rare Plants,
which winds before the fire, and rosts the Bird without turning.

Even Animals near the Classis of Plants seem to have the most restless
Motions. The Summer-worm of Ponds and Plashes makes a long waving Motion; the
Hair-worm seldom lies still. He that would behold a very anomalous Motion, may
observe it in the tortile and tiring strokes of Found often in some form of red
Maggot in the standing waters of Cisterns in the Summer.
Gnatworms.

CHAP. IV.
AS for the Delights, Commodities, Mysteries, with other concernments of this
Order, we are unwilling to fly them over in the short deliveries of Virgil,
Varro, or others, and shall therefore enlarge with additional ampliations.

By this Position they had a just proportion of Earth to supply an equality of
Nourishment; the Distance being ordered, thick or thin, according to the
magnitude or vigorous attraction of the Plant, the goodness, leanness, or
propriety of the Soil; and therefore the rule of Solon concerning the Territory
of Athens not extendible unto all, allowing the distance of six foot unto
common Trees, and nine for the Fig and Olive.

They had a due diffusion of their Roots on all or both sides, whereby they
maintained some proportion to their height in Trees of large radication. For
that they strictly make good their profundeur or depth unto their height,
according to common conceit, and that expression of Quantum vertice ad auras
Aethereas, tantum radice ad tartara tendit.
Virgil, though confirmable from the Plane-tree in Pliny, and some few
examples, is not to be expected from the generation of Trees almost in any
kind, either of side-spreading or tap-roots; except we measure them by lateral
and opposite diffusions; nor commonly to be found in minor or herby Plants, if
we except Sea-holly, Liquorish, Sea-rush, and some others.

They had a commodious radiation in their growth, and a due expansion of their
Branches for shadow or delight. For Trees thickly planted do run up in height
and branch with no expansion, shooting unequally, or short and thin, upon the
neighboring side. And therefore Trees are inwardly bare, and spring and leaf
from the outward and Sunny side of their Branches.

Whereby they also avoided the peril of (...) or one Tree perishing with
another, as it happens ofttimes from the sick Effluviums or entanglements of
Roots, falling foul with each other; observable in Elmes set in Hedges, where
if one dies, the neighboring Tree prospers not long after.

In this situation, divided into many intervalls, and open unto six passages,
they had the advantage of a fair perflation from winds, brushing and cleansing
their surfaces, relaxing and closing their Pores unto due perspiration. For
that they afford large Effluviums, perceptible from Odours diffused at great
distances, is observable from Onions out of the Earth, which though dry, and
kept until the Spring, as they shoot forth large and many Leaves, do notably
abate of their weight: and Mint growing in Glasses of water, until it arriveth
unto the weight of an ounce, in a shady place, will sometimes exhaust a pound
of water.

And as they send forth much, so may they receive somewhat in: For beside the
common way and road of reception by the Root, there may be a refection and
imbibition from without; for gentle Showrs refresh Plants, though they enter
not their Roots, and the good and bad Effluviums of Vegetables promote or
debilitate each other. So Epithymum and Dodder, rootless and out of the ground,
maintain themselves upon Thyme, Savory, and Plants whereon they hang. And Ivy
divided from the Root, we have observed to live some years by the cirrous
parts, commonly conceived but as tenacles and hold-fasts unto it. The Stalks of
Mint cropped from the Root stripped from the Leaves, and set in Glasses with the
Rootend upward, and out of the water, we have observed to send forth Sprouts
and Leaves without the aid of Roots; and Scordium to grow in like manner, the
Leaves set downward in water. To omit several Seaplants, which grow on single
Roots from stones, although in very many there are Side-shoots and Fibers
beside the fastening Root.

By this open Position they were fairly exposed unto the rays of Moon and Sun,
so considerable in the growth of Vegetables. For though Poplars, Willows, and
several Trees, be made to grow about the brinks of Acheron and dark
habitations of the Dead; though some Plants are content to grow in obscure
Wells, wherein also old Elme-pumps afford sometimes long bushy Sprouts, not
observable in any above ground; and large fields of Vegetables are able to
maintain their Verdure at the bottom and shady part of the Sea: yet the
greatest number are not content without the actual rays of the Sun, but bend,
incline, and follow them; as large lifts of Solisequous and Sun-following
Plants. And some observe the method of its motion in their own growth and
conversion, twining toward the West by the South, as Briony, Hops, Woodbine,
and several kinds of Bindeweed; which we shall more admire, when any can tell
us they observe another Motion and Twist by the North at the Antipodes. The
same Plants rooted against an erect North-wall full of holes will find a way
through them to look upon the Sun. And in tender Plants, from Mustardseed sown
in the Winter, and in a plot of earth placed inwardly against a South-window,
the tender Stalks of two Leaves arose not erect, but bending toward the
Window, nor looking much higher then the Meridian Sun. And if the Pot were
turned, they would work themselves into their former declinations, making their
conversion by the East. That the Leaves of the Olive and some other Trees
solstitially turn, and precisely tell us when the Sun is entered Cancer, is
scarce expectable in any Climate; and Theophrastus warily observes it: Yet
somewhat thereof is observable in our own, in the Leaves of Willows and
Sallows, some weeks after the Solstice. But the great Convolvulus or
white-flowered Bindweed observes both motions of the Sun; while the Flower
twists Aequinoctially from the left hand to the right, according to the Daily
revolution, the Stalk twineth Ecliptically, from the right to the left,
according to the Annual conversion.

Some commend the exposure of these orders unto the Western gales, as the most
generative and fructifying breath of Heaven. But we applaud the Husbandry of
Solomon, whereto agrees the doctrine of Theophrastus, Arise, O North-winde,
and blow thou South, upon my Garden, that the Spices thereof may flow out: For
the North-winde closing the Pores and shutting up the Effluviums, when the
South does after open and relax them, the Aromatical Gums do drop, and sweet
Odours fly actively from them. And if his Garden had the same situation which
Maps and Charts afford it, on the East Side of Jerusalem, and having the wall
on the West; these were the Winds unto which it was well exposed.

By this way of Plantation they increased the number of their Trees, which they
lost in Quaternio's and Square-orders; which is a commodity insisted on by
Varro, and one great intent of Nature, in this position of Flowers and Seeds in
the elegant formation of Plants, and the former Rules observed in natural and
artificial Figurations.

Whether in this order, and one Tree in some measure breaking the cold and
pinching gusts of Winds from the other, Trees will not better maintain their
inward Circles, and either escape or moderate their excentricities, may also be
considered. For the Circles in Trees are naturally concentricall, parallel unto
the Bark and unto each other, till Frost and piercing Winds contract and close
them on the weather-side, the opposite Semicircle widely enlarging, and at a
comely distance; which hinders oftentimes the beauty and roundness of Trees,
and makes the Timber less serviceable, whiles the ascending Juice, not readily
passing, settles in Knots and Inequalities. And therefore it is no new course
of Agriculture, to observe the native position of Trees according to North and
South in their Transplantations.

The same is also observable under ground in the Circinations and spherical
rounds of Onions, wherein the Circles of the Orbs are ofttimes larger, and the
Meridional lines stand wider upon one side then the other. And where the
largeness will make up the number of planetical Orbs, that of Luna and the
lower Planets exceed the dimensions of Saturn and the higher. Whether the like
be not verified in the Circles of the large Roots of Briony and Mandrakes, or
why in the Knots of Deal or Fur the Circles are often eccentrical, although
not in a plane, but vertical and right position; deserves a farther enquiry.

Whether there be not some irregularity of Roundness in most Plants according
to their position; whether some small compression of Pores be not perceptible
in parts which stand against the current of waters, as in Reeds, Bull-rushes,
and other Vegetables, toward the streaming quarter, may also be observed; and
therefore such as are long and weak are commonly contrived into a Roundness of
Figure, whereby the water presses less, and slippeth more smoothly from them:
and even in Flags or flatfigured Leaves, the greater part obvert their sharper
sides unto the Current in Ditches.

But whether Plants which float upon the surface of the water be for the most
part of cooling qualities, those which shoot above it of heating virtues, and
why; whether Sargasso for many miles floating upon the Western Ocean, or
Sea-Lettuce and Phasganium at the bottom of our Seas, make good the like
qualities; why Fenny waters afford the hottest and sweetest Plants, as Calamus,
Cyperus, and Crowfoot, and Mud cast out of Ditches most naturally produces
Arse-smart; why Plants so greedy of Water so little regard Oil; why, since many
Seeds contain much Oil within them, they endure it not well without, either in
their growth or production; why, since Seeds shoot commonly under ground and
out of the air, those which are let fall in shallow Glasses, upon the surface
of the water, will sooner sprout then those at the bottom, and if the water be
covered with Oil, those at the bottom will hardly sprout at all; we have not
room to conjecture.

Whether Ivy would not less offend the Trees in this clean Ordination and
well-kept paths, might perhaps deserve the question. But this were a Quere
only unto some Habitations, and little concerning Cyrns or the Babylonian
Territory, wherein by no industry Harpalus could make Ivy grow; and Alexander
hardly found it about those parts to imitate the Pomp of Bacchus. And though in
these Northern Regions we are too-much acquainted with one Ivy, we know too
little of another; whereby we apprehend not the expressions of Antiquity, the
Galen. de med. secundum loc.
Splenetick medicine of Galen, and the Emphasis of the Poet in the Heder a
formosior alba.
beauty of the white Ivy.

The like concerning the growth of Miscletoe, which depends not only of the
Species or kind of Tree, but much also of the Soil; and therefore is common in
some places, not readily found in others; frequent in France, not so common in
Spain, and scarce at all in the Territory of Ferrara; nor easily to be found
where it is most required upon Oaks, less on Trees continually verdant.
Although in some places the Olive escapes it not, requiting its detriment in
the delightful view of its read Berries; as Clusius observed in Spain, and
Bellonius about Jerusalem. But this Parasitical Plant suffers nothing to grow
upon it by any way of art, nor could we ever make it grow where Nature had not
planted it; as we have in vain attempted by Inoculation and Insition upon its
native or foreign Stock: and though there seem nothing improbable in the Seed,
it has not succeeded by Sation in any manner of ground; wherein we had no
reason Linschoten.
to despair, since we read of vegetable Horns, and how Rams-horns will root
about Goa.

But besides these rural Commodities, it cannot be meanly detectable in the
variety of Figures which these Orders open and closed do make: whilst every
Enclosure makes a Rhombus, the Figures obliquely taken a Rhomboides; the
Intervalls bounded with parallel lines, and each Intersection built upon a
Square, affording two Triangles or Pyramids vertically conjoined, which in the
strict Quincuncial Order do oppositely make acute and blunt Angles.

And though therein we meet not with right Angles, yet every Rhombus containing
four Angles equal unto two right, it virtually contains two right in every one.
Nor is this strange unto such as observe the natural Lines of Trees, and parts
disposed in them. For neither in the Root does nature affect this Angle, which
shooting downward for the stability of the Plant does best effect the same by
Figures of Inclination; nor in the Branches and stalky Leaves, which grow most
at acute Angles, as declining from their Head the Root, and diminishing their
Angles with their altitude: Verified also in lesser Plants, whereby they better
support themselves, and bear not so heavily upon the Stalk; so that while near
the Root they often make an Angle of seventy parts, the Sprouts near the top
will often come short of thirty. Even in the Nerves and Master-veins of the
Leaves the acute Angle rules; the obtuse is but seldom found, and in the
backward part of the Leaf, reflecting and arching about the Stalk. But why
ofttimes one side of the Leaf is unequal unto the other, as in Hazell and Oaks;
why on either side the Master-vein the lesser and derivative Channels are not
directly opposite, nor at equal Angles respectively unto the adverse side, but
those of one part do often exceed the other, as the Wallnut and many more;
deserves another enquiry.

Now if for this Order we affect coniferous and tapering Trees, particularly
the Cypress, which grows in a conical Figure, we have found a Tree not only of
great Ornament, but in its Essentials of affinity unto this Order; a solid
Rhombus being made by the conversion of two Aequicrural Cones, as Archimedes
has defined. And these were the common Trees about Babylon and the East,
whereof the Ark was made; and Alexander found no Trees so accommodable to build
his Navy. And this we rather think to be the Tree mentioned in the Canticles,
which stricter Botanology will hardly allow to be Camphire.

And if Delight or ornamental view invite a comely Disposure by circular
Amputations, as is elegantly performed in Haw-thorns, then will they answer the
Figures made by the conversion of Rhombus, which makes two concentrical
Circles; the greater Circumference being made by the lesser Angles, the lesser
by the greater.

The Cylindrical Figure of Trees is virtually contained and latent in this
Order: a Cylinder, or long Round, being made by the conversion or turning of a
Parallelogram, and most handsomely by a long Square, which makes an equal,
strong and lasting Figure in Trees, agreeable unto the Body and motive parts of
Animals, the greatest number of Plants, and almost all Roots, though their
Stalks be angular, and of many Corners, which seem not to follow the Figure of
their Seeds; since many angular Seeds send forth round Stalks, and spherical
Seeds arise from angular Spindles, and many rather conform unto their Roots, as
the round Stalks of bulbous Roots, and in tuberous Roots Stemms of like figure.
But why, since the largest number of Plants maintain a circular Figure, there
are so few with teretous or long-round Leaves; why coniferous Trees are
tenuifolious or narrow-leafed; why Plants of few or no Joints have commonly
round Stalks; why the greatest number of hollow Stalks are round Stalks; or why
in this variety of angular Stalks the quadrangular most exceeds; were too
long a speculation. Meanwhile obvious experience may find, that in Plants of
divided Leaves above, Nature often begins circularly in the two first Leaves
below; while in the singular Plant of Ivy she exercises a contrary Geometry,
and beginning with angular Leaves below, rounds them in the upper Branches.

Nor can the Rows in this Order want delight, as carrying an aspect answerable
unto the dipteros hypaethra, or double order of Columns open above; the
opposite Ranks of Trees standing like Pillars in the Cavedia of the Courts of
famous Buildings, and Portico's of the Templa subdialia of old; somewhat
imitating the Peristylia or Cloister-buildings, and the Exedrae of the
Ancients, wherein men discoursed, walked and exercised. For that they derived
the rule of Columns from Trees, especially in their proportional diminutions,
is illustrated by Vitruvius from the Shafts of Fur and Pine. And though the
Inter-arboration do imitate the Araeostylos, or thin order, not strictly
answering the proportion of Intercolumniations; yet in many Trees they will not
exceed the intermission of the Columns in the Court of the Tabernacle, which
being an hundred cubits long, and made up by twenty Pillars, will afford no
less then Intervalls of five cubits.

Beside, in this kind of Aspect the Sight being not diffused, but
circumscribed between long Parallels and the (...) and adumbration from the
Branches, it frames a Penthouse over the Eye, and makes a quiet vision: and
therefore in diffused and open Aspects men hollow their Hand above their Eye,
and make an artificial Brow, whereby they direct the dispersed rays of Sight,
and by this shade preserve a moderate light in the chamber of the Eye, keeping
the Pupilla plump and fair, and not contracted or shrunk as in light and
vagrant vision.

And therefore Providence has arched and paved the great House of the World
with Colors of Mediocrity, that is, blew and green, above and below the Sight,
moderately terminating the Acies of the Eye. For most Plants, though green
above-ground, maintain their original white below it, according to the candor
of their seminal Pulp, and the rudimental Leaves do first appear in that
color; observable in Seeds sprouting in water upon their first Foliation.
Green seeming to be the first supervenient or above-ground complexion of
Vegetables, separable in many upon ligature or inhumation, as Succory, Endive,
Artichoaks; and which is also lost upon fading in the Autumn.

And this is also agreeable unto Water it self, the alimental Vehicle of
Plants, which first alters into this Color, and containing many vegetable
Seminalities, reveals their Seeds by Greenness; and therefore soonest
expected in rain or standing Water, not easily found in distilled or Water
strongly boiled, wherein the Seeds are extinguished by Fire and Decoction, and
therefore last long and pure without such alteration, affording neither
uliginous Coats, Gnat-worms, Acari, Hair-worms, like crude and common water:
and therefore that is most fit for wholesome Beverage, and with Malt makes Ale
and Beer without boiling. What large Water-drinkers some Plants are, the
Canary-tree and Birches in some Northern Countries, drenching the fields about
them, do sufficiently demonstrate. How Water it self is able to maintain the
growth of Vegetables, and without extinction of their generative or medicall
virtues, beside the experiment of Helmont's Tree, we have found in some which
have lived six years in Glasses. The Seeds of Scurvy Grass growing in
Water-pots have been fruitful in the Land; and Asarum after a year's space,
and once casting its Leaves in water, in the second Leaves has handsomely
performed its vomiting operation.

Nor are only dark and green Colors, but Shades and Shadows contrived through
the great Volume of Nature, and Trees ordained not only to protect and shadow
others, but by their Shades and shadowing parts to preserve and cherish
themselves; the whole Radiation or Branchings shadowing the Stock and the Root,
the Leaves, the Branches and Fruit, too much exposed to the Winds and scorching
Sun. The calicular Leaves enclose the tender Flowers, and the Flowers
themselves lie wrapped about the Seeds in their rudiment and first formations,
which being advanced the Flowers fall away, and are therefore contrived in
variety of Figures best satisfying the intention; handsomely observable in
hooded and gaping Flowers, and the Butterfly-blooms of leguminous Plants, the
lower Leaf closely involving the rudimental Cod, and the alary or wingy
divisions embracing or hanging over it.

But Seeds themselves do lie in perpetual Shades, either under the Leaf, or
shut up in Coverings; and such as lie barest have their Husks, Skins and Pulps
about them, wherein the Neb and generative particle lies moist and secured
from the injury of Air and Sun. Darkness and Light hold interchangeable
dominions, and alternately rule the Seminal state of things. Light unto Lux
Orco, Tenebrae Jovi; Tenebrae Orco, Lux Jovi. Hippocr. de Diaet. l.
Pluto is Darkness unto Jupiter. Legions of seminal Idea's lie in their second
Chaos and Orcus of Hippocrates; till, putting on the habits of their Forms,
they show themselves upon the stage of the world and open dominion of Jove.
They that held the Stars of Heaven were but Rays and flashing glimpses of the
Empyreal Light, through holes and perforations of the upper Heaven, took off
the natural Shadows of Stars; while, according to Hevelii Selenographia.
better discovery, the poor Inhabitants of the Moon have but a Polary life, and
must pass half their days in the shadow of that Luminary.

Light, that makes things seen, makes some things invisible. Were it not for
Darkness and the Shadow of the Earth, the noblest part of the Creation had
remained unseen, and the Stars in Heaven as invisible as on the fourth day,
when they were created above the Horizon with the Sun, or there was not an Eye
to behold them. The greatest Mystery of Religion is expressed by Adumbration,
and in the noblest parts of Jewish Types we find the Cherubims shadowing the
Mercy-seat: Life it self is but the Shadow of Death, and Souls departed but the
Shadows of the living: all things fall under this name. The Sun it self is but
the dark Simulachrum, and Light but the Shadow of God.

Lastly, It is no wonder that this Quincunciall Order was first and still
affected as grateful unto the Eye; for all things are seen Quincuncially: For
at the Eye the Pyramidall Rays from the Object receive a Decussation, and so
strike a second Base upon the Retina or hinder Coat, the proper organ of
Vision, wherein the Pictures from Objects are represented, answerable to the
Paper or Wall in the dark Chamber, after the Decussation of the Rays at the
hole of the Horny Coat; and their Refraction upon the Crystalline Humor
answering the Foramen of the Window, and the Unequal or Burning-glasses which
refract the Rays that enter it. And if ancient Anatomy would hold, a like
disposure there was of the Optic or Visual Nerves in the Brain, wherein
Antiquity conceived a concurrence by Decussation. And this is not only
observable in the Laws of direct Vision, but in some part also verified in the
reflected Rays of sight. For making the Angle of Incidence equal to that of
Reflection, the Visual ray returns Quincuncially, and after the form of an V;
and the line of Reflection being continued unto the place of Vision, there
arises a Semi-decussation, which makes the Object seen in a perpendicular unto
it self, and as far below the reflectent as it is from it above; observable in
the Sun and Moon beheld in water.

And this is also the Law of Reflection in moved Bodies and Sounds, which,
though not made by Decussation, observe the rule of equality between Incidence
and Reflection, whereby whispering places are framed by Ellipticall Arches laid
side-wise; where the voice being delivered at the Focus of one extremity,
observing an equality unto the Angle of Incidence, it will reflect unto the
Focus of the other end, and so escape the Ears of the standers in the middle.

A like rule is observed in the Reflection of the vocal and sonorous line in
Echoes, which cannot therefore be heard in all stations: but happening in Woody
plantations by Waters, and able to return some words, if reached by a pleasant
and well-dividing voice, there may be heard the softest Notes in nature.

And this is not only verified in the way of Sense, but in animal and
intellectual receptions; things entering upon the Intellect by a Pyramid from
without, and thence into the Memory by another from within, the common
Decussation being in the Understanding, as is delivered by Car. Bovillus de
Intellectn.
Bovillus. Whether the intellectual and fantastical lines be not thus rightly
disposed, but magnified, diminished, distorted, and ill-placed in the
Mathematics of some Brains, whereby they have irregular apprehensions of
things, perverted Notions, Conceptions, and incurable Hallucinations, were no
unpleasant speculation.

And if Egyptian Philosophy may obtain, the Scale of Influences was thus
disposed, and the genial Spirits of both Worlds do trace their way in ascending
and descending Pyramids, mystically apprehended in the Letter X, and the open
Bill and straddling Legs of a Stork, which was imitated by that Character.

Of this Figure Plato made choice to illustrate the Motion of the Soul both of
the World and Man; while he delivered that God divided the whole Conjunction
length-wise, according to the Figure of a Greek x, and then turning it about
reflected it into a Circle: by the Circle implying the uniform Motion of the
first Orb, and by the Right lines, the planetical and various Motions within
it. And this also with application unto the Soul of man, which has a double
aspect, one right, whereby it beholds the Body and Objects without; another
circular and reciprocal, whereby it beholds it self. The Circle declaring the
Motion of the indivisible Soul, simple, according to the divinity of its
nature, and returning into it self; the Right lines respecting the Motion
pertaining unto Sense and Vegetation; and the central Decussation, the wondrous
connection of the several Faculties conjointly in one Substance. And so he
conjoined the Unity and Duality of the Soul, and made out the three Substances
so much considered by him; that is, the indivisible or Divine, the divisible or
Corporeal, and that third was the Systasis or Harmony of those two in the
mystical Decussation.

And if that were clearly made out which Justin Martyr took for granted, this
Figure has had the honor to characterize and notify our Blessed Savior, as
he delivers in that borrowed expression from Plato, Decussavit eum in
universo: the hint whereof he would have Plato derive from the Figure of the
Brazen Serpent, and to have mistaken the Letter X for T; whereas it is not
improbable he learned these and other mystical expressions in his learned
Observations of Egypt, where he might obviously behold the Mercurial
Characters, the handed Crosses, and other Mysteries not thoroughly understood in
the sacred Letter X, which being derivative from the Stork, one of the ten
sacred Animals, might be originally Egyptian, and brought into Greece by
Cadmus of that Country.

CHAP. V.
TO enlarge this Centemplation unto all the Mysteries and Secrets accommodable
unto this Number, were inexcusable Pythagorism; yet I cannot omit the ancient
conceit of Five surnamed the number of (...)......
Justice, as justly dividing between the Digits, and hanging in the Center of
Nine, described by Square numeration, which angularly divided will make the
decussated Number; and so agreeable unto the Quincuncial Ordination, and Rows
divided by Equality and just decorum in the whole Complantation; and might be
the Original of that common Game among us, wherein the fifth place is
Sovereign, and carries the chief intention: the Ancients wisely instructing
youth, even in their Recreations, unto Virtue, that is, early to drive at the
middle Point and Central Seat of Justice.

Nor can we omit how agreeable unto this Number an handsome division is made in
Trees and Plants, since Plutarch and the Ancients have named it the Divisive
number, justly dividing the Entities of the world, many remarkable things in
it, and also comprehending the (...), Arbor, Frutex, Suffrutex, Herba, and that
fifth which comprehends the Fungi and Tubera, whether to be named (...) or
(...), comprehending also Conserva marina salsa, and Sea-corals of so many
yards length.
general division of Vegetables. And he that considers how most Blossoms of
Trees, and the greatest number of Flowers, consist of five Leaves, and therein
does rest the settled Rule of Nature, so that in those which exceed there is
often found, or easily made, a variety; may readily discover how Nature rests
in this number, which is indeed the first Rest and panse of Numeration in the
Fingers, the natural Organs thereof. Nor in the division of the Feet of perfect
Animals does nature exceed this account. And even in the Joints of Feet, which
in Birds are most multiplied, it surpasses not this Number; so progressionally
making them out in many, that from five in the Fore-claw she descends unto
two in the hindemost; and so in four Feet makes up the number of Joints in the
five Fingers or Toes of Man.

Not to omit the quintuple Section of a Elleipsis, Parabola, Hyperbole,
Circubus, Triangulum.
Cone, of handsome practice in ornamental Garden-plots, and in some way
discoverable in so many works of Nature; in the Leaves, Fruits and Seeds of
Vegetables, and Scales of some Fishes, so much considerable in Glasses and the
Optic doctrine, wherein the learned may consider the Crystalline Humor of the
Eye in the Cuttle-fish and Loligo.

He that forgets not how Antiquity named this the Conjugal or wedding Number,
and made it the Emblem of the most remarkable Conjunction, will conceive it
duly appliable unto this handsome Economy and Vegetable Combination; and may
hence apprehend the Allegorical sense of that obscure expression of (...), id
est, nuptias multas Rhodig.
Hesiod, and afford no improbable reason why Plato admitted his Nuptial-Guests
by Fives in the Kindred of the Plato de Leg. 6.
married couple.

And though a sharper Mystery might be implied in the Number of the Five wise
and foolish Virgins which were to meet the Bridegroom; yet was the same
agreeable unto the Conjugal Number, which ancient Numerists made out by two and
three, the first parity and imparity, the active and passive Digits, the
material and formal principles in generative Societies; and not discordant even
from the Customs of the Romans, who admitted but Plutarch. Problem. Romans 1.
five Torches in their Nuptial Solemnities. Whether there were any Mystery or
not implied, the most generative Animals were created on this day, and had
accordingly the largest Benediction. And under a Quintuple consideration wanton
Antiquity considered the circumstances of Generation, while by this number of
Five they naturally divided the Nectar of the fifth Planet.

The same Number in the Hebrew Mysteries and Cabalisticall Accounts was the
Archang. dog. Cabal.
Character of Generation, declared by the Letter He, the fifth in their
Alphabet; according to that Cabalistical Dogma, If Abram had not had this
Letter added unto his Name, he had remained fruitless, and without the power of
Generation: not only because hereby the number of his Name attained two
hundred forty eight, the number of the affirmative Precepts; but because as in
created Natures there is a Male and Female, so in Divine and intelligent
productions the Mother of Life and Fountain of Souls in Cabalisticall
Technology is called Binah, whose Seal and Character was He. So that being
steril before, he received the power of Generation from that measure and
mansion in the Archetype, and was made conformable unto Binah. And upon such
involved considerations the Jod into He.
Ten of Sarai was exchanged into Five. If any shall look upon this as a stable
number, and fitly appropriable unto Trees, as Bodies of Rest and Station, he
has herein a great Foundation in Nature, who, observing much variety in Legs
and motive Organs of Animals, as two, four, six, eight, twelve, fourteen, and
more, has passed over five and ten, and assigned them unto none, or very few,
as the Phalangium monstrosum Brasilianum Clusii, and Jac. de Laet Cur. poster.
Americae Descript. if perfectly described. And for the Stability of this
Number, he shall not want the Sphericity of its nature, which multiplied in it
self will return into its own denomination, and bring up the rear of the
account. Which is also one of the Numbers that makes up the Mystical Name of
God, which consisting of Letters denoting all the sphericall Numbers, ten,
five, and six, emphatically sets forth the Notion of Trismegistus, and that
intelligible Sphere which is the Nature of God.

Many Expressions by this Number occurr in holy Scripture, perhaps unjustly
laden with Mystical Expositions, and little concerning our Order. That the
Israelites were forbidden to eat the fruit of their new-planted Trees before
the fifth year, was very agreeable unto the natural Rules of Husbandry; Fruits
being unwholesome and lash before the fourth or fifth year. In the second day,
or Feminine part of five, there was added no approbation: For in the third, or
Masculine day, the same is twice repeated; and a double Benediction enclosed
both Creations, whereof the one in some part was but an accomplishment of the
other. That the Trespasser was to pay a fifth part above the head or principal,
makes no secret in this Number, and implied no more then one part above the
principal; which being considered in four parts, the additional forfeit must
bear the name of a fifth. The five golden Mice had plainly their determination
from the number of the Princes. That five should put to flight an hundred might
have nothing mystically implied, considering a rank of Soldiers could scarce
consist of a lesser number. Saint Paul had rather speak five words in a known
then ten thousand in an unknown tongue; that is, as little as could well be
spoken; a simple Proposition consisting of three words, and a complexed one not
ordinarily short of five.

More considerable things there are in this mystical account, which we must
not insist on. And therefore why the radical Letters in the Pentateuch should
equal the number of the Soldiery of the Tribes; why our Savior in the
Wilderness fed five thousand persons with five Barley Loaves, and again, but
four thousand with no less then seven of Wheat; why Joseph designed five
changes of Raiment unto Benjamin, and David took just five Pebbles out of the
Brook against the Pagan Champion; (...), four and one, or five. Scalig.
we leave it unto Arithmeticall Divinity, and Theological explanation.

Yet if any delight in new Problems, or think it worth the enquiry, whether the
Physician has rightly hit the nominal notation of Quinque; why the Ancients
mixed five or three, but not four parts of Water, unto their Wine, and
Hippocrates observed a fifth proportion in the mixture of Water with Milk, as
in Dysenteries and Bloudy-fluxes; under what abstruse foundation Astrologers do
figure the good or bad Fate from our Children in (...), or bona fortuna, the
name of the fifth House.
Good Fortune, or the fifth House of their Celestial Schemes; whether the
Egyptians described a Star by a Figure of five Points with reference unto the
Conjunct, Opposite, Sextile, Trigonal, Tetragonal.
five capital Aspects whereby they transmit their Influences, or abstruser
Considerations; why the Cabalisticall Doctors, who conceive the whole
Sephiroth or divine Emanations to have guided the ten-stringed Harp of David,
whereby he pacified the evil spirit of Saul, in strict numeration do begin with
the Perihypate Meson, or F fa ut, and so place the Tiphereth, answering C sol
fa ut, upon the fifth String; or whether this Number be oftener applied unto bad
things and ends then good in holy Scripture, and why; He may meet with
Abstrusities of no ready resolution.

If any shall question the rationality of that Magic in the cure of the Blind
man by Serapis, commanded to place five Fingers on his Altar, and then his Hand
on his Eyes; why, since the whole Comedy is primarily and naturally comprised
in (...).
four parts, and Antiquity permitted not so many persons to speak in one Scene,
yet would not comprehend the same in more or less then five Acts; why amongst
Sea-stars Nature chiefly delights in five Points; and since there are found
some of no fewer then twelve, and some of seven and nine, there are few or none
discovered of six or eight: If any shall enquire why the Flowers of Rue
properly consist of four Leaves, the first and third Flower have five; why,
since many Flowers have one Leaf, or Unisolium, nullifolium.
none, as Scaliger will have it, diverse three, and the greatest number consist
of five divided from their bottoms, there are yet so few of two; or why Nature
generally beginning or setting out with two opposite Leaves at the Root, does
so seldom conclude with that order and number at the Flower: He shall not pass
his hours in vulgar Speculations.

If any shall farther Querie why magneticall Philosophy excludes Decussations,
and Needles transversly placed do naturally distract their Verticities; why
Geomancers do imitate the Quintuple Figure in their Mother-Characters of
Acquisition and Amission, etc. somewhat answering the Figures in the Lady or
speckled Beetle; with what Equity Chiromanticall conjecturers decry these
Decussations in the Lines and Mounts of the Hand; what that decussated Figure
intends in the Medall of Alexander the Great; why the Goddesses sit commonly
cross-legged in ancient Draughts, since Juno is described in the same as a
veneficall posture to hinder the birth of Hercules: If any shall doubt why at
the Amphidromicall Feasts, on the fifth day after the Child was born, Presents
were sent from Friends of Polypusses and Cuttle-fishes; why five must be only
left in that Symbolicall Mutiny among the men of Cadmus; why Proteus in Homer,
the Symbol of the first Matter, before he settled himself in the midst of his
Sea Monsters, does place them out by fives; why the fifth year's Ox was
acceptable Sacrifice unto Jupiter; or why the noble Antoninus in some sense
does call the Soul it self a Rhombus: He shall not fall on trite or trivial
Disquisitions. And these we invent and propose unto acuter Enquirers,
nauseating Crambe-verities and Questions overqueried. Flat and flexible Truths
are beat out by every Hammer; but Vulcan and his whole Forge sweat to work out
Achilles his Armor. A large field is yet left unto sharper Discerners to
enlarge upon this Order, to search out the Quaternio's and figured Draughts of
this nature, and, moderating the study of Names and mere Nomenclature of
Plants, to erect Generalities, disclose unobserved Proprieties, not only in
the Vegetable Shop, but the whole Volume of Nature, affording delightful
Truths, confirmable by Sense and ocular Observation, which seems to me the
surest path to trace the Labyrinth of Truth. For though discursive Enquiry and
rational Conjecture may leave handsome gashes and flesh-wounds; yet without
conjunction of this expect no mortal or dispatching blows unto Error.

But the Hyades near the Horizon about midnight at that time.
Quincunx of Heaven runs low, and it is time to close the five Ports of
Knowledge: We are unwilling to spin out our awaking thoughts into the Phantasms
of Sleep, which often continues Precogitations, making Cables of Cobwebs, and
Wildernesses of handsome Groves. Beside De Insomniis.
Hippocrates has spoke so little, and the Artemidorus and Apomazar.
Oneirocritical Masters have left such frigid Interpretations from Plants, that
there is little encouragement to dream of Paradise it self. Nor will the
sweetest delight of Gardens afford much comfort in Sleep, wherein the dullness
of that Sense shakes hands with delectable Odours; and though in the Strewed
with Roses.
Bed of Cleopatra, can hardly with any delight raise up the ghost of a Rose.

Night, which Pagan Theology could make the Daughter of Chaos, affords no
advantage to the description of Order; although no lower then that Mass can we
derive its Genealogy. All things began in Order, so shall they end, and so
shall they begin again; according to the Ordainer of Order and mystical
Mathematics of the City of Heaven.

Though Somnus in Homer be sent to rouse up Agamemnon, I find no such effects
in these drowsy approaches of Sleep. To keep our eyes open longer were but to
act our Antipodes. The Huntsmen are up in America, and they are already past
their first sleep in Persia. But who can be drowsy at that hour which freed us
from everlasting Sleep? or have slumbring thoughts at that time when Sleep it
self must end, and, as some conjecture, all shall awake again?

FINIS.

