A DISCOVERY Of the Notorious Proceedings OF WILLIAM LAVD, Archbishop of
Canterbury, in bringing Innovations into the Church, and raising up troubles in
the State; his pride in riding in his Coach when the King himself went along
on foot, and being reproved, would not alight.

With his tyrannical government both in himself and his Agents.

Confessed by John Brown a Prisoner in the Gatehouse, twice examined by a
Committee of six from the Honorable House of COMMONS.

And now brought to the view of the world, October 15. 1641.

LONDON, Printed, and are to be sold by Henry Walker. 1641.

A discovery of the notorious proceedings of William Laud Archbishop of
Canterbury, by John Brown prisoner in the Gatehouse.
THat concerning the Bishop of Canterbury it is most notorious, he has been
the special cause of the troubles in Scotland, and jar^es betwixt them and the
English; for when he went to the North with his Majesty, he being of a high and
lofty spirit, remarking the government of the Church of Scotland, began his
innovations by setting up of Altars, Episcopal robes, and Organs, which were
not seen since the birth of King James, more then 80 years before in
Scotland; at which they were much incensed, in so much that when the common
people upon a Sunday perceiving his Majesty to go on foot from the Palace of
Holirood house, to the Church at Edinburgh, and so to return, and all his
Nobles with him on foot, my Lords Grace and the Bishop of Ely were seen to go
in their Coach. They exclaimed on them, and said, How dare you presume to go
so, when our Sovereign goes on foot? you are the rags and servants of the
Pope.

That same time did he move his Majesty to make that Church a Cathedral, and
appoint a Bishop, where was never any before, and so the people were more and
more stirred up. At his return from thence he moved his Majesty to erect a
high Commission in all the Bishoprics of that Ki^gdom, by virtue of a
Proclamation which he extorted from his Majesty in August (if I be not
deceived) 5. years ago, wherein was ordered that the Bishops Courts here in
England should have no subordination to any other Courts, no not to his
Majesty's own Council but should proceed without any dependency, not to make
use of his Maj^sties Arms in their Seals, but their own, and so deprive his
Majesty of his Supremacy, which was never done since the reign of King Henry
the 8.

So soon as he had obtained that of his Majesty, he in all have sends his
Proclamation to all the Bishops of Scotland, who being blown up with pride,
following the Archbishops footsteps, began to erect a High Commission Court in
their Diocesses, and called to it the Nobles and the Gentry, punishing them for
trifling things, and fining and confining them to the farthest parts of that
Kingdom, from Galloway to Cachnes, near 300. miles, a cruelty never practiced
before in Scotland in any age. Nay they became so insolent, being made Privy
Councillors by the Archbishops solicitation of S. Andrews, being made great
Chancellor in that Kingdom, never practiced these 300. years, that at open
Council Table they gave the lie to the Peers of the Land, namely to the Earl
of Argile, which affront was done by one Sedserfe, now Bishop of Galloway, and
resident at this present in London, where began the fire to appear, which
before was but smoke: the Nobles, Gentry, and Commons made a league which they
called a Covenant, and combined together for the rooting out of Bishops, and
conservation of their ancient liberties, upon which is ensued a million of
miseries, putting both the Kingdoms to excessive charges, exhausting the Kings
cofers, and oppressing the people. I believe if my Lord Archbishop were nearly
questioned, it would be found he stirred up his Majesty to make up his Army
two several times, which has been the occasion of the ruin of two Shires,
Northumberland, and the Bishopric of Durham, which loss will not be repaired
in 100. years.

These two firebrand Bishops of Galloway and Rosse, who are clients to
Canterbury, and altogether guided by him, it is more then expedient that they
and other incendiaries were given to the Scots Commissioners to be tried by
their Parliament. But I believe Rosse will fl^e to Ireland, where his Majesty
has given him a Bishopric, and Galloway will be forced to hide himself in
some Island, and shake off his robes, or become a Peddler in Poland, as his
father was before him.

One Sandal, a Clarke of the Rolls, told me he saw my Lord Sterling,
Secretary of Scotland, agent at Court for the Bishops, viewing narrowly the
Rolls, to see the original institution of the High Commission, which he would
never have done, had he not bin informed by my Lords Grace. I may not omit to
let you know how of his large liberality he has given to these firebrand
Ministers (refuged in this Kingdom) at some times very large and profuse
charity, which he would never have bestowed on the poor Clergy of his Diocese.

I come to his government, wherein he has been like to a Camelian of diverse
colors, now punishing of Romish Priests, but poor ones, for the fattest he
protected and cherished above measure, as Father Leader, superior of the
Benedictines, Master Flamders, and Master Price after Leaders death, and Master
Gascoyne, and the whole order of the Jesuits.

The poor Recusants for going to hear Mass, or only upon supposition were
cruelly used by him, but the chief he tenderly loved and feasted, as Kenelme
Digby, and others, to what end you may conjecture.

After he took a fit to punish Anabaptists, Familists, and Brownists, sometimes
one, sometimes another: he followed the steps of Cardinal Wolsey, and intended
(because he could not be Pope at Rome) to be a Patriarch in these Kingdoms; to
which end (it is well known) he did so credit and grace Father Leader aforesaid,
cherishing him above the rest, giving him his ear at all times, remaining here
at London till his death, and after him Price and Gascoyne aforementioned.

At the coming of Father Leader he began to look cheerfully upon Recusants;
then began he to erect Altars, to take away Communion Tables, to make all
kneel at the Sacrament, to be all uncovered at time of Divine Service, to
stand up at the reading of the Gospel, to bow at the name of Jesus, and
consecrate anew the Church of Saint Giles in the fields, with many other Arch
tricks, that he might be in the Popes and Queens favor, and so continue in
his Majesty's good liking. Then began he to use rigor against Puritan
Ministers, calling them into the High Commission, some for symony, as master
Ward (and others) of Suffolk, some for contradicting the Bishop of Norwich,
some for heresy, as Doctor Everard Chaplain to the Earl of Holland.

Then began he to practice his Excommunications and aggravations against Sir
Robert Willoughbie son in law to the Bishop of Worcester, and Master Hope a
Scotsman Cupbearer to his Majesty for contemning his citations: In the end such
were his Actions as he is an admiration to the whole world for inconstancy; at
the last he became more outrageous then ever were any of his Predecessors,
conventing before him the Bishop of Lincoln, whose heavy hand and Dragon like
wrath he felt many years, being imprisoned in the Tower of London, so was
Bishop Goodman soundly whipped for refusing to subscribe his Canons, being laid
in the Gatehouse, so that he became the wonder of this age; no less wonderful
has he been in his Vatican at Lambeth, sitting in his graceful Throne,
compassed with Bishops, Deanes, Archdeacon^, and Doctors, Proctors, Notaries,
Registers, guarded with a multitude of Tipstaves from all the prisons in and
about London, besides a hellish guard of Promoters in his Tribunal, sitting in
his Corner cap, Lawne sleeves, and Rochet; no Pope is so glorious on most
festival days, as his Grace was on thursday in Term time.

It Is a pitteous thing worthy of consideration, to see what injustice is done in
that Court by his own knowledge, and what extortion and exaction is used by
his officers, there is not a more corrupt Court in the world, wherein innocence
is punnished and public sins countenanced, the greatest extortions of that
Court cannot be expressed, some are a whole year before they can be heard, and
at last for a fatherly benediction are remitted to Sir John Lamb and Doctor
Duck: I will instance two parties; first, the Lady Willoughby spent in suite in
l^sse then two years (as she related to me) 500. pound and above, and all
tendered, that her husband should wear a white sheet at the Church door
(when God knows) her self deserved no less, for Doctor Reeves assured me she
was declared innocent by bribery.

The other was Mast. Stapleton, Nephew to the Earl of Kingston, who claimed a
certain Lady to be his wife having married her before two witnesses, and used
the formal words of Matrimony, and seen by the some witnesses in naked bed,
yet by force of money he was divorced from her, having spent in the suite in
charges only 300. pound.

In like sort Francis Conne Brother to Seignior George Conne now Cupbearer in
extraordinary to her Majesty, was convented at the high Commission for having
married one Mistress Steward his Country woman in Scotland, and had married
another one Mistress Wiseman in England, with whom he coinhabited here in
London, the Scottish woman claimed him, but she being poor, and having none to
protect her, after two years suite he was declared to be Wisemans husband,
money was the cause, for himself assured me, it cost him in gifts, feasting his
Advocates, and Clerks, above a 150, pound: What intolerable injustice was
this, it being notoriously known that the Scottish woman was his wife?

The chief extortioners are the Registers of the Court, Stephen Knight and his
companion, Nephew to Sir John Lamb, when his Grace foresaw the Parliament
would call them in question, he presently deposed them, and made the said
Knight principal Proctor in his Court, who feared to be questioned for the
same misdemeanors, fled with his whole family to Norwich, and bought of that
Bishop the Registers Office there, and so is like to continue his accustomed
trade of extortion, except this honourabe house call him coram to answer his
innumerable oppressions, which are to be seen in the Registers Book of the
high Commission; he has two bonds of mine, and two Letters of Attorney made by
me to him; his ordinary course was this, to take from every one 20 shillings,
for that which he should have had but two shillings six pence, which extends
to a great sum in the year, and out of Term he had fees for six Clerks
and so many Promoters which went throughout England plaguing the poor, and
enriching themselves, and their Master Knight likewise.

The other extortioner was Bonragg, the greatest knave in the Country, for
money he would do any thing, he carried in his pouch a number of Citations, and
when he pleased for money dismissed any one; Master Quashet, Master Smith the
Jesuit, and Master Fisher of the same order, and one Cuthbert a lay Brother of
theirs of whom I spoke before, a great number of lay persons Recusants whom I
know have been dismissed by him, some for 40. some for 20. but the least was 10.
shillings; of a great part of Anabaptists and Brownists some that were poor he
imprisoned, but the rich for money escaped, as themselves will depose.

It is fit that Bonrag, and also the Bishop of Londons Pursuivants be called in
question, with many other of his Promoters, and under Officers, as Arthur
Husse, living in Saint Peter's street in Westminster.

FINIS.

