CERTAIN MISCELLANY TRACTS.

Written by THOMAS BROWN, Knight, and Doctor of Physic; late of NORWICH.

LONDON, Printed for Charles Mearn, Bookseller to his most Sacred Majesty,
MDCLXXXIII.

THE PUBLISHER TO The Reader.
THE Papers from which these Tracts were printed, were, a while since,
delivered to me by, those worthy persons, the Lady and Son of the excellent
Author. He himself gave no charge concerning his Manuscripts, either for the
suppressing or the publishing of them. Yet, seeing he had procured Transcripts
of them, and had kept those Copies by him, it seems probable that He designed
them for public use.

Thus much of his Intention being presumed, and many who had tasted of the
fruits of his former studies being covetous of more of the like kind; Also
these Tracts having been perused and much approved of by some Judicious and
Learned men; (...) was not unwilling to be instrumental in fitting them for the
Press.

To this end, I selected them out of many disordred Papers, and disposed them
into such a method as They seemed capable of; beginning first with Plants,
going on to Animals, proceeding farther to things relating to Men, and
concluding with matters of a various nature.

Concerning the Plants, I did, on purpose, forbear to range them (as some
advised) according to their Tribes and Families; because, by so doing, I should
have represented that as a studied and formal work, which is but a Collection
of occasional Essaies. And, indeed, both this Tract, and those which follow,
were rather the diversions than the Labors of his Pen: and, because He did, as
it were, drop down his Thoughts of a sudden, in those little spaces of vacancy
which he snatched from those very many occasions which gave him hourly
interruption; If there appears, here and there, any uncorrectness in the style,
a small degree of Candor suffices to excuse it.

If there be any such errors in the words, I Am sure the Press has not made
them fewer; but I do not hold my self obliged to answer for That which I could
not perfectly govern. However, the matter is not of any great moment: such
errors will not mislead a Learned Reader; and He who is not such in some
competent degree, is not a fit Peruser of these LETTERS. Such these Tracts are;
but, for the Persons to whom they were written, I cannot well learn their Names
from those few obscure marks which the Author has set at the beginning of
them. And these Essaies being Letters, as many as take offense at some few
familiar things which the Author has mixed with them, find fault with
decence. Men are not wont to set down Oracles in every line they write to their
Acquaintance.

There, still, remain other brief Discourses written by this most Learned and
ingenious Author. Those, also, may come forth, when some of his Friends shall
have sufficient leisure; and at such due distance from these Tracts, that They
may follow rather than stifle them.

Amongst these Manuscripts there is one which gives a brief Account of all the
Monuments of the Cathedral of Norwich. It was written merely for private use:
and the Relations of the Author expect such Justice from those into whose
hands some imperfect Copies of it are fallen; that, without their Consent first
obtained, they forbear the publishing of It.

The truth is, matter equal to the skill of the Antiquary was not, there,
afforded: had a fit Subject of that nature offered it self, He would scarce
have been guilty of an oversight like to that of Ausonius, who, in the
description of his native City of Bordeaux, omitted the two famous Antiquities
of it, Palais de Tutele, and, Palais de Galien.

Concerning the Author himself, I choose to be silent, though I have had the
happiness to have been, for some years, known to him. There is on foot a design
of writing his Life: and there are, already, some Memorials collected by one of
his ancient Friends. Till that work be perfected, the Reader may content
himself with these present Tracts; all which commending themselves by their
Learning, Curiosity and Brevity, if He be not pleased with them, he seems to
me to be distempered with such a niceness of Imagination as no wise man is
concerned to humor.

Tho. Tenison.

The Contents of these Tracts.
TRACT I. OBservations upon several Plants mentioned in Scripture. Page 1, etc.
TRACT II. Of Garlands, and Coronary or Garland-plants. 89, etc. TRACT III. Of
the Fishes eaten by our Savior with his Disciples after the Resurrection from
the dead. 97. TRACT IV. An Answer to certain Queries relating to Fishes, Birds,
Insects. 103, etc. TRACT V. Of Hawks and Falconry, ancient and modern. 111,
etc. TRACT VI. Of Cymbals, etc. 121, etc. TRACT VII. Of Ropalic or Gradual
Verses, etc. 125, etc. TRACT VIII. Of Languages, and particularly of the
Saxon-Tongue. 129, etc. TRACT IX. Of Artificial Hills, Mounts or Boroughs in
many parts of England: what they are, and to what end raised, and by what
Nations. 151, etc. TRACT X. Of Troas, what place is meant by that Name. Also of
the situations of Sodom, Gomorrah, Zeboim, in the Dead Sea. 157, etc. TRACT XI.
Of the Answers of the Oracle of Apollo at Delphos to Croesus King of Lydia.
167, etc. TRACT XII. A Prophecy concerning the future state of several Nations;
in a Letter written upon occasion of an old Prophecy sent to the Author from a
Friend, with a request that he would consider it. 181, etc. TRACT XIII. Musaeum
Clausum, or, Bibliotheca Abscondita: containing some remarkable Books,
Antiquities, Pictures and Rarities of several kinds, scarce or never seen by
any man now living. 193, etc.
ERRATA.
PAge 13. l, 20, 21. for Carobbe and Carobbole, read, Carboe and Carobala. p.
17. l. 18, 21. blot out the marks of the Parenthesis. p. 36. l. 5. for Prery,
r. la Prairie. p. 40* l. 5. for Centessimal, r. Centesimal. p. 62. l. 4, 5. for
Chesue verde, r. Chesue ver^. p. 77. blot out M. in the Margin. p. 99. l. 9.
for 103 fishes, r. 153. p. 121. l. 1. blot out not. p. 160. the Greek of
Herodot. should have been set on the Margin. p. 170. l. 4. for held a, r. had.

TRACT I. OBSERVATIONS Upon several PLANTS Mentioned in Scripture.
SIR,
THough many ordinary Heads run The Introduction.
smoothly over the Scripture, yet I must acknowledge, it is one of the hardest
Books I have met with: and therefore well deserves those numerous Comments,
Expositions and Annotations which make up a good part of our Libraries.

However so affected I am therewith, that I wish there had been more of it: and
a larger Volume of that Divine Piece which leaves such welcome impressions,
and somewhat more, in the Readers, than the words and sense after it. At least,
who would not be glad that many things barely hinted were at large delivered in
it? The particulars of the Dispute between the Doctors and our Savior could
not but be welcome to them, who have every word in honor which proceeded from
his mouth, or was otherwise delivered by him: and so would be glad to be
assured, what he wrote with his Finger on the ground: But especially to have a
particular of that instructing Narration or Discourse which he made unto the
Disciples after his resurrection, where it is said: And Luke 24 27.
beginning at Moses, and all the Prophets, he expounded unto them in all the
Scriptures the things concerning himself.

But to omit Theological obscurities, you must needs observe that most Sciences
do seem to have something more nearly to consider in the expressions of the
Scripture.

Astronomers find therein the Names but of few Stars, scarce so many as in
Achilles his Buckler in Homer, and almost the very same. But in some passages
of the Old Testament they think they discover the Zodiacal course of the Sun:
and they, also, conceive an Astronomical sense in that elegant expression of S.
James concerning the father of lights, with whom there is no Jam. 1. 17.
variableness, neither shadow of turning: and therein an allowable allusion
unto the tropical conversion of the Sun, whereby ensues a variation of heat,
light, and also of shadows from it. But whether the Stellae erraticae, or
wandering Stars in S. Jude, may be referred to the celestial Planets, or some
metereological wandering Stars, Ignes fatui, Stellae cadentes and erraticae, or
had any allusion unto the Impostour Barchochebas, or Stellae Filius, who
afterward appeared, and wandered about in the time of Adrianus, they leave unto
conjecture.

Chirurgions may find their whole Art in that one passage, concerning the Rib
which God took out of Adam, that is their (...) in opening the Flesh, (...) in
taking out the Rib, and (...) in closing and healing the part again.

Rhetoricians and Orators take singular notice of very many excellent
passages, stately metaphors, noble tropes and elegant expressions, not to be
found or paralleled in any other Author.

Mineralists look earnestly into the twenty eighth of Job, take special notice
of the early artifice in Brass and Iron under Tubal-Cain: And find also mention
of Gold, Silver, Brass, Tin, Lead, Iron; beside Refining, So^ering, Dross,
Nitre, Saltpits, and in some manner also of Depinxit oculos stibio. 2 King. 9.
30. Jerem. 4. 30. Ezekiel. 23. 40.
Antimony.

Gemmarie Naturalists read diligently the precious Stones in the holy City of
the Apocalypse: examine the Breast Plate of Aaron, and various Gemms upon it,
and think the second Row the nobler of the four: they wonder to find the Art of
Ingravery so ancient upon precious Stones and Signets; together with the
ancient use of Earrings and Bracelets. And are pleased to find Pearl, Coral,
Amber and Crystal in those sacred Leaves, according to our Translation. And
when they often meet with Flints and Marbles, cannot but take notice that there
is no mention of the Magnet or Loadstone, which in so many similitudes,
comparisons, and allusions, could hardly have been omitted in the Works of
Solomon; if it were true that he knew either the attractive or directive power
thereof, as some have believed.

Navigatours consider the Ark, which was pitched without and within, and could
endure the Ocean without Mast or Sails: They take special notice of the twenty
seventh of Ezekiel; the mighty Traffic and great Navigation of Tire, with
particular mention of their Sails, their Masts of Cedar, Oars of Oak, their
skillful Pilots, Mariners and Calkers; as also of the long Voyages of the
Fleets of Solomon; of Jehosaphat's Ships broken at Ezion-Geber; of the notable
Voyage and Shipwreck of S. Paul, so accurately delivered in the Acts.

Oneirocritical Diviners apprehend some hints of their knowledge, even from
Divine Dreams; while they take notice of the Dreams of Joseph, Pharaoh,
Nebuchadnezzar, and the Angels on Jacob's Ladder; and find, in Artemidorus and
Achmetes, that Ladders signify Travels, and the Scales thereof Preferment; and
that Oxen Lean and Fat naturally denote Scarcity or Plenty, and the successes
of Agriculture.

Physiognomists will largely put in from very many passages of Scripture. And
when they find in Aristotle, quibus frons quadrangula, commensurata, fortes,
referuntur ad leones, cannot but take special notice of that expression
concerning the Gadites; mighty men of war, fit for battle, whose faces were as
the faces of lions.

Geometrical and Architectonical Artists look narrowly upon the description of
the Ark, the fabric of the Temple, and the holy City in the Apocalypse.

But the Botanical Artist meets every where with Vegetables, and from the Figg
Leaf in Genesis to the Star Wormwood in the Apocalypse, are variously
interspersed expressions from Plants, elegantly advantaging the significancy of
the Text: Whereof many being delivered in a Language proper unto Judaea and
neighbor Countries are imperfectly apprehended by the common Reader, and now
doubtfully made out, even by the Jewish Expositour.

And even in those which are confessedly known, the elegancy is often lost in
the apprehension of the Reader, unacquainted with such Vegetables, or but
nakedly knowing their natures: whereof holding a pertinent apprehension, you
cannot pass over such expressions without some doubt or want of satisfaction in
your judgment. Hereof we shall only hint or discourse some few which I could
not but take notice of in the reading of holy Scripture.

Many Plants are mentioned in Scripture which are not distinctly known in our
Countries, or under such Names in the Original, as they are fain to be rendered
by analogy, or by the name of Vegetables of good affinity unto them, and so
maintain the textual sense, though in some variation from identity.

1. That Plant which afforded a shade The Observations. Kikaion.
unto Jona 4. 6. a Gourd.
Jonah, mentioned by the name of Kikaion, and still retained at least
marginally in some Translations, to avoid obscurity Jerome rendered Hedera or
Ivy; which notwithstanding (except in its scandent nature) agreed not fully
with the other, that is, to grow up in a night, or be consumed with a Worm; Ivy
being of no swift growth, little subject unto Worms, and a scarce Plant about
Babylon.

2. That Hyssope is taken for that Plant Hyssope.
which cleansed the Leper, being a well scented, and very abstersive Simple,
may well be admitted; so we be not too confident, that it is strictly the same
with our common Hyssope: The Hyssope of those parts differing from that of
ours; as Bellonius has observed in the Hyssope which grows in Judaea, and the
Hyssope of the Wall mentioned in the Works of Solomon, no kind of our Hyssope;
and may tolerably be taken for some kind of minor Capillary, which best makes
out the Antithesis with the Cedar. Nor when we meet with Libanotis, is it to be
conceived our common Rosemary, which is rather the first kind thereof among
several others, used by the Ancients.

3 That it must be taken for Hemlock, Hemlock. Hosea. 10. 4. Amos. 6. 2
which is twice so rendered in our Translation, will hardly be made out,
otherwise than in the intended sense, and implying some ^ant, wherein
bitterness or a poisonous quality is considerable.

4. What Tremelius renders Spina, and Paliurus.
the Vulgar Translation Paliurus, and others make some kind of Rhamnus, is
allowable in the sense; and we contend not about the species, since they are
known Thorns in those Countries, and in our Fields or Gardens among us: and so
common in Judaea, that men conclude the thorny Crown of our Savior was made
either of Paliurus or Rhamnus.

5. Whether the Bush which burnt and Rubus.
consumed not, were properly a Rubus or Bramble, was somewhat doubtful from
the Original and some Translations, had not the Evangelist, and S. Paul
expressed the same by the Greek word (...), which from the description of
Dioscorides, Herbarists accept for Rubus; although the same word (...)
expresses not only the Rubus or kinds of Bramble, but other Thorn-bushes, and
the Hipp-briar is also named (...), or the Dog-briar or Bramble.

6. That Myrica is rendered, Heath, Myrica. Cant. 1. 14.
sounds instructively enough to our ears, who behold that Plant so common in
barren Plains among us: But you cannot but take notice that Erica, or our Heath
is not the same Plant with Myrica or Tammarice, described by Theophrastus and
Dioscorides, and which Bellonius declares to grow so plentifully in the
Deserts of Judaea and Arabia.

7. That the (...), botrus Cypri, or Clusters of Cypress, should have Cypress.
Cant. 1. 14.
any reference to the Cypress Tree, according to the original Copher, or
Clusters of the noble Vine of Cyprus, which might be planted into Judaea, may
seem to others allowable in some latitude. But there seeming some noble Odor
to be implied in this place, you may probably conceive that the expression
drives at the (...) of Dioscorides, some oriental kind of Ligustrum or
Alcharma, which Dioscorides and Pliny mention under the name of (...) and
Cyprus, and to grow about Egypt and Ascalon, producing a sweet and odorate
bush of Flowers, and out of which was made the famous Oleum Cyprinum.

But why it should be rendered Camphyre your judgment cannot but doubt, who know
that our Camphyre was unknown unto the Ancients, and no ingredient into any
composition of great Antiquity: that learned men long conceived it a bituminous
and fossile Body, and our latest experience discovers it to be the resinous
substance of a Tree, in Borneo and China; and that the Camphyre that we use is
a neat preparation of the same.

8. When it is said in Isaiah 41. I will Shittah Tree, etc. Isa. 41. 19.
Plant in the wilderness the Cedar, the Shittah Tree, and the Myrtle and the
Oil Tree, I will set in the Desert, the Fur Tree, and the Pine, and the Box
Tree: Though some doubt may be made of the Shittah Tree, yet all these Trees
here mentioned being such as are ever green, you will more emphatically
apprehend the merciful meaning of God in this mention of no fading, but always
verdant Trees in dry and desert places.

9. And they cut down a Branch with one Grapes of Eshcol. Number. 13. 23.
cluster of Grapes, and they bare it between two upon a Staff, and they brought
Pomegranates and Figgs. This cluster of Grapes brought upon a Staff by the
Spies, was an incredible sight, in (...). Philo.
Philo Judaeus, seemed notable in the eyes of the Israelites, but more
wonderful in our own, who look only upon Northern Vines. But herein you are
like to consider, that the Cluster was thus carefully carried to represent it
entire, without bruising or breaking; that this was not one Bunch but an
extraordinary Cluster, made up of many depending upon one gross stalk. And
however, might be paralleled with the Eastern Clusters of Margiana and
Caramania, if we allow but half the expressions of Pliny and Strabo, whereof
one would lade a Curry or small Cart; and may be made out by the clusters of
the Grapes of Rhodes presented unto Duke Radzivil in his Travels.
Radzivil, each containing three parts of an Ell in compass, and the Grapes as
big as Prunes.

10. Some things may be doubted in Ingred. of holy Perfume. Stacte, etc. Exodus
30. 34, 35.
the species of the holy Ointment and Perfume. With Amber, Musk and Civet we
meet not in the Scripture, nor any Odours from Animals; except we take the
Onycha of that Perfume for the Covercle of a Shellfish called Unguis Odoratus,
or Blatta Byzantina, which Dioscorides affirms to be taken from a Shellfish
of the Indian Lakes, which seeding upon the Aromatical Plants is gathered when
the Lakes are dry. But whether that which we now call Blatta Byzantina, or
Unguis Odoratus, be the same with that odorate one of Antiquity, great doubt
may be made; since Dioscorides says it smelled like Castoreum, and that which
we now have is of an ungrateful odor.

No little doubt may be also made of Galbanum prescribed in the same Perfume,
if we take it for Galbanum which is of common use among us, approaching the
evil scent of Assa Foetida; and not rather for Galbanum of good odor, as the
adjoining words declare, and the original Chelbena will bear; which implies a
fat or resinous substance, that which is commonly known among us being properly
a gummous body and dissoluble also in Water.

The holy Ointment of Stacte or pure Myrrh, distilling from the Plant without
expression or firing, of Cinnamon, Cassia and Calamus, contains less
questionable species, if the Cinnamon of the Ancients were the same with ours,
or managed after the same manner. For thereof Dioscorides made his noble
Unguent. And Cinnamon was so highly valued by Princes, that Cleopatra carried
it unto her Sepulcher with her Jewels; which was also kept in wooden Boxes
among the rarities of Kings: and was of such a lasting nature, that at his
composing of Treacle for the Emperor Severus, Galen made use of some which had
been laid up by Adrianus.

11. That the Prodigal Son desired to Husks eaten by the Prodigal. Luke 15. 16.
eat of Husks given unto Swine, will hardly pass in your apprehension for the
Husks of Pease, Beans, or such edulious Pulses; as well understanding that the
textual word (...) or Ceration, properly intends the Fruit of the Siliqua
Tree so common in Syria, and fed upon by Men and Beasts; called also by some
the Fruit of the Locust Tree, and Panis Sancti Johannis, as conceiving it to
have been part of the Diet of the Baptist in the Desert. The Tree and Fruit is
not only common in Syria and the Eastern parts, but also well known in
Apuglia, and the Kingdom of Naples, growing along the Via Appia, from Fundi
unto Mola; the hard Cods or Husks making a rattling noise in windy weather, by
beating against one another: called by the Italians Carobbe or Carobbole, and
by the French Carouges. With the sweet Pulp hereof some conceive that the
Indians preserve Ginger, Mirabolans and Nutmegs. Of the same (as Pliny
delivers) the Ancients made one kind of Wine, strongly expressing the Juice
thereof; and so they might after give the expressed and less useful part of
the Cods, and remaining Pulp unto their Swine: which being no gustless or
unsatisfying Offal, might be well desired by the Prodigal in his hunger.

12. No marvel it is that the Israelites Cucumbers, etc. of Egypt.
having lived long in a well watered Country, and been acquainted with the noble
Water of Nilus, should complain for Water in the dry and barren Wilderness.
More remarkable it seems that they should extol and linger after the Cucumbers
and Leeks, Onions and Garlic in Egypt: wherein notwithstanding lies a
pertinent expression of the Diet of that Country in ancient times, even as high
as the building of the Pyramids, when Herodotus delivers, that so many
Talents were spent in Onions and Garlic, for the Food of Laborers and
Artificers; and is also answerable unto their present plentiful Diet in
Cucumbers, and the great varieties thereof, as testified by Prosper Alpinus,
who spent many years in Egypt.

13. What Fruit that was which our first Forbidden Fruit. Genesis 2. 17, etc.
Parents tasted in Paradise, from the disputes of learned men seems yet
indeterminable. More clear it is that they covered their nakedness or secret
parts with Figg Leaves; which when I read, I cannot but call to mind the
several considerations which Antiquity had of the Figg Tree, in reference unto
those parts, particularly how Figg Leaves by sundry Authors are described to
have some resemblance unto the Genitals, and so were aptly formed for such
contection of those parts; how also in that famous Statua of Praxiteles,
concerning Alexander and Bucephalus, the Secret Parts are veiled with Figg
Leaves; how this Tree was sacred unto Priapus, and how the Diseases of the
Secret Parts have derived their Name from Figgs.

14. That the good Samaritan coming Balsam. Oil. Luke 10. 34.
from Jericho used any of the Judean Balsam upon the wounded Traveller, is not
to be made out, and we are unwilling to disparage his charitable Surgery in
pouring Oil into a green Wound; and therefore when it is said he used Oil and
Wine, may rather conceive that he made an Oinelaeum or medicine of Oil and Wine
beaten up and mixed together, which was no improper Medicine, and is an Art now
lately studied by some so to incorporate Wine and Oil that they may lastingly
hold together, which some pretend to have, and call it Oleum Samaritanum, or
Samaritans Oil.

15. When Daniel would not pollute Pulse of Daniel. Dan. 1. 12.
himself with the Diet of the Babylonians, he probably declined Pagan
commensation, or to eat of Meats forbidden to the Jews, though common at their
Tables, or so much as to taste of their Gentile Immolations, and Sacrifices
abominable unto his Palate.

But when it is said that he made choice of the Diet of Pulse and Water, whether
he strictly confined unto a leguminous Food, according to the Vulgar
Translation, some doubt may be raised, from the original word Zeragnim, which
signifies Seminalia, and is so set down in the Margin of Arias Montanus; and
the Greek word Spermata, generally expressing Seeds, may signify any edulious
or cerealious Grains besides (...) or leguminous Seeds.

Yet if he strictly made choice of a leguminous Food, and Water instead of his
portion from the King's Table, he handsomely declined the Diet which might have
been put upon him, and particularly that which was called the Potibasis of the
King, which as Athenoeus informs implied the Bread of the King, made of
Barley, and Wheat, and the Wine of Cyprus, which he drank in an oval Cup. And
therefore distinctly from that he chose plain Fare of Water, and the gross Diet
of Pulse, and that perhaps not made into Bread, but parched, and tempered with
Water.

Now that herein (beside the special benediction of God) he made choice of no
improper Diet to keep himself fair and plump and so to excuse the Eunuch his
Keeper, Physicians will not deny, who acknowledge a very nutritive and
impinguating faculty in Pulses, in leguminous Food, and in several sorts of
Grains and Corns, is not like to be doubted by such who consider that this was
probably a great part of the Food of our Forefathers before the Flood, the Diet
also of Jacob: and that the Romans (called therefore Pultifagi) fed much on
Pulse for six hundred years; that they had no Bakers for that time: and their
Pistours were such as, before the use of Mills, beat out and cleansed their
Corn. As also that the Athletick Diet was of Pulse, Alphiton, Maza, Barley and
Water; whereby they were advantaged sometimes to an exquisite state of health,
and such as was not without danger. And therefore (though Daniel were no
Eunuch, and of a more fatning and thriving temper, as some have phancied, yet)
was he by this kind of Diet, sufficiently maintained in a fair and carnous
state of Body, and accordingly his Picture not improperly drawn, that is, not
meagre and lean, like Jeremy's, but plump and fair, answerable to the most
authentic draught of the Vatican, and the late German Luther's Bible.

The Cynicks in Athenoeus make iterated Courses of Lentils, and prefer that
Diet before the luxury of Seleucus. The present Egyptians, who are observed by
Alpinus to be the fattest Nation, and Men to have Breasts like Women, owe much,
as he conceives, unto the Water of Nile, and their Diet of Rice, Pease,
Lentils and white Cicers. The Pulse-eating Cynicks and Stoics, are all very
long livers in Laertius. And Daniel must not be accounted of few years, who,
being carried away Captive in the Reign of Joachim, by King Nebuchadnezzar,
lived, by Scripture account, unto the first year of Cyrus.

16. And Jacob took Rods of green Poplar, Jacob 's Rods. Genesis 30. 31.
and of the Hazel and the Chestnut Tree, and pilled white streaks in them, and
made the white appear which was in the Rods, etc. Men multiply the Philosophy
of Jacob, who, beside the benediction of God, and the powerful effects of
imagination, raised in the Goats and Sheep from pilled and party-colored
objects, conceive that he chose out these particular Plants above any other,
because he understood they had a particular virtue unto the intended effects,
according unto the conception of G. Venetus Problem. 200.
Georgius Venetus.

Whereto you will hardly assent, at least till you be better satisfied and
assured concerning the true species of the Plants intended in the Text, or find
a clearer consent and uniformity in the Translation: For what we render Poplar,
Hazel and Chestnut, the Greek translateth Virgam styracinam, nucinam,
plataninam, which some also render a Pomegranate: and so observing this variety
of interpretations concerning common and known Plants among us, you may more
reasonably doubt, with what propriety or assurance others less known be
sometimes rendered unto us.

17. Whether in the Sermon of the Lilies of the Field. Matt. 6. 28.
Mount, the Lilies of the Field did point at the proper Lilies, or whether
those Flowers grew wild in the place where our Savior preached, some doubt may
be made: because (...) the word in that place is accounted of the same
signification with (...), and that in Homer is taken for all manner of specious
Flowers: so received by Eustachius, Hesychius, and the Scholiast upon
Apollonius Rhodius. (...). And (...) is also received in the same latitude, not
signifying only Lilies, but applied unto Daffodils, Hyacinths, Iris's, and the
Flowers of Colocynthis.

Under the like latitude of acception, are many expressions in the Canticles to
be received. And when it is said he feeds among the Lilies, therein may be
also implied other specious Flowers, not excluding the proper Lilies. But in
that expression, the Lilies drop forth Myrrh, neither proper Lilies nor proper
Myrrh can be apprehended, the one not proceeding from the other, but may be
received in a Metaphorical sense: and in some latitude may be also made out
from the roscid and honey drops observable in the Flowers of Martagon, and
inverted flowred Lilies, and, it is like, is the standing sweet Dew on the white
eyes of the Crown Imperial, now common among us.

And the proper Lily may be intended in that expression of 1 Kings 7. that the
brazen Sea was of the thickness of a hand breadth, and the brim like a Lily.
For the figure of that Flower being round at the bottom, and somewhat
repandous, or inverted at the top, does handsomely illustrate the comparison.

But that the Lily of the Valley, mentioned Cant 2.
in the Canticles, I am the Rose of Sharon, and the Lily of the Valleys, is
that Vegetable which passes under the same name with us, that is Lilium
convallium, or the May Lily, you will more hardly believe, who know with what
insatisfaction the most learned Botanists, reduce that Plant unto any described
by the Ancients; that Anguillara will have it to be the Oenanthe of Athenaeus,
Cordus the Pothos of Theophrastus; and Lobelius that the Greeks had not
described it; who find not six Leaves in the Flower agreeably to all Lilies,
but only six small divisions in the Flower, who find it also to have a single,
and no bulbous Root, nor Leaves shooting about the bottom, nor the Stalk round,
but angular. And that the learned Bauhinus has not placed it in the Classis of
Lilies, but nervifolious Plants.

18. Does he not cast abroad the Fitches, Fitches, Cummin, etc. in Isa. 28 25.
and scatter the Cummin Seed, and cast in the principal Wheat, and the
appointed Barley, and the Rye in their place: Herein though the sense may hold
under the names assigned, yet is it not so easy to determine the particular
Seeds and Grains, where the obscure original causes such differing
Translations. For in the Vulgar we meet with Milium and Gith, which our
Translation declineth, placing Fitches for Gith, and Rye for Milium or Millet,
which notwithstanding is retained by the Dutch.

That it might be Melanthium, Nigella, or Gith, may be allowably apprehended,
from the frequent use of the Seed thereof among the Jews and other Nations, as
also from the Translation of Tremellius; and the Original implying a black
Seed, which is less than Cummin, as, out of Aben Ezra, Buxtorfius has
expounded it.

But whereas Milium or (...) of the Septuagint is by ours rendered Rye, there is
little similitude or affinity between those Grains; For Milium is more
agreeable unto Spelta or Espaut, as the Dutch and others still render it.

That we meet so often with Cummin Seed in many parts of Scripture in reference
unto Judaea, a Seed so abominable at present unto our Palates and Nostrils,
will not seem strange unto any who consider the frequent use thereof among the
Ancients, not only in medical but dietetical use and practice: For their
Dishes were filled therewith, and the noblest festival preparations in Apicius
were not without it: And even in the Polenta, and parched Corn, the old Diet of
the Romans, (as Pliny records) unto every Measure they mixed a small
proportion of Lin-seed and Cummin-seed.

And so Cummin is justly set down among things of vulgar and common use, when
it is said in Matthew 23. v. 23. You pay Tithe of Mint, Annise and Cummin: but
how to make out the translation of Annise we are still to seek, there being no
word in that Text which properly signifies Annise: the Original being (...),
which the Latins call Anethum, and is properly englished Dill.

That among many expressions, allusions and illustrations made in Scripture
from Corns, there is no mention made of Oats, so useful a Grain among us, will
not seem very strange unto you, till you can clearly discover that it was a
Grain of ordinary use in those parts; who may also find that Theophrastus, who
is large about other Grains, delivers very little of it. That Dioscorides is
also very short therein. And Galen delivers that it was of some use in Asia
minor, especially in Mysia, and that rather for Beasts than Men: And Pliny
affirms that the Pulticula thereof was most in use among the Germans. Yet
that the Jews were not without all use of this Grain seems confirmable from the
Rabbinical account, who reckon five Grains liable unto their Offerings, whereof
the Cake presented might be made; that is, Wheat, Oats, Rye, and two sorts of
Barley.

19. Why the Disciples being hungry Ears of Corn. Matt. 12. 1.
plucked the Ears of Corn, it seems strange to us, who observe that men half
starved betake not themselves to such supply; except we consider the ancient
Diet of Alphiton and Polenta, the Meal of dried and parched Corn, or that which
was (...), or Meal of crude and unparched Corn, wherewith they being well
acquainted, might hope for some satisfaction from the Corn yet in the Husk;
that is, from the nourishing pulp or mealy part within it.

20. The inhumane oppression of the Stubble of Egypt. Exodus 5. 7, etc.
Egyptian Taskmasters, who, not content with the common tale of Brick, took
also from the Children of Israel their allowance of Straw, and forced them to
gather Stubble where they could find it, will be more nearly apprehended, if we
consider how hard it was to acquire any quantity of Stubble in Egypt, where
the Stalk of Corn was so short, that to acquire an ordinary measure, it
required more than ordinary labor; as is discoverable from that account, which
Lib. 18. Not. Hist.
Pliny has happily left unto us. In the Corn gathered in Egypt the Straw is
never a Cubit long: because the Seed lies very shallow, and has no other
nourishment than from the Mudd and Slime left by the River; For under it is
nothing but Sand and Gravel.

So that the expression of Scripture is more Emphatical than is commonly
apprehended, when it is said, The people were scattered abroad through all the
Land of Egypt to gather Stubble instead of Straw. For the Stubble being very
short, the acquist was difficult; a few Fields afforded it not, and they were
fain to wander far to obtain a sufficient quantity of it.

21. It is said in the Song of Solomon, that Flowers of the Vine. Cant. 2. 13.
the Vines with the tender Grape give a good smell. That the Flowers of the
Vine should be Emphatically noted to give a pleasant smell, seems hard unto our
Northern Nostrils, which discover not such Odours, and smell them not in full
Vineyards; whereas in hot Regions, and more spread and digested Flowers, a
sweet savor may be allowed, denotable from several humane expressions, and the
practice of the Ancients, in putting the dried Flowers of the Vine into new
Wine to give it a pure and flosculous race or spirit, which Wine was therefore
called (...), allowing unto every Cadus two pounds of dried Flowers.

And, therefore, the Vine flowering but in the Spring, it cannot but seem an
impertinent objection of the Jews, that the Apostles were full of new Wine at
Pentecost when it was not to be found. Wherefore we may rather conceive that
the word Acts 2. 13.
(...) in that place implied not new Wine or Must, but some generous strong and
sweet Wine, wherein more especially lay the power of inebriation.

But if it be to be taken for some kind of Must, it might be some kind of
(...), or long-lasting Must, which might be had at any time of the year, and
which, as Pliny delivers, they made by hindering, and keeping the Must from
fermentation or working, and so it kept soft and sweet for no small time after.

22. When the Dove, sent out of the The Olive Leaf in Genesis 8. 11.
Ark, returned with a green Olive Leaf, according to the Original: how the
Leaf, after ten Months, and under water, should still maintain a verdure or
greenness, need not much amuse the Reader, if we consider that the Olive Tree
is (...), or continually green; that the Leaves are of a bitter taste, and of a
fast and lasting substance. Since we also find fresh and green Leaves among the
Olives which we receive from remote Countries; and since the Plants at the
bottom of the Sea, and on the sides of Rocks, maintain a deep and fresh verdure.

How the Tree should stand so long in the Deluge under Water, may partly be
allowed from the uncertain determination of the Flows and Currents of that
time, and the qualification of the saltness of the Sea, by the admixture of
fresh Water, when the whole watery Element was together.

And it may be signally illustrated from the like examples in Theophrast Hist.
Lib. 4. Cap. 7, 8.
Theophrastus and Plin. lib. 13. cap. ultimo.
Pliny in words to this effect: Even the Sea affords Shrubs and Trees; In the
red Sea whole Woods do live, namely of Bays and Olives bearing Fruit. The
Soldiers of Alexander, who sailed into India, made report, that the Tides were
so high in some Islands, that they overflowed, and covered the Woods, as high
as Plane and Poplar Trees. The lower sort wholly, the greater all but the tops,
whereto the Mariners fastened their Vessels at high Waters, and at the root in
the Ebb; That the Leaves of these Sea Trees while under water looked green, but
taken out presently dried with the heat of the Sun. The like is delivered by
Theophrastus, that some Oaks do grow and bear Acrons under the Sea.

23. The Kingdom of Heaven is like to a Grain of Mustard Seed in S. Matt. 13.
31, 32.
grain of Mustard Seed, which a Man took and sowed in his Field, which indeed
is the least of all Seeds; but when it is grown is the greatest among Herbs, and
becomes a Tree, so that the Birds of the Air come and lodge in the Branches
thereof.

Luke 13. 19. It is like a grain of Mustard Seed, which a Man took and cast it
into his Garden, and it waxed a great Tree, and the Fowls of the Air lodged in
the Branches thereof.

This expression by a grain of Mustard Seed, will not seem so strange unto you,
who well consider it. That it is simply the least of Seeds, you cannot
apprehend, if you have beheld the Seeds of Rapunculus, Marjorane, Tobacco, and
the smallest Seed of Lunaria.

But you may well understand it to be the smallest Seed among Herbs which
produce so big a Plant, or the least of herbal Plants, which arise unto such a
proportion, implied in the expression; the smallest of Seeds, and becomes the
greatest of Herbs.

And you may also grant that it is the smallest of Seeds of Plants apt to
(...), arborescere, fruticescere, or to grow unto a ligneous substance, and
from an herby and oleraceous Vegetable, to become a kind of Tree, and to be
accounted among the Dendrolachana, or Arboroleracea; as upon strong Seed,
Culture and good Ground, is observable in some Cabbages, Mallows, and many
more, and therefore expressed by (...), and (...), it becomes a Tree, or
arborescit, as Beza renders it.

Nor if warily considered does the expression contain such difficulty. For the
Parable may not ground it self upon generals, or imply any or every grain of
Mustard, but point at such a grain as from its fertile spirit, and other
concurrent advantages, has the success to become arboreous, shoot into such a
magnitude, and acquire the like tallness. And unto such a Grain the Kingdom of
Heaven is likened which from such slender beginnings shall find such increase
and grandeur.

The expression also that it might grow into such dimensions that Birds might
lodge in the Branches thereof, may be literally conceived; if we allow the
luxuriancy of Plants in Judaea, above our Northern Regions; If we accept of but
half the Story taken notice of by Tremellius, from the Jerusalem Talmud, of a
Mustard Tree that was to be climbed like a Figg Tree; and of another, under
whose shade a Potter daily wrought: and it may somewhat abate our doubts, if we
take in the advertisement of Herodotus concerning lesser Plants of Milium and
Sesamum in the Babylonian Soil: Milium ac Sesamum in proceritatem instar
arborum crescere, etsi mihi compertum, tamen memorare supersedeo, probe sciens
eis qui nunquam Babyloniam regionem adierunt perquam incredibile visum iri. We
may likewise consider that the word (...) does not necessarily signify making
a Nest, but rather sitting, roosting, covering and resting in the Boughs,
according as the same word is used by the Septuagint in other places Dan. 4. 9.
Ps. 1. 14. 12.
as the Vulgar renders it in this, inhabitant, as our Translation, lodges,
and the Rhemish, rests in the Branches.

24. And it came to pass that on the morrow The Rod of Aaron. Numb. 17. 8.
Moses went into the Tabernacle of witness, and behold the Rod of Aaron for the
House of Levi was budded, and brought forth Buds, and bloomed Blossoms, and
yielded Almonds. In the contention of the Tribes and decision of priority and
primogeniture of Aaron, declared by the Rod, which in a night budded, flowred
and brought forth Almonds, you cannot but apprehend a propriety in the Miracle
from that species of Tree which leads in the Vernal germination of the year,
unto all the Classes of Trees; and so apprehend how properly in a night and
short space of time the Miracle arose, and somewhat answerable unto its nature
the Flowers and Fruit appeared in this precocious Tree, and whose original Name
Shacher from Shachar festinus fuit or maturuit.
implies such speedy efflorescence, as in its proper nature flowering in
February, and showing its Fruit in March.

This consideration of that Tree makes the expression in Jeremy more
Emphatical, when it is said, What see thou? and he Jer. 1. 11.
said, A Rod of an Almond Tree. Then said the Lord unto me, Thou have well
seen, for I will hasten the Word to perform it. I will be quick and forward
like the Almond Tree, to produce the effects of my word, and hasten to display
my judgments upon them.

And we may hereby more easily apprehend the expression in Ecclesiastes; When
Eccles. 12. 5.
the Almond Tree shall flourish. That is when the Head, which is the prime
part, and first shows it self in the world, shall grow white, like the
Flowers of the Almond Tree, whose Fruit, as Athenaeus delivers, was first
called (...), or the Head, from some resemblance and covering parts of it.

How properly the priority was confirmed by a Rod or Staff, and why the Rods
and Staffs of the Princes were chosen for this decision, Philologists will
consider. For these were the badges, signs and cognisances of their places, and
were a kind of Scepter in their hands, denoting their supereminencies. The
Staff of Divinity is ordinarily described in the hands of Gods and Goddesses in
old draughts. Trojan and Grecian Princes were not without the like, whereof the
Shoulders of Thersites felt from the hands of Ulysses. Achilles in Homer, as by
a desperate Oath, swears by his wooden Scepter, which should never bud nor bear
Leaves again; which seeming the greatest impossibility to him, advances the
Miracle of Aaron's Rod: And if it could be well made out that Homer had seen
the Books of Moses, in that expression of Achilles, he might allude unto this
Miracle.

That power which proposed the experiment by Blossoms in the Rod, added also
the Fruit of Almonds; the Text not strictly making out the Leaves, and so
omitting the middle germination: the Leaves properly coming after the Flowers,
and before the Almonds. And therefore if you have well perused Medals, you
cannot but observe how in the impress of many Shekels, which pass among us by
the name of the Jerusalem Shekels, the Rod of Aaron is improperly laden with
many Leaves, whereas that which is shown under the name of the Samaritan Shekel
seems most conformable unto the Text, which describes the Fruit without Leaves.

25. Binding his Foal unto the Vine, and The Vine in Genesis 49. 11.
his Asses Colt unto the choice Vine.

That Vines, which are commonly supported, should grow so large and bulky, as
to be fit to fasten their Juments, and Beasts of labor unto them, may seem a
hard expression unto many: which notwithstanding may easily be admitted, if we
consider the account of Pliny, that in many places out of Italy Vines do grow
without any stay or support: nor will it be otherwise conceived of lusty Vines,
if we call to mind how the same Plin. lib. 14.
Author delivers, that the Statua of Jupiter was made out of a Vine; and
that out of one single Cyprian Vine a Scale or Ladder was made that reached
unto the Roof of the Temple of Diana at Ephesus.

26. I was exalted as a Palm Tree in Engaddi, Rose of Jericho. Ecclus. 24. 14.
and as a Rose Plant in Jericho. That the Rose of Jericho, or that Plant which
passes among us under that denomination, was signified in this Text, you are
not like to apprehend with some, who also name it the Rose of S. Mary, and
deliver, that it opens the Branches, and Flowers upon the Eve of our
Savior's Nativity: But rather conceive it some proper kind of Rose, which
thrived and prospered in Jericho more than in the neighbor Countries. For our
Rose of Jericho is a very low and hard Plant, a few inches above the ground;
one whereof brought from Judaea I have kept by me many years, nothing
resembling a Rose Tree, either in Flowers, Branches, Leaves or Gorwth; and so,
improper to answer the Emphatical word of exaltation in the Text: growing not
only about Jericho, but other parts of Judaea and Arabia, as Bellonius has
observed: which being a dry and ligneous Plant, is preserved many years, and
though crumpled and furdled up, yet, if infused in Water, will swell and
display its parts.

27. Quasi Terebinthus extendi ramos, Turpentine Tree in Ecclus. 24. 16.
when it is said in the same Chapter, as a Turpentine Tree have I stretched out
my Branches: it will not seem strange unto such as have either seen that Tree,
or examined its description: For it is a Plant that widely displayeth its
Branches: And though in some European Countries it be but of a low and
fruticeous growth, yet Pliny Terebinthus in Macedonia fruticat, in Syria, magna
est. Lib. 13. Plin.
observes that it is great in Syria, and so allowably, or at least not
improperly mentioned in the expression of Hosea. 4. 13.
Hosea according to the Vulgar Translation. Super capita montium sacrificant,
etc. sub quercu, populo and terebintho, quoniam bona est umbra ejus. And this
diffusion and spreading of its Branches, has afforded the Proverb of
Terebintho stultior, appliable unto arrogant or boasting persons, who spread
and display their own acts, as Erasmus has observed.

28. It is said in our Translation. Saul Pomegranate in 1 Samuel 14. 2.
tarried in the uppermost parts of Gibeah, under a Pomegranate Tree which is in
Migron: and the people which were with him were about six hundred men. And when
it is said in some Latin Translations, Saul morabatur fixo tentorio sub
Malogranato, you will not be ready to take it in the common literal sense, who
know that a Pomegranate Tree is but low of growth, and very unfit to pitch a
Tent under it; and may rather apprehend it as the name of a place, or the Rock
of Rimmon, or Pomegranate; so named from Pomegranates which grew there, and
which many think to have been the same place mentioned in Judges 20. 45, 47.
Chapter 21. 13.
Judges.

29. It is said in the Book of Wisdom, A Green Field in Wisd. 19. 7.
Where water stood before, dry land appeared, and out of the red Sea a way
appeared without impediment, and out of the violent streams a green Field; or
as the Latin renders it, Campus germinans de profundo: whereby it seems implied
that the Israelites passed over a green Field at the bottom of the Sea: and
though most would have this but a Metaphorical expression, yet may it be
literally tolerable; and so may be safely apprehended by those that sensibly
know what great number of Vegetables (as the several varieties of Alga's, Sea
Lettuce, Phasganium, Conferua, Caulis Marina, Abies, Erica, Tamarice, diverse
sorts of Muscus, Fucus, Quercus Marina and Corallins) are found at the bottom
of the Sea. Since it is also now well known, that the Western Ocean, for many
degrees, is covered with Sargasso or Lenticula Marina, and found to arise from
the bottom of that Sea; since, upon the coast of Provence by the Isles of Eres,
there is a part of the Mediterranean Sea, called la Prery, or the Meadowy Sea,
from the bottom thereof so plentifully covered with Plants: since vast heaps of
Weeds are found in the Bellies of some Whales taken in the Northern Ocean, and
at a great distance from the Shore: And since the providence of Nature has
provided this shelter for minor Fishes; both for their spawn, and safety of
their young ones. And this might be more peculiarly allowed to be spoken of the
Red Sea, since the Hebrews named it Suph, or the Weedy Sea: and, also, seeing
Theophrastus and Pliny, observing the growth of Vegetables under water, have
made their chief illustrations from those in the Red Sea.

30. You will readily discover how Sycamore.
widely they are mistaken, who accept the Sycamore mentioned in several parts
of Scripture for the Sycamore, or Tree of that denomination, with us: which is
properly but one kind or difference of Acer, and bears no Fruit with any
resemblance unto a Figg.

But you will rather, thereby, apprehend the true and genuine Sycamore, or
Sycaminus, which is a stranger in our parts. A Tree (according to the
description of Theophrastus, Dioscorides and Galen) resembling a Mulberry Tree
in the Leaf, but in the Fruit a Figg; which it produces not in the Twiggs but
in the Trunck or greater Branches, answerable to the Sycamore of Egypt, the
Egyptian Figg or Giamez of the Arabians, described by Prosper Alpinus, with a
Leaf somewhat broader than a Mulberry, and in its Fruit like a Figg. Insomuch
that some have fancied it to have had its first production from a Figg Tree
grafted on a Mulberry.

It is a Tree common in Judaea, whereof they made frequent use in Buildings;
and so understood, it explaineth that expression in Isa. 9. 10.
Isaiah: Sycamori excisi sunt, Cedros' substituemus. The Bricks are fallen
down, we will build with hewn Stones: The Sycamores are cut down, but we will
change them into Cedars.

It is a broad spreading Tree, not only fit for Walks, Groves and Shade, but
also affording profit. And therefore it is said that King 1 Chronicles. 27. 28.
David appointed Baalhanan to be over his Olive Trees and Sycamores, which were
in great plenty; and it is accordingly delivered, 1 King. 10. 27.
that Solomon made Cedars to be as the Sycamore Trees that are in the Vale for
abundance. That is, he planted many, though they did not come to perfection in
his days.

And as it grew plentifully about the Plains, so was the Fruit good for Food;
and, as Bellonius and late accounts deliver, very refreshing unto Travelers in
those hot and dry Countries: whereby the expression of Amos 7. 14.
Amos becomes more intelligible, when he said he was an Herdsman, and a
gatherer of Sycamore Fruit. And the expression of Psalm. ^8. 47.
David also becomes more Emphatical; He destroyed their Vines with Hail, and
their Sycamore Trees with Frost. That is, their Sicmoth in the Original, a word
in the sound not far from the Sycamore.

Thus when it is said, Luke 17. 6.
If ye had Faith as a grain of Mustard Seed, ye might say unto this Sycamine
Tree, Be thou plucked up by the roots, and be thou placed in the Sea, and it
should obey you: it might be more significantly spoken of this Sycamore; this
being, described to be Arbor vasta, a large and well rooted Tree, whose removal
was more difficult than many others. And so the instance in that Text, is very
properly made in the Sycamore Tree, one of the largest and less removable Trees
among them. A Tree so lasting and well rooted, that the Sycamore which Zacheus
ascended, is still shown in Judaea unto Travelers; as also the hollow Sycamore
at Maturaea in Egypt, where the blessed Virgin is said to have remained: which
though it relisheth of the Legend, yet it plainly declares what opinion they
had of the lasting condition of that Tree, to countenance the Tradition; for
which they might not be without some experience, since the learned describer of
the D Greaves.
Pyramides observes, that the old Egyptians made Coffins of this Wood, which
he found yet fresh and undecayed among diverse of their Mummies.

And thus, also, when Zacheus climbed up into a Sycamore above any other Tree,
this being a large and fair one, it cannot be denied that he made choice of a
proper and advantageous Tree to look down upon our Savior.

31. Whether the expression of our Savior Increase of Seed 100. fold in Matt.
13. 23.
in the Parable of the Sower, and the increase of the Seed unto thirty, sixty
and a hundred fold, had any reference unto the ages of Believers, and measures
of their Faith, as Children, Young and Old Persons, as to beginners, well
advanced and strongly confirmed Christians, as learned men have hinted; or
whether in this progressional assent there were any latent Mysteries, as the
mystical Interpreters of Numbers may apprehend, I pretend not to determine.

But, how this multiplication may well be conceived, and in what way
apprehended, and that this centessimal increase is not naturally strange, you
that are no stranger in Agriculture, old and new, are not like to make great
doubt.

That every Grain should produce an Ear affording an hundred Grains, is not
like to be their conjecture who behold the growth of Corn in our Fields,
wherein a common Grain does produce far less in number. For Barley consisting
but of two Versus or Rows, seldom exceeds twenty Grains, that is, ten upon
each (...), or Row; Rye, of a square figure, is very fruitful at forty: Wheat,
besides the Frit and Uruncus, or imperfect Grains of the small Husks at the top
and bottom of the Ear, is fruitful at ten treble Glumoe or Husks in a Row,
each containing but three Grains in breadth, if the middle Grain arriveth at
all to perfection; and so makes up threescore Grains in both sides.

Yet even this centessimal fructification may be admitted in some sorts of
Cerealia, and Grains from one Ear: if we take in the Triticum centigranum, or
fertilissimum Plinii, Indian Wheat, and Panicum; which, in every Ear,
contains hundreds of Grains.

But this increase may easily be conceived of Grains in their total
multiplication, in good and fertile ground, since, if every Grain of Wheat
produces but three Ears, the increase will arise above that number. Nor are we
without examples of some grounds which have produced many more Ears, and above
this centessimal increase: As Pliny has left recorded of the Byzacian Field in
Africa. Misit ex eo loco Procurator ex uno quadraginta minus germina. Misit and
Neroni pariter tercentum quadraginta stipulos, ex uno grano. Cum centessimos
quidem Leontini Sicilioe campi fundunt, aliique, and tota Boetica, and imprimis
Aegyptus. And even in our own Country, from one Grain of Wheat sowed in a
Garden, I have numbered many more than an hundred.

And though many Grains are commonly lost which come not to sprouting or
earing, yet the same is also verified in measure; as that one Bushel should
produce a hundred, as is exemplified by the Corn in Gerar; Genesis 26. 12.
Then Isaac sowed in that Land, and received in that year an hundred fold. That
is, as the Chaldee explaineth it, a hundred for one, when he measured it. And
this Pliny seems to intend, when he says of the fertile Byzacian Territory
before mentioned, Ex uno centeni quinquaginta modii redduntur. And may be
favorably apprehended of the fertility of some grounds in Poland; wherein,
after the account of Gaguinus, from Rye sowed in August, come thirty or forty
Ears, and a Man on Horseback can scarce look over it. In the Sabbatical Crop of
Judoea, there must be admitted a large increase, and probably not short of this
centessimal multiplication: For it supplied part of the sixth year, the whole
seventh, and eighth until the Harvest of that year.

The seven years of plenty in Egypt must be of high increase; when, by storing
up but the fifth part, they supplied the whole Land, and many of their
neighbors after: for it is said, Genesis 41. 56.
the Famine was in all the Land about them. And therefore though the causes of
the Dearth in Egypt be made out from the defect of the overflow of Nilus,
according to the Dream of Pharaoh; yet was that no cause of the scarcity in the
Land of Canaan, which may rather be ascribed to the want of the former and
latter rains, for some succeeding years, if their Famine held time and duration
with that of Egypt; as may be probably gathered from that expression of
Joseph, Genesis 45. 9, 11.
Come down unto me [into Aegypt] and tarry not, and there will I nourish you:
(for yet there are five years of Famine) lest thou and thy Household, and all
that thou have come to poverty.

How they preserved their Corn so long in Egypt may seem hard unto Northern
and moist Climates, except we consider the many ways of preservation practiced
by antiquity, and also take in that handsome account of Pliny; What Corn soever
is laid up in the Ear, it takes no harm keep it as long as you will; although
the best and most assured way to keep Corn is in Caves and Vaults under ground,
according to the practice of Cappadocia and Thracia.

In Egypt and Mauritania above all things they look to this, that their
Granaries stand on high ground; and how dry so ever their Floor be, they lay a
course of Chaff betwixt it and the ground. Besides, they put up their Corn in
Granaries and Binns together with the Ear. And Varro delivers that Wheat laid
up in that manner will last fifty years; Millet an hundred; and Beans so
conserved in a Cave of Ambracia, were known to last an hundred and twenty
years; that is, from the time of King Pyrrhus, unto the Pyratick War under the
conduct of Pompey.

More strange it may seem how, after seven years, the Grains conserved should
be fruitful for a new production. For it is said that Joseph delivered Seed
unto the Egyptians, to sow their Land for the eighth year: and Corn after
seven years is like to afford little or no production, according to
Theophrastus; Theoph. Hist. l. 8.
Ad Sementem semen anniculum optimum putatur, binum deterius and trinum; ultra
sterile ferme est, quanquam ad usum cibarium idoneum.

Yet since, from former exemplifications, Corn may be made to last so long, the
fructifying power may well be conceived to last in some good proportion,
according to the region and place of its conservation, as the same Theophrastus
has observed, and left a notable example from Cappadocia, where Corn might be
kept sixty years, and remain fertile at forty; according to his expression thus
translated; In Cappadociae loco quodam petra dicto, triticum ad quadraginta
annos foecundum est, and ad sementem percommodum durare proditum est, sexagenos
aut septuagenos ad usum cibarium servari posse idoneum. The situation of that
Conservatory, was, as he delivers, (...), high, airy and exposed to several
favorable winds. And upon such consideration of winds and ventilation, some
conceive the Egyptian Granaries were made open, the Country being free from
rain. Howsoever it was, that contrivance could not be without some hazard:
Egypt (...). Vid. Theophrastum.
for the great Mists and Dews of that Country might dispose the Corn unto
corruption.

More plainly may they mistake, who from some analogy of name (as if Pyramid
were derived from (...), Triticum,) conceive the Egyptian Pyramids to have
been built for Granaries; or look for any settled Monuments about the Deserts
erected for that intention; since their Storehouses were made in the great
Towns, according to Scripture expression, Genesis 41. 48.
He gathered up all the Food of seven years, which was in the Land of Egypt,
and laid up the Food in the Cities: the Food of the Field which was round about
every City, laid he up in the same.

32. For if thou were cut out of the Olive Olive Tree in Romans 11. 24.
Tree, which is wild by nature, and were grafted, contrary to nature, into a
good Olive Tree, how much more shall these, which be the natural Branches, be
grafted into their own Olive Tree? In which place, how answerable to the
Doctrine of Husbandry this expression of S. Paul is, you will readily apprehend
who understand the rules of insition or grafting, and that way of vegetable
propagation; wherein that is contrary to nature, or natural rules which Art
observes: viz. to make use of a Cyons more ignoble than the Stock, or to graft
wild upon domestic and good Plants, according as De causis Plant. Lib. 1. Cap.
7.
Theop^ ^ath anciently observed, and, mak^g ^ce in the Olive, has lest this
Do^ unto us; Urbanum Sylvestribus ut sat^ ^tris inserere. Nam si e contrario
Sylve^ in Urbanos severis, ctsi differentia quaedam (...), tamen (...).
bonae frugis Arbor nunquam profe^ reddetur: which is also agreeable unto our
present practice, who graft Pears on Thorns, and Apples upon Crabb Stocks, not
using the contrary insition. And when it is said, How much more shall these,
which are the natural Branches, be grasted into their own natural Olive Tree?
this is also agreeable unto the rule of the same Author; (...), Insitio melior
est similium in similibus: For the nearer consanguinity there is between the
Cyons and the Stock, the readier comprehension is made, and the nobler
fructification. According also unto the later caution of Laurenbergius; De
horticultura.
Arbores domesticae insitioni destinatae, semper anteponendae Sylvestribus. And
though the success be good, and may suffice upon Stocks of the same
denomination; yet, to be grafted upon their own and Mother Stock, is the
nearest insition: which way, though less practiced of old, is now much
embraced, and found a notable way for melioration of the Fruit; and much the
rather, if the Tree to be grafted on be a good and generous Plant, a good and
fair Olive, as the Apostle seems to imply by a peculiar (...). Rom 11. 24.
word scarce to be found elsewhere.

It must be also considered, that the Oleaster, or wild Olive, by cutting,
transplanting and the best managery of Art, can be made but to produce such
Olives as (Theophrastus says) were particularly named Phaulia, that is, but
bad Olives; and that it was reckoned among Prodigies, for the Oleaster to
become an Olive Tree.

And when insition and grafting, in the Text, is applied unto the Olive Tree,
it has an Emphatical sense, very agreeable unto that Tree which is best
propagated this way; not at all by surculation, as Theophrastus observes, nor
well by Seed, as has been observed. Omne semen simile genus perficit, praeter
oleam, Oleastrum enim generat, hoc est sylvestrem oleam, and non oleam veram.

If, therefore, thou Roman and Gentile Branch, which were cut from the wild
Olive, art now, by the signal mercy of God, beyond the ordinary and commonly
expected way, grafted into the true Olive, the Church of God; if thou, which
neither naturally nor by humane art can be made to produce any good Fruit,
and, next to a Miracle, to be made a true Olive, art now by the benignity of
God grafted into the proper Olive; how much more shall the Jew, and natural
Branch, be grafted into its genuine and mother Tree, wherein propinquity of
nature is like, so readily and prosperously, to effect a coalition? And this
more especially by the expressed way of insition or implantation, the Olive
being not successfully propagable by Seed, nor at all by surculation.

33. As for the Stork, the Fur Trees Stork nesting on Fur Trees in Psalm.
104. 17.
are her House. This expression, in our Translation, which keeps close to the
Original Chasidah, is somewhat different from the Greek and Latin Translation;
nor agreeable unto common observation, whereby they are known commonly to build
upon Chimneys, or the tops of Houses, and high Buildings, which
notwithstanding, the common Translation may clearly consist with observation,
if we consider that this is commonly affirmed of the black Stork, and take
notice of the description of Ornithologus in Aldrovandus, that such Storks are
often found in diverse parts, and that they do in Arboribus nidulari, proesertim
in abietibus; Make their Nests on Trees, especially upon Fur Trees. Nor
wholly disagreeing unto the practice of the common white Stork, according unto
Varro, nidulantur in agris: and the concession of Aldrovandus that sometimes
they build on Trees: and the assertion of Bellonius de Avibus.
Bellonius, that men dress them Nests, and place Cradles upon high Trees, in
Marish regions, that Storks may breed upon them: which course some observe for
Herns and Cormorants with us. And this building of Storks upon Trees, may be
also answerable unto the original and natural way of building of Storks before
the political habitations of men, and the raising of Houses and high Buildings;
before they were invited by such conveniences and prepared Nests, to relinquish
their natural places of nidulation. I say, before or where such advantages are
not ready; when Swallows found other places than Chimneys, and Daws found other
places than holes in high Fabrics to build in.

34. And, therefore, Israel said carry Balm in Gen* 43. 11.
down the man a present, a little Balm, a little Honey, and Myrrh, Nuts and
Almonds. Now whether this, which Jacob sent, were the proper Balsam extolled by
humane Writers, you cannot but make some doubt, who find the Greek Translation
to be (...), that is, Resina, and so may have some suspicion that it might be
some pure distillation from the Turpentine Tree, which grows prosperously and
plentifully in Judaea, and seems so understood by the Arabic; and was indeed
esteemed by Theophrastus and Dioscorides, the chiefest of resinous Bodies, and
the word Resina Emphatically used for it.

That the Balsam Plant has grown and prospered in Judaea we believe without
dispute. For the same is attested by Theophrastus, Pliny, Justinus, and many
more; from the commendation that Galen affords of the Balsam of Syria, and
the story of Cleopatra, that she obtained some Plants of Balsam from Herod the
Great to transplant into Egypt. But whether it was so anciently in Judaea as
the time of Jacob; nay, whether this Plant was here before the time of Solomon,
that great collectour of Vegetable rarities, some doubt may be made from the
account of Josephus, that the Queen of Sheba, a part of Arabia, among presents
unto Solomon, brought some Plants of the Balsam Tree, as one of the peculiar
estimables of her Country.

Whether this ever had its natural growth, or were an original native Plant of
Judaea, much more that it was peculiar unto that Country, a greater doubt may
arise: while we read in Pausanias, Strabo and Diodorus, that it grows also in
Arabia, and find in Theophrast. l. 9. c. 6.
Theophrastus, that it grew in two Gardens about Jericho in Judaea. And more
especially whiles we seriously consider that notable discourse between Abdella,
Abdachim and Alpinus, concluding the natural and original place of this
singular Plant to be in Arabia, about Mecha and Medina, where it still
plentifully grows, and Mountains abound therein. From whence it has been
carefully transplanted by the Basha's of Grand Cairo, into the Garden of
Matarea; where, when it dies, it is repaired again from those parts of Arabia,
from whence the Grand Signior yearly receives a present of Balsam from the
Xeriff of Mecha, still called by the Arabians Balessan; whence they believe
arose the Greek appellation Balsam. And since these Balsam-plants are not now
to be found in Judaea, and though purposely cultivated, are often lost in
Judaea, but everlastingly live, and naturally renew in Arabia; They probably
concluded, that those of Judaea were foreign and transplanted from these parts.

All which notwithstanding, since the same Plant may grow naturally and
spontaneously in several Countries, and either from inward or outward causes be
lost in one Region, while it continues and subsisteth in another, the Balsam
Tree might possibly be a native of Judaea as well as of Arabia; which because
de facto it cannot be clearly made out, the ancient expressions of Scripture
become doubtful in this point. But since this Plant has not, for a long time,
grown in Judaea, and still plentifully prospers in Arabia, that which now comes
in precious parcels to us, and still is called the Balsam of Judaea, may now
surrender its name, and more properly be called the Balsam of Arabia.

35. And the Flax and the Barley was Barley, Flax, etc. in Exodus 9. 31.
smitten; for the Barley was in the Ear, and the Flax was bolled, but the Wheat
and the Rye was not smitten, for they were not grown up. Linum solliculos
germinavit, (...), Septuag. Serotina, Lat. (...), Gr.
How the Barley and the Flax should be smitten in the plague of Hail in Egypt,
and the Wheat and Rye escape, because they were not yet grown up, may seem
strange unto English observers, who call Barley Summer Corn sown so many months
after Wheat, and, beside hordeum Polystichon, or big Barley, sow not Barley in
the Winter, to anticipate the growth of Wheat.

And the same may also seem a preposterous expression unto all who do not
consider the various Agriculture, and different Husbandry of Nations, and such
as was practiced in Egypt, and fairly proved to have been also used in Judaea,
wherein their Barley Harvest was before that of Wheat; as is confirmable from
that expression in Ruth, that she came into Bethlehem at the beginning of
Barley Harvest, and staid unto the end of Wheat Harvest; from the death of
Manasses the Father of Judith, Emphatically expressed to have happened in the
Wheat Harvest, and more advanced heat of the Sun; and from the custom of the
Jews, to offer the Barley Sheaf of the first fruits in March, and a Cake of
Wheat Flower but at the end of Pentecost. Consonant unto the practice of the
Egyptians, who (as Theophrastus delivers) sowed their Barley early in
reference to their first Fruits; and also the common rural practice, recorded
by the same Author, Mature seritur Triticum, Hordeum, quod etiam maturius
seritur; Wheat and Barley are sowed early, but Barley earlier of the two.

Flax was also an early Plant, as may be illustrated from the neighbor Country
of Canaan. For the Israelites kept the Passover in Gilgal in the fourteenth
day of the first Month, answering unto part of our March, having newly passed
Jordan: And the Spies which were sent from Shittim unto Jericho, not many days
before, were hid by Rahab under the stalks of Flax, which lay drying on the top
of her House; which shows that the Flax was already and newly gathered. For
this was the first preparation of Flax, and before fluviation or rotting,
which, after Pliny's account, was after Wheat Harvest.

But the Wheat and the Rye were not smitten, for they were not grown up. The
Original signifies that it was hidden, or dark, the Vulgar and Septuagint that
it was serotinous or late, and our old Translation that it was late sown. And
so the expression and interposition of Moses, who well understood the Husbandry
of Egypt, might Emphatically declare the state of Wheat and Rye in that
particular year; and if so, the same is solvable from the time of the flood of
Nilus, and the measure of its inundation. For if it were very high, and
over-drenching the ground, they were forced to later Seed-time; and so the
Wheat and the Rye escaped; for they were more slowly growing Grains, and, by
reason of the greater inundation of the River, were sown later than ordinary
that year, especially in the Plains near the River, where the ground dries
latest.

Some think the plagues of Egypt were acted in one Month, others but in the
compass of twelve. In the delivery of Scripture there is no account, of what
time of the year or particular Month they fell out; but the account of these
Grains, which were either smitten or escaped, make the plague of Hail to have
probably happened in February: This may be collected from the new and old account
of the Seed time and Harvest in Egypt. For, according to the account of
Radzevil 's Travels.
Radzevil, the River rising in June, and the Banks being cut in September, they
sow about S. Andrews, when the Flood is retired, and the moderate dryness of
the ground permits. So that the Barley anticipating the Wheat, either in
time of sowing or growing, might be in Ear in February.

The account of Plin. lib. 18. cap. 18.
Pliny is little different. They cast the Seed upon the Slime and Mudd when the
River is down, which commonly happens in the beginning of November. They
begin to reap and cut down a little before the Calends of April, about the
middle of March, and in the Month of May their Harvest is in. So that Barley
anticipating Wheat, it might be in Ear in February, and Wheat not yet grown up,
at least to the Spindle or Ear, to be destroyed by the Hail. For they cut down
about the middle of March, at least their forward Corns, and in the Month of
May all sorts of Corns were in.

The turning of the River into Blood shows in what Month this happened not.
That is, not when the River had overflown; for it is said, the Egyptians
dug round about the River for Water to drink, which they could not have
done, if the River had been out, and the Fields under Water.

In the same Text you cannot, without some hesitation, pass over the
translation of Rye, which the Original names Cassumeth, the Greek renders
Olyra, the French and Dutch Spelta, the Latin Zea, and not Secale the known
word for Rye. But this common Rye so well understood at present, was not
distinctly described, or not well known from early Antiquity. And therefore, in
this uncertainty, some have thought it to have been the Typha of the Ancients.
Cordus will have it to be Olyra, and Ruellius some kind of Oryza. But having no
vulgar and well known name for those Grains, we warily embrace an appellation
of near affinity, and tolerably render it Rye.

While Flax, Barley, Wheat and Rye are named, some may wonder why no mention is
made of Ryce, wherewith, at present, Egypt so much abounds. But whether that
Plant grew so early in that Country, some doubt may be made: for Ryce is
originally a Grain of India, and might not then be transplanted into Egypt.

36. Let them become as the Grass growing Sheaves of Grass, in Psalm. 12. 6, 7.
upon the House top, which withers before it be plucked up, whereof the mower
fills not his hand, nor he that binds Sheaves his bosom. Though the
filling of the hand, and mention of Sheaves of Hay, may seem strange unto us,
who use neither handfulls nor Sheaves in that kind of Husbandry, yet may it be
properly taken, and you are not like to doubt thereof, who may find the like
expressions in the Authors de Re rustica, concerning the old way of this
Husbandry.

Columella lib. 2. cap. 22.
Columella, delivering what Works were not to be permitted upon the Roman
Feriae, or Festivals, among others sets down, that upon such days, it was not
lawful to carry or bind up Hay, nec foenum vincire nec vehere, per religiones
Pontificum licet.

Marcus Varro lib. 1. cap. 49.
Varro is more particular; Primum de pratis herbarum cum crescere desiit,
subsecari falcibus debet, and quoad peracescat furcillis versari, cum peracuit,
de his manipulos fieri and vehi in villam.

And their course of mowing seems somewhat different from ours. For they cut
not down clear at once, but used an after section, which they peculiarly called
Sicilitium, according as the word is expounded by Georgius Alexandrinus, and
Beroaldus after Pliny; Sicilire est falcibus consectari quae foenisecae
praeterierunt, aut ea secare quae foenisecae praeterierunt.

37. When it is said that Elias lay and Juniper Tree, in 1 King. 19. 5, etc.
slept under a Juniper Tree, some may wonder how that Tree, which in our parts
grows but low and shrubby, should afford him shade and covering. But others
know that there is a lesser and a larger kind of that Vegetable; that it makes
a Tree in its proper soil and region. And may find in Pliny that in the Temple
of Diana Saguntina in Spain, the Rafters were made of Juniper.

In that expression of Psalm. 120. 4.
David, Sharp Arrows of the mighty, with Coals of Juniper; Though Juniper be
left out in the last Translation, yet may there be an Emphatical sense from
that word; since Juniper abounds with a piercing Oil, and makes a smart Fire.
And the rather, if that quality be half true, which Pliny affirms, that the
Coals of Juniper raked up will keep a glowing Fire for the space of a year. For
so the expression will Emphatically imply, not only the smart burning, but the
lasting fire of their malice.

That passage of Job 30. 3, 4.
Job, wherein he complains that poor and half famished fellows despised him, is
of greater difficulty; For want and famine they were solitary, they cut up
Mallows by the Bushes, and Juniper roots for meat. Wherein we might at first
doubt the Translation, not only from the Greek Text but the assertion of
Dioscorides, who affirms that the roots of Juniper are of a venomous quality.
But Scaliger has disproved the same from the practice of the African
Physicians, who use the decoction of Juniper roots against the Venereal
Disease. The Chaldee reads it Genista, or some kind of Broom, which will be
also unusual and hard Diet, except thereby we understand the Orobanche, or
Broom Rape, which grows from the roots of Broom; and which, according to
Dioscorides, men used to eat raw or boiled in the manner of Asparagus.

And, therefore, this expression does highly declare the misery, poverty and
extremity of the persons who were now mockers of him; they being so
contemptible and necessitous, that they were fain to be content, not with a
mean Diet, but such as was no Diet at all, the roots of Trees, the roots of
Juniper, which none would make use of for Food, but in the lowest necessity,
and some degree of samishing.

38. While some have disputed whether Scarlet Tincture, in Genesis 38. 28. Exodus
25. 4, etc.
Theophrastus knew the Scarlet Berry, others may doubt whether that noble
tincture were known unto the Hebrews, which notwithstanding seems clear from
the early and iterated expressions of Scripture concerning the Scarlet
Tincture, and is the less to be doubted because the Scarlet Berry grew
plentifully in the Land of Canaan, and so they were furnished with the
Materials of that Color. For though Dioscorides says it grows in Armenia
and Cappadocia, yet that it also grew in Judaea, seems more than probable from
the account of Bellonius, who observed it to be so plentiful in that Country,
that it afforded a profitable Commodity, and great quantity thereof was
transported by the Venetian Merchants.

How this should be fitly expressed by the word Tolagnoth, Vermis, or Worm, may
be made out from Pliny, who calls it Coccus Scolecius, or the Wormy Berry; as
also from the name of that Color called Vermilion; or the Worm Color; and
which is also answerable unto the true nature of it. For this is no proper
Berry containing the fructifying part, but a kind of Vessicular excrescence,
adhering commonly to the Leaf of the Ilex Coccigera, or dwarf and small kind of
Oak, whose Leaves are always green, and its proper seminal parts Acrons. This
little Bagg contains a red Pulp, which, if not timely gathered, or left to it
self, produces small red Flies, and partly a red powder, both serviceable unto
the tincture. And therefore, to prevent the generation of Flies, when it is
first gathered, they sprinkle it over with Vinegar, especially such as make use
of the fresh Pulp for the confection of Alkermes; which still retains the
Arabic name, from the Kermesberry; which is agreeable unto the description of
Bellonius and Quinqueranus. And the same we have beheld in Provence and
Languedock, where it is plentifully gathered, and called Manna Rusticorum, from
the considerable profit which the Peasants make by gathering of it.

39. Mention is made of Oaks in diverse Oaks, in Genesis 35. 4, 8. Josh. 24. 26.
Isa. 1. 29. Ezekiel. 27. 6. Hosea. 4. 13, etc.
parts of Scripture, which though the Latin sometimes renders a Turpentine
Tree, yet surely some kind of Oak may be understood thereby; but whether our
common Oak as is commonly apprehended, you may well doubt; for the common Oak,
which prospers so well with us, delights not in hot regions. And that
diligent Botanist Bellonius, who took such particular notice of the Plants of
Syria and Judaea, observed not the vulgar Oak in those parts. But he found the
Ilex, Chesue Verde, or Ever-green Oak, in many places; as also that kind of Oak
which is properly named Esculus: and he makes mention thereof in places about
Jerusalem, and in his Journey from thence unto Damascus, where he found Montes
Ilice, and Esculo virentes; which, in his Discourse of Lemnos, he says are
always green. And therefore when it is said 2 Samuel 18. 9, 14.
of Absalom, that his Mule went under the thick Boughs of a great Oak, and his
Head caught hold of the Oak, and he was taken up between the Heaven and the
Earth, that Oak might be some Ilex, or rather Esculus. For that is a thick and
busshy kind, in Orbem comosa, as Dale-champius; ramis in orbem dispositis
comans, as Renealmus describes it. And when it is said 2 King. 18. 4.
that Ezechias broke down the Images, and cut down the Groves, they might much
consist of Oaks, which were sacred unto Pagan Deities, as this more
particularly, according to that of Virgil,

-- Nemorumque Jovi quae maxima frondet Esculus, --
And, in Judaea, where no Hogs were eaten by the Jews, and few kept by others,
it is not unlikely that they most cherished the Esculus, which might serve for
Food of men. For the Acrons thereof are the sweetest of any Oak, and taste like
Chestnuts; and so, producing an edulious or esculent Fruit, is properly named
Esculus.

They which know the Ilex, or Ever-green Oak, with somewhat prickled Leaves,
named (...), will better understand the irreconcilable answer of the two
Elders, when the one accused Susanna of incontinency under a (...), or
Ever-green Oak, the other under a (...), Lentiscus, or Mastick Tree, which are
so different in Bigness, Boughs, Leaves and Fruit, the one bearing Acrons, the
other Berries: And, without the knowledge hereof, will not Emphatically or
distinctly understand that of the Poet,

Flavaque de viridi stillabant Ilice mella.
40. When we often meet with the Cedars Cedars of Libanus.
of Libanus, that expression may be used not only because they grew in a known
and neighbor Country, but also because they were of the noblest and largest
kind of that Vegetable; And we find the Phoenician Cedar magnified by the
Ancients. The Cedar of Libanus is a coniferous Tree, bearing Cones or Cloggs;
(not Berries) of such a vastness, that Melchior Lussy, a great Traveller, found
one upon Libanus as big as seven men could compass. Some are now so curious as
to keep the Branches and Cones thereof among their rare Collections. And,
though much Cedar Wood be now brought from America, yet it is time to take
notice of the true Cedar of Libanus, employed in the Temple of Solomon; for
they have been much destroyed and neglected, and become at last but thin.
Bellonius could reckon but twenty eight, Rowolfius and Radzevil but twenty
four, and Bidulphus the same number. And a later account of A Journey to
Jerusalem, 1672.
some English Travelers says, that they are now but in one place, and in a
small compass, in Libanus.

Quando ingressi fueritis terram, and Plantaveritis Uncircumci sed Fruit, in
Levit. 19. 23.
in illa ligna Pomifera, auferetis praeputia eorum. Poma quae germinant immunda
erunt vobis, nec edetis ex eis. Quarto autem anno, omnis fructus eorum
sanctificabitur, laudabilis Domino. Quinto autem anno comedetis fructus. By
this Law they were enjoined not to eat of the Fruits of the Trees which they
planted for the first three years: and, as the Vulgar expresses it, to take
away the Prepuces, from such Trees, during that time; the Fruits of the fourth
year being holy unto the Lord, and those of the fifth allowable unto others.
Now if auferre praeputia be taken, as many learned men have thought, to pluck
away the bearing Buds, before they proceed unto Flowers or Fruit, you will
readily apprehend the Metaphor, from the analogy and similitude of those
Sprouts and Buds, which, shutting up the fruitful particle, resembles the
preputial part.

And you may also find herein a piece of Husbandry not mentioned in
Theophrastus, or Columella. For by taking away of the Buds, and hindering
fructification, the Trees become more vigorous, both in growth and future
production. By such a way King Pyrrhus got into a lusty race of Beeves, and
such as were desired over all Greece, by keeping them from Generation until
the ninth year.

And you may also discover a physical advantage of the goodness of the Fruit,
which becomes less crude and more wholesome, upon the fourth or fifth years
production.

41. While you read in Theophrastus, Partition of Plants into Herb and Tree,
in Genesis 1. 11.
or modern Herbalists, a strict division of Plants, into Arbor, Frutex,
Suffrutex and Herba, you cannot but take notice of the Scriptural division at
the Creation, into Tree and Herb: and this may seem too narrow to comprehend
the Classis of Vegetables; which, notwithstanding, may be sufficient, and a
plain and intelligible division thereof. And therefore in this difficulty
concerning the division of Plants, the learned Botanist, Caesalpinus, thus
concludes, Clarius agemus si altera divisione neglecta, duo tantum Plantarum
genera substituamus, Arborem scilicet, and Herbam, conjungentes cum Arboribus
Frutices, and cum Herba Suffrutices; Frutices being the lesser Trees, and
Suffrutices the larger, harder and more solid Herbs.

And this division into Herb and Tree, may also suffice, if we take in that
natural ground of the division of perfect Plants, and such as grow from Seeds.
For Plants, in their first production, do send forth two Leaves adjoining to
the Seed; and then afterward, do either produce two other Leaves, and so
successively before any Stalk; and such go under the name of (...), or Herb; or
else, after the first Leaves succeeding to the Seed Leaves, they send forth a
Stalk, or rudiment of a Stalk before any other Leaves, and such fall under the
Classis of (...), or Tree. So that, in this natural division, there are but two
grand differences, that is, Tree and Herb. The Frutex and Suffrutex have the
way of production from the Seed, and in other respects the Suffrutices, or
Cremia, have a middle and participating nature, and referable unto Herbs.

42. I have seen the ungodly in great The Bay Tree, in Psalm. 37. 35.
power, and flourishing like a green Bay Tree. Both Scripture and humane
Writers draw frequent illustrations from Plants. Scribonius Largus illustrates
the old Cymbals from the Cotyledon Palustris, or Umbelicus Veneris. Who would
expect to find Aaron's Mitre in any Plant? yet Josephus has taken some pains
to make out the same in the seminal knop of Hyoscyamus, or Henbane. The
Scripture compares the Figure of Manna unto the Seed of Coriander. In Jer. 10.
5.
Jeremy we find the expression, Straight as a Palm Tree: And here the wicked in
their flourishing state are likened unto a Bay Tree. Which, sufficiently
answering the sense of the Text, we are unwilling to exclude that noble Plant
from the honor of having its name in Scripture. Yet we cannot but observe,
that the Septuagint renders it Cedars, and the Vulgar accordingly, Vidi impium
superexaltatum, and elevatum sicut Cedros Libani; and the Translation of
Tremelius mentions neither Bay nor Cedar; Sese explicantem tanquam Arbor
indigena virens; which seems to have been followed by the last Low Dutch
Translation. A private Translation renders it like a green selfgrowing
Ainsworth.
Laurel. The High Dutch of Luther's Bible, retains the word Laurel; and so does
the old Saxon and Island Translation; so also the French, Spanish; and Italian
of Diodati: yet his Notes acknowledge that some think it rather a Cedar, and
others any large Tree in a prospering and natural Soil.

But however these Translations differ, the sense is allowable and obvious unto
apprehension: when no particular Plant is named, any proper to the sense may be
supposed; where either Cedar or Laurel is mentioned, if the preceding words
[exalted and elevated] be used, they are more appliable unto the Cedar; where
the word [flourishing] is used, it is more agreeable unto the Laurel, which, in
its prosperity, abounds with pleasant Flowers, whereas those of the Cedar are
very little, and scarce perceptible, answerable to the Fur, Pine and other
coniferous Trees.

43. And in the morning, when they were The Figg Tree, in S. Mark. 11. 13, etc.
come from Bethany, he was hungry; and seeing a Figg Tree afar off having
Leaves, he came, if happily he might find any thing thereon; and when he came to
it, he found nothing but Leaves: for the time of Figgs was not yet. Singular
conceptions have passed from learned men to make out this passage of S. Mark,
which Matt. 21. 19.
S. Matthew so plainly delivers; most men doubting why our Savior should
curse the Tree for bearing no Fruit, when the time of Fruit was not yet come;
or why it is said that the time of Figgs was not yet, when, notwithstanding,
Figgs might be found at that season.

Heinsius in Nonnum.
Heinsius, who thinks that Elias must salve the doubt, according to the
received Reading of the Text, undertaketh to vary the same, reading (...), that
is, for where he was, it was the season or time for Figgs.

A learned D. Hammond.
Interpreter of our own, without alteration of accents or words, endeavors to
salve all, by another interpretation of the same, (...), For it was not a good
or seasonable year for Figgs.

But, because men part not easily with old beliefs, or the received
construction of words, we shall briefly set down what may be alleged for it.

And, first, for the better comprehension of all deductions hereupon, we may
consider the several differences and distinctions both of Figg Trees and their
Fruits. Suidas upon the word (...) makes four divisions of Figgs, (...) and
(...). But because (...) makes no considerable distinction, learned men do
chiefly insist upon the three others; that is, (...), or Grossus, which are the
Buttons, or small sort of Figgs, either not ripe, or not ordinarily proceeding
to ripeness, but fall away at least in the greatest part, and especially in
sharp Winters; which are also named (...), and distinguished from the Fruit of
the wild Figg, or Caprificus, which is named (...), and never comes unto
ripeness. The second is called (...), or Ficus, which commonly proceeds unto
ripeness in its due season. A third the ripe Figg dried, which makes the
(...), or Carrier.

Of Figg Trees there are also many divisions; For some are prodromi, or
precocious, which bear Fruit very early, whether they bear once, or oftener in
the year; some are protericae, which are the most early of the precocious
Trees, and bear soonest of any; some are aestivae, which bear in the common
season of the Summer, and some serotinae which bear very late.

Some are biferous and triferous, which bear twice or thrice in the year, and
some are of the ordinary standing course, which make up the expected season of
Figgs.

Again some Figg Trees, either in their proper kind, or fertility in some
single ones, do bear Fruit or rudiments of Fruit all the year long; as is
annually observable in some kind of Figg Trees in hot and proper regions; and
may also be observed in some Figg Trees of more temperate Countries, in years
of no great disadvantage, wherein, when the Summer-ripe Figg is past, others
begin to appear, and so, standing in Buttons all the Winter, do either fall
away before the Spring, or else proceed to ripeness.

Now, according to these distinctions, we may measure the intent of the Text,
and endeavor to make out the expression. For, considering the diversity of
these Trees, and their several fructifications, probable or possible it is,
that some thereof were implied, and may literally afford a solution.

And first, though it was not the season for Figgs, yet some Fruit might have
been expected, even in ordinary bearing Trees. For the Grossi or Buttons appear
before the Leaves, especially before the Leaves are well grown. Some might have
stood during the Winter, and by this time been of some growth: Though many fall
off, yet some might remain on, and proceed toward maturity. And we find that
good Husbands had an art to make them hold on, as is delivered by Theophrastus.

The (...) or common Summer Figg was not expected; for that is placed by Galen
among the Fructus Horarii, or Horaei, which ripen in that part of Summer,
called (...), and stands commended by him above other Fruits of that season.
And of this kind might be the Figgs which were brought unto Cleopatra in a
Basket together with an Asp, according to the time of her death on the
nineteenth of August. And that our Savior expected not such Figgs, but some
other kind, seems to be implied in the indefinite expression, if happily he might
find any thing thereon; which in that Country, and the variety of such Trees,
might not be despaired of, at this season, and very probably hoped for in the
first precocious and early bearing Trees. And that there were precocious and
early bearing Trees in Judaea, may be illustrated from some expressions in
Scripture concerning precocious Figgs; Jer. 24. 2.
Calathus unus habebat Ficus bonas nimis, sicut solent esse Ficus primi
temporis; One Basket had very good Figgs, even like the Figgs that are first
ripe. And the like might be more especially expected in this place, if this
remarkable Tree be rightly placed in some Mapps of Jerusalem; for it is placed,
by Adrichomius, in or near Bethphage, which some conjectures will have to be
the House of Figgs: and at this place Figg Trees are still to be found, if we
consult the Travels of Bidulphus.

Again, in this great variety of Figg Trees, as precocious, proterical,
biferous, triferous, and always bearing Trees, something might have been
expected, though the time of common Figgs was not yet. For some Trees bear in a
manner all the year; as may be illustrated from the Epistle of the Emperor
Julian, concerning his Present of Damascus Figgs, which he commends from
their successive and continued growing and bearing, after the manner of the
Fruits which Homer describes in the Garden of Alcinous. And though it were
then but about the eleventh of March, yet, in the Latitude of Jerusalem, the
Sun at that time has a good power in the day, and might advance the maturity
of precocious often-bearing or everbearing Figgs. And therefore when it is said
S. Mark 14. 67. S. Luke 22. 55, 56.
that S. Peter stood and warmed himself by the Fire in the Judgment Hall, and
the reason is added [ S. John 18. 18.
for it was cold] that expression might be interposed either to denote the
coolness in the Morning, according to hot Countries, or some extraordinary and
unusual coldness, which happened at that time. For the same Bidulphus, who was
at that time of the year at Jerusalem, says, that it was then as hot as at
Midsummer in England: and we find in Scripture, that the first Sheaf of Barley
was offered in March.

Our Savior therefore, seeing a Figg Tree with Leaves well spread, and so as
to be distinguished a far off, went unto it, and when he came, found nothing
but Leaves; he found it to be no precocious, or always-bearing Tree: And though
it were not the time for Summer Figgs, yet he found no rudiments thereof; and
though he expected not common Figgs, yet something might happily have been
expected of some other kind, according to different fertility, and variety of
production; but, discovering nothing, he found a Tree answering the State of
the Jewish Rulers, barren unto all expectation.

And this is consonant unto the mystery of the Story, wherein the Figg Tree
denotes the Synagogue and Rulers of the Jews, whom God having peculiarly
cultivated, singularly blessed and cherished, he expected from them no
ordinary, slow, or customary fructification, but an earliness in good Works, a
precocious or continued fructification, and was not content with common
after-bearing; and might justly have expostulated with the Jews, as God by the
Prophet Micah 7. 1.
Micah did with their Forefathers; Praecoquas Ficus desideravit Anima mea, My
Soul longed for, (or desired) early ripe Fruits, but ye are become as a Vine
already gathered, and there is no cluster upon you.

Lastly, In this account of the Figg Tree, the mystery and symbolical sense is
chiefly to be looked upon. Our Savior, therefore, taking a hint from his
hunger to go unto this specious Tree, and intending, by this Tree, to declare a
Judgment upon the Synagogue and people of the Jews, he came unto the Tree, and,
after the usual manner, inquired, and looked about for some kind of Fruit, as
he had done before in the Jews, but found nothing but Leaves and specious
outsides, as he had also found in them; and when it bore no Fruit like them,
when he expected it, and came to look for it, though it were not the time of
ordinary Fruit, yet failing when he required it, in the mysterious sense, 'twas
fruitless longer to expect it. For he had come unto them, and they were nothing
fructified by it, his departure approached, and his time of preaching was now
at an end.

Now, in this account, besides the Miracle, some things are naturally
considerable. For it may be questioned how the Figg Tree, naturally a fruitful
Plant, became barren, for it had no show or so much as rudiment of Fruit: And
it was, in old time, a signal Judgment of God, that the Figg Tree should bear
no Fruit: and therefore this Tree may naturally be conceived to have been under
some Disease indisposing it to such fructification. And this, in the Pathology
of Plants, may be the Disease of (...), or superfoliation mentioned by
Theophrastus; whereby the fructifying Juice is starved by the excess of Leaves;
which in this Tree were already so full spread, that it might be known and
distinguished a far off. And this was, also, a sharp resemblance of the
hypocrisy of the Rulers, made up of specious outsides, and fruitless
ostentation, contrary to the Fruit of the Figg Tree, which, filled with a sweet
and pleasant pulp, makes no show without, not so much as of any Flower.

Some naturals are also considerable from the propriety of this punishment
settled upon a Figg Tree: For infertility and barrenness seems more intolerable
in this Tree than any, as being a Vegetable singularly constituted for
production; so far from bearing no Fruit that it may be made to bear almost
any. And therefore the Ancients singled out this as the fittest Tree whereon to
graft and propagate other Fruits, as containing a plentiful and lively Sap,
whereby other Cyons would prosper: And, therefore, this Tree was also sacred
unto the Deity of Fertility: and the Statua of Priapus was made of the Figg
Tree.

Olim Truncus eram Ficulnus inutile lignum. M.

It has also a peculiar advantage to produce and maintain its Fruit above all
other Plants, as not subject to miscarry in Flowers and Blossoms, from
accidents of Wind and Weather. For it bears no Flowers outwardly, and such as
it has, are within the Coat, as the later examination of Naturalists has
discovered.

Lastly, It was a Tree wholly constituted for Fruit, wherein if it fails, it
is in a manner useless, the Wood thereof being of so little use, that it
affords proverbial expressions,

Homo Ficulneus, argumentum Ficulneum.
for things of no validity.

44. I said I will go up into the Palm The Palm Tree, in Cant. 7. 8.
Tree, and take hold of the Boughs thereof. This expression is more agreeable
unto the Palm than is commonly apprehended, for that it is a tall bare Tree
bearing its Boughs but at the top and upper part; so that it must be ascended
before its Boughs or Fruit can be attained: And the going, getting or climbing
up, may be Emphatical in this Tree; for the Trunk or Body thereof is naturally
contrived for ascension, and made with advantage for getting up, as having many
welts and eminencies, and so as it were a natural Ladder, and Staves, by which
it may be climbed, as Plin. 13. cap. 4.
Pliny observes, Palmae teretes atque proceres, densis quadratisque pollicibus
faciles se ad scandendum praebent, by this way men are able to get up into it.
And the Figures of Indians thus climbing the same are graphically described in
the Travels of Linschoten. This Tree is often mentioned in Scripture, and was
so remarkable in Judaea, that in aftertimes it became the Emblem of that
Country, as may be seen in that Medal of the Emperor Titus, with a Captive
Woman sitting under a Palm, and the Inscription of Judaea Capta. And Pliny
confirms the same when he says, Judaea Palmis inclyta.

45. Many things are mentioned in Scripture, Lilies, in Cant. 2. 1, 2, 16.
which have an Emphasis from this or the neighbor Countries: For besides the
Cedars, the Syrian Lilies are taken notice of by Writers. That expression in
the Canticles, Cant. 4. 1.
Thou art fair, thou art fair, thou have Doves eyes, receives a particular
character, if we look not upon our common Pigeons, but the beauteous and fine
eyed Doves of Syria.

When the Rump is so strictly taken notice of in the Sacrifice of the Peace
Offering, in these words, Levit. 3. 9.
The whole Rump, it shall be taken off hard by the Backbone, it becomes the
more considerable in reference to this Country, where Sheep had so large Tails;
which, according to Aristot. Hist. Animal. lib. 8.
Aristotle, were a Cubit broad; and so they are still, as Bellonius has
delivered.

When it is said in the Canticles, Cant. 4. 2.
Thy Teeth are as a Flock of Sheep, which go up from the washing, whereof every
one bears Twins, and there is not one barren among them; it may seem hard
unto us of these parts to find whole Flocks bearing Twins, and not one barren
among them; yet may this be better conceived in the fertile Flocks of those
Countries, where Sheep have so often two, sometimes three, and sometimes four,
and which is so frequently observed by Writers of the neighbor Country of
Egypt. And this secundity, and fruitsulness of their Flocks, is answerable
unto the expression of the Psalmist, Psalm. 144. 13.
That our Sheep may bring forth thousands and ten thousands in our Streets. And
hereby, besides what was spent at their Tables, a good supply was made for the
great consumption of Sheep in their several kinds of Sacrifices; and of so many
thousand Male unblemished yearling Lambs, which were required at their
Passeovers.

Nor need we wonder to find so frequent mention both of Garden and Field
Plants; since Syria was notable of old for this curiosity and variety,
according to Pliny, Syria hortis operosissima; and since Bellonius has so
lately observed of Jerusalem, that its hilly parts did so abound with Plants,
that they might be compared unto Mount Ida in Crete or Candia; which is the
most noted place for noble Simples yet known.

46. Though so many Plants have their Trees and Herbs not expressly named in
Scripture.
express Names in Scripture, yet others are implied in some Texts which are not
explicitly mentioned. In the Feast of Tabernacles or Booths, the Law was this,
Levit. 23. 40.
Thou shall take unto thee Boughs of goodly Trees, Branches of the Palm, and
the Boughs of thick Trees, and Willows of the Brook. Now though the Text
descends not unto particulars of the goodly Trees, and thick Trees; yet
Maimonides will tell us that for a goodly Tree they made use of the Citron
Tree, which is fair and goodly to the eye, and well prospering in that Country:
And that for the thick Trees they used the Myrtle, which was no rare or
infrequent Plant among them. And though it grows but low in our Gardens, was
not a little Tree in those parts; in which Plant also the Leaves grew thick,
and almost covered the Stalk. And Curtius Curtius de Hortis.
Symphorianus in his description of the Exotic Myrtle, makes it, Folio
densissimo senis in ordinem versibus. The Paschal Lamb was to be eaten with
bitterness or bitter Herbs, not particularly set down in Scripture: but the
Jewish Writers declare, that they made use of Succory, and wild Lettuce, which
Herbs while some conceive they could not get down, as being very bitter, rough
and prickly, they may consider that the time of the Passover was in the
Spring, when these Herbs are young and tender, and consequently less
unpleasant: besides, according to the Jewish custom, these Herbs were dipped in
the Charoseth or Sauce made of Raisins stamped with Vinegar, and were also
eaten with Bread; and they had four Cups of Wine allowed unto them; and it was
sufficient to take but a pittance of Herbs, or the quantity of an Olive.

47. Though the famous paper Reed of Reeds in Scripture.
Egypt, be only particularly named in Scripture; yet when Reeds are so often
mentioned, without special name or distinction, we may conceive their
differences may be comprehended, and that they were not all of one kind, or
that the common Reed was only implied. For mention is made in Ezekiel 40. 5.
Ezekiel of a measuring Reed of six Cubits: we find that they smote our Savior
on the Head with a S. Matt. 27. 30, 48.
Reed, and put a Sponge with Vinegar on a Reed, which was long enough to reach
to his mouth, while he was upon the Cross; And with such differences of Reeds,
Vallatory, Sagittary, Scriptory, and others, they might be furnished in Judaea:
For we find in the portion of Josh. 16. 17.
Ephraim, Vallis arundineti; and so set down in the Mapps of Adricomius, and in
our Translation the River Kana, or Brook of Canes. And Bellonius tells us that
the River Jordan affords plenty and variety of Reeds; out of some whereof the
Arabs make Darts, and light Lances, and out of others, Arrows; and withal that
there plentifully grows the fine Calamus, arundo Scriptoria, or writing Reed,
which they gather with the greatest care, as being of singular use and
commodity at home and abroad; a hard Reed about the compass of a Goose or Swans
Quill, whereof I have seen some polished and cut with a Webb; which is in
common use for writing throughout the Turkish Dominions, they using not the
Quills of Birds.

And whereas the same Author with other describers of these parts affirms,
that the River Jordan, not far from Jerico, is but such a Stream as a youth may
throw a Stone over it, or about eight fathoms broad, it does not diminish the
account and solemnity of the miraculous passage of the Israelites under Joshua;
For it must be considered, that they passed it in the time of Harvest, when the
River was high, and the Grounds about it under Water, according to that
pertinent parenthesis, As the Feet of the Priests, which carried the Ark, were
dipped in the brim of the Water, (for Josh. 3. 19.
Jordan oversloweth all its Banks at the time of Harvest.) In this
consideration it was well joined with the great River Euphrates, in that
expression in Ecclus. 24. 26.
Ecclesiasticus, God makes the understanding to abound like Euphrates, and as
Jordan in the time of Harvest.

48. The Kingdom of Heaven is likened Zizania, in S. Matt. 13. 24, 25, etc.
unto a man which sowed good Seed in his Field, but while men slept, his Enemy
came and sowed Tares (or, as the Greek, Zizania) among the Wheat.

Now, how to render Zizania, and to what species of Plants to confine it, there
is no slender doubt; for the word is not mentioned in other parts of Scripture,
nor in any ancient Greek Writer: it is not to be found in Aristotle,
Theophrastus, or Dioscorides. Some Greek and Latin Fathers have made use of the
same, as also Suidas and Phavorinus; but probably they have all derived it from
this Text.

And therefore this obscurity might easily occasion such variety in
Translations and Expositions. For some retain the word Zizania, as the Vulgar,
that of Beza, of Junius, and also the Italian and Spanish. The Low Dutch
renders it Oncruidt, the German Oncraut, or Herba Mala, the French Yuroye or
Lolium, and the English Tares.

Besides, this being conceived to be a Syriack word, it may still add unto the
uncertainty of the sense. For though this Gospel were first written in Hebrew,
or Syriack, yet it is not unquestionable whether the true Original be any where
extant: And that Syriack Copy which we now have, is conceived to be of far
later time than S. Matthew.

Expositours and Annotatours are also various. Hugo Grotius has passed the
word Zizania without a Note. Diodati, retaining the word Zizania, conceives
that it was some peculiar Herb growing among the Corn of those Countries, and
not known in our Fields. But Emanuel de Sa interprets it, Plantas semini
noxias, and so accordingly some others.

Buxtorfius, in his Rabbinical Lexicon, gives diverse interpretations, sometimes
for degenerated Corn, sometimes for the black Seeds in Wheat, but withal
concludes, an hoec sit eadem vox aut species, cum Zizania apud Evangelistam,
quoerant alii. But Lexicons and Dictionaries by Zizania do almost generally
understand Lolium, which we call Darnel, and commonly confine the signification
to that Plant: Notwithstanding, since Lolium had a known and received Name in
Greek, some may be apt to doubt, why, if that Plant were particularly intended,
the proper Greek word was not used in the Text. For (...). Theophrast. Hist.
Plant. l. 8.
Theophrastus named Lolium (...), and has often mentioned that Plant; and in
one place says that Corn does sometimes Loliescere or degenerate into Darnel.
Dioscorides, who traveled over Judoea, gives it the same name, which is also
to be found in Galen, Aetius and Aegineta; and Pliny has sometimes latinized
that word into Era.

Besides, Lolium or Darnel shows it self in the Winter, growing up with the
Wheat; and Theophrastus observed that it was no Vernal Plant, but came up in
the Winter; which will not well answer the expression of the Text, And when the
Blade came up, and brought forth Fruit, or gave evidence of its Fruit, the
Zizania appeared. And if the Husbandry of the Ancients were agreeable unto
ours, they would not have been so earnest to weed away the Darnel; for our
Husbandmen do not commonly weed it in the Field, but separate the Seeds after
Thrashing. And therefore Galen delivers, that in an unseasonable year, and
great scarcity of Corn, when they neglected to separate the Darnel, the Bread
proved generally unwholesome, and had evil effects on the Head.

Our old and later Translation render Zizania, Tares, which name our English
Botanists give unto Aracus, Cracca, Vicia sylvestris, calling them Tares, and
strangling Tares. And our Husbandmen by Tares understand some sorts of wild
Fitches, which grow amongst Corn, and clasp upon it, according to the Latin
Etymology, Vicia a Vinciendo. Now in this uncertainty of the Original, Tares as
well as some others, may make out the sense, and be also more agreeable unto
the circumstances of the Parable. For they come up and appear what they are,
when the Blade of the Corn is come up, and also the Stalk and Fruit
discoverable. They have likewise little spreading Roots, which may entangle or
rob the good Roots, and they have also tendrils and claspers, which lay hold of
what grows near them, and so can hardly be weeded without endangering the
neighbor Corn.

However, if by Zizania we understand Herbas segeti noxias, or vitia segetum,
as some Expositours have done, and take the word in a more general sense,
comprehending several Weeds and Vegetables offensive unto Corn, according as
the Greek word in the plural Number may imply, and as the learned De Horti
cultura.
Laurenbergius has expressed, Runcare quod apud nostrates Weden dicitur,
Zizanias inutiles est evellere. If, I say, it be thus taken, we shall not need
to be definitive, or confine unto one particular Plant, from a word which may
comprehend diverse: And this may also prove a safer sense, in such obscurity of
the Original.

And therefore since in this Parable the sower of the Zizania is the Devil, and
the Zizania wicked persons; if any from this larger acception, will take in
Thistles, Darnel, Cockle, wild strangling Fitches, Bindweed, Tribulus,
Restharrow and other Vitia Segetum; he may, both from the natural and
symbolical qualities of those Vegetables, have plenty of matter to illustrate
the variety of his mischiefs, and of the wicked of this world.

49. When it is said in Job, Let Thistles Cockle, in Job 31. 40.
grow up instead of Wheat, and Cockle instead of Barley, the words are
intelligible, the sense allowable and significant to this purpose: but whether
the word Cockle does strictly conform unto the Original, some doubt may be made
from the different Translations of it; For the Vulgar renders it Spina,
Tremelius Vitia Frugum, and the Geneva Turoye or Darnel. Besides, whether
Cockle were common in the ancient Agriculture of those parts, or what word they
used for it, is of great uncertainty. For the Elder Botanical Writers have made
no mention thereof, and the Moderns have given it the Name of Pseudomelanthium,
Nigellastrum, Lychnoeides Segetum, names not known unto Antiquity: And
therefore our Translation has warily set down [noisome Weeds] in the Margin.

TRACT II. OF GARLANDS, AND Coronary or Garland-plants.
SIR,
THE use of flowery Crowns and Garlands is of no slender Antiquity, and higher
than I conceive you apprehend it. For, besides the old Greeks and Romans, the
Egyptians made use hereof; who, beside the bravery of their Garlands, had
little Birds upon them to peck their Heads and Brows, and so to keep them
sleeping at their Festival compotations. This practice also extended as far as
India: for at the Feast with the Indian King, it is peculiarly observed by
Philostratus that their custom was to wear Garlands, and come crowned with them
unto their Feast.

The Crowns and Garlands of the Ancients were either Gestatory, such as they
wore about their Heads or Necks; Portatory, such as they carried at solemn
Festivals; Pensile or Suspensory, such as they hanged about the Posts of their
Houses in honor of their Gods, as of Jupiter Thyroeus or Limeneus; or else
they were Depository, such as they laid upon the Graves and Monuments of the
dead. And these were made up after all ways of Art, Compactile, Sutile,
Plectile; for which Work there were (...), or expert Persons to contrive them
after the best grace and property.

Though we yield not unto them in the beauty of flowery Garlands, yet some of
those of Antiquity were larger than any we lately meet with: for we find in
Athenoeus that a Myrtle Crown of one and twenty foot in compass was solemnly
carried about at the Hellotian Feast in Corinth, together with the Bones of
Europa.

And Garlands were surely of frequent use among them; for we read in De
Theriaca ad Pisonem.
Galen that when Hippocrates cured the great Plague of Athens by Fires kindled
in and about the City; the fuel thereof consisted much of their Garlands. And
they must needs be very frequent and of common use, the ends thereof being
many. For they were convivial, festival, sacrificial, nuptial, honorary,
funebrial. We who propose unto our selves the pleasure of two Senses, and only
single out such as are of Beauty and good Odor, cannot strictly confine our
selves unto imitation of them.

For, in their convivial Garlands, they had respect unto Plants preventing
drunkenness, or discussing the exhalations from Wine; wherein, beside Roses,
taking in Ivy, Vervain, Melilote, etc. they made use of diverse of small Beauty
or good Odor. The solemn festival Garlands were made properly unto their Gods,
and accordingly contrived from Plants sacred unto such Deities; and their
sacrificial ones were selected under such considerations. Their honorary Crowns
triumphal, ovary, civical, obsidional, had little of Flowers in them: and their
funebrial Garlands had little of beauty in them beside Roses, while they made
them of Myrtle, Rosemary, Apium, etc. under symbolical intimations: but our
florid and purely ornamental Garlands, delightful unto sight and smell, nor
framed according to mystical and symbolical considerations, are of more free
election, and so may be made to excel those of the Ancients; we having China,
India, and a new world to supply us, beside the great distinction of Flowers
unknown unto Antiquity, and the varieties thereof arising from Art and Nature.

But, beside Vernal, Aestival and Autumnal made of Flowers, the Ancients had
also Hyemal Garlands; contenting themselves at first with such as were made of
Horn died into several Colors, and shaped into the Figures of Flowers, and
also of Aes Coronarium or Clincquant or Brass thinly wrought out into Leaves
commonly known among us. But the curiosity of some Emperors for such intents
had Roses brought from Egypt until they had found the art to produce late
Roses in Rome, and to make them grow in the Winter, as is delivered in that
handsome Epigramme of Martial,

At tu Romanae jussus jam cedere Brumae
Mitte tuas messes, Accipe, Nile, Rosas.
Some American Nations, who do much excel in Garlands, content not themselves
only with Flowers, but make elegant Crowns of Feathers, whereof they have some
of greater radiancy and luster than their Flowers: and since there is an Art to
set into shapes, and curiously to work in choicest Feathers, there could
nothing answer the Crowns made of the choicest Feathers of some Tomineios and
Sun Birds.

The Catalogue of Coronary Plants is not large in Theophrastus, Pliny, Pollux,
or Athenaeus: but we may find a good enlargement in the accounts of Modern
Botanists; and additions may still be made by successive acquists of fair and
specious Plants, not yet translated from foreign Regions or little known unto
our Gardens; he that would be complete may take notice of these following,

Flos Tigridis. Flos Lyncis. Pinea Indica Recchi, Talama Ouiedi. Herba
Paradisea. Volubilis Mexicanus. Narcissus Indicus Serpentarius. Helichrysum
Mexicanum. Xicama. Aquilegia novae Hispaniae Cacoxochitli Recchi. Aristochaea
Mexicana. Camaratinga sive Caragunta quarta Pisonis. Maracuia Granadilla.
Cambay sive Myrtus Americana. Flos Auriculoe Flor de la Oreia. Floripendio
novae Hispaniae. Rosa Indica. Zilium Indicum. Fula Magori Garciae. Champe
Garciae Champacca Bontii. Daullontas frutex odoratus seu Chamaemelum
arborescens Bontii. Beidelsar Alpini. Sambuc. Amberboi Turcarum. Nuphar
Aegyptium. Lilionarcissus Indicus. Bamma Aegyptiacum. Hiucca Canadensis horti
Farnesiani. Bupthalmum novae Hispaniae Alepocapath. Valeriana seu Chrysanthemum
Americanum Acocotlis. Flos Corvinus Coronarius Americanus. Capolin Cerasus
dulcis Indicus Floribus racemosis. Asphodelus Americanus. Syringa Lutea
Americana. Bulbus unifolius. Moly latifolium Flore luteo. Conyza Americana
purpurea. Salvia Cretica pomifera Bellonii. Lausus Serrata Odora. Ornithogalus
Promontorii Bonae Spei. Fritallaria crassa Soldanica Promontorii Bonae Spei.
Sigillum Solomonis Indicum. Tulipa Promontorii Bonae Spei. Iris Uvaria.
Nopolxoch sedum elegans novae Hispaniae.
More might be added unto this List; and I have only taken the pains to give
you a short Specimen of those many more which you may find in respective
Authors, and which time and future industry may make no great strangers in
England. The Inhabitants of Nova Hispania, and a great part of America,
Mahometans, Indians, Chinese, are eminent promoters of these coronary and
specious Plants: and the annual Tribute of the King of Bisnaguer in India,
arising out of Odours and Flowers, amounts unto many thousands of Crowns.

Thus, in brief, of this matter. I am, etc.

TRACT III. OF THE FISHES Eaten by OUR SAVIOR WITH HIS DISCIPLES After His
Resurrection from the Dead.
SIR,
I Have thought, a little, upon the Question proposed by you [viz. What kind of
Fishes those were of which our Savior ate with his Disciples after his S. Joh.
21. 9, 10, 11, 13.
Resurrection?] and I return you such an Answer, as, in so short a time for
study, and in the midst of my occasions, occurs to me.

The Books of Scripture (as also those which are Apocryphal) are often silent,
or very sparing, in the particular Names of Fishes; or in setting them down in
such manner as to leave the kinds of them without all doubt and reason for
farther inquiry. For, when it declares what Fishes were allowed the Israelites
for their Food, they are only set down in general which have Finns and Scales;
whereas, in the account of Quadrupeds and Birds, there is particular mention
made of diverse of them. In the Book of Tobit that Fish which he took out of the
River is only named a great Fish, and so there remains much uncertainty to
determine the Species thereof. And even the Fish which swallowed Jonah, and is
called a great Fish, and commonly thought to be a great Whale, is not received
without all doubt; while some learned men conceive it to have been none of our
Whales, but a large kind of Lamia.

And, in this narration of S. John, the Fishes are only expressed by their
Bigness and Number, not their Names, and therefore it may seem undeterminable
what they were: notwithstanding, these Fishes being taken in the great Lake or
Sea of Tiberias, something may be probably stated therein. For since Bellonius,
that diligent and learned Traveller, informs us, that the Fishes of this Lake
were Trouts, Pikes, Chevins and Tenches; it may well be conceived that either
all or some thereof are to be understood in this Scripture. And these kind of
Fishes become large and of great growth, answerable unto the expression of
Scripture, One hundred and three great Fishes; that is, large in their own
kinds, and the largest kinds in this Lake and fresh Water, wherein no great
variety, and of the larger sort of Fishes, could be expected. For the River
Jordan, running through this Lake, falls into the Lake of Asphaltus, and has
no mouth into the Sea, which might admit of great Fishes or greater variety to
come up into it.

And out of the mouth of some of these forementioned Fishes might the Tribute
money be taken, when our Savior, at Capernaum, seated upon the same Lake, said
unto Peter, Go thou to the Sea, and cast an Hook, and take up the Fish that
first comes; and when thou have opened his mouth thou shall find a piece of
money; that take and give them for thee and me.

And this makes void that common conceit and tradition of the Fish called
Fabermarinus, by some, a Peter or Penny Fish; which having two remarkable round
spots upon either side, these are conceived to be the marks of S. Peter's
Fingers or signatures of the Money: for though it has these marks, yet is
there no probability that such a kind of Fish was to be found in the Lake of
Tiberias, Geneserah or Galilee, which is but sixteen miles long and six broad,
and has no communication with the Sea; for this is a mere Fish of the Sea and
salt Water, and (though we meet with some thereof on our Coast) is not to be
found in many Seas.

Thus having returned no improbable Answer unto your Question, I shall crave
leave to ask another of your self concerning that Fish mentioned by De Bello
Gothico, lib. 1.
Procopius, which brought the famous King Theodorick to his end: his words are
to this effect: The manner of his Death was this, Symmachus and his Son-in-law
Boethius, just men and great relievers of the poor, Senators and Consuls, had
many enemies, by whose false accusations Theodorick being persuaded that they
plotted against him, put them to death and confiscated their Estates. Not long
after his Waiters set before him at Supper a great Head of a Fish, which seemed
to him to be the Head of Symmachus lately murdered; and with his Teeth
sticking out, and fierce glaring eyes to threaten him: being frighted, he grew
chill, went to Bed, lamenting what he had done to Symmachus and Boethius; and
soon after died. What Fish do you apprehend this to have been? I would learn of
you; give me your thoughts about it.

I am, etc.

TRACT IV. AN ANSWER To certain QUERIES Relating to Fishes, Birds, Insects.
SIR,
I Return the following Answers to your Queries which were these,

[1. What Fishes are meant by the Names, Halec and Mugil? 2. What is the Bird
which you will receive from the Bearer? and what Birds are meant by the Names
Halcyon, Nysus, Ciris, Nycticorax? 3. What Insect is meant by the word Cicada?]
The word Halec we are taught to render Answer to Query 1.
an Herring, which, being an ancient word, is not strictly appropriable unto a
Fish not known or not described by the Ancients; and which the modern
Naturalists are fain to name Harengus; the word Halecula being applied unto
such little Fish out of which they were fain to make Pickle; and Halec or Alec,
taken for the Liquamen or Liquor it self, according to that of the Poet,

-- Ego faecem primus and Alec
Primus and inveni piper album --
And was a conditure and Sauce much affected by Antiquity, as was also Muria
and Garum.

In common constructions, Mugil is rendered a Mullet, which, notwithstanding, is
a different Fish from the Mugil described by Authors; wherein, if we mistake,
we cannot so closely apprehend the expression of Juvenal,

-- Quosdam ventres and Mugilis intrat.
And misconceive the Fish, whereby Fornicatours were so opprobriously and
irksomely punished; for the Mugil being somewhat rough and hard skinned, did
more exasperate the gutts of such offenders: whereas the Mullet was a smooth
Fish, and of too high esteem to be employed in such offices.

I cannot but wonder that this Bird you Answer to Query 2.
sent should be a stranger unto you, and unto those who had a sight thereof:
for, though it be not seen every day, yet we often meet with it in this
Country. It is an elegant Bird, which he that once beholds can hardly mistake
any other for it. From the proper Note it is called an Hoopebird with us; in
Greek Epops, in Latin Upupa. We are little obliged unto our School instruction,
wherein we are taught to render Upupa a Lapwing, which Bird our natural Writers
name Vannellus; for thereby we mistake this remarkable Bird, and apprehend not
rightly what is delivered of it.

We apprehend not the Hieroglyphical considerations which the old Egyptians
made of this observable Bird; who considering dering therein the order and
variety of Colors, the twenty six or twenty eight Feathers in its Crest, his
latitancy, and mewing this handsome outside in the Winter; they made it an
Emblem of the varieties of the World, the succession of Times and Seasons, and
signal mutations in them. And therefore Orus, the Hieroglyphick of the World,
had the Head of an Hoopebird upon the top of his Staff.

Hereby we may also mistake the Duchiphath, or Bird forbidden for Food in
Leviticus; Levit. 11. 19.
and, not knowing the Bird, may the less apprehend some reasons of that
prohibition; that is, the magical virtues ascribed unto it by the Egyptians,
and the superstitious apprehensions which that Nation held of it, whilst they
precisely numbered the Feathers and Colors thereof, while they placed it on the
Heads of their Gods, and near their Mercurial Crosses, and so highly magnified
this Bird in their sacred Symbols.

Again, not knowing or mistaking this Bird, we may misapprehend, or not closely
apprehend, that handsome expression of Ovid, when Tereus was turned into an
Upupa, or Hoopebird.

Vertitur in volucrem cui sunt pro vertice Cristae,
Protinus immodicum surgit pro cuspide rostrum
Nomen Epops volucri, facies armata videtur.
For, in this military shape, he is aptly phancied even still revengefully to
pursue his hated Wife Progne: in the propriety of his Note crying out, Pou,
pou, ubi, ubi, or Where are you?

Nor are we singly deceived in the nominal translation of this Bird: in many
other Animals we commit the like mistake. So Gracculus is rendered a Jay, which
Bird notwithstanding must be of a dark color according to that of Martial,

Sed quandam volo nocte nigriorem
Formica, pice, Gracculo, cicada.
See Vulg. Err. B. 3. c. 10.
Halcyon is rendered a King-fisher, a Bird commonly known among us, and by
Zoographers and Naturals the same is named Ispida, a well colored Bird
frequenting Streams and Rivers, building in holes of Pits, like some Martins,
about the end of the Spring; in whose Nests we have found little else than
innumerable small Fish Bones, and white round Eggs of a smooth and polished
surface, whereas the true Alcyon is a Sea Bird, makes an handsome Nest floating
upon the Water, and breeds in the Winter.

That Nysus should be rendered either an Hobby or a Sparrow Hawk, in the Fable
of Nysus and Scylla in Ovid, because we are much to seek in the distinction of
Hawks according to their old denominations, we shall not much contend, and may
allow a favorable latitude therein: but that the Ciris or Bird into which
Scylla was turned should be translated a Lark, it can hardly be made out
agreeable unto the description of Virgil in his Poem of that name,

Inde alias volucres mimoque infecta rubenti Crura --
But seems more agreeable unto some kind of Hoemantopus or Redshank; and so the
Nysus to have been some kind of Hawk, which delights about the Sea and
Marshes, where such prey most abounds, which sort of Hawk while Scaliger
determines to be a Merlin, the French Translatour warily expounds it to be
some kind of Hawk.

Nycticorax we may leave unto the common and verbal translation of a Night
Raven, but we know no proper kind of Raven unto which to confine the same, and
therefore some take the liberty to ascribe it unto some sort of Owls, and
others unto the Bittern; which Bird in its common Note, which he uses out of
the time of coupling and upon the Wing, so well resembles the croaking of a
Raven that I have been deceived by it.

While Cicada is rendered a Grasshopper, Answer to Query 3.
we commonly think that which is so called among us to be the true Cicada;
wherein, as we have elsewhere Vulg. Err. B. 5. c. 3.
declared, there is a great mistake: for we have not the Cicada in England, and
indeed no proper word for that Animal, which the French names Cigale. That
which we commonly call a Grasshopper, and the French Saulterelle being one kind
of Locust, so rendered in the Plague of Egypt, and, in old Saxon named Gersthop.

I have been the less accurate in these Answers, because the Queries are not of
difficult Resolution, or of great moment: however, I would not wholly neglect
them or your satisfaction, as being, Sir,

Yours, etc.

TRACT V. OF HAWKS AND FALCONRY, Ancient and Modern.
SIR,
IN vain you expect much information, de Re Accipitraria, of Falconry, Hawks or
Hawking, from very ancient Greek or Latin Authors; that Art being either
unknown or so little advanced among them, that it seems to have proceeded no
higher than the daring of Birds: which makes so little thereof to be found in
Aristotle, who only mentions some rude practice thereof in Thracia; as also in
Aelian, who speaks something of Hawks and Crows among the Indians; little or
nothing of true Falconry being mentioned before Julius Firmicus, in the days of
Constantius, Son to Constantine the Great.

Yet if you consult the accounts of later Antiquity left by Demetrius the
Greek, by Symmachus and Theodosius, and by Albertus Magnus, about five hundred
years ago, you, who have been so long acquainted with this noble Recreation,
may better compare the ancient and modern practice, and rightly observe how
many things in that Art are added, varied, disused or retained in the practice
of these days.

In the Diet of Hawks, they allowed of diverse Meats which we should hardly
commend. For beside the Flesh of Beef, they admitted of Goat, Hog, Deer, Whelp
and Bear. And how you will approve the quantity and measure thereof, I make
some doubt; while by weight they allowed half a pound of Beef, seven ounces of
Swines Flesh, five of Hare, eight ounces of Whelp, as much of Deer, and ten
ounces of He-Goats Flesh.

In the time of Demetrius they were not without the practice of Phlebotomy or
Bleeding, which they used in the Thigh and Pounces; they plucked away the
Feathers on the Thigh, and rubbed the part, but if the Vein appeared not in
that part, they opened the Vein of the fore Talon.

In the days of Albertus, they made use of Cauteries in diverse places: to
advantage their sight they seared them under the inward angle of the eye; above
the eye in distillations and diseases of the Head; in upward pains they seared
above the Joint of the Wing, and at the bottom of the Foot, against the Gout;
and the chief time for these cauteries they made to be the month of March.

In great coldness of Hawks they made use of Fomentations, some of the steam or
vapor of artificial and natural Baths, some wrapped them up in hot Blankets,
giving them Nettle Seeds and Butter.

No Clysters are mentioned, nor can they be so profitably used; but they made
use of many purging Medicines. They purged with Aloe, which, unto larger Hawks,
they gave in the bigness of a Greek Bean; unto less, in the quantity of a
Cicer, which notwithstanding I should rather give washed, and with a few drops
of Oil of Almonds: for the Guts of flying Fowls are tender and easily scratched
by it; and upon the use of Aloe both in Hawks and Cormorants I have sometimes
observed bloody excretions.

In phlegmatic causes they seldom omitted Stavesaker, but they purged
sometimes with a Mouse, and the Food of boiled Chickens, sometimes with good
Oil and Honey.

They used also the Ink of Cuttle Fishes, with Smallage, Betony, Wine and
Honey. They made use of stronger Medicines than present practice does allow.
For they were not afraid to give Coccus Baphicus; beating up eleven of its
Grains unto a Lentor, which they made up into five Pills wrapped up with Honey
and Pepper: and, in some of their old Medicines, we meet with Scammony and
Euphorbium. Whether, in the tender Bowels of Birds, infusions of Rhubarb,
Agaric and Mechoachan be not of safer use, as to take of Agary two Drachms, of
Cinnamon half a Dram, of Liquorish a Scruple, and, infusing them in Wine, to
express a part into the mouth of the Hawk, may be considered by present
practice.

Few Mineral Medicines were of inward use among them: yet sometimes we observe
they gave filings of Iron in the straitness of the Chest, as also Lime in some
of their pectoral Medicines.

But they commended Unguents of Quicksilver against the Scab: and I have
safely given six or eight Grains of Mercurius Dulcis unto Kestrils and Owls, as
also crude and current Quicksilver, giving the next day small Pellets of
Silver or Lead till they came away uncoloured: and this, if any, may probably
destroy that obstinate Disease of the Filander or Back-worm.

A peculiar remedy they had against the Consumption of Hawks. For, filling a
Chicken with Vinegar, they closed up the Bill, and hanging it up until the
Flesh grew tender, they fed the Hawk therewith: and to restore and well Flesh
them, they commonly gave them Hogs Flesh, with Oil, Butter and Honey; and a
decoction of Cumfory to bouze.

They disallowed of salt Meats and Fat; but highly esteemed of Mice in most
indispositions; and in the falling Sickness had great esteem of boiled Batts:
and in many Diseases, of the Flesh of Owls which feed upon those Animals. In
Epilepsies they also gave the Brain of a Kid drawn thorough a gold Ring; and,
in Convulsions, made use of a mixture of Musk and Stercus humanum aridum.

For the better preservation of their Health they strowed Mint and Sage about
them; and for the speedier mewing of their Feathers, they gave them the Slough
of a Snake, or a Tortoise out of the Shell, or a green Lizard cut in pieces.

If a Hawk were unquiet, they hooded him, and placed him in a Smith's Shop for
some time, where, accustomed to the continual noise of hammering, he became
more gentle and tractable.

They used few terms of Art, plainly and intelligibly expressing the Parts
affected, their Diseases and Remedies. This heap of artificial terms first
entering with the French Artists: who seem to have been the first and noblest
Falconers in the Western part of Europe; although, in their Language, they have
no word which in general expresses an Hawk.

They carried their Hawks in the left hand, and let them fly from the right.
They used a Bell, and took great care that their Jesses should not be red, lest
Eagles should fly at them. Though they used Hoods, we have no clear
description of them, and little account of their Lures.

The ancient Writers lest no account of the swiftness of Hawks or measure of
their flight: but De Re Rustica.
Heresbachius delivers that William Duke of Cleve had an Hawk which, in one
day, made a flight out of Westphalia into Prussia. And, upon good account, an
Hawk in this Country of Norfolk, made a flight at a Woodcock near thirty miles
in one hour. How far the Hawks, Merlins and wild Fowl which come unto us with a
North-west wind in the Autumn, fly in a day, there is no clear account; but
coming over Sea their flight has been long, or very speedy. For I have known
them to light so weary on the coast, that many have been taken with Dogs, and
some knocked down with Staves and Stones.

Their Perches seem not so large as ours; for they made them of such a bigness
that their Talons might almost meet: and they chose to make them of Sallow,
Poplar or Lime Tree.

They used great clamours and hollowing in their flight, which they made by
these words, ou loi, la, la, la; and to raise the Fowls, made use of the found
of a Cymbal.

Their recreation seemed more sober and solemn than ours at present, so
improperly attended with Oaths and Imprecations. For they called on God at
their setting out, according to the account of Demetrius, (...), in the first
place calling upon God.

The learned Rigaltius thinks, that if the Romans had well known this airy
Chase, they would have left or less regarded their Circensial Recreations. The
Greeks understood Hunting early, but little or nothing of our Falconry. If
Alexander had known it, we might have found something of it and more of Hawks
in Aristotle; who was so unacquainted with that way, that he thought that Hawks
would not feed upon the Heart of Birds. Though he has mentioned diverse Hawks,
yet Julius Scaliger, an expert Falconer, despaired to reconcile them unto ours.
And it is well if, among them, you can clearly make out a Lanner, a Sparrow Hawk
and a Kestril, but must not hope to find your Gier Falcon there, which is the
noble Hawk; and I wish you one no worse than that of Henry King of Navarre;
which, Scaliger says, he saw strike down a Buzzard, two wild Geese, diverse
Kites, a Crane and a Swan.

Nor must you expect from high Antiquity the distinctions of Eyess and Ramage
Hawks, of Sores and Entermewers, of Hawks of the Lure and the Fist; nor that
material distinction into short and long winged Hawks; from whence arife such
differences in their taking down of Stones; in their flight, their striking
down or seizing of their Prey, in the strength of their Talons, either in the
Heel and fore-Talon, or the middle and the Heel: nor yet what Eggs produce the
different Hawks, or when they lay three Eggs, that the first produces a Female
and large Hawk, the second of a midler sort, and the third a smaller Bird
Tercellene or Tassel of the Masle Sex; which Hawks being only observed abroad
by the Ancients, were looked upon as Hawks of different kinds and not of the
same Eyrie or Nest. As for what Aristotle affirms that Hawks and Birds of
prey drink not; although you know that it will not strictly hold, yet I kept an
Eagle two years, which fed upon Kats, Kittlings, Whelps and Ratts, without one
drop of Water.

If any thing may add unto your knowledge in this noble Art, you must pick it
out of later Writers than those you enquire of. You may peruse the two Books of
Falconry writ by that renowned Emperor Frederick the Second; as also the Works
of the noble Duke Belisarius, of Tardiffe, Francherius, of Francisco Sforzino
of Vicensa; and may not a little inform or recreate your self with that elegant
Poem of De Re Accipitraria, in 3 Books.
Thuanus. I leave you to divert your self by the perusal of it, having, at
present, no more to say but that I am, etc.

TRACT VI. OF Cymbals, etc.
SIR,
WITH what difficulty, if not possibility, you may expect satisfaction
concerning the Music, or Musical Instruments of the Hebrews, you will easily
discover if you consult the attempts of learned men upon that Subject: but for
Cymbals, of whose Figure you enquire, you may find some described in Bayfius,
in the Comment of Rhodius upon Scribonius Largus, and others.

As for (...) mentioned by S. 1 Cor. 13. 1.
Paul, and rendered a Tinckling Cymbal, whether the translation be not too soft
and diminutive some question may be made: for the word (...) implies no small
sound, but a strained and lofty vociferation, or some kind of hollowing sound,
according to the Exposition of Hesychius, (...). A word drawn from the lusty
shout of Soldiers, crying (...) at the first charge upon their Enemies,
according to the custom of Eastern Nations, and used by Trojans in Homer; and
is also the Note of the Chorus in Aristophanes (...). In other parts of
Scripture we read of loud and high sounding Cymbals; and in Clemens
Alexandrinus that the Arabians made use of Cymbals in their Wars instead of
other military Music; and Polyaenus in his Stratagemes affirms that Bacchus
gave the signal of Battle unto his numerous Army not with Trumpets but with
Tympans and Cymbals.

And now I take the opportunity to thank you for the new Book sent me
containing the Anthems sung in our Cathedral and Collegiate Churches: it is
probable there will be additions, the Masters of Music being now active in
that affair. Beside my naked thanks I have yet nothing to return you but this
enclosed, which may be somewhat rare unto you, and that is a Turkish Hymn
translated into French out of the Turkish Meter, which I thus render unto you.

O what praise does he deserve, and how great is that Lord, all whose Slaves
are as so many Kings!

Whosoever shall rub his Eyes with the dust of his Feet, shall behold such
admirable things that he shall fall into an ecstasie.

He that shall drink one drop of his Beverage, shall have his Bosom like the
Ocean filled with Gems and precious Liquours.

Let not loose the Reins unto thy Passions in this world: he that represseth
them shall become a true Solomon in the Faith.

Amuse not thy self to adore Riches, nor to build great Houses and Palaces.

The end of what thou shall build is but ruin.

Pamper not thy Body with delicacies and dainties; it may come to pass one day
that this Body may be in Hell.

Imagine not that he who finds Riches finds Happiness; he that finds
Happiness is he that finds God.

All who prostrating themselves in humility shall this day believe in Vele the
Founder of the Convent.
Vele, if they were Poor shall be Rich, and if Rich shall become Kings.

After the Sermon ended which was made upon a Verse in the Alcoran containing
much Morality, the Deruices in a Gallery apart sung this Hymn, accompanied with
Instrumental Music, which so affected the Ears of Monsieur du Loyr, that he
would not omit to set it down, together with the Musical Notes, to be found in
his first Letter unto Monsieur Bouliau, Prior of Magny.

Excuse my brevity: I can say but little where I understand but little.

I am, etc.

TRACT VII. OF ROPALIC OR Gradual Verses, etc.
Men's mea sublimes rations praemeditatur.
SIR,
THough I may justly allow a good intention in this Poem presented unto you,
yet I must needs confess, I have no affection for it; as being utterly averse
from all affectation in Poetry, which either restrains the fancy, or fetters
the invention to any strict disposure of words. A Poem of this nature is to be
found in Ausonius beginning thus,

Spes Deus aeternae stationis conciliator.
These are Verses Ropalici or Clavales, arising gradually like the Knots in a
(...) or Clubb; named also Fistulares by Priscianus, as Elias El. Vinet. in
Auson.
Vinetus has noted. They consist properly of five words, each thereof
increasing by one syllable. They admit not of a Spondee in the fifth place, nor
can a Golden or Silver Verse be made this way. They run smoothly both in Latin
and Greek, and some are scatteringly to be found in Homer; as,

(...),
Libere dicam sed in aurem, ego versibus hujusmodi Ropalicis, longo syrmate
protractis, Ceraunium affigo.

He that affects such restrained Poetry, may peruse the Long Poem of
Hugbaldus the Monk, wherein every word begins with a C penned in the praise
of Calvities or Baldness, to the honor of Carolus Calvus King of France,

Carmina clarisonae calvis cantate Camaenae.
The rest may be seen at large in the adversaria of Barthius: or if he
delights in odd contrived phancies may he please himself with Antistrophes,
Counterpetories, Retrogrades, Rebusses, Leonine Verses, etc. to be found in
Sieur des Accords. But these and the like are to be looked upon, not pursued,
odd works might be made by such ways; and for your recreation I propose these
few lines unto you,

Arcu paratur quod arcui sufficit.
Misellorum clamoribus accurrere non tam humanum quam sulphureum est.
Asino teratur quae Asino teritur.
Ne Asphodelos comedas, phaenices manduca.
Caelum aliquid potest, sed quae mira praestat Papilio est.
Not to put you unto endless amusement, the Key hereof is the homonomy of the
Greek made use of in the Latin words, which renders all plain. More
aenigmatical and dark expressions might be made if any one would speak or
compose them out of the numerical Characters or characteristical Numbers set
down by Tract 2. Part lib. 1.
Robertus de Fluctibus.

As for your question concerning the contrary expressions of the Italian and
Spaniards in their common affirmative answers, the Spaniard answering cy
Sennor, the Italian Signior cy, you must be content with this Distich,

Why says the Italian Signior cy, the Spaniard cy Sennor?

Because the one puts that behind, the other puts before.

And because you are so happy in some Translations, I pray return me these two
Verses in English,

Occidit heu tandem multos quae occidit amantes,

Et cinis est hodie quae fuit ignis heri.

My occasions make me to take off my Pen. I am, etc.

TRACT VIII. OF LANGUAGES, And particularly of the SAXON TONGUE.
SIR,
THE last Discourse we had of the Saxon Tongue recalled to my mind some
forgotten considerations. Though the Earth were widely peopled before the
Flood, (as many learned men conceive) yet whether after a large dispersion, and
the space of sixteen hundred years, men maintained so uniform a Language in all
parts, as to be strictly of one Tongue, and readily to understand each other,
may very well be doubted. For though the World preserved in the Family of Noah
before the confusion of Tongues might be said to be of one Lip, yet even
permitted to themselves their humors, inventions, necessities, and new
objects, without the miracle of Confusion at first, in so long a tract of time,
there had probably been a Babel. For whether America were first peopled by one
or several Nations, yet cannot that number of different planting Nations,
answer the multiplicity of their present different Languages, of no affinity
unto each other; and even in their Northern Nations and incommunicating Angles,
their Languages are widely differing. A native Interpreter brought from
Califormia proved of no use unto the Spaniards upon the neighbor Shore. From
Chiapa, to Guatemala, S. Salvador, Honduras, there are at least eighteen
several Languages; and so numerous are they both in the Peruvian and Mexican
Regions, that the great Princes are fain to have one common Language, which
besides their vernaculous and Mother Tongues, may serve for commerce between
them.

And since the confusion of Tongues at first fell only upon those which were
present in Sinaar at the work of Babel, whether the primitive Language from
Noah were only preserved in the Family of Heber, and not also in diverse
others, which might be absent at the same, whether all came away and many might
not be left behind in their first Plantations about the foot of the Hills,
whereabout the Ark rested and Noah became an Husbandman, is not absurdly
doubted.

For so the primitive Tongue might in time branch out into several parts of
Europe and Asia, and thereby the first or Hebrew Tongue which seems to be
ingredient into so many Languages, might have larger originals and grounds of
its communication and traduction than from the Family of Abraham, the Country
of Canaan and words contained in the Bible which come short of the full of that
Language. And this would become more probable from the Septuagint or Greek
Chronology strenuously asserted by Vossius; for making five hundred years
between the Deluge and the days of Peleg, there arises a large latitude of
multiplication and dispersion of People into several parts, before the descent
of that Body which followed Nimrod unto Sinaar from the East.

They who derive the bulk of European Tongues from the Scythian and the Greek,
though they may speak probably in many points, yet must needs allow vast
difference or corruptions from so few originals, which however might be
tolerably made out in the old Saxon, yet has time much confounded the clearer
derivations. And as the knowledge thereof now stands in reference unto our
selves, I find many words totally lost, diverse of harsh sound disused or
refined in the pronunciation, and many words we have also in common use not to
be found in that Tongue, or venially derivable from any other from whence we
have largely borrowed, and yet so much still remains with us that it makes
the gross of our Language.

The religious obligation unto the Hebrew Language has so notably continued
the same, that it might still be understood by Abraham, whereas by the Mazorite
Points and Chaldee Character the old Letter stands so transformed, that if
Moses were alive again, he must be taught to read his own Law.

The Chinoys, who live at the bounds of the Earth, who have admitted little
communication, and suffered successive incursions from one Nation, may possibly
give account of a very ancient Language; but consisting of many Nations and
Tongues; confusion, admixtion and corruption in length of time might probably
so have crept in as without the virtue of a common Character, and lasting
Letter of things, they could never probably make out those strange memorials
which they pretend, while they still make use of the Works of their great
Confutius many hundred years before Christ, and in a series ascend as high as
Poncuus, who is conceived our Noah.

The present Welsh, and remnant of the old Britanes, hold so much of that
ancient Language, that they make a shift to understand the Poems of Merlin,
Enerin, Telesin, a thousand years ago, whereas the Herulian Pater Noster, set
down by Wolfgangus Lazius, is not without much criticism made out, and but in
some words; and the present Parisians can hardly hack out those few lines of
the League between Charles and Lewis, the Sons of Ludovicus Pius, yet remaining
in old French.

The Spaniards, in their corruptive traduction and Romance, have so happily
retained the terminations from the Latin, that notwithstanding the Gothic and
Moorish intrusion of words, they are able to make a Discourse completely
consisting of Grammatical Latin and Spanish, wherein the Italians and French
will be very much to seek.

The learned Casaubon conceives that a Dialogue might be composed in Saxon
only of such words as are derivable from the Greek, which surely might be
effected, and so as the learned might not uneasily find it out. Verstegan made
no doubt that he could contrive a Letter which might be understood by the
English, Dutch and East Frislander, which, as the present confusion stands,
might have proved no very clear Piece, and hardly to be hammered out: yet so
much of the Saxon still remains in our English, as may admit an orderly
discourse and series of good sense, such as not only the present English, but
Aelfric, Bid and Alured might understand after so many hundred years.

Nations that live promiscuously, under the Power and Laws of Conquest, do
seldom escape the loss of their Language with their Liberties, wherein the
Romans were so strict that the Grecians were fain to conform in their judicial
Processes; which made the Jews loose more in seventy years dispersion in the
Provinces of Babylon, than in many hundred in their distinct habitation in
Egypt; and the English which dwelt dispersedly to loose their Language in
Ireland, whereas more tolerable relics there are thereof in Fingall, where
they were closely and almost solely planted; and the Moors which were most
huddled together and united about Granada, have yet left their Arvirage among
the Granadian Spaniards.

But shut up in Angles and inaccessible corners, divided by Laws and Manners,
they often continue long with little mixture, which has afforded that lasting
life unto the Cantabrian and British Tongue, wherein the Britanes are
remarkable, who, having lived four hundred years together with the Romans,
retained so much of the British as it may be esteemed a Language; which either
they resolutely maintained in their cohabitation with them in Britane, or
retiring after in the time of the Saxons into Countries and parts less
civilized and conversant with the Romans, they found the People distinct, the
Language more entire, and so fell into it again.

But surely no Languages have been so straightly locked up as not to admit of
commixture. The Irish, although they retain a kind of a Saxon Character, yet
have admitted many words of Latin and English. In the Welsh are found many
words from Latin, some from Greek and Saxon. In what parity and incommixture
the Language of that People stood which were casually discovered in the heart
of Spain, between the Mountains of Castile, no longer ago than in the time of
Duke D' Alva, we have not met with a good account any farther than that their
words were Basquish or Cantabrian: but the present Basquensa one of the minor
Mother Tongues of Europe, is not without commixture of Latin and Castilian,
while we meet with Santifiea, tentationeten, Glaria, puissanea, and four more
in the short Form of the Lord's Prayer, set down by Paulus Merula: but although
in this brief Form we may find such commixture, yet the bulk of their Language
seems more distinct, consisting of words of no affinity unto others, of
numerals totally different, of differing Grammatical Rule, as may be observed
in the Dictionary and short Basquensa Grammar, composed by Raphael Nicoleta, a
Priest of Bilboa.

And if they use the auxiliary Verbs of Equin and Ysan, answerable unto Hazer
and Ser, to Have, and Be, in the Spanish, which Forms came in with the Northern
Nations into the Italian, Spanish and French, and if that Form were used by
them before, and crept not in from imitation of their neighbors, it may show
some ancienter traduction from Northern Nations, or else must seem very
strange; since the Southern Nations had it not of old, and I know not whether
any such mode be found in the Languages of any part of America.

The Romans, who made the great commixture and alteration of Languages in the
World, effected the same, not only by their proper Language, but those also of
their military Forces, employed in several Provinces, as holding a standing
Militia in all Countries, and commonly of strange Nations; so while the cohorts
and Forces of the Britanes were quartered in Egypt, Armenia, Spain, Illyria,
etc. the Stablaesians and Dalmatians here, the Gauls, Spaniards and Germans in
other Countries, and other Nations in theirs, they could not but leave many
words behind them, and carry away many with them, which might make that in many
words of very distinct Nations some may still remain of very unknown and
doubtful Genealogy.

And if, as the learned Buxhornius contendeth, the Scythian Language as the
Mother Tongue runs through the Nations of Europe, and even as far as Persia,
the community in many words between so many Nations, has a more reasonable
original traduction, and were rather derivable from the common Tongue diffused
through them all, than from any particular Nation, which has also borrowed and
holds but at second hand.

The Saxons settling over all England, maintained an uniform Language, only
diversified in Dialect, Idioms, and minor differences, according to their
different Nations which came in to the common Conquest, which may yet be a
cause of the variation in the speech and words of several parts of England,
where different Nations most abode or settled, and having expelled the
Britanes, their Wars were chiefly among themselves, with little action with
foreign Nations until the union of the Heptarchy under Egbert; after which
time although the Danes infested this Land and scarce left any part free, yet
their incursions made more havoc in Buildings, Churches and Cities, than the
Language of the Country, because their Language was in effect the same, and
such as whereby they might easily understand one another.

And if the Normans, which came into Neustria or Normandy with Rollo the Dane,
had preserved their Language in their new acquists, the succeeding Conquest of
England, by Duke William of his race, had not begot among us such notable
alterations; but having lost their Language in their abode in Normandy before
they adventured upon England, they confounded the English with their French,
and made the grand mutation, which was successively increased by our
possessions in Normandy, Guien and Aquitain, by our long Wars in France, by
frequent resort of the French, who to the number of some thousands came over
with Isabel Queen to Edward the Second, and the several Matches of England with
the Daughters of France before and since that time.

But this commixture, though sufficient to confuse, proved not of ability to
abolish the Saxon words; for from the French we have borrowed many
Substantives, Adjectives and some Verbs, but the great Body of Numerals,
auxiliary Verbs, Articles, Pronouns, Adverbs, Conjunctions and Prepositions,
which are the distinguishing and lasting part of a Language, remain with us
from the Saxon, which, having suffered no great alteration for many hundred
years, may probably still remain, though the English swell with the inmates of
Italian, French and Latin. An Example whereof may be observed in this following,

ENGLISH I.
The first and foremost step to all good Works is the dread and fear of the Lord
of Heaven and Earth, which thorough the Holy Ghost enlightneth the blindness of
our sinful hearts to tread the ways of wisdom, and leads our feet into the
Land of Blessing.

SAXON I.
The erst and fyrmost staep to eal good Weorka is the draed and feurt of the
Lauord of Heofan and Eorth, while thurh the Heilig Gast onlihtneth the
blindness of ure sinful heorte to traed the waeg of wisdom, and the one laed
ure fet into the Land of Blessung.

ENGLISH II.
For to forget his Law is the Door, the Gate and Key to let in all
unrighteousness, making our Eyes, Ears and Mouths to answer the lust of Sin,
our Brains dull to good Thoughts, our Lips dumb to his Praise, our Ears deaf to
his Gospel, and our Eyes dim to behold his Wonders, which witness against us
that we have not well learned the word of God, that we are the Children of
wrath, unworthy of the love and manifold gifts of God, greedily following after
the ways of the Devil and witchcraft of the World, doing nothing to free and
keep our selves from the burning fire of Hell, till we be buried in Sin and
swallowed in Death, not to arise again in any hope of Christ's Kingdom.

SAXON II.
For to fuorgytan his Laga is the Dure, the Gat and Caeg to let in eal
unrightwisnysse, makend ure Eyge, Eore and Muth to answare the lust of Sin, ure
Braegan dole to good Theoht, ure Lippan dumb to his Preys, ure Earen deaf to
his Gospel, and ure Eyge dim to behealden his Wundra, whilc ge witnysse ongen
us that we oef noht well gelaered the weord of God, that we are the Cilda of
ured, unwyrthe of the lufe and maenigfeald gift of God, grediglice felygend
aefter the waegen of the Deoful and wiccraft of the Weorld, doend nothing to
fry and caep ure saula from the byrnend fyr of Hell, till we be geburied in
Sin and swolgen in Death not to arise again in aenig hope of Christ's Kynedome.

ENGLISH III.
Which draw from above the bitter doom of the Almighty of Hunger, Sword,
Sickness, and brings more sad plagues than those of Hail, Storms, Thunder,
Blood, Frogs, swarms of Gnats and Grasshoppers, which ate the Corn, Grass and
Leaves of the Trees in Egypt.

SAXON III.
Whilc drag from buf the bitter dome of the Almagan of Hunger, Sweorde,
Seoknesse, and bring mere sad plag, the one they of Hagal, Storm, Thunner,
Blood, Frog, swearme of Gnaet and Gaersupper, whilc eaten the Corn, Gaers and
Leaf of the Treowen in Egypt.

ENGLISH IV.
If we read his Book and holy Writ, these among many others, we shall find to
be the tokens of his hate, which gathered together might mind us of his will,
and teach us when his wrath begins, which sometimes comes in open strength
and full sail, often steals like a Thief in the night, like Shafts shot from a
Bow at midnight, before we think upon them.

SAXON IV.
Gyf we raed his Boc and heilig Gewrit, these gemong maenig othern, we sceall
findan the tacna of his hatung whilc gegatherod together miht gemind us of his
willan, and teac us whone his ured onginneth, whilc sometima come in open
strength and fill seyle, often stael gelyc a Theof in the niht, gelyc Sceaft
scoten fram a Boge at midneoht, beforan we thinck uppen them.

ENGLISH V.
And though they were a deal less, and rather short than beyond our sins, yet
do we not a whit withstand or forbear them, we are wedded to, not weary of our
misdeeds, we seldom look upward, and are not ashamed under sin, we cleanse not
our selves from the blackness and deep hue of our guilt; we want tears and
sorrow, we weep not, fast not, we crave not forgiveness from the mildness,
sweetness and goodness of God, and with all livelihood and stedfastness to our
uttermost will hunt after the evil of guile, pride, cursing, swearing,
drunkenness, overeating, uncleanness, all idle lust of the flesh, yes many
uncouth and nameless sins, hid in our inmost Breast and Bosoms, which stand
betwixt our forgiveness, and keep God and Man asunder.

SAXON V.
And theow they waere a dael less, and reither scort the one begond our sinnan,
get do we naht a whit withstand and forbear them, we ear bewudded to, noht
werig of ure again misdeed, we seldon loc upweard, and ear not ofschaemod under
sin, we cleans noht ure selvan from the blacnesse and daep hue of ure guilt;
we wan tear and sara, we weope noht, faest noht, we craf noht foregyfnesse
fram the mildness, sweetness and goodness of God, and mit eal lifelyhood and
steadfastness to ure uttermost wit hunt aefter the ufel of guile, pride,
cursung, swearung, druncennesse, overeat, uncleanness and eal idle lust of the
flaesc, yis maenig uncuth and nameleas sinnan, hid in ure inmaest Brist and
Bosom, whilc stand betwixt ure foregyfnesse, and caep God and Man asynder.

ENGLISH VI.
Thus are we far beneath and also worse than the rest of God's Works; for the
Sun and Moon, the King and Queen of Stars, Snow, Ice, Rain, Frost, Dew, Mist,
Wind, fourfooted and creeping things, Fishes and feathered Birds, and Fowls
either of Sea or Land do all hold the Laws of his will.

SAXON VI.
Thus ear we far beneoth and ealso wyrse the one the rest of Gods Weorka; for
the Sun and Moan, the Cyng and Cquen of Stearran, Snaw, Ise, Ren, Frost, Deaw,
Miste, Wind, feower fet and crypend dinga, Fix yefetherod Brid, and Faelan
auther in Sae or Land do eal heold the Lag of his willan.

Thus have you seen in few words how near the Saxon and English meet.

Now of this account the French will be able to make nothing; the modern Danes
and Germans, though from several words they may conjecture at the meaning, yet
will they be much to seek in the orderly sense and continued construction
thereof, whether the Danes can continue such a series of sense out of their
present Language and the old Runick, as to be intelligible unto present and
ancient times, some doubt may well be made; and if the present French would
attempt a Discourse in words common unto their present Tongue and the old
Romana Rustica spoken in Elder times, or in the old Language of the Francks,
which came to be in use some successions after Pharamond, it might prove a Work
of some trouble to effect.

It were not impossible to make an Original reduction of many words of no
general reception in England but of common use in Norfolk, or peculiar to the
East Angle Countries; as, Bawnd, Bunny, Thurck, Enemmis, Sammodithee, Mawther,
Kedge, Seele, Straft, Clever, Matchly, Dear, Nicked, Stingy, Noneare, Feft,
Thepes, Gosgood, Kamp, Sibrit, Fangast, Sap, Cothish, Thokish, Bide owe,
Paxwax: of these and some others of no easy originals, when time will permit,
the resolution may be attempted; which to effect, the Danish Language new and
more ancient may prove of good advantage: which Nation remained here fifty
years upon agreement, and have left many Families in it, and the Language of
these parts had surely been more commixed and perplex, if the Fleet of Hugo de
Bones had not been cast away, wherein threescore thousand Soldiers out of
Britany and Flanders were to be wafted over, and were by King John's
appointment to have a settled habitation in the Counties of Norfolk and Suffolk.

But beside your laudable endeavors in the Saxon, you are not like to repent
you of your studies in the other European and Western Languages, for therein
are delivered many excellent Historical, Moral and Philosophical Discourses,
wherein men merely versed in the learned Languages are often at a loss: but
although you are so well accomplished in the French, you will not surely
conceive that you are master of all the Languages in France, for to omit the
Briton, Britonant or old British, yet retained in some part of Britany, I shall
only propose this unto your construction.

Chavalisco d' aquestes Boemes chems an freitado lou cap cun taules Jargonades,
ero necy chi voluiget bouta sin tens embe aquelles. Anin a lous occells, che
dizen tat prou ben en ein voz L' ome nosap comochodochi yen ay jes de plazer,
d' ausir la mitat de paraulles en el mon.

This is a part of that Language which Scaliger names Idiotismus Tectosagicus,
or Langue d' oc, counterdistinguishing it unto the Idiotismus Francicus, or
Langue d' ouy, not understood in a petty corner or between a few Mountains, but
in parts of early civility, in Languedoc, Provence and Catalonia, which put
together will make little less than England.

Without some knowledge herein you cannot exactly understand the Works of
Rablais: by this the French themselves are fain to make out that preserved
relic of old French, containing the League between Charles and Lewis the Sons
of Ludovicus Pius. Hereby may tolerably be understood the several Tracts
written in the Catalonian Tongue; and in this is published the Tract of
Falconry written by Theodosius and Symmachus: in this is yet conserved the Poem
Vilhuardine concerning the French expedition in the Holy War, and the taking of
Constantinople, among the Works of Marius Aequicola an Italian Poet. You may
find, in this Language, a pleasant Dialogue of Love: this, about an hundred
years ago, was in high esteem, when many Italian Wits flocked into Provence;
and the famous Petrarcha wrote many of his Poems in Vaucluse in that Country.

For the word [Dread] in the Royal Title [Dread Sovereign] of which you desire
to know the meaning, I return answer unto your question briefly thus.

Most men do vulgarly understand this word Dread after the common and English
acception, as implying Fear, Awe or Dread.

Others may think to expound it from the French word Droit or Droyt. For,
whereas in elder times, the Presidents and Supremes of Courts were termed
Sovereigns, men might conceive this a distinctive Title and proper unto the
King as eminently and by right the Sovereign.

A third exposition may be made from some Saxon Original, particularly from
Driht, Domine, or Drihten, Dominus, in the Saxon Language, the word for Dominus
throughout the Saxon Psalms, and used in the expression of the year of our Lord
in the Decretal Epistle of Pope Agatho unto Athelred King of the Mercians,
Anno, 680.

Verstegan would have this term Drihten appropriate unto God. Yet, in the
Constitutions of V. Cl. Spelman^ Council.
Withred King of Kent, we find the same word used for a Lord or Master, Si in
vespera proecedente solemn servus ex mandato Domini aliquod opus servile egerit,
Dominus (Drihten) 80 solidis luito. However therefore, though Driht, Domine,
might be most eminently applied unto the Lord of Heaven, yet might it be also
transferred unto Potentates and Gods on Earth, unto whom fealty is given or
due, according unto the Feudist term Ligeus a Ligando unto whom they were bound
in fealty. And therefore from Driht, Domine, Dread Sovereign, may, probably,
owe its Original.

I have not time to enlarge upon this Subject: 'Pray let this pass, as it is,
for a Letter and not for a Treatise. I am

Yours, etc.

TRACT IX. OF ARTIFICIAL HILLS, MOUNTS or BURROWS, In many parts of ENGLAND.
What they are, to what end raised, and by what Nations.
My honored Friend Mr. E. D. his Quaere.
IN my last Summer's Journey through Marshland, Holland and a great part of the
Fenns, I observed diverse artificial heaps of Earth of a very large magnitude,
and I hear of many others which are in other parts of those Countries, some of
them are at least twenty foot in direct height from the level whereon they
stand. I would gladly know your opinion of them, and whether you think not that
they were raised by the Romans or Saxons to cover the Bones or Ashes of some
eminent persons?

My Answer.
Worthy Sir,
COncerning artificial Mounts and Hills, raised without Fortifications
attending them, in most parts of England, the most considerable thereof I
conceive to be of two kinds; that is, either signal Boundaries and Landmarks,
or else sepulchral Monuments or Hills of Interrment for remarkable and eminent
persons, especially such as died in the Wars.

As for such which are sepulchral Monuments, upon bare and naked view they are
not appropriable unto any of the three Nations of the Romans, Saxons or Danes,
who, after the Britains, have possessed this Land; because upon strict
account, they may be appliable unto them all.

For that the Romans used such hilly Sepultures, beside many other testimonies,
seems confirmable from the practice of Germanicus, who thus interred the
unburied Bones of the slain Soldiers of Varus; and that expression of Virgil,
of high antiquity among the Latins,

-- facit ingens monte sub alto
Regis Dercenni terreno ex aggere Bustum.
That the Saxons made use of this way is collectible from several Records, and
that pertinent expression of Leland. in Assertione Regis Arthuri.
Lelandus, Saxones gens Christi ignara, in hortis amoenis, si domi forte
oegroti moriebantur; sin foris and bello occisi, in egestis per campos terroe
tumulis, quos (Burgos appellabant) sepulti sunt.

That the Danes observed this practice, their own Antiquities do frequently
confirm, and it stands precisely delivered by Adolphus Cyprius, as the learned
Wormius in Monumentis Danicis.
Wormius has observed. Dani olim in memoriam Regum and Heroum, ex terra
coacervata ingentes moles, Montium instar eminentes, erexisse, credibile omnino
ac probabile est, atque illis in locis ut plurimum, quo soepe homines
commearent, atque iter haberent, ut in viis publicis posteritati memoriam
consecrarent, and quodammodo immortalitati mandarent. And the like Monuments
are yet to be observed in Norway and Denmark in no small numbers.

So that upon a single view and outward observation they may be the Monuments
of any of these three Nations: Although the greatest number, not improbably, of
the Saxons; who fought many Battles with the Britains and Danes, and also
between their own Nations, and left the proper name of Burrows for these Hills
still retained in many of them, as the seven Burrows upon Salisbury Plain, and
in many other parts of England.

But of these and the like Hills there can be no clear and assured decision
without an ocular exploration, and subterraneous enquiry by cutting through one
of them either directly or crosswise. For so with lesser charge discovery may
be made what is under them, and consequently the intention of their erection.

For if they were raised for remarkable and eminent Boundaries, then about
their bottom will be found the lasting substances of burnt Bones of Beasts, of
Ashes, Bricks, Lime or Coals.

If Urns be found, they might be erected by the Romans before the term of
Urnburying or custom of burning the dead expired: but if raised by the Romans
after that period; Inscriptions, Swords, Shields and Arms after the Roman mode,
may afford a good distinction.

But if these Hills were made by Saxons or Danes, discovery may be made from
the fashion of their Arms, Bones of their Horses, and other distinguishing
substances buried with them.

And for such an attempt there wants not encouragement. For a like Mount or
Burrow was opened in the days of King Henry the Eighth upon Barham Down in
Kent, by the care of Mr. Thomas Digges and charge of Sir Christopher Hales; and
a large Urn with Ashes was found under it, as is delivered by Thomas Twinus De
Rebus Albionicis, a learned Man of that Country, Sub incredibili Terroe acervo,
Urna cinere ossium magnorum fragmentis plena, cum galeis, clypeis oeneis and
ferreis rubigine fere consumptis, inusitatoe magnitudinis, eruta est: sed nulla
inscriptio nomen, nullum testimonium tempus, aut fortunam exponebant: and not
very long ago, as Cambd. Brit. p. 326.
Cambden delivers, in one of the Mounts of Barklow Hills in Essex, being
levelled there were found three Troughs, containing broken Bones, conceived to
have been of Danes: and in later time we find, that a Burrow was opened in the
Isle of Man, wherein fourteen Urns were found with burnt Bones in them; and one
more neat than the rest, placed in a Bed of fine white Sand, containing nothing
but a few brittle Bones, as having passed the Fire; according to the particular
account thereof in the Published 1656. by Dan. King.
description of the Isle of Man. Surely many noble Bones and Ashes have been
contented with such hilly Tombs; which neither admitting Ornament, Epitaph or
Inscription, may, if Earthquakes spare them, out last all other Monuments. Suae
sunt Metis metae. Obelisks have their term, and Pyramids will tumble, but these
mountainous Monuments may stand, and are like to have the same period with the
Earth.

More might be said, but my business, of another nature, makes me take off my
hand. I am

Yours, etc.

TRACT X. OF TROAS, What place is meant by that Name.
Also, of the situations of Sodom, Gomorrha, Admah, Zeboim, in the dead Sea.
SIR, To your Geographical Queries, I answer as follows.
IN sundry passages of the new Testament, in the Acts of the Apostles, and
Epistles of S. Paul, we meet with the word Troas; how he went from Troas to
Philippi in Macedonia, from thence unto Troas again: how he remained seven days
in that place; from thence on foot to Assos, whither the Disciples had sailed
from Troas, and there, taking him in, made their Voyage unto Caesarea.

Now, whether this Troas be the name of a City or a certain Region seems no
groundless doubt of yours: for that 'twas sometimes taken in the signification
of some Country, is acknowledged by Ortelius, Stephanus and Grotius; and it is
plainly set down by Strabo, that a Region of Phrygia in Asia minor was so taken
in ancient times; and that, at the Trojan War, all the Territory which
comprehended the nine Principalities subject unto the King of Ilium, (...), was
called by the name of Troja. And this might seem sufficiently to salve the
intention of the description, when he came or went from Troas, that is, some
part of that Region; and will otherwise seem strange unto many how he should be
said to go or come from that City which all Writers had laid in the Ashes about
a thousand years before.

All which notwithstanding, since we read in the Text a particular abode of
seven days, and such particulars as leaving of his Cloak, Books and Parchments
at Troas: And that S. Luke seems to have been taken in to the Travels of S.
Paul in this place, where he begins in the Acts to write in the first person,
this may rather seem to have been some City or special Habitation, than any
Province or Region without such limitation.

Now that such a City there was, and that of no mean note, is easily verified
from historical observation. For though old Ilium was anciently destroyed, yet
was there another raised by the relicts of that people, not in the same place,
but about thirty Furlongs westward, as is to be learned from Strabo.

Of this place Alexander in his Expedition against Darius took especial notice,
endowing it with sundry Immunities, with promise of greater matters at his
return from Persia; inclined hereunto from the honor he bore unto Homer, whose
earnest Reader he was, and upon whose Poems, by the help of Anaxarchus and
Callisthenes, he made some observations. As also much moved hereto upon the
account of his cognation with the Aeacides and Kings of Molossus, whereof
Andromache the Wife of Hector was Queen. After the death of Alexander,
Lysimachus surrounded it with a Wall, and brought the inhabitants of the
neighbor Towns unto it, and so it bore the name of Alexandria; which, from
Antigonus, was also called Antigonia, according to the inscription of that
famous Medal in Goltsius, Colonia Troas Antigonia Alexandrea, Legio vicesima
prima.

When the Romans first went into Asia against Antiochus 'twas but a (...) and
no great City; but, upon the Peace concluded, the Romans much advanced the
same. Fimbria, the rebellious Roman, spoiled it in the Mithridatick War,
boasting that he had subdued Troy in eleven days which the Grecians could not
take in almost as many years. But it was again rebuilt and countenanced by the
Romans, and became a Roman Colony, with great Immunities conferred on it; and
accordingly it is so set down by Ptolomy. For the Romans, deriving themselves
from the Trojans, thought no favor too great for it; especially Julius Caesar,
who, both in imitation of Alexander, and for his own descent from Julus, of the
posterity of Aeneas, with much passion affected it, and, in a discontented
humor, Sueton.
was once in mind to translate the Roman wealth unto it; so that it became a
very remarkable place, and was, in Strabo's time, (...), one of the noble
Cities of Asia.

And, if they understood the prediction of Homer in reference unto the Romans,
as some expound it in Strabo, it might much promote their affection unto that
place; which being a remarkable prophecy, and scarce to be paralleled in Pagan
story, made before Rome was built, and concerning the lasting Reign of the
progeny of Aeneas, they could not but take especial notice of it. For thus is
Neptune made to speak, when he saved Aeneas from the fury of Achilles.

Verum agite hunc subito praesenti a morte trahamus
Ne Cronides ira flammet si fortis Achilles
Hunc mactet, fati quem Lex evadere jussit.
Ne genus intereat de laeto semine totum
Dardani ab excelso prae cunctis prolibus olim,
Dilecti quos e mortali stirpe creavit,
Nunc etiam Priami stirpem Saturnius odit,
Trojugenum posthaec Aeneas sceptra tenebit
Et nati natorum and qui nascentur ab illis.
The Roman favors were also continued unto S. Paul's days; for Sueton.
Claudius, producing an ancient Letter of the Romans unto King Seleucus
concerning the Trojan Privileges, made a Release of their Tributes; and Nero
elegantly pleaded for Tacit. l. 13.
their Immunities, and remitted all Tributes unto them.

And, therefore, there being so remarkable a City in this Territory, it may
seem too hard to loose the same in the general name of the Country; and since
it was so eminently favored by Emperors, enjoying so many Immunities, and
full of Roman Privileges, it was probably very populous, and a fit abode for S.
Paul, who being a Roman Citizen, might live more quietly himself, and have no
small number of faithful well-wishers in it.

Yet must we not conceive that this was the old Troy, or rebuilt in the same
place with it: for Troas was placed about thirty Furlongs West, and upon the
Sea shore; so that, to hold a clearer apprehension hereof than is commonly
delivered in the Discourses of the Ruins of Troy, we may consider one Inland
Troy or old Ilium, which was built farther within the Land, and so was removed
from the Port where the Grecian Fleet lay in Homer; and another Maritime Troy,
which was upon the Sea Coast placed in the Maps of Ptolomy, between Lectum and
Sigaeum or Port Janizam, Southwest from the old City, which was this of S.
Paul, and whereunto are appliable the particular accounts of Bellonius, when,
not an hundred years ago, he described the Ruins of Troy with their Baths,
Aqueducts, Walls and Towers, to be seen from the Sea as he sailed between it
and Tenedos; and where, upon nearer view, he observed some signs and
impressions of his conversion in the ruins of Churches, Crosses, and
Inscriptions upon Stones.

Nor was this only a famous City in the days of S. Paul, but considerable long
after. For, upon the Letter of Adrianus, Philostrat. in Vita Herodis Attici.
Herodes Atticus, at a great charge, repaired their Baths, contrived Aqueducts
and noble Watercourse in it. As is also collectible from the Medals of
Caracalla, of Severus, and Crispina; with Inscriptions, Colonia Alexandria
Troas, bearing on the Reverse either an Horse, a Temple, or a Woman; denoting
their destruction by an Horse, their prayers for the Emperor's safety, and, as
some conjecture, the memory of Sibylla, Phrygia or Hellespontica.

Nor wanted this City the favor of Christian Princes, but was made a Bishop's
See under the Archbishop of Cyzicum; but in succeeding discords was destroyed
and ruined, and the nobler Stones translated to Constantinople by the Turks to
beautify their Mosques and other Buildings.

Concerning the Dead Sea, accept of these few Remarks.
IN the Map of the Dead Sea we meet with the Figure of the Cities which were
destroyed: of Sodom, Gomorrha, Admah and Zeboim; but with no uniformity; men
placing them variously, and, from the uncertainty of their situation, taking a
fair liberty to set them where they please.

For Admah, Zeboim and Gomorrha, there is no light from the Text to define
their situation. But, that Sodom could not be far from Segor which was seated
under the Mountains near the side of the Lake, seems inferrible from the sudden
arrival of Lot, who, coming from Sodom at day break, attained to Segor at Sun
rising; and therefore Sodom is to be placed not many miles from it, not in the
middle of the Lake, which against that place is about eighteen miles over, and
so will leave nine miles to be gone in so small a space of time.

The Valley being large, the Lake now in length about seventy English miles,
the River Jordan and diverse others running over the Plain, it is probable the
best Cities were seated upon those Streams: but how the Jordan passed or
winded, or where it took in the other Streams, is a point too old for Geography
to determine.

For, that the River gave the fruitfulness unto this Valley by over watring
that low Region, seems plain from that expression in the Genesis 13. 10.
Text, that it was watered, sicut Paradisus and Aegyptus, like Eden and the
Plains of Mesopotamia, where Euphrates yearly overfloweth; or like Egypt where
Nilus does the like: and seems probable also from the same course of the River
not far above this Valley where the Israelites passed Jordan, where it is said
that Jordan oversloweth its Banks in the time of Harvest.

That it must have had some passage under ground in the compass of this Valley
before the creation of this Lake, seems necessary from the great current of
Jordan, and from the Rivers Arnon, Cedron, Zaeth, which empty into this Valley;
but where to place that concurrence of Waters or place of its absorbition,
there is no authentic decision.

The probablest place may be set somewhat Southward, below the Rivers that run
into it on the East or Western Shore: and somewhat agreeable unto the account
which Brocardus received from the Sarazens which lived near it, Jordanem
ingredi Mare Mortuum and rursum egredi, sed post exiguum intervallum a Terra
absorberi.

Strabo speaks naturally of this Lake, that it was first caused by Earthquakes,
by sulphurous and bituminous eruptions, arising from the Earth. But the
Scripture makes it plain to have been from a miraculous hand, and by a
remarkable expression, pluit Dominus ignem and Sulphur a Domino. See also Deuteronomy.
29. in ardore Salis: burning the Cities and destroying all things about the
Plain, destroying the vegetable nature of Plants and all living things, salting
and making barren the whole Soil, and, by these fiery Showers, kindling and
setting loose the body of the bituminous Mines, which showed their lower Veins
before but in some few Pits and openings, swallowing up the Foundation of their
Cities; opening the bituminous Treasures below, and making a smoke like a
Furnace able to be discerned by Abraham at a good distance from it.

If this little may give you satisfaction, I shall be glad, as being, Sir,

Yours, etc.

TRACT XI. OF THE ANSWERS OF THE Oracle of Apollo at Delphos TO Croesus King of
Lydia.
SIR,
AMong the Sea Vulg. Err. l. 7. c. 12.
Oracles of Apollo there are none more celebrated than those which he delivered
unto Croesus King of Herod. l. 1. 46, 47, etc. 90, 91.
Lydia, who seems of all Princes to have held the greatest dependence on them.
But most considerable are his plain and intelligible replies which he made unto
the same King, when he sent his Chains of Captivity unto Delphos, after his
overthrow by Cyrus, with sad expostulations why he encouraged him unto that
fatal War by his Oracle, saying, Herod. Ibid. 54.
(...), Croesus, if he Wars against the Persians, shall dissolve a great
Empire. Why, at least, he prevented not that sad infelicity of his devoted and
bountiful Servant, and whether it were fair or honorable for the Gods of
Greece to be ungrateful: which being a plain and open delivery of Delphos, and
scarce to be paralleled in any ancient story, it may well deserve your farther
consideration.

1. His first reply was, That Croesus suffered not for himself; but paid the
transgression of his fifth predecessor, who killed his Master and usurped the
dignity unto which he held no title.

Now whether Croesus suffered upon this account or not, hereby he plainly
betrayed his insufficiency to protect him; and also obliquely discovered he had
a knowledge of his misfortune; for knowing that wicked act lay yet unpunished,
he might well divine some of his successors might smart for it: and also
understanding he was like to be the last of that race, he might justly fear and
conclude this infelicity upon him.

Hereby he also acknowledged the inevitable justice of God; that though Revenge
lay dormant, it would not always sleep; and consequently confessed the just
hand of God punishing unto the third and fourth generation, nor suffering such
iniquities to pass for ever unrevenged.

Hereby he flatteringly encouraged him in the opinion of his own merits, and
that he only suffered for other men's transgressions: mean while he concealed
Croesus his pride, elation of mind and secure conceit of his own unparalled
felicity, together with the vanity, pride and height of luxury of the Lydian
Nation, which the Spirit of Delphos knew well to be ripe and ready for
destruction.

2. A Second excuse was, That it is not in the power of God to hinder the
Decree of Fate. A general evasion for any falsified prediction founded upon the
common opinion of Fate, which impiously subjecteth the power of Heaven unto it;
widely discovering the folly of such as repair unto him concerning future
events: which, according unto this rule, must go on as the Fates have ordered,
beyond his power to prevent or theirs to avoid; and consequently teaching that
his Oracles had only this use to render men more miserable by foreknowing
their misfortunes; whereof Croesus himself held a sensible experience in that
Daemoniacal Dream concerning his eldest Son, That he should be killed by a
Spear, which, after all care and caution, he found inevitably to befall him.

3. In his Third Apology he assured him that he endeavored to transfer the
evil Fate and to pass it upon his Children; and did however procrastinate his
infelicity, and deferred the destruction of Sardis and his own Captivity three
years longer than was fatally decreed upon it.

Wherein while he wipes off the stain of Ingratitude, he leaves no small doubt
whether, it being out of his power to contradict or transfer the Fates of his
Servants, it be not also beyond it to defer such signal events, and whereon the
Fates of whole Nations do depend.

As also, whether he intended or endeavored to bring to pass what he
pretended, some question might be made. For that he should attempt or think he
could translate his infelicity upon his Sons, it could not consist with his
judgment, which attempts not impossibles or things beyond his power; nor with
his knowledge of future things, and the Fates of succeeding Generations: for he
understood that Monarchy was to expire in himself, and could particularly
foretell the infelicity of his Sons, and has also made remote predictions unto
others concerning the fortunes of many succeeding descents; as appears in that
answer unto Attalus,

Be of good courage, Attalus, thou shall reign
And thy Sons Sons, but not their Sons again.
As also unto Cypselus King of Corinth.

Happy is the Man who at my Altar stands,
Great Cypselus who Corinth now commands.
Happy is he, his Sons shall happy be,
But for their Sons, unhappy days they will see.
Now, being able to have so large a prospect of future things, and of the fate
of many Generations, it might well be granted he was not ignorant of the Fate
of Croesus his Sons, and well understood it was in vain to think to translate
his misery upon them.

4. In the Fourth part of his reply, he clears himself of Ingratitude which
Hell it self cannot hear of; alleging that he had saved his life when he was
ready to be burnt, by sending a mighty Shower, in a fair and cloudless day, to
quench the Fire already kindled, which all the Servants of Cyrus could not do.
Though this Shower might well be granted, as much concerning his honor, and
not beyond his power; yet whether this merciful Shower fell not out
contingently or were not contrived by an higher power, which has often pity
upon Pagans, and rewards their virtues sometimes with extraordinary temporal
favors; also, in no unlike case, who was the author of those few fair
minutes, which, in a showry day, gave only time enough for the burning of
Sylla's Body, some question might be made.

5. The last excuse devolveth the error and miscarriage of the business upon
Croesus, and that he deceived himself by an inconsiderate misconstruction of
his Oracle, that if he had doubted, he should not have passed it over in
silence, but consulted again for an exposition of it. Besides, he had neither
discussed, nor well perpended his Oracle concerning Cyrus, whereby he might
have understood not to engage against him.

Wherein, to speak indifferently, the deception and miscarriage seems chiefly
to lie at Croesus his door, who, if not infatuated with confidence and
security, might justly have doubted the construction: besides, he had received
two Oracles before, which clearly hinted an unhappy time unto him: the first
concerning Cyrus.

When ever a Mule shall over the Medians reign,
Stay not, but unto Hermus fly amain.
Herein though he understood not the Median Mule of Cyrus, that is, of his
mixed descent, and from Assyrian and Median Parents, yet he could not but
apprehend some misfortune from that quarter.

Though this prediction seemed a notable piece of Divination, yet did it not so
highly magnify his natural sagacity or knowledge of future events as was by
many esteemed; he having no small assistance herein from the Prophecy of Daniel
concerning the Persian Monarchy, and the Prophecy of Jeremiah and Isaiah,
wherein he might read the name of Cyrus who should restore the Captivity of
the Jews, and must, therefore, be the great Monarch and Lord of all those
Nations.

The same misfortune was also foretold when he demanded of Apollo if ever he
should hear his dumb Son speak.

O foolish Croesus who have made this choice,
To know when thou shall hear thy dumb Son's voice;
Better he still were mute, would nothing say,
When he first speaks, look for a dismal day.
This, if he contrived not the time and the means of his recovery, was no
ordinary divination: yet how to make out the verity of the story some doubt may
yet remain. For though the causes of deafness and dumbness were removed, yet
since words are attained by hearing, and men speak not without instruction, how
he should be able immediately to utter such apt and significant words, as
Herod. l. 1. 85.
(...), O Man slay not Croesus, it cannot escape some doubt, since the Story
also delivers, that he was deaf and dumb, that he then first began to speak,
and spoke all his life after.

Now, if Croesus had consulted again for a clearer exposition of what was
doubtfully delivered, whether the Oracle would have spoke out the second time
or afforded a clearer answer, some question might be made from the examples of
his practice upon the like demands.

So when the Spartans had often fought with ill success against the Tegeates,
they consulted the Oracle what God they should appease, to become victorious
over them. The answer was, that they should remove the Bones of Orestes. Though
the words were plain, yet the thing was obscure, and like finding out the Body
of Moses. And therefore they once more demanded in what place they should find
the same; unto whom he returned this answer,

When in the Tegean Plains a place thou find'st
Where blasts are made by two impetuous Winds,
Where that that strikes is struck, blows follow blows,
There does the Earth Orestes Bones enclose.
Which obscure reply the wisest of Sparta could not make out, and was casually
unriddled by one talking with a Smith who had found large Bones of a Man buried
about his House; the Oracle importing no more than a Smith's Forge, expressed
by a double Bellows, the Hammer and Anvil therein.

Now, why the Oracle should place such consideration upon the Bones of Orestes
the Son of Agamemnon, a mad man and a murderer, if not to promote the idolatry
of the Heathens, and maintain a superstitious veneration of things of no
activity, it may leave no small obscurity.

Or why, in a business so clear in his knowledge, he should affect so obscure
expressions it may also be wondered; if it were not to maintain the wary and
evasive method in his answers: for, speaking obscurely in things beyond doubt
within his knowledge, he might be more tolerably dark in matters beyond his
prescience.

Though EI were inscribed over the Gate of Delphos, yet was there no uniformity
in his deliveries. Sometimes with that obscurity as argued a fearful prophecy;
sometimes so plainly as might confirm a spirit of divinity; sometimes morally,
deterring from vice and villainy; another time vitiously, and in the spirit of
blood and cruelty: observably modest in his civil enigma and periphrasis of
that part which old Numa would plainly Plut. in These.
name, and Medea would not understand, when he advised Aegeus not to draw out
his foot before, until he arrived upon the Athenian ground; whereas another
time he seemed too literal in that unseemly epithet unto Cyanus King of *
Cyprus, and put a V. Herod.
beastly trouble upon all Egypt to find out the Urine of a true Virgin.
Sometimes, more beholding unto memory than invention, he delighted to express
himself in the bare Verses of Homer. But that he principally affected Poetry,
and that the Priest not only or always composed his prosal raptures into
Verse, seems plain from his necromantical Prophecies, whilst the dead Head in
Phlegon delivers a long Prediction in Verse; and at the raising of the Ghost of
Commodus unto Caracalla, when none of his Ancestors would speak, the divining
Spirit versified his infelicities; corresponding herein to the apprehensions of
elder times, who conceived not only a Majesty but something of Divinity in
Poetry, and as in ancient times the old Theologians delivered their inventions.

Some critical Readers might expect in his oraculous Poems a more than ordinary
strain and true spirit of Apollo; not contented to find that Spirits make
Verses like Men, beating upon the filling Epithet, and taking the license of
dialects and lower helps, common to humane Poetry; wherein, since Scaliger, who
has spared none of the Greeks, has thought it wisdom to be silent, we shall
make no excursion.

Others may wonder how the curiosity of elder times, having this opportunity of
his Answers, omitted Natural Questions; or how the old Magicians discovered no
more Philosophy; and if they had the assistance of Spirits, could rest content
with the bare assertions of things, without the knowledge of their causes;
whereby they had made their Acts iterable by sober hands, and a standing part
of Philosophy. Many wise Divines hold a reality in the wonders of the Egyptian
Magicians, and that those magnalia which they performed before Pharaoh were not
mere delusions of Sense. Rightly to understand how they made Serpents out of
Rods; Froggs and Blood of Water, were worth half Porta's Magic.

Hermolaus Barbarus was scarce in his wits, when, upon conference with a
Spirit, he would demand no other question than the explication of Aristotle's
Entelecheia. Appion the Grammarian, that would raise the Ghost of Homer to
decide the Controversy of his Country, made a frivolous and pedantick use of
Necromancy. Philostratus did as little, that called up the Ghost of Achilles
for a particular of the Story of Troy. Smarter curiosities would have been at
the great Elixir, the Flux and Reflux of the Sea, with other noble obscurities
in Nature; but probably all in vain: in matters cognoscible and framed for our
disquisition, our Industry must be our Oracle, and Reason our Apollo.

Not to know things without the Arch of our intellectuals, or what Spirits
apprehend, is the imperfection of our nature not our knowledge, and rather
inscience than ignorance in man. Revelation might render a great part of the
Creation easy which now seems beyond the stretch of humane indagation, and
welcome no doubt from good hands might be a true Almagest, and great celestial
construction: a clear Systeme of the planetical Bodies of the invisible and
seeming useless Stars unto us, of the many Suns in the eighth Sphere, what they
are, what they contain and to what more immediately those stupendous Bodies
are serviceable. But being not hinted in the authentic Revelation of God, nor
known how far their discoveries are stinted; if they should come unto us from
the mouth of evil Spirits, the belief thereof might be as unsafe as the enquiry.

This is a copious Subject; but, having exceeded the bounds of a Letter, I will
not, now, pursue it farther. I am

Yours, etc.

TRACT XII. A PROPHECY, Concerning the future state of several NATIONS,
In a Letter written upon occasion of an old Prophecy sent to the Author from
a Friend, with a Request that he would consider it.
SIR,
I Take no pleasure in Prophecies so hardly intelligible, and pointing at
future things from a pretended spirit of Divination; of which sort this seems
to be which came unto your hand, and you were pleased to send unto me. And
therefore, for your easier apprehension, divertisement and consideration, I
present you with a very different kind of prediction: not positively or
peremptorily telling you what shall come to pass; yet pointing at things not
without all reason or probability of their events; not built upon fatal
decrees, or inevitable designations, but upon conjectural foundations, whereby
things wished may be promoted, and such as are feared, may more probably be
prevented.

THE PROPHECY.
WHen New England shall trouble New Spain. When Jamaica shall be Lady of the
Isles and the Main. When Spain shall be in America hid,
And Mexico shall prove a Madrid.
When Mahomet's Ships on the Baltic shall ride,
And Turks shall labor to have Ports on that side.
When Africa shall no more sell out their Blacks To make Slaves and Drudges to
the American Tracts. When Batavia the Old shall be contemned by the New. When a
new Drove of Tartars shall China subdue. When America shall cease to send out
its Treasure,
But employ it at home in American Pleasure.
When the new World shall the old invade,
Nor count them their Lords but their fellows in Trade.
When Men shall almost pass to Venice by Land,
Not in deep Water but from Sand to Sand.
When Nova Zembla shall be no stay
Unto those who pass to or from Cathay.
Then think strange things are come to light,
Whereof but few have had a foresight.

THE EXPOSITION OF THE PROPHECY.
WHen New England shall trouble New Spain.
That is, When that thriving Colony, which has so much increased in our days,
and in the space of about fifty years, that they can, as they report, raise
between twenty and thirty thousand men upon an exigency, shall in process of
time be so advanced, as to be able to send forth Ships and Fleets, as to infest
the American Spanish Ports and Maritime Dominions by depredations or assaults;
for which attempts they are not like to be unprovided, as abounding in the
Materials for Shipping, Oak and Fur. And when length of time shall so far
increase that industrious people, that the neighboring Country will not
contain them, they will range still farther and be able, in time, to set forth
great Armies, seek for new possessions, or make considerable and conjoined
migrations, according to the custom of swarming Northern Nations; wherein it is
not likely that they will move Northward, but toward the Southern and richer
Countries, which are either in the Dominions or Frontiers of the Spaniards: and
may not improbably erect new Dominions in places not yet thought of, and yet,
for some Centuries, beyond their power or Ambition.

When Jamaica shall be Lady of the Isles and the Main.
That is, When that advantageous Island shall be well peopled, it may become so
strong and potent as to overpower the neighboring Isles, and also a part of
the main Land, especially the Maritime parts. And already in their infancy they
have given testimony of their power and courage in their bold attempts upon
Campeche and Santa Martha; and in that notable attempt upon Panama on the
Western side of America: especially considering this Island is sufficiently
large to contain a numerous people, of a Northern and warlike descent, addicted
to martial affairs both by Sea and Land, and advantageously seated to infest
their neighbors both of the Isles and the Continent, and like to be a
receptacle for Colonies of the same originals from Barbados and the neighbor
Isles.

When Spain shall be in America hid; Mexico shall prove a Madrid.
That is, When Spain, either by unexpected disasters, or continued emissions of
people into America, which have already thinned the Country, shall be farther
exhausted at home: or when, in process of time, their Colonies shall grow by
many accessions more than their Originals, then Mexico may become a Madrid, and
as considerable in people, wealth and splendor: wherein that place is already
so well advanced, that accounts scarce credible are given of it. And it is so
advantageously seated, that, by Acapulco and other Ports on the South Sea, they
may maintain a communication and commerce with the Indian Isles and
Territories, and with China and Japan, and on this side, by Porto Belo and
others, hold correspondence with Europe and Africa.

When Mahomet's Ships in the Baltic shall ride.
Of this we cannot be out of all fear: for, if the Turk should master Poland,
he would be soon at this Sea. And from the odd constitution of the Polish
Government, the divisions among themselves, jealousies between their Kingdom
and Republic; vicinity of the Tartars, treachery of the Cossacks, and the
method of Turkish Policy, to be at Peace with the Emperor of Germany when he
is at War with the Poles, there may be cause to fear that this may come to
pass. And then he would soon endeavor to have Ports upon that Sea, as not
wanting Materials for Shipping. And, having a new acquist of stout and warlike
men, may be a terror unto the confiners on that Sea, and to Nations which now
conceive themselves safe from such an Enemy.

When Africa shall no more sell out their Blacks.
That is, When African Countries shall no longer make it a common Trade to sell
away their people to serve in the drudgery of American Plantations. And that
may come to pass when ever they shall be well civilized, and acquainted with
Arts and Affairs sufficient to employ people in their Countries: if also they
should be converted to Christianity, but especially unto Mahometism; for then
they would never sell those of their Religion to be Slaves unto Christians.

When Batavia the Old shall be contemned by the New.
When the Plantations of the Hollanders at Batavia in the East Indies, and
other places in the East Indies, shall, by their conquests and advancements,
become so powerful in the Indian Territories; Then their Original Countries
and States of Holland are like to be contemned by them, and obeyed only as
they please. And they seem to be in a way unto it at present by their several
Plantations, new acquists and enlargements: and they have lately discovered a
part of the Southern Continent, and several places which may be serviceable
unto them, when ever time shall enlarge them unto such necessities.

And a new Drove of Tartars shall China subdue.
Which is no strange thing if we consult the Histories of China, and successive
Inundations made by Tartarian Nations. For when the Invaders, in process of
time, have degenerated into the effeminacy and softness of the Chinese, then
they themselves have suffered a new Tartarian Conquest and Inundation. And this
has happened from time beyond our Histories: for, according to their account,
the famous Wall of China, built against the irruptions of the Tartars, was
begun above a hundred years before the Incarnation.

When America shall cease to send forth its Treasure,
That is, When America shall be better civilized, new policied and divided
between great Princes, it may come to pass that they will no longer suffer
their Treasure of Gold and Silver to be sent out to maintain the Luxury of
Europe and other parts: but rather employ it to their own advantages, in great
Exploits and Undertakings, magnificent Structures, Wars or Expeditions of their
own.

When the new World shall the old invade.
That is, When America shall be so well peopled, civilized and divided into
Kingdoms, they are like to have so little regard of their Originals, as to
acknowledge no subjection unto them: they may also have a distinct commerce
between themselves, or but independently with those of Europe, and may
hostilely and pyratically assault them, even as the Greek and Roman Colonies
after a long time dealt with their Original Countries.

When Men shall almost pass to Venice by Land,
That is, When, in long process of time, the Silt and Sands shall so choke and
shallow the Sea in and about it. And this has considerably come to pass within
these fourscore years; and is like to increase from several causes, especially
by the turning of the River Brenta, as the learned Castelli has declared.

When Nova Zembla shall be no stay Cathay.
That is, When ever that often sought for Northeast passage unto China and
Japan shall be discovered; the hindrance whereof was imputed to Nova Zembla;
for this was conceived to be an excursion of Land shooting out directly, and so
far Northward into the Sea that it discouraged from all Navigation about it.
And therefore Adventurers took in at the Southern part at a strait by Waygatz
next the Tartarian Shore: and, sailing forward they found that Sea frozen and
full of Ice, and so gave over the attempt. But of late years, by the diligent
enquiry of some Moscovites, a better discovery is made of these parts, and a
Map or Chart made of them. Thereby Nova Zembla is found to be no Island
extending very far Northward; but, winding Eastward, it joineth to the
Tartarian Continent, and so makes a Peninsula: and the Sea between it which
they entered at Waygatz, is found to be but a large Bay, apt to be frozen by
reason of the great River of Oby, and other fresh Waters, entering into it:
whereas the main Sea does not freez upon the North of Zembla except near unto
Shores; so that if the Moscovites were skillful Navigatours they might, with
less difficulties, discover this passage unto China: but however the English,
Dutch and Danes are now like to attempt it again.

But this is Conjecture, and not Prophecy: and so (I know) you will take it. I
am,

Sir, etc.

TRACT XIII. MUSAEUM CLAUSUM, OR, Bibliotheca Abscondita:
Containing Some remarkable Books, Antiquities, Pictures and Rarities of
several kinds, scarce or never seen by any man now living.
SIR,
WITH many thanks I return that noble Catalogue of Books, Rarities and
Singularities of Art and Nature, which you were pleased to communicate unto me.
There are many Collections of this kind in Europe. And, besides the printed
accounts of the Musaeum Aldrovandi, Calceolarianum, Moscardi, Wormianum; the
Casa Abbellita at Loretto, and Threasor of S. Dennis, the Repository of the
Duke of Tuscany, that of the Duke of Saxony, and that noble one of the Emperor
at Vienna, and many more are of singular note. Of what in this kind I have by
me I shall make no repetition, and you having already had a view thereof, I am
bold to present you with the List of a Collection, which I may justly say you
have not seen before.

The Title is, as above,

Musaeum Clausum, or Bibliotheca Abscondita: containing some remarkable Books,
Antiquities, Pictures and Rarities of several kinds, scarce or never seen by
any man now living.

1. Rare and generally unknown Books.
1. A Poem of Ovidius Naso, written in the Getick Language; Ah pudet and
scripsi Getico sermon Libellum.
during his exile at Tomos, found wrapped up in Wax at Sabaria, on the Frontiers
of Hungary, where there remains a tradition that he died, in his return toward
Rome from Tomos, either after his pardon or the death of Augustus.

2. The Letter of Quintus Cicero, which he wrote in answer to that of his
Brother Marcus Tullius, desiring of him an account of Britany, wherein are
described the Country, State and Manners of the Britains of that Age.

3. An Ancient British Herbal, or description of diverse Plants of this Island,
observed by that famous Physician Scribonius Largus, when he attended the
Emperor Claudius in his Expedition into Britany.

4. An exact account of the Life and Death of Avicenna confirming the account
of his Death by taking nine Clysters together in a fit of the Colic; and not
as Marius the Italian Poet delivers, by being broken-upon the Wheel; left
with other Pieces by Benjamin Tudelensis, as he traveled from Saragossa to
Jerusalem, in the hands of Abraham Jarchi, a famous Rabbi of Lunet near
Montpelier, and found in a Vault when the Walls of that City were demolished by
Lewis the Thirteenth.

5. A punctual relation of Hannibal's march out of Spain into Italy, and far
more particular than that of Livy, where about he passed the River Rhodanus or
Rhosne; at what place he crossed the Isura or L'isere; when he marched up
toward the confluence of the Sone and the Rhone, or the place where the City
Lions was afterward built; how wisely he decided the difference between King
Brancus and his Brother, at what place he passed the Alps, what Vinegar he
used, and where he obtained such quantity to break and calcine the Rocks made
hot with Fire.

6. A learned Comment upon the Periplus of Hanno the Carthaginian, or his
Navigation upon the Western Coast of Africa, with the several places he landed
at; what Colonies he settled, what Ships were scattered from his Fleet near the
Aequinoctial Line, which were not afterward heard of, and which probably fell
into the Trade Winds, and were carried over into the Coast of America.

7. A particular Narration of that famous Expedition of the English into
Barbary in the ninety fourth year of the Hegira, so shortly touched by Leo
Africanus, whither called by the Goths they besieged, took and burnt the City
of Arzilla possessed by the Mahometans, and lately the seat of Gayland; with
many other exploits delivered at large in Arabic, lost in the Ship of Books
and Rarities which the King of Spain took from Siddy Hamet King of Fez, whereof
a great part were carried into the Escurial, and conceived to be gathered out
of the relations of Hibnu Nachu, the best Historian of the African Affairs.

8. A Fragment of Pythaeas that ancient Traveller of Marseille; which we
suspect not to be spurious, because, in the description of the Northern
Countries, we find that passage of Pythaeas mentioned by Strabo, that all the
Air beyond Thule is thick, condensed and gellied, looking just like Sea Lungs.

9. A Sub Marine Herbal, describing the several Vegetables found on the Rocks,
Hills, Valleys, Meadows at the bottom of the Sea, with many sorts of Aiga,
Fucus, Quercus, Polygonum, Gramens and others not yet described.

10. Some Manuscripts and Rarities brought from the Libraries of Aethiopia, by
Zaga Zaba, and afterward transported to Rome, and scattered by the Soldiers of
the Duke of Bourbon, when they barbarously sacked that City.

11. Some Pieces of Julius Scaliger, which he complains to have been stolen from
him, sold to the Bishop of Mende in Languedock, and afterward taken away and
sold in the Civil Wars under the Duke of Rohan.

12. A Comment of Dioscorides upon Hyppocrates, procured from Constantinople by
Amatus Lusitanus, and left in the hands of a Jew of Ragusa.

13. Marcus Tullius Cicero his Geography; as also a part of that magnified
Piece of his De Republica, very little answering the great expectation of it,
and short of Pieces under the same name by Bodinus and Tholosanus.

14. King Mithridates his Oneirocritica. Aristotle de Precationibus.

Democritus de his quae fiunt apud Orcum, and Oceani circumnavigatio.

Epicurus de Pietate.

A Tragedy of Thyestes, and another of Medea, writ by Diogenes the Cynick.

King Alfred upon Aristotle de Plantis.

Seneca's Epistles to S. Paul.

King Solomon de Umbris Idaearum, which Chicus Asculanus, in his Comment upon
Johannes de Sacrobosco, would make us believe he saw in the Library of the Duke
of Bavaria.

15. Artemidori Oneirocritici Geographia.

Pythagoras de Mari Rubro.

The Works of Confutius the famous Philosopher of China, translated into
Spanish.

16. Josephus in Hebrew, written by himself.

17. The Commentaries of Sylla the Dictatour.

18. A Commentary of Galen upon the Plague of Athens described by Thucydides.

19. Duo Caesaris Anti-Catones, or the two notable Books writ by Julius Caesar
against Cato; mentioned by Livy, Salustius and Juvenal; which the Cardinal of
Liege told Ludovicus Vives were in an old Library of that City.

Mazhapha Einok, or, the Prophecy of Enoch, which Aegidius Lochiensis, a
learned Eastern Traveller, told Peireschius that he had found in an old Library
at Alexandria containing eight thousand Volumes.

20. A Collection of Hebrew Epistles, which passed between the two learned
Women of our age Maria Molinea of Sedan, and Maria Schurman of Utrecht.

A wondrous Collection of some Writings of Ludovica Saracenica, Daughter of
Philibertus Saracenicus a Physician of Lions, who at eight years of age had
made a good progress in the Hebrew, Greek and Latin Tongues.

2. Rarities in Pictures.
1. A Picture of the three remarkable Steeples or Towers in Europe built
purposely awry and so as they seem falling. Torre Pisana at Pisa, Torre
Garisenda in Bononia, and that other in the City of Colein.

2. A Draught of all sorts of Sistrums, Crotaloes, Cymbals, Tympans, etc. in
use among the Ancients.

3. Large Submarine Pieces, well delineating the bottom of the Mediterranean
Sea, the Prerie or large Sea-meadow upon the Coast of Provence, the Coral
Fishing, the gathering of Sponges, the Mountains, Valleys and Deserts, the
Subterraneous Vents and Passages at the bottom of that Sea. Together with a
lively Draught of Cola Pesce, or the famous Sicilian Swimmer, diving into the
Voragos and broken Rocks by Charybdis, to fetch up the golden Cup, which
Frederick, King of Sicily, had purposely thrown into that Sea.

4. A Moon Piece, describing that notable Battle between Axalla, General of
Tamerlane, and Camares the Persian, fought by the light of the Moon.

5. Another remarkable Fight of Inghimmi the Florentine with the Turkish
Galleys by Moonlight, who being for three hours grappled with the Basha
Galley, concluded with a signal Victory.

6. A delineation of the great Fair of Almachara in Arabia, which, to avoid the
great heat of the Sun, is kept in the Night, and by the light of the Moon.

7. A Snow Piece, of Land and Trees covered with Snow and Ice, and Mountains of
Ice floating in the Sea, with Bears, Seals, Foxes, and variety of rare Fowls
upon them.

8. An Ice Piece describing the notable Battle between the Jaziges and the
Romans, fought upon the frozen Danubius, the Romans settling one foot upon
their Targets to hinder them from slipping, their fighting with the Jaziges
when they were fallen, and their advantages therein by their art in volutation
and rolling contention or wrestling, according to the description of Dion.

9. Socia, or a Draught of three persons notably resembling each other. Of King
Henry the Fourth of France, and a Miller of Languedock; of Sforza Duke of
Milain and a Soldier; of Malalesta Duke of Rimini and Marchesinus the Jester.

10. A Picture of the great Fire which happened at Constantinople in the Reign
of Sultan Achmet. The Janissaries in the mean time plundring the best Houses,
Nassa Bassa the Vizier riding about with a Cimetre in one hand and a Janizary's
Head in the other to deter them; and the Priests attempting to quench the Fire,
by pieces of Mahomet's Shirt dipped in holy Water and thrown into it.

11. A Night Piece of the dismal Supper and strange Entertain of the Senators
by Domitian, according to the description of Dion.

12. A Vestal Sinner in the Cave with a Table and a Candle.

13. An Elephant dancing upon the Ropes with a Negro Dwarf upon his Back.

14. Another describing the mighty Stone falling from the Clouds into
Aegospotamos or the Goats River in Greece, which Antiquity could believe that
Anaxagoras was able to foretell half a year before.

15. Three noble Pieces; of Vercingetorix the Gaul submitting his person unto
Julius Caesar; of Tigranes King of Armenia humbly presenting himself unto
Pompey; and of Tamerlane ascending his Horse from the Neck of Bajazet.

16. Draughts of three passionate Looks; of Thyestes when he was told at the
Table that he had eaten a piece of his own Son; of Bajazet when he went into
the Iron Cage; of Oedipus when he first came to know that he had killed his
Father, and married his own Mother.

17. Of the Cymbrian Mother in Plutarch who, after the overthrow by Marius,
hanged her self and her two Children at her feet.

18. Some Pieces delineating singular inhumanities in Tortures. The Scaphismus
of the Persians. The living truncation of the Turks. The hanging Sport at the
Feasts of the Thracians. The exact method of flaying men alive, beginning
between the Shoulders, according to the description of Thomas Minadoi, in his
Persian War. Together with the studied tortures of the French Traitors at
Pappa in Hungaria: as also the wild and enormous torment invented by Tiberius,
designed according unto the description of Suetonius. Excogitaverunt inter
genera cruciatus, ut larga meri potione per fallaciam oneratos repent veretris
deligatis fidicularum simul urinaeque tormento distenderet.

19. A Picture describing how Hannibal forced his passage over the River Rhosne
with his Elephants, Baggage and mixed Army; with the Army of the Gauls opposing
him on the contrary Shore, and Hanno passing over with his Horse much above to
fall upon the Rere of the Gauls.

20. A neat Piece describing the Sack of Fundi by the Fleet and Soldiers of
Barbarossa the Turkish Admiral, the confusion of the people and their flying up
to the Mountains, and Julia Gonzaga the beauty of Italy flying away with her
Ladies half naked on Horseback over the Hills.

21. A noble Head of Franciscus Gonzaga, who, being imprisoned for Treason,
grew gray in one night, with this Inscription,

O nox quam longa est quae facit una senem.
22. A large Picture describing the Siege of Vienna by Solomon the Magnificent,
and at the same time the Siege of Florence by the Emperor Charles the Fifth
and Pope Clement the Seventh, with this Subscription,

Tum vacui capitis populum Phaeaca putares?
23. An exquisite Piece properly delineating the first course of Metellus his
Pontificial Supper, according to the description of Macrobius; together with a
Dish of Pisces Fossiles, garnished about with the little Eels taken out of the
backs of Cods and Perches; as also with the Shell Fishes found in Stones about
Ancona.

24. A Picture of the noble Entertain and Feast of the Duke of Chausue at the
Treaty of Collen, 1673. when in a very large Room, with all the Windows open,
and at a very large Table he sat himself, with many great persons and Ladies;
next about the Table stood a row of Waiters, then a row of Musicians, then a
row of Musketeers.

25. Miltiades, who overthrew the Persians at the Battle of Marathon and
delivered Greece, looking out of a Prison Grate in Athens, wherein he died,
with this Inscription,

(quam,
Non hoc terribiles Cymbri non Britones un-
Sauromataeve truces aut immanes Agathyrsi.
26. A fair English Lady drawn Al Negro, or in the Ethiopian hue excelling the
original White and Red Beauty, with this Subscription,

Sed quandam volo nocte Nigriorem.
27. Pieces and Draughts in Caricatura, of Princes, Cardinals and famous men;
wherein, among others, the Painter has singularly hit the signatures of a Lion
and a Fox in the face of Pope Leo the Tenth.

28. Some Pieces A la ventura, or Rare Chance Pieces, either drawn at random,
and happening to be like some person, or drawn for some and happening to be
more like another; while the Face, mistaken by the Painter, proves a tolerable
Picture of one he never saw.

29. A Draught of famous Dwarfs with this Inscription,

Nos facimus Bruti puerum nos Lagona vivum.
30. An exact and proper delineation of all sorts of Dogs upon occasion of the
practice of Sultan Achmet; who in a great Plague at Constantinople transported
all the Dogs therein unto Pera, and from thence into a little Island, where
they perished at last by Famine: as also the manner of the Priests curing of
mad Dogs by burning them in the forehead with Saint Bellin's Key.

31. A noble Picture of Thorismund King of the Goths as he was killed in his
Palace at Tholouze, who being let blood by a Surgeon, while he was bleeding, a
stander by took the advantage to stab him.

32. A Picture of rare Fruits with this Inscription,

Credere quae possis surrepta sororibus Afris.
33. An handsome Piece of Deformity expressed in a notable hard Face, with this
Inscription,

-- Ora
Julius in Satyris qualia Rufus habet.
34. A noble Picture of the famous Duel between Paul Manessi and Caragusa the
Turk in the time of Amurath the Second; the Turkish Army and that of Scanderbeg
looking on; wherein Manessi slew the Turk, cut off his Head and carried away
the Spoils of his Body.

3. Antiquities and Rarities of several sorts.
1. CErtain ancient Medals with Greek and Roman Inscriptions, found about Crim
Tartary; conceived to be left in those parts by the Soldiers of Mithridates,
when overcome by Pompey, he marched round about the North of the Euxine to come
about into Thracia.

2. Some ancient Ivory and Copper Crosses found with many others in China;
conceived to have been brought and left there by the Greek Soldiers who served
under Tamerlane in his Expedition and Conquest of that Country.

3. Stones of strange and illegible Inscriptions, sound about the great ruins
which Vincent le Blanc describes about Cephala in Africa, where he opinion'd
that the Hebrews raised some Buldings of old, and that Solomon brought from
thereabout a good part of his Gold.

4. Some handsome Engraveries and Medals, of Justinus and Justinianus, found in
the custody of a Bannyan in the remote parts of India, conjectured to have been
left there by the Friars mentioned in Procopius, who traveled those parts in
the Reign of Justinianus, and brought back into Europe the discovery of Silk
and Silk Worms.

5. An original Medal of Petrus Aretinus, who was called Flagellum Principum,
wherein he made his own Figure on the Obverse part with this Inscription,

Il Divino Aretino.
On the Reverse sitting on a Throne, and at his Feet Ambassadors of Kings and
Princes bringing presents unto him, with this Inscription,

I Principi tributati da i Popoli tributano il Servitor loro.
6. Mummia Tholosana; or, The complete Head and Body of Father Crispin, buried
long ago in the Vault of the Cordeliers at Toulouse, where the Skins of the
dead so dry and parch up without corrupting that their persons may be known
very long after, with this Inscription,

Ecce iterum Crispinus.
7. A noble Quandros or Stone taken out of a Vulture's Head.

8. A large Ostridges Egg, whereon is neatly and fully wrought that famous
Battle of Alcazar, in which three Kings lost their lives.

9. An Etiudros Alberti or Stone that is apt to be always moist: useful unto
dry tempers, and to be held in the hand in Fevers instead of Crystal, Eggs,
Limmons, Cucumbers.

10. A small Viol of Water taken out of the Stones therefore called Enhydri,
which naturally include a little Water in them, in like manner as the Aetites
or Aegle Stone does another Stone.

11. A neat painted and gilded Cup made out of the Confiti di Tivoli and formed
up with powdered Egg-shells; as Nero is conceived to have made his Piscina
admirabilis, singular against Fluxes to drink often therein.

12. The Skin of a Snake bred out of the Spinal Marrow of a Man.

13. Vegetable Horns mentioned by Linschoten, which set in the ground grow up
like Plants about Goa.

14. An extract of the Inck of Cuttle Fishes reviving the old remedy of
Hippocrates in Hysterical Passions.

15. Spirits and Salt of Sargasso made in the Western Ocean covered with that
Vegetable; excellent against the Scurvy.

16. An extract of Cachunde or Liberans that famous and highly magnified
Composition in the East Indies against Melancholy.

17. Diarhizon mirificum; or an unparalled Composition of the most effectual
and wonderful Roots in Nature.

Rad. Butuae Cuamensis. Rad. Moniche Cuamensis. Rad. Mongus Bazainensis. Rad.
Casei Baizanensis. Rad. Columbae Mozambiguensis. Gim Sem Sinicae. Fo Lim lac
Tigridis dictae. Fo seu Cort. Rad. Soldae. Rad. Ligni Solorani. Rad. Malacensis
madrededios dictae an. ij. M. fiat pulvis, qui cum gelatina Cornu cervi
Moschati Chinensis formetur in massas oviformes.
18. A transcendent Perfume made of the richest Odorates of both the Indies,
kept in a Box made of the Muschie Stone of Niarienburg, with this Inscription,

-- Deos rogato
Totum ut te faciant, Fabulle, Nasum.
19. A Clepselaea, or Oil Hourglass, as the Ancients used those of Water.

20. A Ring found in a Fishes Belly taken about Gorro; conceived to be the same
wherewith the Duke of Venice had wedded the Sea.

21. A neat Crucifix made out of the cross Bone of a Frogs Head.

22. A large Agath containing a various and careless Figure, which looked upon
by a Cylinder represents a perfect Centaur. By some such advantages King
Pyrrhus might find out Apollo and the nine Muses in those Agaths of his whereof
Pliny makes mention.

23. Batrachomyomachia, or the Homerican Battle between Frogs and Mice, neatly
described upon the Chizel Bone of a large Pike's Jaw.

24. Pyxis Pandoroe, or a Box which held the Unguentum Pestiferum, which by
anointing the Garments of several persons begat the great and horrible Plague
of Milan.

25. A Glass of Spirits made of Ethereal Salt, Hermetically sealed up, kept
continually in Quicksilver; of so volatile a nature that it will scarce endure
the Light, and therefore only to be shown in Winter, or by the light of a
Carbuncle, or Bononian Stone.

He who knows where all this Treasure now is, is a great Apollo. I Am sure I am
not He. However, I am,

Sir, Yours, etc.

AN ALPHABETICAL INDEX.
A
AGath, 214. Alfred 's Epistles, 199. Almond-Tree, 31. America, 189, 190.
Apollo 's answers to Croesus, 168, etc. -- to Attalus and Cypselus, 171. Ark,
without Masts, 5. Aristot. de Precat. 198. Artemidorus, 199. Astronomical Hints
in the Bible, 2, 3. Avicenna 's death, 195.
B
BArley-harvest in Egypt, 52. Balm, 49. Balsam-oil, 15. Baltic, 187. Barham-
Down. One of the Tumuli opened there, 155. Barklow- Hills: a Tum. opened there,
155, 156. Barchochebas, 3. Batavia, Old and New, 188. Basquensa- Tongue, 136.
Bay Tree, 67. Beeves of Pyrrhus, 65. Blacks, 187. Broom-rape, 59.
C
CAchunde, 212. J. Caesar against Cato, 199. Cedars of Libanus, 63. Cephala.
Inscriptions there, 209, 210. Chirurgion's Art in the forming Eve, 3.
China-Language, 132, 133. China, 189. -- North-East passage to it, 191, 192. Q.
Cicero's Letter, 195. M. Cicero's Geogr. 198. Cicada: what, 108. Cold, at S.
Peter's denial: how, 73. Cockle. 88. Corn-Ears, 23. Confusion of Tongues, 130,
131. Confutius's Works, 199. Crosses in China. 209. Croesus King of Lydia, how
answered at Delphos, 167, etc. -- his Son's first Speech, 174. Crucifix, 213.
Cucumbers, 14. Cummin, 22. Cup, a remarkable one, 211, 212. Cymbals; tinkling
Cymbal, 121. Cypress, 9. Cypselus, how answered by Apollo. 171. Cyrus, the
Oracle concerning him, 172, 173.
D
DAnish-Tongue, 146. Darnel, 84, 88. Democritus, 198. Diarhizon mirificum, 212,
213. Diogenes, Cyn. Thyestes, etc. 198. Dioscorides on Hippocrates, 198. Dread
Sovereign; its signification, 149, 150.
E
New England, 184. English, their Expedition into Barbary, 196, 197. Enoch's
Prophecy. 200. Etiudros Alberti, 211.
F
FAlconry, ancient and modern, 111, etc. -- its Terms, whence, 116. Famine in
Egypt, 42. Fitches, 21. Firr-Tree. 48. Fig Tree, 68. Fishes of the Sea of
Tiberias, 97, etc. Fish called Faber Marinus, 99, 100. Fish that affrighted K.
Theodorick, 100. Flax, 52. Forbidden Fruit, 14.
G
GAlen, 199. Garlic and Onions, 14. Garlands and Garland-Plants, 89, etc.
Ghosts consulted on frivolous occasions, 178. Grapes of Eschol, 10. Granaries,
43. Grass; the Sheaves of it, 57. Gracculus, what Bird, 107. Gradual Verses,
125, etc. Green-Field, 35.
H
HAnnibal's march into Italy, 196. Hanno's Periplus, a Comment on it, 196.
Halec, what Fish, 104. Halcyon, what Bird, 107. Hawks and Hawking, 111, etc. --
their Diet, 112. -- their Physic, 112, 113, etc. -- their Flights, 116, 118.
Herbal Submarine, 197. Herbs at bottom of Red Sea, etc. 35, 36. Herbs eaten at
the Passover, 81. Herbal British, 195. Hemlock, 8. Hebrew-Tongue, 131.
Hourglass with Oil, 213. Homer's Battle of Froggs, 214. Hugo de Bones. 147.
Husks of the Prodigal. 13. Hymn Turkish, 123.
J
JAmaica, 185. Ida-Mount, its Plants, 80. Ilex Coccigera, 61. Ink of
Cuttle-fish, 212. Jordan, 83, 165. Josephus, 199. Irish-Tongue, 135.
K
KIkaion, 7.
L
LAdders, their signification in Dreams, 5. Languages, 129, etc. Language of
the people found in a certain place in Spain, by Duke d'Alva, 136. Languedoc,
147, 148. Lilies, 19, 79. Loadstone, not mentioned in Scripture, 4.
M
MAdrid, 186. Mazorites, 133. Medals, 209, 210. Milium, 22. Modest and immodest
forms of speaking, 176. Mounts and Hills artificial, 151, etc. Mithridatis
Oneirocrit. 198. Manuscripts from Aethiopia, etc. 197, 198. Musaea. Musaeum
Clausum, 193, 194, etc. Mugil, what, 104. Mustard Seed, 27. Mummia Tholosana,
210, 211. Myrica, 9. Myrtle, 81.
N
NOrfolk, odd words in use there, whence, 146. Nysus, what, 108. Nycticorax,
what, 108.
O
OAks, 61. Oats, 23. Olive-Leaf, 26. Olive Tree, in Romans 11. 45. Oracle at
Delphos, 167, etc. -- its answer about the Bones of Orestes, 175. -- its
obscurity, 175, 176. Oracles, why in Verse, 177. Ostriches Egg, 211. Ovid's
Getick Poem, 194.
P
Palm Tree, 78. Paliurus, 8. Perfume, 11, 213. Petrarch, 148. Pictures.
Rarities in Picture, etc. 200, etc. to 209. Pomegranate, 34. Plants in holy
Scripture 1. to 88. -- Scripture distribution of Plants, 65. Physiognomy. Face
Quadrangular, etc. 5, 6. Prophecy, a feigned one by the Author, 181, 182,
183. -- Its Exposition, 184, etc. Prepuces of Fruit, 64. Pyramids, 45.
Pythaeas's Fragment, 197. Pythag. de Mari rubro, 199. Pyxis Pandorae, 214.
Q
AQuandros, 211.
R
REeds 82. Rye, 22, 54, 56. Ring, one found in a Fish, 213. Rods of Jacob, 18.
Rod of Aaron, 30. Roman-Tongue, 137. Ropalick Verses, 125, etc. Roses of Egypt
and Rome, 92. Rose of Jericho, 33. Rubus, 8. Rump of the Sacrifice, 79.
S
SAlt of Sargasso, 212. -- aetherial, 215. Saxon-Tongue, 134, 138, etc.
Samaritans Oil, 15. Seed, Increase of it, 39. Shekels of Jerusalem, 32.
Shittah-Tree, 10. Sheep, how fruitful, 79, 80. Snakes-Skin, 212. Stones in
Aaron's Breast Plate, 4. Stones called Enhydri. 211. Solomon de Umbris, etc.
199. Seneca's Epistles to S. Paul, 199. Jo. Scaliger; some pieces of his stolen
away. 198. Sea, dead, 164, etc. Sodom, where, 164, etc. Spain, 186.
Spanish-Tongue, 133. Lud. Saracenica, 200. Shower said to be sent by Apollo,
172. A. M. Schurman, 200. Sylla Dict. 199. Stork, 48. Stubble of Egypt, very
short, 24. Sycomore, 36. Scythian-Tongue, 137.
T
TArtars invading China, 189. Tincture, Scarlet, 60. Troas, where, and what its
privileges, 161, 163. Trees not expressly named in Scripture, 81. Trees named by
the Elders who accused Susannah, 63. Turpentine Tree, 34. Tumuli of Romans,
Saxons, Danes, 151, 152, 153. -- how to know the nature of them, 153, 154.
U
UPupa, 105.
V
VEnice, 190. -- Sea about it, why apt to be choked with Sands, 190, 191.
Verse used by Oracles, 177. Vine, 32. Vine-Flowers, 25.
W
WElch-Tongue, 133, 135. Wine new, not at Pentecost, 25. Wheat-Harvest in
Egypt, 54.
Z
ZEmbla, 191. Zizania, 85.
FINIS.

