THE CONFESSION OF JOHN BROWN A IESVITE, In the Gate House. Twice Examined By
A Committee from the Honorable HOUSE OF COMMONS. Wherein is Discovered the
late Plots of the Pope and Papacy, against these Kingdoms, England, Scotland,
and Ireland. And the manner how he poceeds in his Intents, to intrude himself
into the Temporal Monarchy hereof. With the Copy of the Popes Breve, and the
sansinesse of his Nuntio with the English Ladies, and the event that may
proceed by stopping such proceedings.

Printed by Barnard Alsop 1641.

The Confession of John Brown a Jesuit in the Gate House, twice examined by a
Committee from the Honorable House of COMMONS.
THIS John Brown desiring to inform concerning some special points, for the
Weal of this State, as himself has observed, for above 50. years past,
which are reduced to these Heads.

1. Concerning the Jesuits, and damage they have done to these Kingdoms,
laboring that the Oath of Allegiance might not be taken, and the ways which
they use with their Penitents, and projecting of Monopolies of their Ministers,
and substitutes, and the way to root them out of these Dominions.
THat they have their Lay-brethren, which collect duly their Annuities, and
rents, and play the merchants transporting cloth and other Merchandise of great
value. I do know a brother in law of Captain Reads, who continually trades in
Marchandises for them, as also one Cuthbert of Lancashire, and one Gray of
Barwick^, and they are protected by the Spanish Ambassadors. They have their
Merchants in London: namely, one Evans, worth 5000 l. who means to make them
his Heirs, and to disinherit his own kindred. He was appointed to be Sheriff
of Middlesex this last year, and by their persuasions did go out of the City,
and lived retiredly, until Michaelmas was past.

More of their Agents are Doctor More, Captain Re^d a Scottish-man, Lieutenant
Col. in Ireland, under Col. Bruce, he lets their buildings in Long-acre for
them, and the fair buildings in Lincolnes-Inne fields, inhabited by Sir George
Gage. etc. and at his death left to the Lady Gardeners, where the Jesuits
continually do resort. They do use with them Penitents to tell the poorer
sort, that to take the Oath of Allegiance is damnable, and they tell the richer
sort; that they may do as their Conscience will inspire them, not making
Conscience to perform.

Some have left by testament, others by donation, to bring up some 2, some 3,
and paid 25 l. and 30 l. per annum, but since they are not willing to take the
^oyle, to take it yearly, b^t have entised the D^^ators to give them, some
three, some four, some 500 l. and in my knowledge, they have got in this
manner for nourishing above 200, extorting Money from this Kingdom, to the
great prejudice of this State.

2. Of the Reformation of some things in the Queens Court, and of some Persons
which are fit to be removed.
THe Actors are Father Philips, her Confessor, and the superior of the
Capuchins, and a gray Friar, who has intruded himself by degrees, to be a
Clark of her Majesty's Chapel: sometimes he is called by the name of Wilson,
sometimes of Tomson, and a Doctor of Divinity, a furious and unquiet Spirit, by
a nickname called Cackafugo: he rules Father Philips, he rules the business
amongst them, that concerns the State; and for the most part, the matters of
Rome, having three wives at this present all alive. There is also one Penrick
resident at Rome, by his Master Mr. William Hamilton, l^te agent at Rome.

There be many more, one Francis Maitland, alias quashet has 100 crowns, per
annum of her Majesty's Pensioner, a firebrand intelligencer at Rome, France,
Flanders, and Spain, with Liddington, colonel Syms, Chambers, and Penricke at
Paris.

I should think it good to remove all these from about her Majesty, except only
Father Philips, who is of a sweet disposition: though so easily persuaded by
Sir Toby Matthewes, Sir John Winter, Mr. Walter Mountague, who are of the
Cabinet Counsel.

3. Of the manner whereby the Pope means to intrude himself into the
Temporal Monarchy of this Kingdom, and the manner how he proceeds.
ONe Seignior George was appointed by the Pope to inform him of all important
business of England and Scotland: who as soon as English, Scottish, or Irish
Runnagates came to Rome, he went to their lodging in the Popes behalf, and
brought them of his Holinesses bread, and wine, and other rarities, as
Bolognean, Sassages, and such dainties, and showing them all the antiquities of
Rome, and feasting them at the Popes charges (though they were Protestants) for
this purpose 2000 Families were requested of His Majesty to be sent to Rome,
with a promise of their quiet abode there, and their use of liberty of
conscience.

To break the Ice for the Popes honors sake: then was nominated also Mr.
Robert Duglas, cozen German to the Marquess Duglas, an eminent friend to
Father Philips and Seignor George a great traveller; a great Linguist, a
Courtier, whose directions were to be from Cardinal Richlieu, and from the
Court of France, receives moneys for his Journey, where he had great
entertainment, and after a years space the viatick being dismissed, they sent
him with Pictures A^g^^ D^^s, and many other small gifts which they brought
into England of presents: under pretense of a breve from his Holiness, The
Substance of the BREVE is this.
To the Clergy, Secular, and Regular, and Lay-Catholicks of the two Kingdoms
of England, and Scotland, etc.
HIS Holiness being very sorry for such Jarres, and Divisions between the
Secular, and the Clergy, to the great prejudice of the Catholic Church; and
for that respect having a Fatherly care of souls, in those Kingdoms of
England and Scotland, he has sent (expressing his reverend Fatherly care)
George Pausanone of his Family to compose, and recronicle them, if he can.

This man at Paris quits his Priests Robes, and dressed himself in secular
apparel: covering his shaven crown with a great Periwig, and writes to Father
Philips, to be the primum mobile, and Directer of all who send to him at Paris,
as to an Italian Gentleman, desirous to see these Kingdoms. That coming to
London, he lodged first at the Italian Ordinary in the Strand; but being so
much resorted to by persons of great quality: he removed to Seigneor Germines
House near the Exchange, is you pass to Covent Garden.

In their meetings (at last) it was concluded, that they should speak
Honorably of the King, and Queen, and be sparing to discourse of the Oath of
Allegiance. It is worthy of consideration to observe the Nuntioes carriage day
and night, in courting of Ladies and Gentlewomen, in Terme-time all the Gentry
of both Sexes.

Such were his comportments. that it is a shame to relate them, his
Conversation abroad, and Conventicles at home with Ladies, Sir John Winter: her
Majesty's Secretary, Sir Toby Matthewes, Sir Kellum Digby, and Mr. Walter, were
his Cabinet Counsel. He visited one of the best Ladies in the Land alone, and
being found by her husband, and being asked why he durst be so bold, he was in
fear to have bin precipitated out at the window. His manner was in the
morning, sometimes two hours before day, to visit Ladies and Gentlewomen,
enquiring of them, how they had slept that night.

The Pope had made his eldest Nephew Francisco Protector of England, Scotland,
and Ireland, and directing a particular Congregation, for the matters of these
Kingdoms, and with him were joined two other Cardinals, and a new Secretary,
and other Prelates of Rome his Counselors. He entertained Mr. Francis
Mountague with great pomp, and sent him abroad in his Nephews Coach, and so
others the like. He made Segn^or Georgeo Patriarch of Jerusalem.

No less was his pride puffed up, when Sir William Hambleton, brother to the
Earl of Abercorn, and Cozen to Marquess Hambleton, whose carriage was like to
Segnior Georgeo here: carrying (clothed in man's apparel) through Scotland,
England, France and Italy; his Sweetheart Eugenius Bonny.

After Segnior Georgeo was sent hither, Count Rossey, who was intended to be
made Cardinal, in case he may have means. But it was dashed, and so will all
correspondency be: no doubt hereafter by this grave Counsel of the Honorable
Parliament. So that Mr. Penricke Agent there, be called back, and a certain
Knight of the Order of St. John of Jerusalem, whom Count Rossey intends to send
hither to keep correspondency, be likewise dismissed from hence. Which done, all
the project will end in smoke: provided that M. Mountague, Sir Toby Matthewes,
Sir Kellam Digby, Sir John Winter be removed, and barred from Rome, or any of
his Holinesses Territories.

I heard a Frenchman of good worth say, that he had seen a Breve from Rome
with this Inscription.

TOBIAE MATTHEW SACERDOTI, SOCIETATIS JESU. That is, to Toby Mathewes Priest of
the Order of JESUS: wherein (inter alia) was Confirma Amazones illas quae
strenue laborant in vita pro Christo. First, confirm those Amazonian
Court-Ladies, that is, those brave Catholics, Catamountaines of the
Popish-faction, that labor lustily for the advancement of Popery.



4. That the Roman Catholics shall be stopped from going over Sea, with their
goods and all.
TOuching Romish Catholics, they (especially those that have Lands) should be
stopped from going over Sea, in respect that selling and morgaging their Lands
the money is transported to foreign parts, whereby the Kingdom is
depauperated, his Majesty loses his yearly Pay for their Recusantsie, the
Shires where they remain are disabled to pay such Subsidies, as formerly in
time of their residence, and finally the poor lose much by their absence.

FINIS.

