THE BROWNISTS SYNAGOGVE OR A LATE DISCOVERY Of their Conventicles, Assemblies;
and places of meeting,

Where they Preach, and the manner of their praying and preaching,

With a Relation of the Names, places, and Doctrines of those which do
commonly Preach.

The chief of which are these.

Green, the Feltmaker.

Marler, the Buttonmaker.

Spencer, the Coachman.

Rogers the Clover.

Which Sect is much increased of late within this City.

A Kingdom divided cannot stand.

Printed Anno Dom. 1641.

The Brownists Synagogues. OR, A Discovery of their Conventicles and Assemblies,
THe distractions of these times are not unknown to be caused by the
Copiousnesse of Sects, Religions I cannot term them least I should disallow of
that Axiomaticke of K. James of blessed Memory, for he acknowledged but two
Religions, the good and the bad, and those were the Protestants and the
Papists, the Protestant the true, and the Papists the false, but there are a
Company of erroneous Sectarists, and Haeriticall opinions, crept in amongst us,
like so many weeds in a pleasant Garden; what good counsel has our Savior
given us, and how little use do we make of it, he bids us take heed least we
be led away wirh the Doctrine of false Prophets, Matthew. 7. 15. yet how apt are
we to believe the Traditions of men.

How many Sects and Schisms are lately sprung up here in this Kingdom, that
they (like to the Plagues of Egypt) have overrun the Land, but namely the
Brownists, the Brothers of the Separation, bear the greatest sway, to what an
height of impudency have they of late aspired unto, being upheld by too many of
that Sect, they like the Philisti^^s bring their Goliath to fight their battles;
But there is no doubt, but there will arise a David of truth to beat down
their violent and fantastical Doctrine, by which so many simple Disciples are
seduced, further these our Sectarists will abide no degrees in Schools, all
humane Learning must be laid by, Academies are to them abominable, nay herein
they comply with the Papists, whose Doctrine they pretend utterly to abhor,
who hold that ignorance is the mother of Devotion, and of these opinions was
How, that notorious Predicant Cobbler, whose body was buried in the highway,
and his Funeral Sermon was preached by one of his Sect in a Brewars Cart, such
an Anti-Bishop was Eaton the famous Buttonmaker in St. Martins, but because
they are translated from life to death: I leave them. Hence come those violent
outrages, and Sacrilegious disorders committed in the Church, even in the time
of Divine Service, and hubbubs and strange tumults raised, where reverend
silence ought to be used, by laying violent hands upon the Minister, rending
his Hood from his neck, and tearing the Surplice from his back, he hardly
escaping in his own person, from being torn in pieces, and even when the
Psalm is singing, and the Preacher, ready to go into the Pulpit, to deliver
his Sermon; as likewise rending the Railes from before the Communion Table,
chopping them in pieces, and burning them in the Church Yard, and this to be
done without authority, commission, or order, in a riotous manner, taking upon
them further power then Justice requires, I hope the Parliament will take into
their wise and grave considerations and pious care, the peace of the Church,
and not suffer it to be clowded or eclipsed by these mists and errors of
darkness and ignorance, my prayer is, and let it be prayer of all good
Christians, that these Egyptian Locusts, that swarm in every corner of this
City and Kingdom, may be expelled, that we may enjoy the light of the Gospel.

Let me gentle Reader not be prolixious, and I shall here relate unto thee the
names, and places where these illiterate preachers live, and make their
assemblies, with the unlearned Doctrines and opinions they hold.

The first man that I begin with, shall be an Irreverend Glover, whose name is
Richard Rogers, living nigh Whitecrossestreet in the Suburbs of London, in
Blew-Anchor-Alley, he oftentimes does call a Congregation as he terms it, and
at his own house tells them what they should do, which is to con^^^^ the Church
where the Relics of Religion (...) to separate themselves from it, and gather
themselves to those which do feed the holy flocks, which do abhor that
Diabolical function of the Bishops, which are nothing but Altarwise, the
spirit he tells them, moves him, and so proceeding he tells them what first
comes into his mind, his Apology is, that he speaks nothing, but that which
the spirit gives him utterance for.

Then there is one Jeremy Manwood, whose Doctrine is to be heard in Goat Alley
nigh the same street, who does commend the opinion of those which being
Seperatists, to abhor the Society of the wicked, once in a forrnight does he
teach.

Also there is one Edward Gyles, whose holy Brothers meet together in
Checker-Alley nigh the same place, his Doctrine is this, That the gilded
Cross in Cheapside, is an Idolatrous Cross, for many adore and worship it as
an Idol, and that it is an Eyesore to their uprightness, and ought to be
abolished, he teaches every first day of the month.

There is also a Buttonmaker in Aldersgate Street, whose name is Marler, which
does seldom miss once in a week, and his opinion is, That every man should
follow his own calling, why then does he rob Levi of his due? Why does he
dare to reckon himself amongst the Children of the Prophets, his answer to
which proposition is, because they prove droanes, wherefore he to show himself
a laborious Be, does supply their places.

Also there is one John Tucke, whose Associates have their Convocation in
Fleet-lane, and his opinion is, That the Book of Common Prayer, had its first
Original from the Mass.

Humphrey Gosnold does teach nigh Tower Hill, who does keep his hair long,
because he would not be known to be a Precisi^n, he tells his holy assembly,
that those Pipes, or Organs, which are set up in Paul's Church, and other
places, makes more noise with their roaring, then all the Bulls of Basan did,
when Ogg their King passed by them in triumph.

Jonas Hawkins a Fisherman is a provoker to separation, and lives in
Chick-lane.

John Brumley in Chancery Lane is another Zelote, which does exhort his
Brethren to follow him, twice in a week he teaches, the women his holy and
zealous sisters, well affect him.

Roger Kennet, a Yorkshire man, does draw a company to him, nigh the Royal
Exchange, his opinion is, none can be saved, but those which are of their
Elect.

Edward Johnson a Chandlor, is the teacher to the Society which Assemble
together in More-lane, and holds these tenants, that the house, field, or
Wood wherein their Congregation meets, is the Church of God, and not the
Churches we meet in, because the good and bad come both thither, neither is it
lawful to have any Society with the wicked.

John Bennet, is he which teaches nigh Love lane in Westmin. he disalloweth of
humane Learning, his reason is this, some of Christ's Apostles were Fishermen,
when he called them.

George Dunny is the man which does teach in the Minories, he terms his holy
Brothers and Sisters the separated Saints, from the Profane Church, wherein
Idols have bin worshipped, and where Copes and Surplices, the Garments of the
Babilonish Whore, is still worn.

Charles Thomas a Welchman, does teach in Warwick Lane, once in a fortnight, as
he holds none lawful to be amongst the Prophets, but those who were inspired
by the Spirit, so no man is fit for their holy service, but devout men, and who
is familiar with the Spirit.

Alexander Smith, does teach in the Congregation which gather themselves
together in Shorditch, whose opinion is, no man ought to teach but whom the
spirit moves, and for this one reason, may we set our selves against those
Scholars, as Bishops, Deanes and Deacons, which strive to construe the
Scriptures according to the translation of the Hebrew, Greek, and Latin, which
last language, stinkes like a piece of Biefe a twelve month old, yet new
salted.

Edmund Nicholson teaches in an Alley in Seacole-lane, he says they are the
Elect and pure in Spirit, chosen vessels of honor, and not of this world.

But now I come to the two Arch Separatists, Green and Spencer, both which are
accounted as Demy-Gods, they keep no constant place, but are here, and every
where, the one of them is a Feltmaker, which is Green, the other a Coachman,
both which called an Assembly upon Tuesday being the 28. of September. in
Houndsditch, the tenor of his Doctrine was this, That the Bishops function is
an Antichristian calling, and the Deanes and Prebends, are the Frogs and
Locusts mentioned in the Revelation, there is none of these Bishops (says he)
but has a Pope in their bellies, yea they are Papists in grain, they are all
of them unleavened souls, and we have turned them over to be buffetted by
Satan, and such like Shismaticall Phrases, as the evil Spirit moves him.

But let all judge, was not this an excellent simile of the Reverend Coachman,
which having an occasion to make use of a place, which says, ye shall be like
unto Kings and Queens, which he did apply to those which were gathered together
to his Sermon, he called the men there Kings, the women Queens, saying, that
it was an absurd thing for a King to keep company with a slave, or one of the
black guard, or for a Queen to keep company with a Kitchin-stuffe wench, so
was it an unseemly part for any of that holy Assembly, to keep company with a
Reprobate, one of the wicked, or one which did accord with the late Innovations
raised by the Corporation of Prelacy, which similitude, whether it were
Religious, let all good men judge, for the whole needs no Physician, wherefore
it is requisite in some cases, that those which are piously affected, should
keep company with those that are in a wrong way, that by their Admonitions,
the wicked might learn to tread the paths of the Righteous, but I forbear to
speak any more of his Doctrine.

But to proceed to show the manner of their assembling, or rather dissembling.

In that house where they intend to meet, there is one appointed to keep the
door, for the intent, to give notice if there should be any insurrection,
warning may be given them.

They do not flock all together, but come 2. or 3. in a company, any man may
be admitted thither, and all being gathered together, the man appointed to
teach, stands in the midst of the Room, and his audience gather about him.

He prays about the space of half an hour, and part of his prayer is, that
those which come thither to scoff and laugh, God would be pleased to turn
their hearts, by which means they think to escape vndiscovered.

His Sermon is about the space of an hour, and then does another stand up to
make the text more plain, and at the latter end, he intreates them all to go
home severally, least the next meeting they should be interrupted by those
which are of the opinion of the wicked, they seem very steadfast in their
opinions, and say rather then they will turn, they will burn.

Now have I discovered their Teachers, their meetings, and the manner of their
meetings, I conclude, praying to God, that he would put it into the minds of
some well affected Christians, to complain of them to the higher powers, the
Honorable and High Court of Parliament, for unless they be prevented and
suppressed, it is to be feared, that this Kingdom will never be free from
Divisions, disturbances, and distractions, which, God of his great mercy ever
defend.

FINIS.

