Cursus Osteologicus: BEING A Complete Doctrine OF THE BONES; According to the
Newest, and most Refined Notions of ANATOMY.

Showing their Nature, Substance, Composition, manner of Ossification,
Nourishment, etc. Also the various ways of their Articulation; together with
the Parts to be considered in each particular Bone of the whole SKELETON, as
Figure, Cavities, Protuberancies, Foramina, Situation, Connection and Use; with
several Curious Observations relating to the BONES.

To which is Annexed by way of APPENDIX, An Excellent Method of Whitening,
Cleansing, Preparing, and Uniting the Bones, to Form a Movable Skeleton,
wherein the Bones may have the same Motions as in a Living Subject.

The Whole being a Work very Useful and Necessary for all Students in Physic
and Surgery.

By ROBERT BAKER, Surgeon.

London, Printed by I. Dawks, for D. Brown, at the Black Swan without
Temple Bar; and R. Clavell, at the Peacock near St. Dunstan's Church. 1697.

INTRODUCTION.
REctum est Regulasui, and obliqui, is an undeniable Axiom among the
Mathematicians; the same may be said of that thrice Noble Science called
Anatomy, it being the Grand Foundation, or if I may so say, the Cornerstone
both of Physic and Surgery, especially the latter, it being the Basis on
which we build all our Structures toward the Cure of Distempers, both
External, and Internal; for how is it possible we should pretend to Cure any
Internal Affect, unless we know what Part or Viscera is affected; the like may
be said in Chirurgical Cases; for what Surgeon can give a true Prognostic in
Wounds, Ulcers, etc. or Restore Luxated or Fractured Limbs, or perform any
Manual Operation, without a true Knowledge of the Economy of Humane Body; and
this ought not to be a bare Knowledge only of the Parts, and where they lie (as
many who are unwilling to give themselves the Trouble of Scrutinying into the
more nice Composition of them) but we ought also to know the Figure, Structure,
Use, what Juices they separate, and the like, all which the Doctrine of Anatomy
teaches; for to what a prodigious height is the Art of Medicine improved, since
our most Ingenious and Accurate Countryman, Doctor Harvey, found out and
demonstrated the Circulation of the Blood; Jolivius the Lymphatick Vessels;
Casper Assellus the Venae Lacteae; and Haver's the Articular Glands; with many
more great Improvements, which are too long to mention; nay, the whole Method
of Physic is almost altered; and this Great and Noble Work could never have
been performed, had those Learned Men contented themselves with a bare
Knowledge o the Parts only; for suppose any had a Pile of Building to Erect,
would they think you, employ any one who is Ignorant of what Figure of Size the
Stones or Timber ought to be, and how to be joined together? The same may be
said of a Surgeon, or Physician, who is ignorant of Anatomy; so that whoever
is willing to perform the Duty of a Good and Conscientious Surgeon, ought to
know the whole Fabric of Man's Body; and that as well in its perfect, and
sound state, as morbid, that he may re-establish Health when lost, and restore
unsound Parts to their former Sanity.

I shall not here Harangue, or run out in the many Praises which are due to
Anatomy, or Treat of its Origin and Antiquity; it being already so excellently
well performed by the Learned Doctor Charleton, in the Preface to his Anatomic
Prelections, but proceed to the Matter in hand.

Various are the Opinions of Authors, about the Parts we ought to begin with,
in Anatomical Demonstrations. Bartholinus says, We ought to begin with the
Teguments, they being first in view, then proceed to the Viscera, and Muscles,
and lastly, end with the Bones; and the Reasons he gives for it, are because
the Bones cannot be examined before they appear, which they cannot do, (says
he) 'till all the Muscles are separated from them; others begin with the
Abdomen, or Lower Belly, so proceed to the Thorax, then to the Head, and
lastly, to the Extremities; by reason the Belly is apt to send forth in a
little time, very noisome and offensive Smells, which would hinder the Operator
from prosecuting his intended Design: It Is true this is the best way, supposing
we have but one Subject to work on, and that we be obliged to show all, or most
of the Parts on this one Subject.

Galen says we ought to begin with the Bones, and gives many Cogent Reasons to
prove it; first, because they serve as Beams or Supporters of the whole Body.
Secondly, they serve to fasten the Muscles too; for how can we tell the Origin
or Insertion of any Muscle, if we be wanting in the true Doctrine of the Bones;
nay, all the Parts seem as if designed for their use; for when the Bones cease
to grow, they also put a Period to the growth of all the other Parts.

Laurentius says, that in the Anatomical School of Alexandria, the Young
Students in Medicine, always began their Anatomical Course with the Osteology,
and then proceeded to the Doctrine of the Muscles, several of which receive
their Denominations from the Bones, which they pass by, or lie on, as the
Tibialis Posticus, and Anticus the Peronii, Scapulares, Sternohyoidei,
Mastoideii, etc. Lastly, the Knowledge of the Bones is of that great use to a
Surgeon, that it is impossible for him to restore well a Fracture or
Dislocation, who is Ignorant of; the Structure, Figure, Articulation, etc. of
the Fractured or Dislocated Bone.

All these Reasons are a sufficient Inducement to persuade us, that we ought to
begin with the Skeleton, and then proceed in order, to the Rest of Man's Body.

The Skeleton is an Assemblage of all the Bones of the Body; it is either
Natural, or Artificial; the Natural, is when the Bones are all excarn'd, but
kept together by their proper Ligaments; the Artificial one, is when the Bones
are Artificially Cleans'd, Whitened and Joined together by Wiers.

That part of Anatomy which Treats of the Bones, is called Osteologia, which is
as much as to say, A Discourse of the Bones.

We shall in this Tract examins what belongs to the Bones in general, and what
belongs to each particular; which we shall divide in several Demonstrations.

Cursus Osteologicus: BEING A Complete Doctrine OF THE BONES, etc
Demonstration I.
Of the Bones in General.
THE Doctrine of the Bones in General, What to be considered in the Bones in
General.
consists in these Eleven Things, as Definition, Substance, Composition, manner
of Ossification, Vessels, Nourishment, Differences, Parts, or Things to be
considered in the Bones; together with their manner of Articulation, Number and
Use; of all which in order.

Galen defined a Bone to be the most hard, Ancient Definition.
firm, and terrestrious part of all the Body. Laurentius adds, and says, That
it is engendered by the formative Faculty, by reason of great heat, out of the
most crass and terrestrious part of the Semen, to serve as a Foundation to all
the Body, and to give it Shape and Figure; but this Definition, as it is not
complete enough, so on the other hand, the word Faculty, is a Term which they
used to exprese themselves by, when they were at a loss for an Answer or
Solution to any Question proposed; besides, it is not at all agreeable to the
Idea we have of the formation of the Bones, or Use; yet it is certain the
Ancients made use of that Term to explain most of the Actions of the Body; for
when they were to declare how the Chyle, or Blood was made, or how the Bones or
Cartilages were formed, nay, how the Senses acted; they answered, That the
Stomach had a Chylific Faculty, the Liver a Sanguifying; the Bones were formed
by an Ossific, and the Cartilages by a Cartilaginous Faculty, that the Eye saw
by the Visive Faculty; etc sic de caeteris.

This was a general Answer, by which they eluded (as well by their occult
Qualities) all Difficulties proposed to them, so that their Pupils were as
Ignorant at the finishing of their Studies* as at the beginning; but we at this
Day explain all these Actions purely Mechanically; as I shall show in
demonstrating each part of the Osteology exactly, that the Action which it
performs, absolutely depends on its Structure, so that it can do naught else,
but what it does.

But to return from whence I have digress'd; Modern Definition.
the Moderns say a Bone is a similer part, most dry, cold and hard, without
sense, (unless by some Preternatural Accident) inflexible, affording
Stabiliment, Figure and Form to the whole Body.

A Bone may be considered at two distinct times, either before or after the
Birth.

In their beginning, Nature and Substance.
or before the Birth, they are of a Membranous Substance, wrapped up, as it were,
in very many folds, or Laminae; which at first are Gelatinous, in time grow
Cartilaginous, and at last when sufficiently indurated by the Ossific Liquor,
are so strong as to resist all inward force, and their Parts which had before
some Heterogeneous Bodies in their Insterstices, being squeezed closer by the
power and pressure of the Spirits, dis-engage themselves from those Bodies
which lie between their Laminae, so grow more solid, wholly fixed, and void of
motion, which is about the time when the Bones have attained their full
perfection of growth, which also puts a period to the bulk and magnitude of the
Body, so that they are no more extended or enlarged, either in breadth or
length.

The Bones are composed of many strings, Composition of stringy Fibrils.
or threads, which have their course according to the length of the Bones, or
their Figure; for if the Bone be of an unequal, or irregular Figure, the
strings are also unequal, and irregular; except in the Cranium, where the
threads begin at a point, (sometimes two or more) for the most part in the
Center, and terminate in the Circumference of the Bone, as the Spokes in a
Wheel; for which reason it is more thick, and compact there, than in the
Circumference, the thready Fibrils being more close and united there, which is
visible in the Cranium of a Foetus; the Bones have also some transverse Fibers,
to hold the long ones in; which may be seen in the Bones of the Tarsus, as also
in the Extremities of most of the long Bones, where the Porosities are.

The Ossification begins not in the same place of every Bone; Where the
Ossification begins.
in the long Bones it begins in the middle, and toward each end; but in Bones
of an irregular Figure in several places, as may be seen in the Ossa Innominata
of a Foetus, where it begins at three points or places at once, so that they
seem to be three distinct Bones united just in the middle of the Acetabulum,
but in time, as the Ossification increases, they grow more strong, the fibrous
threads join, and so make but one Bone; for if the Bones should have been
totally Ossified before the Birth, Why the Bones are not totally Ossified
before the Birth.
how should the Foetus pass through the Vagina of the Womb as it does? For it is
without Dispute, that both the Bones of the Head, and also the Hips of the
Foetus, give way somewhat in time of Exclusion; for it is observed that those
Animals which have long and small Heads,
but big Bodies, have the Bones of their Head wholly Ossified before the Birth,
but their Ribs not, so careful is Nature in this Affair.

In the Skull, and most broad thin Bones, as the Sternon, the Ossification
begins at two, three, or more points, commonly about the Center; Nature is also
very cautious in Ossifying long Bones all at once; for if their Extremities had
been Ossified as soon as their middle, the ligamentous and tendorous threads
would not enter so easily their ends, to join them together, which they can do,
being not totally Ossified. The Ossification, as I said before of the Ossa
Innominata, begins at three points, that they may have the greater solidity;
but quite contrary in the Bones of the Cranium, for while the middle of most
Bones of the Cranium are fully Ossified, their edges are only Membranous, that
they may give way somewhat in time of Birth, which they would not, were the
Cranium completely Ossified. These are the Reasons why Nature retards
Ossification in some Bones, and advances it in others.

The Bones before they be thoroughly indurated, Vessels.
have many Blood Vessels, which are obliterated, as soon as the Meduller Glands
are large enough to separate the Oily Particles from the Arterial Blood, (which
have a Property of keeping the Bones soft) then the Ossific Liquor which is
emitted from the aforesaid Glands hardens them, and so presses the Parts closer
together, and hinders the Blood from passing and repassing as usual, when they
were softer, their bony threads gave way, and being then not pressed so close;
which Vessels are also bonified by the Ossific Juice, having lost their first
use; yet some few remain, which serve only the Meduller Glands, for their
Nourishment, the Pulsation of Blood in them having strength enough to scatter
the Fibrils of the Bones in that Part, and so makes passages for themselves.

The Bones are nourished two ways, Nourishment two fold.
the one in their beginning, that is, when they are only Membranous, and is
quite different from the Nourishment they receive after their Perfection; for
now they are nourished as all other Membranes, When Membranous.
with Blood immediately from the Arteries, so that if you then cut them, you will
find every thread bloody, which is not so when truly Ossified; for when the
Bones have occasion of greater solidity, Nature then changes her way of
Nourishment, When Bony.
which is by a peculiar Liquor of a Saline Tartarous Nature, prepared by the
Meduller Glands, the more oily Particles being separated, and kept in them,
Medulla Quid.
which is that we call the Marrow; this Liquor; I say, insinuates its self all
along the bony strings, and is visible in a Fractured Bone, it appearing at
their Extremities, and meeting together causes them to reunite, Callus Quid.
which we call Callus; nay, we often find that the adjacent Parts are sometimes
indurated by this Ossific Liquor, and the Limbs often grow Gouty, and has not
its former nimble motion, the Callus growing too big; for if they were bloody
Particles, which exuded forth of their bony threads, instead of generating a
Callus, it would Impostumate, for all Blood shed out of its Vessels putrifies,
this Liquor is of such an indurating Quality, that if the Fibrils of the Bones
be any ways broken, that it sheds it self in any great quantity, it will
Ossifie the very Tendons; I have seen the Marrow it self turned bony.

The Bones have Nerves (is plain) although no Sense, Nerves, but no Sense.
for when they come to the solid Substance of the Bone, they are pressed so
close, that the Animal Spirits cannot enter their Substance, and so
consequently can have no feeling, Acids soften the Bones.
unless softened by Acids, which will cause them to have a dull Sense, as may be
tried by the use of Acids on the Teeth; which, as the acidity goes off,
reassume their former hardness, and insensibility. Sometimes the Blood acquires
such an acidity which is apt to cause a Spina Ventosa, Cause of a Spina Ventosa.
which is nothing else but a Cariosity of the Bones, proceeding from an Acid
Blood coming to the Meduller Glands for the Nourishment of the Bones; also Acid
Acrid Humors in an Ulcer may cause a Cariosity.

The Differences observed in the Bones, Differences Nine.
may be derived from Nine Things, viz. from their Substance, Quantity, Figure,
Situation, Uses, Motion, Sensibility, Generation, and Cavities.

From their Substance.
for some Bones have a very hard one, as the Tibia; others less hard, as the
Vertebrae; and finally, others have a more soft and spongy one, as the Sternon.

The Second is derived from their From their Quantity.
for some as those of the Thigh, Leg, Arm, etc. others less, as those of the
Head; some least of all, as those of the Fingers.

The Third proceeds from their Figure; From their Figure.
as the Os Femoris, Tibia, etc. others short, as those of the Fingers, and
Metatarsus, etc. some round, as the Rotula; others flat, as the Ossa Palati;
others square, as the Ossa Parietaria; others triangular, as the first Bone of
the Sternon, Scapula, etc.

The Fourth is from their Situation, From their Situation.
as some are placed in the Head, others in the Trunk, and some in the
Extremities; others are seated deeply, as the Officles in the Cavity of the
Ear, etc.

The Fifth is from their Use, From their Use.
as some etc. Ossa Innominata, and Os Sacrum, the Bladder, Womb in Women, etc.
Cranium the Brain.

From their Motion.
for some have a more manifest motion, as the great Bones of the Extremities;
others have a less, as those of Tarsus and Carpus; others none at all, as those
of the Head.

From their Sense.
which is easily remarkt, for all the Bones, generally speaking, have no Sense,
except the Teeth, and they only a very dull Sense; except, as I have already
observed, they be softened by some offending Acid.

From the time of their Generation.
and Perfection; for some Bones are perfect in the Womb, or before the Birth,
as the small Officles of the Ears; and others, which do not acquire their
Perfection, but as the Subject advances in Age, as all the rest of the Bones of
the Body, yet some of these Ossifie quicker, as those of the lower Jaw; others
slower, as the Fontanella of the Head.

From their Cavities.
for some have great ones, and contain Marrow, as the Bones of the Extremities;
and there be others which have no manifest Cavity, but only Porosities; which
contain a Meduller Juice, as those of Tarsus, Carpus, etc. some have holes, by
which Vessels pass and repass, as those in the Basis of the Cranium and
Vertebrae; others have only Trenches or Furrows, as those of the Sternon, Ribs;
others have Sinesses, as the Os Frontis, and Ossa Petrosa; lastly, some are
pierced like the holes in a Seive, as the Os Cibriforme.

The things to be considered in the Doctrine of each Bone are three;
Threetian's considered in the Bones.
1. The Apophisis. 2. Epiphisis. And 3. Cavities, Furrows, and Sinusses.

First, Apophysis, of Process.
The Bones not being of one the Tendons of the Muscles, and is called an
Apophysis, or Process.

Epiphysis, or Apendage.
as if Nature had forgot to make the Bone long enough, and is generally more
porous than the Bone it self; which will separate if you boil in Oil, for they
will not separate if boiled in Water never so long, unless the Subject be very
young, it is called an Apendage, or Epiphisis; this in young Bodies may
sometimes by great force be separated from the rest of the Bone, or to speak
improperly, Dislocated.

If this Protuberance be round, it is called Caput, under which is the Cervix,
as in the superior part of the Os Femoris; if it be flat, Cordilus; if sharp,
Corone; others from their figure are called Styloides, Mostoides, Coracoides,
Ancyroides, etc.

Embrions have not these Protuberances so large; for except some very few large
ones, they are hardly visible.

These Protuberances are either Natural, as the Spina of the Scapula; the rest
are only Accidental.

The Accidental Protuberances of the Bones, Cause of the Protuberances.
(which are only manifest when the Bones are perfect) are caused by the Tendons
of the Muscles or Ligaments, which always are inserted there; for the stringy
Filaments of the Tendons and Ligaments, entering into the Bones (while soft)
between their stringy threads, cause them to enlarge there into a bulk, which
it must do of necessity, there being a double portion of Fibers united
together; which are all Ossified as the bony Liquor increases.

It Is a general Note, that where you find such Protuberances, some Ligaments or
Tendons of Muscles are inserted there; although these Protuberances seem only
to be accidental, Uses of the Protuberances.
yet they have many uses; first, by them the Muscles have a greater force to
lift or pull up the Part. Secondly, they are of use to enlarge the Extremities
of the Bones, that the Body be sustained.

Cavities of three sorts.
that come under our Consideration, are the Cavities, which are either External
or Internal: These Cavities are of three sorts, Holes, or Foramina; Trenches,
or Furrows, and Sinusses.

Foramina, Foramina, or holes.
or Hole, is a Cavity which is perforated in a Bone, or made up of two Bones
joined together, as may be seen in the Basis of the Cranium, lower Jaw,
Vertebrae of the Ribs. They are designed for the passage of the Vessels and
Nerves, which pass through them, also the great Cavity of the Ischium may be
called a Hole.

A Trench, Trenches, or Furrows.
or Furrow, is not a Cavity through the Bone, but only a deep hole, or
hollowness, long, or round, as the orbit of the Eye, etc. sometimes very
shallow, as those in the inside of the Cranium, etc. some of a mean between
both, as those in the Joints, to receive the Protube. rances of other Bones;
some call these Sinusses, but improperly.

Sinus is a sort of Cavity in a Bone, Sinusses.
whereof the Orifice or Entrance is very strait, and the bottom large, such are
in the Frontal Bone, etc.

I shall declare the use of all these Cavities, when I Treat of each Bone in
particular.

All the long Bones of the Body are hollow in the inside toward the middle,
All long Bones hollow.
and contain a Marrow, which is only a heap of Membranous Vesicule, full of a
fatty or oily Substance, called Meduller Glands; which, Meduller Glands.
as I observed before, separated the more oily Particles from the Blood, so
that the more salfish only remained, which has the Ossific Virtue of rendering
the Bones hard: The Ends or Extremities are porous, somewhat like a Pumice
Stone, containing a Meduller Juice, Meduller Juice.
like thin Oil, and have very few Glands; it is probable that the Ligamentous
strings entering the top of the Bones, divide and scatter the bony threads,
which make it so porous.

The External Superficies of all Bones have a certain solid Cortex. Solid
Cortex in all Bones.


All the External Cavities which serve for Articulation, have at their
Circumference an Eminence called a Lip, to which is fastened a Circular
Ligament, which embracing the Head of the received Bone, fortifies the
Articulation.

As for each particular Process and Cavity, we shall describe them in the
Demonstrations of each particular Bone.

Before I mention the Articulation of the Bones, I think it convenient to
observe these things.

First, The Bones not of the same bigness in Women as in Men.
All the Bones are not of the same greatness, and that not only in Persons of
different Stature, but also in those of an equal Height, or Stature; for some
of these have their Bones smaller than others, and it is Beauty consists (as
some have said it does) in the delicateness and smallness of the Bones, then
Women have all the Reason imaginable to have a better Shape and Symetry than
Men, by reason their Bones are smaller; the Bones also of their Face are finer
and more smooth.

There Is also a great difference between the Bones of the Ossa Innominata,
Difference of the Ossa innominata.
which makes the Pelvis. In Men they are less and more unequal, but in Women
larger, and smoother, to have a greater space to contain the Womb; also a
Woman's Os Sacrum inclines more backwards than a Man's which makes their
Buttocks more large.

We must also observe a difference in the Bones, Difference of the Bones
according to Age.
according as we grow in Years; for from the Birth to the twentieth Year, or
thereabouts, the Bones continually increase, and from that to the sixtieth they
continue in the same stay, neither increasing or diminishing; but after that
they daily diminish, by reason of the bony Fibers drying, approach nearer one
another, and so must consequently have a less bulk.

The Color of the Bones is not alike in all; Difference from the Color.
for some have them very white, others less, but some almost greyish; so that
if you take the same Pains in whitening two or three Skeletons, yet one will be
doubtless whiter than the other.

It Is true, Periostion.
as I have observed before, that the Bones have no sense; yet they are Invested
with a very sensible Membrane, called Periostion, as if we should say a
Membrane over or inversing the Bone, it is very thin; all Bones have this,
except the Teeth. I think there is a great Question about its Use. Use.
Some affirm it is to convey bloody Vessels to the Bones; but its rather
believed to be for the greater implantation of the Tendons of the Muscles; for
when you separate the Periostion, the Muscle comes off with it.

I shall now proceed to the manner of the Articulation of the Bones; there is
such Art in the Conjunctions of the Bones, Articulation of the Bones.
that they have served as a pattern to many Artizans in their Curious Works;
for they could find nothing in Nature more fit to copy by; and although there
be so many various ways of Articulation, as almost Junctures, yet they are all
necessary, otherwise Man could never move himself every way so completely as he
does.

The Bones joined together have either motion, or none, the former is called
Articulation, the latter Symphysis, Or growing together.

Articulation, Articulation twofold.
is either for manifest, or obscure motion: The first is called Diarthrosis, or
loose Articulation, the other Synarthrosis, or more close and compact.

Diarthrosis is Threefold, 1. Enarthrosis. 1. Diarthrosis threefold.
2. Anthrodiae. 3. Gynglimus.

1. Enarthrosis, Enarthrosis.
is when a large Head is received into a deep Cavity, as the Os Femoris in the
Acetabulum of the Ossa Innominata.

2. Arthrodia, Arthrodia.
is when the Cavity is shallow, and the Head of the received Bone also shallow
and flattish, as the Os Humeri, with the Scapula, and the Bones of the Metacarp
and Metatarse; with the first Phalanx of the Fingers and Toes.

Now the Bones which are Articulated by Enarthrosis, and Arthrodia, are capable
of all sorts of motion, as upwards, downwards, forwards, backwards, and
circularly; yet the deeper the Cavity, and the more bony the Edges are, the
motion is rendered more slow, and not so brisk and nimble as when the Cup is
not so deep; These two all sorts of motion.
this is seen in the Os Femoris, and Acetabulum, for the Os Humeri being
inserted in a more shallow Cup, is capable of all sorts of motion, and that to
a great degree, yet about the Cup or the Scapula there are several Cartilages,
which make it seem as deep as the Acetabulum, but at the same time by giving
way, hinders not the very free motion of the Humerus.

Ginglimus, Ginglimus threefold.
is when the same Bone both receives, and is received, and is Threefold. 1.
Ginglimus Proximus. 2. Longus. 3. Compositus.

1. Ginglimus Proximus, Proximus.
is when a Bone is received by another, and receives the same, as the lower
part of the Os Humeri, and Vlna.

2. Ginglimus Longus, is when two Bones are joined together according to their
length, Longus.
so that the one Bone having a Cavity in its side toward the end, receives the
head of the other, which has a Cavity likewise at its other Extremity, to
receive a Protuberance of the first Bone, as the Radius and Ulna.

2. Ginglimus Compositus, Compositus.
is when a Bone receives one, and is received by another, as in some of the
Vertebrae of the Back, where one receives the upper, and is received by the
lower: Ginglimus Compositus, is also when a long Process of a Bone is inserted
into another above it, and so turns in the Cavity as an Axis in a Wheel, as the
second Vertebra of the Neck with the first.

As Enarthrosis, and Arthrodia, Ginglimus for Flexion and Extension ouly.
serve for all sorts of motion, Ginglimus serves only for Flexion, and
Extension; yet in the Radius and Vlna it serves for Pronation and Supination.

When a Bone is joined by double Arthrodia, it makes a sort of Ginglimus, as
may be seen in the lower Jaw.

Synarthrosis, Synarthrosis.
or obscure motion, is in the Ribs which have a little motion in their ends
toward the Vertebrae in Respiration; also most of the Bones of the Tarsus and
Carpus, which in great pressure give way a little, for the more easy motion of
the Part.

Symphysis, 2. Symphysis Threefold.
is only when the Bones are united without any motion at all, and is Threefold,
as Sutura, Harmonia, and Gomphosis.

1. Sutura, Sutura.
is when the Bones are united together in their edges by little Points, or
Teeth (as it were) unequally, as may be seen in the Bones of the Cranium.

2. Harmonia, Harmonia.
is an union of the Bones by a simple Line only, either straight or curved, as
the Bones of the Nose, Face, Palate; but this is only in their outward part,
for we always find them Internally Serratil, or Suture like.

3. Gomphosis, Gomphosis.
is when one Bone is fastened in another, as a Nail in Wood, so are the Teeth in
the Jaws.

Some add to the symphysis several other sorts of Articulations, as
Synchondrosis, Syssarcosis, syneurosis, vel Syntenosis.

Synchondrosis, Synchondrosis.
is when a Cartilaginous Substance interveens, as may be seen in the middle of
the lower Jaw; which in young are two distinct Bones, but as the Ossific Liquor
predominates, grow one; also the Ossa Pubis are united by it, so are the Bodies
of the Vertebrae one to another.

Syssarcosis, Syssarcosis.
is when a Bone is fastened by Means of Flesh only, as the Os Hyoides in the
Mouth, and the Scapula to the Ribs.

Syneurosis, Syneurosis.
vel Syntenosis, is when Bones are united together by means of Ligamentous
Parts, as the Rotula with the Bones of the Legs; but I think these are not
properly Articulations.

The Bones of the Body in an Adult, Number 245.
are accounted 245. For Example, the Head has 64, the Trunk 57, the Arms and
Hands 64, the Legs, etc. 60, which makes in all 243. Some perhaps may wonder
why the Great Creator composed such a number of Bones; I Answer, how could the
Hand or Arm perform all the Actions it does, and put it self in so many
Thousand Postures, had it not many Junctures and Articulations? For had the
Part been composed but of one or two Bones, how Lame and Preposterously would
it have acted? The same may be said of the Legs, etc. And if the Spine had not
been made up of such a number of Vertebrae, how could we have bent, or moved it
as we do? It was therefore convenient and necessary for the Perfection of Man
and his Functions, to have as many Bones as he has.

The Head, Head 64.
as I said, is made up of 64 Bones, which are thus numbered, 6 proper of the
Skull, 8 of the Ears, 4 in each, 3 Common of the Skull; Face 11, with the
Vomer; Os Hyoid 1, lower Jaw 1, though some make it 2, Teeth about 32, which
make 62; but if you add the Ossa Spongiosa, they make 64.

The Trunk consists of 57 Bones; Trunk 57.
Vertebrae 25, as 7 of the Neck, 12 of the Back, 5 in the Loins, and 1 in the
Os Sacrum, which some say is made up of 5; 3 in the Coccyx, Ribs 24, Sternon 3,
Ossa Innominata 2, which A Table of the BONES.
The Bones of the Body are those; of the Head, Whose Parts are either of the
Cranium, which has, Proper Bones 6, as, Os Frontis 1. Ossa Sincipitis 2.
Occipitis 1. Temporum 2. In whose Foramina Auditoria are 8 Bones, 4 in each
Malleus. Stapes. Incus. Os Orbiculare.


Common Bones 3* Os Sphenoides. Os Cribriforme. Os Jugale. To which is annexed;
Ossa Spongiosa 2.

Of the Bones of the Face, In the Superior part are 11 Bones; 5 pair and an odd
one, Upper Jaw. Ossa Triangularia. Ossa Lachrimalia. Ossa Malae. Ossa Nasi.
Ossa Palati. Os Vomer.
Lower Jaw 1. Teeth in both Jaws 32. Incisorii 8. Canini 4. Molares 20.



To which is Annexed, the Os Hyoides, joined by Syssarcosim.
Spine, in which are the Bones of the Neck, in which are 7 Vertebrae. Breast,
divided into the Forepart, in which are, Clavicles 2. Ossa Pectoris 3.
Lateral-part, in Which are, Ribs 24.
Back-part, in which are, Scapulae 2. Vertebrae 12.

Loins, divided into the Forepart, in which are, Ossa Pubis 2.
Lateral-part, in which are, Ossa Ilia 2. Ossa Coxendicis 2. These joined
together in Adults, make up the Ossa Innominata.

Back-part, in which are, Lumborum Vertebrae 5. Os Sacrum, which some make 5.
Ossa Coccygis 3.

Limbs, which are either, Superior, or Hands, divided into Os Humeri 2. Cubitus
ejus Radius Vlna
Lower-part, or Hand, strictly so called, whose Parts are, The Wrist 8.
Metacarpus 4. Fingers 15. Three in each.
To which are annexed, some Ossa Sesamoidea.

Inferior, or Feet, divided into Bones of the Thigh Patella
Leg, strictly so called, Tibia Fibula
Lower-part, or Foot, strictly so called in which is Tarsus, Bones 7.
Metatarsus 5. Fingers or Toes 14. To which are annexed, Ossa Sesamoidea.





makes up the number of 57. -- I once saw a Skeleton which had 13 Ribs on each
side.

The upper Extremities, or Limbs, consist of 64 Bones, Upper Limbs 64.
taking in the Claviculae, which I think we ought to do, since much of the
motion of the Arms depends on them; there is 32 Bones in each Arm then, as
Clavicula, Scapula, Os Humerus, Radius, and Vlna; 8 Bones of the Carpus, 4 of
the Metacarp; and Bones of the Fingers 15, 3 in each, accounting the Thumb as
one Finger, which added to the other Arm makes 64.

The Lower Extremities consists of 60, Lower Limbs 60.
that is, 30 in each; as the Os Femoris, Rotula, Tibia, and Fibula; 7 in the
Tarsus, 5 in the Metatarsus, and 14 in the Toes, which makes together with the
other Leg 60.

Some augment the number, who make many of the Os Hyoides, 3 of the Os
Innominatum, 2 of the lower Jaw, 5 of the Os Sacrum, and add the Ossa
Sesamoidea, which are not often found, and then for the most part in the great
Toes, which would then make up above 250.

I am come now to the last Consideration of the Bones in General, Use of the
Bones.
which is their Use.

They have many Uses; 1. They serve for the support of the Body, being as so
many Beams or Pillars in a House. 2. For the Defense of some Noble Part, as the
Skull for the Brain, Ribs for the Heart, Lungs, etc. Ossa Innominata and
Sacrum, which make the Pelvis for the Womb, Bladder, etc. 3. For the
Progression and Motion of the Animal, of which with the Muscles, they are the
only Instruments. 4. To give Shape and Figure to the whole Body; these are the
General Uses, as for their Particular, we shall speak of them in the
Demonstration of each particular Part.

Demonstration II.
Of the Bones of the Skull.
WE now come to the Doctrine of the Bones in particular; Skeleton divided into
three parts.
we divide the Skeleton into three parts, as the Head, Trunk and Limbs.

By the Head we understand not only all the Bones of the Skull, but also those
of the Face, even from the Vertix to the first Vertebra of the Neck; by the
Trunk all that composes the Neck, Back, Loins, Os Sacrum, Ossa Innominata,
Sternon, etc. By the Limbs those which make up the Arms and Legs, generally so
called; of all which in order. The Head is subdivided into the Skull, properly
so called, and the Face.

The Skull (I mean that upper part whose Bones compose, Figure of the Skull.
and make up a large Cavity, which contains the Brain, in which you must
consider its Figure altogether) is globous, somewhat what long, but flattish
toward the sides, for the better Situation of the Temporal Muscles; which
being on, make it look more round.

All the Bones of the Skull are made up of two Laminae or Plates, Skull, two
Tables.
called Tables, one Internal, the other External, between which lies a Medullar
Juice, of a reddish Color, called the Pith, Diploe, what.
or Diploe, which is very discernable in young Persons; but as we grow in
Years, the Ossific Liquor invading, it bonifies.

The Exterior and Superior Superficies of the Cranium; is very smooth, and
polished, having few inequalities; but where the Sutures are, the Internal
Superior Superficies is not so equal, having many little Sulci, or Furrows,
which are caused by the Vessels of the Dura Matter, when the Skull is but
Membranous, being then capable of receiving any Impression, that the Pulsation
of the Vessels give it, Cause of the Furrows.
so make themselves Furrows; but its Internal Inferior Part is very unequal, by
reason of the many Productions and Cavities found there.

The Cranium has many Foramina, Foramina in General.
which give way or passage to the Vessels sels passing and repassing, which
fill up these holes so close, that no Fumes or Vapors, as the Ancients
believed, can get in, or come forth, unless by the Vessels themselves: we will
show all these holes, at the latter end of this Demonstration.

It Is a Question, The bigness of the Cranium, depends on the Brain.
whether it be the Cranium, which gives greatness to the Brain; or whether the
Brain gives form to the Cranium, I Answer, that the bigness of the Cranium
depends on that of the Brain, for two Reasons; First, the Cranium, while
Membranous, especially toward the Sutures, extends it self more or less, as
the Brain increases: The Second, is that the Cranium is not totally Ossified
till the Brain is arrived to its full Magnitude; for we see in an Infant
newborn, that although the Brain be perfect, yet at the same time, the Cranium
is only Cartilaginous about the Sutures; though bony in the middle of every
Bone, nay, the Fontanella does not Ossifie under some Years; from whence also
it is, that in Labor these Bones, as I have before observed, give way, and
fold over one another, for the more easy exit of the Infant out of the Womb.

The Bones of the Cranium are joined together by Sutures, Sutures, twofold.
which are of two sorts, true, or false; or to speak more properly, common, or
proper.

The Proper are Eight. Proper, three.


Coronalis, Coronalis.
( vel Frontalis) because the Ancients used to wear their Garlands on that part
of the Head, it reaches from one Temporal Bone to the other, joining the Os
Frontis to the Ossa Parietaria.

Lambdoides being like the Greek Letter (...), Lambdoides.
others call it Triangularis; this Suture is seldom wanting, whatever the rest
are; it begins at the Basis of the Os Occipitis, and ascends obliquely to the
middle of the back-part of the Head, and descends again to the other side of
the Head; the Point in the middle is called Vertix, Vertix, what.
by reason the Hair on the Scalp commonly turns there; it joins the Occipital
Bone to the Bones of the Temples, and Ossa Parietaria.

3. Sagittalis, Sagittalis.
because it runs lengthways Vertix of the Sutura Lambdoides, and marching
strait forwards to the middle of the Coronal Suture; in Children it divides the
Coronal Bone, and goes quite to the Nose, which as we grow in Years vanishes;
yet I have seen it in the Cranium of some Adults.

The Sutures being so united together, make up a Figure almost like this) --
andlt;.

Some of our Modern Anatomical Professors, will have the Sutures to be Serratil
only in the Superior Table, but joined by Harmony in the Lower, but it is always
found to the contrary.

The Common are Five, Common, five.
or more; these are the Chief, 1. The Suture Squamose, Squamosae.
or Scale-like, because applied as one Scale on another; they are two, one on
each side, which arise from the outside of the Mastoidprocess, and
circumscribing the Temple-bones, descend Circularly toward the Basis of the
Ears.

Whatever Anatomists say, I think them true Sutures, being Serratil as well
Internally, as Externally.

2. Orbalis, Orbalis.
it begins at the top of the Sutura Squamosa, and descending obliquely toward
the Orbit of the Eye, crosses on the top of the Nose, so passes over the other
Eye, and so on to the other Squamous Suture.

3. Nasalis, Nasalis.
which divides the Bones of the Nose.

4. Sutura Basilaris, Basilaris.
which separates the other Bones from the Os Basilare.

5. Sutura Ethmoides, Ethmoides
seu Cribriformis, dividing this Bone from the Os Frontis; some say that these
Four last are rather Harmonia, than Sutura, but Demonstration shows the
contrary.

The Sutures have many uses, Use of the Sutures.
the principal are these; 1. Many Ligamentous Fibers pass through them from the
Dura Matter to the Pericranium, which suspends the Dura Matter, so are a sort of
hinderance of too violent Concussions of the Brain, in any great motions of the
Body; for by these Fibers the Brain is kept more light; it is by this
Communication, that when the Pericranium is wounded, an Inflammation often
arises in the Dura, Matter, as if it had received some offense it self: These
Fibers also, by suspending the Dura Matter, and keeping it close to the Interior
Surface of the Cranium, the Arteries in the Cortical part have a freer motion,
which would be somewhat impeded, if it fell on the Brain. 2. They give passage
to several Vessels, that are passing and repassing to the Diploe, for the
Nourishment of the Bones of the Cranium. 3. They are of use in hindering
Fractures from passing further than one Bone, for they always stop at the
Sutures, which if the Skull were but one continued Bone, the Fracture would be
apt to run over all the Cranium, as may be seen daily in any Earthen or Glass
Vessel, when cracked by a stroke, it commonly runs almost quite over, or round.
Some say, a fourth Use is, to give a vent or breathing to many Fuliginous
Vapors gathered within the Cranium, but I much question this use; yet some
say, that many who have had their Sutures too close, have been subject to
insupportable Headaches, Transpiration having been stopped, as they say; but I
rather think it proceeded from the pressure of the Vessels which pass through
them, which causing an Obstruction of the flowing Liquors, was a cause of these
Pains.

There are many Observations in several Authentic and Learned Authors, Some
have had no Sutures.
of some who have had none, or very few Sutures, and others who have had more
than usual. I saw a Skull lately in the Hands of an Ingenious Surgeon, my
very good Friend, which had a Suture running transverse the Occipital Bone, and
the Sagittal passed quite through the Os Frontis, and it was the Skull of an
Adult; such is the various Disports of Nature; also in very Old Age the Sutures
are almost obliterated, the Ossific Liquor then predominating.

Embryons have no Sutures, How the Sutures are made.
or at least not to be well distinguished, their Skulls being wholly
Membranous; so while the Ossific Liquor, (which as I have said, begins at a
point, etc. in the Cranium) insinuates it self along the bony Threads, and by
degrees hardens them, some Fibrous and Vascular Strings passing from the Dura
Matter to the Pericranium, hinders in those places the bony Liquor from uniting,
so forms these Seams or Sutures; for in a Foetus the Skull being as yet
Membranous in its edges, wrap, or fold themselves as it were one over another,
to take up less room in the Birth; for had the Skull been totally Ossified
before the Birth, the Infant would for the most part endanger the Life of the
Mother; this may be daily seen in young Children, where the Skull is wholly
Membranous in the top of the Head between the Coronal and Sagittal Sutures,
which place is called Fontanella. Fontanella, what.


The Bones of the Skull are either Proper or Common; the Proper are Six in
number.

1. The Os Frontis, Proper Bones of the Skull, Six.
or Coronalis, the Forechead-Bone; of a Semicircular Figure, in its superior
part, situated in the Superior part of the Face, and Anterior of the Cranium,
bounded above by the Coronal Suture from the Ossa Parietaria, on the sides by
the Ossa Temporum, below by the Transversalis, or Orbalis from the Nose, Eyes,
etc.

The things to be considered in this Bone, are its Cavities and Processes.

Its outside is smooth, as are most of the Bones of the Cranium, no Tendons or
Ligaments being inserted here.

The Ossification begins in this Bone at two Points, between the Laminae of
this Bone there is a Cavity called Sinus Frontalis; 1. Os Frontis.
it is oft-times double, which by two small Foramina enter into the Nostrils;
this Sinus makes the inside of this Bone arise in a ridge, which begins about
the top of the Forehead, where the Hair grows not, and reaches to the Crista
Galli;
for which reason we must not Trepan here, lest we offend the Dura Matter on
each side the ridge, whenas the middle is not perforated by much; the upper
Lamina of this coming to the Eyes, where turning inwards, makes up part of the
Orbit on the upper side: This: Sinus is lined with a thick Membrane full of
Glands, which separate a Mucus to moisten the Nose; in Brutes it is very large,
but not so in Men; yet once I saw a Skull which had it extremely large, and
divided in four or five Cells, quite round the Basis of the Os Frontis, so that
the Internal Protuberances almost hid the Crista Galli;
yet sometimes this Sinus is quite obliterated, and the Membrane turned bony,
as the Ossific Liquor increases, and we incline in Age.

In its lower part over each Eye is a small Foramen, Foramine.
through which passes a Branch of the five pair of Nerves to the Musculous
Flesh on the Forehead.

It has Four Processes; Processes.
the two greater at the Internal Canthus of the Eyes, the other two at the
less; its inner Lamen about the Eyebrows toward the Nose, bunches inwards, so
causes a hollowness there, which is part of the Sinus Frontalis.

2. The Os Occipitis is opposite to the Coronal, 2. Os Occipitis.
in the hinder part of the Head, it is the thickest and strongest Bone of the
Head; the reason whereof is this, we having no Eyes behind, Nature has framed
it of a thicker consistence, to the end it may the better resist any stroke or
blow it receives; it is five-corner'd, joined to the Ossa Parietaria by the
Lambdoid Suture, and to the Ossa Temporum by the Squamous Sutures, and it is
bottom to the Os Sphenoides, by a sort of Harmony.

The things to be considered in this Bone, are its Sinusses, Foramina, and
Processes.

Its Sinusses, Sinusses, or Sulci.
or rather Sulci, are many, two on the External part just behind the Foramen
Medullare; and seven in the Internal Superficies, the two largest of which
contain the Protuberances of the Carebel, the other are of small moment.

It has five Foramina or Holes, Foramina.
the lowest and largest called Foramen Medullare, the Spinal Marrow passing by
this hole to all the Vertebrae; the other four are less, and only serve for the
exit of the Vessels; two give passage to the Nerves of the Tongue, and two to
the Arteriae Cervicales; these are proper Foramina, there are two others which
are common both to it and the other Bones, one on each side the Os Petrosum,
which give passage to the eighth pair of Nerves called parvagum, and to the two
Internal Jugular Veins.

It has five Processes, four of which are on the outside by the Foramen
Medullare; the two innermost are called Condyli, Processes.
and are received by the two shallow Sinus's of the first Vertebra of the Neck,
serving for the Articulation of the Head; in its Internal part it has a long
Protuberance or Ridge, which ascends in the middle from the Foramen Medullare,
and parts the Protuberances of the Cerebellum, this is its fifth Process.

There Is another small Protuberance or Process, A sixth Process, not described
by any Author.
which is not described by any Author; it lies between the Condyli, from it
passes a Ligament, which joins it to the first Vertebra of the Neck.

It has also several small Prominences toward its Basis on the outside, some
Tendons being inserted there.

Third and fourth are the Ossa Sincipitis, vel Parietaria, Third and fourth,
Ossa Sincipitis.
because alike, or forming the Walls of the Cranium, as it were; they are the
thinnest Bones of the Head, are joined by the Coronal Suture to the Os Frontis,
to the Occiput by the Lambdoidal, to the Ossa Temporum by the Squamosae, and to
one another by the Sagittalis: They are very smooth on their outside, but
somewhat unequal within, Sulci.
having many small Sulci, or Furrows, for the reception of the Vessels of the
Dura Matter; they are thinnest toward the Sutures, as are all Bones of the
Cranium; these Furrows are thus caused, How caused.
while the Skull is Membranous, the Vessels by their Pulsation make themselves
these Furrows.

These Bones are of a Quadrangular Figure. Figure.


Anatomists call that the Bregma of the Head, Bregma, what.
where these two Bones are united together by the Sagittal Suture, toward the
Coronal Bone.

The fifth and sixth Bones are called Ossa Temporum, Fifth and sixth, Ossa
Temporum.
so called a Temporibus, because as a Man grows old, the Hairs on the Temples
whiten the soonest; they lie on the sides of the Skull, being joined above by
the Squamous Sutures to the Ossa Parietaria, before to the Process of the first
Bone of the upper Jaw, below to the Sphenoidal Bone, and behind to the Os
Occipitis; their superior part is smooth, thin, and semicircular, so sometimes
called Ossa Squamosa; Ossa Squamosa and Petrosa. Sinusses.
their inferior thick, and hard, and called Ossa Petrosa.

Their Parts to be considered, are Sinusses, Processes, and Holes.

These Bones have two Sinusses each; the first is large, and lined with a
Cartilaginous Substance, placed between she Meatus Auditorius, and its long
Process, which makes up part of the Os Jugale, Glenoides.
called Sinus Glenoides, and receives one of the Processes of the lower Jaw,
called Condylus; the other two are less, and lie on the inside of the aforesaid
long Process.

Each Bone has four Processes, Processes.
three External, and one Internal.

The First is called Styloides, Styloides.
being slender, sharp, and long; some take it to be an Appendix only; in
Infants it is Cartilaginous; those Animals which want these Processes,
their Os Hyoides have a double Horn, or Process which supplies its place, many
Muscles arise from it.

Secondly, Mastoides.
Mastoideus, or Mamillaris, because like a Cow's Teat; it is blunt, thick, and
short, hollow within, placed at the botton of the Auditory passage.

Thirdly, Jugalis.
Processus Jugalis vel Zygomaticus, very long, somewhat broad, and curved, it is
thin, arising a little from the outside of the Sinus Glenoides, and meeting
with another long Process belonging to the first Bone of the Maxilla superior,
are joined together by an oblique Suture, and make up the Os Jugale, or Bridge.

Fourthly, The Internal Protuberance is called Petrosus, Petrosus.
from its hardness, or Auditorius; it is somewhat long, and jets out toward the
inner Basis of the Skull, or Os Sphenoides; it is hollow, and contains the
Instruments of Hearing: Four small Bones of the Ear.
It has four little Bones within its Cavity.

1. Incus, or the Anvil.

2. Malleus, the Hammer.

3. Stapes, the Stirrup.

4. Os Orbiculare, which lies just on the top of the Stapes.

These Bones are as big and perfect at the Birth, as in Adults; they are
Articulated after this manner, Manner of Connection.
the Apophisis of the Malleus is fastened to the Tympanum, and Articulated by
its Head in the Cavity of the Incus; this Incus has two Feet, the shortest of
which is placed on the Tympanum, and the longer on the Stapes, on which lies
the Os Orbiculare.

These Bones have many Foramina each. Foramina.


The First is External, and called Foramen Auditorium, seu Meatus Auditorius,
Meatus Auditorius.
by which the Sound enters to the Organs of Hearing.

Its Second, Is narrow, short, and oblique, by which the Jugular Vein enters
the inner Cavity of this passage.

The Third, Is between the Styloid and Mastoid Process, and ends in that which
goes from the Ear to the Mouth.

The common Bones are three. Common Bones, three.


1. Os Sphenoides, Os Sphenoides.
Basilare, vel Cuneiforme, some call it Polyforme, from its strange Figure;
it is not called Cuneiforme, as if it were like a Wedge, but by reason it is
seated between the Bones of the Skull and upper Jaw; in Infants it consists of
two or three Bones; it is very thick at its Basis, but thin toward the Temples.
It Is joined to, or touches all the Bones almost of the Cranium, and some of the
Bones of the upper Jaw, to which it is fastened by the Sphenoid Suture.

Its Parts to be considered, are either Processes, Sinusses, or Foramina.

It has eight Processes, Processes.
four Internal, and four External.

The Internal are called Clinoides, Clinoides.
they resembling the Feet of a Bed; these with the deprest Sinus in the middle,
Sella Turcica.
make up the Sella Turcica, being like the Seat of a War-saddle, on which lies
the Glandula Pituitaria.

Two of the External are called Pterigoidei, Pterigoidei.
seu Aliformes, or the Bats Wings, being like the Wings of a Bat; the other two
have no Name.

The Sinusses are many. Sinusses.
It has one in each Process, called Pteregoides, Pteregoides.
to give way to the Musculi Pteregoidei Interni: It has also a very large one
in the middle of the Sella Turcica, to receive the Glandula Pituitaria.

Within this Bone lies a true Sinus, Basilaris.
called Basilaris, which have the same Glands, and separate the same Juice, as
the Sinus Frontalis, and has the same use.

The Foramina, Foramina.
are either Common, or Proper.

The Common are those which lie between it and the Ossa Petrosa, through which
the Jugulars pass; the proper are twelve, six on each side; the first pair is
called Transcolatores, Transcolatores.
which serve as a discharge to the Glandula Pituitaria; the second Foramina
Optica, Optica.
by which passes the Optic Nerves; the third Motoria, Motoria.
by which passes the Motory Nerves; the fourth called Crotophites; Crotophites.
the fifth Gustatoria, Gustatoria.
by which the Tasting Nerves pass; the sixth called Carotides, Carotides.
by which the Carotid Arteries pass.

The second Common Bone is called Os Cribriforme, Os Cribriforme.
being perforated like a Seive, the Fibrils of the Olfactory Nerves pass
through these Holes; it is seated at the middle of the Basis of the Forehead, to
which it is joined by Harmonia; it is also joined to the two Bones of the upper
Jaw, and behind to the Os Sphenoides.

On its inside it has an almost Triangular Process, called Crista Galli Crista
Galli.
the Coxcomb; it arises just where the Process of the Sinus Frontalis ends, and
reaches about half way in the middle of the Bone; the Falx which divides the
two Lobes of the Brain, is tied to the point of this Process.

On its outside, Septum Nasi.
just opposite to the Crista Galli; it has another very thin, but hard Process,
called Septum Nasi, dividing the Nostrils.

To the Os Cribriforme is annexed two other very fine and thin Bones, Ossa
Spongiosa.
one in each Nostril, called Ossa Spongiosa, they be wrapped up, as it were, in
many folds, and lined with a Membrane made up of the Expanded Fibers of the
Olfactory Nerves;
so that those Creatures, who have more of these Laminae have a more exquisite
smell, as Cats, Greyhounds, etc. for a Man has not above three or four folds,
whereas the above-named Creatures have very many; so that it is not difficult to
judge of the acuteness of the smell, from the multiplicity of these folds; most
Anatomists consider them as parts of the Os Cribriforme, using the one for the
other promiscuously; but I think them to be different Bones.

The third Common Bone is called Os Jugale, Os Jugale.
vel Zygoma, by some the Bridge, or Yoak-bone; it is not one distinct Bone, but
made up of a long Process of the Temporal Bone, and another of the first Bone
of the upper Jaw.

It Is situated on the outside of the Face, Situation.
under the External Canthus of the Eye, there is one on each side.

Its use seems as if ordained by Nature, Use.
for the defense of the Temporal Muscle which passes under it; it also gives
Origination to the Musculi Masseteres.

Demonstration III.
Of the Bones of the Face.
IF the structure of the Bones of the Cranium be worthy our Admiration, the
Composition of the Bones of the Face, which now comes under our view, is no
less surprising; for although that contains the Brain, which is one of the most
Noble Parts of the Body; yet the Face where most of the Senses are lodged, and
for many Reasons may be called the Image of the Soul, since most, if not all
the Passions of the Mind, are fully demonstrated in the Face, cannot merit
less, especially in the wonderful structure of the Bones which compose it. The
Face is also the Seat of Beauty, which Charms and Attracts the Eyes of all to
behold it; The Bones give Figure, Form, and Beauty to the whole Body.
and nothing contributes more to this Beauty than a good Formation, and true
Symmetry of the Bones: Ex. gratia, if the lower part of the Coronal Bone bunch
out too much, it makes them Beetle brow'd, as we call it: If the Bones of the
Nose be too large, and rising from the Face, it makes them Hawk-nosed: If the
lower Jaw be too sharp, or pointed, it makes an Out mouth, and so of the rest;
yet we may say the same of the Bones of the whole Body, they giving, as I have
said, Shape and Figure to all; so that if they be any way deformed or
unproportioned, that part must of necessity be disfigured.

The Bones of the Face are divided into those of the upper and lower Jaw.
Division.


The Bones of the superior Jaw are eleven in number, Bones of the upper Jaw,
eleven.
five on each side, and an odd one.

The Ossa Triangulares are big, 1, 2, Ossa Triangulares.
of a hard and solid Substance, in Figure triangular, wherefore so called,
placed on the lower side of the outward Canthus of the Eye's Orbit, the middle
are advanced out, and rising, which forms the Balls of the Cheeks: One of their
Angular Processes, as I said before, makes up the Os Jugale, being joined with
the long Process of the Temple-Bone; they also make the inferior part of the
Orbit of the Eyes, and is united to four Bones, viz. the Coronalis, Sphenoides,
Maxillary, and Os Petrosum.

They have three Apophises each; Apophisis, three.
one of which makes an eminence, which forms the lesser Angle of the Eye; the
other advancing toward the Nose, makes the greatest part of the inferior Lip
of the Orbit; the third may well be called Processus Jugalis, which I have
already mentioned.

The Ossa Lachrimalia, 3, 4, Ossa Lachrimales.
seu Vnguis, are very little and thin, in shape of a Nail of a Man's Hand,
seated in the great Canthus of the Eyes, within the Orbit; there is a small
Foramina, in each called Lachrimale, in which the Lachrimal Duct passes to the
Nose, Puncta Lachrimalia.
also through this hole passes a Branch of the fifth pair of Nerves, to the
inner Membrane of the Nose.

These Bones are so small, that they be easily lost.

The Ossa Male 5, 6, Ossa Maxillares.
some call them Maxillares, are the thickest, greatest, and spongiest of all
the Bones of the Face, and makes up the greatest part of the Cheeks and Palate.

Parts to be considered in these Bones, are first, many deep Cavities which are
in their lower edge, called Alveoli, Alveoli.
or Sockets, in which the Teeth are fastened: Secondly, each has an Internal
Sinus, which is lined with the same sort of Glandulous Membrane, as the Sinus
Frontalis, and of the same use, and is called Sinus Maxillare. Sinus Maxillare.
There Is also another long one, which runs along over the Roots of the Teeth,
in which the Vessels pass which serve for the Nourishment of the Teeth.

The Ossa Nasi are two long, 7, 8, Ossa Nasi.
hard, and somewhat thick Bones, of a Pyramidal Figure each, being joined, they
make up the bony or superior part of the Nose; their lower Extrmities are
somewhat unequal, for the more strong Connection of the Cartilages of the Nose
with it; they are joined together by Harmonia.

The last pair are called Ossa Palati, 9, 10, Ossa Palati.
are very broad, but thin, and being joined by Harmonia, make up the Roof of
the Mouth; they are joined to the Ossa Maxillares forwardly, and backwardly,
sideways to the Pterygoid Apophisis, by the Sphenoidal Suture: Each Bone has a
hole forwardly, called Foramen Gustativum.

The eleventh Bone of the upper Jaw is called Vomer, 11, Os Vomer.
by reason the Ancients say it resembes a Plough-share; it is situated in the
middle over the Palate, edgeways, and is, as it were, a sort of Septum,
dividing the interior part of the Nostrils.

Before I pass to the lower Jaw, Orbita Occulorum.
'twill not be amiss to give a Description of the Orbits of the Eyes; they are
two great Cavities placed at the inferior part of the Os Frontis, which serve
as Habitations to the Eyes, and to defend them against all Injuries; their
external part is quite round, but internally they grow Pyramidal, having at
their bottom many perforations for Vessels, etc.

Each Orbit is made up of part of six different Bones, Each Orbit made up of
six Bones.
which altogether composes its Cavity.

Five of which are Common, and one Proper, which is called, as I have already
demonstrated, Os Vnguis vel Lachrimale: Of the Common, three belong to the
Cranium, and two to the Face; the first of those of the Cranium, is the
Coronal, which forms the superior part; the second is the Ethmoidal Bone, which
forms part of the internal side next the Nose; the third is the Sphenoidal,
which makes up part of the internal Cavity; the two of the Face compose all its
lower part, the Os Triangulare forming that part toward the lesser Canthus,
and the Maxillare, that next the greater.

The lower Jaw is but one continued Bone in Adults, Inferior Jaw.
but in young Bodies is composed of two joined together in the forepart, by
Syncondrosis; they unite, and become one about the seventh Year, of a somewhat
Circular Figure, or rather like the Greek Letter V, smooth and polished
without, but a little rough within, several Muscles being inserted, and arising
from thence.

This in all Creatures is only moveable, except as some affirm in the
Crocodile, who moves the upper only.

The Parts to be considered in this Bone, are its Processes, Foramina, and
Alveoli.

It has two large Processes at each end, Processes.
the first called Condiloides vel Articularis, Condiloides.
it is received into the Sinus of the Os Petrosum, and fastened there by a strong
Membranous Ligament; the motion of the Jaw depends on this Articulation; the
other is called Corone, Corone.
which from a large Basis ends in a sharp point; it lies under the Os Jugale,
the Tendon of the Musculus Temporalis is inserted into it; these Processes are
in the superior part of the Bone. In its inferior part, just where it begins to
turn up on each side, are its Angles, to whose outward part the Masseter
Muscles are inserted, and the Pterygoidei to the interior.

This Bone is somewhat hollow within, containing a Meduller Juice.

It has four Foramina, Foramina.
two of which are at the Roots of the Processes in the inside, in which a
Branch of the fifth pair of Nerves, together with the sanguifying Vessels
enter, and pass under the Roots of the Teeth, distributing Branches to each as
they pass; the other two are in the forepart of the Chin, out of which come
two Twigs of the aforesaid Nerve, which are spent on the Muscles and Skin of
the lower Jaw. Alveoli.
It has also its Alveoli, or Sockets for the Teeth, as the upper Jaw.

The Uses of the lower Jaw, Uses.
besides its adding to the Beauty of the Face, is to help Mastication, and
serves to form the Voice.

The Teeth are the hardest of all the Bones of the Body, Teeth.
having a peculiar Cortex, are smooth, and fixed in the Alveoli of the Jaws, by
Gomphosis.

They are in number about Thirtytwo, Number 32.
of three Ranks or Orders.

1. The Incisores, Incisores 8.
or Cutters, four in each Jaw placed in the forepart, and have commonly but
one Phang or Root; they are also called by some Risores, they appearing when we
laugh.

2. Canini, Canini 4.
or Dog-teeth, by some the Eye-teeth, two in each Jaw, one on each side the
Incisores; they have sometimes two Roots, but strong, and crooked.

3. The last are called Molares, Molares.
or Grinders, in number about twenty, five on each side the Canini, and have
two or three Phangs.

The Teeth are not perfected all at once, nor appear before a certain time,
when they force their way through the Jaws and Gums; yet there are Observations
of some who have been Born with Teeth; the first that appear in Children, are
for the most part the superior Incisives, which is sometimes sooner, sometimes
later, but generally about the seventh, eighth, or ninth Month; then in time
come the Canini, and lastly the Molares: When the Teeth come to about the
number of twenty, there appears no more till about the seventh Year, about
which time there appears four more: At fourteen there comes four more, and
toward the twentieth Year the last four, which are called Teeth of Wisdom,
because they come at an Age, when we ought to be Wise and Serious.

The first twenty Teeth are called Milk-teeth, which fall or shed about the
seventh Year, and new ones come in their places.

I have seen some who have had new Teeth, when they have been upwards of Sixty
Years, but this is not very usual.

The Teeth have several Uses; Uses.
first, they serve for Mastication, which is its chief, the Teeth being as so
many Mill stones which bruise and grind the Aliment, the Incisores cut the
Morsel, and the Molares grind it. Secondly, to help Articulation of the Voice,
for we see those that lose their Teeth, especially the Incisores, do not speak
plain, but lisp, as we call it; they are also Ornamental.

Since we are demonstrating the Bones of the Head, Os Hyoides.
it will not be amiss to mention the Bone which is at the Root of the Tongue,
being united only by Muscles; it is called Os Hyoides, or Ypsiloides, by reason
it is like the Greek V.

It consists of two parts, the Body and Horns which receive the Epiglottis.

The principal Use of this Bone, Use.
is not to support the Tongue, as some pretend, but rather to facilitate the
entrance of Air into the Trachea Arteria, also of the Aliments into the
Oesophagus; many Muscles also are inserted into this Bone.

The Bones of the Cranium being joined together, Foramina, in the whole Cranium.
there are many Foramina or Holes, through which Vessels pass and repass; to
begin then in order, these appear first, and are commonly by pairs.

1. There Is a Hole which lies between the Crista Galli, Foramen, Crista Galli.
and the Process of the Sinus Frontalis; it is a single Hole, and mentioned by
no Author as I find: It may well be called Foramen Nasale, vel Crista Galli;
through this Hole a Vessel passes from the Sinus Longitudinalis of the Dura
Matter to the Nose, where it becomes double, one to each Nostril; this is the
way how in great Commotions of the Brain,
the Blood sometimes streams out, and that with violence, the Vessel being then
more turgid.

2. The Foramina in the Cribriforme Bone, Foramina Ethmoides
for the passage of the Olfactory Nerves, and may be called Foramina Ethmoides.

3. The Foramina Opticorum Nervorum, Foramina Opticorum
number two.

4. Two for the Nervi Motorii, Foramina Motorii.
and other Vessels, they are very large long Holes.

5. Two called the Crotophite, Foramina Temp.
or Temporal Holes, through which passes two Branches of the fifth pair of
Nerves, to the Temples.

6. Two for the Arteriae Carotides, Foramina Carotidum
which lie just by the sides of the lower parts of the Sella Turcica.

7. Two small ones, Foramina Durae Matris.
one on each side the Carotide Holes, called Foramina Durae Matris.

8. Two for the Auditory Nerves, Foramina Auditoria.
which pass into the Antra Auditoria.

9. Two for the Jugular Veins. Foramina Jugul.


10. Two called Linguales, Foramina Lingnales.
through which passes Vessels to the Tongue.

11. Two more for the Cervical Arteries, Foramina Nervor. paris 5.
and also for the exit of some Nerves of the fifth pair.

12. Lastly, Foramen Medullare.
the great one, called Foramen Medullare, for the passage of the Spinal Marrow.

All these Holes are in the Basis of the Skull, or Internal Part.

There are also several Foramina, of great use in the External Part.

1. Are two Foramina, Foramina Orbicularia.
or Holes, one by the edge of the orbit of each Eye, called Orbicularia,
through which passes a Branch of the fifth pair of Nerves, to the Lips.

2. The Foramina seu puncta Lachrimalia, Foramina Lachrimalia.
in the Lachrimal Bones through which the Tears pass into the Nose.

3. The Foramina Palati, Foramina Palati.
they are placed in the forepart of the Roof of the Mouth next the Teeth, the
thinnest Mucus of the Nose is conveyed through these two Holes.

4. Two in the back part of the Palate, Foramina Alia.
through which Branches of the fifth pair of Nerves pass to the Palate.

As for the Foramina of the lower Jaw, I have already mentioned them in the
Description of that Bone.

Demonstration IV.
Of the Bones of the Trunk.
THE next part of the Skeleton that is to be Demonstrated, Division, threefold.
is the Trunk, which we shall divide into Three Parts, as the Back or Spine,
Ribs and Breast; and lastly, the Hips, or Ossa Innominata.

The Back, or rather Spine, is composed of many Bones, called Vertebrae,
Vertebrae.
or Spondils, all which being joined or united together, may not unfitly be
termed a Pyramid of Bones; but before we Treat of them in particular, it will
be requisite to say something of the Spine in General, Of the Spine in General.
in which several Things are to be taken notice of.

1. All the Bones, Denomination.
from the first of the Neck, to the very Extremity of the Coccigis, are called
the Spine, I suppose from the acute Processes each Vertebrae have, called
Spinales.

2. The figure or shape of the Spine, Figure.
is of great Consideration, for if you look on its Anterior or Posterior Parts,
it appears straight; but if you look on its Lateral Parts, its curved in and
out: First, the Spondils of the Neck bend inwards, for the better support of
the Oesophagus, also to sustain the Head in an Equilibrium, then the Vertebrae
of the Back jet themselves outward, to augment the Capacity of the Thorax, that
the Heart and Lungs may have a larger room to play in; toward the Loins again,
they bend inwards, not only to defend the great Vessels which lie on them, but
also to Counterballance the better the weight of the Body; the Os Sacrum bends
outward, that the Pelvis be enlarged to contain the Bladder, Womb in Women, and
Intestinum Rectum; and lastly, the Os Coccygis bends inwards, that it might not
be offended when we sit down, also that the Intestinum Rectum be tied to it.

The third Thing to be observed in General, Bodies of the Vertebrae.
or Common to all, is that the Bodies, of each Vertebra are of a spongy
Substance, made up of many irregular bony Threads, containing a Medullar Juice,
of a Unequal Figure forwards, but Concave backwards, and plain above and below,
being only joined with Cartilages, which makes them Contiguous, and unites them
there, which gives them a more easy motion, the Body also of each Vertebra
gradually increases in bulk, till to the very Os Sacrum; for it is reasonable
that those which support,
should be larger than those which are supported, and at the same time as the
Spinalis Medulla passes down it grows less, losing of its bulk as the Nerves
pass from it, and the Foramina Medullares of each Vertebra consequently less.

4. Each Vertebra have five Things to be considered, Five things to be
considered in the Vertebra.
which belong to all; 1. Each, as I have said, have a Body. 2. Each have a
great Foramina, Foramina Spinales.
through which the Spinalis Medulla passes, even to the very Os Sacrum, which
may well be called Foramina Spinalia vel Medullaria; these holes are largest in
the Vertebrae of the Neck, and so lessen as they descend, several Nerves, as I
have hinted before, passing from the Spinal Marrow, so lessens them; but the
Bodies grow larger to sustain the rest, the Spinal Marrow reaches no further
than the last Vertebra of the Back, where it begins to divide into many small
Filaments, which are subdivided into smaller in the Os Sacrum, Cauda Equina,
quid?
where it is called Cauda Equina, or the Horse-tail. 3. They have each seven
Processes, Seven Processes in each Vertebra.
four oblique ones, two superior, and two inferior, two transverse, and an odd
one called Acutus, vel Spinalus, by some Posterior. 4. They are joined one to
another in their oblique Processes by Ginglimus, Conjunction.
and by Synchondrosis in their Bodies; also on their inside, they are lined
with a strong smooth Membrane, which reaches from the first, to the Os Sacrum.
5. They have many Sinuffes, but the most remarkable, are those under their
oblique Processes, which being united to others above the aforesaid Processes
of other Vertebrae, make certain Foramina, through which the Nerves of the
Spinal Marrow passes, as also many Blood Vessels to and from the Spinalis
Medulla; they may be aptly enough called Foramina Nervina. Foramina Nervina.


We come now to Treat of each Vertebra in particular; Of the Vertebrae in
particular. Number 25.
the Vertebrae are in number twenty-five; that is, seven of the Neck, twelve of
the Back, five of the Loins, and one of the Os Sacrum, to which is annexed the
Ossa Coccygis.

The Neck has seven. Seven of the Neck.


The first is called Atlas, 1. Atlas.
by reason is sustains the Head, as Atlas was supposed to do the Heavens; its
transverse Processes, as also all the other of the Neck, are not so long as
those of the Back; it is Articulated to the Condiloid Processes of the Os
Occipitis, by its superior oblique Processes, in which are two Sinus's that
receives the aforesaid Condiloid Processes; this Articulation is a sort of
double Arthrodia, so is only capable of Flexion and Extention; it has very
little, or no Body, but within has a small Sinus to receive the Dens of the
second Vertebra; this Sinus is lined with a strong Ligament, which fastens the
aforesaid Dens, the Spinal Process is a very little blunt knob, but all the
other Spines of the Neck are forked, except the last. It has a small round
Process in its upper part where the Body should be, from which passes a small
Ligament, to another small round Process between the Condiloides of the
Occipital Bone, close to the Foramen Medullare.

The second Vertebra is called Dentata vel Epistrophous, 2. Dentata.
because between its two superior Processes, springs another very hard one,
called Dens, being like a little Tooth, which being received into the
abovementioned Sinus of the first Vertebra, and encompassed with strong
Membranous Ligaments; this moves in the Atlas as an Axis, as the Flexion and
Extention depend on the first Vertebra with the Head;
the Circular Motion depends on this and the first: When a Luxation happens
here, the Neck is said to be broke.

The five following have no particular Name, and are much like one another,
only increasing a little in bigness, and the Spinal Process of the last is not
fork'd, beginning to grow somewhat like those of the Back; the transverse
Processes, and spinous ones, are somewhat rough, for the better insertion of
many Muscles, which are fastened there.

All the Vertebrae of the Neck, Foramina Vertebrarum Colli*
have two small Foramina each, which lie in the Head of the transverse
Processes, serving for the passage of the Vertebral Arteries.

Their oblique Processes have this observable in them, their superior ones are
somewhat hollowish, to receive the inferior Unequal ones, that the motion of the
Neck be freer.

The Back has twelve Vertebrae; Back 12.
yet I once saw a Skeleton that had thirteen, and thirteen Ribs; they are
bigger than those of the Neck, but less then those of the Loins; their Spinal
Processes are not fork'd but pointed, and lie one over another; the transverse
are short, but large, and blunt, and have a Cavity to receive the Heads of the
Ribs; the oblique are sharp, and smooth, and so consequently little motion,
Vertebrae Costales.
these are called the Costal Vertebrae; the eleventh Vertebra has its spinal
Process, not lying over the other, as those above it.

The last Vertebra of the Back has this to be observed in it; it receives none,
but is received, both by the eleventh of the Back, and first of the Loins; on
this depends the greatest motion of the Back.

The five of the Loins are larger than those of the Back, Loins 5.
and their Articulation looser, their transverse Processes are more long and
fine than those of the Back, which serve as Ribs, as it were, yet the first and
fifth are shorter than the rest; their Foramina Nervina are excavated only out
of the lower Vertebra, N. B.
whereas those of the Back equally out of both, but those of the Neck only out
of the superior; their posterior Spines, are short, blunt and thick, a little
broad, and turn a little upwards, that the bending of the Body be no way
hindered; and whereas in the other Vertebrae, the upper oblique Processes
receive the lower, in these the lower receive the upper.

The first of these Vertebrae is called Renalis, Renalis.
the Kidneys being lodged at the side of it; the other four have no particular
Name.

The Os Sacrum, Os Sacrum.
or holy Bone, so called, as some think, because the Ancients used to save this
part as Sacred in Sacrifices; but I think rather from (...), as the Greeks call
it, which signifies Magnum, as well as Sacrum, it being the biggest Bone of all
the Spine. It Is immovable, and serves as a Basis or Pedestal to the whole
Spine; it is of a somewhat triangular Figure, with the point downwards; it is
Concavous within, which helps to form the Pelvis, also smooth; behind it is
Unequal, and unequal, many Muscles arising, and being inserted here, it seems as
if it were composed of five or six Bones, (as indeed it is in Infants) its
Ossification beginning at so many points, but its edges, or rather, if you
will, its transverse Processes look but like one continued Bone, as it is; the
Foramen Spinale toward its lower part is very small; its Foramina Nervina are
before and behind, and not on the sides, as in the other Vertebrae; its spinal
Processes are very small, the last being only a small round Protuberance, it
oblique Processes are hardly visible, except the superior ones; the parts which
compose the Os Sacrum, are placed in the number of the Vertebrae, not by reason
of their use, but because of their resemblance, for otherwise they are
immovable: The Os Sacrum may be said to be divided into five Vertebrae of
different bigness, whereof the superior is biggest, they diminishing as they
descend, the last being the least; these separate easily in Infants, by reason
the Cartilages which unite them, are not fully ossified; but in Adults, they
all make up but one entire Bone.

This Bone seems to have several Uses, Uses.
the first is, as I have already remarked, to serve as a Foundation to the
whole Spine. Secondly, to help to contain the parts of the Hypogastrium, by
forming Cavity, as I have said. The third to defend them; the fourth to
Articulate the Bones of the Hips; the fifth to give Origin and Insertion to
many Muscles.

To the end of this Bone are annexed two or three little Bones called Ossa
Coccygis, Ossa Coccygis.
the Cuckow's Beak; some call them the Rump-bones: They have a somewhat loose
Articulation, and tied by Cartilages one to another, the last is the smallest:
They have this loose Articulation, that they may give way to the Foetus in the
Birth, therefore in Women these Bones are always more bent backwards than in
Men; they end in a Cartilaginous point, to which is tied the Intestinum Rectum;
they have no thing more material in them, having neither Process nor Cavity.

We shall now proceed to the Bones of the Breast and Ribs, Bones of the Breast.
which is the second Division of the Trunk.

The Ribs are twenty-four in number, Ribs 24.
twelve on each side; to be well-instructed in all which concerns the Ribs, we
must observe several things, as their Substance, Figure, Connexions, Parts,
Division and Use, of all which in order.

The substance of the Ribs is partly Bony, Substance of the Ribs.
and partly Cartilaginous, that end next the Vertebra, being of a harder and
more solid and thick substance than that toward the Sternon, which is
flattish, so less capable of being broke; sor that end toward the Sternon
being more spongy in substance, all the Ribs end toward the Breast by
Cartilages, increasing in length as the Ribs descend; and those Cartilages of
the superior Ribs, are harder than those of the inferior; sometimes these
Cartilages grow bony in Old People, so that they cannot be separated by a Knife.

The Ribs have a sort of Semicircular Figure, Figure.
making a sort of Arch; when two are together, they make a kind of a true
Circle, Concave inwardly, to form the Capacity of the Thorax, and to contain
the Lungs and Heart, and Unequal outwardly, to resist outward force; the farther
they depart from the Sternon, the more round they are in their own Body; they
are not equally big, for the superior are shorter, the middle biggest of all,
and the inferior one least of all; their upper sides are thick, blunt, and
broad; one edge is called the interior, the other the exterior Lip; their under
edges are sharp, having in their inside a long Sinus, or Furrow, in which lie
the Intercostal Vessels.

The Ribs are Articulated by their Extremities, Articulation.
both to the Vertebrae of the Thorax, and Sternon; that Articulation with the
Back is moveable, the other not; the long Head of each Rib is Articulated by a
single Arthrodia; it has a small Protuberance clothed with a Cartilage, which
head is received into a Sinus of the transverse Process of the Vertebra; it is
this Process which supports the Ribs, and hinders them from coming lower in
Expiration: You must observe, N. B.
that the back-part of every Rib is higher than the forepart, till the
Cartilage be joined, which turning a little up, makes the two ends of an equal
height, so that by the rising of the Ribs, the Breast is enlarged. We must also
take notice, that almost all the Ribs have a Communication with the Sternon,
either directly or indirectly; that is, the superior ones are by a direct
insertion, but the lower by an indirect, which is by Cartilages adhering to the
superior.

All the Ribs make a sort of Angle by their Cartilages toward the Sternon,
which serves to increase the Spring of the Cartilages, that the Ribs be brought
down again, having been raised in Inspiration. It sometimes happens, though
seldom, that these Cartilages are ossified,
which occasions an Incurable Asthma; the last, or lowest Rib in Man, have no
Cartilage as the rest; the lower the Ribs, are, longest and more movable, N. B.
because Respiration in Man is downwards, but in Birds upwards.

The Ribs are commonly divided in two sorts, Ribs of two sorts.
as true or false, but I think they may well be all accounted true, except the
last, (being joined mediateor immediately to the Sternon by Cartilages) which
has none, so only may be termed a false Rib; however it being a common received
Opinion, I shall make the division: the long or true are seven on each side,
True 14.
and are the superior ones; the first of which has no motion at all, it being
as a prop for all the rest, but as they descend they increase in motion; they
are Articulated to the Vertebrae of the Back by a sort of double Arthrodia,
which makes a Ginglimus, and to the Sternon by Synarthrosis, the three lowest
of which are by some called the Pectoral Ribs. Costae Pectorales.


The false or bastard are five on each side, False, 10.
the four uppermost of which have at their Extremities toward the Sternon long
Cartilages, bending upwards, and cleaving only one to another; that is, the
lowest to the superior, so not directly united to the Sternon, as the first
seven are; which was the Reason the Ancients gave them the Name of Spurious:
The last has no Cartilage at its end, the edge of the Diaphragme being tied to
it.

All the Ribs, as I have already demonstrated, are received both into the
transverse Processes, and body of the Vertebrae; except the two or three last,
which are only received into the body of the Vertebrae.

The Ribs are to defend the Heart and Lungs, Use.
etc. from all sorts of external Injuries, so that they be not pressed, but have
free motion, which were it not bony, would be always in danger of being
offended; they also serve to sustain the Respiratory Muscles.

The Cartilages of the Ribs have this Use, Use of the Cartilages.
that is, when the Ribs are drawn something upwards in Inspiration, they draw
them down again with a sort of Spring; for all Cartilaginous Bodies are endued
with a sort of Elasticity, so that they always recover their first Figure.

This Mechanism is observed in various Animals,
for in Birds the Sternon is immovable, because the flying Muscles arise from
thence; so that if the Sternon had any thing to do in Respiration, it would be
hindered; therefore Nature has contrived another Artifice, which is this,
between every Rib there is a little Bone, placed somewhat obliquely, so that if
one moves, the other follow by consent.

All these Birds have no Diaphragm,
but instead thereof two Bladders, which reach to the bottom of their Bellies,
they serve for the Diaphragma, and also help to keep them suspended in the Air:
Those Creatures which have a Diaphragma, breathe downwards, but Birds, etc.
which have none, breathe upwards.

In Amphibious Creatures, as the Tortoise, etc. their shell is in place of
Ribs, and Frogs have only one Rib on a side, to defend the Lungs.

The Breast Bone is called Sternon, Sternon made up of three Bones.
or Os Pectoris, situated in the middle of the Anterior part of the Breast,
composed of two or three Bones, having the Productions of the Cartilages of the
Ribs inserted into their sides, of a reddish fungous Substance.

To consider it well, it must be examined at two different times; for in
Infants it is almost all Cartilaginous, except the first Bone where the
Claviculae are fastened. In Old People I have seen it all ossified, except the
first with the second at its juncture, but in those of Middle Age, partly Bony,
and partly Cartilaginous, the superior Bone always ossifies first, and the
inferior last. In the Sternon of Infants you may perceive seven or eight
Junctures, as if so many Bones, but in the seventh or eighth Year, they
uniting, make up but three or four at most.

The first or superior Bone of the Sternon, First Bone.
is more thick and solid than the rest, made in the shape of a Crescent almost,
at each side of its superior part, it has a Sinus to receive the head of the
Clavicula; at its top it has a Lunated Sinus called Jugulum; Jugulum.
it has also a small long Sinus on its inside, to give way to the Aspera
Arteria: It Is immovable.

The second Bone is narrower, Second Bone.
longer and thinner, having at its sides many Sinosities, to receive the
Cartilages of the Ribs.

The third Bone is less than the second, Third Bone.
but broader, at the lower end of which is annexed a Cartilage called
Xiphoides, vel Mucroconita, vel Ensiformis, the Sword-like Cartilage; Cartilago
Ensiformis.
it is of a Triangular Figure, it serves to defend the superior Orifice of the
Stomach: It Is this place which is called Scrobiculus Cordis, the Heart-pit; the
Diaphragma is also fastened to it; a strong Ligament of the Liver, called
Suspensorium,
is tied to it, for in Inspiration the Ribs being draw upwards, then the Liver
by its weight keeps this from moving, and when in Exspiration the Ribs assume
their former Figure, this by its Cartilaginous Spring assumes his also.

The Uses of the Sternon are, Uses of the Sternon.
first, to unite the Ribs, that their motion may be all at one and the same
time, also to receive the Clavicula: Lastly, to fasten the Mediastinum, which
is a Membrane that divides the Breast in two.

The third part that compose the Trunk, Ossa Innominata.
are called Ossa Innominata, because of a very strange Figure; they are in
number two, one on each side of the Os Sacrum, having where they are united to
it, many Depressions and Risings, for their greater Strength and Connection,
Articulation.
being Articulated before by Synchondrosis, so make up that Cavity called the
Pelvis, Pelvis.
which contains the (Womb in Women) Bladder, and Intestinum Rectum, with other
of the Guts.

In Children each Bone consists of three, Each consists of three in Children.
all of them meeting in that deep Cavity, called Acetabulum, which receives the
head of the Fenier, but as we grow in Years they all make but one Bone, yet
then, for better distinction, named as three, as the Os Ileum, Ischium, and
Pubis, of all which in order.

The Ileum is the superior part of the Bone, Os lleum.
so called, because most part of the Ileum-Gut lies on its Internal Face; from
it is External arise the Musculi Glutei: It Is the biggest of the three, and
joined with the Os Sacrum.

Things to be considered in this Bone, Spina Ilei.
are, first, its Figure, which is Semicircular. Secondly, its top, which is
called the Ridg, Comb, or Spine, being covered with a Cartilage: Its Internal
Face is Concave, and its Exterior Unequal: It has three Protuberances, being
rather so many parts of the Spine; Three parts of the Spine.
one forwards, called Spina Anterior Superior; another below, called Spina
Anterior Inferior, less than the former; and a third behind, called Spina
Posterior.

The Os Ischium, Os Ischium
or Coxendicis, is the lower part of the Os Innominatum, in which is to be
considered two parts; first, It Is Superior, which makes up the greatest part of
the Cotula, or Acetabulum. Secondly, Its Inferior, or lower part, which we sit
on, which is called Tuberositas Ischii; Tuberositas.
it has a Sinuosity on its inner side, where the Musculus Obturator Internus
winds about; the Muscles of the Penis, and Elevators of the Anus, have their
Origin from the Tuberosity of the Ischium.

The Os Pubis, Os Pubis.
or Pectinis, by us the Share-bone, is the forepart of the Os Innominatum;
it is joined forwardly to its Fellow by Synchondrosis, the hinder part of it
forms part of the Acetabulum; the superior part is called the Spine, to which
the Muscles of the Abdomen are fastened; where this joins with the Ischium
there is large Foramen, called Ovale, Foramen Ovale Ossis Pubis.
covered with very a strong Ligamentous Membrane; above this Foramen there is
Sinus, by which the Crural Vessels pass to the Thigh.

All these Bones being joined together in their middle, make up that deep
Cavity called Acetabulum, vel Cotula, in which the head of the Os Femoris
enters, which is tipped with a Cartilage, called Supercilium.

These Bones are more ample and large in Women than Men, Ossa Pubis, largest in
Women.
and those which have them most advanced, have the easiest Labor.

The Ancients believed, that in Labor the Ossa Pubis separated for the more
easy Delivery of the Birth, The Ossa Pubis do not separate in Labor.
nay, Bartholinus is of this Opinion, for he says, that in a Woman newly
Delivered, you may divide them with the back of a Knife; but I presume it is not
so, for they separate not the least; it is only the Os Coccygis which gives way
a little by bending backwards, for most pain is felt when the Foetus passes by
the Fundament; yet some have a more loose Articulation of their Bones, and so
perhaps might bring them into this Error.

Demonstration IV.
Of the Bones of the Superior Extremities.
I Have Demonstrated all the Bones which make up the two parts of the Skeleton,
there remains now only the third part, which is those of the Extremities.

The Extremities, Extremities, Upper and Lower.
or rather the Limbs, are either Superior, as the Arms; or Inferior, as the
Legs.

We will begin with the Superior; but first I must inform you, that since both
Extremities are double, I shall only speak of them in the singular number, for
by demonstrating one side, you at the same time show the other.

Although there be no part which does not furnish us with some Subject of
Admiration, yet we must all agree, that the Arm has as great a share, if not
more, than any other; for which reason Aristotle called it the Organ of Organs,
and the Instrument of Instruments; and since Nature has given to all Animals,
something particular, either to defend themselves against others, and preserve
themselves from external Injuries; or else to offend; we may say then, that Man
has received two things preferable to Animals, to wit, Reason and Hands, the
one for Counsel and Conduct, the other for Execution of our Will; it is these
Hands which gives him the Sovereign Command over all Creatures be he never so
Cruel, Strong, or Swift; for of what Advantage would all our Reason and Conduct
be, if we had not Hands to perform what Reason dictates: I could say much more
on this Subject, but that I am here on plain Demonstration, and not
Philosophizing.

The Arm, Division. Arm, five parts.
generally so called, has five parts, as the Clavicula, Scapula, Shoulder, Arm,
and Hand, of all which in due course.

1. The Clavicula, Clavicula*
which some place among the Bones of the Spine, but I think it rather belongs
to those of the Arms, as I shall show in its use, the whole motion of the Arm
depending on this Bone; It Is called Clavicula, I suppose, being a diminutive
from Clavis a Key, because the Keys in old time were like an s Figure.
in Padua they have such sort of Keys still, as I am informed by those who have
been there; it is not so crooked in Women as in Men; Articulation.
it is Articulated by one end to the Acromium of the Scapula, and by the other
to the upper part of the first Bone of the Sternon; by a sort of Arthrodia, yet
has but little motion; the more crooked these Bones are, the more force and
agility has the Arm. Substance.
It Is hollow in the middle, and contains Marrow, as all long Bones, but toward
the ends Spongy; that end toward the Acromium is not very thick, but rough,
and unequal, the end toward the Sternon smoother: It Is also here outwardly
Unequal, but inwardly Concave, to give way to the Vessels which pass under it,
otherwise it would have pressed them; but toward the Acromium,
Unequal inwardly, and Concave outwardly, for the more convenient situation of
the Deltoid Muscle, which would otherwise appear too bulky, and make the Breast
look deformed.

They serve to uphold the Scapula and Humerus from falling on the Breast, Use.
which they do when this Bone happens to be Fractured; the whole motion of the
Arm depends also on this Bone; for Brutes having no Claviculae, cannot move
their Forelegs so readily as Man, or as some Animals which have them, as
Monkeys, Squirrels, etc.

2. The Scapula, Scapula.
or Shoulder bone, is situated on the back-part of the Thorax, being only
fastened with Muscles, (so more loose, that the motion be freer and easy)
except in its Acromium where it is Articulated with the Clavicula; it is of a
Triangular Figure, Figure.
whereof two Angles are Posterior, and one Anterior, Its inward Face is
Concave, as well to accommodate it self to the Ribs whereon it lies, as to
contain a Muscle, but outward Gibbous, thicker on its edges than in the middle,
being there transparent, and very thin; so that in a Caries of that part we
cannot expect Exfoliation, no Medullar Glands being there, it is nourished from
its sides.

Parts to be considered in this Bone, Processes, three.
are first, its Processes, which are three, first is a thin, but rising
Process, in the middle of its outside, extending all its length, it is called
the Spine; Spine Acromium
its Point or Extremity is called the Acromium, in which is a flattish Sinus to
receive the Clavicula: Some say that this Process is a distinct Bone from the
Scapula, because in Infants its only Cartilaginous, which ossifying by degrees,
makes up but one Bone; the second is less, and placed at the superior part of
the Neck, which advances above the Head of the Bone of the Arm: It Is curved,
and called Coracoides, Coracoides Ancyroides
the Crows-bill, or Ancyroides, some call it only Processus Curvatus, it
strengthens the Articulation of the Humerus. The third, or middle one, is
called Cervix, Cervix.
is which in a somewhat flat Sinus to receive the head of the Humerus, called
Glenoides; the Humerus is tied to it by a strong, but somewhat loose Ligament;
the edges of this Sinus is tipped with a Cartilaginous Ligament, which hinders
the Humerus from being too easily Dislocated; there is also a strong Ligament
from the Acromium to the Processus Coracoides, which, together with the
Acromium,
hinders the Humerus from being too easily Dislocated upwards, except this
Ligament or the Acromiune be broken.

The edges of this Bone are called Costa. Costa.


It has three Angles, Angles, three.
1. The Inferior. 2. Posterior. 3. Cervix; that part which reaches from the
Posterior to the Inferior Angle, is called the Basis of the Scapula. Basis.


It has two notable Sinusses Sinusses.
one on each side the Spine, where the Musculi Infra, and Supra Spinati lie;
the lower Sinus is largest; in its inside Concave part lies the Musculus
Subscapularis, vel Immersus.

The Scapula has many Uses; Use.
first, it gives Origin to many Muscles, it fastens also the Arm to the Body,
and serves to support it, to the end it may have all its motions.

The third part of the superior Limb is the Os Humeri, Humerus.
or Shoulderbone, it is the strongest and largest of all that compose the Arm;
it is long and round in its fore part, but somewhat flat behind; its superior
part is Articulated to the Cervix of the Scapula by Arthrodia; Articulation.
at its lower end with the Cubitus by Ginglimus; it also touches the Radius by
Arthrodia.

To examine the parts of the Humerus, you must consider its Extremities, Parts
to be considered.
and Body.

The Body is long and round, within it contains a Marrow; Body.
its Figure is not absolutely straight, but somewhat hollow inwardly, and
bunching outwardly, to fortify it in its Actions; there is observed a Line
which descends and terminates in two Processes, which serve to fasten the
Muscles inserted here.

The superior Extremity of the Humerus is bigger and more spongy than the
Inferior; Superior Extremity.
and contains a Medullar Juice; it is called the Head, covered with a Cartilage:
It Is encompassed on all sides with Ligaments and Membranes, which proceed from
the Glenoid Cavity of the Scapula; a little below this Head, Processes.
there is a round part a little smaller, called the Neck; there is at the hinder
part of this end two rough unequal Processes, into which several Tendons and
Ligaments are inserted; so that great Care ought to be had in Wounds, or Ulcers
of this part, lest you mistake the Roughness for a Cariosity; N. B.
between these inequalities there is a long Slit, or Scissure, in which the
Tendon of the Musculus Biceps passes.

The Inferior Extremity of the Humerus is less, flatter, and harder than the
other; it has three Processes, two whereof are called Condyli, Condyli*
the Exterior and Interior: The Bone seems here to be divided in two parts. The
third, or middle Process, is large, and called Trochlea, Trochlea.
the Pully; it has two large Sinusses, which receive the Processes of the Vlna,
to which it is Articulated by Ginglimus; the back Sinus is large and deep, which
receives the Olecranon, but that on its fore part smaller.

The fourth part, Brachium, two Bones.
or that which is strictly called the Arm, is composed of two Bones, the
biggest and longest called Vlna, the lesser Radius; for had this part been made
up only of one Bone joined by Ginglimus, we could do nothing else but extend
and draw up the Arm, and not turn it upwards and downwards, which is performed
by means of the Radius, for which end it is Articulated by Arthrodia.

The two Bones are not both of a bigness, for which some distinguish them by
the Names of Major and Minor Focile; in their middle they are somewhat distant
the one from the other, for the more Commodious Situation of the Muscles,
Passage of the Vessels, and principally for the Ease of Motion.

1. The Vlna, or Cubitus, Ulna.
so called, by reason it is this Bone which makes the Elbow; it is biggest at the
superior part, and had two large Processes, that in the back-part is called
Olecranon* Olecranon.
vel Ancon, which when the Arm is extended, is received into the large
Posterior Sinus of the Trochlea, so stops the Arm from going further backwards,
it is otherwise called the Elbow; the other is less, and received into the fore
Sinus of the Trochlea, it stops the Arm from being bent too close forward;
below this is another very small Process, into which the Tendon of the Musculus
Biceps is inserted.

It has two small Sinusses, Sinusses.
the Latteral one receiving the Head of the Radius, the other is between the
two large Processes, and receives the Trochlea of the Humerus; it may be called
Sigmatoides, because it resembles the Greek Letter Sigma.

At the body, Three Angles in its Body.
of middle of this Bone, there is observed three Angles, whereof the Inferior is
called the Spine, and is very straight; the other two are oblique, the one of
which is the Anterior Angle, the other Posterior; one side is very smooth and
equal, the other pretty rough, some Tendons being inserted there.

The Inferior part of this Bone has two Eminencies, and one Cavity; the first
of the Eminencies is seated at the lateral part, and is received by the Glenoid
Cavity of the Radius: The second is at the very Extremity, and may be called
Styloides, Stylodes.
it serves to strengthen the Articulation; the Cavity or Sinuosity is at the
end of the Bone, and helps to make the Arthrodia with the Carpus: This Bone at
its superior end receives the Radius, but is received by the Radius at its
lower end.

The Radius Radius.
is the second Bone of the Arm, (or as some call it, the Fore-Arm) so called,
because it resembles the Spoke of a Wheel; Articulation.
it is Articulated in its superior part, two manner of ways: First, with the
External Condyl of the Humerus. Secondly, with the Ulna, and both by Arlhrodia:
It Is likewise Articulated two manner of ways in its Inferior part, either with
the Bones of the Carpus at its Extremity, or with the Vlna, on its latter part:
The Radius is smallest in its Superior, but largest in its Inferior part.

The Things to be observed in its Superior part are these; Superior part.
First, its Head, which is round and polished, at the end of which is a Glenoid
Cavity, which as I have already remarked, receives the External Condyl of the
Humerus; the Neck is somewhat long. Now this is very observable,
that the Ligament which comes from the other Bone to join it, is not inserted
in it as in other Bones, but only encompasses this Neck as a Ring, so that it
may turn, Ligamentum Admirabile.
for its Prone, and Supine Motions, which had the Ligament been inserted into
it, it could not have done, yet at the same time it is strong enough to keep it
firm; the whole motion of the Wrist is performed by the Radius; the Tuberosity
or Eminence is seated just below the Neck, and is received into the lateral
Superior Sinus of the Ulna.

In its middle it has an obtuse Angle, which some call the Spine, which
gradually grows bigger as it inclines toward the Carpus, different from the
Cubitus, Body.
which diminishes: It Is in this that we may admire Nature, which not being able
to avoid making these two Bones unequal in their Extremities, has found means
to make the Arm equally strong in all parts, by placing the weakest part of one
Bone against the strongest of the other.

At its Inferior part many Sinuosities appear, Inferior part.
which are as small Gutters, that so the Tendons be not incommoded; it has also
a Cavity at its Extremity, which receives one of the Bones of the Carpus; at
its lower end it has a blunt Process, Mastoides.
called Mastoides: from the Internal Angle of this Bone, there is a long broad
Ligamentous Membrane, which unites it to the Internal Angle of the Ulna,
according to its length.

The Ulna serves only for Flexion and Extension, Use of the Radius and Ulna.
and the Radius for Pronation and Supination.

The fifth and last part of the Arm, 5. Hand.
generally so called, is the Hand, which is subdivided into the Carpus,
Metacarpus. and Fingers.

The Carpus, Carpus, eight Bones.
or Wrist, is composed of eight small Bones placed in two ranks, four in a
rank, three of the first rank are united very close on their sides, the two
greatest of which are received into the Cavity of the Radius by Arthrodia, for
the motion of the Hand in their Inferior part, they touch the three Bones of
the second rank of the Carpus; the third of the first rank which is next in
bigness, and received in the Cavity at the lower Extremity of the Ulna; the
fourth of the first rank which lies on the outside, a little out of its rank,
is the least of the four: The four Bones of the second rank are joined together
on their sides by Harmonia, as the Bones of the first rank are, also one to
another so; but at their ends, to the Bones of the Metacarpus by Enarthrosis,
having an obscure motion: The first Bone of this rank is seated more within the
Hand, that the Thumb be better sustained; the second and third sustain the
first and second Bone of the Metacarpus; the fourth Bone of this second rank
sustains the third and fourth Bones of the Metacarp, by its two Glenoid
Cavities: All these Bones are Unequal on the back-part, but hollowish within,
for the more safe passage of the Vessels, and Tendons of the Musculi Flexores,
being likewise guarded by the Ligamentum Anulare which covers them, Ligamentum
Anulare.
and joins together all these Bones.

The Metacarpus is composed of four long hollowish Bones, Metacarpus, four
Bones.
containing Marrow in their Internal Sinusses; there are some who make five
Bones of the Metacarp, and for that end add thereto the first Bone of the
Thumb, but it ought not to be numerated among those of the Metacarp, it having
a manifest, but the others a very obscure Motion.

These four Bones are united by their Superior Extremities with the Carpus,
Articulation.
as I have already mentioned, by means of strong Cartilaginous Ligaments, and
with the first Bones of the Fingers by Arthrodia; they also touch one another
in their lateral Parts, especially toward the Carpus; about the middle they
are a little separated to give way to the Musculi Interossei: They are Unequal,
and smooth outwardly, but Concave inwardly; all their Extremities are tipped with
Cartilages.

These four Bones are not of an equal bigness, for that which sustains the
Index is the largest, that which sustains the middle Finger less, and so on to
the very last, which is least of all.

The Fingers, Fingers.
counting the Thumb, are five, having three Bones each; these Orders may be
well called Phalangi Digitorum, Phalangi Digitorum.
the first largest, the second less, the third least of all; their outward Face
round, but plain, and even within, Articulated to each other by Ginglimus,
except the first rank, which are joined by Arthrodia to the Metacarp, and so
have all sorts of Motion, but the other Joints have only Flexion and Extension:
The least Bones are not hollow as the rest, but spongy.

The Greeks call the Hand in general Cheir, but the Thumb Antichier, as much as
to say, an opposite Hand: The second Finger, counting the Thumb as one, is
called Indicator, because we are apt to point it, when we intend to show
something: The third is called the Middle-Finger, because of its situation, and
is the longest of all: The fourth is called the Annular, by reason Rings are
used the most upon this Finger: The fifth and least is called the Auricular,
being most fit to pick the Ear with.

I will not speak here of the Ossa Sesamoidea, which are sometimes found in the
Joints of the Fingers, till we explain the Bones of the Toes.

Demonstration. V.
Of the Bones of the Inferior Extremities.
WE come now to Demonstrate the Bones of the Inferior Limbs, which is the last
part of the Osteology.

The Leg, Division.
generally so taken, may be divided into the Bones of the Thigh, Leg, and Foot.

We shall begin with the Thighbone, Os Femoris.
which is but one in each Leg: It Is the longest largest, and strongest Bone of
the Body, being formed to sustain the weight of the whole Body; some saying
that the word Femur is derived from the Verb Fero, to carry or bear; it is
imbow'd a little on the forepart, but hollow in its back.

We must examine in this Bone several Things. Things to be examined in it.


First, At its upper end it has a great round head, covered with a smooth
Cartilage, Articulation.
and received into the Acetabulum by Enarthrosis, and tied therein by a short,
but strong round Ligament, which is fastened in the very middle of the Head;
Caput.
under this Head lies the Neck, Cervix.
which is long, and lies obliquely, otherwise the Head coud never have entered
conveniently into the Acetabulum, considering its posture in the Skeleton; and
also the Neck carrying it self outwardly, puts these Bones the one from the
other, and so causes that the Body be carried more conveniently and surely.

At this Extremity or End lies two Apophyses, Trochanters.
behind the Neck, called Trochanters, which are derived from the Greek work
(...), which signifies to turn, because many of the Muscles of the Thigh,
especially the Rotatores, are fastened to these Protuberances, the Anterior and
Upper one is the biggest, the Posterior and Lower the less: the outward part of
this Bone is smooth, but rough within, many Muscles arising from thence: This
Bone has a large long Cavity all its length, full of Marrow; it is of a crooked
Figure,
so that Surgeons in Fractures of this Bone, ought well to consider its sound
Figure: Toward its lower end it grows thicker and larger, ending in two large
heads, which are received into the two shallow Sinus's of the Tibia; between
these two Processes is a Sinus which receives a rising Process of the Tibia, so
that here the Thigh Bone is Articulated by a loose Ginglimus; the forepart of
this Articulation is called the Knee, the Posterior the Ham.

The Leg, Leg.
strictly so called, is composed of two Bones, the greater and internal called
Tibia, the lesser and external Fibula, by many also Focile majus and minus.

The Tibia is the biggest, Tibia.
hollow within, and full of Marrow, it is partly Triangular; its sharp Angle of
Spine makes that we call the Shin; it has a ridge like a Process at its upper
end, which is received by the Sinus at the extremity of the Femur; on each side
of this Process, there is two longish, shallow Cavities, to receive the two
lower Eminences of the Femur: These shallow Cavities are deepned by a lunated
Cartilage, which is thick about the edges, but grows thin toward the Center;
as this Bone approaches toward the Tarsus it lessens, but grows more solid; at
the lower part of the Tibia there is notable Process which makes the Internal
Ancle, Malleolus Internus.
which hinders the luxation of the Foot, in keeping in firm: At the bottom of
the Tibia there is a Sinus, which receives the Unequal head of the Astragalus;
this Bone supports the whole Body.

The Fibula, Fibula.
or Perone, is as long as the other, but much slenderer, placed on the outside
of the Leg; its superior head reaches not quite to the Os Femoris, but has a
shallow Sinus on its side, which receives a small lateral Process of the Tibia;
this Articulation is fortified with a Ligament; its Body is of a Triangular
Figure as well as the Tibia, but a little more irregular; the lower end is
received by the Tibia, and extending it self to the side of the Astragalus,
Malleolus Externus.
makes the external Ankle; both these Ankles, or rather Processes, hinder the
Talus from being too easily dislocated.

These two Bones separate a little one from another in their middle, to make
room for the Muscles and Vessels.

Upon the Knee lies a small round Bone, Rotula.
gibbous, and plain without, but hollowish within, about two Inches broad,
somewhat like the Boss of a Buckler, the middle being thick, and thinning
toward its edges, called Rotula, Patella, the Knee-pan; it is movable, and
Articulated by a sort of Ginglimus, covered with the Aponeurosis of four
Muscles, being the Extenders of the Leg; internally it has a very smooth
Cartilage, to facilitate its motions.

Some believe it is to strengthen the Articulation of the Joint, Use.
but it is no such thing, it being rather placed to cause greater force in
extending the Leg, by reason the Tendons of the Musculi Extensores pass over
it;
for if the Tendons had not this hillock, as it were, to pass over, but lain
flat on the Bones, they could not have had so much force, as by this means to
extend the Leg.

It Is of a hard Substance, Substance.
but somewhat spongy within, and tied loosly by Ligaments.

The Foot is subdivided into the Tarsus, Metatarsus, Ossa Pedis.
and Toes.

The Tarsus is made up of seven Bones, Tarsus.
differing much in shape and bigness; four of which have particular Names, the
other three no other but Ossa Cuneiformia in general.

First, The Talus, vel Astragalus, Talus.
is of a very strange figure, in which is to be considered its six Faces:
First, the Superior, which is very smooth and unequal, Articulated with the
Tibia, hedged in by both Malleoli: Secondly, its Anterior, which is a great
head which enters the Cavity of the Os Naviculare, with which it is strongly
Articulated: Thirdly, the Posterior, which has a Protuberance received by the
Os Calcis: Fourthly, the Inferior, which is rough and unequal, rising in some
places, and sinking in others: The fifth and sixth are the two Lateral Faces,
hedged in, as I said, by the Malleoli; it serves as a Basis to sustain the
Tibia, which supports the whole Body.

The second Bone is the Os Calcis, Os Calcis.
or Heel bone, the biggest and largest of the seven, but most porous of all;
it is this Bone which hinders the Body from falling backwards, being seated at
the Posterior part of the Foot; it lies uner the Talus, to which it is
Articulated; it is also joined with a flat head to the Os Cuboides; behind it
has a long Process, to which is tied the great Tendon, called Nervus
Hectoricus, vel Achillis; it has a large Sinus on its inside, by which the
Tendons pass under the Foot, it is very unequal on its outside, for the
insertion of Ligaments and Tendons.

The third is called Os Scaphoides, Cymbiforme, vel Naviculare, Os Naviculare.
the Boat-like Bone, behind it has a large Cavity, wherein the head of the
Astrgalus is received: but before it has three Eminences, which unites it to
the Ossa Cuneiformia.

The fourth has a somewhat unequal Figure of six irregular sides, Os Cuboides.
therefore called Cuboides, the Die-like Bone, by some Multiforme; in its
forepart it is joined to the fourth and fifth Bone of the Metatarse, behind to
the Os Calcis, its inside to the Ossa Cuneiformia; it lies on the outside of
the Foot, and sustains the little Toes.

The other three are called Ossa Cuneiformia, Ossa Cuneiformia.
or Wedge-like Bones, and lie all in a rank, but differ in bigness one from
another, joined behind to the Os Naviculare, and before to the three first
Bones of the Metatarsus: These Bones are Unequal outwardly, but hollowish
within, for the more safe passage of the Vessels; there is a broad Ligament
which passes from the Os Calcis to the Bones of the Metatarsus, Ligamentum
Latum.
under which the Vessels and Muscles lie; for if there were no such, in long
standing on the Foot, the action of the Muscles, and circulation of the Juices
would have been hindered: It Is a sort of Ligamentum Annulare.

The Metatarsus, Metatarsus.
or Instep, is composed of five long Bones, placed at the side of each other,
to sustain each a Toe, very close where they are united to the Tarsus, but part
a little in their middle, to give place to the Musculi Interossei; unequal
outwardly, but hollow within, for the better lying of the Muscles, and passage
of the Vessels; their lower ends are round, and received into the Cavities of
the first Phalanx of the Bones of the Toes by Arthrodia; that which sustains
the great Toe the biggest, the next less, and so on to the least of all.

The Bones of the Toes are in number 14, Digiti Pedis.
for all have three Bones each, except the great Toe, which has only two; their
Articulation the same as in the Fingers and the same Observations.

There are sometimes, found in the Articulations of the Fingers, Ossa
Sesamoidea.
but especially in the Toes, some very small Bones, called Ossa Sesamoidea,
Seed-like Bones, because they resemble much the Semina Sesami; they are fastened
only by Ligaments in number uncertain, sometimes more, sometimes less, in some
none at all.

They have the same Use as the Patella. Use.


The Bones of the Foot being all united together,
may well be compared to a Lever placed under any great weight, which we intend
to raise; for the unequal part of the Talus being placed just under the Tibia,
which, as I have showed, sustains the whole Body; the long hinder Process of
the Os Calcis, being, as it were, the handle of this Lever, and so raised, (as
by the Hands) by the Nervus Hectoricus, which is strongly inserted there: This
Nerve, or rather Tendon, is composed of three or four Tendons of several
Muscles of the Leg, as Solaris, Gastrochnemii, etc. and with it the whole Body
is raised, as may be seen when we rear our selves on our Toes.

There Is one thing very Curious to observe, N. B.
in the bending of the Joints of the Skeleton; for all the Junctures of the
Arms, as Elbow, Wrist, and Fingers, bend upwards, but otherwise in the Legs;
for at the Thigh it bends forwards, that we may sit when weary; at the Ham
backwards, at the Ankle forwards again, and the Toes backwards: All these
several bendings give us a greater strength, both to walk, and rise when down,
which we could not do, if the bendings were otherwise disposed.

AN APPENDIX TO THE Doctrine of the Bones; SHOWING,
The Best Method of Whitening, Cleansing, and Preparing the Bones of Man's
Body, for making a Movable Skeleton, wherein the Bones may have the same
Motions, as in a Living Subject; together with the manner of Uniting them
together.
WHen you have a Body, that you intend to save the Bones, toward forming a
skeleton, proceed in this manner*

First, No Bone to be lost.
Take Care that in Decarning the Bones, you lose none, although never so small,
for by so doing you will spoil the Beauty of your Skeleton; also be Cautious
lest you cut away any of the Substance of the Bones with your knife, which if
you are not aware you may do, especially when you come toward the more Spongy,
and Cartilaginous Extremities of them; as in the Bones of the Breast,
Cartilaginous parts of the Ribs, and Cartilago Ensiformis, also the Processus
Styloides of the Basis of the Cranium, is very apt to be separated, unless you
are careful, especially in young Subjects; but if by chance you lose any of the
small Bones, get one in its place from any other Skeleton, and about the same
bigness; also if you happen to break any Bone, join it again with Lithecolla,
the same as Masons use to join their broken Stones together; or a Preparation
of Wax and Rosin.

That you be at the less trouble in preparing your Skeleton for boiling, Method
to be observed in boiling and separating the parts.
you ought to divide it in several parts, before you put it into your Chaldron
to boil, which you must perform thus; first, Artificially bare from the
Muscles, the first and second Vertebra of the Neck, on which the whole Head
turns, and separate them gently one from another, so that the first Vertebra be
still fastened to the Cranium, then Saw off the upper part of the Cranium to
take out the Brain, and with a slender piece of Wire a little hooked, strive to
extract the Ossicles of the Ears by the Foramen Auditorium, which will be more
easily extracted after a little boiling of the Cranium, so that by the use of
the aforesaid Wire they will come out; when they are extracted, keep them by
themselves till you have occasion to use them. Secondly, separate the last
Vertebra of the Back from the first of the Loins, and the Thighs from the Ossa
Innominata, and the Arms from the Scapula's, so you have all most movable Parts
separated, Thirdly, separate the Clavicle from the Scapula, and also from where
it is joined to the first Bone of the Sternon, and put them by themselves,
always taking Care by some mark to distinguish the Right side from the Left.
Fourthly, divide the Cartilages from the bony Extremities of the Ribs in their
very Coalition; then separate every Rib from the Vertebrae of the Thorax, tying
them one below another in order, in a piece of Packthread, to distinguish them
rightly, observing also always the side they belong to; take Care in separating
them, they having a double Insertion, as well with the Bodies of the Vertebrae,
as with their transverse Processes. Fifthly, separate every Vertebra of the
Neck and Back one from another, hanging them in order on a small Cord, that you
be not at a loss in uniting them again when boiled also the Vertebra of the
Loins in the same order from the Os Sacrum; and divide the Ossa Coccygis from
that, and the Ossa Innominata from the Os Sacrum, so that you may command, and
cleanse each in order more commodiously. Sixthly, come to the Limbs, beginning
first with the Arms; as for Example, separate the Os Humeri from the Cubitus,
and that from the Carpus, which when you come to, take Care in separating the
Flesh and Tendons from them, that you may keep them as much as possible in
their due places; for which end, I think it will not be amiss to drill two or
three holes quite through each rank, in which pass a Wire or two that will hold
them in their right Situation, in time of boiling, they have in been before
separated from the Bones of the Metacarpus, which four Bones you must also
separate from each Finger, making some fitting Marks with Thread, or the like,
which sustains one Finger, and which another; and as for the Fingers, put them
in the Fingers of a Glove, according to order; so there will be less danger of
Confusion; the Leg is to be separated after the same manner as the Arm, always
making some distinguishing Character, which belongs to the Right side, and
which to the Left.

Some Bones require a longer time of boiling than others, Sternon, will not
^dmit of boiling.
and some will not endure boiling at all, as the Sternon, with its annexed
Cartilages; the large Bones admit of longer boiling than the small; now suppose
it be the Skeleton of a young Subject, boil not above an Hour, or an Hour and
half at most, lest the Cartilaginous tips of the Bones come away; but in an
Adult you may boil longer, the older the Subject is, the longer time is
required in boiling; but before you put the long Bones into your boiling
Vessel, bore a hole in their Extremities, large enough, according to the
bigness of the Bones, that the Medullar Parts may have free exit in boiling; to
further which, run up the Bones so drilled, a red hot Wire to and fro, to make
a quicker dispatch of the fatty Particles, then cast them into your boiling
Water; for it is this fatty Substance only, which in many Skeletons makes them
look so muddy and dull; when you think your Bones sufficiently boiled, let them
be presently taken out and cleaned one after another, a fast as you can; it is
very good to rub the Bones with Masons Dust, which fetches off the Periostion,
and levigates them very well; or you may wash them in boiling Lie made of
Ashes, which scowers and cleanses them very well; after they are thus cleansed,
throw them in clean cold Water, in which let them lie about half a Day, then
take them out, and wipe them dry, putting them still in the same order as they
were before you boiled them, and observing to make the same marks of
distinction; when they are thus dried, place them on the Leads of he House for
some Days and Nights, especially when the Dews fall most, but keep them from
the violent heat of the Sun, that being apt to make them brittle; by this means
they will become as white as Ivory.

The Sternon, The Sternon not to be boiled.
as I have told you, is not to be boiled at all, by reason the Cartilages will
shrink, and go out of their true Figure, so that you cannot bring the
Cartilages to their true Shape, to be annexed to the ends of the Ribs from
whence they were separated, which will make your Skeleton deformed neither will
it endure too great a heat in drying, so that you must use very great Caution
in preparing it, which you may do thus, After you have Artificially and Neatly
separated it, as I have already taken notice of, cleanse it as carefully from
the Flesh as you can, then let it dry moderately in the shade, always striving
to keep the Cartilages in their true Figure, and now and then picking away what
you find of fleshy Particles; when you think you have cleansed it well, rub it
all over, especially the Cartilages, with this mixture, made of Wax, Rosin, and
Turpentine, used very warm, for so you will hinder them from drying, and
growing brittle, which they would be apt to do otherwise, and likewise defend
them from the Worm and Moth, as also from Corruption, so keep it whole by you
till you have occasion to use it, in making up your Skeleton.

When your Bones are thus cleaned and dried, Method of uniting your Skeleton.
then begin to unite your Bones toward forming your Skeleton. Since the Spine
is the prop of all, and the Os Sacrum the Basis of that, you ought to begin
with it, as your Shipwrights do in making a Ship, who always begin with the
Keel, to which they annex the other parts toward completing the Vessel; the
Spine therefore may well be called the Keel of Man's Body, to which the rest of
the Bones of the Skeleton are joined.

First, Therefore prepare a fitting Rod of Steel, so ordered that it may have
an Elastic Property, that is, when you bend it, to return to its first Figure
of streightness; let it not be too thick, yet strong enough to support all the
Vertebrae; for by this means you will have the Spine perform all its motions.
It must be a little more than three Foot long, that it may pass through all the
Vertebrae, and come out of the top of the Cranium, to hang the whole Skeleton
on; it must be smaller toward its top than bottom, by reason the Bones of the
Vertebra grow less toward the superior part of the Spine; then Drill a hole in
the very Body of the Os Sacrum, through which pass your Steel Wire, which you
must Artificially fasten at the lower end of the Os Sacrum, to sustain all the
rest, then pass on the same Wire the rest of the five Bones of the Loins,
according to their order, holes being Drilled through the very Bodies of all
the Vertebra in the very Center, that they may fit exactly each other; in the
same manner pass on the twelve Vertebrae of the Thorax, one by one, to which
join the Ribs likewise in order, beginning with the lowest; this unition must
be made with Brass Wire, as well to the Bodies of each Vertebra as transverse
Processes, then pass on the Steel Wire to the Vertebrae of the Neck in their
order, except the last, which is called the Atlas, which must be joined to the
Condiloid Processes of the Occipital Bone, by two fitting Brass Wires, so that
the Head may have its due flexion and extention; this being done pass the Steel
Rod through the Medullar Foramen of the Atlas, into the very Capacity of the
Cranium, to pass through a hole Drilled on the top, that the Head and Spine may
hang regular, so the Head will have its Circular motion, as well as flexion and
extention, that being performed by the first and second Vertebra of the Neck,
as this by the first only, being joined by a double Arthrodia to the Os
Occipitis; when you have so done, unite the lower Jaw by its Condiloid
Processes into the Glenoid Sinusses of the Ossa Petrosa; then fasten the Teeth
in their proper Alveoli, with a preparation of Rosin and Wax; then in its place
hang the Os Hyoides, also at the outward part of the Foramina Auditoria hang
the Officles of the Ear in order; when you have done this, fasten the Sternon
and its Cartilages to the Ribs, holes being Artificially Drilled through their
Extremities, to fasten them with Brass Wire; then fasten the Clavicula to the
Sternon, to which unite the Scapula, which is not only to be fastened with its
Acromium to the Clavicula, but also to the Body of the Ribs, to which its flat
side lies on, then pass to the inferior part of the Spine, and fasten strongly
the Ossa Innominata to the sides of the Os Sacrum, so as to be joined even
before at the Ossa Pubis, which must be joined together with Wires, so the
Pelvis, will be formed, and to the Extremity of the Os Sacrum, fasten the Ossa
Coccygis, and so you will have the Trunk with the Head extraordinary well
fitted.

Then pass to the Limbs; first take the Os Humeri, to whose lower Extremity
unite the Vlna by two Hooks, one fitly adapted to receive the other, which
Hooks must be fastened one in the Extremity of each Bone, so as the Bones sit
close one to another, for which end you may hollow a little the Extremity of
the Humerus with a Graver, to make the Junctures the closer; then to the side
of the Ulna fasten the Radius, so that it may have its Prone and Supine motion,
which may be done thus, Encompass its Neck pretty close with a Ring of Brass
Wire, (after the same manner as the Ligamentum Admirabile does, which comes
from the Ulna) which you must fasten in the lateral Sinus of the Head of the
Ulnae; then adapt fitly, and in their due order, the Bones of the Carpus, and
they having but little, or very obscure motion, you may only fasten them by
their sides with Brass Wire, holes being first Drilled through their very
middle, also fasten the first rank to the other according to Art; when the
Carpus is thus formed, unite the Bones of the Metacarp to them in their due
order; for which end, you must have four little Brass Hooks, fitted close in
the Bones of the Carpus, to receive in order four other little Hooks, one in
each Bone of the Metacarp, to be engaged in the four first Hooks, fasten them
so as the Bones may touch close, and yet at the same time, the Juncture to have
its proper motions; also fasten the sides of the Metacarp one to another with a
piece of Brass Wire, yet so as the proper distance be kept where it ought; then
fasten the first Phalanx of the Bones of the Fingers to the Metacarpus, then
the second, and then the third, all in their due place, which must be fastened
with fitting Hooks, as in the Bones of the Metacarp with the Carpus; lastly,
join the Carpus to the Radius and Vlna, so that it may have its proper motions:
When you have thus finished the whole Limb, then fasten it to the Trunk, but so
as you may take it off when you please, which may be done by only fastening a
Hook on the very Head of the Os Humerus, just where its Ligament is, which is
to be hung on a curved Brass Wire, which must be fastened in the Cavity of the
Scapula; the lower Extremity must be managed after the same manner, observing
fitting Circumstances, which must be also made to take off and on, as occasion
requires.

I only designed this Appendix as a hint toward the forming of a Skeleton,
which cannot be so well expressed by Writing, as by often Working, and seeing it
done.

FINIS.
Books Printed for, and Sold by Daniel Brown, at the Black Swan and Bible
without Temple Bar.
A Treatise of the Gout, wherein both its Cause and Cure are demonstrably made
appear. To which are added some Medicinal Observations concerning the Cure of
Fevers, etc. by the Means of Acids. By John Colbatch, Physician, a Member of
the Royal College of Physicians, London.

Officina Chymica Londinensis. Sive exacta notitia Medicamentorum Spagyricorum,
quae apud Aulum Societatis Pharmaceutiae Londin. Praeparantur, and Venalia
prostant. Consilio Pharmacopoeorum, and Approbatione Collegii Medicorum
Londinensium exhibitum. Opera and Studio Nicolai Staphorst, Oper* chym dict.
(...).

Catalogus Plantarum que in In^^^a Jamaica sponte proveniu^t, vel vulgo
coluntur^ cum earundem Synonymis and locis natalibus; adiectis aliis quibusdam
quae in Insulls Madera, Barbados, Nieves, and Sancti Christophori nascutur
(...) Prodomi Historiae Naturalis Jamaicae Pars prima. Autore Hans Sloane, M.
D. Coll. Reg. Med. Land. neo non Soc. Reg. Land. Soc.

Curiosities in Chemistry: Being new Experiments and Observations concerning
the Principles of Natural Bodies. Written by a Person of Honor, and Published
by his Operator, H. G.

Secrets of the Famous Lazarus Reverius, Counselor and Physician to the French
King, and Professor of Physic in the University of Montpelier.


