engraved portrait of Alexander Brown by Arnold de Jode, after Jacob Huysmans
ALEXANDER BROWN


ARS PICTORIA: OR AN ACADEMY TREATING OF DRAWING, PAINTING, LIMNING, AND
ETCHING. To which are added Thirty Copper Plates expressing the choicest,
nearest and most exact Grounds and Rules of Symetry; Collected out of the most
Eminent Italian, German, and Netherland Authors. By ALEXANDER BROWN
Practitioner of the Art of Limning, and Published for all Ingenious Gentlemen
and Artists.

LONDON, Printed by J. Redmayne, for the Author, and are to be sold by him at
his Lodging, at the Sign of the Angel, the Corner of James street and Long
Acre, and Richard Tompson at the Sun in Bedford street, and Arthur Tooker at
the Globe in the Strand near the New Exchange, 1669.

TO THE Most Excellent and Illustrious Princess ANNE Duchess of MONMOUTH and
BUCCLUGH, etc. WIFE To the Most Illustrious and Highborn Prince JAMES Duke of
Monmouth, etc.
Madam,
ALl the World knovvs that Nature in its perfection needs nothing of Art, and
that great Beings regard no more the use of it, then sound Men do that of
Medicine. Your Graces therefore goodness in ovvning Peinture, which you once
honored to learn, with as much charity as dying Saints build Colleges, is so
signal, that it oblieges in duty this imperfect Treatise to beg your pity: and
then I am sure 'tvvill deserve other persons esteem. Your Grace was pleased
from my poor instructions to dravv a nobler honor to this Art, then Artists
themselves e're could do. Not that I presume to claim any share of this,
which is solely due to the Grandeur of your Quality and svveetness of Humor.

The Gods themselves here prayers, and smell Sacrifices, and declare they love
these practices for no other end, but to bless and encourage us Men in our
Obedience, and Industry, As much as can, or may be attributed of Divinity to
mortals, is certainly due to your Grace, who are so much higher advanced in
glory, by how much the meaner and undeserved a Title I can make to my self of
your indulgence, to this honest, though not grand essay, unless only in this,
that it entreats the favorable Eye of so Eminent a Personage.

However Madam, since my own Fortune is low and narrovv, I have endeavored to
get so much credit in the World, as to make a considerable collection both from
the living and the dead, and that of the best Painters and Sculptors of their
times.

These Madam will be more beholding to you for their memory, then to their
own monuments: For paint and marble must needs dye sooner then your great Name.

For their sakes unparalled Princess own, and conserve this small Record of
their vvorth: and after that, (because your bounty is unlimited) pray pardon
the rude hand, and bold address of

Your Graces most devoted, and humblest Servant Alexander Brown.

To the Reader.
YOu have the Contents of this Treatise so particularly in the Title Page, that
I meant it no other Preface: But upon second thoughts, I shall say somewhat to
the Conception of Paulus Lomatius, Page the 11th. touching the Affinity betwixt
Symetry and Music. It has been urged, that in regard of the Obscurity of the
Musical terms there made use of; as Diapente, Diapason, Sesquialter, etc. It
were requisite to give some explanation of them; but I shall rather referr the
Reader for his satisfaction to Mersennus, Morley, or any other writer upon that
Subject; then enlarge this Discourse; which I have contracted, both for his
ease and my own, as much as I could conveniently. But if any ill tempered
person should be angry at the hard words and Terms of Art here, because they do
not well understand them: They may know this was not intended for a Dictionary,
but a Treatise only for the ingenious, who need no Key to lock or unlock this
Cabinet, in which these Mysterious terms are couched. Neither have I been
ambitious in the least of popular applause in the publication of this Piece,
but merely have aimed at the public benefit, being ashamed it should be
objected 'that I who have in the course of my Life and Study been so much
beholding to others, should prove ungrateful, or niggar, to conceal any thing
from the view of the world, since we are as Men and Christians, all designed by
industry and experience to improve each other; more particularly what I have
here wrote, is directed to the lovers and favorers of all noble Sciences, to
whom I stand oblieg'd, and whose pardon I only beg, wherein I may be found
unhappily or ignorantly offensive. And indeed I am extremely unwilling any
person should lose time, or take the trouble of casting his eye here, were not
I modestly of the opinion, something may not be impertinent, or unworthy
curious men's Lection.

Farewell I am your humble Servant A. B:

ALEXANDRI BROWN Generosi etc.
TAndem Brown venis, expectatissimus hospes
Florilegas imitatus Apes; qui Sculptilis Artis,
Quicquid ab externis populis exsuxeris, annis
Pluribus, in proprium prudens disponis Hymitton,
Et nunc in Patrii partiris commoda Mundi.
Quanta Poetarum praeconia dona morantur,
Quanta Patronorum Te! Qui velamine dempto
Artibus, antiquum reparata luce Timantem
Afflasti, and Britonum radiis melioribus orbem.
Quod si Roma dabat pro digno munere serta,
Civica, cui civem Bello servaverat unum;
Debentur tum Brown tuis quot serta capillis!
Qui tot semineces arts in luminis auras
Dux isti, propriaque manu caelata novasti
Artificum simulachra Senum. Jam Cous Apelles,
Praxitilesque cluens, and magni nominis Urbin,
Angelo and insignis, visi rupisse sepulchris,
Et rediviva sibi sumpsisse cadavera rursus,
Auspiciis mi Brown tuis. Correggio jamjam
Et Delvincentus, nec non Holbenus, and audax
Titian, et nostri Vandikus gloria secli,
Dogma Pythagoricum, de sponte fatentur, and arts
Sculpendi pariter veterum, pariterque modernae,
In chartas migrasse tuas: ubi machina Mundi
Et nitido natura Globo spirare videtur
Principiis animata novis. I fortibus ausis
Dexter Alexander, multo et faelicior illo
Qui face lanquentem ferroque subegerat Orbem;
Alitibus proceed bonis! nomenque per arts
Sic extend tuas, ut te primaeva salutent
Teque hodierna suum, venturaque secla Magistrum.
P. Fisher dudum Militum Serviens Major.

On my INGENIOUS FRIENDS Most EXCELLENT PIECE.
HEre you may find objected to your Eye,
Paint, the creations, Man Gods Ima'gry.
What scattered ray's of Heaven in us remain,
Are here preserved, if not renewed again.
For who can draw to life the humane face
Does therein show the intellectual grace.
Whose fair Idea though it is not oppressed
With natures body, or Arts color dressed;
From thence yet all those numerous shadow's flow,
Which men so worship and admire below.
Fancy the original, and parent, gives
This Art a birth, which beyond nature lives,
And keeps the Father youthful as the son,
With the same colors, when complexions gone.
Death cannot part them; for when ugly age
That Grand destroyers, last and fatal page
Is all deciphered, He a column stands
Coaeval to his heirs, and all his lands.
And when his body to the grave is sent
He serves for furniture and monument.
Nature is troublesome in its decays,
No Poet cares to wear the withered bays.
It Is kindness, and it is manners to remove,
When we can neither be beloved nor love.
Must then all die? no, that the painters skill
Forbid's, assisted with the Writers quil.
This immortality dear Friend you cause,
Without ordaining, or repealing Laws.
Your Book advances further, and displayes
What Plutarqu's Morals, or his lives have said.
Weary Philosophy expires in strife
Whilst you expose plain truth unto the Life.
Natures excess, or narrowness by you
Is civily reproved, and all that is due,
Of beauteous art, and Symetry to man;
Must own its payment to your mind and hand.
We know no form of Angels but from paint,
Nor difference make of devil, or of Saint.
The famous Michael Angelo so drew
Hell and the damned, and in such a hue;
'Twas thought the Archangel some old grudge might bear,
And bid his namesake to renew the war.
It Is then hoped by the painter at the least,
He may assistant be unto the Priest.
Since Virtu's lovely drawn, and vice so ill
Sinners by him converted are against will.
Emblems of honor, piety, and love,
Arts greatest teachers, by him only move.
J. H.

ERRATA,
In Page the 4 Line. 25. for it, Read us; for whosoevever Read whatsoever. In
Page 17. line 15. for in, read and. In page 73. line 24. for Son, read sum. In
page 74. line 4. for near, read were. In page 87. line 10. for keeping color,
read keeping the color. In page 88. line 21. for silvea, read silver. In page
90. line 3. for use with, read use it with. In page 92. line 7. for white
Serus, read white or Serus.

OF THE Virtue and Praise OF PROPORTION, or, SYMETRY.
SUCH is the Importance and Virtue of Proportion, that nothing can any way
satisfy the Eye without the help thereof: So that whatsoever works any
Pleasure or Delight in us, does therefore content us; because the Grace of
Proportion consisting in the measure of the Parts, appears therein; Wherefore
all the Inventions of Men carry with them so much the more Grace and Beauty,
by how much the more Ingeniously they are proportioned, whence Vitruvius says,
That whosoever will proceed in his Works with Judgment, must needs be
acquainted with the Nature and Force of Proportion; which being well and kindly
understood, will make him not only an excellent Judge of ancient and late
Workmen, but also an Inventor and Performer of Rare and Excellent Matters
himself.

Now the Effects proceeding from Proportion are unspeakable, the Principal
whereof, is that Majesty and Beauty which is found in Bodies, called by
Vitruvius, EURITHMIA. And hence it is, that when we behold a well-proportioned
thing, we call it Beautiful, as if we should say, Endued with that exact and
comely Grace, whereby all the Perfection of sweet Delights belonging to the
Sight, are communicated to the Eye, and so conveyed to the Understanding.

But if we shall enter into a farther Consideration of this Beauty, it will
appear most evidently in things appertaining to Civil Discipline; for it is
strange to consider what effects of Piety, Reverence and Religion, are stirred
up in men's Minds, by means of this suitable comeliness of apt proportion. A
pregnant example whereof we have in the Jupiter carved by Phidias at Elis,
which wrought an extraordinary sense of Religion in the People, whereupon the
ancient and renowned Zeuxis well knowing the excellency and dignity thereof,
persuaded Greece in her most flourishing Estate, that the Pictures wherein this
Majesty appeared were dedicated to great Princes, and consecrated to the
Temples of the Immortal gods, so that they held them in exceeding great
estimation; partly because they were the Works of those famous Masters, who
were reputed as gods amongst men; and partly because they not only represented
the Works of God, but also supplied the defects of Nature: ever making choice
of the Flower and Quintessence of Eye-pleasing delights.

Neither yet is this Proportion proper unto painting alone, but extends
itself even unto all other Arts; insomuch as is drawn from man's Body, which as
the Painter chiefly proposes to himself, (as Vitruvius notes) so does the
Architect much imitate it, in the convenience of his buildings, and without
which, neither the Carver, nor any Handicrafts man can perform any laudable
Work; because it was the first pattern of all Artificial things: So that there
is no Art, but is someway beholding to Proportion: yet notwithstanding the
Painter as ( Loo Baptista Albertus affirms) insomuch as he considers man's
Body more especially, is justly preferred before all other Artizans, which
imitate the same, because antiquity meaning to grace Painting above all the
rest, Handicrafts men exempting only Painters out of that number.

Of the Necessity and Definition of Proportion.
IT was not without just Cause, that the ancient Graecians (at which time the
Art of Painting had fully attained to his Perfection, by the Industry of
Timantes, Eusenidas, Aristides, Eupompus, Sicyonias and Pamphilus, the Famous
Macedonian Painter, and Master of Apelles, who also was the first learned
Painter directing his Works by the Rules of Art, above any of his
Predecessors, and well considering that whatsoever was made without measure and
proportion, could never carry with it any such congruity as might represent
either Beauty or Grace to the judicious beholder) were wont to say, that it was
impossible to make any tolerable, much less any Commendable Picture, without
the help of Geometry and Arithmetic, wherefore they required the Knowledge
thereof, as a thing most necessary, which saying was also approved by Philip
Macedo. And surely it is impossible (to omit the mere Artizans) that he who
is ignorant of these two Sciences, should understand the exact measure and
proprotion of any probable or true Body, the necessity of which proportions
shall be showed hereafter.

It is apparent then that a Picture lacking this, is like a piece of Marble
grossly wrought, without Rule or Measure, or two Columns: which although they be
to slender, or to gross, to short or to long, yet are called Columns; as
Dwarfes and deformed Creatures are named Men. Now this Book shall contain the
general proportions of the principal things alone, from whence the rest are
derived, of which before I begin to speak. I hold it convenient to consider the
definition of proportion, and the parts thereof;

Proportion is a correspondency and agreement of the Measure of the parts
between themselves and with the whole, in every Work, this correspondency is by
Vitruvius called Commodulation, because a Model is a Measure which being taken
at the first measures both the parts and the whole. And this is that (to omit
the several kinds thereof, which shall be distinguished in their due place,)
which for so long space having been lost, was the cause why the exact and true
proportion of Man's Body was not understood, by Occasion whereof there never
came any Excellent Pieces abroad, although the matter were never so costly: And
consequently that the Painters being ignorant of that they had in hand, instead
of proportionable men made lame Pictures as the Architecture, Temples, Images,
and Pictures made throughout the whole World (but especially in Italy) about
the time of Constantine the Great, until Giotto in Tuscany, as Andrino di
Edesia Pauese in Lombardy can sufficiently witness, and this (in a word) is
that, the knowledge whereof so satisfies the judgment, that it makes it not
only able to make whosoever we list, but also teaches us to judge of Images,
and Pictures, as well ancient as new, and without this a Painter (besides that
he is not worthy the name of a Painter) is like one which persuades himself he
swimmeth above Water, when indeed he sinketh, to conclude then it is impossible
to make any decent or well proportioned thing, without this Symetrical measure
of the parts orderly united.

Wherefore my greatest endeavor shall be, to lay open the worthiness of this
part of painting unto all such as are naturally inclined thereunto, by reason
of a good temperature joined with an apt Disposition of the parts thereof, for
such men will be much affected therewith, to the end they may the better
perceive the force of Nature: who by industry and help of a good conceit,
will easily attain to so deep a reach, that they will be able upon the sudden
to discern any Disproportion, as a thing repugnant to their Nature: unto which
perfection on the contrary Side they can never attain, whose Judgments are
corrupted through the Distemperature of their Organical parts, I speak of such
who not knowing the virtue of proportion, affect nothing else, but the vain
surface of garish colors, wrought after their own humor, who prove only
Dawbers of Images and Walls throughout the whole World; moving the beholders
partly to smile at their Follies, and partly to greive that the Art should be
thus disgraced by such absurd Idiot's: who as they have no judgment herein;
so do they run into diverse other most shameful errors, into which I never
heard that any ever fell, who were acquainted with the Beauty of proportion,
but have rather prooved men of rare Spirits and sound Judgments, as may be
gathered by the great request it was in, until the times of those Princes, as
well ancient as late: But before I proceed any farther, I think it necessary to
treat something of a Head in particular, First,

Of the Head in Prophile or side-wayes.
THe manner to make this Head by just and safe rules is thus, First form a
perfect equal Triangle in what position you will, turning the Triangle to make
the Face upon one of the three sides, be it which it will, either upwards or
downwards, According to Odnardo Fialetti.
higer or lower; dividing that side into three equal parts, the one to serve
from the lower part of the Hair, to the lower part of the Forehead; the Second
thence to the under part of the Nostrils; the Third to the lower part of the
Chinn: now having framed these three lines, draw a little crooked stroke with
a Cole or Chalk, out of the right Line, that may reach from the top of the
Forehead unto the Eyebrow, from whence draw away the slope Line, bending at
the end. To perform the Nose, either long, short, gross or thin, as you would
have it, ending that at the second distance, where the Nostrils end, then
subdivide the remaining third part in the midst, where the Mouth shall be
placed for the parting of the upper and under Lips, then frame the Chinn,
having a respect to the perpendicular Line, that it fall not out of the middle
of the Chinn; adjoining thereto the under Chinn down to the Throat-pit. So with
the other two dividing lines, the one from the Top of the Forehead downwards
(and ends in the midst of the back part of the Ear;) the other proceeds
upwards from the Chinn, ascening till that meet with the Superior descending
Line, whose Intersection directs the Ear, that the circumference thereof
stretch not too far: Thus with your judgment take the upper part of the
Forehead, and come to describe a great circular Line about, to Form with that
the roundness of the Head, unto the Nape of the Neck, keeping the proportion
that Nature teaches; and from thence downwards frame the rest of the Neck,
remembering that the Tip of the Ear does not exceed the lower part of the
Nostril. So you may have the Head in what Position you will, so this abandon
not the two other Lines, each concurring in their due points.

Of the Foreright Face.
BEing then desireous to draw the Foreright Face, it will be necessary to Form
a perfect Ovall, which being made, divide it in the midst, with a line the
longest way (that is to say) a perpendicular line, divide this line into three
equal parts, allowing a fourth of one of the three parts for the Hair in the
Forehead, the First for the Forehead, the Second for the Nose, the Third for
the Chin. In the midst thereof must the Mouth be formed, always remembering
that the Eyes must be in one line, the cross line of the Nose and Mouth must
always be correspondent to the cross line where the Eyes are placed; and the
Eyes must be the length of one Eye distant from the other; and that their
inward Corners be perpendicularly over the outside of the Nostrils punctually,
but to make the Ears in a Foreright Face proportionable, they must be much
Foreshortned by Foreshortning, I mean when the Eye does not see the full
Latitude of it, the proportion of the length of the Ear, to be from the
Eyebrowes to the bottom of the Nostrils, and then join the Neck with the Hair
in such sort as may seem most pleasant unto the Eye.

Of the Head in Foreshortning.
HItherto I have treated of the Head, both Foreright and in other Positions,
but that you might know all that is needful for the perfect understanding of
this profession, it is necessary that I specify the manner how to draw the
Face by an easy, absolute and fair way; Treating thus I propound to you
Methodical means therein; because my intent is to Facilitate the matter in that
manner, but without writing thereupon it may be intelligible, for a draught
well made has that power, that it makes itself understood without any
discourse of the Author thereon, but I always observe both the one and the
other also; I say that the foreshortning which is made only with Fretts,
Grates, Squares, or with Geometrical Instruments, breed only a confusion of
lines, which is not the best principal of expert Ingenuity, the reason whereof
is, that it can hardly be measured by any Rule, unless the whole Body be framed
together. Therefore I will show an easy Rule, very like to that of the
foreright Face, that is, to make a Circular draught with the aspect upwards, or
downwards, as in the foreright Head, where the Traverse lines are straight, but
these go Circularly, for if the Heads fly upwards the Traced strokes and the
Divisions must be raised, with caution that the Ears and Eyes fall not out of
their due points, as is signified in the first Plate.

Of the side face without any Measure.
BEing desireous to make the side face without any Triangle or Measure, which
with a little care and practice, observing the distances and Measures which
will serve for Direction, because the Head and other parts of the Body ought to
be proportional, and made from Measures; it will easily follow, Framing or
Traceing many, you may not only Facilitate it by the Eye and Judgment, but
also accommodate the Hand, to Trace and draw, all things right, for it is true
that the Eye will have its place. I having drawn certain strokes or draughts
from the life of nature, and reduced it with the Pencil into Colors, have
found it come off punctually right, of a correspondent bigness to that, which I
have imitated, and have not found any thing disproportioned, but have always
found it fall out right as I would have it, therefore I say that this Rule, and
Measure which I have set down, in the Porphile or other opositions of the Head,
is not any hindrance to the excellency of the Art, nor will weaken your worth,
but will serve for a general Rule being once possessed therewith, and also become
prevalent when occasion shall require, to make a Head Ten times as big as the
Life; for that with this Measure, you shall readily Frame it right by any great
Head; and that because the understanding therein is equally extended, but the
more the capacity is wanting, the more my Labor will farther when need
requires. These then I give as Principal for the first strokes, as in the
next figure may be perceived, which is from the Forehead, as I have already
said, for the beginning of the Nose; that is from the lower part of the Hair,
to the hollowness of the Nose and the Nostrils, and from thence to the Chinn.

Several Observations, in drawing a Head after the Life.
ANd because the greatest difficulty, and principal parts of this Art consist
in some part in drawing the lively Resemblance of a Face, therefore I thought
it very necessary to add this as a further Direction to draw any Face after the
life. Therefore if you will draw any Face after the life, that it may resemble
the party you draw it after; take notice in the First place of the Physiognomy
or circumference of the Face, whither it be round or long, Fat or Lean, Big or
Little, so that in the First place you must be sure to take the right
Physiognomy and bigness of the Face, and in case it be a Fat Face, you will
perceive the Cheeks to make the side of the Face to swell out, and so make the
Face look as if it were square: And if it be neither too fat nor too lean, it
will be round for the most part; but if it be a lean Face the Jaw-Bones will
stick out, and the Cheeks fall in, and the Face will be long and slender,
observe when you draw the outmost circumference of a Face, to take the Head and
all with it, or otherwise you may be deceived in drawing the true bigness of a
Face, then you must diligently and judiciously observe and discern all the
Gentle Master Touches, which gives the Spirit and Life to a Face, and discovers
the Grace or Disposition of the Mind, wherein lies the whole Grace of the
Work, and the Credit of the Artist, you may easily discern a smiling
Countenance in the Corners of the Mouth, when they turn up a little; you may
best discern a stayed and sober Countenance in the Eyes, when the upper Eyelids
comes somewhat over the Balls of the Eyes, but a frowning Countenance is easily
discerned in the Forehead by the bending of the Eyebrowes, and some few
wrinkles about the top of the Nose between the two Eyebrowes, and a laughing
Countenance is easily discerned all over the Face, but an angry Countenance is
discerned by extraordinary frowning; there are also some touches about the Eyes
and Mouth which you must diligently observe, which gives the Spirit and Life to
a Face.

The Proportion of a Man of Ten faces.
IT stands with good reason, that (following the Method of the Ancient
Graecians) I should make this Body, whose proportion I intend to handle
particularly, answerable to the Symetry of all other Artificial Bodies, which
may be made far more Beautiful, then Nature affords any; wherein
notwithstanding the whole Symetry of Art may be comprehended more or less; and
this Point I mean to handle in this Chapter and the next, wherefore I have
prefixed this before the rest, because it is, as it were the Foundation of them
all. This Figure then is First divided into Ten parts or faces: the First
whereof (I mean in length) begins at the top of the Head, and reaches to
the root of the Nostrils: the Second from thence to the Throat-pit: the Third
thence to the parting of the Breast: the Fourth thence to the Navile: the Fifth
thence to the Privities, which is just the middle of the length of the Body,
from thence to the Sole of the Foot are Five Faces, whereof two lie between the
Privities and the Mid-Knees, the other three betwixt that and the Sole of the
Foot. Thus according to this Division all these Parts are equal.

Now the first Part from the Top of the Head to the Nose, answers to the
space betwixt that and the Chinn, in a triple proportion, (which makes a
Diapente and a Diapason) that beneath the Chinn, and the Throat-pit answers
to that betwixt the Nose and the Chinn in a double proportion (which makes a
Diapason) whereunto the Head answers in the same According to John Paul
Lomatius.
proportion; the Three faces (between the Throat-pit and the Privities
answers to the Second betwixt them and the Knee Sesquialter proportion,
whence arises a Diapente, but with the Legs they are Unisons for it has the
same proportion with the Thigh.

Now the breadth of this Body consists likewise of Ten faces; namely between
the extremities of both the middle fingers, when the Arms are spread abroad,
and is thus divided: One to the Wrist of the Hand, one and a half to the Elbow,
so much to the Clavicolae or joint of the Shoulder, and one to the Throatpit,
so that only the Hands are Unisons, with that between the Shoulder-Joynt and
the Throat-pit, and the space between the Shoulders and the Elbow, with that
between the Elbow and the Wrist; so that these answer to each other in a
Sesquialter proportion called a Diapente) again a face is as much as the
distance between the Nipples, and so much more from each of them to the
Throat-pit, making an Equaliter Triangle.

The compass of the Head from the Eyebrowes to the Neck behind is double to
the length of the whole Head, the circumference of the Waste is a Triple
Sesquialter to the Diameter thereof; and is all one with the Trunk of the Body,
which is three Faces, the circumference of the Body under the Armpits, and the
space between them and the VVrist answer in a double proportion, and is all one
with any half of the Body.

The Measures which are Unison or all one, and equal between themselves, are
these: First the space between the Chinn and the Throat-pit, is as much as the
Diameter of the Neck: the circumference of the Neck, is as much as from the
Throat-pit to the Navile, the Diameter of the Waste answers to the distance
between the Knobbe of the Throat and the top of the Head, and this is the
length of the Foot, the space between the Eyelids and the Nostrils is all one
with that betwixt the Chinn and the Throat-bone, again from the Nose to the
Chinn, is as much as from the Throat-Bone to the Throat-pit, moreover the space
from the hollow of the Eye below, and from the Eye-brow to the Center of the
Eye, is the same with the prominency of the Nostrils; and so much it is between
the Nostrils, and the end of the Upper Lip so that these three spaces be equal,
besides the distance between the top of the Nail of the Forefinger and the
last Joint thereof, and from thence to the VVrist are equal, again the space
between the Nail of the Middle Finger, and the last Joint thereof; and from
thence to the VVrist is all one, the greater Joint of the Forefinger, is the
height of the Forehead, and the space between that Joint and the top of the
Nail, is equal to the Nose, beginning at the bottom of the most eminent Arch
above the Eyes, where the Forehead and the Nose are divided, the two first
Joints of the Middle Finger, are equal to the space between the Nose and the
Chinn, the first Joint whereon the Nail grows; is the distance between the
Nose and the Mouth; so that the second Joint answers to the First in a
Sesquialter proportion, as also does the space between the Mouth and the Chinn,
(whence arises the Concord Diapente) the bigger Joint of the Thumb gives the
length of the Mouth, the space betwixt the top of the Chinn, and the Dint under
the Lower Lip, answers to the lesser Joint of the Thumb, and is as much as
from the Nose to the same Dint, wherefore from the greater Joint there is a
Sesquialter proportion and a Concord ( Diatesseron) the last Joint of each
Finger, is double to the length of the Nail, and makeeth a Diapason from the
middst between the Eyebrows to the outward Corner of the Eye, is as much as
from thence to the Ear, the height of the Forehead, the length of the Nose,
and the length of the Mouth are ( Unisons) the breadth of the Hand and Foot are
all one, the length of the Foot in respect of the breadth makeeth a double (
Supra by partient, and a Diapason and a Diatesseron.)

The breadth of the Foot to his height at the Instep, makes a ( Sesquialter and
a Diatesseron) the breadth of the Hand is double to the height, the Arches of
the Eyebrowes, are equal to the Arch of the Upper Lip, at the Division of the
Mouth, the breadth of the Nose and the Eye is all one, and either of them half
the length of the nose, the navile is the midst betwixt the nose and the Knee,
from the top of the Shoulder to the Elbow, and from thence to the Hand, is a
Diatesseron, the space between the lower end of the Ear, and the Joint of the
Shoulder, is half as much as the breadth of the Breast at the Shoulders, which
makes a double Sesquialter the whole breadth of the Body to the space between
the top of the Head, and the Throat-Bone makes a Quadruple proportion; whence
arises a Disdiapason, the same proportion has the Cubit, or lower Part of the
Arm from the Elbow to the top of the Middle Finger, with the breadth of the
Body, by the Arms spread abroad the breadth of the Flanckes is double to the
Thigh or a Diapason, the length of a Man is all one with his breadth.

The breadth of the Back at the Arme-pits; of the Hippes at the Buttocks, and
of the Legs at the Knees, in respect of the Soles of the Feet, make a triple (
Sesquitertia) the like is from the space of the Head to the Breast-pit: the
Diameter of the Head at the Forehead, to the depth thereof, (that is between
the Eyes, and the Nape of the Head) is a Sesquioctava: whence arises a Tone,
the circumference of the Forehead at the Temples, is a Quadruple to his
height, or a Diapason, the height of the Face, and the space between the Chinn
and the Throat-Bone, makes a triple proportion, or a Diapason, and Diapente.

And thus if we should proceed, we might find in the Head all the other
proportions of the smallest Parts, together with their Concord most exactly:
which for Brevities sake I omit, hasteing to the Measures of all the Parts,
which are truly Symmetrical, and correspondent to the Parts of the World.

The Proportion of a Man's Body of Ten faces.
THe proportion of a long and slender Body must be patterned after the Body of
Mars the god of War, amongst the Gentiles, who by reason of his Heat and
Dryness has a long and slender Body agreeable thereunto; and may also serve
for any other Body of that nature, as being Boisterous, Choleric, Cruel,
Martial, Mutinous, Rash and prone to Anger; as are all active and strong men,
by reason of the bigness of their Bones, void of much Flesh, which causes them
to be of a hard, and sharp Body, with great Joints, and big Nostrils dilated
with Heat, whose Eyes, Mouth, and other passages, are correspondent; as in his
due place shall be more particularly showed.

The breadth of the Hand, being divided into Four Parts, makes the Four
Fingers from the top of the Middle Finger to the Elbow, is the Fourth Part of
the whole Body; And this proportion is of such indifferent Beauty, that sparing
the Martial asperity and bouldness, it may sit diverse other slender and noble
Bodies, as occasion shall serve.

The extravigant Proportion of Ten Heads.
SInce my purpose is to Handle this matter exactly it shall not be amiss,
briefly to touch the slight proportion of Ten Heads delivered by Albert Durer
for although it be (in truth) to slender in all Men's Judgments, yet I may not
omit it, because it has the authority of so Famous a Man in the Skill of
Painting, as Germany cannot match again. First then this proportion is in
length from the top of the Head to the Chinn, a tenth part of the whole: thence
backwards to the top of the Forehead, an Eleventh: The face may be divided
into Three equal Parts, as the rest are.

The Proportion of a Young Man of nine Heads.
I Am of opinion that Francis Mazzalinus would have proved the only rare Man of
the World, if he had never Painted any other kind of Pictures (as rude, gross,
and melancholy) then these slender ones which he represented with an admirable
dexterity as being naturally inclined thereunto; so that if he had only
represented Apollo, Bacchus, the Nymphs, etc. he had sufficiently warranted
this his most acceptable proportion, which was ever slender, and oftentimes to
slight, but when he took upon him to express the Prophets, our Lady and the
like in the same; as appears by his Moses at Parma, our Lady at Ancona, and
certain Angels not far from thence, and diverse other things quite contrary to
the Symetry they ought to have, he gave a president to all other Painters to
shun the like error: which himself might also have easily avoided, being
reputed little inferior to Raphael Vrbine, whom he might have proposed to
himself as a pattern; for Raphael ever suited his personages answerable to the
variety of the Natures, and Dispositions of the Parties he imitated: so that
his Old Folks seem stiff and crooked, his Young Men agile and slender and so
forth in the rest, which example admonishes us, that a Painter ought not to
tie himself to any one kind of proportion, in all his Figures; for besides that
he shall lose the true Decorum of the History: He shall commit a great
absurdity in the Art by making all his Pictures like Twinns: Into which error
notwithstanding diverse (otherwise worthy Painters) have runn, whose names I
suppress; and especially one of those two great ones, which oversight all good
practitioners will easily discern, because all their Figures are of an Uniforme
proportion, though wonderfully expressing variety of actions: And for our
better understanding in this kind of proportion (as best fitting Young Men, who
are somewhat Beautiful by means of their slenderness, agility, and gentle
Disposition mixed with a kind of boldness) Raph: Vrbine has very well
expressed it in St. George fighting with the Dragon, now to be seen in the
Churches of St. Victore de Fratri in Milane; in St. Michaell at Fontainblew in
France, and in that George which he made for the Duke of Vrbine on a Piece
richly guilt, according to which Observation of his, every Man may dispose of
this proportion in the like young Bodies, now for our more exact insight
hereinto, by way of precept, we must first note that a slender young Body of
Nine Heads is from the top of the Head to the end of the Chinn, a Nineth Part
of the whole length: And thence back again to the root of the Hair a Tenth or
Eleventh Part, as I have observed in Raphaels St. Michael and in an old Apollo,
but which way soever you make it, this space is divided into Three equal Parts;
whereof the First makes the forehead, the Second the Nose, the Third the Chinn,
howbeit I grant that in a face which is the Eleventh Part (by reason of a
certain Tuff of Hair which is usually expressed) the forehead becomes lower
by a Third Part; which Rule the ancient Graecians kept, as their Statutes do
evidently witness.

The Proportion of a Man of Eight heads.
WHereas in every Work there is some one entire Figure, whereunto all the
particulars of the whole History ought to be principally referred, the Painter
ought not to imagine, (because he is more skillful in representing some other
thing in the work then that which bears the reference of the whole) that
therefore he shall deserve commendation, but rather discredit, for it is most
certain that Work will prove offensive, where some inferior and by matter, is
more curiously handled then the principal, and the rather, because the other
Parts cannot choose but loose their Grace. A thing which has caused diverse
excellent Painters (as well new) as ancient (being purposely carried away with
too great a desire of doing well) to leave their Works imperfect, which they
could not remedy any other way, then by utterly defacing that which they had
done, were it never so excellent.

A most pregnant example whereof we have in that ancient Painter Euphzanor; who
being to draw the Twelve gods in Athens, he began with the Picture of Neptune,
which he wrought so exquisitely both for proportion, color, and all other
points; that purposing afterward to make Jupiter with far greater perfection,
he had so spent his conceit in the First Figure, that he was not able
afterward to express any of the other gods, much less Jupiter) the like
Disgrace happened to Zeuxes by the Naturaleness of his Grapes, and the
Imperfection of the Boy, not unlike unto which was that of Leon: Vincent of
late Days, who being to Paint Christ at his last Supper in the middst of his
Disciples in the Refectory of St. Maria de Gratia in Milane, and having
finished all the other Apostles, he represented the two James's with such
perfection of Grace and Majesty, that endeavoring afterward to express
Christ, he was not able to perfect and accomplish that sacred Countenance,
notwithstanding his incomparable skill in the Art, whence being in a desperate
Case, he was enforced to advise with Bernard Zenale concerning his Fault, who
used these Words to comfort him. O Leonard this thine Error is of that quality,
that none but God can correct it; for neither thou nor any Man living, is able
to bestow more Divine Beauty upon any Figure, then thou have upon these
James's, wherefore content thy self, and leave Christ unperfect, for thou
may not set Christ near those Apostles, which advise Leonard observed, as
may appear by the Picture, at this day, though it be much defaced. Whence my
Council is; that for the avoiding of the like Errors, we examine the original
thereof, having an especial regard to our proportions; as the chief Cause of
the grossness, slenderness, clownishness, and daintyness of Bodies: whence all
the Beauty and Ill-favourdness of Pictures proceeds; wherefore let each Body
have his true and particular proportion: which is to divide the Body into Eight
equal Parts, whereof the head is one, which may serve for all Men in general,
who agree with this most absolute form, whose proportion follows.

Of the Proportion of a Man's Body of Seven Heads.
THe grand Philosopher Pythagoras, gives sufficient Testimony of the Truth of
these Rules concerning the proportion of Man's Body; insomuch as by their help
he distinguished the proportion of Hercules his Body, from the other gods, by
finding out the true Stature thereof, and consequently how much he exceeded the
Stature of ordinary Men; of whom An: Gellius writes, that he observed the
Quantity of Hercules Foot, wherewith the race in Acaia before Jupiter Olmypius
his Temple (where the Olympian Games were celebrated every Fifth Year) was
measured; and found it to agree, in the Number of Feet, with the other Races,
which were six hundred Twenty Five Foot; and yet to be much longer then any of
the rest.

By which Example we may easily conceive, that every proportion will not fit
all kinds of Bodies, because there are many varieties thereof, as there are
Natural Differences of Bodies, wherefore I will proceed to the handling of the
proportion of a Body of Seven substantial and big Heads, all whose Members are
strong, sturdy, and raised; his length then from the Crown of the Head to the
Sole of the Foot, is seven-times the length of his head.

Of the Proportion of a Woman of Ten Faces.
ALbeit Dame Nature, the cunningest Work-Mistress of all others, does
ordinarily observe so great variety, in all her Works, that each of her
particulars differs in Beauty and Proportion; yet notwithstanding, we find by
experience, that she is more industrious, In showing her Art and Skill in some
few most Beautiful creatures, whereupon I (insomuch as Art being the
counterfeiter of Nature, must ever endeavor to imitate the most absolute
things) intending to handle the proportion of a Woman mean not to spend much
time in discoursing of the several proportions of all the Sorts of Women which
Nature affords (for that were infinite) but purpose to write only of the most
pleasing proportions appearing in dainty and delicate Bodies, now this Body is
thus measured: Divide the Body into Ten equal Parts, whereof the Head must be
one, from the Crown of the head to the privities must be Five of the Ten, and
from the privities to the Sole of the Foot Five more.

And this is the Measure and proportion of a comely Woman's Body, drawn not only
from the observations of the ancient Statues of Venus, but even from the ground
of Nature it self; which proportion may serve for any Woman, wherein you would
especially represent the perfection of Beauty, and not for every common Woman;
as Martial, Huntresses, grave Matrones, or other stayed Women, inclineing to
grossness, as the other tend to slenderness, and because all the other
proportions depend upon these two (as may easily be proved by Geometrical
lines) I thought good to set them down first, as a Rule and Direction for the
rest, which I purpose now to handle, with the same Method I did the other two:
Least otherwise, it might happily be thought, that these proportions were made
by chance; wherefore all the particulars are to be framed, answerable to the
Nature of such Bodies as they resemble; otherwise some one disproportionable
and unsuitable Part, will cause as great, or rather a greater blemish in a
beautiful Body: As a Tuscan Capital, in a Corinthian Cullumne; or a Phrigian
note mixed with a Dorick.

The Proportion of a Woman of Ten heads.
THe proportion of a Woman of ten Heads in length, is thus measured, between
the top of the Head and the Sole of the Foot; is ten times as much as between
the Chinn, and the top of the Head, thence to the Privities is half.

The Proportion of a woman of Nine Faces.
IT was not without just cause that Vitruvius in the First of his Architecture,
distinguishing the manner of Temples by their several Orders; dedicated the
Ionick Order to the goddess Juno, as being slenderer then the Dorick, and more
substantial then the Corinthian: Considering no doubt very wisely, that this
goddess was not naturally so Grave as Vesta nor yet so slender and beautiful
as Venus; notwithstanding she carries a Matrone like Beauty, full of State and
Majesty, for which cause also, I apply this Portion of Nine Faces unto her, as
most properly belonging unto her, being inferior in Beauty to the proportion
of Venus, and yet the most beautiful amongst the Matrone-like, wherein Majesty
and Grace ought to be represented. Moreover this proportion may be applied unto
Queens of Middle-age; or unto any other honest, fair and grave women; and does
most properly appertain to our Lady.

Of the Proportion of a Woman of Nine Heads.
THough I might describe diverse other proportions of Bodies (albeit of small
worth in respect of the principal) yet I purpose to pretermit them, as well for
their small use, as for brevities sake, wherefore concluding the Principal and
most Regular proportions, I come to the rest, and First to that of Nine Heads,
which being very slender and comely, as representing the third Degree of
Beauty, may be given not only to Minerva, but also to Diana for her swiftness
and agility, as also to the Nimphs of the Rivers, and to the Muses, though with
diverse attire, in regard of their place. This proportion is from the top of the
head to the Chinn, a Ninth Part of the length. The Face from the Root of the
hair, to the Chinn, may be either a tenth or eleventh Part, as shall please the
Painter. This divided into Three equal Parts, the first gives the Forehead,
the second the Nose, the third the Chinn.

The Proportion of a Woman of seven heads.
IT was not without good Ground, that the old Graecians made the goddess Vesta
but Seven heads high; because this proportion is Grave and Matrone like, and
therefore was attributed to the Earth, the common Parent of all things. Besides
you may give it to any other goddess, which has any kind of resemblance with
the Earth, as also to the more stayed and ancient sort of Women, wherefore it
were a great oversight to give a slender and delicate proportion to the Sibills
or other Grave and Sage Prophetesses, as it were likewise to make a Prophet
with such a proportion as belongs to young Men.

A Child of six Heads is thus measured, dividing the body into six equal parts,
whereof the Head must be one.

A Child of five Heads is thus measured, dividing the body into five equal
parts, whereof the Head must be one.

A Child of four Heads is thus measured, dividing the body into four equal
parts, whereof the Head must be one.

The Reason why I have not given Descriptions or Rules, upon all the particular
designs upon the Plates, farther then the Side-way, or Triangle, Fore-right or
Fore-shortening, is because I think it unnecessary, unless you could force Dame
Nature to observe the same method, with them ancient Rules of Alberta Durera or
Cousine, the grand reason is because every Print shows its design of it self,
to any one that is Ingenious, observing the due distances, and lights.
The Definition of Painting.
PAinting is an Art which with proportionable Lines, and Colors answerable to
the life, by observing the Perspective Light, does so imitate the Nature of
corporal things, that it not only represents the thickness and tenderness
thereof upon a Flat, but also their actions, and gestures, expressing moreover
diverse affections and passions of the Mind.

For the better unfolding of which Definition we must understand that every
Natural thing consists of Matter and Form: Whereunto Genus and Difference
answer in Logic whence the Logicians say, that Genus declares the Essence of
things, and Difference of their Form and Essential Qualitys. Wherefore I think
it not amiss, according to this Doctrine, to lay open the above named
Definition, by expounding all the Differences whereby the Art of Painting is
distinguished from all other Arts and Sciences; the Genus then in Painting is
Art, which is prooved by two Reasons. The First is drawn from the Definition of
Art it self, which is nothing else but a sure and certain Rule of things to be
made, the Second from the Natural things themselves, which are a Rule and
Measure to the greater Part of the Arts and Sciences, in the World (insomuch as
they are Gods creatures, and consequently endued with all such Perfection as
their Nature is capable of, and therefore may well be a certain Rule to
Artificial things.

Hence it appears that Painting is an Art, because it imitateth natural
things most precisely, and is the counterfeiter and (as it were) the very Ape
of nature; whose Quantity, Eminency and Colors, it ever striveth to imitate,
performing the same by the help of Geometry, Arithmetic, Perspective, and
Natural Philosophy, with most Infallible Demonstrations, but because of Arts
some be Liberal, and some Mechanical, it shall not be amiss, to show amongst
which of them Painting ought to be numbered. Now Pliny calls it plainly a
liberal Art, which authority of his may be proved by reason, for although the
Painter cannot Painting is a Liberal Art.
attain to his end, but by working both with his hand and pencil, yet there is
so little pains and labor bestowed in this Exercise, that there is no
Ingenious Man in the World, unto whose Nature it is not most agreeable, and
infinitely pleasant.

For we read of the French King Francis, the First of that name, that he
oftentimes delighted to handle the pencil, by exercising, drawing and painting;
the like whereof is reported of diverse other Princes, as well ancient as late;
amongst whom I may not conceal Charles Emanuel Duke of Savoy, who (in all other
Heroical Virtues, so amongst other Liberal Sciences in this) imitated and most
happily equalled, that great King Francis his Grandfather by the Mothers side,
so that in these and the like Exercises, nothing is Base or Mechanical, but all
Noble and Ingenious.

For to say the truth; what Prince or Ingenious Man is there, which takes not
delight with his pencil to imitate God in nature, so far forth as he is able:
Farthermore it cannot be denied, but that the Geometrician also works with
the Hand, by drawing Lines, as Circles, Triangles, Quadrangles and such like
Figures, neither yet did ever any Man therefore account Geometry a Mechanical
Art, because the Hand-labour therein employed is so slight, that it were an
absurdity in respect thereof, to reckon it a base condition.

The like reason is there of painting, the Practice whereof, does so little
weary a Man, that he which was Noble before, cannot justly be reputed Base by
exercising the same; but if besides all this, we shall farther consider, that
Painting is subordinate to the Perspectives, to Natural philosophy, and
Geometry (all which out of question are Liberal Sciences) and moreover that it
has certain Demonstrable conclusions, deduced from the First and immediate
Principalls thereof, we must needs conclude that it is a Liberal Art.

Now what kind of Liberal Arts it is (to omit all other proofs) may easily
appear by the foresaid Definition; where it is first said, that it represents
upon a plain, the Thickness and roundness of Bodily thing, not excepting any,
either Natural The Differences
or Artificial, whereby we may gather that it belongs to the Painter also to
represent Palaces, Temples, and all other things made by the hand of the
Artificer.

Moreover it is said, that it represents the Figure upon a Plain, and hereby
it is distinguished from Carving (though not Essentially, but only
Accidentally (as it is said in the Proem) by reason of the diversity of the
matter, wherein both of them represent natural things which imitateth Nature
likewise, though it express the perfect roundness of the Bodies as they are
created of God, whereas the Painter represents them upon a Flat Superficies:
Which is one of the chiefest reasons, why Painting has ever been preferred
before Carving.

Because by mere Art upon a Flat, where it finds only length, and breadth, it
represents to the Eye the Third Dimension, which is roundness and thickness;
and so makes the Body to appear upon a Flat, where naturally it is not.

Furthermore it is added in the Definition: that it represents the Bodily
Motions, which is most Motion.
true, for in that most Famous Picture of the last judgment, done by the Hand
of the Divine Michael Angelo, in the Popes Chapel at Rome, who sees not what
motions may be expressed in Bodies, and in what order they may be placed; there
may you see our Lady, St. John, and the other Saints represented with great
Fear, whilst they beheld Christ moved with indignation against the wicked, who
seem to fly away and hide themselves behind his Back, that they might not
behold his angry countenance wholly inflamed with indignation: There shall you
behold the guilty, who being astonished with Fear, and not able to endure his
glorious presence, seek dark Dens and deep Caves to hide themselves in.

On the one side, you shall find the Saints seeming (in a Sort) to finish the
Act of the resurrection, ascending up into the Air, to be placed at the right
hand of Christ: On the other side you would think you saw the Angels coming
down from Heaven with the Standard of the Cross: And on the other, carrying the
Blessed Souls to be placed at the right hand of God.

And to conclude there is no corporal Motion, whether it be forwards, or
backwards; on the right hand, or on the left; upwards, or downwards, which may
not be seen expressed, in this most artificial and admirable Picture, but if we
shall farther consider the passions and motions of the Mind, whereof the
Definition makes mention likewise, they are also to be found in the same work,
with no less Art then admiration to the beholder, especially in Christ in whom
you may see Wrath and Indignation so kindled, that he seems to be altogether
incensed therewith.

Again both in the Saints, and damned In the Saints a reverent in the damned, a
desperate fear.
Souls, being appalled, and confused, is most lively expressed, an exceeding
dread and horror of the wrathful Judge, and in a Word, many motions as well of
the Body, as of the Mind, are to be found in the Works of this Divine Bonaraot,
of the rare Raphael Vrbine, and of other worthy Painters both old and new, as
well of love as hatred, sadness as mirth, and all other passions of the Mind.

All which representations are after declared in that part of the Definition,
where it is said, that Painting, with proportionable lines makes, Proportion.
etc. where we must Note that the Painter in his descriptions, does not draw
lines at random, without Rule, Proportion, or Art, (as some vainly have
imagined) since the Arrantest Bunglers that are, proceed with some little
Method, and although Horace in his book de Art Poetica says: that

The Poet and the Painter, has like Patent to invent,
A Story and dispose the same as shall him best content.
Yet that is thus to be understood, that it is lawful for him to express a
Figure, in what action he list, as in showing Julius Caesar in the Pharsalian
War, in some action, which peradventure he never did; as setting him in the
Vaward, when he perchance was found in the Rereward, or representing him
encourageing his Soldiers to Valor which perchance he never did; this only
excepted the Painter is bound to proceed in all his Works according to
proportion and art. Wherefore before you begin to Stell, delineate or trick out
the proportion of a Man, you ought to know his true Quantity and Stature for it
were a gross absurdity to make a Man of the length of Eight Faces; which is of
Nine or Ten, besides this, we ought to know what proportion the Forehead has
with the Nose, the Nose with the Mouth and the Chinn, the whole Face with the
Neck, and in a Word to learn the true proportions of all things natural and
artificial.

Now because it seems a matter of great difficulty, and almost impossible for
one Man to attain to the full perfection of all this Knowledge, we may propose
unto us the Example of the most judicious Apelles, who when he undertook any
special piece of Work, wherein he meant to show the utmost of his Skill, he
used to Hang it forth to public View, hiding himself behind, to the end he
might hearken what every Man's Judgment was, concerning the proportion and
Workman-ship thereof, and according to each man's censure of such things as
appertained to their professions. He still corrected his work, as on the
contrary side, he did confute and reprehend the censures of such as would take
upon them to give their judgments of such things as appertained not to their
professions (as did the Shoemaker, who not content to find Fault with the Shoe
of one of his Pictures, would needs censure the other Parts) unto whom he
answered, ne Suitor ultra crepidam.

Furthermore the Painter ought to observe Let not the Shoemaker presume beyond
his Last.
an Order and Method in those proportionable lines therein, imitating Nature in
her proceedings; who first presupposes Matter being a thing void of Form,
Beauty, Bound, or Limit, and afterward brings in the Form, which is a
beautiful and limited thing, in like sort the Painter taking a Panel or Cloth
(in the Surface whereof there is nothing but a Flat and plain Super-ficies,
without Beauty or Limitation of parts) he trimmeth, primeth, and limiteth it by
tracing thereon a Man, a Horse, or a Cullumne, forming and tricking the true
proportion thereof, and (in a Word) Imitating by lines, the Nature of the thing
to be painted in breadth, length, or thickness.

And because in this place there falls out a Rule.
certain Precept of Michael Angelo, much for our purpose, I will not conceal
it, leaving the farther interpretation and understanding thereof, to the
judicious Reader. It is reported then that Michael Angelo upon a time gave this
observation to the Painter Marius de Scina his Scholar, that he should always
make a Figure Pyramidal, Serpent like, and multiplied by One Two and Three, in
which precept (in my Opinion) the whole Mystery of the Art consists, for the
greatest Grace and Life that a Picture can have, is, that it express motion;
which the Painters call the Spirit of a Picture. Now there is no Form so fit to
express this Motion, as that of the Flame of Fire, which according to
Aristotle, and the other Philosophers is an Element most active of all others,
because the Form of the Flame thereof is most apt for Motion, for it has a
Conus or sharp Point wherewith it seems to divide the Air that so it may
ascend to his proper Sphere, so that a Picture having this form will be most
beautiful.

Now this is to be understood after two sorts: either that the Conus of the
Piramis be placed upwards, and the Base downwards as in the Fire, or else
contrariwise, with the Base upwards, and the Conus downwards: In the First it
expresses the width and largeness of a Picture, about the Legs and Garments
below, showing it slender above, Piramidal Wise, by discovering one Shoulder,
and hiding the other, which is shortened by the turning of the Body; in the
Second it shows the Figure biggest in the upper Parts, by representing either
both the Shoulders, or both the Arms; showing one Leg and hiding the other,
or both of them after one sort, as the Skillful Painter shall judge fittest for
his purpose, so that his meaning is, that it should resemble the Form of the
letter S placed right, or else turned the wrong way as S because then it has
his Beauty: Neither ought he only to observe this Form in the whole Body, but
even in every Part; so that in the Legs, when a Muscle is raised outward on
the one side, that which answers directly on the contrary side, must be drawn
in and hid, (as may be seen in the life)

The last part of Michael Angelo his Observation was; that a Picture ought to
be multiplied by One, Two, and Three, and herein consists the chiefest Skill
of that Proportion for the Diameter of the biggest place between the Knee and
the Foot is double to the least, and the largest part of the Thigh triple.

But to return to the Definition, that part Color.
remains to be expounded, wherein it is said that Painting represents
things with Colors, like to the Life; whence it is to be marked that the
Artificial painter ought to proceed according to the course of Nature, who
first presupposes Matter (as the Philosophers hold) unto which it adds a
Form, but because to create the Substances of things proceeds from an
infinite power, which is not found in any creature (as the Divines teach) the
Painter must take something instead of Matter, namely Quantity proportioned;
which is the Matter of painting, here then the Painter must The Matter of
Painting.
needs understand that proportioned Quantity, and Quantity delineated, are all
one, and that the same is the Material Substance of Painting, for he must
consider, that although he be never so Skillful in the use of his Colors, and
yet lacks this Delineation, he is unfurnished of the Principal Matter of his
Art, and consequently of the substantial part thereof, neither let any Man
imagine that hereby I go about to diminish the power and virtue of color, for
if all particular Men should differ one from another in Matter alone (wherein
out of all doubt all agree) then all Men must needs be one, and so that most
acceptable variety of so many particulars as are now in the world would be
wanting (which variety is caused by those Seven particularities which the
Philosophers call Individuantes Qualitates.
particularizing Qualities,) that is Seven substantial accidents, which cause
the particularity and singularity of substances, so if the Painter should only
Pourtrait out a Man in just Symetry agreeable to Nature; certainly this Man
would never be sufficiently distinguished by his mere Quantity: But when unto
this proportioned Quantity he shall farther add Color, then he gives the last
form and perfection to the Figure: Insomuch, that whosoever beholds it may
be able to say, this is the Picture of the Emperor Charles the Fifth, or of
Philip his Son, it is the picture of a Melancholic, Phlegmatic, Sanguine, or
Choleric Fellow, of one in love, or in fear of a bashful young Man, etc. and
to conclude the picture will attain to such perfection, that the party
counterfeited may easily be known thereby: Wherefore I advise the Painter to
be very skillful in the use of Colors, as in that wherein consists the whole
perfection of his Art.

And in this point alone is painting distinguished Painting and Carving differ.
from all other Arts, and chiefly from Carving, because in precise imitation of
the life the painter performs much more then the Carver is able, for the
Carvers intent is only to give the self same quantity to his Figure which his
Natural pattern has, so that his special purpose is to make the Figure equal
to the life; which cannot therefore be said to be perfectly like thereunto,
because Philosophy teaches us that Similitude, is not properly found in
Quantity; but in Quality only: now the Color which the Painter uses, giving
thereby the Similitude and proper Resemblance to his counterfeits, is most
truly and properly Quality, and although we usually call one thing like to
another, when it has the same Quantity, yet this is an improper speech, for if
we should speak properly, we should call it Equal and not Like, wherefore
Similitude is found only in Quality, and Equality, which the Carver considers
only in Quantity, but the Painter does not only endeavor to give the true and
just quantity to his figure, by making it equal to the life; as the carver
does, but moreover adds quality with his colors, giving thereby both
quantity and similitude, which (as has been proved) the carver cannot do.

Now the Painter expresses two things with his color: First the color of the
thing, whether it be artitificial or natural, which he does with the like
color, as the color of a blew garment with artificial blew, or the green
color of a Tree with a like green: Secondly he expresses the light of the
Sun, or any other bright Body apt to lighten or manifest the colors, and
because color cannot be seen without light, being nothing else (as the
Philosophers teach) but the extreme Superficies of a dark untransparent Body
lightened, I hold it expedient for him that will prove exquisite in the use
thereof, to be most diligent in searching out the effects of light, when it
enlightneth color, which who so does seriously consider, shall express all
those effects with an admirable Grace; and although the blew be equally
dispersed through all the Parts of a garment, so that there is no more in one
part then in another: Yet notwithstanding when it is illustrated by any light,
it causes one kind of brightness in that part where it strikes more
vehemently, then another, in that part, where it shines less.

Now when the Painter would imitate this blew thus lightened, he shall take his
artificial blew color, counterfeiting therewith the blew of the garment, but
when he would express the light, wherewith the blew seems clearer, he must mix
so much white with his blew, as he finds light in that part of the garment,
where the light strikes with greater force, considering afterward the other
part of the garment, where there is not so much light, and shall mingle less
white with his blew proportionably, and so shall he proceed with the like
discretion in all the other parts: and where the light falls not so
vehemently, but only by reflection there he shall mix so much shadow with his
blew, as shall seem sufficient to represent that light, loosing it self as it
were by degrees, provided always, that where the light is less darkened, there
he place his shadow,

In which judicious expressing of the effects of light together with the
colors, Raphael Vrbine, Leonard Vincent, Antonius de Coreggio and Titian were
most admirable, handling them with so great discretion and judgment, that
their Pictures seemed rather natural, then artificial; the reason whereof the
vulgar Eye cannot conceive, notwithstanding these excellent Masters expressed
their chiefest art therein, considering with themselves that the light falling
upon the flesh caused these and such like effects, in which kind Titian
excelled the rest, who as well to show his great Skill therein, as to merit
commendation, used to cozen and deceive Men's Eyes, the like did Michael Angelo
who to make proof of his singular insight in the Anatomy, inclined somewhat
toward the Extreme, by raising up his Muscles a little too hard, and by this
means showed the eminencies and risings, in which naturally they were small, as
in the Body of Christ, etc.

Again Titian to make known his art in lights and shadows, when he would
express the lightest part of the Body used to add a little too much white,
making it much lighter then his pattern, and in the obscure parts, where the
light fell by reflection, a little too much shadow, in resemblance of the decay
of the light in that part of the Body, and so his work seems to be much
raised, and deceive the sight, for the light which comes to the Eye, in a
Pyramidal form (as shall be showed in the ensuing discourse) comes with a
blunter and bigger Angle, and so is seen more evidently, whence arises a
wonderful eminency, the especial cause whereof is, because there is much more
shadow then needs in that part, where the light decays most, so that the
vusual lines failing, that part comes to the Eye in an accuter and sharper
angle, and therefore cannot be seen so perfectly, insomuch that that part
seems to fly inwards, and stand farther off. Thus when the Four parts of a
Body are much raised, and the hinder fly sufficiently inwards, there appears
a very great heightning, which gives a wonderfrll Spirit, and after this sort
Titian beguiled the Eyes of such as beheld his most admirable works.

Of the Virtue of Light.
LIght has so great force in Pictures, that (in my judgment) therein
consists the whole grace thereof, if it be well understood, an contrariwise,
the disgrace if it be not perceived, and evident example whereof we may see in
a Body proportionably drawn, which being yet without his lights, shows very
beautiful, so far forth as it is wrought, but if afterward it shall be
shadowed without judgment and art, so that the shadows be confusedly placed
where the lights ought to be, and contrariwise the lights where the Middle of
the shadows should be, and the concavities and convexities disorderly suited,
without any Imitation of Nature it were better it had never been either drawn
or lightened, whereas having lights well disposed, it does not only add
perfection to the draught but so sets it off from the Flat that it seems to be
imbossed.

And in this virtue and power consists the chiefest excellency of the
Painter: Insomuch as this point most properly concerns him, by making his
counterfeits seem to be as much raised, by reason of the striking of the light,
as they are indeed in the Carvers work, by reason of the matter, which (as all
Men know) has height and depth, the right side and the left, the forepart and
the hinder, wherefore they say that the thing which the Carver intends to
make, is in the Marble, which afterward becomes good or bad, by cutting and
forming, but to return to the light, I say this moreover, that although it be
of such efficacy, that it diminishes the grace of the draught, where it
wants (as is said) yet the Inartificialness of the draught cannot disgrace
it, whence we see, that if the lights be well and proportionably bestowed
throughout a Body, which is ill proportioned and without Muscles, it contenteth
the Eye of the beholder somewhat the more, by moving him to a desire of seeing
the Muscles and other necessary parts, in such a Body as in the Pictures of
Bernard, Zenale, Friviliano, viz. the glorious resurrection of Christ painted
by him, over, the Gate in the Covent of the Church of Grace in Milane, and many
other Histories of his doing as well in colors, as in black and white, in the
same place.

Wherein may be seen Pictures, made without Muscles, and other necessary
accomplishments, for the more gracious representation of Eye-pleasing
perfection, but yet well placed, and with their lights; most artificially
disposed in their places, insomuch that they seem to be imbossed outward, such
is the force of these lights in which you shall also find admirable
perspectives and foreshortnings, wholly proceeding from the orderly disposing
of the lights, without which these draughts would have proved imperfect,
loosing much of that grace, although they were well placed, so that we find
many Painters, who being ignorant of the art of proportions, only by a little
practice, in disposing their lights in some tolerable sort, have
notwithstanding been reputed good Artists; which commendation they deserve not,
because they neither have the Art of perspectives nor the true representing of
any of the lights.

Now for an Example of the true art of exquisite bestowing of these lights,
that Piece of Le: Vincent amongst many others, may serve us, instead of all the
rest of his well lightened Pictures, which is now to be found in St. Francis
Church in Milane, where he has painted the conception of our Lady; which (to
omit other excellencies therein) is most singular in this point, for the
perfection of lights, those two pieces done by the hand of Antonio Correggio
are most admirable, which are yet to be seen in the same City, with Cavalier
Leon: Aretino, in one whereof is painted fair Jo, with Jupiter upon a Cloud,
and in the other Danae and Jupiter descending into her lap in the form of a
golden shower, with Cupid and other Loves; having their lights so well
disposed, that I dare boldly say, no other Painter is able to match him in
coloring and lightning; which Degrees were sent him out of Spain, from his
Son Pompey a carver. Moreover Michael Angelo, and Raphael Vrbine, the Fathers
and Masters of painting are reputed most rare and divine in lights, out of
whose Schools I may truly say, almost all the famous Painters of Italy have
attained to the worth of their fame.

Now then insomuch as these lights, are of so great virtue, we ought to use all
diligence for the perfect attaining to the knowledge thereof, by applying them
to our draughts, as is showed, insomuch as the art of proportion, motion and
foresh ortning, has but small use or commendation in a Painter, without the
knowledge of these lights, found out by reason and art, and not taken by bare
imitation from the imbossed models, under a false apprehension of the light,
without order or distance, as also in the lines and super-ficies of Bodies:
wherefore they prove false, and altogether contrary to the rules of art. And
thus much I thought good to note concerning this point purposing now to begin
the treatise of light it self, by the assistance of him who inlightneth the
understanding of such as submit themselves unto him, with a pure Mind wholly
prepared for the receiving of so divine beams.

Of the Necessity of Light.
IT appears by that which has been hitherto spoken, that a piece of painting
drawn in proportion having his true motion, and put in colors without the
lights, is like a Body in the dark, of whose Quantity or Quality a Man cannot
judge, save only by the help of his understanding, that is by that inward
conceit he has of the thing, and not by any outward, insomuch as it is hidden
from the external light, which concurring with the internal, by means of the
Beams proceeding from the Eye, makes the diversity of Bodies known to the
understanding, after the same manner, as they receive their light naturally.

Wherefore I will handle the lights, saying nothing of the shadows, although
they be handled together with them, for the shadows do necessarily follow the
lights, being caused by the decay of the light, taking so much the more force,
by how much the more forcibly the light strikes upon the Body, whence arises
that exceeding great raising and heightning of a natural plain, in a Body
receiving the light according to his proper nature.

And by this we shall know, how the lights, reflections, and natural rebating
of the lights, do vary, according to the diversity of the Bodies, by altering
them as shall be said, wherein also we shall see the very perfection of the
art; for without this, neither order, form, proportion, motion, composition,
or figure; can attain to their perfection, like unto a Body without situation
or spirit, or to counterfeit Stars without the light of the Sun, giving them
their brightness answerable to their qualities, whereby they may be seen. But
now as touching my proposed matter, I will First handle the nature of light,
and afterward (by the help of Natural Philosophy and the Optics, being the
First part of the perspectives) I will speak in general of the primary and
secondary lights, then of direct and reflected lights, afterward how by
Mathematical reasons, diverse distinct lights may be seen, by reason of the
variety of the Bodies, and finally of the qualities of things appertaining
thereunto, how it may be understood in all things, and in the Elements
themselves.

Of the Nature of Light
THis Word Light is diversely taken: First and principally it signifies the
Image of that Divine Nature which is the Son of God, and the brightness
thereof, which the Platonicks called the Image of the divine mind. Secondly the
comfortable operation of the Holy Ghost: Thirdly that divine virtue, which
being diffused through all the creatures, is in Men their divine grace, and in
all other living creatures, that power whereby they are preserved and defended,
as that of the Seraphims according to Dionysius: Fourthly that intelligence in
the Angels, which breeds that Joy in them, which passes our understanding,
yet diversely received, according to the diversity of the intelligence
apprehending it, as Marcilius Ficinius upon Plato notes: Fifthly in the
Heavenly Bodies it causes abundance of Life, signifying an effectual
propagation, and visible brightness in the Fire, with a certain accidental
power proceeding from the same: Sixthly it is taken in Men for the Light of
their agent, understanding, which illuminateth their Patient or passable
understanding; (and in a Word) for the discourse of reason, and the knowledge
of divine things: Last of all it signifies a quality proceeding from the Sun
or the Fire, which so discovers colors, that they may be seen, and this (as
the Peripateticks say) is the cause of Formal Reason, whereby colored things
are seen, whose Shapes and Images pass to the fantasy, and especially
enlighten the Eyes, in which the Image is formed, which First paseth to the
common sense, afterward to the fantasy, and last of all to the
understanding, this Light is dispersed and extended unto all Bodies that are
openly proposed unto it, in which color, and a beautiful resplendency of
thick and dark Bodies is discovered (as the Platonicks speak) caused by this
light, together with certain beneficient and generative virtues. But where the
Sunbeams fall not, and are not at all dispersed, there (the beams of the Eye
being restrained) remains a dark color, which displeases, and evil
effects the mind, so that all things according to their capacity, feel the
power of the light, which joining all Creatures to it self by this lively heat,
and piercing through them all gives to each of them his proper Quality and
Virtue.

Whence those who are judicious in this Art, use to give lights to all things
after one and the self same manner; insomuch as we see, that the Sun rising
above our Horizon, lightneth all things in an instant, the reason whereof is,
because the light has no contrary which might hinder it, with his action.
Wherefore it performs his operations in the Air, in an instant.

And hereunto appertains that, which the Philosophers say concerning the
darkness of the Night, that it is not caused of any dark or black color, which
colors the Air, but only by the absence of the Sun, whose presence and
brightness equally lightneth our whole Hemisphere, and would in like sort
lighten the whole Earth, together with all compound Bodies, if they were
transparent as the Air is, but being Opake, thick and corpulent, they receive
not the light in his perfect brightness, save only in that part which is
directly opposite to the Sun, and therefore in this our Hemesphere (because the
Sun never passes perpendicularly over our Zenith) the Earth can never be so
lightened, but that one side or other of it will be shadowed, which happens
unto those parts, which lie directly under the equinoctial line, where the Sun
at Noon does so lighten the Earth, and the inhabitants, that it gives light to
the whole circumference of round Bodies, and there is no shadow seen unto the
very Feet. Whence the judicious in this Art, forbid us to give lights in a
picture unto all Bodies, after one and the self same manner.

But besides this consideration of the light illuminating, and the Earth with
all earthly Bodies lightened, there is another more forcible reason drawn from
the grounds of the Mathematics, viz. from the visual lines of perspective,
together with the Eye, for the better understanding whereof we must note, that
Three things concur to our sight, the visual lines, the colored Body, and the
faculty of seeing, which is in our Eye, the visual lines lightened (which are
the proper Matter and subject of the perspectives) come to our Eye in a
Pyramidal Form, the Base of which Pyramid rests in the Object, and the conus
or angle thereof, comes to our Eye more blunt and obtuse: And hereby we see
the Object more plainly and distinctly; but if the Object be afar off, the
conus or angle of the Pyramid comes to the Eye sharper and lesser, and then our
Eye cannot discern it so clearly as otherwise it would.

Secondly it is to be noted, that the Object comes not to our Eye, but the
visible species or shapes are diffused through the clearness of the Air unto
the Eye, which species are nothing else but certain Images, like unto those
which we see in a glass, when a Man or any thing else standing against it, is
represented therein.

And if the colored Body or Object stand near to this Image, it comes to our
Eye in the same quantity and bigness of the angle of the Pyramid: Now because
this angle comes to our Eye in an obtuse and blunt form, the Image also seems
great, and so is discerned more distinctly, but when the colored Object stands
afar off, the Image comes to the Eye in a very small and slender angle, and
therefore fills not the Eye, but wavereth in such sort, that it cannot be
clearly and distinctly discerned. As touching the Third I have no more to say,
but that the faculty of seeing is reduced into Art, being formed by the
concurring of the other Two things required before, viz. the visual lines,
(without which the Eye cannot see) and the Image of the colored Body, which
informs the Eye, by reducing it from mere ability into act, and informing it
more perfectly with a great Image, by performing his operations better, and
causing the thing to be seen more apparently and distinctly: whereas with the
small Image of a thing too far distant, the Eye cannot be so well informed, and
therefore it cannot see the thing perfectly.

From which grounds, I draw these Two reasons, why the self same Body cannot be
lightened equally in all places.

The First is because the light does not with all his brightness illuminate any
more then that part, which is directly opposite to it, being not able to
illustrate the other parts so perfectly, by reason of the Nature of the dark
Terrene, and gross Body, which so hinders the beams, that they cannot pierce
inwards, and perform their effects perfectly.

The Second reason is taken from the Nature of our Eye, for as the First part
of the Body is seen and placed nearest the Eye, comes unto it with a bigger
angle, so is it also seen more distinctly, because it is more lightened, but the
Second part thereof, being farther of, comes to the Eye in a lesser angle, and
being less lightened, is not so plainly seen as the First, and by this rule, the
Third part will be obscurer, and so the Fourth proportionably until the Eye
can see no farther.

Now if you ask me what the Painter ought to do, when he would paint Two,
Three, or Four Men, standing one behind another, all of them equally receiving
the light, I answer always according to the former Doctrine, that although
they be equally lightened, yet we must paint the Second which is farther off
from the Eye darker, and the Third more then him, and the Fourth most of all,
etc. until our Eye can see no more.

The reason is because the Second standing farther off, comes to the Eye with
a lesser angle, wherefore he cannot be seen so evidently as the First, the same
reason there is of the Third, etc.

The same is also meant side-long, wherefore whatsoever Painters have observed
this Doctrine, have became excellent, and nothing inferior to the chief
Masters of this Art, as Le: Vincent with diverse others named before, together
with Jac: Tintoretto Marco de Scina, Frederick Barozzi of Vrbine, Paulus
Caliarius of Verona, Lucas Gangiasus, the Bassans, and Ambrose Figinus.

Now the whole Doctrine delivered in this present Chapter is (for the most
part) taken out of Aristotle, Alhazen, Vitello, Thomas Aquinas, and (to
conclude) out of all the best Philosophers and Divines, ( whose Opinions I
approve of) and thus much may be spoken for the Opinions of other Men.

Of the Virtue and Efficacy of Motion.
IT is generally confessed of all Men, that all such Motions in Pictures, as do
most nearly resemble the Life, are exceeding pleasant, and contrariwise those
that which do farthest dissent from the same, are void of all gracious Beauty,
committing the like discord in Nature, which untuned strings do in an
instrument. Neither do these motions thus lively imitating Nature in Pictures,
breed only an Eye-pleasing contentment, but do also perform the self same
effects, which the natural do, for as he which laugheth, mourns, or is
otherwise effected, does naturally move the beholders to the self same passion,
of mirth or sorrow, so a picture artificially expressing the true natural
motions, will (surely) procure laughter when it laugheth, pensiveness when it
is grieved etc. And that which is more, will cause the beholder to wonder, when
it wondereth to desire a beautiful young woman to his Wife, when he sees her
painted naked, to have a Fellow feeling when it is afflicted, to have an
appetite, when he sees it eating of dainties, to fall a sleep at the sight of
a sweet sleeping Picture, to be moved and wax furious when he beholds a
battle most lively represented, and to be stirred with disdain and wrath at the
sight of shameful and dishonest actions, All which points are (in truth) worthy
of no less admiration then those miracles of the ancient Musicians, who with
the variety of their melodious harmony, were wont to stir Men up to wrath and
indignation, love, war, honorable attempts, and all other affections as they
listed; or those strange conclusions of the Mathematical motions, recorded of
those undoubted wise Men, who made statues to move of their own accord, as
those of Dedalus, which (as Homer writes) came to the battle themselves, or
Vulcanus Tripodes mentioned by Aristotle, or those gilded Servitors which
walking up and down at the feast of Jarbas the Gymnosophist, served at the
Table, or those ancient ones of Mercury in Egypt, which spoke, etc.

In which kind of artificial motions, Leonard Vincent was very skillful, (who
as his Scholar Signior Francesco Melizi the great Limner verifies) invented a
certain conceited matter, whereof he used to make Birds that would fly into the
Air, and made a most artificial Lion, which being brought into a large Hall
before Francis the First King of France of that name, after he had a while
walked up and down stood still opening his Breast, which was all full of
Lillies and other flowers of diverse sorts, at which sight the King and other
spectators were rapt with so great admiration that they then easily believed,
that Architas Tarentinus his wooden Dove flew, that the brazen Diomedes,
mentioned by Cassiodorus, did sound a Trumpet, that a Serpent of the same
metal, was heard to hiss, that certain Birds sung, and that Albertus Magnus his
brazen Head spoke to St. Thomas of Aquine, which he brake, because he thought
it the Devil, whereas indeed it was a mere Mathematical invention (as is most
manifest.)

But to return thither where I left, I am of Opinion that insomuch as these
Motions are so Potent in affecting our Minds, when they be most artificially
counterfeited, we ought for our bettering in the knowledge thereof, to propose
unto us the example of Leonard Vincent above all others: Of whom it is
reported, that he would never express any motion in a Picture, before he had
first carefully beheld the Life, to the end he might come as near the same, as
was possible: whereunto afterward joining Art, his Pictures surpassed the Life.

This Leonard (as some of his Friends, who lived in his time have given out)
being desireous to make a Piece wherein he would express certain Clowns
laughing (although he never perfected it more, then in the First draught) he
made choice of some Clownes for his purpose, into whose acquaintance after he
had insinuated himself, he invited them to a feast, amongst other of his
Friends, and in the dinner, while he entered into a pleasant vain, uttering such
variety of merry conceits, that they fell into an exceeding laughter (though
they know not the reason thereof, Leonard diligently observed all their
Gestures, together with those ridiculous speeches which wrought this impression
in their Minds, and after they were departed, withdrew himself into his
Chamber. And there portraited them so lively, that they moved no less mirth in
the beholders, then his jests did in them at the banquet.

They add moreover that he took special delight, to behold the Gestures of the
condemned, as they were led to Execution, to the end, that he might mark the
contracting of their brows, the motions of their Eyes, and their whole Body.
In imitation whereof, I hold it expedient for a Painter, to delight in seeing
those which fight at cuffs, to observe the Eyes of privy murderers, the
courage of wrastlers, the actions of Stage Players, and the enticing
allurements of curtesans, to the end he be not to seek many particulars,
wherein the very Life and Soul of painting consists, wherefore I could wish
all Men carefully to keep their Brains waking, which whosoever shall omit his
invention ( out of doubt) will sleep, studying perhaps Ten Years about the
action of one Figure, which in the end will prove nothing worth, whence all
famous inventors, for the avoiding of such gross defects, have the rather
showed themselves subtle Searchers out of the effects of nature, being moved
thereunto by a special delight of often seeing, and continually practizing that
which they have preconceived, so that who so keeps this Order, shall unawares
attain to such an habit of practice, in lively expressing all Actions and
Gestures, best sitting his purpose, that it will become an other nature.

And whosoever shall diligently consider Caesar Sestius his admirable works,
wherein all the actions are most naturally appropriated to the Subject, will
easily conclude that he trod in Leonards steps, and for this cause was he
highly esteemed of Raphael Vrbine, unto whom they say he was wont jestingly to
say often, that it seemed a very strange thing unto him, that they two being
such near Friends, in the Art of Painting, yet spared not each other when they
offended, a speech surely well be seeming honest men, albeit they lived
together in such sweet emulation, which humor if it were to be found in these
our Days, the World might be reputed right happy, but now malicious envy (to
our great disadvantage) takes place instead thereof, Ministering Matter to
ignorant and absurd people, insolently to disgrace and carp at other Men's rare
perfections.

Of the Necessity of Motion.
THe order of the place requires, that I should consequently speak of Motion
it self, namely with what Art the Painter ought to give Motions best fitting
his Pictures, which is nothing else but a correspondency to the nature of the
proportion of the form and matter thereof, and herein consists the whole
spirit, and life of the Art, which the Painters call sometimes the fury,
sometimes the grace, and sometimes the excellency of the Art, for hereby they
express an evident distinction between the living and the dead, the fierce and
the gentle, the ignorant and the learned, the sad and the merry, and (in a
Word) discover all the several passions, and Gestures which Man's Body is able
to perform, which here we term by the name of Motions, for the more significant
expressing of the Mind by an outward and bodily demonstration, so that by this
means inward motions and affections may be as well, (or rather better)
signified as by their speech, which is wrought by the proper operations of the
Body, performing just as much as is delivered unto it from the reasonable Soul,
stirred up either unto good or bad, according to their private apprehensions.

Which things, while all good Painters propose to themselves, in their works,
they express such admirable secrets of Nature, as we see, which being moved by
that stirring virtue, which continually lying hid in the heart, is outwardly
showed forth in the Body, by extending her branches through the exterior
Members, in such sort, that they may also receive motion, hence spring those
admirable motions in Pictures, which appear as diverse as the passions whence
they have their original, are different, of which point somewhat shall be said
in this ensuing Treatise.

Now the perfect knowledge of this motion, is (as has been showed) accounted
the most difficult part of the art, and reputed as a divine gift. Insomuch, as
herein alone consists the comparison between Painting and Poetry, for as it
is required in a Poet, that besides the excellency of his wit, he should
moreover be furnished with a certain propension and inclination of will,
inciting and moving him to versify, (which the ancient called the fury of
Apollo and the Muses) so likewise a Painter ought, together with those natural
parts which are required at his hands, to be furnished with a natural dexterity
and inborn slight of expressing the principal motions, even from his cradle;
otherwise it is a very hard (if not impossible) matter, to obtain to the
absolute perfection of this Art.

The truth whereof, experience it self may teach us: Insomuch as there both
have been, and are many excellent Painters, who for their extraordinary skill
in the art, are most highly esteemed of all Men, as being able to make sweet
colored pictures, having their loins and joints in all points answerable to
the rules of proportion, understanding Anatomy and painfully lightened and
shadowed, but because notwithstanding all their care and industry in this
behalf, they could never be so happy, as to attain unto this faculty. They have
left their works to the view, and hard censure of posterity, only because they
expressed unsuitable and lame Gestures, in their Pictures, which they had
stolen out of other Men's inventions: namely, out of theirs who were naturally
endued with that grace, and persuading themselves that these would very well
serve their turns: they imagined such Actions and Gestures in their own
Pictures, as being used besides the purpose, for which they were First
invented, could not be approved for good, because they offended in diverse
circumstances, wherefore those unfortunate painful Men (who notwithstanding in
some other parts of the art, be sufficiently skilful) although they can imitate
the Actions and Gestures of other inventors, yet shall they never be able to
make a commendable History, because they be naturally disfurnished of that
inborn facility and inclination.

Now on the contrary part, I deny not, but those who are furnished with natural
invention, may want that patience in their work, which the others have, which
propriety arises from the multitude of their continual inventions, and
stirring apprehensions: Insomuch, that before they can thoroughly finish or
complete any one Body or Action, infinite others arise in their fantasy, so
that by reason of the great delight they feel in their invention, they cannot
have the patience to finish any thing they take in hand.

But the most absolute and complete Painters (who are not so much inclined by
nature, as perfected by art) endeavor to choose out the best Actions for every
purpose, in restraining the luxurious fury of nature, by that deliberate
discretion which they have in their Idea, by the benefit whereof, they finish
their Pictures with delight and contentment, always expressing in each member,
a certain hidden resemblance of the princial motions, wherefore these alone
carry away the commendation of the profession which is not granted to those
furious mad-caps, by reason of their impatiency, nor yet unto the former over
diligent plodders, because they have not the natural knowledge of these
motions, and therefore cannot express them in their works, as those natural
inventors will do, with Three or Four strokes, wherefore they become inferior:
so that as well the one as the other, must needs give place to the inventor,
who wisely joyneth the industry of art, with the gift of nature.

Notwithstanding, I am of Opinion, that it is possible to attain unto this so
excellent a faculty, (though perhaps not with that special eminency of natural
facility,) as by industrious study in the knowledge of these motions, and the
causes whence they proceed. For from hence a Man may easily attain to a certain
understanding, which afterward putting in practice with patience, together
with the other points, he may undoubtedly prove a judicious inventor, who never
had any extraordinary natural inclination, my meaning is, that such an
inventor, as guides himself by understanding, shall attain to better
perfection then the other, who is naturally endued with the dexterity, without
industry and patience: for example, if a Man shall diligently peruse the whole
History of Christ, out of doubt he shall gather the true Idea and Method, how
he ought to represent the motions of Christ, the Apostles, the Jews, and all
the rest, who had any part in that cruel Tragedy, so sufficiently, that the
Mind of the beholder shall be no less moved to pity, tears and sorrow, at the
sight of the picture, then Men are usually at the reading of the History, so
that by this means he shall show in Judas; violent, offensive, brutish, buisie,
and distempered motions, and in Christ being full of patience, remiss, and
gentle, representing in him, as in a glass that singular humility and patience,
wherewith he reconciled us unto his Father: All which, notwithstanding they may
be sufficiently drawn out of the reading of the History, yet for more ease
sake, they may be taken from the accidental examples in the living, imitated
with great felicity, and afterward industriously and artificially expressed,
by causing the abundance of his diligence to appear, in stirring up affections
of piety and sorrow (as in a piece of the passion) or other affections, as the
History he has in hand, shall require.

Now concerning the way and manner how these Actions are to be given, according
to the diversity of Passions and Affections, which at sundry times, upon
several occasions may move Men's Minds; I hope in this Treatise to show evident
examples, although they be somewhat hard and drawn from the secrets of natural
Philosophy, a thing which might seem to require a Man of riper Years, then so
young a Man as my self, wherefore I must crave pardon for breaking the bounds
of Modesty, in undertaking the handling thereof, had I not been prompted unto
it by the Painters, ( it being of so great use and importance) howbeit, If
neither in that which has been already spoken, I have sufficiently laid open
this point, nor hereafter shall be able to deliver the Method fully, which I
promised, yet notwithstanding this my pains is not to be contemned, insomuch as
it will, (at the least) prepare an easy, free and Methodical passage for every
Man to exercise his Wit, which must needs prove a most sure and ready way;
insomuch as all the most Famous Painters have been directed thereby, who when
they went about to counterfeit any story, First conceived the general form
thereof, and then gave to each Figure his peculiar Actions, proportioning,
disposing, and guiding them by discretion, accompanied with natural felicity.

Now amongst the worthy Painters who excelled herein, Raphael Vrbine, was not
the least, who performed his Works, with a Divine kind of Majesty, neither was
Polidore much behind him in his kind, whose Pictures seemed as it were passing
furious, nor yet Andreas Montagnea whose vain showed a very laborious
curiosity: Nor yet Leonard del Vincent, in whose doings there was never any
error found in this point: Whereof amongst all other of his works, that
admirable last supper of Christ in Refect. St. Mariae de gratia in Milane,
makes most evident proof, in which he has so lively expressed the passions of
the Apostles minds in their countenances, and the rest of their Body, that a
Man may boldly say, the truth was nothing superior to his representation, and
need not be afraid to reckon it amongst the best works of Oyl-painting, (of
which kind of painting John Van Eyck of Maesyck born in the Year 1366. was the
first Inventor) for in those Apostles, you might distinctly perceive
admiration, fear, grief, suspicion, love etc. all which were sometimes to be
seen together in one of them, and Finally in Judas a Treason-plotting
countenance, as it were the very true counterfeit of a Traitor, so that therein
he has left a sufficient argument of his rare perfection, in the true
understanding of the passions of the Mind, exemplified outwardly in the Body,
which because it is the most necessary part of painting, I propose (as I say)
to handle in this present Treatise.

I may not omit Michael Angelo in any case, whose skill and painfulness in this
point was so great, that his Pictures carry with them more hard motions,
expressed after an unusual manner, but all of them tending to a certain stout
boldness. And as for Titian he has worthily purchased the name of a greater
Painter in this matter, as his Pictures do sufficiently witness; in each
whereof, there shines a certain moving virtue, seeming to incite the beholder,
unto the imitation thereof, of whom this saying may be well verified, that he
was beloved of the World, and envied of nature.

Finally, Gaudentius (though he be not much known) was inferior unto few, in
giving the apt motions to the Saints and Angels, who was not only a very witty
painter, as I have elsewhere showed, but also a most profound Philosopher and
Mathematician, amongst all whose all praise worthy works, (which are almost
infinite, especially in this point of motion) there diverse Mysteries of Christ's
passions, of his doings, but chiefly a crucifix, called Mount Calvary at the
Sepulcher of Varasto, where he has made admirable Horses and strange Angels,
not only in painting but also in plaistick, of a kind of earth, wrought most
curiously with his own hand, di tutto relievo, through all the Figures.

Besides in the Vault of the Chapel of St. Mary de gratia in Milane, he has
wrought most natural Angels, I mean especially for their actions, there is also
that mighty Cube of St. Mary de Sorono full of thrones of Angels, set out with
habits and actions of all sorts, carrying diversity of most strange Instruments
in their hands, I may not conceal that goodly Chapel, which he made in his
latter time, in the Church of peace in Milane, where you shall find small
Histories of our Lady and Joachim, showing such superexcellent motions, that
they seem much to revive and animate the spectators.

Moreover the story of St. Roccho, done by him in Vercelli, with diverse other
works in that City; although indeed all Lombardy be adorned with his most rare
works, whose common saying concerning this Art of motions, I will not conceal;
which was, that all painters delight to steal other Men's inventions, but that
he himself was in no great danger of being detected hereafter. Now this great
painter, although in reason, he might for his discretion, wisdom, and worth be
compared with the above named in the First Treatise: Yet notwithstanding is he
omitted by George Vasary, in his lives of the Famous Painters, Carvers, and
Architects, an argument (to say no worse of him that he intended to eternize
only his own Tuscanes, but I proceed to the unfolding of the original causes of
these motions: And First for our better understanding, I will begin with those
passions of the mind, whereby the Body is moved, to the performance of his
particular effects.

Of the passions of the Mind, their original and difference.
THe passions of the mind, are nothing else but certain motions, proceeding
from the apprehension of some thing, now this apprehension is Threefold,
sensitive, rational, and intellectual, and from these Three, there arise Three
passions in the mind, for sometimes we follow sensitive apprehensions, and then
we consider good and evil, under the show of that which is profitable or
unprofitable, pleasant or offensive; and these are called natural affections,
sometimes we pursue rational apprehensions, considering good and evil in manner
of virtue or vice, praise or dispraise, honesty or dishonesty; and these are
reasonable affections, sometimes we embrace apprehensions intellectual,
regarding good and evil, as true and false, and these are intellectual
apprehensions.

Now the inferior powers of the mind are of two sorts, either desire or anger,
and both of these respect that which seems good or bad, diversely, for the
desiring part either considers good and bad absolutely; and so it causes
love and liking, and contrariwise hatred, or else it respects good as absent,
whence arises desire or longing, or else evil as absent, but at hand, and so
it breeds fear, dread, etc. or both of them as present, and so from the First
comes joy and delight, from the latter heaviness and grief, the angry faculty
considers good and evil, as it is easy or hard to be attained unto, or
avoided; whence springs sometimes confidence and hope, sometimes audacity,
sometimes distrust, and so desperation, etc. sometimes it is moved to revenge,
and that is in regard of evil past, as injury or offense received, and so it
breeds anger, by that which has hitherto been spoken it is evident, that
there are Eleven passions or affections in the mind, which are these, love,
hatred, desire, fear, joy, sorrow, hope, despair, audacity, timerousness and
anger, from which there do consequently arise so many sorts of actions in the
art, as there may be affections expressed in Men's Bodies, wherefore we ought
carefully to observe the motions which are outwardly expressed, in such sort,
as they do manifestly point to the roots, whence they spring, and discover the
causes from which they proceed, distributing them and disposing them
accordingly in the Bodies, or Physiognomies which whosoever shall fail in,
shall ( questionless) wholly pervert the Order of things, confounding the
Beauty of Histories, whether they be Fables, or other Inventions, which are to
be painted.

How the Body or Physiognomy is altered by the Passions of the mind.
IT is a clear case, that the mind according to the diverse affections (whereof
I spoke before) by reason of the apprehensions both sensible and imaginative)
does diversely change and alter the Body with sensible alterations, by varying
the accidents thereof, and producing sundry qualities in the members, so that
in mirth, the spirits are enlarged, in fear they are contracted, in bashfulness
they fly up to the Brain, again, in joy the heart is extended by degrees, in
displeasure it is drawn in by little and little, as likewise in anger and fear,
but sudden anger and desire of revenge procures heat, blushing, bitter taste,
and the flux of the Belly, fear brings coldness, the panting of the heart, the
failing of the voice, and paleness, heaviness causes sweating, and a bluish
paleness, mercifulness breeds a certain heaviness, which oftentimes hurts him
that is moved to mercy, which appears ordinarily in lovers, in whom there is
such a Sympathy, that whatsoever one indureth, the other likewise suffers the
same; Anxiety causes dryness and blackness; desire and love, breeds sundry
colors, sometimes red, sometimes pale, as we daily see in lovers, especially
in their meetings.

Now all these passions when they be exceeding vehement do sometimes bring
Death, which happened to Sophocles and Dionysius the Sicilian Tyrant, when he
received the News of a desperate victory; the like has befallen drivers others
through heaviness and sundry other mishaps have proceeded from the like
passions, when they assaulted Men's minds, whereof we have diverse examples in
stories, which I mean not to stand upon as being a thing more curious then
necessary to our purpose; only I will show, of what power and efficacy, fierce
wrath joined with a magnanimous audacity can do, by the example of Alexander
the Great, who being overmatched by his Enemies in India, was seen to reak
forth from his Body, fire and light, the like whereof we read of the Father of
Theodoricus, who by the like vehement effect, breathed out of his heart, as
from a burning furnace, fiery sparkles, which flying forth shon and made a
sound in the Air. Thus therefore we represent all these passions in a story,
together with their convenient and proper Motions, we set forth that great
variety which works such delight and pleasure, that it allureth our Minds
unto it, with a sweet kind of compulsion, no otherwise then most delectable
Music enchaunteth the Ears of the Hearers, which (as they write) is so
forcible that way, that a certain Musician boasted, that by the power of his
notes, he caused Men to grow furious, and afterward come to themselves again.

Of the Motions procured by the Seven planets.
AMongst the Seven Governors of the World (which Merc: Trismegistus calls
Planets, as Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Sol, Venus, Mercury and Luna) the chief and
principal is Saturn, which has also received diverse names of antiquity, as
Heaven, Sith-bearer, the father of the gods, Patron of time, and from his
effects here below: wise, intelligent, ingenious, the seed of great profundity,
the Auctor of secret contemplation, the imprinter of weighty thoughts in Men, a
destroyer and preserver, the Subjector of power and might, the keeper of hidden
things, and the Auctor of finding and loosing.

His influences are partly good, and partly bad, according to the disposition
of him that receives them, as weeping, melancholy etc. he causes religious
actions, as to bow the knee, look down upon the earth, pray, and such like
motions of the Breast and Face, common to those which pray, or other austere
and satirical Fellows, with Head declining, Eyes fixed on the earth, wasting
himself with a furious silence, and examining his own speech, with hanging
lips. Moreover, he causes a complexion of color between black and yellow,
meager, distorted, of an hard skin, eminent veyns, an hairy Body, small Eyes,
Eyebrows joined together, a thin beard, thick lips, with looks cast down, an
heavy gate, enterfairing as he goes, besides he makes a Man subtle, witty, a
way-layer, and murderer: Now according to this form of Body, and these
motions, you may frame any Body subject unto Saturn, that is of the temper and
complexion answerable to the nature of Saturn, so that by that which has been
said concerning this Planet in particular, as also by that which shall be
spoken severally of the rest, we may gather one general Rule, as touching the
Art of motions in our Pictures, as well in respect of the quality of the
humor, as of the motions themselves, etc.

Jupiter.
The Second Planet is Jupiter, so named of the Latins, as you would say Juvans
Pater, the Father of beneficence and liberality, he is otherwise called of the
Poets, magnanimous, the thunderer and lightner, invincible, altipotent,
magnipotent, good natured, fortunate, sweet, pleasant, the best well-willer,
honest, neat, of a good gate, honorable, the author of mirth and judgment,
wise, true, the revealer of truth, the chief judge exceeding all the Planets in
goodness, the bestower of riches and wisdom: the dispositions and affections
proceeding from this Planet are, a merry and ingenious countenance, actions of
honor, shaking of hands, after the manner of those which entertain strangers,
commending and speaking Men fair, with cap and knee, lifting up the head as
those use which pray.

Concerning the complexion, disposition and feature of the Body, he makes a Man
of a mixed sanguine, betwixt white and red, of a delicate Body, good stature,
either bald or else high-foreheaded, Eyes somewhat big, short nostrels and
unequal, the cheek-teeth somewhat big, a curled beard, deceitful and fair
conditioned: All which correspondencies betwixt the qualities of the mind, and
the constitution of the Body, together with their exterior affections, if the
Painter shall with judgment consider and observe, they will breed both delight
in him, and estimation to his Art, teaching him farthermore the true difference
between an honest man and a varlet, one that is merry, and a melancholy
Fellow, a Man of his hands, and a coward, and so forth, according to all those
qualities naturally proceeding from Jupiter, etc.

Mars.
The third Planet is Mars, and by the Poets is also called Mavors, the god of
war, bloody, armipotent, ensifer, magnanimous, bold, inconquerable, full of
generosity, of invincible power, of impetuous presence, unresistable, a
subverter of the strong and mighty, and a deposer of Kings: he is the Lord of
heat, burning and power, the Planet of blood, brawls and violence, incensing,
contentions and bold spirits, and (in a word) broching all disordered,
inconsiderate and heady actions: his Gestures are terrible, cruel, fierce,
angry, proud, hasty and violent: he causes Men to be of a red complexion, a
deep yellow hair, round visaged, fiery Eyes, a cruel and fierce countenance, by
reason of his intemperate heat; insomuch that he is reputed hot and dry, in the
highest degree, bearing sway over red choler.

Sol.
The Fourth Planet is Sol, which has diverse other appellations as Phoebus,
Apollo, Titan, Pean, Horus, Osiris, Arcitenent, Fiery, Golden flamiger,
Radiant, Igni-comus, the Eye of the World, Lucifer, Multifidus, Omnipotent, the
Prince of Stars, the grand Seignior, he is of good Nature, fortunate, honest,
neat, prudent, intelligent, wise, the governor, the bestower of life upon all
Bodies endued with Soul, obscuring the light of the other Stars with his
exceeding brightness, and yet imparting unto them all that light they have,
whence in respect of the night he is called Dyonisius, and of the day Apollo,
as you would say pellens malum, the dispeller of evil, wherefore the Athenians
called him (...), etc.

He was named Phoebus by reason of his Beauty, and Vulcan because of the
violent heat he ingendereth in those Bodies, over which he has dominion, and
Sol for the pre-eminence of his light; wherefore the Assyrians named him Adad,
which signifies alone, the Hebrews Shemesh; the Motions proceeding from him
are courageous, honorable, majestical, considerate and wise; the color and
hew which he gives is brownish, betwixt yellow and black mixed with red,
causing those which are subject to him to be of a low stature, yet of a comely
personage, bald, curled, with yellowish Eyes, touching the affections of their
mind, they are considerate, prudent, trusty, vain glorious, and magnanimous.

Venus.
The Fifth Planet is Venus, whose denominations are likewise diverse, expressed
by variety of Epithites; as chief, mild, fair, bright, white, pleasant,
powerful, fruitful, the Mother of love and beauty, the progeny of ages, the
First Mother of Man, she that First joined both Sexes together in love, the
Queen of all joy, friendly, merciful, ever bountiful to Mankind, embracing all
things with her virtue, humbling the strong and lofty, and exalting the base
and weak, and directing all things; they call her Aphrodite, because she is
said to be born of the froth of the Sea, and Phosphorus, or Lucifer, when she
appears before the Sun in the East, and Hesperus when she follows the Sun,
her motions are pleasant and mirthful, being given to sports, dalliance,
dancing, and embraceings, she makes the countenance amiable, pleasant, and
merry, working a kind of whiteness in the Body, by reason of her cold and moist
nature (resembling the water which when it is congealed and frozen, looks
white) yet prettily mixed with red, she causes Men to be proper of Body, fair
and round visaged, with black rolling Eyes, brown hair, of a lovely
disposition, gentle, bountiful, courteous, affable and gracious.

Mercury.
Mercury is the sixth Planet, and of the ancient is called the Son of Jupiter,
the Herald and prolocutor of the gods, the Graecians call him (...), which
signifies shining, serpentiger, caducifer, light-foot, eloquent, gainful,
wise, reasonable, strong, potent as well on the good as on the bad part, the
notary of the Sun, Jupiters herald, having commerce with the supernal and
infernal gods, male with the male, and female with the female, most fruitful,
an Hermaphrodite: Lucian calls him the Vmpire of the gods, others Hermes, or
the interpreter, and the expounder of the mysteries of nature; his motions are
inconstant, slippery, mutable, strong, lively, prompt and ready, he causes a
complexion neither very white, nor very black, a long visage, an high forehead,
small Eyes, not altogether black, an even Nose and something long, thin beard,
long and slender fingers: the operations which he causes in the mind are
witty, subtle, busy, sharp, wary, and fruitful.

Luna.
The Seventh and last Planet is Luna, of the ancients called Phoebe, Diana,
Lucina, Proserpina, Hecate, Menstrena, Triformis, Nocti Luca, wandering, silent,
double horned, safe, night walking, cornigera, Queen of Heaven, the first of
the goddesses, Queen over men's minds, Mistress of all the Elements, she to home
the stars have relation, and the Elements are in subjection, at whose beck the
lightnings shine, and seeds spring, the Mother of corn, Sister of Phoebus, the
transporter of light, from one planet to another; imparting her light, to all
the other stars, and restraining their diverse courses; the Lady of rain and
moisture, the bestower of riches, the Nurse of mankind, the ruler of all
states, pitiful, merciful, the preserver of men both by Sea and Land,
mittigating the tempests at Sea, the subduer of carnal affections, Queen of the
world, and vanquisher of Hell, whose Majesty the birds of the air, the beasts
of the fields, the serpents in the rocks, and caves of the earth, and the
fishes of the sea do reverence; finally the Enemy to Thieves and Murderers.

Her motions are moveable, beneficent, childish, simple, oblivious, and
curious; she makes a man of a pale complexion, intermingled with red of a
comely stature, round visaged and marked blackish eyes, beetle brows, tender
and soft flesh, the Qualities of whose minds are satiability, facility,
pensiveness, affection of news, no ready gift in discoursing.

And from hence springs the whole variety of all the other motions besides
the above named of the Elements, all which serve for tokens, and signs whereby
we may the better attain to the knowledge of the natures of people, and their
affections and passions, answerable to the virtue and influence of the Planets,
which the ancient Mathematitians have by long experience observed, neither did
those excellent Motistes Al. Magnus, Abbas Tritemius, and Rai: Lullius consider
them to any other end and purpose. Whosoever therefore, shall be thoroughly
possessed with these things, imprinting them well in his mind, and proceeding
according to their direction in his Pictures, may assure himself that his works
will prove not only commendable, but even exceeding admirable, expressing in
them sadness by Saturn, by Jupiter contentment, by Mars cruelty, by
Solmagnanimity, by Mercury quickness of spirit, by Venus love and wantonness,
and by Luna humanity and gentleness; exemplifying moreover according to these
Observations, these and such like effects, united together in the compounds;
all which the Ancient Masters, carefully observed, (as may appear by their
works) which sufficiently declare, that they both understood these mysteries,
and took great pains in expressing them, whence it is most apparent, that the
knowledge of these things, cannot be attained unto, by the mere practice of
Painting, but by the earnest study of philosophy, wherewith the Ancient
Painters were sufficiently furnished; and hence it is, that Michael Angelo of
late Years, being very skilful in these matters, gave to the Devils in his last
judgment in the Vaticane, not only the actions and gestures of Angels and
nimble and active Men, together with other earthly ornaments, but also diverse
other looks and countenances, most suitable to their wicked intents, as in his
own discretion he thought fittest; whence we find Charon and the other Devils,
to have several countenances, though all of them dreadful and malicious, in
which point Leonard Vincent was much renowned, and the other Five mentioned in
the Second Chapter of this Treatise, who were the very light and direction of
all the other good Painters, whom I therefore pass over, because they are
recorded in the lives of the Painters, who were reputed little inferior to
Michael Angelo.

How all the motions may accidently befall any man though diversely.
HAving hitherto discoursed of the motions arising from the Elements, the
humors and the Celestial bodies, as also how they differ each from other,
according to their several operations in men, and their various effects; it
remains that I should now speak in particular of certain principal
properties of these motions, taking natural examples, (as my manner is) and
applying them to the Planets, from whence this variety of effects and
influences descends, which particularity of motions if it shall be expressed,
it will discover all sorts of passions of the mind in each Body or Physiognomy,
but because each man is subject to some one of the Planets, and therefore is
more especially inclined to some one affection, it will not be amiss to show
how upon occasion any affection whatsoever may be stirred up in a Man of any
condition, or constitution; the manifestation whereof, rises wholly from the
Five Senses, as the instruments whereby the objects be apprehended: as by the
Eye we The Five Senses.
see that which is comely and undecent; by the Ear we hear sounds pleasant and
unpleasant, as praise and dispraise; by the Nostrils we smell sweet and
stinking, strong and sharp savours, by the taste we discern sweet, sharp,
unsavory, thick, salt, stiptick, virulent, bitter, fat, strong, unpleasant,
and (as Aristotle says) hard and soft: Finally by the feeling, we touch cold
and hot, moist and dry, as also sharp, light, slippery, heavy, hard, soft,
gross, slender and such like qualities, from whence all actions, whereunto any
kind of Body is subject, are caused, though more abundantly, and more
apparently in some, then in others, whence we are given to understand, that as
these qualities are distinct between themselves, and are severally applied to
the Planets, so likewise the affections proceeding from them do vary,
accordingly as the senses, apprehensions and passions, together with their
objects, viz. colors, sounds, smells, tastes and matters do differ.

Now although there be but one particular instinct in each private Man, which
inclines him to good or evil, whereunto that Free Governor and Arbiter of his
affections most naturally learneth, anst from whence all his ordinary actions
proceed, notwithstanding there is no impediment why a Man may not be affected
diversely, by any of the exterior senses (the ordinary instruments of all our
operations) by framing in his mind, passions answerable to the object
apprehended by his senses, and so cause such like Actions to break forth in
him, as be repugnant to his particular instinct, the truth whereof we read in
David King of the Hebrews; who was lasciviously affected, when from the top of
his Palace, he beheld Bathsheba, bathing her self naked; and at the same
instant was stirred up unto cruelty in commanding Vrias to be slain, although
he were naturally both a most continent and clement Prince. Again his Son
Solomon the Wise, was subdued by his sense, and bewitched by the inticings of
Concubines and Idolaters, things much abhorrent from the Instinct of his
nature: And thus in perusing of Histories, we shall find how diverse most
valiant Princes, have upon occasions proved faint hearted, and been stained
with covetousness, many pittyful Men been given to cruelty, religious Men to
revenge and malice, chaste Men to luxury, stout Men to cowardice, etc. observing
moreover the alteration of mirth into sorrow, lamentation into laughter,
covetousness into liberality; which I therefore omit, because we daily see
lively examples of people successively affected with sundry vices, as rapines,
grief, love, dishonesty, theft, murder, hatred, revenge, treachery, tyrany,
insolency, etc. and contrariwise with religion, mercy, loyalty, clemency,
liberality, honesty, victorious, desire of honor, etc. as Thieves being
ashamed to lay themselves open before company, for fear of being discovered,
will make a fair show of true Men; and curtesans and light Hous-wives, in the
presence of other grave Matrons, will bare the countenance of very honest
women, concealing their habitual naughtyness, for Fear of the disgrace and
punishment, which would otherwise ensue; and fellones to avoid the danger of
the halter, will take upon them the habit of honest and civil Men.

Hence then the Painter may learn how to express not only the proper and
natural motions, but also the accidental, wherein consists no small part of
the difficulty of the Art, namely in representing diversities of affections and
passions in one Body or Face: a thing much practiced, by the ancient Painters
(though with great difficulty) who ever endeavored to leave no part of the
Life unexpressed. It is recorded that Euphranor gave such a touch to the
counterfeit of Paris, that therein the beholder might at once collect, that he
was Vmpire of the Three goddesses, the courter of Helena, and the slayer of
Achilles, and of Parasius the Ephesian, that he painted the Idol of the
Athenians in such sort, that he seemed angry, unjust, inconstant, implacable,
gentle, merciful, etc. again we read how Theon represented in Orestes, fury and
grief mixed together; and of another who resembled in Ulysses a dissembling
patience: as also of Aristides the Thebane, who (in the Person of a wounded
Woman giving her child suck) expressed pain, and fear so lively, that it is
hard to say whether she were more pained with the sense of her wound, then
afraid, least her child lacking milk, should suck blood; who also is reported
to have been the First that began to represent these perturbations of the Mind,
and was afterward followed of the other Painters, as a guide herein, as it was
once by chance found upon a small earthen head of Christ in his Childhood,
made by Leonard Vincent himself; wherein you might evidently perceive, the
simplicity and innocence of a Child, accompanied with understanding, wisdom,
and Majesty: and although it were the countenance of but a young and tender
Child, yet it seemed to show forth a kind of sage antiquity, much to be admired.

Of diverse other necessary Motions.
BEsides the Motions already declared at large, for the better understanding of
such other as might hereafter serve for our purpose, it is to be observed, that
there are certain others of no small importance, which are to be referred unto
that which is most comely, and agreeable to Man's Body, as well in respect of
such effects as proceed from the same; as also in regard of the times and
seasons, together with the consideration of the objects, offering themselves to
our sense, for the better attaining whereof, we must in all the Actions and
Gestures; make choice of the chiefest and most principal, searching them out
most diligently, and deducing them from the Vide George Vasari della pittula
capib.
circumstances, which are found in the part to be represented, as Leonard
Vincent did in the Cartone of St. Anne, which was afterward transported into
France, and is now to be seen in Milane, with Aurelius Lovinus a Painter, in
the border whereof, there are many draughts, expressing the great joy and mirth
which the Virgin Mary conceived, when she beheld so goodly a Child as Christ
born, considering with her self that she was made worthy to be his Mother: and
likewise in St. Anne, the joy and contentment which she felt, seeing her
daughter become the Blessed Mother of God.

Moreover in that Piece which is to be seen in the Chapel of the conception in
St. Francis Church at Milane, where you shall see how St. John Baptist kneeling
with his Hands together, bowed toward Christ; which was an action of
obedience, and Child-like reverence, and in the Virgin, a gesture of cheerful
contemplation, whilst she beheld these actions; and in the Angel, an action of
Angelical Beauty, in consideration of the joy which was to betide the world by
this mystery; in Christ as yet a child divinity and wisdom, where the Virgin
Mary also kneeled by holding St. John in her Right Hand, and stretching forward
her Left Hand which was foreshortned, and finally the Angel holding Christ in
his Left Hand, who sitting by, looked upon St. John and Blessed him; again,
diverse other Famous Painters and lights of the art, have observed other
motions, as contemplation in casting the Eyes up to Heaven, admiring the
Angelical Music, and neglecting for a time all Inferior Music, with the
hands, instruments, and other earthly melodies, which motions were expressed in
that singular piece of St. Cecily which Raph. Painted with Four other Saints,
which work is now to be found in Bolognia at St. John's in the mount, the Agony
also and sorrow of the afflicted, which Anton: Correggio expressed most
artificially in his own City, in Christ praying in the Garden; as likewise
want, panting, sweating, sleeping, threatening, and the motion of the flaming
fire: all which are most lively expressed by them in diverse places, and now to
come to the Poets, that which Ariosto speaks of his Orlando, may serve for a
fit example herein.

His legs and hands he shakes, and breaths withal,
Whiles from his Face the liquid drops do fall.
And in another place, of a Man grievously diseased, famished, and out of
heart, in the Person of the same Orlando, when Angelica found him lying upon
the shore.

Rough, grisly-hair'd, Eyes stairing, visage wan,
Sun-burnd and patcht, and all deformed insight,
In fine he looked to make a true description
In face like Death, in hew, like an Egyptian.
And that of Dant describing a Shipwreck in a great Tempest at Sea, where the
Men are saved.

And even as they, who panting at a wrack,
Escaped from the Sea, and gotten to the shore,
Turned to the dangerous water, and look back.
And thus much for examples, for he that would set down all the examples which
would serve for the showing, how in every effect we ought to choose the most
proper motions, without which the Picture will be of small worth, should grow
infinite; we must also have regard to the seasons, for the Summer causes
open, and wearisome actions, subject unto sweatings and redness; the Winter
restrained, drawn in, and trembling; the Spring merry, nimble, prompt, and of a
good color; the Autumn doubtful, and more inclining unto melancholy then
otherwise, notwithstanding if you be to paint a laboring Man, you must
without any regard of the season (though more of Summer then any of the rest)
represent him with raised limns and strong muscles, swelling and standing
forth, sweating and burning, especially in such as carry burdens, draw great
weights, or use vehement leaping, walking, jesting with weapons, fencing and
such like exercises; lastly, sleep causes no motions of vigor or force to be
represented, but as if the body were without life; Wherefore we must take
heed, we do not (as some use) give unto those which sleep such kinds of
actions in their lying, as in probability will not suffer them to sleep, as we
see ofttimes in Men lying athwart stones, benches, etc. being represented with
their limns supported by their own force, wherein it is evident, that such
Painters know not how to observe a Decorum.

Farthermore, there are motions proceeding from the Taste, as daily experience
teach us, for sourness and bitterness cause the bending of the Eyelids, and
other parts; sweet and savoury, a cheerful countenance; the like of good
smells, whereas contrariwise bad smells make us draw in the Nostrils, look
aside, turn the back, with wrinkled Eyelids, Eyes almost closed, and mouth
drawn in; of hearing and touching, they also cause distinct motions in our
Bodies, as for example, from sharp sounds and noise, rises sudden fear and
affrighting, from touching any hot thing, quick and speedy motions, from
touching cold things, restrained and fearful motions, as in such in the winter
touch Ice or Snow. And so I conclude of seeing, for in looking upon things
exceeding bright, the sight is offended, and a Man withdraws himself for
safeguard in beholding obscure things; the Eyes are sharpened, by drawing near,
and as it were clozing them as Painters use to do, when they would look near on
a thing, which effect is caused by a Picture set afar off: And here I will
conclude those simple Motions which are of most Importance, proceeding unto
those which consist of multiplicity.

Of the Motions of all sorts of Cloth.
THe Motions of Cloth, that as the Folds or Plaits ought to run out every way
like boughs from the Stem and Body of the Tree: and must be so made that one
Plait rise from another, as one bough, or one stream of Water issues out from
another, in such wise, that there be no part of the Cloth wherein there appear
not some of these motions; now these motions would be moderate, gentle and
free, without any interruptions, more to be admired for their grace and
facility, then for affected pains and industry, and because all sorts of Cloth
have their motions, as well as Bodies, it must needs be that they differ
between themselves, according to the differences of the clothes themselves.

Wherefore, they must be more light in fine Cloth, as Sarcenet, Linen,
Cypress, etc. in which the Plaits are small, raised up, trembling, and as it
were sweetly waving, somewhat puffed up by extending and spreading themselves
like a Sail, where the motion receives more strength by the wind, they do fall
close upon the bare skin, as appears plainly in women's garments, in whom you
shall see their Thin clothes stretched upon their bare skin, on that side where
the wind blows, and blown upon the contrary part, the same falls out in
mantells, the loose ends of girdles and garters, all which motions do most
fitly belong unto the apparel of nimphs and other goddesses, in respect of
their lightness; gross and dull shadows are found in stiff cloths, where the
Plaits are few and gross, so that they are capable but of slow motion, and
therefore they sink downwards, and can hardly fall close to the bare skin, by
reason of their own grosseness, which sustaineth them, and these motions do
chiefly appear in cloth of gold, felt, thick leather etc: in which the Air can
have little force or none, wherefore the plaits or folds have their motion
accordingly as they are handled and pressed by the wearer; as under the arm,
and under the knee, by opening and stretching out the leg and the arm, ever
making gross, hard, and stiff folds, without all slightings or plyableness, in
such sort, that if a Man may lay Finer cloth upon them, they will easily bear
it up without pressing down.

Temperate motions, which are neither too gross, nor too slight, are such as
appear in the folds of stuff and other cloths of Fine wool, which therefore may
conveniently be moved of the Air, and are pliable to a Man's limns, and so
making most sweet and pleasant folds, they follow the bare very well, becoming
very nimble, and falling plyably about the loins. And hence have Raphael,
Michael Angelo, Leonard, Gaudentius, Albertus Durerus, and other Famous Masters
in Drapery, taken the method and way of giving the true motions unto garments,
as from the most perfect pattern for their general use in making the mantells
of the Saints, Pavilions or Tents, which are made with this kind of Drapery,
besides these, there are also other kinds of motions called turnings and
crossings, which are proper unto Damasks, Taffataes, Sattins, Cloth of gold
etc: in which appear folds crossing and breaking each other, by the diverse
Virtue of the Drapery.

Whence the Venetians have taken their manner of Drapery, who make their folds
much different from the said motions of Raphael and the rest, which indeed
ought not to be used any where save in counterfeits by the life, where it seems
they are not only tolerable, but also very requisite; but in my Judgment they
should not ordinarily be used in Histories, and yet if occasion do require that
they should be represented in any place, they ought not to be done wholly, but
only somewhat and resembled with a pretty touch and grace, in such sort that
they may not savor of an affected imitation of the natural garments, without
grace or order which is often used of many with small reason (as I think:)
there are also other motions as of velvet, limber leather, etc, all which
differ one from another, but I think these may suffice, without proceeding any
farther in the discourse hereof; only let the Painter be careful and
industrious, as well herein as in the rest: Insomuch as in the excellency and
perfection thereof depends, as well hereon, as on the rest; because these
motions of garments come so near the life, that it is evident, that they are
able to make a picture seem displeasing and ilfavoured, procuring the scorn and
laughter of the beholders, such were some of those which were used by our Great
Grandfathers Son Two hundred Years since, which seemed like round sticks, or
candles hanging down, which some of our late workmen of good Note have also
used, making their folds too long, hanging down like Canes, without any kind of
grace. Another defect in the Drapery of old Pictures I find, which is; that
they seem to be made like unto Scales in some sort: which I think, they took
from the imitation of the models of Men, clothed with paper, which point
afterward attained to high perfection, by the great industry of Bramant, and
Andreas Montegnia, and was afterward reformed, and made much more absolute by
Albert Durer, and Lucas of Leiden, and Aldigravers, whose Folds for the most
part nere like guts confounded in one another.

Of the Motions of Trees and all other things that are moved.
LAstly the Motions of every thing which is moved, ought to be expressed with
Judgment, accordingly as they agree with the thing whereunto they are given,
sometimes quick, sometimes slow, sometimes moveable, sometimes not: And First
of all in Trees, when they are shaken with the wind, there smaller (and
therefore more pliable) boughs, must be resembled with such an action, that
they may more strike one against another, by yiedling and declining from the
part whence the wind blows, then the stiffer (and therefore slower) the Body
notwithstanding remaining strong and steadfast, the boughs growing from thence,
begin a little to bend, and the others which proceed from them a little more,
so that in the end they show the same agility, in the leaves most of all; it is
true that all Trees have not a like motion: For the Willow moves, and is
shaken extremely, the Pine Tree not at all, or very little, and so forth of the
rest according to their natures, but by the way we must Note, that young and
tender Trees of Body, begin First to move from the bottom of the Body, shaking
their boughs and leaves together. Herbs likewise whether they bear flowers or
fruits, have trembling motions, according to the conditions of the wind which
blows them, and also accordingly as they are forced or oppressed of any
thing; as for example, an Ear of Corn when a Bird sits feeding upon it, which
will not only make it bend, but even weigh it down to the Earth, as well
observed that Country Fellow in Greece of a Painter, whether it were Aristides
or Pamphilus I do not well remember, who had painted a Bird upon an Ear of
Corn, without making the stalk bend a jot: In like sort the motions of other
unsensible things, as quivering of Feathers, of wings and plumes, the wreathing
of ropes, the knots of hands, flying of straws, dust, etc. must be expressed
according to the violence done unto them, to the end there may no occasion be
given unto the meanest, to tax and carp at Painters (otherwise most excellent;)
as not long since fell out, in the work of a good carver; who in the vvrong
side, where he had carved Michael Angelo, made a blind Beggar, led by a Dog
tied with a string about his Neck, which seemed to be so stretched, that it was
as stiff as a staff, without any bowing: which gave occasion to a waggish Boy
to scoff at it, saying, that if the Dog, had straightened the string so hard, he
had either been strangled, or not able to go any farther, which caused certain
Painters which were there to break into an extreme laughter.

Many such blame worthy motions may be found in Pictures, which would not so
easily escape the hands of Painters, if in every thing they Paint, they did
consider, that it is their own disgrace be it never so small, as the most
diligent Leonard, and Caesar Sestius did out of whose hands there never came
any unperfect piece of work; for in the smallest herbs, you shall find their
most true Proportion, and Natural Motion.

Albertus Durerus was no less careful in this behalf, as may sufficiently
appear by his prints and colored pieces, in which you shall find the
legitimate motions, even unto the smallest hairs of the beard, as in that of
the Duke of Saxony, which was also drawn again by Titianus, and afterward in
the hairs of St. Sebastians dog, in the print of the horses of sense and death,
and in the great leaves of Adam and Eve.

The motions of the Sea must be otherwise expressed by representing the diverse
agitations of the waters, as likewise in rivers, the flashing of the waters
upon Boats, and Ships floating up and down on the waters, through the
uncertainty of the surges and the Ships resistance. We must also represent the
motions of waters falling down from an high place, but especially when they
fall upon some Rock or stones, where you shall see them spirting up into the
Air, and sprinkling all about.

Clouds also in the Air require to have their motions judiciously expressed,
now gathered together with the winds, now violently condensated into Hail,
Thunderbolts, Lightning, Rain, and such like Meteors: Finally you can make
nothing, which requires not his proper motions, according unto which it ought
to be represented, but having hitherto sufficiently (as I suppose) discoursed
of these kind of motions, I will here shut up all with the most hot and
vehement motions of the flaming Fire, hastening toward an end as that does
naturally, although it be diversely stirred and blown with the wind, whereby
notwithstanding gathering more force, it is augmented and increased.

THE Art of Miniture OR LIMNING.
I Hope that no Ingenuous person, will be so bold to attempt this Art, before
he can design, (that is to say) further than Copying any Picture in black and
white, as Cole, black Chalk, black Lead or the like. It is necessary to draw
much after good Heads of plaster of Paris, because the difference is much more
difficult to draw after a round then a flat, and after you have practiced much
by the Heads of plaster, you must endeavor to draw much after the life, in
black and white, before you undertake the Art of Limning.

The Colors to be used in Limning are termed thus,

Whites Flake white Serus
Red Carmine, Indian Lake, Red Lead, Indian Red, Burnt Ocur, etc.
Yellow Masticot, Yellow ocur, Eng. ocur, Pinck.
Greens Sap Green, Pinck and Bice, Green Bice, Terra Vert.
Blews Vltra Marine, Dutch Bice, Smalt, Indigo.
Browns Gall Stone, Mumme, Cullins Earth, Vmber, Rust.
Blacks Ivory black, Sea-cole, Lamp black, Cherry Stone.

As for Vermillion, Verdigrease, Orpiment, etc. they are too course and gritty
to use in water colors; Turnsoile, Litmus blew, Rosset, Brasil, Logwood,
Saffron, are more fit for washing prints then curious Limning.

The way and manner of preparing colors,
White Lead.
To make your white lead that it shall neither rust nor shine, both which are
no small inconveniences in the Art of Limning, therefore before you grind
either of them, lay them in the Sun two or three days, which will exhale those
greasy and salt humors that poison and starve the colors, besides you must
scrape away the superficies of the white lead, and only reserve the middle of
it, then grind it with fair water, or rosemary water, upon a Pebble or
Porphire, when it is ground have in readiness a chalk-stone with furrows in it,
into which furrows put the color while it is wet, and so let it dry in the
Sun, and it will be exceedingly cleansed thereby, after it is through dry it
must be washed in spring water; as for example,

Let one Instance serve for all
Colors to be washed and how.
TAke a Pound of white lead finely ground, put it into a basin of spring water,
stir it a while together, till the water be all colored, then let it stand,
and you will soon perceive a greasy scum to arise, which scum blow off and
power the colored water into a clean basin, leaving the grosser Body at the
bottom of the basin behind, it being good for nothing but grosser uses, let
the purer part stand One hour or Two, until it is quite settled, then power
off the water from the color, and put it in fresh water, and stir it as
before mentioned, then let it settle half the time that it did at first, and
then power off the water into a clean basin, leaving the courser part behind;
and when it is dry put it up into papers for your use; then let the other water
which you powered off, settle, and then power off the water from it, and take
the color when it is dry, and paper it as before, for your use: colors thus
refined five or six times over are the purest, and most fit for the best use,
and when you use it spread a little of it about a shell, with your finger, and
temper it with gum water.

Colors to be vvashed are these follovving.
Red Lead or Mean, Masticot, green Bice, blew Bice, Smalt, Vltamarine, Sap
green.

Colors to be ground are these.
White Lead, Serus, Indian Lake, Brown Oker, Yellow Oker, Pinck, Indigo, Vmber,
Cullins earth, Cherry stone, Ivory, Lamp black, Indian red.

Of the Nature of Colors in general
English Ocur.
Yellow) This color lies even in the shell of it self, and is of great use,
especially if well ground.

Pinck mixed with Bice, a good green.
Green) The Fairest Pinck is best, well ground and tempered with blew Bice,
allowing one quantity of Pinck to three of blew Bice; to deepen this color in
Landscape or Drapery, mix with it a little Indigo finely ground.

Vmber.
Brown) This color is somewhat greasy; to cleanse it, burn it in a Cruciple,
afterward grind it and it will be good.

Indian Red.
Dark Red) Because this color is very course, you may use Vmber, and a little
lake tempered, which is as good.

Black.
Black) Ivory and Cherry-stone, are both to be burnt in a Cruciple, and so
ground; Cherrystone is good for Drapery, for a black Satin, temper with it a
little white, Indian Lake, and Indigo, heighten it with a lighter mixture,
deepen it with Ivory black, this was Hilliards way.

Ivory Black.
Black) Grind Ivory with a pittance of white Sugar Candy, which will preserve
it from crackling out of your shel.

Indian Lake.
Purple) Grind this with a little gum water, and when it is ground fine, before
you put it into the shell, mix a little powder of white Sugar Candy with it,
which will preserve it from crackling, after this temperature you may spread
it thinly with your finger about the shell.

Observations in Grinding.
Leave not your color too moist, but thick and clammy, if after your color be
dry in your shell, you rubbing your fingers thereon shall find any to come off,
it must be better bound with gum, and if too much gum, it will shine and be
apt to crackle off after it is used.

To wash Bice.
Blew) Grind your Bice first very purely, then fill a large shell with clean
water, put the Bice therein and stir it, then let it settle One hour, take
off the scum and power off the water, then reserve the bottom when it is dry
for use: To deepen this, use Litmus water.

How to choose your Pencils.
Choose such Pencils as are clear and sharp pointed, not dividing into parts;
of these you must have in readiness a several Pencil, for every several color.

To prepare a Tablet to work on with Miniture for Pictures by the life.
Take an ordinary playing Card, polish it with a Dogs Tooth, and make as smooth
as you can the white side of it, cleansing it from all spots and extuberances;
then choose of the best abortive parchment, a Piece proportionable to your
Card, which piece with fine and clean starch past fast on the card, temper the
starch before you past it on, in the palm of your hand, that it may be free
from Knots; let the card thus pasted dry, then making your grinding-stone as
clean as may be, lay the card thereon with the parchment side downwards; then
with a Tooth burnish or polish the backside as hard as you can, Note that the
outside of the skin is best to Limne upon, and must therefore be outmost.

The Ground color for a Face.
Your card thus prepared, you are to lay a ground or primer of flesh color
before you begin your work, and that must be tempered according to the
complexion of the Face to be drawn; if the complexion be fair, temper white,
red lead, and lake, if an hard swarthy complexion, mingle with your white and
red a little fine Masticot, or English Ocur, but Note that your ground ought
always to be fairer then the Face you take; for it is a facile matter to
darken a light color, but a difficult to lighten a deep one; for in Limning
you must never heighten, but work them down to their just color.

Your ground thus prepared, you must lay it on the card, (ordered as before)
with a Pencil bigger then ordinary, lay it on as smooth, even, and free from
hairs of your Pencil, as it is possible, which that you may do) fill your Pencil
full of color, rather thin or watrish, then thick and gross, and with two or
three dawbes of your great Pencil, lay it on in an instant, the nimbler it is
laid on, the evener the color will ly.

Note that you ought to cover rather too much then too little with this prime;
cover somewhat more of the card with the ground color, then you shall use for
the Face.

This done, take a pretty large Pallet of Ivory, and before you begin to work,
temper certain little heaps of several shadows for the Face, which you must
temper with your finger about the Pallet.

The Order of Shadows for the Face.
In all your Shadows, remember to mix Shadows
some white, (exempli gratia) for the red in the Cheeks, Lips, etc. temper
Lake, red Lead; and a little white, for the blew, as the Veins, etc. a little
Indigo and white; for blew Bice is never used in a Face, for the faintest and
weakest color or shades, Lake and white, a little Ocur, and a little Indigo,
adding thereto if you will a small pittance of Pinck or Masticot, for the
deeper shadows, white English Ocur, Vmber, for the darkest and hardest
shadows, use Lake and Pink mixed with Vmber: Note that black must not by any
means be used in a Face, for other shadows your own observation must direct
you, for it is impossible to give a general Rule for the shadows in all Faces,
unless we could force nature to observe the same method in composing and
modelling them, so that one in every punctilio should resemble the other.

For your Light to draw by a Northern is accounted Light
best, which if it fall slooping down from an high window, is best.

Place your self to your Desk, that the Position
light may strike in sidelong from the left hand to the right, and observe that
in all your works it will show to the best advantage, when it is turned and
seen by the same light it was drawn by.

Let a Saucer or clean Shell of fair Water be Necessaries in Limning.
ever on your right hand, wherewith you may temper your colors and wash your
pencils, together with a brush pencil dry, to cleanse your work from dust; also
a sharp penknife, wherewith to take away such specks or hairs as may casually
mix with your colors, or fall into your card; you may also conveniently cover
your picture with a piece of paper, whereon to try your pencils before you
begin to work.

To begin a Face.
Having these accommodations, draw the The first draught.
lines of porphile (i. e. the outmost stroke) of a Face with lake and white,
mingled very faint, by this you may conveniently mend the draught (if false)
with a deeper mixture of the same color, the lines being exactly drawn, and
true proportion observed (which is the chiefest thing of concernment) next
observe the deeper and more remarkable shadows, and with the same faint
Crimson color of lake and white, give some slight touches and marks somewhat
roughly of these shadows, which afterward you will finish.

The Order to be observed in drawing by the life.
First you must only dead color the Face, The Order of drawing first sitting.
as the Oyl-painters do, and not meddle with the rest, and this first sitting
commonly takes up two hours.

The second sitting will require Four or Second sitting.
Five hours, in that time you are to go over the Face very curioussly,
observing what ever may conduce either to likeness, or judicious coloring,
also observing of the several graces, beauties, or deformities, as they appear
in nature, or else in smoothness of shadows, or close and sweet couching the
colors.

The third sitting commonly takes up two Third sitting
or three hours, and is spent in closing what was before left imperfect and
rough; but principally in giving to every deep shadow, the strong touches and
deepnings as well in the dark shadows in the Face, as in the Eyes, Eyebrows,
Hair and Ears, and these touches are ever the last part of this business, and
are never to be done till all the Hair and Drapery be finished, these touches
(if well done) add exceedingly to the life.

Concerning dead coloring.
The dead coloring of a Face is to be done the roughest and boldest of all;
having drawn your Face with lake and white (as before) you must take to the
said color a little red lead, tempering it to the color of the Cheeks, Lips,
etc. but very faintly, because you cannot lighten a deep color, without hazard
of spoiling the picture.

The first color to begin the Face with, is the To begin to Limn.
red of the Cheeks and Lips, somewhat strongly the bottom of the Chin, if the
party be beardless; over under and about the Eyes you will perceive a delicate
and faint redness, and underneath the Eyes, inclining to purple color, which
in fair and beautiful Faces is usual, and must be observed; the tip of the Ear,
and the roots of the Hair are commonly of the same color.

All this you must do after the manner of hatching, with faint and gentle
strokes, washing it all along. In short, in your dead coloring you must cover
your ground with the aforesaid red, and the subsequent shadows.

Note) Be not too curious in your first working, but regard a good bold
following of nature, rather then smooth curiosity, the roughness of the color,
you may end at another sitting.

The second work of Limning.
The red being done, the next is the faint blews The second Procedure.
about the balls and corners of the Eyes, and the gray and bluish under the
Eyes, the Temples, etc. which you are also to work from the uppermost part of
the Face almost all over, but exceeding sweet and faint, by degrees, sweetning
and heightning your shadows, as the light falls: And in going over the Face, be
sure to mark out the hard shadows in the dark side of the Face, under the Nose,
Chin, Eyebrows, etc. As the light falls, and somewhat strong touches, in those
places bring up your work together in an equal roundness, not giving perfection
to to any particular part of the Face, but visiting all the parts curiously,
and in a kind of random, by which means you will better observe the likeness,
roundness, postures, coloring, or what ever else is requisite to the
perfection of your work.

Having done the fainter or lighter shades, and The third Procedure.
somewhat smoothed and wrought them into the red, you may go over the hair,
disposing into such forms, folds or tramels, as may become your Picture best.

You must at first only draw them with color as near as you can, suitable to
the life, and after wash them lightly at the first, and then once more peruse
your work, being careful to fill up the void, empty and bare places, which are
uncovered with color, and at last deepen it somewhat more strongly then before
in the deepest shady places, still carefully observing the life; thus much for
the first sitting.

The Order of Limning in the second sitting.
The party being set just in his former Seat, you must most exactly observe and
curiously delineate with your pencil, those several varieties of nature, which
you did rudely trace out before, to do this you must use the same color in the
same places you did before, working, driving and sweetning the same colors one
into another, to the end that nothing be left in your work with a hard edge,
uneven, or a lump together, but also so swept and driven one into another, with
the point of somewhat a sharper pencil, then you used at the first as that your
shadows may lie soft and smooth, being dispersed and gently extended into all,
and toward the lighter parts of the Face, like air or a vapoury smoke; but
before this you must carefully observe all the shadows and colors.

For the Ground behind the Picture, it is The ground behind the Picture.
commonly blew or crimson, somewhat like a Satin or red Velvet Curtain: if
blew you must lay it thus, your Bice being pure and clear washed, temper as
much in a shell as will cover a Card, let it be all thoroughly moist and well
bound with gum, then with a small pencil, go about with the same color, the
porphile, that is the utmost stroke and ambient superficies of the Picture;
this done take a greater pencil and therewih wash over somewhat carefully the
whole ground that you mean to cover with a blew, somewhat thin and watrish, and
then with a reasonable big pencil full of color and flowing, lay over that
place with a thick and substantial Body of color, which before you had only
washed over, in the doing of this you must be very swift, keeping color moist
that you have laid, not permitting any part to dry til the whole be covered.

A Crimson Ground.
If you would have your Ground Crimson like A Crimson Ground.
Satin, you must with Indian-Lake trace out where and in what places you will
have these strong and hard lights and reflections to fall, which is seen in
Satin or Velvet, there lay your lights with a thin and waterish lake, and
while it is yet wet with a stronger and darker color of lake thick ground, lay
the deepning and hard strong shadows, close by the other lights; your best way
is to have a piece of Satin before you to imitate.

After this lay your linen with a flat white, For Method in the Touches.
and the Drapery likewise flat, then go over your face again, endeavoring to
reduce each shadow to its true perfection, then draw the lines of the Eyelids,
expressing the red dark Nostril, the shady entrance into the Ears, the
deepness of the Eyebrows, and those more perspicuous notes and marks in the
face, with a pencil somewhat more curious and sharp then before, you may darken
your ground as you see will be most advantageous to the setting out the Picture.

Next go over your hair heightning and deepning The Hair
it as you shall see by the life, drawing some locks loosely over the ground,
which would otherwise seem unpleasant.

To Shadow in Linen, use black, white, a little Linen Shade.
yellow, and less blew, the black must be deepned with Ivory-black, with which
mix a little Lake, and Indigo, or Litmus blew, thus much for the second sitting.

The manner of finishing at the third sitting.
The third will be wholly spent in giving Third sitting.
the strong touches and observations necessary for the rounding of a face,
which you will now better see to do, the apparel, hair and ground, being
already finished. In this sitting curiously observe whatever may conduce to
similitude, which is the chiefest thing, as Scars, Moles, etc. glances of the
Eyes, descending and circumflections of the Mouth, never make your deepest
shadows so deep as they appear in the life.

Thus much of the Face and three sittings,
For Ornaments thus.
Armor silvea) for coloring armor, first lay Liquid Ornament.
silver flat and even, which dried and burnisht with a Tooth, temper the
shadows with Silver, Indigo, Litmus, and a little Vmber, work these shadows on
the Silver as directed by the life.

For the gold armor, lay gold as you did silver, Gold Armor.
for the Shadow, Lake, English Ocur, tempered with a little gold.

To express roundness and luster of Pearls, your Pearls.
ground must be white and Indigo, your shadow black and Pinck.

Diamonds are expressed with a ground of flat Liquid Diamonds.
silver, the deepning is Cherristone, black and Ivory; the deeper the shadow,
the fairer the Diamond.

Lay a ground of silver, burnisht to the bigness Rubies.
of the Ruby, then take Turpentine of the best and purest, and temper with it
very neat a little Indian Lake, then taking a needle, or some small Iron
instrument heated in a Candle, (lay or drop) a little of the composition upon
the silver, fashioning the stone in a round or square, or what fashion you
please, with the point of your instruments, you must let it lie a day or two to
dry, if it be too long in drying, add to your composition a little powder of
clarified Mastick; This receipt is not commonly known.

For any green stone, temper your Turpentine Emeraulds.
with Verdigrease, and a little Turmerick root, first scraped with Vinegar,
then let it dry, then grind it to fine powder, and temper it.

Mix Turpentine with Vltramarine, etc. Saphires
Note that the ground to all must be Liquid silver polisht.

A true Receipt to make liquid gold.
Take of fine leaf-gold, the Value of 2s, 6d, Liquid gold.
grind this gold with a strong and thick gum-water upon a reasonable large
stone, which you must grind very fine, and painfully; as you grind it, still
add more of your strong gum-water, and though the gold look never so black and
dirty it is never the worse, having brought it to a competent fineness, wash it
in a great shell as you did Bice; etc. Being very clean add to it a little
quantity of Mercury sublimate, with the point of your Knife, which you must
temper with it, and a very little gum to bind it in the shell, and as it
settles, and begins to dry in the shell, shake it together, and remove and
spread the gold about the sides of the shell, that it may be altogether of one
color and fineness, use with fair water, as you do the other colors.

So for liquid silver, only observe (and it is a secret) Note.
that when your silver either with long keeping or moistness of the Air becomes
starved and rusty; you must to prevent this inconveniency, before you lay the
silver Cover over the place with a little Juice of Garlic, which will preserve
it.

Of Landscape.
In drawing Landscape with water colors ever begin Landscape.
with the Sky, and if there be any Sunbeams, do them first.

For the Purple Clouds, only mingle Lake and Purple Clouds.
white.

The Sunbeams, Masticot and white. Yellow.


Work your blew Sky with smalt only, or Vltramarine. Note 1.


At your first working dead color all the piece over, Note 2.
leave nothing uncovered, lay the color smooth and even.

Work the Sky down in the Horizon fainter as you Note 3.
draw near the Earth, except in tempestuous skies, work your further Mountains
so that they should seem to be lost in the Air.

Your first ground must be of the color of the Earth Note 4.
and dark; yellowish, brown, green, the next successively as they loose in
their distance must also faint and abate in their colors.

Beware of persection at a distance. Note 5.


Ever place light against dark, and dark against light Note 6.
(that is) the only way to extend the prospect far off, is by opposing light to
shadows, yet so as ever they must loose their force and vigor in proportion as
they remove from the Eye, and the strongest shadow ever nearest hand.

A Dark Green.
For a dark green for Trees mingle Verduter, Pinck, and Indigo, the deepest
shadows of all in green are made with sap green and Indigo.

A Rare secret to preserve Colors.
Take Rosemary water double distilled, and with a few drops of it, temper your
shell of white, and you shall see it become instantly perfect white, however
dead and faded it was before, besides this water allayes the Bubbles in white
and umber, which are usually very troublesome in the grinding them.

Some general observations in Miniture.
1. If your colors peel or by reason of the greasiness of your Parchment will
not lie on, mix with them a very little Ear wax, and it will help them.

2. Sit not above two yards from him you draw by.

3. Draw not any part in the face of a picture exactly at the first, neither
finish a Mouth, Eye or Nose, till the rest of your work come up, and be wrought
together with it.

4. When you have finished the Face, make the party stand up to draw the
Drapery by him.

5. Let the Party you draw be set in an higher seat then your self that draw.

To make Crayons or Pastils.
To instance one for all, if you were to make Pastils.
a Pastil for a brown complexion, grind on your stone, serus, red lead, or
vermillion, English ocur, and a little pinck; to this add a proportionable
quantity of plaster of paris, burnt and finely sifted, mix this with the other
colors, and you may role it up.

Mix white Serus with all your other colors, and Note.
some instead of Serus use Tobacco pipe clay.

To make white.
Take two parts of ordinary chalk, and one part Serus.
of Alum, grind those together fine, make them up in a lump, burn them in a
Cruciple and use them.

To make white Lead.
Take a Cruciple where into put several small White Lead.
plates of clean Lead, cover them with white wine Vinegar, luit the Pot close
and dig an hole in a dunghill, where let it abide for the space of six weeks;
Take it it up and scrape off the superfluities of the white Lead, and so use
them.

To prepare a Card for a Picture.
Wet a card all over with a great pencil so soon as the water is sunck in,
burnish it smooth on the backside, having tempered some starch with a knife in
the palm of your hand spread it over, instantly lay on a piece of abortive
parchment, let it be pressed in a book till it be almost dry, then smooth it on
the backside.

To preserve Colors fresh, grind them with the gall of a Neet.
To prepare White Excellently.
Take some Serus which being grossly bruised and White.
put into a fine earthen Basin, put to it a good quantity of running water
distilled, wherein wash the Serus till it be thoroughly clean and purged, which
you shall know by the Taste of the water, which is drained from thence.

Is made thus, take of Oil of Turpentine one Vernish.
pound, Sandrake one pound, Oil of Spike one pound, mixed the Oils together,
and let all stand over the fire till the Sandrake be dissolved, if the fire
should chance to catch hold on this, clap a pewter dish over it.

Concerning Wax-work or Moulding, to make the Moulds.
Take a good big lump of plaster of Paris and The Mould.
burn it in a Cruciple till it be red hot, let it cool, then beat it very fine,
and searse it through a Tiffany Sieve; be very cautious that the wind come not
at it, for that will hinder its hardening; after it be tempered keep it wrapped
up in a clean brown paper, use it thus; take any Earthen or Pewter Vessel, that
is shallow, and put ten or twelve spoonfulls of fair water in it, then prepare
your fruit, and bind a rag round it like a cord in a wreath long ways on the
fruit: then take some linsed Oil or (which is more cleanly) Oil of sweet
Almonds, with which in a pencil besmear the Lemmon, or (what other fruit it be)
on the one side, which lay uppermost, your Lemmon thus prepared, take some of
your sifted plaster of Paris, and temper it in the forementioned water to a
pretty thickness, then as speedily as may be with the help of your spoon, cast
it on the oyled Lemmon, lay it on very thick, least the thinness of the Mould
spoil the work, when it is hardened (which will be in a small time) take away
your rag, leaving the linen still fast in it is half mould; which done turn the
hardened side downward, then Oil the other half of the Lemmon together, with the
edges of the mould, which the rag did cover; then wash your porringer or vessel
where the former plaster was clean and prepared, and cast on more plaster of
Paris as before, observe, it must not be too thick when you cast it on, and
after it is hardened, you must put no more water to it, for then it will crumble;
when you have done the moulds so, and made a notch that one may fall fitly into
the other, tie them close together, having before well Oyled them, and keep
them for use.

To cast in these Moulds.
Use the whitest and purest Virgins wax. To cast.


To color the wax answerable to the things you mould.
For a Raddish your ground is Serus, which must To color.
be afterward painted over with Lake, the top of the Raddish painted with
Verdigrease, all other such colors must be tempered with gum water; gum water
is thus made, dissolve a lump of pure gum Araback about the bigness of a
Walnut, in two spoonfulls of fair water, herewith temper your colors.

Note that every thing Mouldable is either all of one, and the same color, as
a ( Lemmon) or striped and parti-colored with different colors, as a Pear,
Pearmain, etc. Now such as are of one color may be easily cast all of the same
color; but such as are varicated must be kept out afterward by colors
tempered with gum water (as above) you color your wax by putting into it
whilst it is hot and melted in a Gally-pot, a little linen bag of that color
you use, provided that the color be before bruised very fine.

As to particulars for the Lemmons or Apricocks, take only Turmerick in a bag,
for Oranges turmerick and red Lead well tempered; Apples, Pears, or Grapes,
turmerick and a little Verdigrease, Wallnuts and Figs, mix turmerick and
English Ocur, and Vmber all in a bag together, Cucumbers or Hartichoaks,
Peescods or Filbirds, turmerick, verdigrease Eggs and Serus, all put into
several baggs and steept in the Virgins wax, when it is melting as before
mentioned, for Damason bruise Charcole, Indigo and blew starch in a bag
together, for flesh color, white Lead, and vermilion mixed, etc.

To counterfeit Rochcandid sweet meats.
Dissolve the quantity of a walnut of gum Araback Rochcandy.
in two spoonfulls of clear water, let it be very thick, then take any piece of
broken Venice glass, the thicker the better, beat it in a mortar, so small as
you please, that it may serve your occasion, daub over some cast sweet meats,
with the forementioned gum water, strew this powder on them, and it will with
much delight satisfy the expectation,

Additional Observations out of a Manuscript of Mr. Hilliards touching Miniture.

When you begin to Limn temper all your colors fresh with your Finger, in your
shell, or on your pallat.

Pearl.
Your Pearl must be laid with a white mixture, with a little black, a little
Indigo and Mastick, but very little in comparison of the white, not to the
hundredth part; that dry, give the light of the Pearl with a little silver,
somewhat more to the light then the shadowed side, then take a white allai'd
with Masticot, and underneath the shadowed side give it a compassing stroke,
which shows a reflection, then without that a small shadovv of Seacole
undermost of all: But note, your silver must be laid round and full.

The manner how to draw with Indian Ink.
To draw with Indian Ink after the manner of washing, or instead of Indian Ink
take Lamp-black or Bread burnt, temper a little of your Indian Ink with fair
water, in a shell, or upon your hand, your outlines being drawn with Cole or
black Lead, take an indifferent long sharp pointed pencil, dip the point into
fair water, then dip the pencil into the Indian Ink, and draw all your
outlines very faint, (Note that all the temperature of Indian Ink must be thin
and vvaterish, and not too black) when it is dry, take a little crum of stale
white bread, and rub out the outlines which you drew with the Cole, (if too
black) then dash on your shadows very faintly, and deepen it by degrees, as you
think convenient, then finish it with stipples, it being most advantageous to
any one that shall practice Limning, beware of taking too much color in your
pencil, which you may prevent by drawing the pencil through your Lips; in
laying on your shadows, never lay them to deep, but deepen them down by
degrees, for if too deep you can never heighten them again.

How to prevent your colors from sinking in.
Take Roach Alum and boil it in spring water, then take a bit of a sponge
and dip it into the water, and wet the backside of your paper that you intend
to draw on, very thin, whilst the water is hot, in the vvetting of it be as
nimble as you can, and this will prevent it from sinking.

The manner how to draw with water colors upon Satin.
Take Izing glass and steep it Four and twenty hours in water, then boil it in
spirit of wine until it be very clammy, which you will perceive by dipping
your finger into it, then after your outlines are drawn upon the Satin, take
an indifferent big pencil, and wash it thin over as far as your outlines are,
which will prevent your colors from sinking or flowing.

A farther observation in grinding of colors.
Observe in grinding ultramarine and other colors, that your motion be not too
swift, but grind it gentle and slow, because the swiftness of the motion,
causes the stones to heat, by which consequence your color will starve or
loose something of it is Luster, especially if it be a color of no great Body
as Pinck and Indigo, etc. observe, in grinding white, that you grind it not too
much, least it prove greasy or oily, or of a dirty color.

How to prepare Vmber.
Take Vmber and grind it very fine, put it into an earthen pot or gally pot, of
fair water, cover it over and keep it from dust, and in frosty weather, let it
freeze until it thaws of it self, then power off the water, and when it is dry
put it up in paper for your use. And when you temper it in your shell, use a
drop or two of white Onyon water which will preserve it from crackling.

The Art of Etching.
The Grounds and Rules of Etching.
BEfore that you begin to Etch upon copper, it is very necessary to practice
the Art of drawing, till you be able if need require to draw any head after the
life, or to draw a design, for if you intend to practice the Art of Etching,
you will find it very profitable to draw after good prints, which are well
designed, and graved, and when you have practiced so long that you are able to
copy any print, or drawing very exactly; then draw after good Heads of
plaster or figures, according to your own fancy, which will learn you to
shadow according to Art, if well observed, therefore be sure when you draw
after plaster, to observe very exactly to take the true outlines or
circumferences, and then take notice how the shadow falls, then shadow it very
faint and soft, where need requires. The prints which I recommend unto you as
absolutely the best to learn to Etch or Grave after, be the prints of Henry
Goldshis and Hermon Muller, therefore it is very convenient to leaan to hatch
with the Pen exactly after either of the aforesaid prints of Goldshis or
Muller, and when you have brought it to that perfection; and can draw very well
after plaster, you may practice to draw after the life; but before you draw
after the life, you must be very exact and true in your outlines or
circumferences.

The Instruments with their particular names which are used to Etch withal.
A Copper plate polished, a piece of ground bound up in a piece of Silk or
Taffatae, and preserved from any dust or grease; and about twenty Needles of
all sizes, the best are made at Cleafe; then take the Needles and set them
indifferent deep into some round slender sticks about a span long, with a
Needle at one of the ends of the sticks, and a pencil at the other, a scraper,
a polisher, and two or three good French gravers, well ground and whetted, and
a pair of Compasses, a Ruler, some green wax, a Bottle which holds some half
a pound of single Aqua fortis stoped close with soft wax, some white Lead, a
Stift, a hand Vice to hold the Plate over the fire, an Oil stone.

The use and property of every particular Instrument.
The Copper Plate is the only matter to Etch upon; the ground is to lay upon
the Copper Plate, when they are both warmed; your Needles are to hatch withal
upon the ground, the pencil is to wipe away the bits of ground, which rise when
you hatch upon the ground with your Needles, the scraper is to scrape out any
thing that is amiss, the Polisher is to make smooth any place that is rough, so
that you can mend any place that is amiss according to your own Mind; the
Gravers are to mend here and there a stroke where need requires. But note, that
your Gravers must be ground, and whet very sharp and smooth, upon an Oil stone
before you use them, your Compasses are of very little use in Etching, except
it be to measure a distance, or strike a Circle, the Ruler is used to hatch all
the straight hatches or Lines upon the Plate. The green wax is used to make a
Wall round about the edges of your Plate, to keep the Aqua fortis from running
off from the Plate, the Aqua fortis is the finisher of the work, when you
have hatched the design upon the Plate with your Needles. The white Lead is
used to scrape upon the backside of the drawing or print that you Etch after,
The Stift is used to draw through all the outmost Lines or circumferences of
the print or drawing which you Etch after. The Oil stone is to whet your
Gravers upon; having these things in readiness, Note that if it be a black
Ground that lies upon the Plate, then you must take white Lead and rub it upon
the backside of the print or drawing which you intend to Etch after, but if it
be a white Ground, then you must take black Lead, or a piece of Charcole and
rub on the back of your print as aforesaid.

The manner and way to make the Ground.
Take a quarter of a pound of Virgins wax, and half a quarter of a pound of
Expoltum burnt, of Amber One Ounce, of Mastick One Ounce. Having all these
materials in readiness, you must take the Mastick and the Expoltum and beat
them very fine in a mortar; this being done, take a new earthen Pot, and put
the wax into it, and set it upon the fire, let not the fire be too hot, which
if you do it will burn the ground, therefore when they are thoroughly melted,
take it off from the fire, and pour the ground out into a Pot of fair water,
and make it up into a Ball, and preserve it from dust; and when you will use
it, take a quantity of it and bind it up in a piece of Taffatae or Silk, and
use it as hereafter.

A red Ground.
Grind red Lead, very well tempered with Vernish.

A white Ground.
Take of wax one Ounce, Rosin two Ounces, melt them together, add thereto a
quarter of an Ounce of Venice Serus, finely ground.

A black Ground.
Asphaltum two parts, Bees wax one part, melt them Spaltum.
together, being warm, lay it thinly on with a Lawn rag.

Another Ground.
Grind red Lead with Linseed Oil; Note, your ground must be laid very thin.

The manner and way to lay the Ground upon the Plate.

Take some Charcole and kindle them, this being done, take an hand-vice and
screw it fast to one of the corners of the Plate, as near to the edge as you
can, because you must lay the ground all over the Plate, then take the Plate
and hold it over the fire, till it be so warm to melt the ground, then take the
ground which is bound up and rub it to and fro upon the Plate till it be
covered all over alike; then take of the stiffest Feathers out of a Ducks wing
that is not ruffled, and spread the ground very thin, and smooth every where
alike upon the Plate, but have a special care you heat not the Plate too hot,
least you burn the ground; which if it be, the ground will break up when you
put on the Aqua fortis and spoil the Plate; you may discover when it is burnt,
by its rising as it were sandy, which if you perceive, you must take a clean
linen rag, and warming the Plate, wipe the ground clean off, and lay a new as
aforesaid. But if you perceive the ground to be smooth and not sandy, take it
off from the fire, and when it is cold, take a piece of Link and hold under the
ground till you have smoaked it very black, but let not the flame touch the
ground, least you burn it, this being done, if the Plate be cold hold it over
the fire again till it be just warm, to let the smoke melt into the ground,
that it may not rub off under your hand, then hold it off from the fire, with
the ground-side of the Plate downwards for to preserve it from the dust, other
wise when the ground is warm, dust will fly in and spoil it, therefore you
must hold it with the ground-side downwards until the ground is cold.

The way to draw the outmost lines of any Print or drawing upon the ground of
the Plate.
First take the drawing or Print which you intend to Etch after, and scrape a
little white lead upon the backside of it, then take a feather and rub it
over every where alike, and shake off that which remains, then take the print
and lay it upon the Plate on that side the ground is, then fasten the four
corners of the print to the Plate with a little soft wax; this being done, take
the Stift and draw upon the print all the outmost circumferences and lines
exactly, and when you have so done, take off the print from the Plate, and all
the same outlines and circumferences which you drew upon the print with the
Stift, will be exactly and unfailably upon the ground.

Several Observations in Hatching.
First observe exactly and judiciously how your principle is shadowed, and how
close the Hatches join, and how they are laid, and which way the light falls
or comes; the light must fall all one way, for if the light fall side ways in
your print, you must hatch the other side which is farthest from the light
darkest, and so place your lights altogether on the one side, and not
confusedly to have the light come on both sides alike, as if it stood in the
midst of many lights, for neither does the light withal its brightness
illuminate any more then that part that is directly opposite unto it, then
observe exactly how close all the Hatches join, and how they are laid, and
which way they twist and wind, then follow them as exactly as possibly you can,
but before that you begin to Hatch or shadow, you must draw all the outmost
lines with a Needle upon the ground, as Artificially as you can; and then you
must shadow it with your Needles of several sorts according to your principle,
and when you will make a broad stroke, then break off the point of a great
Needle and whet it upon an Oil stone four square until it comes to a point;
and if you will hatch fine strokes, then you must use fine pointed Needles; and
if middle sizes, then break off the point of a middle size Needle, and whet it
as aforesaid, and so according to all sizes. But some Masters when they make a
bold stroke, hatch it fine at first, and so by degrees make them broader.

Necessary Observations in Etching Landskips.
Observe when you Etch Landskips, to make or hatch that which is nearest to the
Eye darkest, and so let it lose or decline its shadows by degrees, and that
which is furthest off must be faintest, and so lose equally by degrees; the
same Observation must be in making the Sky, for that which is nearest to the
Eye must be the darkest shadowed, but in general as faint and soft as possible,
and so also let it lose by degrees as before is mentioned, and the nearer the
Sky comes to the ground, the more it must lose and be fainter; but when they
as it were meet together the Sky must quite be lost, and when you have hatched
it as exactly as you can possibly with your Needles, according to the print or
drawing, that you do it after; this being done, compare them exactly and
judiciously together, and if you find it like the original, take some green
soft wax, and make a wall round about the edges of the Plate.

How to make the Wax wall round about the Plate, to keep the Aqua fortis from
running off from it.
Take some green soft wax and temper it till it be warm, then draw it into a
long slender roll as long as will reach about the Plate, then flat it and
fasten it about the edges of the Plate, and let it be about half an inch high,
then take an old knife and heat it in the fire, and sear the wax round about
under the Plate very close, otherwise the Aqua fortis will run out, but be sure
to fasten the wall as near to the edges of the Plate as you can conveniently,
then pour the Aqua fortis upon the Plate, letting it lie till it be deep enough.

How to use the Aqua fortis on the Plate.
You must use single Aqua fortis. Take a quantity of Aqua fortis and pour it
into a glass and mingle it with a little Vinegar to weaken it if it be too
strong, or a little Aqua fortis which has been used before; for in case the
Aqua fortis work too strong, it will make the work very hard, and sometimes
make the ground to break up; and when you have tempered it very well, pour it
upon the Plate almost as high as the wax wall; the deeper the Aqua fortis
lies, the harder it will eat, and when you perceive it to be deep enough, pour
off the Aqua fortis from the Plate into a glass, and preserve it to mingle with
other as aforesaid; this being done, take some fair water and wash the Plate,
and then take off the wax wall and preserve it for the same use again; then
warm the Plate and take a clean linen rag when it is indifferent warm, and
rub off the ground from the Plate very clean, then take some Oil and rub over
the Plate to clean it, and if you perceive that the Aqua fortis has not eaten
as deep in some places, as it should be, then it must be helped with a Graver.

Observations by which you may know when it is deep enough.
When the Aqua fortis has lain upon the Plate a little more then a quarter of
an hour, or half an hour, there being no certainty in time, because sometimes
the Aqua fortis will work stronger then at another; therefore when you think it
is deep enough, pour off the Aqua fortis from the Plate into a glass, then wash
the Plate with a little fairwater, then take a Knife and scrape off a little
piece of the ground where it is hatched, and may be least prejudicial to the
Plate, and if you perceive it not to be deep enough, take a little candle
tallow and melt it in a spoon, and while it is warm, take a pencil and cover
the plate with it, where you scraped the ground off, then pour the aquafortis
upon it again, and let it lie till you guess it to be deep enough; then pour
the Aqua fortis from the Plate as aforesaid, and at any time when you perceive
that the Aqua fortis does not work strong enough, you pour off half the old,
and refresh it with some new, for when the Aqua fortis has been upon the Plate
about half an hour, it will be much the weaker, because the strength of it does
evaporate away, and by a little practice you will come to the certain knowledge
when the Aqua fortis has eaten deep enough.

Another way to know when it is deep enough.
Take a little piece of a Copper plate, and lay a ground upon it as you before
mentioned, and make a wax wall about it, then hatch it with several hatches as
you think best, and when you pour the Aqua fortis upon the one, pour it upon
the other, and when you think they be eaten deep enough, pour the Aqua fortis
from the little Plate, and wash it with some fair water as aforesaid, then take
a Knife and scrape off a little piece of the ground from the little Plate where
it is hatched, and in case you percieve it not deep enough, cover the place
again with some warm candle tallow, and then pour the Aqua fortis upon it
again till you guess it be enough, then pour the Aqua fortis from the little
Plate again, and try as before, and if you see it to be enough, pour the Aqua
fortis from the great Plate, and wash it with a little fair water before you
warm it, or else the Aqua fortis will stain the Plate.

A way to lay a white Ground upon a Black.
First you must understand that most grounds are black, and when you lay a
white ground upon a black you must not smoke the black with a Link, and you
must lay the undermost ground the thinner, when you lay a white ground upon it;
and if you would lay a white ground upon a black, take a quantity of Serice, as
much as you think will cover the plate, and grind it very fine with gum water,
and temper it very thin, then take a pencil and wash the plate all over very
thin and even.

The way to lay a red Ground upon a black Ground.
Take the red Chalk and grind it very fine with gum water, then take a pretty
big pencil, and wash the plate all over with the red ground very thin and
smooth, as before mentioned.

A Receipt for a ground taken out of a Manuscript of Collots.
Take a quarter of a pound of Virgins wax, and half a quarter of a pound of the
best Expolium burnt of Amber, and half a quarter of a pound of Mastick if it be
warm weather, because it does harden the ground and preserve it from injury,
when you lean with your hand hard upon it; if it be cold vveather, then take
but an ounce of Mastick; this being observed, then take an ounce of Rosin, and
an ounce of Shoomakers pitch, and half an ounce of other pitch, half an ounce
of Vernish; having all these materials in readiness, take a new earthen pot,
and put the Virgins wax into it; and when it is melted, stir it about, and put
in the other materials by degrees as before mentioned, and when they are
thoroughly mingled and melted, take the pot off from the fire and pour it out in
a clean pot of fair water, and work it into a Ball, and preserve it from dust
and grease, and when you have occasion to make use of it, take a quantity
thereof and bind it up in a piece of Silk, and make use of it as before
mentioned.

The Ground of Rinebrant of Rine.
Take half an ounce of Expoltum burnt of Amber, one ounce of Virgins wax, half
an ounce of Mastick, then take the Mastick and Expoltum, and beat them
severally very fine in a Mortar; this being done, take a new earthen pot and
set it upon a Charcole-fire, then put the Virgins wax into it and melt it,
then shake into it the Mastick and Expoltum by degrees, stirring the Wax about
till they be thoroughly mingled, then pour it forth into fair water and make a
Ball of it, and use it as before mentioned, but be sure you do not heat the
plate too hot when you lay the ground on it, and lay your black ground very
thin, and the white ground upon it, this is the only way of Rinebrant.

The way to preserve any Ground, which is laid upon a Plate in Frosty weather.
Take the plate and wrap it very warm in a woollen cloth, and lay it in the
warmest place you can convenient, for if the frost is gotten into the ground,
it will break up when you pour the Aqua fortis upon it.

A way to preserve the Plate from injury of the Aqua fortis, where the Ground
breaks up.
If you perceive the ground to break up in any place, pour off the Aqua fortis
from the plate and wash it with a little fair water, then take a quantity of
Candle tallow and melt it in a spoon, and while it is warm take a pencil and
cover the Plate which is broken up with the said tallow, and so far as the
tallow is spread, the Aqua fortis will not eat; some make use of Vernish
instead of tallow, and when you have covered the place that is broken, pour on
the Aqua fortis again, and let it lie upon the plate till you guess it has
eaten enough; then pour the Aqua fortis from the plate and preserve it, then
take the wax Wall and preserve it also, and wash the plate with a little fair
Water, then rub off your ground as aforesaid, and for the places which the
ground broak up in, it must be helped with a Graver.

Therefore it will be necessary for one that desires to learn this Art, to
practice graving a little, so much as to help a stroke where you think
convenient.

A way to make the Aqua fortis work soft or hard according to nature or art.
First take Candle tallow and melt it in a spoon, then with a pencil cover that
place so far as you will have it to be faint, but note it must be after the
Aqua fortis has lain upon your plate an indifferent while, and so by degrees
you must use the tallow as you would have it fainter, this is very necessary
when you Etch Landskips, which must lose and stand at a distance by degrees,
therefore when you Etch Landskips, observe to stop off that place first which
must be faintest, and so by degrees stop it off, and make it lose equally; and
note the nearer you come to the Eye, it must be strongest and darkest shaded,
but not on that side from whence the light comes for that side must be
preserved as faint as may be, but according to art.

Observations in Etching Prospective.
Prospective is a thing that is one of the difficultest Arts that is practiced;
because it is not rightly understood, but by good Arithmetic; otherwise you
can never understand prospective, because you can never guess rightly how much
a Pillar or Figure, or the like must decline, or lose at their several
distances, according to Art and Proportion; For when you Etch a piece of
prospective after a drawing or a print, observe these Rules, beware of
perfection at a distance, and be sure to shadow that which is nearest to the
Eye, perfectest and strongest, and the farther from the Eye, it must decline in
length and breadth, and height according to

Art and Proportion, observe also to let it lose and be fainter by equal
degrees.

Away to Grave any hand or letter upon a Copper Plate.
Take some Charcole and kindle them, then take a hand-vice and screw it to the
corner of the plate, and hold it over the fire till it be warm, then take a
piece of Virgins wax, and rub it all over the plate until it is covered every
where alike; this being done, take a stiff feather of a Ducks wing that is not
ruffled, and drive it even and smooth every where alike, and let it cool, then
write the hand and letter which you intend to grave upon the plate, on a piece
of paper with ungum'd Ink; then take the paper which you have written, and lay
that side which is written downwards next to the wax, and fasten the four
corners with a little soft wax, but be sure to place the writing so, that the
lines may run straight, then you must take a Dogs Tooth, and rub the paper all
over which is fastened, and not miss any place; this being done, take off the
paper from the plate and you shall see the very same Letters which you wrote on
the paper has left their perfect impression upon the wax; then take a Stift
and draw all the Letters through the wax upon the plate, and when you have done
that, warm the plate, and take a linen rag and rub the wax clean off, and you
shall see all the Letters drawn upon the Copper, then get some good French
Gravers and grind them, as they should be very sharp toward the points upon a
Grind-stone, and afterward whet them very smooth and sharp upon a good Oil
stone, then Grave the Letters with them.

The way to polish a Copper Plate.
At first you buy the Copper rough, then you have it planished, if you cannot
do it your self; when it is planished, then you polish it with these following
Instruments.

The Names of the Instruments or Tools which are used to polish a Copper Plate.
A Plain which cuts very well, and of an indifferent bigness, but not broad;
some pieces of pumice-stones some pieces of Sand-stones, and some
Moulton-stones; a soft blew stone, and a burnisher and scraper; and some
Charcole.

The use of every particular Tool or Instrument.
First fasten your Plate with some small Nails, to a place that is as high as
your middle; then make use of the plain to shave all the roughness off from it
and make it very even in all places alike, and if you perceive any crackles or
little holes upon that side which you shave, then you must shave them all clean
out, and when you have shaved it even and smooth with the plain, then take a
piece of Sand-stone, and wet the plate with some water, and rub to and fro with
the stone upon the plate, till you have worn it very smooth and even every
where alike, but be sure to choose the softest stones, because they make the
least scratches; and when you have worn it even and smooth with this stone,
wash off the sand from the Plate, and take a piece of Pumice stone and rub to
and fro upon the Plate, quite a cross the grain of the former stone, because it
is of a hard sandy nature, and will therefore leave some scratches; therefore
the Pumice stone is of a more softer and spungy nature and is always used to
wear out the former scratches: and when you have worn out all the former
scratches, you will perceive the plate to be worked into a finer grain, then
wash the sand very clean off from the plate,; then make use of the moulton
stone, and work with it quite across the grain of the Pumice stone, until you
have worn it quite out, withal be sure you supply this and all the other
stones with water, when you work with them upon the plate, and when you have
worn out all the scratches of the Pumice stone clean out, then for the fourth
make use of the soft blew stone, it being of a very soft grain and softer then
any of the former; then work with that quite across the grain of the
Moulton-stone, till the grain is worn out, but if you perceive any scratches in
the plate here or there, rub them over with your burnisher till you have work't
them out, but in case they are very deep, you must make use of your scraper,
and scrape them out, and burnish them afterward; this being done, in the fifth
place you must burnish it all over; last of all take a charcole which is
thoroughly burnt, and scrape off the Rine; then put it in the fire till it is
thoroughly kindled, then take it out and quench it in Chamber Lee, and make use
of it as of the former, till you have glased the plate; then wash it very clean
with fair water, and let it dry.

The Manner or Way of Mezo Tinto.
FIrst take a very well polished Plate of Copper, and ruffen it all over with
your Engine one way, then cross it over with the Engine again, and if you find
occasion, then cross it over the third time, until it be ruffened all over
alike (that is to say) if it were to be printed, it would print black all over;
this done, take Charcole or black Chalk to rub over the plate, and then draw
your design with white Chalk upon the plate, then take a sharp Stift and trace
out the outlines of the design you drew with the white Chalk, and where you
would have the light strike strongest, take a burnisher, and burnish that part
of the plate, where you would have the light strike as clean as it was when it
was first polished; where you would have the fainter light, you must not polish
it so much, and this way you may make it either fainter or stronger, according
to your fancy. As for the manner or shape of the Engine, they are diverse, and if
any ingenious person have a desire to have any made, the Author will give them
farther directions.

FINIS.
A Table of the Contents of this Book.
OF the Virtue and Praise of Proportion or Symetry. Page 1. Of the Necessity
and Definition of Proportion. 3. Of the Head in Porphile or Side-vvayes. 5. Of
the Fore-right Face. 7. Of a Head in Fore-shortning. Ibid. Of the Side-Face
without any Measure. 8. Of several Observations in drawing a Head after the
Life. 9. Of the Proportion of a Man of ten Faces. 10. Of the Proportion of a
Man's Body of ten Faces. 15. Of the extravigant Proportion of ten Heads. Ibid.
Of the Proportion of a young Man of nine Heads. 16. Of the Proportion of a Man
of eight Heads. 18. Of the Proportion of a Man's Body of seven Heads. 19. Of the
Proportion of a Woman of ten Faces. 20. Of the Proportion of a Woman of ten
Heads. 21. Of the Proportion of a Woman of nine Faces. 22. Of the Proportion of
a Woman of nine Heads. Ibid. Of the Proportion of a Woman of seven Heads. 23.
Of the Proportion of Children. Ibid.
The Definition of Painting. 24. Of the Virtue of Light. 35. Of the Necessity
of Light. 38. Of the Nature of Light. 40. Of the Virtue and Efficacy of Motion.
44. Of the Necessity of Motion. 48. Of the Passions of the Mind their Original
and difference. 55. How the Body is altered by the passions of the Mind. 56.
Of the Motions procured by the seven Planets. 58. Of Jupiter. 59. Of Mars. 60.
Of Sol. Ibid. Of Venus. 61. Of Mercury. Ibid. Of Luna. 62. How all the Motions
may accidently befall any man though diversely. 64. Of Diverse others Necessary
Motions. 67. Of the Motions of all sorts of Cloth or Drapery. 71. Of the
Motions of Trees and other things that are moved. 74.
The Art of Miniture or Limning. 77. Of the colors to be used in Limning.
Ibid. The way and manner of preparing colors. 78. Of white Lead. Ibid.
Colors to be vvashed and How. Ibid. Of Colors to be vvashed. 79. Of Colors
to be ground. Ibid. Of the Nature of Colors in general Ibid. Observations in
grinding. 80. To vvash Bice. Ibid. How to choose your pencils. 81. To prepare
a Tablet to work on. Ibid. The ground color for a Face. Ibid. The Order of
shadows for the Face. 82. To beginn a Face. 83. The Order to be observed in
dravving by the life 84. Concerning dead Coloring. Ibid. The second work of
Limning. 85. The Order of Limning in the second sitting. 86. A Crimson ground.
87. The manner of finishing at the third sitting. 88. Concerning Ornaments.
Ibid. A Receipt to make Liquid Gold. 89. Of Landscape. 90. A Dark Green. 91. A
rare secret to preserve Colors. Ibid. Some general Observations in Miniture.
Ibid. To make Crayons or Pastiles. 92. To make white. Ibid. To make white
Lead. Ibid. To prepare a Card for a Picture. Ibid. To prepare white
excellently. Ibid. Concerning Wax work or Moulding. 93. To cast in Moulds. 94.
To counterfeit Roch Candid svveetmeets. 95. To counterfeit Pearl. Ibid. The
manner how to dravv with Indian Ink. Ibid. How to prevent your Color from
sinking 96. The manner how to dravv with water color upon satin. Ibid. A
farther observation in Grinding. Ibid. How to prepare Umber. 97.
The grounds and rules of Etching. Ibid. The Instruments with their particular
names to Etch vvithall. 98. The use and property of every particular
Instrument. Ibid. The manner and way to make the ground. 99. A red ground.
Ibid. A white ground 100. A black ground. Ibid. Another ground. Ibid. The
manner and way to lay the ground upon the Plate. Ibid. The way to dravv the
out lines of any dravving upon the Plate. 101. Several observations in
Hatching. Ibid. Necessary observations in Etching Landskips. 102. How to lay a
wax wall upon a plate. Ibid. How to use Aqua Fortis on the plate. 103.
Observations by which you may know when it is deep enough. Ibid. Another
way to know when it is deep enough. 104. A way to lay a white ground upon
a black. 105. A way to lay a red ground upon a black. Ibid. A receipt for a
ground taken out of a Manuscript. Ibid. The ground of Rinebrant of Rine. 106.
The way to preserve a Ground in Frosty vveather. Ibid. A way to preserve the
Plate from injury. Ibid. A way to make Aqua Fortis eat soft or hard. 107.
Observations in Etching prospective. Ibid. A way to grave any hand or letter
upon a Copper Plate. 108. The way to polish a Copper Plate. Ibid. The Names of
the Instruments used to polish. 109. The use of every particular tool or
Instrument. Ibid. The manner or way of Mezo Tinto. 110.
examples for drawing the human head examples for drawing the human eye
examples for drawing the human nose and mouth examples for drawing the human
ear examples for drawing male and female human heads examples for drawing male
human heads and hand examples for drawing male and female human heads, hair and
head-dresses examples for drawing male human heads and hands examples for
drawing human hands examples for drawing human hands examples for drawing human
hands holding objects examples for drawing female heads, hands, arms and legs
examples for drawing human hands, arms and legs examples for drawing human
feet, hand and head examples for drawing human legs examples for drawing human
legs and feet examples for drawing human children, infants, feet, hand and a
female head examples for drawing human children, infants and a hand examples
for drawing male and female human torsos examples for drawing female human
heads and torsos examples for drawing male human heads and torsos examples for
drawing male and female human bodies, anatomies and skeleton examples for
drawing male human bodies, anatomies and skeletons examples for drawing female
human bodies examples for drawing human children and infant bodies examples for
drawing the Holy Family and angels or cherubs with a bow, riding a bird, and
holding an orb examples for drawing female human bodies partially- and
fully-clothed examples for drawing female human bodies partially- and
fully-clothed examples for drawing female human bodies partially- and
fully-clothed with a basket of grapes

printer's device of Arther Tooker, featuring a glode underneath a crescent The
Pitkteer Shope From the Old Bailey
Industrious Man his Tallent To Maintain
Plots Strives Up Early Late but All in vain
The Moon ye World ye Heavens so often Does Vary
No Wonder Man does Many times Miscarrie
R Gaywood secit
A.T.

1664

Are to be sold by Arthur Tooker Stationer, at the Globe in the Strand over
against Salisbury house.




