Whereas Sergeant Major General Brown has desired me, that the passages of
the late Treaty between him and the Lord Digby may be published; It is
therefore my pleasure, that the said passages shall be Printed accordingly.
Dated, 1. Febr. 1644.

ESSEX.

To all whom it may concern.

The Lord Digbies DESIGN To Betray ABINGDON, Carried on for diverse VVeeks by
an intercourse of Letters.

Which are here published for the satisfaction of all Men, BY Sergeant Major
GenerallBrown.

Together with the CIPHER which the Lord DIGBY sent him for that purpose.

LONDON: Printed for Laurence Blaiklock, and are to be sold at the Sign of the
Sugar Loaf at Temple Bar. 1644.

To His Excellency Robert Earl of Essex, Lord General, etc.
May it please your Excellency,
THat intercourse between the Lo: Digby and my self (fed on their side with
hope of prevailing, and on mine with hope of fortifying by the Defign we had
upon each other) is happily (I bless God) on our side, and with rage and fury
on theirs, brought to a period. It has been in the womb ever since the 14. of
September, as soon as it was quick, I gave Your Excellency and the Committee of
both Kingdoms notice of it, and ever since have (for fear of Abortion) born it
with some difficulty the full time, and not miscarryed, till it gr^w so strong
and big, that it delivered it self.

When the Lord Digby savv it was born with an honest face, and nothing like
the Brat which he hoped for, he presently would have made it away, by the
poison of his last forged Letter, which is so full of malice, that I wonder he
burst not with it, before he could have time to vent it: I do believe Spain and
Italy where he has grown, afford not a more dangerous Drug then this of his
last Letter, wherein Atheistically and wickedly by his Forgery, he (as it were)
defies the God of Heaven, and hates Truth perfectly.

My Lord, were it not that I dare not conceal this man's impiety and cruelty,
expressed in his last, I should be content for my own part, to conceal all his
Flattery and Folly, expressed in his former Letters, But I am not my own, but
the Kingdoms Servant; and therefore, though I be but a bad Writer, I hold it
my duty to give those whom he calls my Masters (and I thank him for it) account
of my Words as well as Actions, and I wish they could read thoughts too; it may
be, when their blinded Party shall by this unworthy carriage of his, see him in
his colors, they will at last pity, at least, if not rescue a Prince that
makes use of such a wicked head, and subscribes to such a lying hand: And if
Propositions from the Parliament thrive not, may know who is that Haman which
blasts Mordecais petition: That Countenance which I have had from Your
Excellency at all times, invites me, that leading example of faithfulness to
Gods Cause and the Kingdoms safety, which shines in you, obliges me; and that
dirt which is cast in some of these Letters by an impudent Clergy^man upon your
Name^ these added to that imediate command your Excellency has over me, force
me to make these passages public; and above others, to crave Your
Excellencies leave and approbation to prefix this thankful acknowledgement:
That as Your Excellency has every where honored and served the Kingdom, so
particularly, your influence on Abingdons necessities, has kept warmth in us
all; and for ever obliged me particularly to approve my self

My Lord,

Your Excellencies most humble Servant,Richard Brown.

The Lord Digbies Design to betray Abingdon.
IT seems (by the Story) that when the Enemy had done what he could in the
West, and was ready to return, It was fancied, That Abingdon, as weak as it
was, might be made theirs again by Policy rather then Power, and my self won
out of it by good words, sooner then warred out of it; And therefore, in
September last, they made use of a spiritual Engine, one Mr. Bernard,
sometimes a Preacher in London, now (as it appears) a great Clerk at Oxford;
This man being my former acquaintance, by reason of some remote alliance, took
opportunity, by a Trumpet, who came from thence about Exchange of Prisoners, to
send me this Letter:

NOble Sir, If my Name should be too light, yet for our Alliance sake, I am
hold to represent to you a Request, which from you will for its own justice
sake be granted, namely, to release (if prisoners) and to give safe Conduct, by
way of Pass, to two Women, and a Child of Mr. Doctor Dukesons, who are now in
Abingdon, the one of the women is a Nurse, the other a Maidservant.

I am glad, for your own sake, and my respect also (who am grieved heartily,
that we are not both of one side) that yo^ carry on the Party you deal in, with
so much honored candor and ingenuity. I hope God will one day reconcile all
the Differences now on foot, that we may meet our friends as friends. I have
had no heat, but pure conscience in this contention, neither have I any
ambition, then by the granting of this Request, as an addition of more to many
former favors, to be acknowledged in the quality of

Your most indeared and affectionate Kinsman and Brother to serve you.Nath:
Bernard.
Oxford, Sept. 14. 1644.
Postscript. Sir, If you would grant safe Conduct to me, I would be glad to
k^sse your hands at Abingdon, that I may enquire of the welfare of ou^ Brothers
and Sisters, etc. and to give you account how I was forced hither from home,
and some other Passages.


This I looked upon but slightly, giving him neither Pass nor Answer, finding
it to be but the Language of a private, and (as I thought) obscure person,
complementing with me (as far as a few Lines would go) for old acquaintance
sake, and like a Divine bemoaning the Times; about a Month he was quiet, and
then came this second, seconded with a little more Flattery, in these words:

SIr, When I wrote last unto you, I suppose I received no Answer, for the
places sake whence it came; but to remove all doubt from you, when I came
thither I was a prisoner, now I am removed out of it: May you be pleased to
grant me a Pass to come to you; I have a Request to propose to you, which is
for my safety and your Honor. And I will likewise preassure you, `tis no more
then what has been granted by my Lord of Essex and Sir William Waller both,
neither of whom, you come behind in valor, and I hope will not come short of
them in Honorable Courtesy, I will not now name it, that I may not be
prevented of kissing your hand, who am, for your never to be forgotten
courtesy when I last saw you at London,

Your most obliged Servant,Nath: Bernard.
Water-Eaton, October. 18. 1644.

In this you see he persuades me to believe he had been a prisoner at Oxford,
now set at liberty, and in another Town, from whence he dates, and again urges
leave to come and see me, and ask a favor, which was only for his safety and
my Honor to grant.

Upon this I acquainted some friends about me, with the Request, Conditions,
and Qualities of the man, and then sent a Pass, which brought him on our
Lecture day: when he came I received him courteously; he desired to Preach, but
was denied; he dined with me and some of my Officers, and at last, upon his
going away, desired a word or two with me privately, and then he falls upon the
Errand (which it seems he was sent on) and wishes me on their side, laying
about him, and lavishing out his breath in paintings and flatteries at random.

Now I found my good Cozen to be but the Ecclesiastical Duck-c^y, let fly
from a higher Gamester, and forthwith I baited my hook as well as he his --
Truly Mr. Bernard I pray for nothing more then a good Conscience; and if I
thought my self in an Error, I would not be long in leaving it. At this, the
Gudgeon gaped, and I gave him line; he desires liberty to write to me, I gave
it him (with a Protection of his Lady Lovelaces house at Water-Eaton from
plunder and violence) and he jogged home jocundly to tell his Lord George how
his Pill had wrought, and a few days after sent this to me:

NOble Sir, I am emboldned by your last great favor, and necessitated by some
loss, since that time you sent my Lady your Protection, not without some
affright, given by some of Major Temples men, to our whole house, together with
the approach (as we hear) of the Armies toward us, to desire your advice,
whether the Protection you gave me will (in case the Armies come hither) keep
my person free, or whither, notwithstanding that, I am in danger of being
mistaken for, and used like an Enemy. The Answer whereto will yet further oblige

Your most humble Servant, Nath: Bernard.
Water-Eaton, Nov. 1. 1644.

This Letter being occasioned, as he pretends, by some affrightments given from
the great number of Parliament Soldiers who marched that way, is but a private
one, and had an Answer answerable thus:

SIR, The protection I sent by you to my Lady Lovelace, I presume will keep her
and her family from all irregular Plunder, by any under my Command; but whether
'twill prove a security to her Ladyship, or your self from other Forces now
here, or to come this way I know not, nor can I therein advise; I shall be
willing to serve you in what I may: and be

Your Friend and Servant, Rich. Brown.
Abingdon, Nov. 1. 1644.

All this while Mr. Bernard has been scowring, screwing, and oyling his
Engine; now he is resolved to charge and give fire: But his first charge for
fear of breaking or recoyling, shall be only Powder and paper: Witness this
which he let fly at me:

SIR, Having received so many signal and obliging favors from you, and those,
since the fate of the Kingdom has (together with our own) made us to run
contrary fortunes: I who abhor nothing more then ingratitude, pity nothing
more then seduced virtue, and misplaced Gallantry; have here as the only way
left me to testify my thankfulness, so vindicated your reputation, that I
believe your credit with us will be more precious, then with them for whom you
have hazarded all that is dear to man.

For proof whereof, as I am able to produce evidence sufficient of neglect and
secret scorn from some men, who owe the safety of their evils to your valor:
So, I am Commanded, to let you know, (...) you have with us friends that (as
you are) will Honor you; but if you were otherwise, would be proud really to
serve you: And that through our endeavors, you are so fairly reported to the
highest.

That you are desired -- But i will say no more till you answer one request; and
that is, that you will promise not to betray those that Honor you, to scorn,
my life to danger by discovering what my undertaking has resolved to go on
with, to preserve to you a good Conscience, a good name to future ages, and a
securing with your Country and King, what God has blessed you with in this world
with our friends.

And I do again preassure, that by this I will engage you to nothing, but what
Gods Word and a good Conscience and the Peace of this Kingdom do require of
you: Besides what other Inducements I am to acquaint you with when you have
assured me; that if through violent sway of contrary affection we should not
satisfy each other; yet we shall neither through passion betray one another to
scorn or danger, which is all at present I do desire, besides the continuance
of the favor of safe access and recesse of my Messenger. I pray God bless
Your Honor with all that is good, and guide all our feet into the way of
Peace. Sir, I shall ever be

Your most humble Servant,Nath. Bernard.
Water-Eaton, Nov. 4. 1644.

Was not this pretty well for the first shoot, to aim at the very joint, and
make a division between friends? Some of those for whom you hazarded all etc.
Neglect you, scorn you etc. `Tis rarely begun Machi^vell, as soon as we had
received this (for I had the advice of some about me, as many as might be a
full Testimony of my integrity; and yet not more then might warrant secrecy)
Now we saw plainly a Plot of a Council, and not the attempt of a single Priest
only; and perceived other faces peeping behind the Arras, waighting for the
Cue to bring them out.

A little before this, when their Forces were beaten at Newbery, we marched out
and vexed them in their retreat; but now having relieved Dunnington, they
quartered round about me; so that we all concluded upon this opportunity, by
dallying and deluding, to retard their assault, ti^^ we could get up our
works, and make out for assistance: And now w^ fall to our work: He begins
upon me with King, Conscience, Kingdom, Honor etc. All good Theames: I echo
back to him such of his own ^ayings (...) would (...) then his own, as in this
which I returned him,

SIR, I give you (...) for the respect, I believe you be^r him who shall ever
labor ^^ an Honorable Reputation and the way to it; I do assure you of safe
access and recesse, being resolved to serve your desires in any thing
agreeable to the Word of God and a good Conscience.

Sir, be assured there is nothing I prize more then peace, nor any thing I beg
more then to serve my King and Country whose I am: and Sir,

Your Loving Friend and Servant, Rich. Brown.
Abingdon, Nov. 5. 1644.

By this my Friend thinks verily that I have a mind to chaffer, and therefore
down he pitches his pack, and brings out his small parcells of silken
Rhetoric, fine and course complements, Scriptures woven at Oxford, Posies for
Prerogative, Ribands with Vive le Roy, and Lawn for Sleeves, which ^^ hopes to
wear himself, for by this next you will think he had his Congedeslier his black
Box already, for converting me.

He quotes the Kings, Excommunicates ipso facto (as he calls it) the Kingdoms,
and Da^nes the Parliament, as confidently as if he had been Priest at Lambeth,
and not Lecturer at Wooll-Church; witness this divine charitable composure.

SIR, I am commanded to let you know that His Majesty cannot but wonder, that
you who being recommended to him for many worthy parts and actions, declaring
you no stranger to virtue and Noble qualities, as one no way aspersed with any
infamous factions inclination in your self in times past, one whom he, nor his
former Government has ever wronged: He having never taken the Staff of Lord
Chamberlain from you, nor were you ever fined 1500. l. in the Star Chamber, at
the suit of Sir Thomas Reynolds, as the case is of Essex and Waller, (wherein
yet he denies that either of them were wronged or injuryed) no Wife taken from
you in his Fathers days, nor your Father beheaded in the days of Queen
Elizabeth.

That you who was never thought of so broken or low a fortune as some Scottish
Reformers. That you who were so far from a Schismatic spirit, that you have
obliged Orthodox Divines (now his cosufferers) to bear you an Honorable
Testimony.

That you to whom he never so much as in thought, intended other then good when
occasion offered it self. That you whose moderation in other things has
witnessed, that you neither want valor nor courtesy. That you should not
only join with, but lead on his Subjects armed against his Life, his Crown,
and Kingdom, when he has declared with so much vehemence, and (to his
knowledge) inward integrity and sincerity, his resolutions to perform all your
desires concerning the true Reformed Protestant Religion, and just Rights of
Parliaments, the Liberty and property of his Subjects; when there is nothing
left that may be desired by equal and just-dealing men; but he has yielded
to. That you should be one of them that will never trust him, till by their
means he be killed or made a Prisoner, or which is worse, such a slave as must
never say (No) or [I will advise] to any thing he shall be required.

He desires you to make the case your own, and to judge whether you could
without defense suffer all that you have to be violently taken from you, etc.
Or whether you could find out a way that you would think, were it your case,
more equal and just for you to go in.

I am therefore in my way appointed to let you know, that that place Prove.
24.21. is part of that Word of God which shall one day judge the World, and
does ( ipso facto) Excommunicate that Party which you are ensnared with; That
that place, 2 Timothy 3.5. expressly commands you to turn away from such,
notwithstanding their form of Godliness: And that you are looked upon as
Mordecai did on Esther, chap. 4. verse. 14. as one advanced for such an occasion
as this, to restore the King to his Subjects, and his Subjects to their King.

I should have come secretly to you, to have given you evidence of what I told
by the last, concerning Injuries you suffer by your own side, and to have made
Honorable and advantageous Propositions to you, both for your own and the
Kingdoms good, with the way of assurance; But though your Letter did infinitely
add to you; Yet the news of hanging some of ours at Abingdon has stopped my
Commission, and somewhat daunted my resolution to the present. Only I would
pray you to furnish with a reasonable account in your defense,

Sir, your most faithful Servant,Nath: Bernard.
Nov. 8. 1644.

Had it not been that we saw a direct necessity of whilng with him, This Letter
(which they made bitter with those Ingredients to try how it would work) had
made me break off with such an unsufferable Rabsheca, but on we went and I
returned this:

SIR, It Is true, I never countenanced, but ever abhorred all Faction, nor do or
shall I side with any contemning lawful authority, neither can I believe that
revenge is the cause why the Lord General, or Sir William Waller are in Arms,
I am assured they as my self have no other ends but the Kings and Kingdoms
good, and am confident the Parliaments aims are the same, and will appear so
in the end, otherwise I should turn my sword against them, or any that should
s^eke His Majesty's life, or to imprison His person; I shall in nothing more
willingly adventure mine, then in rescuing Him in both; shall cheerfully
hearken after all honorable and advantageous Propositions which may prove my
own and the Kingdoms good.

I deny that any of your party in Abingdon have been hanged, nor shall any,
except by Order of Parliament; I have always given order for christian usage
of all prisoners with me, and wish you would do the like by ours.

Sir, you have twice filled your Letters to me with Riddles, which till you
make plain to my understanding I will say no more, I am,

Sir, Your loving Friend and Servant,Rich. Brown.
Abingdon, November. 11. 1644.
Postscript. Sir, I hold it unsafe for your self to come any more to me, your
last being here was much distasted.


I must desire the Reader to know, that now all my Letters went to His
Majesty's eye (as their Letters afterward tell me) and must necessarily carry
seeming answers to demands, and therefore my hardest task was to compile
innocent words, such as would carry double, with some seeming satisfaction,
such as these: My design in hand: I hope to bring all to pass as I desire:
Settle my aff^i^es at London: What I have undertake^, I will perform etc. All
which are but new Anagrams of my old resolutions which I was much afraid they
would find out, and therefore took the advantage of working hard, and a day
or two after, heard from him in these,

NOble Sir, This is the last time I will trouble you with any generals, which
you are pleased to call Riddles; And since you think it not safe for my self
to wait on you: I am commanded to entreat you would express your doubts and
fears on one side, and your hopes and desires on the other, viz. The motives
whereupon you engaged so much worth as we find in you in the present action;
that if we can give you no satisfaction, we may suspect our selves to have gone
amiss.

To this end I am further to beseech you to assure safe access and recesse to
a discreet third person, that shall wait upon your Honor for those purposes
which I have already intimated, whereby you shall perceive how much I have
labored to evidence that your favour^ have inviolably obliged

Your most humble Servant,N. Bernard.
Water-E^ton, Nov. 15. 1644.
Postscript. I have authority to tell you, and you shall speedily and exactly
find it made good to you, that there is no just or reasonable thing you can
propose, in which you shall not be satisfied.


Now he begins to leave off single selfing of it, and Wee's it by authority,
asking me the lowest price of Abingdon and my self, and thus being a slave
himself, he ventures to buy and sell Abingdon, and Conscience, and Faith, etc.
Methought his-part was a pretty long one, but he tarries two Scenes longer
before any other enters, so I was feign to personate still as follows.

SIR, My doubts and fears on one side, and my hopes on the other, are various
as the motives which first engaged me in this present Action, If there be any
thing of Secrecy in our Letter discourses, I conceive it unsafe to admit a
third man.

I am glad you promise me to deal no longer in generals, a thing desired, I
shall conclude with your own words, That there is no just or reasonable thing
you can propose, in which you shall not be satisfied, more I will not say at
present but that I am

Your humble Servant,Rich. Brown
Abingdon, Nov. 16. 1644.

My denial of a third man which I conceived would make them suspect me less,
pretending the danger of it, (though my maine aim was not to meddle in any
thing but what was under their hands) made them confident, and bid a little
higher, as in this:

SIR, Since you have given me leave to deal with you in particulars, I must
begin with you upon this Foundation; That you do believe (or will be so just,
as to show reasons to the contrary) the satisfactions whereof shall make faith
of the Professions and Protestations made by the King of his Resolutions to
defend the true reformed Protestant Religion established by Law, the Liberty
and Property of his Subjects and just Privileges of PARLIAMENT.

And then that you will be so far from opposing him in this, that you will,
like a good Christian and a good Subject, assist him therein; And that you may
know how good an opinion His Majesty has of you, if he may know your
resolution by me, you shall be left to your own election in what way you will
serve Him for the present, either in Abingdon, or by finding some means to
remove to London, or by imediatly coming over to Him, you best knowing which
way He may receive most advantage by your service.

And for your Recompense, you shall be a Barone^, Have any other Testimony of
His Majest^es favor and value of you, and any place of trust your self shall
propose, and what other reward you shall desire within His Majesty's power to
grant.

The truth is I find (as I have before intimated) that though you are looked
on here as a shrewd enemy, yet you are valued as one who carries himself most
like a Gentleman, and who proceeds more civily then any of that party, although
Sir William Waller told our Lord Generals Lady when he sent Her home hither to
other day, having been his prisoner, she were best to go such a way about,
least she fell into the hands of that Rogue Brown, who would use Her like a
Clown.

You will pardon this intimation which proceeds from my respects of you, and to
assure you that this proceeds not from some private heat only betwixt your
honor and the Knight, but from the natural ingratitude of that party, I have
sent you here enclosed a Copy of the Lord Says Letter written with his own
hand, whereby you may guess at your future respects with them you now defend
to your own, and the hurt of ^s all.

I will trouble you no further at present then to assure you, there is one only
third person privy to this, who has full authority to undertake for His
Majesty, and who is Honorable and so honest that he will see all particulars
performed, I am still

Sir, Your most obliged Servant, N. Bernard.
Nov. 19. 1644.
Postscript Sir, if you desire it, I shall help you to other Letters written by
the same Lords hand hereafter; requesting that they may be returned if it shall
be desired: Whilst I am writing, the Letter is for some other purposes,
remanded to be conveyed to Banbury, but I assure you of them, if you shall
distrust me at present, though the want of them has retarded the messenger two
days.

I pray God make you ours, with -- your will.
I pray God keep you from being ours, against your will.

This was done artificially, one while he strokes me with promises from
Oxford; presently he pricks me with wrongs done at London; but as the one
pleased me not, so the other troubled me not: I conquered the flattery of the
one, and owned not the injury of the other,

But seeing now be quotes a third Honorable customer authorized by the King to
cheapen me; I thought it good for our works sake which more wanted time, to
bid that man of Honor welcome into my warehouse too; and slighting Bernards
offers, as being to little, sent him this.

SIR, It will be needless to give any Reply to that foundation you begin with,
which must necessarily be involved in the Issue of this our Treaty; nor as yet
to pitch upon any particular way, wherei^ my service may be most advantageous;
since they to whom I resign my self, may dispose of me to what shall be thought
fit.

And although I am not swayed by mercenary respects; yet I looked for a greater
Argument of that Estimation you say I am in with you, then the proposed reward,
which does not equalize what I am: And that I urge nothing my self, you must
attribute to that necessary discretion which ought to be in a business of so
great consequence.

I shall proceed no further at present, then to desire immediate intercourse,
with that Honorable person you mentioned, that from him I may have more
special grounds of assurance in that whereon I adventure so much.

I am ashamed at the ingratitude and contempt you acquaint me withal, from
them of whom I have deserved better: And desire for my more full satisfaction,
you will send me the original of those Letters you speak of, which may prove
of singular advantage; and which I asure you, shall be returned by the same
Messenger. I am Sir

Your assured Friend and Servant,Rich. Brown.
Abingdon, Nov. 22. 1644.

My Lord Digby having now his properties all on, and himself ready to issue
forth, makes Bernard write once more, desiring (what I was resolved not to
yield to) Secrecy: That so in case he acted not well, and his part did not
take; he might not be hist off; but go out like a mute in a mask: So says
this of the 25. of November.

NOble Sir, My desire to express how dearly my engagements from you stick to
me, I have done what I could to your advantage on this side, whereon to live or
dye ^o my Conscience is the only way to be (caereris paribus) safe Temporal
and Eternally.

To satisfy your desire of intercourse with that Honorable person
immediately, there wants nothing but your Answer to that request in plainer
terms, which I made the 4. of Nov. Namely, whether we may be confident in
case of non-satisfaction to either party, we may mutually trust one another
silence, which is promised withal assurance upon our side; and such a promise
from your word (to satisfy you how much we value your word) shall be
sufficient; Which done, you shall receive both parts of your demands.

For the Letters of the Lord Says, I could at present send but the enclosed,
the other being now at press or lent out, which you shall have from me as soon
as may be, I pray return this again by this bearer: The other of your desires
we are upon the return to this ready to satisfy the very next day: I am

Your most humble Servant,Nath. Bernard.
Nov. 25. 1644.

At this very time Prince Rupert and his forces came near and faced us, and we
(though then very weak) drew out a party, upon which he marched away; and I
took boldness from that in my Answer, to be peremptory and stand upon it, that
I feared them not in these words.

SIR, In seriously urging that point of Secre^y, you do but seem seriously to
question my discretion, since that my Life and Fortunes are engaged in the
discovery, and you nor any other can run any considerable hazard.

Besides that, it is unreasonable to expect from me, that promise which may so
deeply ensnare me in case intentions on yuor side were less answerable to
expressions; and in that particular, my Jealousy must be excused, since whilst
you Treat with me in Letters, your Forces are advancing to sudden attempt of
our Garrison which we prepare for as much as we fear little: I am resolved
never by any demand, to make my self liable to a refusal; what Propositions
come from your part, must be dispatched and confirmed with the highest
security: By this you may understand my meaning.

And so, whil^st I am in the power of my own choice, I leave it to yours,
whether suddenly and fully to proceed, or immediate^^ ^^ break off: and so rest

Your very Loving Friend and Servant,Rich. Brown.
Abingdon, Nov. 25. 1644.
Postscript, I have returned the enclosed which you sent for, which I thank
you, and desire a sight of the rest, which shall be ^^ faithfully restored.


This ^oy carriage made the Gentleman come on, and my Lord (...) to the hazard,
and now both at once, the Goshauke and the Kistrell, fly at me with great
fierceness. Witness these:

NOble Sir, I have at length sent you the other part of your desires, neither
have my tendernesses; and with them some delays, been without a design for the
Honorable, and especially the safe conveyance of this Negotiation: I have
foreseen all things here that probably might be dangerous, before I would too
far have engaged you, that if there had been any appearance of ill, or
unfaithfulness; I might h^^e forewarned you escaped: But of this I hope more
opportunely and more nearly.

But now Sir, I dare safely engage my life, that the'nclosed contains no more
then what you may build upon; Neither would I have you stand upon any nice
Punctilio of greater Honor at prese^^^ for I am promised (though you are not
yet to be acquainted with ^^ that you shall be denied no just request, nor kept
back from any Honor you can imagine your self capable of; But there must be a
consultation and provision against envy toward your self, and an opinion of
neglect which others may take upon it.

The King is infinitely taken with your Letters, and believes a great deal of
worth in you, insomuch, that he professes a greater mind to your self, then
your Garrison, desiring rather to have you his own, then that; I hope you will
help him to both, and in both, to his own.

Sir, What has been long in preparing, must be speedy in Execution, you have
Examples to evidence delays dangerous; that person who speaks to you in the
enclosed, has prevented many forcible designs upon. Abingdon, and the often
stages of them, will run him or your self into suspit^on; I pray consider the
ways of gaining such Friends, and such a side as you will never repent just
joining ^o.

I pray for your own Credits sake, withal, cause the Gray Gelding which was
taken from Mr. Th^^ H^^th to be ^^turned: He is in your Secretaries power: I am
confident you were misinformed concerning the Horses employment, upon any part
against you; I shall take the Gentleman's word before any ordinary man's, or
strangers oath: I know that for the recovery of ten Horses, he could not be
hired to a lye^ And he protests the Horse was never in any service at all.

He received your Pass and I think Protection too; Let them be dearer with
your Honor, then the satisfying their minds that have him. I am

Your most humble Servant,Nath. Bernard.
Nov. 28. 1644.
This should have been with you last night, but that I was out of Town.


The enclosed mentioned in the last, was from the Lord Digby, which speaks
thus:

SIR, Having had a sight of your severa^ll Letters to your worthy Kinsman
concerning the late Negotiation between you, I find in them so much
franknesse, so much reason, and so much of a Gentleman, that I should think my
self ^aulty to all those, should I in any wise doubt your sincerity, or
forbear out of any further Scruples to own my part in what you have received
from him.

I shall not enter into any Argument with you to alter your judgment from the
Tenants of that party, to which you have formerly adhered, since I conceive you
too worthy a man to have proceeded thus far had not that conversion been
already wrought.

And therefore all that I shall apply my discourse to, shall be to give you the
assurance (which you may rely upon) of His Majesty's great sense and value of
your disposition to his service, which I assure you is so much upon those
handsome expressions which he has seen of it in your Letters, that he does not
so much prize the gaineing of such a place as Abingdon, as such a person as you
to his service and not so much a Recompense for the one, as encouragement to
the other; I have full authority to assure you, That your declaring for him,
and putting such of his Force^ into Abingdon as may secure you in it after such
a Declaration: You shall receive His Majesty's Commission for the Government of
that place; For the Comm^nd (if you desire it) of a Brigade in His Majesty's
Army, and a Warrant to be a Baronet: This for the present till I shall be more
particular informed by (...), whether your inclinations may point at any other
more proper testimony of his Majesty's favor.

In the mean time, I shall only add this, that for reasons well concerning
your safety in this Negotiation (in which all pro^ractio^ are dangerous) as His
Majesty's service: It is desired that there (...) be suddenly a small
conclusion of this business, and if possible, by Sunday next: The particular
ways whereof, I shall expect direction in from you; And for my own particular,
I shall desire you to remember that among all the imputations which His
Majesty's enemies have cast upon me, I have never been blasted with a faileing
in my word or honor; And I pray be confident, I shall not begin with you, who
over and above the usefullnesse which I promise my self of you in my Masters
and the Kingdoms business, have begoten in me ^ very sincere desire of seeing
you in a capacity for me to avow my self.

Your affectionate Servant,George Digby.
Oxford, Nov. 27. 1644.

No sooner had I read my Lords, but forthwith I sent away to the Committee of
both Kingdoms, with reasons why I deal thus, and must still, entreating help to
be sent speedily, with directions how to carry on, and when to break of this
delusion: In the Interim for fear of any Plot within the Town (which I had
cause to suspect) I called in all whom I knew to be dangerous, to take the
Covenant, those who denied, I sent away Prisoners, and warned in the whole Town
the week following, who took it, but I writ back this answer the next day
after I had received theirs.

SIR, I cannot but be apprehensive of your tenderness to my self, and your
discretion in all respects through the whole persuit of this affair, which now
deserves, that I ingeniously profess, there shall be no Punctilio (as you have
wisely admonish't) put any demur upon my present resolutions, for the truth is,
I value not an Honorable Tittle, in respect of a just Tittle to an Honorable
reputation, and (which I hope ere long, freely and confidently to avouch) His
Majesty's favor.

That our Negotiation has been (as you intimate) a prevention to any forcible
design against us I rejoice, For when His Majesty shall peaceably possess this
Garrison, it will easily appear how much blood by this means has been
preserved for more seasonable service: The enclosed I commend to your trusty
care, in expectation of the event, whereof I rest,

Your loving friend and Servant,Rich. Brown.
Abingdon, Nov. 28. 1644.

MY Lord, I account it no small Honor, that any action of mine should receive
from your Lordship so favorable an interpretation; and shall always esteem it
my greatest happiness, to be thought capable to do His Majesty service.

What Expressions soever have fallen from me which your Lordship may have taken
notice of, I shall make good to the utmost of my power; And have received so
full satisfaction from your Lordships assurance (as concerning the scope of
your Letters) that there is now nothing wanting to an absolute conclusion
between us, saving a speedy provision of my affairs at London, which will be
immediately taken order for; so soon as I may adventure a trusty messenger
thither, which I presume your Lordship will hold reasonable, and so I rest,

Your honors most humble Servant,Rich. Brown.


Who would think that can read any thing, that ever this wise and learned Lord
and his Chaplin, who are such notable painters, themselves should be con^ened
with painted Graps, and admire an empty counterfeited shape, as if there were
something behind it.

I profess I expected they should find me in my Answers to say (as I did) so
many new nothings, and send me the next message by their Army: Yet they fall in
love with those shaddows I sent them, and follow those shaddows with mighty
earnestness, as in these.

SIR, The expressions of your last Letter to my self, and your worthy Kinsman,
added to the former Characters which I have received of your worth, have raised
such an assurance in me, that I am no more capable of the least distrust of
you, and I shall not deceive you, to let you know, that His Majesty is possessed
with the same confidence, so that you are looked upon now, as one wholly
devouted to His service, and with so much consideration of your person and
abilities, that we cannot but promise our selves yet greater advantages by them
then those that are present in view.

It is very just and reasonable, That you should provide in the best manner
that the condition of affairs will allow, for what concerns your fortune at
London, and I hope you have not wholly neglected that all this while.

But I must conjure you, that you will use all possible expedition in bringing
our business to a final conclusion, for it would be an extreme grief to me,
to be an occasion of misfortune to you; And you cannot be ignorant, how
dangerous suspense is in things of the ^ture, especially where prejudices and
jealousies are once broken (...), as (by the Letter which was sent you, and by
some discourses which to my knowledge the Committee let fall at their being
here) it is m^^^fest they are toward you: Besides that, the pressures of our
Military men here for some enterprise, either for the taking or blocking up of
that place, are daily such as I suffer much by opposing them And it will be
impossible for me to divert them long without acquainting some with the true
reason of my opposition, whom I am resolved not to trust with such a secret.

Wherefore I do most earnestly desire you in your next, to assign me (if you
can possibly) a certain time, that I may procure some diversion of our designs
during that, and that you would also frankly let me know what your sway and
interest with your own men is likely to be upon that alteration; and what way
it will necessary to assist you with His Majesty's Forces, that they may be
dispossed of accordingly.

I shall not need to recommend to so discreet a person two Ca^tions, the one to
beware of admitting any new Forces into your Garrison from the Parliament that
my master your power: The other, to be sure to have some trusty person still by
you, as in case you should discover any design within against you, may give
instant notice ^^ ^ther, with the way to rescue you; This is the last that I
shall adventure unto you barefaced, therefore for future correspondency, I have
sent you the enclosed Cipher which I hope I shall not long make use of to
disguise my being.

Your very affectionate friend and Servant,George Digby.
Oxford, Dec. 1. 1644.

His Lordships Cipher before mentioned.
(...)

Another Letter of M. Bernards which came at the same time with the former.
Noble Sir.
SInce you have now immediate Intercourse I shall need so much the less to
trouble you, I am now commanded to let you know that whereas we have certain
information that there are forces and p^^^ision coming to reinforce your
Garrison, Iealousies fall heavy upon your unfeigned Friends for what they have
already done and an impossibility to sustain themselves without giving an
account to Prince Rup^rt, and some others of the present businesses, if they
withold the Acts of Hostility any longer.

Sir, I should not be my self if I should not engage my self for your
fidelity, you cannot imagine the advantages you will meet with in the Execution
of the business you know, what acclamations popular, what favor from the
King, what friends and servants that all the Bells in London can never decry
your Honor much less equal it: I shall greive at nothing more then at the
prevention of all, which cannot be without your great dishonor, of whom we all
think good, and in whom we think is the Seat of most honorable and discreet
thoughts, Sir I am

Your Honors most humble Servant N. BERNARD.


What r^ckoning is here without my (...)! By Lord is possessed, and (...), a^
that must ^^eds follow (though in manners it should go before) the King ^^
possessed too, that I am for his service. Tru^ly I am possessed (...), but not in
his Lo^dship sense, I am and ever was for his Majesty's service, only now they
desire expedition: and to effect it. His Lor^ship (...) the Commissioners who
m^nt th^^her for peace (and th^rfore not (...) to him) for scattering words as
Jealous of me and my actions, which is as true as the Letter which he sends
me at last. I hope th^s^ m^n of (...) will consider him according^y.

But to show his Confidence, behold a cip^^ enclosed in his Letter^ which I
must learn to conjure by. But not without the Parlia^ents (...) and therefore
sent that up after the rest and top't his mouth the whilst (...) this empty
Spoone --. And Bernardwi t^ his --

My Lord.
YOur last^ (...) the first of December, came not to my hands till this
afternoon which something (...) me, And my answer, though it bring with it
some Ru^^, yet I hope will not alter your Lordships favorable opinion, The
truth is that last Saturday night there came to us 1500 Foot by order of the
Comittee of both Kingdoms with provisions of vict^^lls etc. which I admire at,
since it could not be imagined but that ayd^ which I had before, of whom by
their Order I gave account in a m^ster Role but the last week, were
sufficiently able to defend this place.

These additionall Forces being a commanded party out of my Lord Generals, my
Lord of (...), and the City, (with whom I am not yet well acquainted) m^st of
necessity re^^^d the business: And herein your Lordships advice by the Ciphes
you sent me will be requisite. The maine, concerning my own affairs at London
I do hasten; nor shall any private interests take me off from my resolutions:

I am, my Lord, Your Honors most humble Servant, Rich. Brown.
Abingdon December. 4. 1644.

The Major Generals Letter in answer to the last from Bernard.
THose jealousies you speak of, which arise amongst you since these new forces
came to me, are but jealo^sies, and must out o^ that fidelity you put in me be
blown over by your policy, till an opportunity (which I wait for) set all
right.

The truth is, there came last Saturday by order from above 1500 more foot and
provisions to me, of which I have given account in the enclosed, and shall
expect advice in.

I should not be my self, if I should own those applauses you talk of, as
charms that can move me: And I wonder that you (knowing me so well) should
think them weighty. No, it is not popular acclamation on the one side, or
fear of any acts of hostility on the other, but only the discharge of an
honest and loyal conscience which has invited me into this course which I now
run. And these for the present I assure you of faithfully I am.

Your loving friend and Servant, Rich. Brown.
Abindon December. 4. 1644.

THese Forces which I t^ll them of, were now come to me, and therefore I send
t^em Wo^d their number; and pretend they came unexpect^^, and I had no need of
them, and now my affairs at London (which expression d^d m^ Knights service)
Were pretty we^l settled: yet having (...) Directions when to break off I
dandled them one on one knee, and the other on the other.

But in their nex they begin to ^uspect, yet not by my Letters; but (...)
scruples bubble up they know not why and ^ere resolved ^^ to ch^me (...) Wha^
m^^ all I am m^de on. For this purpose my L^ has hi^, and Bernard his device:
my Lord desires time and m^nner to b^ told him, and desires (...) now to send
him some blanke passes.

Bernard be scar^s me with the knavery of the Messenger, how he op^^^d my
Let^er^, and what danger might ensue, giving an hint by this, that now all
would out, or might miscarry, if I did not dispatch Thus they write.

The Lord Digbies Letter.
Sir,
I Have received Yours of the Fourth, unto which all the answer I can return
is, that I am glad of your Confidence that our Iealousies concerning your
remove from tha^ Government, (raised in us upon several intelligences from
London) are vain, however I pray carry in memory those cautions which I gave
you in my last, and I shall be very glad to receive a more particular answer
unto those Queries in it, concerning the time and manner of Your performing
your engagements.

In which (however delays are apt to suggest suspicions) I protest I cannot
intertaine the least, of your reality being founded according to your
professions upon reason and loyalty, and a convinced and confirmed sense of the
Pious Intentions of Your Sovereign toward the good of his people, Toward the
happiness of which in the settlement of the miserable distr^ctions of the
Kingdom, I know not any man has more power to contribute then your self by
this Action, And I reckon it as a singular good fortune to be made an
Instrument in it, and ^ir,

Your very affectionate Servant George Digbye
Oxford this 6 of Dec. 1644.
Postcript
I may be destitute sometimes of means to convey unto you what may be fit for
you to know, And therefore you shall do very well to favor me with a blanke
pass or two, which upon my Credit shall not be made use of but to your self,


Bernard^ Letter at the same time.
Sir,
I Am to thank you as well for your reprehensions as favouurs. And I must tell
you, I kuow you too well to think you unworthy, but the messenger that brought
this days message, was so bold as to break open my Letter for the Pass
enclosed: And but that I have certain assurance, that no body but the Messenger
and my self, (whom I have taken order to make sure for blabbing this good
while) he might have done mischief to our undoing. I beseech you make use of
the persons I send upon the present occasions, and know that I make no change
but upon reason and good grounds.

Sir, put a period to our expectations I beseech yo^, and put us not to the
pain to be doubted, not your self to the danger. He who lovingly invites you
to your duty, will be able as well to repair your losses as to honor your
well deservings, besides the heavenly blessing and protection which will
certa^nly out-doe your care to your content. An. Example whereof you may have (I
thank God Almighties providence

Sir, Your most obliged Servant, N. Bernard.
December 5. 1644.

You see the (...) ^^d their ^^st, it was h^rd passing and repassing from
London, and I had yet no rules wha^ to do, therefore still I h^l^ up their
Ch^nnes in a mo^e plausible answer, for fear ^hey should sink themselves, and
I not have the drowning of them; and once more closed with them in these
expressi^ns, taking no notice of my Lord desire of blanks at all.

My Lord,
YOurs of the last came to my hands this afternoon, which intimate some
grounds of Jealousies through some late intelligence of my removal from this
Garrison, a thing which may not sink into my thought: for I cannot Imagine
(much less do know of) any grounds to suspect my calling off, and the
confidence I have of my self here assures me that it will not be easy for me
to be snatched hence.

And as concerning your Lordships Querie, I must confess these new forces are
not a little troublesome, and do wholly take from me the possibility of
pointing, either at time, or manner, at present. But I do notwithstanding
perceive, that in a short time I may gain ground upon all difficulties, and
bring this affair to a happy period.

And of this your Lordship may be most assured that I shall consecrate what
power or Capacity I have, whereby to promote the service of my Sovereign, and
the good of his oppressed people. And to that end shall most gladly sacrifice
both my self and fortunes, and remain, my Lord

Your Honors most humble Servant Richard Brown.
Abingdon, Dec. 6. 1644.

A Letter to Bernard at the same time.
Sir,
YOur knowledge of me shall still be for the better as shall ere long, (God
willing) appear, only my reprehensions as you call them, came not till now.
That you should use a Messenger whose hand and tongue and heart should not be
wholly yours, especially in things of this nature troubles me not a little, and
may make all miscarry. Therefore above all be careful to silence him a while,
and i will promise you this accident (which may boade dangers) shall hasten my
resolutions into a speedy, and I hope happy issue.

And in the quickening me on through all oppositions, I shall make use of that
good expression of yours, That my confidence is' that gracious Majesty which
invited me to my duty will bear me out, and be able as well to repair my
losses, as to honor my well deservings.

Sir, my desired ends are followed with such a resolved heart, that you shall
not need to write any more incitements, or make use of a Messenger, unless in
things which my Lord shall think of moment, in which I shall expect to be
acquainted, that so I may know the better how to act. Sir believe the integrity
of

Your loving friend, Rich. Brown.
Abingdon December. 6. 1644.

Exit Bernard, and he thinks with great applause, l^aving his Master and m^
hand to hand, who though h^ te^ls me every time of hi^ confidence, yet had much
ado to hold up his hopes; for from the sixth to the fifte^nth h^e walks and
breathes: and I would have wager'd my Gamester wou^d have struck no more; yet
at last he ventures another spirt, and s^nds the old Messenger again with this.

SIR,
HAving seen your desires in your last to your Kinseman, that he would use no
more incitements, as being unnecessary to a person so well resolved in his
Majesty's service: And being for mine own part fu^ly persuaded of the realitie
o^ your intententions, I have been unwilling to press the p^rformance of your
engagements, so as to give you the least cause to sus^ect^ want of confidence
in me. And therefore I have forborne this long to send to you, although I
assure you I am in danger of suffering much by the delay.

But now I suppose after so long a forbearance, you cannot but think it
reasonable (I being also commanded to do it, that I desire of you a po^^tive
resolution, as to the time and manner of your performing that, which as it
imports so much good to the public, so will give you assurance to a higher
degree than has yet been mentioned, both of his Majesty's intentions to
obliege you, and of my most real desires to manifest my self,

Your affectionate Servant, George Digby.
Oxford. December. 15. 1644.

I was glad to see my despairing Custom^r; who was gone out of sight, come
back again, which he does, and bi^s me the other crown. The King will do
more for me then was yet promised etc. Bernard like a Chickin not of the right
kind, is cowed out of the Pit. This C^cke of the Game still st^a^s pe^king and
billing, and by his last, I found might with a little streaking hold out about
or two longer.

And because I w^uuld bring Bernard on again, and neck them both together, I
crumbled him a few Barley corns more, and sent these.

My Lord.
YOur Honor cannot conceive how much I am quickened by your Letter to the
performance of that, which I am resolved to go through with, if time and
instruments were but once fit. I wish ^y letter to my Kinsman unwritten, rather
then that it should speak any thing which might hinder your Lordships
necessary influence unt^^ it be accommodated to my mind.

My Lord, I did begin by the silence of this last week to conjecture that His
Majesty (as I hear) having sent Propositions up tending to a Peace, might
make you less to hasten this about Abbingdon, however I am the same which I
expressed my self in my last to your Lordship, only your Honors own words,
that that which I am to perform imparts so much good to the Public, may
(being of so much moment) both excuse and beg a little more time.

And for the mannner, the yet concealment of it for some few days will
produce me more advantage, not only in this of Abingdon, but other places than
you can yet imagine: And then I shall suddenly bring that to pass, which I am
confident shall convince your Lordship that these delays were necessary. In
the mean while if I may receive any thing of your Lordships pleasure which may
command me, I am

Your Honors humble Servant RICHARD BROWN.
Abingdon December. 16. 1644.

Another Letter to Mr. Bernard at the same time.
Sir,
MY loving respects to you, etc. I have received another Letter from my Lord,
and have returned this enclosed, which I hope may give satisfaction; one from
your self should have been welcome; for I would not be mistaken, that I desired
your forbearance altogether, but only to let you know, that both for my
judgment and affections I had satisfaction enough to carry me on, without any
more of your Rhetoric, which yet I may not forget to thank you for.

Sir, I desire my humble service may by your tongue as my hand be presented to
his Lordship: for which, and other favors of yours, until I see you, you must
be contented to take thanks from the Pen of Sir,

Your assured friend to serve you, Richard Brown.
Abingdon December. 16 1644. 12 at night.

I could not with all this luring recover my learned Cousin, who smelt powder
like a Wildegoose, and flies quite away; but his Lordship, in as much as he was
better dieted, was longer breathed.

Next day he at me again, telling me, this is the last time of asking, and I
must now speak, or for ever hereafter hold my peace. You will find he burns
dim and is in the s^cket by this sudden flashing.

The Lord Digbies Letter.
Sir,
I have received your^ of yesterday, but truly less satisfaction with it then
I expected, which (together with the accident lately happened) has put it out of
my power to preserve in another that reliance upon your reality which I am apt
to h^ve.

For as I ever d^^l^ with much sincerity my self, so I am not subject to
suspect others of the contrary. The accident lately happened, is the taking and
hanging of a Spy of yours, which has raised suspicions of you beyond the
power of my allaying, your actions only can do it now.

In a word, if in return of this I may hear from you what and when you will do
in plain terms, all and more then has been promised shall be performed. If
not, I am clear from any misfortune that may befall you, for which I shall be
very sorry, as having great dispositions prepared in me, to be

Your affectionate friend and servant, George Digby.
Oxford Wednesday 18 December. 1644.

Had it been possible, I would have reprieved him yet a little, till I could
have had directions, but our works were now ready, and our men in some plight,
and 'twas pity he should dye a timely death. We concluded therefore to go to
sentence, and to bring him to execution, which I did in this fatal answer, and
the rather, because they had hanged a poor woman whose blood lies upon them, a
woman whom ^e never knew nor heard of.

My Lord,
YOur just diffidence has broke the shell, and hatched now at length my just
defiance, and your design, which with much ado I have persuaded to the
uppermost round, is now fit to be turned off.

Is it possible that your Lordship (my Lord Digby) should think his oil so
artificially mixed with his ink as not to betray its flattery, or that it could
catch like Birdlime? Alas my Lord, persuading your self thus, you declare to
the world, that 'twas honor and courtship that was the prevailing argument to
fetch your Lordship out of that honorable House where once you sat, but it
shall never lure a meaner man out of Abington.

My Lord, let this Letter be the Cipher to all my former; read them over
again, and see whether they do not all breath, both in word and sense, loyalty
to his Majesty, and yet full resolution to go through with what I have
undertaken; and for the design which I mention so much, I thank yours which
first gave life to it, it is perfected my Lord, it is perfected, and you may
come when you will.

The design was to play with you at your own game, till our works (which once
were not so strong as you have now made them, though at the weakest should have
been lined with our lives) were strengthened and accommodated with men and
provisions, which I thank God now they are, and therefore I do acquit your
Lordship of all misfortune that may befall me.

Oh my Lord, be more tender of the Kings honors and favors then thus to hang
them out as Colors to invite treachery and disloyalty to come after them; I
bless God I have in this whole action been careful to avoid tampering with
his Majesty in things of this nature: and for that often practiced plot of
yours, and that Iesuited kinsman of mine, to sow jealousies between those who
employ me and my actions (which shall dare to look the world in the face) leave
it my Lord leave it, it is threadbare and rotten: and in confidence that I have
now written what your Lordship looks for; in which if you have not full
satisfaction, but shall scruple at any thing, if your Lordship shall please to
send once more, I do assure your Honor, your Messenger shall come and return
safe; for who knows but that your Lordship (in whom there is so much ingenuity)
may not only now read me right in my intentions, but also hereafter give me
thanks for my reality. I am my Lord

Your honors most humble servant Richard Brown.
Abington 19 December. 1644.
Postscript.
My Lord you have hanged (as you say) a Spy of mine whom I know not; but that
you may be balanced in this also, this very morning I will cause to be hanged
one of yours, condemned by our Council of war six weeks since, according to an
Ordinance of Parliament, resolving never to be out done by you either in
civility or Justice.


I expected that after this doom read to him, the offender should have made
his confession, wrung his hands, praid good people to forgive him, begged the
benefit of his book, warned others to take heed by his example, etc. But behold
he raves and talks idely, and fomes at mouth such frothy forgeries and poor
lies, as argue he had no memory left in him. I appeal to all his friends who
shall read these two last (yet one is more like a Gentleman's hen the other)
what they think of his Lordship, whether he be a Christian or no. They be these,

Sir,
I Shall make use of the liberty which you allow me to send to you once more, I
profess I am very sorry to find my wishes and my hopes of your returning to
your duty and loialty in such a useful manner to the public as you might have
done, deceived, but my confidence I assure you, you have not abused, for I
seldom ground it but upon great probability of the persons integrity with whom
I deal; a foundation which I could not well look for, from a person that had
already forfeited his allegiance: and you must excuse me from believing, that
what you have done now proceeds from any firmness to your own principles in
that which you your self think honest, (how erroneously soever) but rather
from some new and greater corruption of interest on that side, then what was
proposed unto you on this, whereof I make no doubt but the world will be a
right Judge, when by the publishing what has passed between us, it shall
appear how industriously and how mercenarily you long courted your own
corruption before I ever provoked you to it, and offered to you those rewards
which I did, as to a prostituted, not solicited person, who hence forwards must
necessarily be infamous of all sides; on this, both s^r treason and treachery;
on the other, for having with solemn renuntiations of what you now seem to
think honest, so long acted a part whereunto no man can be tempted, without
infamy, so far as you went uninvited, unless upon a sincere alteration of
judgment, which no provocation can make me so uncharitable, as not to wish
still most heartily to you and all your party, and then I shall again
subscribe my self

Your friend to serve you George Digby.
Oxon this of December. 1644.

The Lord Digbies last Letter.
Worthy Colonel Brown,
IN the first place I must extremely lament the unlucky burning (by chance) of
the Cipher, wherein all my former Letters, but only those which were meant sor
your well-serv'd masters supervizing, were written; whereby I am constrained to
venture these mysteries without a veil, which I should not have done, but that
the necessity of this instant time presses it; and that I am as confident as I
can be of any thing, that this will come safe to your hands.

In the next place, I must chide you for hazarding in your Cousin Bernards
packet that other paper of yours, which was so little meant for his sight. But
your Letter of defiance which I read out to him, made him so mad, that he
observed not my Cleanly Conveyance away of the Treasure within it. For truly I
cannot give any other name to that which contained so admirable contrivance and
disposition of the principal Scene of our Act.

You know my opinion from the beginning, that I valued Abington but as a
slight part of those services (which if your reputation and trust with your
masters could be by any act upheld) his Majes^y might expect from a person of
your dexterity and interests; and therefore I willingly consented to the
design of seeming to make those with whom you were to improve the confidence
of you, privy to all our Negotiations with me, though with the inconvenience of
making the Surrender of Abington somewhat more difficult, and less seasonable
by the delay.

But I must confess to you, with an unfeigned pleasure, to be so excelled, that
it was beyond my skill to find out such a way (as that which you resolve on,
by blowing up so artificially your Magazine) to make Abington the Kings upon
such Conditions, as might let you march away unsuspected and unblemisht in your
power, to do his Majesty those greater services aimed at by you.

I will enlarge no further, then to assure you, that the time and hour upon
the blazing sign given, shall be punctually observed according to your
agreement, with our incomparable Engineer Beckman, whose escape so artificially
and so unsuspectedly, as to your having any hand in it has succeeded even to a
Miracle.

In case there should a^ise any difficulty unforeseene in the course proposed,
and that there should need a nearer approach of our Forces, either for assault
or surprise, direct your pleasure to Beckman, by the conveyance agreed on by
you, and it shall be punctually executed; for there is no room for distrust
when there are such Hostages given; of which take it upon my word, the one
(your friend) shall be a^ kindly used as in your own house, and the other as
safely kept for you as in your own coffers.

I must not conclude without admiring your incomparable Letter of defiance,
which as if it were to prevent the scorns being first put upon me at London, I
have in great rage caused to be printed here with my Eloquent Answer, which I
send you here enclosed, to be presented (with moderate insulting) unto your
masters, to whom certainly the world could not have furnished you with a
pleasanter endearment^ then to have fooled my Lord Digby, who can expect no
less, if this business be cleanly gone through with, then to see you one of
their Generals, especially now the rest are displaced by their last Vote.
Farewell. I have that faith in what I hope for of you, which has seldom
deceived

Your Friend entirely George Digby.

Postscript.
Since the writing of this, I have a small Agent come in from Abington, who
assures me, that he saw you march out since noone to Reading, which I do not
believe; but yet for more security I have sent thither the last night to meet
you, a duplicate of this, and of the enclosed, by a very safe messenger, with
one of the blank Pastes you gave me.

I fo^got to tell you my opinion, that Reading is a fi^^er place for you to
march unto upon your Composition then Alisbury, and lies apter for his
Majesty's service.


The last of these (as all hellish machinations do) belies it self, as a very
ordinary Readers eye will find. The scope of it is to possess the world, that
I had appointed him time and manner of betraying Abington, notwithstanding my
Letter of defiance; I knew God would bless me with an opportunity which would
seriously sooner or later by action confute it, and in the interim, laughing at
his miserable shifts to heal himself and wound me, I shut up with him
merrily, and returned this, which left him speechless.

My Lord,
YOu are so far from winning by playing an aftergame, that you will not save
your own stake (which you aim at) by it, for standers by see you do it very
poorly, and dare not throw out your dice. I find you are swelled, and the
poison you vent is worse then Spiders; but your web is so thin, that the
Readers will guess by the ridiculousnesse of your Plot, that it was the Kings
Iester, not his Secretary, that contrived it, and yet by the wickedness of it,
will again conclude, that the Devil works journey work to my Lord Digby.

Sir, my Magazine is safe, and will be when your dishonorable underground
dealings shall be blown up; within these few days you may expect a Blaze, but
it must be of this machination of Oxfords, wherein your Honor shall go for
the Faux and the Garnet, (I find you can personate them both) against the
Kingdom; and at such a time as now when you feared his Majesty (who I know has
found you out) should conclude a peace with his people, which you dare not pray
for (I thank God I do daily) nay would ravell in the first knitting. You t^l^
me your Cipher is burnt, it was of your own writing my Lord I suppose; I am
sorry your Lordships hand should be burnt, it is a scurvy brand and ominous.
But fear not, your friends at London will send your Honor a copy of it in
print.

You say Bernard saw not your cleanly conveyance; I am glad they take your
Lordship for a Iugler in Oxon, they have done in London a long time; but being
your Familiar, I much wonder he should not know your tricks.

I am sorry your Honor should be his Majesty's Hocus Pocus, and have the knack
of cleanly conveyance. Now the world may see which way the King was conveyed
from London, the jewels beyond Sea, the Irish Rebels brought over; which way so
many overtures of peace have appeared and vanished, surely by my Lord Digbies
trick of cleanly conveyance. Play above board, my Lord, that is fittest for a
Council Table.

My Lord, I tax you now for your incomparable base Beckmans escape, I verily
think he got away by one of your Lordships tricks of cleanly conveyance. You
upbraid me much with my Masters, my Lord they will answer for themselves, and
it is unworthily done to scoff at them whom your Master and mine calls his
Parliament again whether you will or no; and to them I refer you, who are
fit to judge of such language.

If I were a Prostitute, my Lord, as you call me, why did your Honor act the
Pimp, and offer me a reward with such solicitations so frequently, so hotly,
so long a while? Let the world judge of your wooings, which since they fail, I
look now your force should venture upon a rape.

My Lord, you say at Oxford, that Londoners can preach (which is more then we
can say of you again, the rest therefore shall be wholesome exhortation.) Do
not destroy a Noble man's soul, pity your self, though not the Kingdom, and
let the fear of God be in you to expel forgeries, even for your own (if not
yours) for his Majesty's sake and honor, who has taken you so near to
himself; for if you counterfeit hands and seals of Subjects, it will be
historied that you were not chaste to his. For my self, you see my Lord, this
Plot of yours is so far from molesting my thoughts, that it makes them merry;
for I serve a God and a Cause which shall make them so in death; yet I hope to
live to see more and more (...) wise caught in their own craftiness. I am, my
Lord,

Your Honors most humble Servant, Richard Brown.
Abington Dec. 20, 1644.

Since this Conclusion, they sent a party of 200 to fortify a house of Mr
Speakers two or three miles from us; as soon as I had notice, I sent out some
of ours, who took, the house upon Composition, and there unexpectedly we found
Beckman their Swedish Engineer, who being my prisoner before, made (...) escape
perfidiously, and is now used according to his desert, and by this Providence
that part of my Lords Letter which concerns my suffering him to go away, is
seriously answered.

And now since that, our beating them off when they came to storm us, and
hanging all their Irish I took, by Gods blessing choaks the other part of
slander concerning my self. Let God, (whose mercies fail not to deliver from
the heads of the Politic, and defend from the hands of the Powerful, those
that trust in him) have the glory of all.

FINIS.

