Joannes Brown Regius Chirurgus Ordinarius.

Aetatis suae 39 An^o Do^m 1681.



A Complete Treatise OF THE MUSCLES, As they appear in Humane Body, And arise
in DISSECTION; With Diverse Anatomical Observations Not yet Discovered.

Illustrated by near Forty COPPER PLATES, Accurately Delineated and Engraven.

By John Brown, Sworn Surgeon in Ordinary to His Majesty.

Non Nobis Nati.

In the SAVOY. Printed by Tho. Newcombe for the Author. 1681.

TO HIS Most Sacred Majesty CHARLES II. By the Grace and Providence of God KING
OF Great Britain, France, and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc. THESE
Anatomical Exercitations OF MUSCULAR DISSECTION, Are most Humbly Dedicated,

by Your Majesty's Most Loyal Subject, And most Obedient Servant, John Brown.
Charles R.
CHARLES By the Grace of God, King of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith, etc. To all Our loving Subjects of what Degree,
Condition, or Quality soever within Our Kingdom and Dominions, Greeting:
Whereas it has been manifested unto Us, that Our Trusty and Welbeloved John
Brown Esquire one of Our Surgeons in Ordinary, has not only with great Art,
but at the Expense of much Time and Charge, delineated, described, and
accurately Engraved in Copper Plates an Anatomical Treatise of Muscular
Dissection; which performance of his is to Our great liking and satisfaction,
so that We may express Our Approbation thereof, and give him all due and ample
encouragement for the future; We do hereby signify Our Royal Pleasure,
granting unto the said John Brown the sole Privilege of Printing the
aforesaid Treatise with its Copper Figures; and strictly Charging, prohibiting
and forbidding all Our Subjects to Copy or Counterfeit any the Sculptures or
Description aforesaid, either in great or small, or to Import, Buy, Vend,
Utter, or Distribute any Copies or Exemplars of the same Reprinted beyond the
Seas within the term of Fifteen Years next ensuing the Date of this Our
License, and Prohibition, without the Consent and Approbation of the said John
Brown, his Heirs, Executors and Assigns, as they and every of them so
offending will answer the Wardens and Company of Stationers of Our City of
London, the Farmers, Commissioners, and Officers of Our Customs, as all other
Our Officers and Ministers whom it may concern, are to take particular notice
that due Obedience be given to this Our Royal Command.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall this 22th Day of Nov. in the Three and
thirtieth Year of, etc. By His Majesty's Command, L. Jenkins.

To His Grace CHRISTOPHER Duke of Albemarle, Earl of Torington, Baron Monck of
Potheridge, Beauchamp, and Teyes, Knight of the Most Noble Order of the Garter,
One of the Gentlemen of His Majesty's Bedchamber, One of His Majesty's most
Honorable Privy Council, Lord Lieutenant of the Counties of Devon and Essex,
And Captain of His Majesty's Guards of Horse.
May it please Your Grace,
HIS Majesty having been Graciously pleased not only to take a view of, but to
allow the Publication of this Treatise of Muscular Dissection; Now after Him it
waits at Your Graces Feet, imploring Your Pardon for its Presumption: But Your
Generous Spirit always encouraging the Industrious Man, breathes Life into my
Undertaking, by which Your Grace does declare to the World Your valuable
Goodness, as well as Your substantial Honor: You never exercising Your self in
little Designs, but in the Public Service of Your King and Country; These
being the main Columns of Your Great Luster, all which when Greatness shall be
shrivel'd into nothing, or at least into a cold Remembrance, will raise Yours
into everlasting Praise, and force future Ages to speak well of Your Merit.

And were my Performances equal to my Wishes, I might not doubt of a happy
Reception; but since the knowledge of my own weakness forbids the entertainment
of such thoughts, it waits on Your Grace with all Humility: And whilst You have
so much of that Heaven about You, I shall fear little damage from any Earthly
defects of my own.

And Noble Sir, As You are not only the true Heir of the Fortunes, but of the
incomparable Worth of so Great a Father, and so Renowned a General, whose
Character being too big for my Pen, I dare leave it to any Impartial Reader of
this Age to Judge, whether You do not most worthily participate with him, both
in Your Benign Temper and Honorable Conduct; The delineating of both whose
Heroic Spirits, may well challenge the best of Orators to describe; Whose
Goodness joined with most noble Qualifications, may as deservedly Entitle You
both to that which was once given to the great Emperor Titus: (THE DELIGHTS OF
MANKIND.) But why should I strive to tell the World what they already know, and
what I am confident none will Dispute? It Is an Honor too great for me, that
Your Grace has (by laying this Command upon me) given me an occasion to
publish the hearty desires I have to acknowledge all Your Graces Favors, and
to assume a liberty (few Men living but will be proud to share in) of declaring
my self,

Your Graces, Most Humble, most Faithful, And most Obedient Servant, John
Brown.

LIbrum hunc (cui Titulus Myotomia) Dignum Judicamus, Qui Imprimatur,

Al. Frasier M. R. Charl. Scarburough M. R. Johannes Wicklethwait Praeses
Colleg. Medicor. Londinens. Thomas Witherley Censor. Samuel Collins Censor.
Tho. Millin^ton Censor. Edvardus Brown Censor.


Clarissimis, Doctissimisque Viris D. D. Praesidi and Sociis Collegii Regalis
Medicorum Londinensium, Myologicam hanc exercitationem ex animo lubens ac
merito Dicat Dedicatque, J. Brown.
QUantum Lucis Scientiae conferat Methodica Institutionis ratio, non vobis
solummodo (Literatorum Coryphaei) sed and Tyronibus etiam omnibus tam clarum
est, quam quod Clarissimum. Parts enim si Debita serie tractentur
explicenturque, and perspicue abinvicem dignoscuntur, and multo melius a
Lectoribus percipiuntur; Quippe quod Ordinata rerum dispositio praecepta, tam
Jucundiora, tam faciliora reddat, dum singula separatim in sua Class reposita,
memoriam adjuvant and oblectant. Ut igitur ista tam manifesta praetermittam, de
re ipsa dicere liceat. Antiquiores hanc Scientiam Anatomicam in duas parts
diviserunt, Actionem, and Contemplationem, quarum alterius open, quicquid in
Caelo, Terra Marique videri usquam possit, in uno homine conspicitur, and tot
miracula deteguntur, ut Calamus iis enumerandis oneri succumberet, and
admiratio nos penitus obruat. Nihil est quod vel a Natura, vel Art expectari
possit, quod haec Ars non proferat. Subjectum enim ejus adeo nobile est,
nimirum Corpus hominis, ad Imaginem Dei, a Deo creati, ut nihil nobilius sub
Sole inveniri possit; and singulas humani corporis particulas adeo eleganter
describit, ut Arti simul vestrae Medicorum, and nostrae Chirurgorum summo
ornamento siet. Veritatem in abditis musculorum (and caeterarum partium)
meatibus and tenuissimis fibrillis latentem e Tenebris vindicat, and in
clarissimam Lucen revocat. Obscuris Lumen, Obsoletis nitorem, Fastiditis
gratiam, Dubiis fidem, and vetustate quasi abrogatis Authoritatem conciliat:
Per hanc Medici ferendo Judicio aptiores fiunt; cum Symptomatibus and
indicationibus instructi citius certiusque affirmare queant, quam partem, qua
causa morbi dolor, urgeat, afficiatque imo ex ipsa mortuorum dissectione
discunt, and vivis hominibus, bona valetudine utentibus, vitam denuo
instaurare, and moribundus Spiritum, ne exeat, detinere. Et in hac equidem
praxi nulla unquam aetas fuit (sive diligentiam indefessam, sive abundantem
Inventorum faelicitatem Spectes) nostra hac aut ditior aut foecundior; cujus
assidua Cura ac Labor improbus nova non pauca adinvenit, antiqua correxit, and
hanc artem ita illustravit, ut jam fere ad culmen perfectionis summum
pervenisse videatur. Quod si de Anatomicis videndum esset. Nostrates plurimi
extiterunt Heroes, qui ut sidera Caeli, Clarissima medicinae Lumina, and veluti
Dii Mortales in hac Art emicuerunt; Inter quos quanta cum fama Harvaeius,
Entius, Glissonius, Whartonus, Charltonus, Willissius, Gualterus Nedhamus,
Lowerus, cum multis aliis scripserunt, ut Libri and nomina ipsorum celeberrima
nullis delenda saeculis testantur. Jam tandem ad vos, Viri Apollinei, mea se
dirigit Oration, sub quorum Patrocinio Lucubrationes hasce ausus sum divulgare.
De vobis dicere fas est; quod quasi Medicorum Principes doctrinae Jatricae
fines producitis, and Industria quotidiana Artem condecoratis, una and augetis;
adeo ut ex Collegio vestro, veluti solo fertili, Inventa faelicissima ad artis
propagationem, and Morborum extirpationem indies nascantur. Ad me quod attinet,
Non ita arrogens sum, ut aliorum aut dicta, aut facta mihi ascribere velim, se
potius suum cuique tribuere cupiens, Authorum nomina ad marginem Libri appono,
quos in Elencho (eos referente, e quorum scriptis universum hoc opus congestum
fuit) Invenietis. Nostrum itaque, qualecunque Munusculum, etsi non verbis
politum, attamen ad utilitatem hominum aliquo modo conducens, (quandoquidem
veritatis plurimum in se contineat) front serena accipite. Valete and Aeternum
quam faelicissimi vivite,

Sic Orat, Nominib. Illustrib. and Nobillissim. Devotissimus and
Observantissimus, John Brown.

To his Highly Esteemed Friend Mr. John Brown, etc.
SIR,
I Have through want of leisure, but cursorily viewed your History of, and
Observations on the Muscles: together with your choice number of their Types
and Figures elegantly delineated with your own hand. Yet I think I did it not
so superficially, but that I may truly and confidently say, that whoever
considers how profitable, and indeed how necessary the knowledge of the Muscles
is, not only in Surgery, but in Medicine and Philosophy also, (since the
faculty and use of the Nerves which distributes Life and Motion to all parts
cannot be understood and explained without it) must, when he has perused your
Brief, Accurate, and Judicious Treatise, of the Muscles, together with your
Observations and Animadversions thereon, be so Ingenuous, if he be just, as to
acknowledge their great usefulness not only to Surgeons, but to Students in
Medicine and Philosophy likewise, and must therefore join with me to their
Encomium; and earnestly desire, and importune their Publication as well as

Sir, Your assured Friend and Servant, E. Dickinson M. D. Physician to the
Kings Person and Family.

To Mr. John Brown on his Treatise of Muscles.
SIR,
I cannot but commend your Ingenuous Design of making so useful a Book for the
benefit of young Surgeons, and your Judicious choice of Cuts for that
purpose: It is a Book which I am sure the Chirurgeons-Hall does much want, for
the younger sort to have in their hands in order to their better attending the
Learned Reader. And not only so, but the most able Anatomists will be glad of
so complete a Contraction of so considerable part of Anatomy into one view,
where they may at any time recollect themselves, as to their former Readings
and Observations. Therefore your Edition of this Treatise cannot but oblige the
World, and amongst others,

Charter House, April 14. 79. Sir, Your humble Servant, Wall. Needham.

MYographicum hunc Tractatum ab Expertissimo Viro D. Johanne Brown
conscriptum, Medicorum Chirurgorumque Tyronibus, and utrorumque etiam
Peritissimis utilem fore Judicat,

Tho. Allen M. D.
Regius Medicus Oridinarius and Coll. Lon. Soc. and Censor.
In Laudem Authoris.
PErlegendo vestrum de Musculis Libellum, magnum invenio certamen inter
Ingenium and Ingeniosum tui calamum, quis Palmam portare meruit; and ne inique
Judicarem, Legentibus sat erit, tam perutilem, sic perjucundum fore existimat,

Amicus tuus tui ad Aras, Edvardus Warner. Med. Personae Regis Ordinarius and
ejus Exercitui M. Generalis.

To his much valued Friend Mr. John Brown.
SIR,
I Have read over your Treatise of Muscles, (as my time would permit) and find
you have taken great pains and care in your Collections, and made good
Observations, and expressed much Art and Industry in your Figures: and (by
consulting excellent Authors) have contracted much into little: that a
competent knowledge in this part of Anatomy (so absolutely necessary in the
safe practice of Surgery) may probably be much easier attained to, than
formerly by young Indagators; and be a further confirmation to others, who have
already sweat in the same Study. Therefore I cannot but encourage you to make
it public, by which I suppose you will oblige many who are Friends to such
Anatomical Enquiries: amongst whom give me leave to reckon,

Sir, Martii 26. 79. Your Affectionate Friend To serve you, Edmund King M. D.
Physician in Ordinary to his Majesty.

TO THE Ingenuous and Studious READER.
Courteous Reader,
AS Anatomy is generally allowed the best and truest Speculum or Looking-Glass,
illustrating, and presenting all the parts of the Body, with their Affects, and
Affected Parts, most clearly and evidently: so also is it the main Basis, on
which Surgery does build its fairest Fabric, and comely Structure. And of
what great use this has been, and is, to Mankind, not only the Ancients, but
also Modern Writers do most admirably declare; How this Renowned Art has in
former Ages been treated, and carefully treasured up and Celebrated in Theaters
and Anatomical Schools, many Authors have to Posterity voluminously satisfied;
And that it still does get greater footing amongst the Ingenuous and
Industrious Sons of Art, every Age does, and may with admiration evince, and
the many Learned Lectures annually read, may both most honorably and happily
set forth and demonstrate.

This Art of Anatomy, as it does require the industrious Study, and accurate
care of a curious Enquiry, so also does it reward his pains with the Jewel of
Knowledge, and afford his Endeavors the happy issue of a fair success: giving
those methods and measures of security in Chirurgical Practice, which are most
consentaneous and genuine for the Industrious Practitioner, to study and search
after. This is as his best Compass, whereby he may sail freely in the main
Ocean of his Art, without any mistrust or dread of splitting himself upon any
Rocks of danger, or Shelves of mistake, for its by this alone, that we arrive
at and do gain how our Membranes are made, and spun out of Spermatick Fibers,
and how out of Maternal Blood are framed our Muscular parts. It is from this
Tree of Knowledge, all the differences between a Vein and Artery are plucked up:
Its this Garden that affords us the various Flowers of Nerves and Tendons, and
shows us the different. Beds of Ligaments and Bones: It Is this Sun that
conducts the Understanding, that advances the same into Affection, that
promotes our Affections toward our Maker. And come we but to take a view and
survey of the symmetry of his parts, and therein but cast our Eye and consider
on the rare Offices and Uses which are variously bestowed on them, we ought as
well in Justice, as in Reason, to grant and allow, that nothing in this great
Universe may or can surpass him, especially in the exquisite Fabric of his
Muscles, and the variety of their Motion.

Now although Myology has been by the Ancients thus traced, yet Steno has
quite altered the Fabric of their design, affirming, that there is in every
Muscle two opposite Tendons, into which are inserted two kinds of Fibers, the
which being closely annexed do frame the Tendon, and in that part wherein they
are loosely intertext, there they do allow of a constituted Flesh, implanting
one above another, here placing and disposing the thickness and depth of the
Flesh, framing its latitude, and declaring its order of Fibers; and this Figure
he describes by a Mathematical Line, taking thence their Cannons which do
explain their actions; Thus he satisfies, that all the Fleshy Fibers in a
simple Muscle, are carried in a direct Line from one Tendon obliquely into
another, and these Tendons are interwoven in their opposite ends and angles of
the Fleshes; Steno's description of a Muscle.
by which he does ingeniously describe a Muscle to be a collection of moving
Fibers, so framed and formed, that the middle Fleshes do frame an oblique
angle, and that the two opposite Tendons do form two Quadrangular Prisma's;
this Figure he very accurately represents by Instruments used by Painters, or
Picture-Drawers, wherein we see by the application of their Pegs, the true
insertion of their Tendons are hereby very well explained, and the Fleshy parts
lively delineated: for when they bring their greatest distances from their
opposite angles, and being hereby made more acute, these are brought to two
sides, and so this Instrument is made both longer and narrower, this showing
the Muscle no way contracted, but rather narrowed, and reduced into a longer
body, the length thereof not being changed, save only in its Position; Thus
have we by Steno shown, a muscle may appear as a simple part consisting of one
Venture and two Tendons, as are many of those in the Arm, or Thigh, and in many
other parts of the Body; or Compound having many Venters, to every of which is
allowed two Tendons.

In a simple Muscle, because either one Tendon or both ought to be attracted,
and because the attracting part is thin, and broad, the Belly of the Muscle
does require for its frame, a diversity of Fibers to answer to the variety of
its Figures; whereas Compound Muscles are distinguished by their greater
variety of Fibers: for besides this variety of Figures which ought to be
observed; so also ought their Venters, being either more or less, with their
order of Fibers, and diversity of Frames have a respect allowed them. Therefore
shall we find that to every simple, as well as compound Muscle is bequeathed a
Membranous covering, Membrane
invested with Fleshy Fibers for its direct motion, and is intertext with
transverse Fibers for forming it into a Membrane. Vein and Artery.
It has a Vein and Artery inserted into its middle, sending forth of their
Surcules into the oblique moving Fibers, from whence the smaller Ramifications
being dispersed through the Interstitia of the Fleshes, does besprinkle and
bedew them with their Afflux of Blood, Nerve.
and its Reflux: The Nerve entering herein does distribute of its small Branches
into its neighboring Muscles, carrying in it the soul of the commanded action,
and commanding its execution in the lower guard of the Fleshy Fibers, and of
its Membranous Fibrilla's; And as touching its action, Its action.
in dissection of living Bodies, we plainly perceive that it does contract, but
not as the old opinion held: that the Fibers did contract from their ends,
toward their Originations, one end of the Muscle being carried through the
other; whereas the Fleshy Fibers only, and their ends are seen to be contracted
toward their middle, their Tendons being mutable, and not altered either in
their longitude or thickness, the which Worthy Steno first observed, the which
he does describe in the Diaphragma, and those Muscles appointed for
Respiration, the which is moved by a constant turn, as is cleared and
perceived; How often therefore the Muscle is seen to be contracted, all its
Fleshy Fibers in either end are apparently shown to be driven together, and as
it were seen to bow and yield to each other; and hence do seem to appear either
shorter or thicker: the which being loosned from its constriction, you will
find it to appear in its proper length and thickness, this alteration being
produced by the Spirit or subtle Matter which passes from the Tendons into
the Fleshy parts; and here stuffing them or filling them up in every place,
does force and compel them to yield hereunto, it tumefying its Fibers; but when
this receeds from these Fleshly parts into the Tendons, these Fibers do lessen
of their bulk, and do appear in their genuine length and thickness.

We ought also to speak somewhat of that Matter which keeps them moist, Humors.
and here may we offer, that as touching the Humors by which all the Muscular
Fibers, Fleshes, Tendons and Membranes are besprinkled and filled, and so
hereby seen as it were to run into tumefaction, these are generally reckoned
two, ( vid.) Blood and Nervous Juice; As to the first, this is allowed to tinge
and wash over all the Fleshy Fibers, and those parts to which they are
interwoven, and their Membranes, and to soften them with manifest sense; Thus
if Spirit of Wine tinged with Ink, Obs.
be injected into an Artery reaching a Muscle, the Vein being tied up, you will
find all the Superficies of the Fleshy Fibers, and of its transverse Fibrilla's
to be covered with blackness, yet will you see its Tendons scarcely concerned
with any change of color, these only irrigating the Fleshy parts, and those
chiefly which are most exterior. How much these Humors may, and do conduce
toward the Animal Faculties and their Exercise is easily made out: for without
this Nervous Liquor, the Animal Spirits would have no proper consistence
granted them, and their chief dependence is from their Crasis; Hence therefore
according to Steno, a perpetual Afflux of Blood is plainly requisite, for as he
observes, in a living Dog, the descendent Trunck of the Aorta or great Artery
being tied up without any incision, the voluntary motion of all the back parts
do cease, so often as it was tied up, and that the motion renewed so often as it
was relaxed.

Now when the Muscle is contracted, Vivisection does only declare the Fleshy
Fibers to attain the only motion, as being more tumefied, asperate, and
abbreviated, the Muscle swelling and enlarging in it is belly, and the inward
Tendons as being of themselves immovable, being neither changed in length or
thickness, only drawn up by their Fleshy Fibers; whence may be collected, that
the Animal Spirits, when they perfect any Muscular motion, they do generally
perform this between the Fleshy Fibers. Now shall we disclose some difficulties
which do and may arise as Knotty Disputes about Muscular Dissection, and
Muscular Motion, and how these Spirits do operate so tacitly without any
incitement thereto; How they fill these Fleshy Fibers, and so seeming to
shorten their Tendinous Fibers, for the producing of which effects, the plenty
of these Spirits arising from these Tendinous Fibers, are not altogether
sufficient for performing and managing this, and therefore do require others as
its adjutants or assistants to promote and further the same in its design, both
in occasioning mutual Rarefaction, and Tumefaction, or sudden Inflation of
those Bodies which do occasion this Abbreviation.

That the Fleshy Membrane of the Muscle does tumefie when its contracted, is
without all doubt, and beyond all dispute, for this is apparent enough to sight
and touch in Vivisection; all the Fleshy Fibers being corrugated together, and
are more tumefied, and do appear more asperate, hence comes its abbreviation;
the Muscle appearing both more thick and more broad, hence therefore may we
justly conclude, that Muscular Motion in general may probably be granted; As
that the Animal Spirits being derived from the Brain by the conduct of the
Nerves, and thence conveyed into the body of every Muscle, and from hence by
commerce do pass to the Tendinous Fibers, and do at length get quarter there,
and entertainment, as in other Promptuaries or Mansions, the which Spirits
being in their nature very active, so fast as their vigor will permit them,
they do expand themselves, and penetrate into the Fleshy Fibers: and continuing
this their course, they at length do arrive at the Tendons, and having once
entered them, they do therein proceed in the same method: and that the Animal
Spirits flowing from the Tendinous Fibers, do equally pass under the Fleshy
Fibers, is very apparent; in that it is granted that in every Muscle there is
allowed two Tendons, whose opposite Angles are so framed, that these Animal
Spirits running from a double top do fill the whole Body of the Muscle; and the
motion hence taking its Origination, does very speedily receed, if the
contraction ought to be made indifferently toward the middle Fleshy parts: the
Tendons are generally equal, but the motion most inclinable toward one part of
the Flesh: and hence may we collect, the regular, or irregular motions of a
Muscle, every regular or irregular motion hereof granted to arise from either
the Cerebrum or Cerebellum, it being thence dispatched by the Nerves, and so
sent into the Muscles, the effects and consequences whereof do evidently evince
and demonstrate. Thus have I a little presumed to enlarge upon the Readers
Epistle, as touching the use and benefit of the Muscles, wherein also I have
introduced somewhat of Muscular Motion according to Steno, and have the rather
chosen to enlarge the Discourse here, the Body of the Treatise being wholly
intended to appear Public and Concise, without any Flourishes or empty
Enlargements of Discourses or Controversies.

Peruse therefore this ensuing Discourse with a Candid Interpretation, and pass
by all the Literal Elapses you may meet with, and accept these with that
Amicable Mind, as they are Dedicated and intended by,

From my House at the Chirurgeons-Arms at Charing Cross, London. John Brown.

The Names of the Subscribers.
A.
l. s. d. CHristopher Duke of Albemarle 02 03 00 Henry Earl of Arlington Lord
Chamberlain of His Majesty's Household 01 01 06 Henry Earl of Arundel 02 03 00
Henry Earl of St. Albans 01 01 06 Robert Earl of Alisbury 00 10 00 Thomas Allen
M. D. 00 10 00 Adam Angus M. A. 01 01 00 Richard Adams M. B. 00 10 00 George
Aldebar M. A. 00 10 00 Thomas Allen Gent. 01 00 00 John Anderson Chir. 00 10 00
B.
William Earl of Bedford 01 01 06 John Earl of Bath 01 01 06 Charles Beauclear
Earl of Burford 05 00 00 George Lord Berkley 00 10 00 Sir John Baber 01 01 06
Sir Nicholas Bacon 01 00 00 Sir Edward Ba^sh 0 01 06 William Bell D. D. His
Majesty's Chaplain 00 10 00 John Butler D. D. Prebend of Windsor 00 10 00
Francis Bridge D. D. His Majesty's Chaplain 00 10 00 Robert Brady M. D and
Regius Professor of Physic at Cambridge for himself and Caius-College 01 00 00
Samuel Blyth D. D. for Clare-Hall 00 10 00 Pierce Brackenbury M. D. 00 10 00
S^muel B^^k M. A. 00 10 00 John Batly M. A. 00 10 00 Thomas Bambrig M. A. 00 10
00 Joshua Barnes M. A. 00 10 00 Arthur Bury D. D. at Oxon 00 10 00 John
Bainbrigg Gent. at Oxon 0 10 00 Procter Balch of Wadham-Colledge 00 10 00 Sir
Tho. Brown of Norwich M. D. 01 00 00 Peter Barwick M. D. 00 10 00 Edward
Brown M. D. 00 10 00 William Briggs M. D. 00 10 00 Robert ^oyle Esquire. 01 00 00
William Brigdman Esquire. 01 00 00 James Beverly Esquire 00 10 00 Henry Bedingfield Esquire
00 10 00 James Bagnal Esquire 00 10 00 John Brown Cler. Parliamentor. Esquire 01 00 00
Philip Brown Gent. 00 10 00 C.
William Lord Archbishop of Canterbury 01 00 00 Henry Earl of Clarendon 01 01
06 John Lord Bishop of Chester 00 10 00 Tho. Lord Cromwell Earl of Ardglass 01
01 06 Benjamin Calamy D. D. His Majejesties Chaplain 00 10 00 John Clerk D. D.
for himself and College 01 00 00 Ralph Cudworth D. D. for Corpus
Christi-Colledge. 00 10 00 William Cook D. D. for himself and Jesus-Colledge
01 00 00 Thomas Coxe M. D. 01 00 00 Samuel Collins M. D. 00 10 00 Andrew Clench
M. D. 00 10 00 John Clerk M. D. 00 10 00 Hugh Chamberlain M. D. 00 10 00
Richard Colinge Esquire 01 00 00 John Cook Esquire 01 00 00 John Cresset Esquire 00 10 00
William Chapman Esquire 00 10 00 Thomas Coxe Esquire 01 00 00 Benjamin Colinge Gent. 01
00 00 Charles Chapman Gent. 00 10 00 James Cook Gent. 01 00 00 John Clerk
Gent. 00 10 00 Nathaniel Coxe Gent. 00 10 00 D.
William Earl of Denbigh 00 10 00 Tho. Earl of Danby 01 00 00 Sir Edward
Deering 00 10 00 Edward Dickinson M. D. Physician to His Majesty's Household 01
01 06 John Downs M. D. 00 10 00 Robert Davy Esquire 00 10 00 Richard Dalton Esquire 00
10 00 Thomas Dunckley Gent 00 10 00 Peter Dearines Gent. 00 10 00 Walter Drury
Apothecary 02 00 00 George Dear Apothecary 00 10 00 Peter Dent M. B. 00 10 00
E.
Arthur Earl of Essex 01 01 06 Tho. Lord Howard of Eschrick 00 10 00 Peter Lord
Bishop of Ely 00 10 00 Peter Elliot M. D. at Oxon 00 10 00 John Eachard D. D.
for himself and Catherine-Hall in Cambridge 01 00 00 Samuel Elmore Chir. 01 01
06 F.
Lewis Lord Duras Earl of Feversham 01 01 06 Robert Lord Ferrers 00 10 00 Ralph
Flyer M. D. at Cambridge 00 10 00 Sir Alexander Frasier M. D. Def. 00 10 00
Phineas Fowke M. D. 00 10 00 Thomas Fetherstonhalg Esquire 00 10 00 Martine Folk
Esquire 00 10 00 James Fraser Gent. 00 10 00 Tho. Field Gent. 00 10 00 John
Francklin Chir. 00 10 00 John Fage Gent. 00 10 00 G.
Henry Duke of Grafton 02 03 00 John Goad D. D. 00 10 00 William Gibbons M. D.
at Oxon 01 00 00 Humphrey Gower D. D. Vice Chancellor of Cambridge, for himself
and St. John' s-Colledge 01 00 00 John Gostlin M. D. at Cambridge 00 10 00
Charles Goodall M. D. 00 10 00 Christopher Green M. B. 00 10 00 William Gold M.
A. 00 10 00 John Gadbury Student in Astrology 00 10 00 Peter Gilsthorp
Apothecary 00 10 00 Allen Gyles Apothecary 00 10 00 Richard Green Bookseller,
for six Books in Quires. 02 05 00 H.
George Viscount Hallifax 01 01 06 Sir Philip Howard 00 10 00 Sir John Hobart
01 01 06 Sir Michael Hickes 00 10 00 William Holder D. D. Subdean to His
Majesty's Chapel 00 10 00 Dr. Hascard D. D. Chaplain to His Majesty 00 10 00
Tho. Holbeck D. D. for Emanuel-Colledge Camb. 00 10 00 Edward Hulse M. D. 00 10
00 Peter Hume Gent. 00 10 00 John Hollyer Gent. for two Books 02 00 00 Tho.
Hollyer Surgeon of His Majesty's Hospitals 00 10 00 Tho. Harper Chir. 00 10
00 Henry Hern Apothecary 00 10 00 I.
Sir William Jennings 00 10 00 William Jane D. D. and Regius Professor of
Divinity at Oxon 00 10 00 Gilbert Ironsides D. D. President 00 10 00 Charles
James M. A. 01 00 00 Henry James D. D. for Queens-Colledge at Cambridge 00 10
00 James Jackson M. D. at Camb. 00 10 00 Tho. Jamson Esquire 00 10 00 Gabriel Jones
Chir. 00 10 00 K.
Anthony Earl of Kent 00 10 00 Sir John Kirk 01 00 00 Edmund King M. D.
Physician in Ordinary to His Majesty 01 00 00 John Knight M. D. Principal Chir.
to his Majesty def. 01 00 00 L.
Henry Lord Bishop of London 00 10 00 Henry Lord Bishop of Lincoln 00 10 00
Aunger Lord Longford 00 10 00 Sir Peter Lely def. 01 00 00 John Lamphire M. D.
History Professor at Oxon 00 10 00 John Luff M. D. Regius Professor of Physic
at Oxon 00 10 00 William Levenz M. D. President of St. John' s-Colledge, Oxon,
for himself and College 01 00 00 John Ludwell M. D. at Oxon. 00 10 00 Richard
Lydall M. D. at Oxon 00 10 00 John Lawson M. D. 00 10 00 Christopher Ludkin M.
B. 00 10 00 John Leeger Chir. 00 10 00 Tho. Langham Apoth. 00 10 00 M.
James Duke of Monmouth 02 03 00 Tho. Lord Morely and Mounteagle 01 01 06 John
Montague D. D. Clerk of His Majesty's Closet 00 10 00 Tho. Marshall D. D. His
Majesty's Chaplain 00 10 00 Henry More D. D. at Cambridge 00 10 00 Sir John
Micklethwait M. D. President of the College in London 01 00 00 Sir Thomas
Millington M. D. 00 10 00 Ferdinand Mendez M. D. Physician to the Queen 00 10
00 George More Esquire. 01 00 00 John Malyverer M. A. 00 10 00 Richard Mill^s Chir.
R. 00 10 00 Martine Mey Chir. 00 10 00 Nicholas Mosely Apoth. 00 10 00 N.
Henry Duke of Newcastle 01 01 06 George Earl of Northumberland 02 03 00 James
Lord Norries 01 01 06 Walter Needham M. D. 01 00 00 Tho. Newcombe Junior 01 00
00 John Northleigh Gent. 00 10 00 O.
Aubery Earl of Oxford 01 01 06 John Lord Bishop of Oxford 00 10 00 George
Oliver M. A. 00 10 00 P.
William Lord Paston 01 01 06 Sir John Petcus 01 01 06 Simon Patrick D. D. His
Majesty's Chaplain 00 10 00 John Price D. D. 00 10 00 Robert Pepper D. L. L.
Chancellor of Norwich 00 10 00 Sir Tho. Page Provost of King 's-Colledge in
Cambridge 00 10 00 John Peachel D. D. for himself and Magdalen-Colledge, Camb.
01 00 00 For Pembroke-Hall 00 10 00 Henry Paman M. D. 00 10 00 Robert Pit M.
D. Anatomy Professor 00 10 00 Jos. Pullein S. T. B. 00 10 00 John Packer M. B.
00 10 00 George Pain of Clare-Hall Oxon 00 10 00 Robert Paston Esquire 00 15 00
Roger Pope Esquire 00 10 00 William Prince Esquire 00 10 00 George Perin Esquire 00 10 00
Robert Power Gent. 00 10 00 James Pearse Esquire Surgeon to the King's Person 01
00 00 William Pearse Surgeon to His Majesty's Hospitals 00 10 00 John
Partridge Student in Astrology 00 10 00 Tho. Prescott Apothecary 00 10 00 Q.
Gabriel Quadring M. A. 00 10 00 R.
High Highness Prince Rupert 05 00 00 Charles Duke of Richmond 02 03 00 Thomas
Earl Rivers 01 01 06 John Ratcliff M. D. 00 10 06 John Rudston B. L. L. 00 10
00 William Rowley Gent. 00 10 00 William Row Apothecary 01 00 00 William
Rapier Apoth. 00 10 00 S.
Tho. Earl of Sunderland 01 01 06 Anthony Earl of Shaftsbery 01 00 00 Seth Lord
Bishop of Salisbury 00 10 00 George Stradling D. D. His Majesty's Chaplain 00
10 00 Tho. Spratt D. D. His Majesty's Chaplain 00 10 00 John Sewmears D. D.
Dean of Gernesy 00 10 00 Gregory Scott D. D. 00 10 00 Sir Tho. Sclater M. D. 00
10 00 For Sydney-Colledge Camb. 00 10 00 John Spencer D. D. for
Corpus-Christi-Colledge Camb. 00 10 00 Sir Charles Scarborough M. D. Principal
Physician to the King. 00 10 00 Nicholas Staphurst M. B. 00 10 00 Francis Smith
M. A. 00 10 00 Mr. Sagittary M. A. 00 10 00 Bevill Skeleton Esquire 00 10 00 Henry
Street Gent. 01 00 00 Edward Syston Gent. 00 10 00 Edward Snape Gent. 00 10 00
Samuel Staynes Gent. 01 00 00 Tho. Sydny Gent 00 10 00 Daniel Sneaton Chir. 00
10 00 Henry Staff Chir. 00 10 00 Zacha^iah Skillearn Chir. 00 10 00 T.
Sir Richard Tufton 00 10 00 Tho. Tenison D. D. His Majesty's Chaplain 00 10 00
Dr. Thi^^ethlethwait D. D. His Majesty's Chaplain 00 10 00 George Thorp D. D.
00 10 00 Edward Tys^n M. D. 00 10 00 Samuel Tryon Esquire 00 15 00 John Topham Esquire
01 00 00 William Tovey Gent. 01 00 00 Edmund Themylthorp Gent. 00 10 00 Mr.
Tyndall M. B. 00 10 00 Edmund Theorold Chir. Master of the Company 01 00 00 V.
Philip Vendosme Grand Prior of France 02 03 00 W.
Henry Lord Marquess of Worcester 01 01 06 Edward Lord W^rd 00 10 00 Dr. Wallis
D. D. Geometry Professor at Oxon 00 10 00 Thomas Witherly M. D. and Physician
to the Kings Person 00 10 00 Daniel Whystler M. D. 00 10 00 Edward Wa^ner M. D.
Physician to the King 00 10 00 Robert Werden Esquire 01 00 00 John Wynyard Esquire 01
00 00 John West Esquire 00 10 00 William Williams Esquire 00 10 00 John Walker Junior
Gent. 01 00 00 Powel Williams Gent. 00 10 00 Hugh Willoughby M. A. 00 10 00
Owen Win Gent. 00 10 00 Richard War Gent. 00 10 00 Sackvil Whittle Reg.
Chir. def. 01 00 00 Jaques Wiseman Chir. 00 10 00 Doughty Wormell Chir. 0^ 10
00 Josias Westwood Chir. 00 10 00 Y.
Thomas Yates Gent. President of Brason-Nose-Colledge Oxon. 00 10 00 Robert
Yard Gent. 00 10 00 John Young Gent. 00 10 00

This Table shows the Names of the Muscles, as they do arise in Dissection.
OBliquus Descendens Obliquus Ascendens Rectus Piramidilis Transversus
Frontlais Aperiens Palpebram Rectus Claudens oculum superior Claudens oculum
inferior Recti Quatuor Oculi Obliquus Primus Oculi Obliquus Secundus Oculi
Attollens Aurem Detrahens Aurem Adducens Aurem Abducens Aurem Externus Tympani
Auris Internus Tympani Auris. Abducens Nasi alas Attollens Nasi alas Claudens
nasum externus Claildens nasum internus Communis Claudens Alas
Zygomaticus-Riolani Abducens ^abios Deprimens Labii inferius Constringens
Labios Platysma Myodes sive Quadratus Buccinator Massetter sive Mansorius
Temporalis seu Crotaphites Mastoideus Biventer sive Digastricus Coracohyoideus
Sternohyoideus Sternothyroideus Hyothyroideus Styloceratohyoideus
Pterygopalatinus Spheno-palatinus Mylohyoideus Riolani Geniohyoideus
Miloglossus Ceratoglossus Genioglossus Hypsiloglossus Styloglossus Lingualis
Cricothyroideus anticus Aesophigaeus seu Sphincter Gulae Stylopharyngaeus
Cephalopharyngaeus Cricoarytenoideus Posticus Cricoarytenoideus Lateralis
Arytenoideus Thyroarytaenoidus Sphaenopharyngaeus Primus Sphaenopharyngaeus
Secundus Pterygoideus Externus Pterygoideus Internus Longus Scalenus seu
Triangularis Pectoralis Subclavius Serratus major Anticus Serratus minor
Anticus Intercostales Externi Intercostales Interni Cremasteres Erector sive
Director Penis Accelerator Penis Musculi Clitoridis Levatores Any Sphincter Any
Sphincter Vesicae Detrusor Vrinae Diaphragma.
Here let the Body be turned upon the Face.
Cucullaris sive Trapezius Latissimus Dorsi Rhomboides Levator Patientiae
Rotundus Major Superscapularis Superior Superscapularis Inferior Nonus humeri
Placentini sive Rotundus Minor Subscapularis
If you intend to take off the whole Arm with the Scapula, the Dissection of
these following Muscles will with more ease be performed.
Deltois Biceps Octavus humeri Placentini sive Coracobrachialis Brachiaeus
Internus Gemellus Major Gemellus Minor Anconaeus Palmaris Caro Musculosa
Quadrata Flexor Carpi Interior seu Ulnaris Flexor Carpi Exterior sive Radialis
Flexor Secundi Internodii Perforatus Flexor Tertii Internodii Perforans Flexor
Tertii Internodii Pollicis Pronator Radii Teres Pronator Quadratus Flexores
Primi Internodii Digitorum Flexor Primus, Primi Internodii Pollicis Flexor
ejusdem Secundus Flexor Secundi Internodii Pollicis Primus Secundus Tertius
Quartus Minimi Digiti abductor Pollicis abudctor Pollicis adductor Interossei
Extensor Carpi Exterior Extensor Secundi and Tertii Internodii Digitorum
Supinator Radii Longus Extensor Pollicis ossis Tertii Extensor Secundi and
Tertii Pollicis Abducens Indicem Supinator Radii Brevis Primi Internodii
Extensores.
Here you return to the Body it self as it lies
Serratus Posticus Superior Serratus Posticus Inferior Splenius sive
Triangularis. Trigeminus Transversalis Spinatus Recti Majores Recti Minores
Obliqui Superiores Obliqui Inferiores Longissimus Dorsi Sacrolumbus Cervicalis
descendens Sacer Semispinatus Quadratus Psoas Psoas Parvus
If you please to take off the Thigh from the Trunck of the Body, by dividing
the Os Ileon from the Os Sacrum, the dissection of the subsequent Muscles will
the better be performed.
Iliacus Internus Glutaeus Major Glutaeus Minor Glutaeus Medius Piriformis sive
Iliacus Externus Obturator Internus Quadrigeminus Obtuator Externus Membranosus
Sartorius Gracilis Rectus Vastus Externus Vastus Internus Biceps
Semimembranosus Seminervosus Triceps Lividus Gasterocnemius Externus Plantaris
Gasterocnemius Internus Subpopliteus Flexor Tertii Internodii Perforans.
Tibiaeus posticus Flexor pollicis Flexor Secundi Internodii Perforatus.
Adducens Pollicem Abducens minimum Digitorum Transversalis Placentini Tibiaeus
Anticus Peroneus Primus Peroneus Secundus Extensor Pollicis Extensor Tertii
Inte nodii Digitorum Extensor Secundi Internodii Digitorum Interossei.
The Names of the Authors concerned in this Muscular Discourse.
THomas Bartholinus Casper Bauhinus Albertus Columbus Bartholomeus Cabroules
Isbrandus Diemerbroeck Galen Regnerus de Graaf Hipp crates Andreas Laurentius
Julius Casserius Placentinus Johannes Riolanus Daniel Sennertus Adrianus
Spigelius Joannes Valverdus Andreas Vesalius Joannes Veslingius Vidus Vidii
Obliquus Descendens.
THis first pair of Muscles with which Nature has covered the Abdomen, This
does laterally compress the Abdomen.
as a Vail, are endowed with oblique Fibers, and by reason of their descent,
they have this name bestowed upon them. They do arise from the lower parts of
the 6th. 7th. 8th. and 9th. Ribs indented; or indenting themselves with
Serratus Major Anticus; as also Membranous from the transverse processes of the
Vertebres of the Loins, and part of the Os Ileon, and then passing to the Linea
Alba, and Os Pubis, by a broad Nervous Tendon marches into the middle of the
Abdomen; (its very hard to separate this Muscle from its subjacent Tendon
without laceration) it adhering so closely to it. Obs.
This Tendon with its next neighbor being either lacerated or dilated, and the
Omentum or Intestines hereby making a prolapsion either into the Inguen or
Scrotum, does occasion either an Hernia Omentalis, or Intestinalis. To dissect
this Muscle exactly, you must divide the Latissimus from him very low, so as
that you may attain his Lumbal Origination the better.

The chief use of this Muscle, Its use.
as Columbus and Laurentius do affirm, is to contract the Thorax, as sometimes
upwards, hereby assisting Respiration. Laurentius's observation of these
Muscles is worth note; when he writes that these Abdominal Muscles are quite
contrary to the other Muscles of the Body, these being crooked before they do
Operate, and do turn inward in their Operations, hereby with much facility
compressing the inward Cavities; the which, by reason of the laxness of the
lower Belly, and its yielding to vacuity, it frames a Contention inward, Obs.
and a Remission outward. Another Observation may be,
that these Muscles do bind the Intestines in oblique descending Angles.

The Explanation of the First Table.
B Part of the Muscle called Ani-scalptor. D. Musculus Pectoralis in situ. C.
Serratus Major Anticus. G. G. I. I. K. K K. Musculus obliquus descendens. G. G.
Shows the Fleshy part of this Muscle. a.a.a.a. Shows its Connection with
Serratus Major. l. l. Shows another part of the same Muscle. K. K. K. Shows
another Fleshy part of this Muscle, with its Tendon and where it begins, and
how it is expanded into the Linea alba. V. V. Shows the Semilunary Line. L. L.
L. The Tendon of the Oblique descendent Muscle running over the right Muscles
of the Abdomen to the Linea alba. M. M. M. The White Line into which this
Tendon is inserted. N. N. N. The Intersections of the Right Muscles. P. P. The
Spine of the Os Ileon. Q. Q. Some heads of the Muscles moving the Thigh.
TAB. 1.


Obliquus Ascendens.
THis is immediately substrated to the former, This does help the former in its
Compression.
and is furnished with Ascendent Fibers, it arises fleshy from the Appendix of
the Os Ileon, and Membranous from the processes of the same Vertebres as the
former; and so ascending into the 11th. and 12th. Ribs with a fleshy Margent,
then extending himself into a large double Tendon in which the Rectus is
conveyed, proceeds to the Linea alba, and Semilunary Line, Obs.
and is implanted into the 9th. 10th. 11th. and 12th. Ribs. Observe that this
Muscle is best raised by finding the Nerve that runs between this and the
Transverse at his Origination from Os Ileon.

The chief use and action of this Muscle as Columbus does offer, Its use.
is, That these working together, they do detract the Muscles of the Thorax.
Nature planting here a Series of Fibers contrary to the former, and these being
by her thus made for a stronger Compressions.

Moreover as I humbly conceive, Obs.
that this Oblique ascending Muscle is obliquely perforated near the Os Pubis,
by the Cremasters and the Spermatick Veins and Arteries a little above the
perforation of the Oblique descending Muscles; so that these Oblique ascending
Muscles lodging just under the former, do run counter with them in their
Fibers, and do keep them in Oblique ascending Angles.

Moreover, that whereas the various Muscles of the Abdomen several ways
contracting themselves inwards, do force the Excrement downwards, and at the
same time do reduce both the Ventricle and Intestines into their proper places,
and are Antagonists to the Diaphragma, because in its motion in order to
enlarge the capacity of the Thorax to give reception to the Lungs tumefied with
Air, the Diaphragma is brought toward a plain, and does thereby both press the
Stomach and Intestines downwards, by which, the motion of the Chyle is gently
solicited into the Ductus chiliferus. And when the Diaphragma has done
playing, these Abdominal Muscles do act their parts, by relaxing the
Diaphragma, and bringing it into an Arch, the Belly growing lank, and the
Intestines and Stomach being forced inwards, and upwards, by the contraction of
the Abdominal Muscles.

The Explanation of the Second Table.
A A. Obliquus Descendens, laid bare. B. B. B. The bodies of the Ribs. 9. 10.
11. The lower Ribs. a a. a. Shows the Tendinous Membrane of the Oblique
descendent Muscle. B. B. Obliquus ascendens, in situ, showing its Ascendent
Fibers. C. C. C. Linea Semilunaris. i. i. i. i. Recti Musculi, Transparent
under the Tendons of the Oblique ascendent Muscle.
TAB. II



Rectus.
THis third pair are clothed with Right Fibers, This Muscle brings the Belly
forwards.
being made very strong, and well lined with Flesh: They do arise from the Os
Pubis, and running according to the length of the Body, are inserted into the
sides of the Sternon, where the last true Ribs have their Cartilages. The
Insertions hereof are various, for sometimes there is seen three, sometimes
four, and sometimes three and a half; sometimes all above, sometimes some
below; as also the Anastomosis, of the Mamillary Vessels external, and
Epigastrick internal, always found in Women, rarely in Men; as also the
multitude of Nerves sent to the Perigraphs is very observable, for if you find
four Perigraphs, you will find no Pyramidal Muscles.

These Muscles are allowed to be of great use; Use.
some Authors affirming that they do abduce the Penis from the Ribs. And when
we do arise out of our Beds, these Muscles do seem to tumefie and fill
outward; others do declare, that these do inflex the Thorax, and do draw the
Breast to the Os Pubis, and the Os Pubis to the Thorax, and that out of their
Contraction, there is seen two various Motions performed.

But I humbly conceive that these Muscles taking their Origination from the Os
Pubis and Sternon,
and inserting themselves into the Linea alba, and running all down in length
through the middle of the Abdomen, do in their Contraction press the Insertions
inwards, and do assist the Peristaltick motion in the exclusion of grosser
Excrements.

The Explanation of the Third Table.
A A. The Cutis with the Fat laid bare. D.D.D.D. The Right Muscles of the
Abdomen. e.e.e.e. The Intersections of these Muscles. i i. The Pyramidal
Muscles. L.L. The Oblique Ascendant Muscles in site. M M. That part of the
Tendon of the Oblique Ascendant Muscle which covers the Right Muscle. P.P. The
Intercostal Muscles.
TAB III


Pyramidalis or Succenturiatus.
THis Muscle has its name from its make, This presses the Abdomen downwards.
and resemblance it carries with a Pyramidal Figure. It arises from the
external part of the Os Pubis broad and fleshy, and running somewhat below the
Rectus, is inserted by a long and round Tendon into the Linea alba. These
Muscles are seen sometimes to be wanting in such Persons as have the
Origination of the Ascendent Muscle not from the Ileon, but from the strong
Ligament which runs from the Spine up to the Os Pubis, internally: and have
four Perigraphs in the Rectus.

Vesalius, Adernaus, and Columbus do all describe them (though badly) to arise
from the beginning of the Right Muscles; But that these are distinct Muscles
are evidently apparent.

Fallopius the Inventer of them, Their Use.
does ascribe the action of Compression to them; and that they do promote the
Excretion of Urine, this also he does affirm. Laurentius does observe, that if
one of these Muscles does work alone, it draws the Linea alba obliquely
downwards; if they do work together, they do work it directly downwards, and do
hereby compress part of the Inguen and the Bladder, when we at leisure do
discharge our Urine. Columbus will have these Muscles somewhat to add to the
Erection of the Penis, but his Opinion is much contradicted by Flud from their
Situation: for they cannot reasonably be allowed to serve for this use, because
they do in no measure reach this part, and are also apparent in Women.

The Explanation of the Fourth Table.
A Shows the Muscle Obliquus Ascendens B B. Demonstrates its Tendon. C.C.C.C.
The Right Muscle of the Left Side, showing the Tendons Duplicature. K.K.K.K.
The same Muscle of the Right Side. d. The Transverse Muscle of the Abdomen.
e.e. The Pyramidal Muscles.
TAB. IV.


Transversus.
THis fifth Muscle firmly annexed to the adjacent Peritonaeum is framed of
Transverse Fibers, This brings the Abdomen inwards.
it arises from the Transverse processes of the Loins and the Os Ileon, and
the Cartilaginous inward part of the lower Ribs with a Nervous Membrane, from
the same Ligament as the former; as also with a Fleshy Origination from the
inward part of the Spurious Ribs, and Terminates in a broad Tendon at the
Semilunary Membranes, the Linea alba, and so down to the Os Pubis; he adheres
firmly to the adjacent Peritonaeum in a manner all along, save only in the
Pubes, where he divides himself. Bartholinus declares, that its chief use is to
Compress the Colon. Its generally agreed by all Anatomists, that these Muscles
do serve for bringing the Abdomen inwards; the which action is very necessary
in the Contraction of the lower Belly. Spigelius allows it another action,
which is, that it moves the Thorax Circularly to the Sides, hereby promoting
and cherishing the Native Heat; These Muscles also being of a moderate
thickness, do serve as a defense and covering to the subjacent Parts

This Transverse Muscle is obliquetly perforated a little above the Oblique
ascending Muscle, O^s:

by the Cremasters, and Spermatick Veins and Arteries; so that the perforations
of the Oblique Descending, and Ascending Muscles of the Abdomen being framed
one above another, not in straight but in bevil Lines, do intercept the passage
of the Intestines falling into the Scrotum. These Transverse Muscles running
the breadth of the Abdomen cross-ways, do run counter to the Fibers of the
Right Muscles, which binds in the Intestines crossing the length of the Abdomen
downwards long-ways, as the Fibers of the Transverse Muscles running
overthwart, do in their Right Angles secure the Intestines in their actions
broad ways, and cross the Abdomen.

The Explanation of the Fifth Table.
A A. The Inward face of the Right Muscles. B.B. Another of the same cut in
pieces. e.e. The Pyramidal Muscles laid bare. F.F. The whole Muscle,
Tranversalis in situ. e.e. Shows its first beginning. G.G.G. Nerves sent to
this Muscle from the Spinal Marrow. A.A.A.A. Branches of Veins and Arteries of
the Eight Muscle, transmitted into this Muscles. 1. 1. 1. The same Muscle laid
bare. h. Shows its Tendon laid bare also. K.K.K. Part of the Peritonaeum to
which part of this Muscle does closely adhere. L. The Navel. O.O O. The
Intercostal Muscles.
TAB. V.


Frontalis.
HAving cleared all the Abdominal Muscles, This Muscle does lift up the
Forehead.
which in necessity did require the first use of the Knife: we next come to
those parts which in order of Dignity do deserve our Inspection; And here begin
we with Frontalis, which Muscle does act variety of postures in Human Bodies,
and hereby are excellently delineated the Pictures of Sadness, Joy, Sorrow, and
Mirth, these being the Passions of the Mind, and are by this Muscle extremely
well Decyphered. This Muscle arises from the most elated part of the Forehead,
where the Hair ends near the Temporal Muscle, and where the Carnous Membrane
adheres most firmly to the Cranium, and running right down, is inserted into
the Skin which covers the Eyes, and into the Eyebrows; In raising this from the
Cranium, you will find Nerves sent from the Cranium to him.

This being raised up, Use and Caution.
it opens the Eye with it: its framed of Right Fibers, and therefore lies as a
good Caution for every young Chyrurgeon that he makes no transverse Incision
here, lest by neglect thereof, he purchase the utter downfall of the upper
Eyelid. To this Muscle by late Anatomists are added the two Occipitales which
do arise from the middle of the Occiput, Use
and passing by the Muscles of the Ears, tends to the aforesaid Musculus
Frontalis: though these do not appear so well in all Subjects, yet they do
counterpoise in some measure. The proper use of these is to draw the Skin
backward, and to keep the Forehead straight and smooth, that so it may not be
too subject to Wrinkles, by the frequent action of the former.

This Muscle you have very well described at Tab. 6. Fig. 1. at A. A. at Tab.
7. Fig. 3.

1. At A. Showing the same in situ.

a a. Showing its beginning.

V. V. Its Termination.

A. At Fig. 2. The same Table shows same Muscle.

Aperiens Palpebram Rectus.
THere are two Eyelids belonging to either Eye, This lifts up the upper Eyelid.
the upper of which is moved upwards and downwards, both for the opening and
shutting of the same; the first de^^gned for Sight, and the second appointed
for maintaining is Vigor. This Muscle arises from the upper Orbite of the
Eye, near its Elevator, where the Optic Nerve has its transmission: arising
with a thin and fleshy beginning, and is expanded with a broad and thin Tendon
into the Margent of the Palpebra, and taking the same up, does open the Eye;
this is not to be shown but with the other Muscles of the Eye after it is taken
from the Cranium. O^s.
This Muscle of the next following, have their distinct Originations and
Insertions, although their Muscular Fibers do seem to unite, which has ^^ade
some Physicians conclude them to be both but one Muscle; the which on the
contrary by acurate Demonstration; is shown that they have two distinct Nerves
taken into two distinct places; for the upper takes a small Nerve from that
Motion which arises out through the Cavity of the upper Orbite, the lower
assuming its small Nerves from that which it produces through the Cavity of
the lower part of the Orbite, the which Physicians have observed in a Cymical
Spasm of the Face: wherein the lower Eyelid is seen to appear as it were
immovable, convel'd and drawn downwards, whilst the upper does move Naturally;
The which could not succeed if they both should be moved by one Muscle.

This Muscle you have very well explained at Tab. 7. Fig. 1. at B. C. and at
Tab. 6. Fig. 2. at I. I.

Claudens seu Semicircularis superior Deprimens.
THis arises with a sharp beginning from the inward Angle of the Eye, This
shuts the Eye.
and from part of the Eyebrow near the Nose, and so falls somewhat transverse
toward the Exterior part of the Eye, becoming fleshy, and so broad, as that
he possesses the whole space between the Eyebrow and the Cartilage out of
which the Hairs of the Eyebrow do grow, and is inserted into the Angle of the
Eye.

Julius Casserius, Use.
Sect. 1. de Organ. cap. 8. does describe these Indications drawn from the
Palpebra, as that such as have their upper Eyelids elated, to be Proud and
Fierce; those who have them deprest, to have their Eyes as it were half shut,
these generally accounted to be of a mild and humble Nature and Disposition.

This Muscle you have described at Tab. 6. Fig. 2. at I. I. at B. B. Fig. 1. at
the same Table, and at Tab. 7. Fig. 1. at B. and B. Fig. 2.

Inferior seu Attollens Semicircularis.
THis arises being Membranous and thin from the top of the Nose near the Angle
of the lower Eyelid, The nether is lifted up by this.
with a sharp point, and carried transverse about the middle of the Lid,
becoming fleshy, and is inserted into the same Angle as the other. Amongst
Authors there is held a Dispute, whether that these two Muscles be not properly
one, and that Orbicularis being so generally received; though the one does
depress, and the other attol or lift up, at the same time to make a perfect
close over the Eye.

These Muscles are as Drawbridges for the Eye to open and shut; and as the
first does produce its perfect Sight by being drawn up, so does the other
procure its ready Rest and Quiet by as perfect a closure.

To these Riolanus does add Musculus Ciliaris, Use.
which he would have serve to the more firm closure of the Eyelids; but this
depends rather on his Fancy or his Knife, than any Foundation in Nature: nor is
there need of such a Muscle, since that Office is sufficiently performed by the
two forementioned; if they be not one Orbicular Muscle, as some suppose, and
consequently by their Circular Fibers constringe as firmly as a Sphincter does.

Both these you have described at Fig. 1. Tab. 7. at C. and at B. Fig. 2. in
the same Table.

Rectus Oculi Primus Elevator.
THe Curtains of the Eye being drawn, This lifts the Eye upwards
we next arrive at the Body of the Eye its self with its Muscles, by which it
performs all its variety of Motions; the truth is, so much has already been
said of these Muscles, as well as of the Coats and Humors which belongs to
the Eye, that its lost time to trouble you with Repetition thereof; this only I
shall offer, that this fine Globulous Body ought to have so many Muscles as it
enjoys, to make it hang so perpendicularly in the Orbite of its Bone, and be so
well balanced, as that it may perform every of its Motions with dexterity, and
thereby with ease and advantage execute those Offices for which it was at first
designed.

This Muscle arises from the upper part of the Orbite of the Eye, near where
the Optic Nerve comes forth, and is inserted into that Coat of the Eye called
Cornea, where it is clear, and near the Iris by a thin and Membranous Tendon.

This Muscle amongst Anatomists is generally accounted the first of the Eye,
Use.
and is either called Attollens or Superbus, being held the Master of Pride and
Disdain; the expressing of which Action occasions the Eye to open. Dr. Willis
Fol. 149. de Anima Brutorum, does attribute this Motion to the Eyelid rather,
and by him is called Musculus Humilis, because in a devout and intense Prayer
it is much lifted up, and hence is it that we commonly see the Hypocritical
Tribe, who do affect a form of Sanctity to lift their Eyes so much up, that
scarce any part but the White thereof is seen, the Pupil in these Creatures
being so obscured that scarce any part thereof is to be seen.

This you have very well delineated at Tab. 6. Fig. 3. at O. O. and at Fig. 5.
in the same Table at A.

Rectus Secundus sive Depressor.
THis is by some Anatomists called the second Muscle of the Eye, This brings
the Eye downwards.
and is so far from advancing it, that it brings it down; and hence has it the
name of Humilis given it, by some also it is called Deprimens, showing by its
Action and Motion the Index of an humble and submissive Temper and
Constitution; it is opposite to the former, and is lesser, arising from the
lower opposite part of the same Cavity, and has its insertions as the former,
it brings the Eye toward the Chin; Use.
This Muscle you have exactly described in Tab. 6. Fig. 3. at H. and at D. Fig.
the 5th. of the same Table.

This Muscle is less than the former, Obs.
which is its Antagonist Muscle, though their powers hereby are not rendered
unequal; because there is less force required to depress than to elevate, and
therefore we see it happen in like manner in other parts of the Body. And
indeed our great Architect has hereby admirably provided for a due balance of
the opposite Muscles; for where there is an excess of power or action on either
side, we usually see a Spasm succeed: as happens in the following Muscle, (or
Adducens) which in Children is so often contracted by a vicious turning their
Eye inward upon drinking, or otherwise, that it occasions that deformed
Squinting or cast of the Eye, the which on the account of the Pliablenes of the
opposite Muscle they are so prone to in their tender years, over what they are
in a more confirmed Age.

Rectus Tertius sive Adducens.
THis third Muscle of the Eye does arise from the Orbite of the Eye near the
Origination of the Elevator, This brings the Eye inwards.
subsisting in the inward Angle, drawing the Eye inwards toward the Nose; This
Muscle by some Authors is called Bibitorius, and amongst good Fellows great
respect is given to this Muscle, bringing their Eye toward their good Liquor;
bringing the Eye toward its inward Angle, and making it hereby look somewhat a
Squint. Obs.
Dr. Willis in his Book De Anima Brutor. cap. 15. de Visu, makes mention of a
Young man troubled with the Palsy, who when his other Muscles of his left Eye
were relaxed, this Adducens was strongly contracted, and hence his Eye was so
distorted, that its Object seemed as it were double, neither could he
distinguish any thing very well with it.

This Muscle you have excellently described at Tab. 6. Fig. 2. at G. at Fig. 3.
at I. I. in the same Table, and also at Fig. 5. of the same Table at B.

Rectus Quartus sive Abducens.
THis Muscle by Anatomists is sometimes called Abducens, This brings the Eye
outward.
and likewise Indignatorius, from its cross and scornful Effects it carries
with it, bringing the Eye outward. This Muscle arises from the External Angle
of the Eye, and is inserted as the former: the Eye is drawn inwards by these
four working together, and the motion is as it were suspended, which by
Physicians is called a Tonick Motion. In Dissection of a Monkey, Obs.
all these Muscles perfectly appeared exactly as in a Human Eye: and which is
observable in these Creatures distinguishable from all other Bruits, these have
no Musculus Suspensorius, or Septimus Brutorum.

This Muscle you have also exactly described at Tab. 6. Fig. 2. at H. and at K.
K. Fig. 3. and at C. Fig. 5. of the same Table.

Obliquus Minor sive Inferior.
THis Muscle arises from a Chink which is in the lower part of the Orbite of
the Eye, This brings the Eye toward its External Angle.
in his Origination Fleshy, small, and not altogether round, and is c^rried
Obliquely in his whole course, and ascending by degrees to the upper part of
the Eye, is there inserted by a short but Nervous Tendon, near the Tendon of
the Abducent Muscle; not far off which, the Tendon of the other Oblique Muscle
has also its insertion, Use.
and by moving the Eye downwards* it does convert and abduce it toward its
External Angle in a rolling manner.

This Muscle also you have described at Tab. 6. Fig. 3. at ^. and at Fig. 5. at
E. in the same Table.

Obliquus Major vel Superior cum Trochlea.
THis arises from the same place with the Abducent, This carries the Eye to
its inward Angle.
and marches in a right Line to the External part of the Internal Angle, where
it grows indifferently thick, and is then attenuated and grows round, and goes
through a Pulley there designed for it, the which so soon as it has past it,
it, yet so bends its self that it makes the Right Angle of the Eye; and running
upwards it begins to grow Oblique, and passing by the Levator is inserted
between the Abducent and Oblique Muscles, as is before demonstrated. The
Trochlea or Pully is a perforated Cartilage, passing to the Bone of the upper
Mandible, near the inward Angle of the Eye; These two Muscles are called
Amatorii, or the Lovers Muscles, being as the true Messengers of Affection, by
some they are called Circumactores or the Rolling Muscles, for they do much
work in Human Body; in Sheep also they are of very great use, being given them
as their chief Watchers, or those which do work their Eyes about. The young
Chyrurgeon is here cautioned, that in his Curing of Fistula Lachrimalis,
Caution.
he takes great care of this Muscle. The use of this Muscle is to turn or roll
the Eye inwards toward the inward Angle of the Eye by a Circular Motion, Use.
and so to abduce the Pupil from the Nares or Nostrils; Obs.
several Fibers do pass from the Periostium, or inward Film of the Orbite to
the forementioned Trochlea, and according to some do constitute the Musculus
Trochleae, though the use of them seem designed for a steady fixing the
Trochlea, rather than for a Muscular motion.

This Muscle you have also exactly described at Tab. 6. Fig. 2. at D. E. F. D.
showing the Muscle E. the Trochlea, and F. the chord of this Muscle; at Fig. 3.
at M. M. you have it, and at E. Fig 5. you have it again very exactly
delineated.

Attollens Aurem.
AS the Eyes are placed in the forepart of the Head as Watchmen to guard the
Body, This carries the Ear upwards and forwards.
so also has our wise Creator planted two Ears at the sides thereof for the
better perception of Sounds, and a more ready passage to hearing, to the better
performance of which there are hereto given variety of Muscles; amongst which,
this is reckoned as the first, it arising from the External Termination of the
Frontal Muscle, and so being thin and Membranous, is carried over the Temporal
Muscle, and is inserted growing narrower into the upper part of the Ear, Use.
moving it upwards and forwards

This Muscle you have exactly delineated at Tab. 6. Fig. 4. at H. and at S.
Tab. 7. Fig. 1. you have the same again.

Detrahens Aurem.
THis Muscle arises Fleshy, This moves the Ear downwards.
broad, and sometimes Fibrous, from the back part of the Head, near the
Mamillary process, and so growing narrower in its progress is inserted into the
whole Cartilage which encompasseth the Ear; be careful in raising the Cutis
lest you take up this Muscle with it, and so loose him; this moves the Ear
downwards and forwards, this Muscle is by some allowed as part of Quadratus
Buccas De rahens. Use.


This you have shown you at Tab. 7. Fig. 1. at T. T. T.

Adducens Aurem ad Anteriora.
THis is a common Muscle, This draws the Ear forwards.
being part of that which Spigelius calls Quadratus Buccas Detrahens, and is
also allowed as part of that Muscle called Platusma Myodes, from whose
insertion you will find a Fleshy and Fibrous Elongation implanted into the Root
of the Ear

This Muscle is said to draw the Ear forwards and somewhat upwards. Expect to
meet this at Quadratus Buccas Detrahens, Use.
as being a part of it.

Abducens Aurem ad Posteriora.
THis Muscle is planted at the Occiput, This brings the Ear backwards.
and arises above the Mamillary processes from a Knot of Muscles which belong
to the Occiput, with a narrow beginning, and being carried downwards
transversely, is inserted with a double and sometimes treble Tendon into the
hinder part of the Ear. This Muscle is said to draw the Ear backwards: In
Beasts, as in Horses, Oxen, and the like Bruits these Muscles are much more
large and apparent, and often times more numerous, whence it is, that these can
move their Ears more powerfully, and act those strong motions with them which
we see is customary for them to do.

This you have described at Tab. 6. Fig. 4. at I. I. I.

Externus Tympani Auris.
THe inward Ear has two Muscles allowed it, This brings the Tympanum upwards
and forwards.
found our by the two excellent Anatomists Hieronimus Fabritius de aqua
pendente, and Julius Casserius Placentinus, and of these one is planted (...),
the other inwards; and from hence they do take the^^ names; this arises from
the upper and inward passage of (...) Auditory passage with a large
Origination, and becoming ^eshy is inserted externally by a short Tendon into
the Tympanum, extending the Membrane with the Malleus upwards and outward. Use.
Spigelius says it is small and arises from the Culis, and that Membrane
which covers the Auditory passage.

This Muscle is one of the least in the whole Body, and is to be shown entire
with some difficulty; (...)
great caution therefore is to be used (...) opening the Os Petrosum, about
that part which respects the Temples, whether it be done by the small Chiss^l
or filing, (...) so the pieces of Bones being taken out by degrees, this Mus^^^
may receive no prejudice; the like car^ is to be observed also in showing the
following Muscle.

This Muscle you have exactly shown you at Tab. 6. Fig. 6. at A.

Internus Tympani Auris.
THis Muscle is inwardly planted, This brings it obliquely forwards and
somewhat inwards.
seated in the Os Petrosum, having its Origination from the Basis of the Os
Cuneiforme, and so becoming Fleshy, though thin and small, and having made half
his progress, divides himself into two very small and very thin Tendons, the
one of which is implanted into the upper process of the Malleus, the other into
the Neck thereof, drawing it obliquely forwards, and bringing it somewhat
inwards.

These two Muscles do then first move the Membrane with its small Bones upwards
and downwards, Use.
when we would carefully listen or hearken to any important Matter, etc. Matter
or Concern, as Diemerbroeck observes. Dr. Willis Fol. 133. de Anima Brutorum,
Obs.
writes, that the action of this Muscle is involuntary, and is wrought about by
some Instinct of Nature; for when a very vehement sound does approach the Ears,
this Muscle does remit its great noise, so as that it does sensibly obtund the
relaxed Tympanum more powerfully; but if it be either more thin, or more
obtuse, this contracted Muscle does distend the Tympanum, so that this obtuse
Impression may be made more sensible.

This Muscle also you have exactly described at Tab. 6. Fig. 6. at C. C.

TAB. VI


The Explanation of the Sixth Table.
FIG. I.
Shows at A. A. The Frontal Muscle. B. B. The Muscles of the Eyelids. b. c. The
Membrana Carnosa laid bare.
FIG. II.
A. The Optic Nerve. B. The Motory Nerve. C. The Exortion of the Muscles. D.
Musculus Trochlearis. E. The Trochlea. F. The Chord of this Muscle. G. Musculus
Adducens. H. Musculus Adducens. I. I. The Muscle of the upper Eyelid. K. K.
Shows them cut off.
FIG. III.
A. A. A. A. Shows the Cranium resected. B. B. Part of the Brain. C. C. The
Cerebellum. D. The uniting of the Optic Nerves. E. E. Their progress to the
Eyes. G. G. Musculus Attollens. H. Deprimens of the Right Eye. I. I.
Adducentes. K. K. Abducentes. L. Obliquus Externus. M. M. Obliquus Internus.
FIG. IV.
H. Musculus Auriculam recta sursu^ Movens. I. I. I. Musculus Triceps eandem
sursum trahens.
FIG. V.
A. Attollens. a. Showing its Nerve. B. Bibitorius. b. Shows its Nerve. C.
Indignatorius. D. Humilis. E. Musculus Trochlearis, or Obliquus Superior. F.
Obliquus Inferior. o. The Optic Nerve.
FIG. VI.
A. Externus Tympani Auris. B. Membrana Tympani. C. C. Internus Tympani Auris.
Abducens Nasi Alas.
THe Nose is the Organ of Smelling, This dilates (...) Nose.
and this gains place in the more eminent part of the Body, for the better
susception of the ascent of Vapors and invisible Halations, and their
Qualities are sent up hither by the Olfactory Nerves to the common Sensory, and
are there approved of according to Judgment; and thus is Man brought into a
capacity of either taking or refusing such things as may prove either
beneficial or prejudicial, purchased without the Eye, and perceived without the
Ear; The Nose is not wholly moved, but rather its lower parts which we call
Alae, and these are either kept open or shut by the benefit of Muscles: and
these are called either Abducentes or Adducentes, or if you please Aperientes
or Claudentes.

This Muscle arises very small and Fleshy from Os Maxillae Superioris, near
the first Par Labiorum proprium, and is inserted into the lower and upper part
of the Alae, Use.
and moves either part upwards.

This you have exactly delineated at Tab. 7. Fig. 1. at D. in s^^, c. shows its
Origination, d. its Insertion Fig. 2. id. Tab. you have the same at B.

Attollens Nasi Alas.
THis Muscle arises from the top of the Bone of the Nose, This brings it
upwards.
near the Lachrymal Cavity, with a sharp and Fleshy beginning, descending to
its sides in a triangular form much resembling the Greek Letter (...) and so
descending according to the length of that Bone, is inserted broad and Fleshy
into the Alas Nasi, and do carry the same upwards; Casserius has found them
much resembling Myrtle Leaves, these two pair drawing the Nasi Alas, Use.
do dilate and open the Nostrils.

This you have fairly described at Tab. 7. Fig. 1. at E. e. showing its sharp
and Fleshy beginning, f showing its Termination into the Alas, B. shows the
same in the same Table Fig. 2.

Claudens Nasum Externus.
THese Muscles are very small, This Muscle shuts the Nostrils.
and without it happen in very Nasute Persons they are never seen or to be
distinguished; the first pair of which is outward and Fleshy, and so do arise
at the Root of the Alae, and so climbing transversely is inserted into the tip
of the Nose; and as Veslingius judges, Use.
does dilate the same, whilst others do affirm that this does constringe it.

These Muscles are not to be shown by any Figure, being both so small, and so
inwardly implanted.

Claudens Nasum Internus.
THis is much like the former as to its bigness, This does constringe the Nose
inwards.
lodging inwardly under the Membrane which covers the Nose from the Bone, it
arises from the end of the Bone of the Nose, and is expanded into the Alam
Nasi, and does constringe it; this is very small, and very rarely found out,
unless in such Nasute Persons whose general Series of Muscles are very
apparent, thicker, and larger than ordinary.

There is also another Constrictive Muscle, which has gotten the name of
Orbicularis common to the upper ^ip, the which drawing the ^ip downwards, does
also therewith shut up and close the Nostrils; And this Bartholinus describes
in Fol. 358. Anatom. where he affirms, That he has observed an Appendix hereof
to descend to the upper Lip, and that in such People who could not lift up
their Nose without their Lips.

This Muscle with its former is not to be shown by Figures, they being so very
small.

Zygomaticus Riolani, vel Attollens Labium Superius.
TO Man are given Lips, This lifts up the Lip.
both for his accommodation of Eating and Drinking; as also for forming his
Voice, retention of Spettle, shutting the Mouth and defending the same from
outward Injuries; and because all these Qualifications do require a voluntary
Motion, they have given to them variety of Muscles to perform the same: amongst
which this is nominated one of the third proper pair called by Riolan.
Zygomaticus.

It arises Fleshy from the Os Sygoma, with a Fleshy and broad beginning, and
running obliquely downwards and forwards is inserted into the side of the upper
Lip near Primus Nasi, the which does abduce it to its sides upwards. See this
Riolanus Anatomy.

This also you have shown you at the Letter G. at Tab. 7. Fig. 1. and at Fig 2.
id. Tab. at C. you have the same.

Abducens Labia.
THis arises from the Os Zygoma Fleshy and round with much Fat, This brings
the Lip upwards and outward.
and is implanted into the Lips where they are joined together: this moves the
Lips upwards and outward, Use.
and does also help the former in their motion; this by some Anatomists is
accounted the first proper pair: these Muscles do also draw the Lips to the
side, whether either one or both do operate either singly or together.

This Muscle you have shown in situ, at Tab. 7. Fig. 1. at H. i. and k. showing
both its Origination and Insertion; the same you have at the Letter D. in the
second Figure of the same Table.

Labium inferius Deprimens.
THis arises Fleshy from the lowermost and outermost part of the lower
Mandible, This brings the lower Lip downwards and outward.
whence running obliquely, it is broadly inserted into the middle of the Lip,
and moves it downwards and outward; this is called the fourth pair of the
proper Muscles.

This Muscle has a part with the first pair called Detrahens Quadratus, by
which it is obliquely moved to either side, ( vid.) right or left, as either of
them are in Operation, drawing the whole lower Lip downwards.

This Muscle you have shown at the Letter I. Tab. Use.
7. Fig. 1. and at E. in the second Figure of the same Table.

Par Labium constringens sive Musculus Orbicularis and Constrictor.
THis is common to either Lip, The Lips are pursed up by this.
being framed of a fungous Substance, with Orbicular or Constrictory Fibers,
arising from the middle of the Bones of the upper and lower Mandible, and does
form and make the whole Body of the Lips, encompassing the Mouth like a
Sphincter, and drawing the Lips mutually to it, the which do firmly adhere to
the red Cutis, which gives them their admirable Vermilion Dye; as also shows
the Paleness of them in Sickness; All these Muscles of the Lips are so closely
conjoined to the Cutis, that their Fibers do intersect one amongst another; and
hence is it that such a variety of motions are seen in the Lips; and thus have
we shown all the Muscles of the Lips. Fallopius has another pair of these
Muscles belonging to the Lips, whose Cutis is so closely mixed with the
Muscles, that it rather seems to be a Musculous Cutis or a Cuticular Muscle.

This Muscle is also called Osculatorius from the use which is made of it. Use.


These Muscles of the Lips have variety of Uses given them for performing their
diversity of Actions; as some being designed for shutting the Mouth, others for
opening the same: some made for accommodation of Eating and Drinking, and
others formed for Ornament of Speech and Love Motions.

This you have fairly shown you at Tab. 7. Fig. 1. at K. K. and at Tab. id.
Fig. 2. you have the same at F. F.

Quadratus sive Platysma Myodes.
THe first Muscle lying under the Skin of the Neck is called Quadratus, This
draws down the Che^k.
from its Figure, and is small and Membranous firmly adhering to the Cutis,
arising from the Vertebres of the Neck, Scapula, Clavicle, and Sternon, large,
broad and thin, with store of Membranous Fibers, and so running up with oblique
Fibers, is inserted into the Chin, where both the upper and lower Lips are
joined; and enlarges himself so far as to make Adductor auris ad Anteriora and
because it agrees much with the Chin, it helps forwards the opening of the
Mouth; and by its enlarging its self so far as to make Adductor auris ad
Anteriora, the Ears also may be allowed to be moved by the help of this Muscle;
it has various Surcules of small Nerves belonging to it from those of the
Neck; This Muscle being once convelled there follows a Cynick Spasm.

Here Is Caution also for the young Chyrurgeon, Caution.
where he ought to take notice of the Fibers of this Muscle, especially when he
may or shall be called to make Incision here; for want of knowing of which upon
making transverse Incisions here, and crossing the Fibers and their Ductures,
he presently occasions an Avulsion in the Cheeks, otherwise great care must be
had to preserve this Muscle; for whether you do raise the Cutis from above or
below, he adheres very closely to it; In the raising this Muscle, be careful of
leaving its Elongation that makes Adductor auris ad Anteriora, which you will
rarely miss.

This Muscle according to Riolanus you have expressed in our 10th. Tab. Fig. 1.
at F.

Buccinator.
THis second Muscle which forms the Cheek is called Buccinator from the use
that is made of it; This draws the Cheek inwards.
it arises from the upper part of the upper Mandible, and from the lower part
of the lower Mandible, where the Gums begin, and do amplect the whole Cheeks in
their seats, being round like a Circle: the proper Coat of the Mouth adheres so
firmly to him inwards, that he is scarce separab^e from it; outwardly he has a
large round Tendon implanted into the midst of him, which has his Origination
from a Glandalous Substance, growing to the Os Zygoma, close by the Origination
of the Muscle so called.

This Muscle does not only move the Cheeks with the ^ips, Use.
but does also constringe them, and drive the Meat fallen into the Mouth into
the Cheeks back again to the Teeth, sending or conveying the Meat thither,
until it be better lessened, and made smaller, and a more accurate Confraction
of the same be hereby made. Placentinus writes, That he has found a very
strong Ligament in the Center of this Muscle; the which arising outward, and
creeping along the Os Gingivae, terminateth into a small and thin Muscle
directly opposite to the Cheek; but Riolanus denies the same.

This Muscle if you please may also be allowed as a hand to the Teeth, Use.
sending the Meat till it be well Chewed to the Teeth, by which it may the
be^ter be lessened and comminuted.

This Muscle you have shown you at Tab 7. Fig. 1. at F. and at P. Tab. ead.
Fig. 2.

Masseter sive Lateralis, seu Mansorius.
THis arises with a double beginning, This draws then th^r Mandible latera^y.
strong, large, and Nervous; first from that Suture where the fourth and first
Bone of the upper Mandible joyneth; secondly Fleshy from the Os Jugale, and is
firmly and largely inserted into the lower Mandible External; Use.
This Muscle by reason of its diversity of Fibers given it, does move the
nether Mandible forwards, backwards, and laterally, and ^s it were about also;
If you throw this Muscle either from its Origination o^ Insertion, Temporalis
will appear in its Insertion.

The proper Use of this Muscle is shown in Mastication; Use.
it moves to both sides, as to Right and Left; it takes its name of Mansorius
from its proper Action: and from its site, it is called Lateralis.

This you have shown you at Tab. 7. Fig 1. at the ^etter O. I. shows it also at
Fig. 2. Tab. ead. where b. b. shows its Origination, and c. c. its Insertion.

Temporalis seu Crotaphites.
THis is the first and strongest of all the Muscles, T^^^ draws the Mandible
upwards.
filling the whole Cavity of the Temple Bones; it arise^h from the Os Frontis,
Syncipitis, and Sphaenoides, fleshy and Semicircular, and growing narrower in
his des^^ntion, runs under Os Jugale, with a short but very strong and
fleshy Tendon into the process of the lower Mandible called Corone; it has
allowed it three Nerves on either side: One from the third, a second from the
fourth, and a third from the fifth pair; Use.
Wherefore this Muscle being either inflamed, contused or wounded, sharp pains
do immediately succeed, and great danger of Convulsion and fear of Death,
especially if the hurt do happen about the Nervous part thereof; As touching
the Periostium, you will find that if you do raise this Muscle carefully,
(contrary to the opinion of some) you will meet it under this Muscle, although
many have asserted the contrary. The end of this Muscle is the beginning of the
lower Mandible, the which it moves and draws upwards, and hereby shuts the
mouth; and by some hence it is called Attollens, and is the strongest Muscle of
the Body in respect of its bulk. And as Spigelius writes, it is furnished with
so much strength, that he remembers in his ripe years that he has lifted up
several pounds of Lead by the strength of his Teeth, and carried them
therewith. I have seen very great weights brought from the ground by the Teeth
and strength of this Muscle, and it has been reported above 200l weight has
been lifted from the ground by them. This Muscle both shuts the Mouth, and
constringes the Teeth.

In opening the Temporal Artery, Use.
caution is to be used by the young Surgeon lest he injureth this Muscle,
Obs.
by cutting too deep,
whence fatal Convulsions (or at least a prejudice to Mastication) do succeed.
The safest way therefore is, first to make a light incision of the Skin, and
then the Artery lying bare may the readier be hit and divided without injuring
this Muscle, which lies under it; or at least it will be well to use in this
Operation the Lancet that is retuse on one side like the Penknife, and to take
the Artery pretty high about that part of the Temples which joins to the Os
Frontis.

This you have at Tab. 7. Fig. 1. at L m. m. m. showing its Semicircular
beginning, H. shows the same, Fig. 2. ejusd. Tabal.

Mastoideus.
THis is one of the eight pair seated in the forepart of the Neck, This
contracts the Neck.
strong, long, and smooth: it arises with a double beginning; a certain Cavity
distinguishing them, one from the Sternon Nervous, and the other Fleshy from
the more elated part of the Clavicle, and is obliquely inserted into the
Mammillary process by a round and Fleshy Tendon.

This is worthy Note, Obs.
that in a live Man, especially in thin and aged People, in which it is very
conspicuons, that if the whole pair do work, Use.
it bends the Head right, but if one of them do only work, this Muscle is only
contracted, and this brings the Head forward laterally.

This you have at Tab. 7. Fig. 2. at K in situ, d. d. showing its Origination
from the Sternon, e. e. its Insertion into the Mammillary process of the Temple
Bone.

Biventer Digastricus seu Graphyoides.
THis is the second pair called Biventer, This draws the Mandible downwards and
opens (...) Mouth.
the like of which is not to be found in Human Body; in the middle of whose
Venture it grows thinner, having as it were two Venters, arising near the
Mammiform process: it arises with a broad and Nervous beginning from the
process Styloides, and suddenly becoming round, Fleshy, and small, so soon as
he recurvates under the Styloides, he becomes a Nervous round Tendon, and then
becomes Fleshy again, and is inserted into the middle Interior part of the
nether Mandible, and by drawing the Mandible downwards does open the Mouth; the
too great descent of which is hindered by its annexed Ligament. And for the
better performance of this work, the former Muscle does help this very much in
its Operation.

Provident Nature has given this Muscle two Bellies, Obs.
and from thence it got its name, having in its middle an interjacent Tendon,
very aptly resembling a Trochlea or Pulley; formed for this use, that whereas
these Muscles do not arise from the lower parts of the Neck, but rather bred
from the upper parts thereof; they do reflect about the lower parts of the
Mandible like a Pulley, drawing the Mandible downwards, and so opening the
Mouth.

This you have shown at Tab 7. Fig. 1. at N. Extra Situm, whose Tendon is
described by N. and its Venters by L. M.

Coracohyoides.
THis Muscle is very thin and lon, This brings the Os Hyoides obliquely
downwards.
so that by Anatomists it is held there is not its like to be found in Human
Body, for thinness and length; it is endowed with a double Belly by a distinct
Tendon: it arises with a Fleshy beginning near the Neck of the Os Scapulae
from its process Coracoides, and running under the Levator Patientiae of the
Scapula, is obliquely carried under the Mastoides, and there becomes a small
round Tendon, and then Fleshy again: and so is implanted into the Horns of the
Os Hyoides, Use.
and draws it obliquely downwards; If you leave this Muscle in its Origination
at the Dissection of the Levator, you will find his Origination perfect.

This Muscle has a double Venture, Obs.
as its former Companion, that the Jugular might not be too much comprest by it.

This you have described very exactly at Tab. 7. Fig. 2. at the Letters L. L.
these two Letters demonstrating its two Venters described in their Natural
Position; and at Tab. 8. Fig. 3. you have the same laid bare at H. H.

TAB. VII.


The Explanation of the Seventh Table.
FIG. I.
A The Frontal Muscle in situ. a. a. Shows its beginning. b. b. Its end or
Termination. B. C. The Muscle of the Palpebrae. D. Abducens alas in situ. c.
Shows its Origination. d. Its Termination. E. Attollens Nasi Alas. e. f. Shows
its beginning and ending. F. Buccinator. G. Attollens Labium Superius. i. k.
Shows its beginning and ending. H. Shows the second pair, Abducens Labia. i. k.
Its beginning and ending. I. Labium inferius Deprimens. K. K. Labium
Constringens. L. Temporalis. m. m. m. Shows its Semicircular beginning. O.
Lateralis. S. Attollens Aurem in situ. T. T. T. Detrahens Aurem.
FIG. II.
A. Musculus Frontalis in situ. B. B. The Muscles of the Palpebrae. Ae. Nasi
Alas Constringens in situ. B. Nasi Alas Abducens. C. Attollens Labium Superius.
D. Abducens Labia. E. Inferius Labium Deprimens. F. F. Par Labia Constringens.
H. Temporalis. b. b. Shows its two beginnings. c. c. Shows its insertion into
the largeness of the lower Mandible. K. Mastoides. d. d. Shows its beginning
from the Sternon. e. d. Its insertion into the Mammillary process. L. L.
Coracoides. O. The outward Jugular Vein. P. Buccinator. G. Shows the Os Jugale.

Sternohyoides.
THese are generally accounted the second pair, This brings the Os Hyoid^s
downdownwards.
moving the Os Hyoides downwards and backwards; This Muscle arises broad and
Fleshy from the inner part of the Sternon under the Skin of the Neck, and
running on (the same in substance and breadth all along) the Aspera Arteria,
and the Thyreoidal Cartilage of the Larynx, is inserted into the Basis of the
Os Hyoides.

This Muscle brings the Os Hyoides directly downwards and somewhat backwards.
Use.


You have this fairly delineated at Tab. 8. Fig. 2. at C. C. and at G. G. Fig.
3. id. Tab.

Sternothyreoides.
THese Muscles of the Larynx (as they call the Head of the Asperia Arteria) are
so nominated, This extends the Larynx.
not because they do move the whole Larynx, but its Cartilages; This formerly
was called Bronchus, but we more properly from its name and insertion do call
it Sternothyreoides: it arises Fleshy and broad from the upper and inner part
of the Sternon, and keeping his dimensions, creeps up with straight. Fibers
along by the Aspera Arteria, and is inserted into the lower side of the
Scutiformal Cartilage, the which when it presses the Scutiformis, it narrows
its Rima or Cleft.

It is generally believed that this does close up the lower part of the
Scutiformis, Use.
and that it draws downwards, whence the upper part thereof is seen to be
extended, and the Rimula or Cleft dilated.

This also have you delineated at Tab. 8. Fig. 2. at L. L. N. N. shows the same
at Fig. 3. Tab. ejusd.

Hyothyreoides.
THis arises from the whole side of the Os Hyoides, This contra^s the La^ynx.
at his Basis, and running down broad with right Fibers is inserted into the
lowest and lateral part of the Scutiformal Cartilage, and by attolling it, does
dilate its Rima. Riolanus thought this pair not to be peculiarly appointed to
any Cartilage, but did lift up the whole Larynx; if you raise this Muscle clear
from its Origination and Insertion, you will be less troubled to find out these
Muscles of the Larynx.

This draws the Larynx upwards, Obs.
whence it is we in our selves, when we would frame a sharp Voice, that we then
do bring the Larynx upwards, and when this is contracted, it contracts the
upper part of the Scutiformis, driving it inwards.

This also you have delineated at Tab. 8. Fig. 2. at m. m. M. M. showing the
same at Fig. 3. ejusd. Tab.

Styloceratohyoides.
THis third pair arises from the Root of the Processus Styloides, This brings
the Os Hyoides obliquely ^ipwards.
and being small and round, is implanted into the Horn of the Os Hyoides, found
infallibly by Digastricus his running through or under him, obliquely, moving
the Os Hyoides obliquely upwards.

This draws it obliquely upwards. Use.


Observe that its Insertion is in the lower part of the Horn (or rather toward
the Basis) of the Os Hyoides.

E. E. Shows this, Tab. 8. Fig. 3. F. F. Shows the same, ead. Tab. Fig. 2.

Amongst these Muscles of the Fauces,.
the two pair lately found out by the Ingenious Doctor Croune may not
improperly here be mentioned; one of which are named by him Musculi
Pterygo-palatini, and the other Spheno-palatini. The former of these are seated
in the Interior part of the Cavity of the Os Pterygoides, and terminate with
their Tendons (which run on part of the forementioned Bone as on a Trochlea)
about the Glandula palati, which (together with the Uvula) they depress.

The latter of these, or Spheno-palatini, arise from the Os Sphenoides, and
with a broader Tendon are inserted into the sides of the Glandula palati, which
(together with the Uvula) they do attoll. From the situation and action of
these latter Muscles may some account be given, how the Uvula being relaxt is
commonly reduced by thrusting the Thumb bent toward the Palate or these Muscles.

These Muscles you have exactly shown you at Tab. 10. Fig. 2. at O. O. X. X.
Shows its Tendon, Q. Shows the latter, where f. f. shows its Tendon also.

Mylohyoides Riolani.
THis arises laterally from the nether Mandible inwards, This moves the Os
Hyoides directly upwards.
under the Dentes Molares, Fleshy, and is inserted into the Basis of the Os
Hyoides, externally; this is to be thrown upwards in Dissection. Look into
Riolan. which does give you satisfaction as to this Muscle.

Styloceratohyoides.
THis third pair arises from the Root of the Processus Styloides, This brings
the Os Hyoides obliquely upwards.
and being small and round is implanted into the Horn of the Os Hyoides, found
infallibly by Digastricus, his running through, or under him moving the Os
Hyoides obliquely upwards;.
Observe that its insertion is in the lower part of the Horn, or rather toward
the Basis of the Os Hyoides.

This draws it obliquely upwards. Use.


This you have shown you at Tab. 8. Fig. 2. at E. E. F. F. showing the same at
Fig. 3. ejusd. Tabul.

Myloglossus.
THe Tongue, This moves the Tongue upwards.
whereas it is not only the primary Instrument of the Voice, but also is useful
for turning of the Meat contained in the Mouth, and does obtain very many
voluntary Motions; for the executing of each of which, there are required
several Muscles, amongst which this is said to be the fourth pair, it arises
with a broad beginning from the innermost lateral part of the lower Mandible
under the Molares, and is inserted into the Ligament which ties the Basis of
the Tongue to the Fauces; At the Origination of Mylohyoides you will certainly
find this, and it is best shown when the Mandible is divided: when one of these
move, the Tongue is turned upwards: when both move, the tip is directly lifted
upwards toward the Palate.

C. Shows this Muscle, Tab. 8. Fig. 2.

Ceratoglossus.
THis is one of the four pair arising from the Horns of the Os Hyoides, This
brings the Tongue downwards.
and hence it is called Ceratoglossus, and is implanted obliquely into the
sides of the Tongue, near its Root; Use.
if both these work together, they draw the Tongue downwards and inwards: if
only one operate, it moves it either to the right or left side.

I. Shows this, Tab. 8. Fig. 3. D. Shows the same, Fig. 2. ejusd. Tab.

Genioglossus.
THis is one of the second pair so called by Spigelius: This moves it forward^.
it arises with a narrow Origination, about the middle of the lower Mandible
or Chin, and then enlarging himself, is inserted into the Root of the Tongue;
Veslingius does number this amongst the number of Os Hyoides, and says that
they are implanted at the Basis of the Bone, which it draws straight upwards,
Use.
whereby the Tongue is the more easily thrust forward out of the Mouth, though
in the excessive heat of Fevers, the Fibers of this Muscle are so parcht that
the Patient does it with difficulty.

E. Shows this, Tab. 8. Fig. 3.

Hypsiloglossus seu Basioglossus.
THis is one of the third pair, This moves it backwards.
it arises Fleshy from the Basis of Os Hyoides, and is inserted into the
middle of the Tongue, according to its longitude, and by drawing it inwards,
Use.
does bring it backwards.

This being contracted, it brings the Tongue inwards, and backwards.

G. Shows this, Fig. 3. Tab. 8.

Styloglossus.
THis arises Fleshy and small, This brings the Tongue upon upwards inwards.
with a sharp beginning from the Styloidal process, and growing more broad and
Fleshy, is inserted into the lateral part of the Tongue, and it brings it
upwards and inwards: it is best found, by discovering of Styloides with your
Finger, and then your Eye will direct you to it, at the lateral part of the
Tongue; in man it is slender, but in Beasts it is double, Fleshy, and thick.

Its use is thus explained; Use.
If either of these Muscles moves, the Tongue is carried either to the right or
left side directly, but both moving, its brought back to the Fauces.

K. Shows this, Tab. 8. Fig. 3.

Lingualis.
THis arises Fleshy and large from the Basis of the Os Hyoides, This moves the
Tongue both in Constriction and Dilatation.
and so runs according to its longitude, forward to the tip of the Tongue, and
is much disputable whether it be a Muscle or not; it is endowed both with
oblique, transverse, and right Fibers, all which are so fully sprinkled about
the Tongue, that is through its whole Body, that they are scarce divisible, and
cannot by the best and most industrious hand be separated.

Spigelius does give these Uses to these pair of Muscles, Use.
if they may properly be called so, that the transverse Fibers which are
implanted in them do serve to contract the Body of the Tongue and so to thicken
it, the oblique (...) and separating them from one another, and that the (...)
framed for bringing it to the Palate and Fauces in (...).

This Muscle is not to be explained, being disputable whether it be a Muscle or
not amongst Anatomists.

Cricothyreoides Anticus.
THis is said to be the first proper pair of the Larynx, This moves the
Cartilage obliquely downwards.
as is held by Veslingius and most Anatomists: it takes its Origination from
the forepart of the Annulary Cartilage, and ends in the sides of the
Scutiformal, and hence it gets the name of Cricothyreoides Anticus, and is
generally reputed to move the Cartilage somewhat obliquely downwards; it
arises in the lower and forepart of the Larynx, having a Fleshy beginning;
when this is contracted, Use.
it extends the Cartilage Cricois or Annularis, and so opens its Cleft for a
more deep and greater Voice or Sound.

F. Shows this at Tab. 8. Fig. 2. D. D. Shows the same laid bare, Tab. ead.
Fig. 2. C. Shows the same, Tab. ead. Fig. 3.

The Explanation of the Eighth Table.
C. C. Sternohyoides at Fig. 2. G. G. Shows the same laid bare at Fig. 3.
ejusd. Tab. L. L. Sternothyroides Fig. 2. at N N. Shows the same laid bare Fig.
3. M. M. Hyothyroides Fig. 2. at m. m. Shows the same bare at Fig. 3. ejusd.
Tab. E. E. Styloceratohyoides at Fig. 2. F. F. Showing the same laid bare at
Fig 3. ejusd. Tab. D. D. Genehyoides at Fig. 2. E. E. Shows the same laid bare
at Fig. 3. ejusd. Tab. C. Miloglossus shows this at Fig. 2. E. Geneoglossus at
Fig. 1. I. Ceratoglossus at Fig. 1. D. Shows this also at Fig. 2. G.
Hypsiloglossus at Fig. 2. K. Styloglossus at Fig. 2. F. Crycoarytenoides
Anticus at Fig. 1. D. D. Shows the same laid bare.


Aesophageus seu Sphincter gulae.
THe Aesophagus is a round Channel, This contracts the Fauces.
by and through which our Nourishment, as both Meat and Drink does pass from
the Mouth into the Stomach, and this Action of Deglutition is performed by the
Fibers of the Aesophagus, and its Muscles; for whereas we Eat and Drink at our
wills and when our pleasure is this Action is performed when thus made use of,
by such Instruments as do serve for a voluntary Motion, as Muscles, which are
to be numbered with their Animal Actions: and although it may serve for a
Natural use, (as for Nutrition) yet it is no less Animal than Breathing, the
which also is customary to Nutrition, yet is it Animal; Now this Sphincter
Gulae is very officious in this service, for when a due Mastication is made,
Its Use.
this by its Constriction does drive it downwards.

It arises Fleshy, and is a broad Muscle wholly encompassing both the fore and
back part of the Aesophagus, arising laterally according to the length of the
Scutiformal Cartilage, encompassing the Aesophagus like a Sphincter; This
Muscle being carefully raised, you will much better find Stylopharyngaeus and
Cephalopharyngaeus.

D. D. Shows this, Tab. 9. Fig. 5.

Stylopharyngaeus.
THis third pair is so called, This dilates and opens the Aesophagus.
and do arise with a small beginning from the inner part of the Styloidal
process, and descending with its thin body, is implanted by a Membranous Tendon
into the Thyrois, the sides of the Os Hyoides, and the Root of the Tongue; Use.
this helps forwards the former in its Contraction.

Whereas there are appointed two as Dilators of the Aesophagus, so this is
accounted as one of the Constrictors, though Veslingius thinks it rather
Dilates.

C. C. Shows this, Tab. 9. Fig. 5.

Cephalopharyngaeus.
THis arises from the Cranium, This does contract the Fauces.
and the first Vertebre of the Neck where they are joined, and so descending,
is implanted into the lateral sides of the Os Hyoides, Cartilago Scutiformis,
and the beginning of the Aesophagus, for whom he seems to make a Coat, Use.
and by lifting this up does constringe the Fauces in the Deglutition.

A. A. Shows this, Tab. 9. Fig. 5.

Cricoarytaenoides Posticus.
BY Spigelius this is reckoned as one of the first pair of the Larynx, This
extends the Larynx.
extending or opening its Cleft, and by Casserius it is called Par Cucullare,
it arises Fleshy from the hinder and lower part of the Cricoides, and running
up with right Fibers, and repleating the Cavity of the Cricoides, is Nervously
implanted into the inner seat of the Arytaenoides, Use.
and by division of the Two Arytaenoidal Cartilages, the Larynx is opened. This
does extend the Arytaenois, and by converting it backwards to the outward
parts, it opens the Epiglot.

D. D. Shows this at Tab. 9. Fig. 1. G. G. Shows the same laid bare, Tab.
ejusd. Fig. 2. C. C. Shows the same, Fig. 4. ejusd. Tab.

Tab. IX.


The Explanation of the Ninth Table.
D D. Aesophagaeus at Fig. 4. C. C. Stylopharyngaeus at Fig. 4. A. A.
Cephalophryngaei at Fig. 4. B. B. Sphenopharyngaei at Fig. 4. D. D.
Cricoarytenoideus Posticus at Fig. 1. G. G. Shows the same laid bare at Fig. 2.
D. D. Shows the same at Fig. 5. E. E. Cricoarytenoideus Lateralis at Fig. 2. C.
C. Shows the same laid bare at Fig. 3. C. C. Shows the same also at Fig. 6. F.
F. Aritenoides shows this laid bare at Fig. 2. D. Thyroaritenoides at Fig. 3.
B. B. Shows the same at Fig. 6.
Cricoarytaenoides Lateralis.
THis is generally allowed one of the third pair, This extends it obliquely
lateral.
extending the Larynx to the side, or opening its second Rima or Cleft, it
arises from the lower part of the Annulary Cartilage upwards, and is inserted
into the lateral external part of the Arytenoides, Use.
opening the Larynx by the oblique diduction of its Cartilages.

Here Is also observable, That by how much the second pair of the Contractors
does draw to a mutual Contract, the second pair of the Extenders do bring them
outward, and so open them. This is generally allowed to extend the Larynx
laterally, and so does open the Rimula.

E. E. Shows these laid bare, Tab. 9. Fig. 2. C. Shows the same in situ, Tab.
ead. Fig. 3. C. C. Shows them in situ, Tab. ead. Fig. 5.

Arytaenoides.
THis is also called Claudens Secundum, This contracts it obliquely lateral.
its very small and Fleshy, and arises with oblique Fibers from the
Arytaenois, where it is joined to the Cricois, and is again inserted into it,
Use.
where it connecteth its self with its Companion; This moves the Arytaenois
obliquely, and to either side, and so by constringing its Basis, does shut the
Glottis

This is called Arytaenoides or Guttalis, and whereas there are allowed two
motions of the Larynx, by which it is either contracted or dilated, shut or
opened, so does both these Dilatations and Constrictions, or Clausion and
Apertion proceed from their proper Muscles. Thus when the Thyrois is dilated,
the Arytaenoides is shut; and thus according to Galens opinion, the Larynx is
contracted when the sides of the Thyrois or Scutiformis are contracted and
moved inward, dilated when they are extended and brought outward, and shut
when the Arytaenois is constringed and brought into a cavity, opened when it is
brought outward and extended.

The action of these Muscles are most remarkable, when we forcibly stop our
Breath for some time, for then it prevails against the contrary endeavor of
the Muscles of the Thorax which serve to Respiration, and shuts the
Arytaenoides so close, that no Air can enter in.

F. F. Shows the same laid bare, Fig. 2. ejusd. Tab. B. B. Shows them at Fig.
4. ejusd. Tab.

Thyreoarytenoides.
THis is one of the fourth pair, This contracts it ^irectly.
arising Fleshy, broad, and is transversely implanted in the Cavity of the
Larynx, and from the middle inner part of the Thyrois, and being carried
upwards according to its length, is inserted into the lateral part of the
Arytaenoidis, which makes the Glottis, the which constringing does shut the
Larynx; This Muscle is best found by dividing Cartilago Thyroidis, from the
Cricoidis, Arytaenoidis, and subjacent Muscles, the Coats of them being
carefully preserved, after which will plainly appear this.

This pair if they be inflamed, Obs.
in a Squinancy, when as they do exactly shut the Rima or Cleft, it brings
Death along with it.

D. Shows this, Fig. 3. Tab. 9. B. B. Shows the same at Fig. 6. ejusd. Tab.

Sphenopharyngaeus Primus.
THe Muscles of the Fauces, (...).
by some the Pharynx or beginning of the Aesophagus, are those which do serve
for Deglutition, and therefore Nature has planted at the top of the Aesophagus
Muscles here as Instruments of voluntary motion for acting to our wills or
pleasures; and as some of these do serve for Constriction, so also are others
as useful for Dilatation, amongst which are these reckoned as the first pair.

This arises thin and Nervous nigh the sharp Appendix of the Os Cuneiforme,
descending by the inward Cavity of the Pterygoides, and is inserted by a small
Tendon into that Skinny part of the Palate, from which the Gargareon seems to
proceed, and does dilate these parts for Reception of their Nutriment.

Neither this nor its fellow are raised well or distinctly without much trouble
and d^fficulty.

B. B. Shows this at Tab. 9. Fig. 4.

Sphenopharyngaeus Secundus.
THis second is by some allowed to arise from the same Origination as the
former, This helps the former in its dilatation.
and is inserted into the lateral and back part of the Fauces and Aesophagus,
the which drawing downwards, they do dilate the Cavity of the Fauces and Gula;
Use.
To find these after you have raised the Larynx and Aesophagus, leave the
Fauces entire, then divide the Fauces themselves from Os Palati, till you come
into the Cavity, then carry your Knife close internally to the Os Cuneiforme,
and being thus divided, you will with ease find both their Originations, and
with as much pleasure you may dissect them.

This also is shown at Tab. 10. Fig. 1. at B. B.

Next to these should I have put in the Stomach and Intestines, but Dr. Willis
has given so full an Account of them, and shown their Fibers so exactly, that
whoever desires to take a view of them may be very well satisfied thereof in
his Book named Pharmaceutice Rationalis.

Pterygoides Externus sive Abducens.
THe lower Mandible has allowed it variety of Motions, This brings the
Mandible forwards.
and these are both very necessary to Human life, as also for well ordering of
their Designs: for how can the Meat be either received into the Mouth, or there
chewed or lessened, unless the Mouth were opened, and then shut again; the
Teeth do act their parts, and by a mutual Collision and Comminution toward a
fair Deglutition, do make a happy progress toward the health of Man; without
the benefit of Muscles, the Grinders must lie still, and the Incisors grow
dull; the Mandible has its variety of Muscles granted it for the discharge of
its variety of Offices, amongst which this is accounted as one of its fourth
pair, and does arise from the External part of the Processus Aliformis in part,
as also from the rough and sharp Line of the Os Sphaenoidis, strong, Nervous,
and Fleshy, and so marching down large, is inserted by a strong broad Tendon
into the inner part of the lower Mandible, laterally, just under the Tendon of
the Temporal Muscle, and does move the Mandible forwards, Use.
and as it were does abduce it from the Head.

E. E. Shows this at Tab. 10. Fig. 1.

Tab. 10


Pterygoides Internus seu Adducens.
THis arises thick and short from the inner Cavity of the Processus aliformis,
This brings it backwards.
being first Nervous, then Fleshy, and is inserted by a broad, long, and
Nervous Tendon into the lower Mandible internally lateral, the which drawing it
upwards, does help the Office and Action of Temporalis, bringing the Mandible
inwards and backwards. Use.
These two Muscles do not appear until the whole dissection of the Tongue,
Larynx, and Gula be fully completed.

D. D. Shows this at Tab. 10. Fig. 1.

The Explanation of the Tenth Table.
FIG. I.
A. A. Temporalis laid bare. B. B. Masseter. C. C. Digastricus or Biventer. D.
D. Pterygoideus Internus. E. E. Pterygoideus Externus. F. Quadratus Riolani.
FIG. II.
r. s. t. v. Os Ptery. oides. O. O. Musculus Pterygopalatinus which depresseth
the Uvula, and with it the Glandule of the Palate. *
X. X. Shows its Tendon which is reflected about the neck of the Os Pterygoides
as on a Trochlea, and is inserted into the Glandule of the Palate. r. Shows the
neck of the Os Pterygoides with its small head. B. Shows the Glandula Palati.
d. The Uvula. a. a. Part of the Muscle Pterygoideus Internus to which is
adjacent Pterygopalatinus mentioned at O. O. C. Shows its Origination arising
from the lower part of the Cavity of the Os Pterygoides. q. Shows another
Muscle called Sphenopalatinus which attols the Glandula Palati, and with that
the Uvula. *
f. f. Shows its. Tendon implanted in the side of the Glandula Palati. Z. Shows
its Origination out of the Os Sphenoides. g g The Interior Cavities of the
Nostrils
Moreover as touching these two * Muscles (besides what has already been said
as to their Uses) this Observation is very material as to their Usefulness, (
viz) in Hauking or forcibly raising up any tough Phlegm or Lapidouse Matter
lodged about the Aesophagus, these are of very great use as to the dispatch of
the same forward, and sending it outward, being here planted as two strong
Ligaments which can give force to the Pallates raising it self for the
discharge of the same

FIG. III.
A Musculi Longi. B. Scalenus. C. Mastoideus.
Longus.
THe Neck is as an Appendix to the middle Venture, Th^s contracts the Neck.
or a middle between the Head and Trunck. Such Animals are destitute hereof,
which do not move their Heads with the Trunck of their Bodies, as Fishes,
Frogs, etc. This Neck has a four fold motion granted it, as forwards,
backwards, and to either side, and every of these Motions are performed by the
benefit of Muscles, of which some are called Flectors, others Extensors; of the
Flectors, the first pair are called Longi, lying under the Aesophagus.

This Muscle arises sharp and Fleshy from the forepart of the Body, from the
fifth and sixth Vertebre of the Thorax, where the Rib joins its self to him,
and so running up under the Aesophagus, is joined to the sides of the Bodies of
all the Vertebres, ascending until he comes to the first of them, where meeting
with Scalenus, they insert themselves by a sharp Nervous Tendon into the
transverse process of the first Vertebre of the Neck.

The Neck by the benefit of these with the Head, Use.
is bent or contracted forwards, one only operating, it carries it to the
sides.

A. A. Shows this, Tab. 10. Fig. 3.

Scalenus sive Triangularis.
THese pair of Muscles resembling a Triangular Figure, This contracts the Neck
as the former.
by some Anatomists are not improperly called Triangulares.

This arises from the first and uppermost Rib of the Thorax, broad and Fleshy,
and then narrowing himself, in his upper course he bestows transverse Fibers
upon all the transverse processes of the Neck, and is inserted as the former,
and does also help the former forward in their motion; This Muscle has a
peculiar Cavity allowed it, through which the Arteries descending to the Arm,
and the Veins ascending from thence do pass.

If these Muscles do work together, Use.
they do contract and bring the Neck and also the Head right forwards, but if
only one do operate, it inclines the Neck to one side forwards.

B. Shows that at Tab. 10. Fig. 3.

Pectoralis.
THe upper part of the Arm reaching from the top to the Cubile, This m^ves to
Arm forwards.
is that which we generally do call the Arm, and this is moved by several
Muscles, the first of which is called either Adducens Humerum, or Pectoralis,
by some the Boxing Muscle, it possesses the forepart of the Thorax, and
arises first from the middle of the Clavicle, where he is most round, and next
the Breast Fleshy, then from the Sternon according to his length, and is
annexed to his Cartilages; Thirdly, from the Cartilages of the sixth, seventh,
and eighth Ribs, and is there Nervous in his Origination, and so proceeds
Fleshy and large until he arrives at the lateral part of the Thorax, where he
is converted into a short, broad, and strong Tendon, and is inserted into Os
Humeri, and according to his length between Deltois and Biceps.

This brings the Arm to the Breast forwards, Use.
and hence by some has it given it the name of the Boxing Muscle, and this
either directly, or somewhat upwards, or downwards, according to the
contraction of its upper, middle, or lower Fibers.

B. Shows this in Tab. 16. c. b. d. Show its diverse Fibers.

Subclavius.
THis is called the Subclavius which is seated under the Clavicle, This brings
the (...) upwards and outward, and does open the Thorax.
and lodges between the first Rib of the Thorax; This is accounted the first
Muscle of the Thorax, it arises from the Inferior part of the Clavicle, and
being enlarged forwards with Oblique and ^ransverse Fibers, it is implanted
into the first Rib near the Sternon, and by drawing it upwards and outward,
does dilate the Thorax.

The use of this Muscle is for drawing down the Clavicle, Use and Obs.
when it is moved upwards with the Scapula, for when the Scapula's are
attolled, the Clavicles are lifted up with them, the which to reduce into their
proper places, the Subclavius is to be brought downwards; and hence in
Fractures of the Clavicles, if they be fractured near the Sternon, the Arm with
the Scapula does soon fall downwards, and that part which is next the Sternon
does ascend and is raised upwards, as Hippocrates does observe, Lib. de
Fractur. and on the contrary, if they be broken near the Acromium, you will
find neither part to ascend: the cause of which, the same worthy Anthor does
fortify with this ingenious Reason; Whereas this Muscle is inserted to that
part which is next the Acromium, when the Clavicle is fractured two ways, this
Subclavian Muscle is presently contracted; and thus the Arm draws the dependent
Scapula together with its self, whilst the other part is detained in its place
by the strength of the Muscle.

F. Shows this, Tab. 11.

Serratus Major Anticus.
THese Muscles of the Scapula have not their Names given them from their Use,
This brings the Scapula forwards.
but rather from their Figures, as this pair much resembling the Teeth of a
Saw, and hence called Serrati. This is the second Muscle placed in the side of
the Thorax, arising from the third, fourth fifth, sixth, seventh, eighth,
ninth, and tenth Ribs, with a Saw-like, Nervous, and sharp Origination, hence
growing Fleshy upon the Ribs, he ascends and inserts himself Fleshy into the
whole Basis of the Scapula inwards; It is much Disputable both by Spigelius and
Veslingius, Use.
whether the Origination and Insertion be not e contra; the motion of this
Muscle is promoted by the Oblique Descendent Muscle of the Abdomen: when this
is contracted to its beginning, it draws the Scapula forwards, as also the
Serratus Minor, but somewhat downwards.

And also as I apprehend, another Use may be to tie or fasten the Scapula to
the Breast.

A. Shows this at Tab. 16. a. a. a. Shows its Origination and its Tendon, D. D.
Shows the same at Tab. 11. F. F. F. F. Shows the same in its place in Tab. 1.

Serratus Minor Anticus.
THis is the fourth, This brings it upwards.
which wholly lies under the Pectoral Muscle in the fore part of the Thorax,
and is called Serratus from its being like a Saw, acuminated with various
Fleshy Fibers; Minor, as touching its difference with the Major, it is
substrated to the Pectoral Muscle, arising from the four first upper Ribs (but
one) by so many serrated Originations, and so descending toward the Scapula
narrows himself, and is inserted broad, Fleshy, and Nervous into the Processus
rostriformis of it, Use.
and draws it forward to the Thorax: if they work both together, they do
bring the Scapula to the Breast: if the upper they bring it upwards, and e
contra: if the lower, they bring it downwards.

This Muscle has also (as I conceive) the same Use with the former, binding
the Scapula forward to the Trunck of the Body.

E. Shows this laid bare, Tab. 11.

Intercostales Externi.
THese have their Originations from the Transverse processes of the Back, These
do dilate the Thorax.
where the Ribs are joined, and so proceeding Fleshy, do fix themselves all
along from the lowermost part of the upper Rib, external to the upper part of
the lower Rib, and so does proceed to the Cartilage of the Sternon: Use.
The outward Muscles being contracted, do draw the Ribs toward their
Originations upwards and outward, in Respiration; hence the Thorax is dilated,
and so its Cavity is made wider.

All these Muscles are endowed with Oblique Fibers, Obs.
and these intersecting each other, do show their differences from the Interni.
As a good Observation to the young Surgeon, let him take care in opening of
any Abscosses or Empyemas which may happen here, for if he makes a direct
Incision here downwards, he cuts and divides all the Spermatick Fibers, and
therefore in these cases he is advised to make his Incision in an oblique
manner.

K. K. K. K. Shows this at Tab. 11. O. O. O. Shows the same, Tab. 5.

TAB. XI.


The Explanation of the Eleventh Table.
F Subclavius. D. D. Serratus Major Anticus. E. Serratus Minor Anticus showing
it laid bare. K. K. K. K. Intercostales Externi, Intercostales Interni. C. C.
Subscapularis.
Intercostales Interni.
THese have their Originations where the Ribs do begin to bend inwards, These
do mov^ the Thorax and constringe it.
and run from the lower to the upper part of the Ribs, not only to the
Cartilage, but under that to the Sternon; these Muscles do work contrary to the
former, for these do bring the Thorax downwards and inwards in Expiration, Use.
whence it becomes Constrict, and the Cavity is made less.

Moreover, whereas the External Muscles do end about the beginning of the
Cartilages, so as that there are left Intercartilaginous spaces: hence is it,
that Nature, that provident Mistress, who abhors all vacancies, has filled all
these empty spaces with these Internal Muscles, and has raised the same to the
Exterior Superficies of its space or those spaces.

These you may also see with the former.

Pectoralis Internus seu Triangularis.
THis by some is accounted the sixth Muscle of the Thorax; This does constringe
the Thorax.
it is a small and thin Muscle arising from the inner part of the Sternon, and
adheres to the Cartilage of the upper Ribs, sending forth on either side four
small Projections to the Osseal Extremities, by which the third, fourth, fifth,
and sixth true Ribs are joined to the Cartilages, by the adduction of which,
Use.
they do constringe the Thorax, and do somewhat depress it forward.

This Muscle is not to be shown by any Figure.

Cremasteres sive Suspensorii.
THere are three proper Coats allowed the Testicles, These keep the Testicles
from falling down.
1st. Erythroides or Tunica rubra, and 2dly. Elytrois, or Vaginalis, and 3dly.
Tunica Albuginea, or Nervea: to the External Membrane of the first are adnated
the Cremaster Muscles, one on either side, the which in Men have their
Originations from that Ligament which is in the Os Pubis; in Dogs and other
Animals they are seen to take their Originations from the Tendons of the
Transverse Muscles, and their Fleshy Fibers do run through the whole length of
the Vaginal Coat, especially in its back part; for which cause the outward
Superfices of this Coat is seen to be Asperate and Fibrous, the inward smooth,
and covered with a certain waterish Humidity, and is strongly annexed to the
lower part of the Testicles.

Regne rus de Graaf does allow a three fold Use of this Muscle; Use.
as first that it keeps the Testicles from Cold; Then that it keeps them up
from falling down, the which by their weight, should it once so happen, they
would hinder the Spermatick Vessels in their Operations; And lastly, as various
Authors have writ and observed, That they attract them for a better Excretion
of the Seed, as is seen in the Act of Venery. Bartholinus does witness, That
there are such who have this so strong, that they can according to their will
retract the Testicles, and then again dismiss them.

Tab. 13. Fig. 4. at C. C. you have this, D. D. Shows their Fleshy Fibers.

Erector Penis, sive Collateralis.
THe Seed made, prepared, This is said to erect the Penis.
and elaborated in the Spermatick Vessels do require a proper Instrument for
its discharge into that part which Nature at first designed it for, by which
means we see the like produced by the help of this Instrument. Plato in Timaeo
did suppose the Penis to be some certain Animal, which could produce such
strange effects as touching both Generation and Propagation, but although it is
no Animal, yet it must properly be allowed an Animal-part and Instrument: Its
placed in the lower part of the Belly, for the more commodious executing its
Office, it takes its Original from a strong Foundation, as from the Bones of
the Pubis, to whose Root it is most firmly planted; we pass by its Figure and
Substance, and come to its Muscles.

This Muscle has his Original from the Appendix of the Coxendix, beneath the
beginning of the two Nervous Bodies, in whose Interior part their thickest
Fibers do terminate and vanish.

Spigelius does assert that they take their names from their qualities, and
that they do erect the Penis, and in coition do preserve the same; but this is
denied by Regnerus de Graaf, as you will see in the next Chapter: for these
Muscles rather depress the Penis, that so the Seed may be the more straightly
ejaculated into the Vterus.

S. S. Shows this at Tab. 13. Fig. 1. T. T. Shows the same, Tab. ead. Fig. 2.
G. G. Shows this, Tab. 12.

The Explanation of the Twelfth Table.
G G. Erector Penis. F. F. Aceelerator Penis. K. K. Levatores Any. I. Sphincter
Any.
Accelerator Penis.
BEsides the former, This said to dilate the Ur^thra.
the Virile Member has two other Muscles allowed it called Urethram Trahentes,
arising Fleshy from the Sphincter Any, and joining with its partner internally
lateral, and marching by the fore part of the Penis, is inserted into the
Vrethra, and is generally asserted that it was framed for the dilating of the
Urethra; but the Use thus designed these Muscles is much rejected by Ren. de
Graaf, the which he confuteth by these Reasons, That when all Muscles do work
in their own proper method, their Venters do tumefie, and their ends do
approach nearer each other; the which being granted, it cannot thus happen that
the Penis should be extended, the Action of the Muscle being Contraction, and
this being most contrary to Extention; neither can the Penis obtain Erection by
the benefit or help of these Muscles, for it rather would appear depressed than
erected these being contracted, and they being planted in the lower part, or
under the Penis, taking their Origination from the Appendix of the Coxendix,
and so implanted to the lower part of the Yard.

As to the two also which are assigned by other Authors to dilate the Urethra,
they are in no ways capable to perform this, these Muscles running through the
middle of it, are firmly united to each other by one extremity of Fibers,
whilst the opposite to the former obliquely running over the Urethra, do send
the same into the sides of its Nervous Bodies; but as to the Erection of the
Penis two kinds of Vessels do seem chiefly to serve with the Muscles for the
performance of this, as Nerves and Arteries; but of these you may plentifully
satisfy your self in Regner. de Graaf, de Organ. Viror. Fol. 154. etc.

This you have at R. R. Tab. 13. Fig. 1. Fig. 2. at S. S. you have the same,
ead. Tab. F. F. Shows the same, Tab. 12.

Musculi Clitoridis.
THe Clitoris has variety of names bestowed on it, This extends the Cli^oris.
as Amoris Dulcedo, Oestrum Veneris, Libidinis Seeds, etc. it differs from the
Virile Member if you consider its whole Fabric; First, because its bifurcated
parts are twice longer when joined, in the Penis when the parts are conjoined
they are four times longer than the bifurcated parts; Then because it has no
such like Channel as has the Penis, neither is its Glans perforated as is that
of the Penis in Men; All Anatomists have by consent allowed that there are
Muscles annexed to the Clitoris, but as touching the number of them there is
held a Dispute; we judge and allow of two arising from the Bones of the
Coxendix, and running above its Crura, are implanted in them; This Muscle we
call Graafiani, and by this the Clitoris is raised.

This Use we think proper to ascribe to the Clitoris and its Muscles, Obs.
by the Contraction of the Clitoris and compressing its Thighs, it does distend
the third Body much more with the Glans.

There is also another pair of Muscles ascribed to the Clitoris by Authors,
arisin^ from the Sphincterani with a broad beginning, passing by the Lips of
the Pudendum, between the Clitoris and Plexus Retiformis, and it is so annexed
to the Clitoris, that it is judged that it was appointed rather for the
contracting of the Vaginal Orifice, Use.
than for erecting the Clitoris; and from hence we presume to call it Musculus
Labiorum Uteri Contractor.

C. C. Shows these at Tab. 13. Fig. 4. by this Muscle the Clitoris is
depressed, D. D. Shows its Fleshy Fibers, E. E. The Fleshy Fibers of the
Sphincter annexed to the Nervous substance of the Clitoris.

Levatores Any.
THat part we generally call the Anus is that which is the end of the
Intestinum Rectum; This lifts it up.
these arise from the Ligaments of the Coxendix, and Os Sacrum, under the
Bladder, small, thin, broad, and Membranous, and are inserted into each side of
the Podex; These Muscles being very much relaxed, Use.
do suffer a Procidentia Any, or rather Prolapsus Intestini, these are best
discovered before you remove the Intestinum Rectum, Vesica, and adjacent parts.

R. R. Shows these at Tab. 13. Fig. 2. K. K. Shows the same, Tab. 12.

Sphincter Any.
THis from its Use is called Constrictor Any, This purses up the Anus.
or Orbicularis, it arises from the lower Vertebres of the Os Sacrum, round,
and broad, joining himself largely circular to the Intestinum Rectum with
Transverse Fibers much thicker above than below, where he adheres so firmly to
the Cutis, that it is scarce separable: and hence by some Anatomists it is
called Cuticulosus.

We acknowledge the Use and Nobility of either of these, Use.
for when they any wise suffer a Paralysis, this being hurt, the Excrements
involuntarily do come down, and for the service they do in this case, they are
called Constrictores

Q. Shows this at Tab. 13. Fig. 2. I. Shows the same, Tab. 12.

Sphincter Vesicae.
THe Urinary Bladder is an Organick Membranous part of the lower Belly, This
purses the Bladder.
the which is formed as a receiver to take the Urine into it, or Serum which
passes from the Kidneys into it, and at due time does also serve for a
discharge of the same, and so this Bladder has two Muscles given it, the one
is said to retain the Urine in it, the other drives it out; How unkind would
Human life be, if it should be continually attended with a continual dropping
of Urine, as also how troublesome would it be to Mankind to be perplexed with
as great a stoppage; therefore kind Nature as she has been so free as to give
the Bladder one pair to keep it in whilst it is convenient to discharge it, so
also has she been as provident to let it out when the Bounds of Nature
commands a discharge thereof: the first from its Office has gained the name of
Sphincter.

This is placed orbicularly in the neck of the Bladder, scarcely distinct from
the substance of it, only where you find a round Induration, this is the same,
this does keep the Urine from involuntary falling out from the Bladder, pursing
it up.

O. O. Shows this at Tab. 13. Fig. 1.

Detrusor Urinae.
THis is said to arise between the common, This lets is out.
and second proper Coat of the Bladder, the first Coat properly being his, if
not him, and therefore it is very Fabulous, which some Physicians so strongly
contend for, that besides the former they will allow the Bladder many other
Muscles, but in truth the best of Authority does not afford any other of the
Bladder besides these two already named.

This Muscle therefore is only the middle Coat of the Bladder, which consisting
of Carnous Fibers running length-ways serves to the expulsion of the Urine. The
tone of these Fibers is much injured when the Bladder is overmuch distended
with Urine, or when it is held too long.

M. M. M. Shows this, Tab. 13. Fig. 1.

TAB. XIII


The Explanation of the Thirteenth Table.
C D. Cremasters at Fig. 3. S. S. Erector Penis at Fig. 1. T. T. Shows the same
laid bare at Fig. 2. R. R. Accelerator Penis at Fig. 1. S. S. Shows the same
laid bare at Fig. 2. C. C. Musculi Clitoridis at Fig. 4. and at D. D. E. E. R.
R. Levatores Any at Fig. 2. Q. Sphincter Any at Fig. 2. O. Sphincter Vesicae at
Fig. 1. M. M. M. Detrusor Urinae at Fig. 1.
Diaphragma.
THis Muscle has its Origination from the first Vertebre of the Loins; This
distinguishes the lower Be^ly from the middle.
obtaining a circular Figure, and much different in situ from other Muscles,
answering in magnitude the transverse bottom of the Thorax, and is inserted
into the forepart of the Sternon, and Termination of the True Ribs, and to the
twelfth Rib, as also to the extremities of the bastard Ribs, on the Sides.

It is in its middle (for its greater strength) Membranous and Nervous, Obs.
to which middle the Fleshy Fibers do run as to their Center: Wounds happening
in this Center, are reputed Mortal, because hence suddenly does follow a
present decay of Respiration, and very troublesome Convulsions, whereas Wounds
happening in the Fleshy parts hereof, are void of this danger allowed by Galen,
and this is confirmed by various examples.

The Diaphragma borrows its Origin from the Vertebres of the Back near the
Loins, Use.
and round the Termination of the Ribs and Ensiformis Cartilago, and has its
Tendon in its Center or middle of it: and by contracting it self, moves
downward, bringing it self from an Arch toward a Plain, and so enlarges the
Cavity of the Thorax to give way to the blown up Lungs, inspired with numerous
Particles of Air.

Next to this should I have Discoursed of the Heart, that Royal Muscle of the
Body, by the Reciprocal motion of whose Fibers all that Blood is let both into
it and out of it, by which our Human Pile is kept up and preserved: but Doctor
Lower having already so fully written hereof, and also given such exact Figures
of all its variety of Fibers, I recommend the Reader wholly to his Book De
Cord, my task more properly relating to those of the Artus.

This you have at Tab. 16. Fig. 2.

Here let the Body be turned upon its Face.
Cucullaris sive Trapezius.
THis is the first, This moves the Scapula variously.
the which with its Companion does very aptly express a Monks Hood: it takes
its Origination Fleshy from the lower part of the Os Occipitis, and from the
Spines of the Vertebres of the Neck, and the eight upper Spines of the Thorax,
and springs Membranous, broad, and running externally toward the Scapula,
grows narrower, and is inserted into the whole Spine of the Scapula, and near
half his Basis, as also to part of the Clavicle, by a broad, Nervous, and
Fleshy Origination, and by the variety of Fibers allowed it, Use.
it is variously moved, as upwards, downwards, directly, obliquely, according
as its Fibers are variously contracted; Divide this Muscle from its partner at
their Originations from the Spines of the Vertebres, and being so followed and
cleared from the Os Occipitis, the Muscles underneath this will much better
appear.

And I conceive another Use of this Muscle may be to fasten the Scapula to the
Vertebres of the Neck and Thorax; but the chief Use of it is to move the
Scapula obliquely upwards.

This you have at A. A. A. B. Tab. 14. B. Shows its Tendinous Insertion into
the Scapula, a. b. c. Its three sorts of Fibers.

The Explanation of the Fourteenth Table.
A A. A. Cucullaris. B. B. Shows one part thereof laid bare. C. C. Levator
Patientiae. D. D. Rhomboides. G. G. G. G. Latissimus Dorsi.
TAB. XIIII.


Latissimus Dorsi, sive Aniscalptor.
THis Abducent Muscle, This brings the arm backwards to the Fundament.
or Latissimus is so called from its magnitude, the which with its Companion
does near cover the Back, it arises with a large Membranous beginning from the
Spines of the Vertebres of the ^horax, between the Os Sacrum, and the sixth
Vertebre of the Thorax, as also from the upper part of the Os Ileon: his
Origination here is chiefly Membranous, but running higher, so soon as it
attains the curvation of the Ribs, he grows Fleshy, and in his ascension
becoming narrower, is carried over the lower Angle of the Scapula, and by a
strong and short, but broad Tendon, he is implanted below the upper head of Os
Humeri, between the Pectoralis and Rotundus, great care must be had, lest in
the raising this Muscle from his Origination, you do take up the Origination of
the subjacent Muscle Serratus Major Posticus, and if you be not very careful in
your dissection, you will borrow from Quadratus Lumbi, as you raise him from
the Ileon, to which he firmly adheres; Use.
as also near the Scapula, Serratus Major Anticus will arise with him, without
mature and deliberate observation hereof: this brings the Arm backwards,
sometimes upwards; its diversity of Fibers contracting themselves does occasion
these variety of Motions.

This is shown at Tab. 14. at G. G. D. C. C. Shows its Origination, D. Shows
where its Tendon arises, N. N. O. O. Shows the same laid bare at Tab. 15.

Rhomboides.
THis is so called from Rhombus, This brings the Scapula backwards.
the which is by Mathematicians said to be a foursquare Figure, not consisting
of equal Angles, but of Lines: it arises broad and Fleshy immediately under
the Cucullaris, from the Spinal processes of the three lower Vertebres of the
Neck, and three upper Vertebres of the Thorax, whence running with thin Fibers,
it descends down to the Scapula, to whose whole Basis externally, it adheres
broad and Fleshy; in the raising of this, take care that you do not raise the
Tendon of Serratus Posticus Superior, Use.
who lies just under him. And also because it takes its Origin from the three
lower Vertebres of the Neck, and the three upper of the Thorax, and is inserted
into the Basis of the Scapula, whereupon it does assist the Cucullaris, and
bind the Scapula backward to the lower part of the Neck and upper part of the
Thorax.

This Muscle holds the Scapula to the Back: hence Consumptive people have
prominent Scapula's from the weakness of this Muscle; from this also in some
Persons may an account be given of the Gibbosity of this part.

This you have at Tab. 15. at B. B. in situ, c. c. c. c. Shows its Origination,
G. Shows the same laid bare at Tab. 24. h. h. i. Shows its beginning and ending.

Levator Patientiae.
THis is also called Scapulam Attollens: This brings it forwards.
This arises from the second, third, fourth, and fifth Transverse Processes of
the Neck, and has as many Originations with their Interstitia: these joining
do descend, and adjoyn to the whole upper side of the Rhomboides, until it is
inserted by a broad, Fleshy Tendon to the highest, as also to the lower Angle
of the Scapula, Use.
and does draw the same upwards and forwards, and is raised with the Arm.

This Muscle had its name from Spigelius: it bearing many heavy burdens, for
the Scapula by the help hereof with the Arm is lifted up forwards, and hence
takes the better name of Patientiae.

This you have at Tab. 15. at A. laid bare, 1. 2. 3. 4. Shows its four
beginnings.

Rotundus Major.
THis is also called Humerum Deprimens, This draws the Arm down backwards.
its also called Rotundus, it being Sphaerical; it arises with a Fleshy
beginning from the lower Angle of the Scapula, and adheres Fleshy from his
lower Rib, and having marched half way, deserts, and being indifferently
dilated somewhat upwards, is inserted by a short, broad, and strong Tendon into
that part of the Os Humeri where Pectoralis has his insertion, and does draw
the Arm down backwards. Use.
It partly lies under the Arm-pit.

Its generally observed by all Masters of Anatomy, Obs.
that all Depressers are much less then the Attollers in Human Body. Thus the
Temporalis is the strongest Attollent of the lower Mandible, and Biventer is
the most infirm Depriment, and the reason is, there is required much more for
the lifting up of a weight, than for his bringing down.

This you have at Tab. 15. at E.

Superscapularis Superior sive Supraspinatus.
THis is Fleshy and long, This brings it about outward.
and presses the whole Scapula upwards: it arises from the whole Basis of the
Scapula Fleshy above the Spine, filling the whole Cavity between the Spine and
the upper Rib of the Scapula, and going back to the neck of it, passes under
the second Ligament of the Humerus, as the Biceps does, and is inserted by a
broad and strong Tendon obliquely into the neck of the Os Humeri, Use.
and does bring the Arm about with the former; others do affirm that it moves
the Arm upwards with the Deltois. And I apprehend that a great Use of this
Muscle is to help the Coracobrachialis and Infraspinatus, in lifting up the Arm.

This you have at Tab. 15. at F. L. Shows the same laid bare.

Superscapularis Inferior sive Infraspinatus.
THis covers the whole Exterior part of the Scapula, This brings the Arm
about outward.
which under the Spine, arising from almost the whole Basis of the lower part
of the Scapula, and possessing the major part of that Cavity, Fleshy, running
backward, narrows himself according to the form of the part, Use.
and by a broad Tendon is inserted into the Ligament of the Os Humeri, as some
will have it; But I humbly conceive, That this Muscle according to its
situation, does more probably assist the Deltoeides and Coracobrachialis,
lifting the Os Humeri upward.

This you have at Tab. 15. at G. M. Shows the same laid bare.

Nonus Humeri Placentini sive Rotundus Minor.
FAllopius calls this Transversalis Brevior from its site, This helps the
motion of Rotundus Major.
and Rotundus from its form: It arises sharp and Fleshy from the lowest Angle
of the Scapula, at his Basis, and growing more Fleshy to its Venture, decreases
again, and terminates himself by a sharp Tendon into the neck of Os Humeri;
This by some Anatomists is held as a part of that Muscle called Rotundus Major.

This Muscle depresseth the Os Humeri, Use.
and is an Antagonist to the Deltoeides and Coracobrachialis.

This you have at Tab. 17. at Fig. 2. at A. B. C. A. Showing its Fleshy
beginning, B. Its Cavity or Fissure, C. Its thin and Nervous Tendon; This you
have also at Fig. 1. Tab. id. at P. P. Q. Q. Q. Shows the Nerve that passes
through this into other Muscles.

Subscapularis.
THis is seated in the Cavity of the Scapula, This brings the Arm inwards.
and possesses the whole Cavity thereof: it arises Fleshy from the whole
inward Basis of the Scapula, and so running forwards, according to the
dimensions of the Bone, narrowing himself, and by a broad Tendon, is inserted
into the third Ligament of the Os Humeri.

These last Muscles do work the whole Arm about, Use.
from whence they have also their names, but the Subscapularis brings it
inwards, the Superscapularis Inferior outward, and also upwards, but these
together do moderately elevate it; their Use may be most commodiously shown, if
the whose Arm be put into a middle Figure, and afterward, neither abduces from
the Breast to the Arm, neither the middle Figure changed with the Cubite of the
Arm, the Cubitus being drawn outward, and again brought inwards.

This you have at Tab. 11. at C. C.

TAB. XV


The Explanation of the Fifteenth Table.
A Shows Levator Patientiae. B. B. Rhomboides. C. C. C. C. Shows the Spines of
the Vertebres, from whence they do take their Origination. E. Rotundus. F.
Superscapularis Superior. L. Shows it laid bare. G. Superscapularis Inferior.
M. Shows it laid bare. a. Octavus Humeri Placentini. v. Shows it laid bare.
The Explanation of the Sixteenth Table.
A Serratus Major Anticus. ae. ae. ae. Shows its Originations. B. Pectoralis.
c. b. d. Shows its diversity of Fibers. F. F. F. F. Deltois. H. H. I. Shows it
laid bare. L. M. Biceps in situ. K. Shows the same somewhat laid bare. X. Shows
Brachieus in situ.
TAB. XVI.


If the whole Arm with the Scapula be taken off, the dissection of these
following Muscles will with more ease be performed.
Deltois.
THis is accounted the second Muscle of the Arm, This lifts up the Arm.
called by some Triangularis Humeralis, arising generally Nervous; First,
forward from the middle of the Clavicle where it is broadest, next the Os
Humeri; Secondly, from the top of the Scapula, where it is joined to the
Clavicle; Thirdly, from the whole Spine of the Scapula, these Originations
presently growing Fleshy, descending and narrowing become a strong Tendon,
externally Fleshy, internally Nervous, which is transversely planted under the
neck of Os Humeri; Use.
this lifts up the Arm sometimes directly, sometimes forwards, or backwards
according to its Series of Fibers, these being contracted: In the middle part
hereof unexperienced Surgeons do make Fontanels, Ca^tion.
but very inconsiderately, because this Muscle being contracted, the Orifice of
the Fontanel therein made is also therewith contracted, sending thereby the Pea
forth with force and pain, and the Issue does heal up presently; which Error
may with ease be shunned, if they made them in the distance between this and
the Biceps, four or five Fingers breadth from the joint of the Arm, in which
place, when the Arm is bent, there is presently perceived this Interstitium.

This you have at F. F. Tab. 16. H. H. I. Shows the same laid bare.

Biceps.
THis Muscle arises with a double beginning, This Muscle bends the ^ulit^.
arising first externally from the top of the Acetabulum Scapulae by one
Substance, and so runs under the Ligament of that Juncture over the head of the
Os Humeri, and through a Channel insculpt for it, where it is bound in by a
proper Ligament; Secondly, arising broad, Fleshy, and Nervons from the
Coracoidal Apophysis of the Scapula, and is carried over the internal head of
the Os Humeri, and so descending meets with the other, and makes one strong and
Fleshy Muscle, and narrowing himself becomes a strong, thick, large, and
Nervous Tendon, and is inserted into an Oblong Prominence under the upper head
of the Radius.

Its this Tendon which generally does lie under the middle Vein of the Arm,
Caution.
which cautioneth all young Surgeons to beware of it in Venae Sectione, for
it produces great danger to the Patient: for Wounds received here are of very
great Consequence, because both Veins, Nerves, and Arteries are very relative
to it and bordering upon it, the which, of what direful consequence it has
been many Masters of our Art in this Honorable City can both evince and
certify.

This Biceps bends and lifts up the Cubite. Use.


This you have at Tab. 16. at L. M. And at Tab. 17. at G. H. I. you have the
same, G. Showing its first head, H. Another head of this Muscle, I. Showing its
Fleshy belly, K. Its thick and Nervous Tendon.

Octavus Humeri Placentini, sive Perforatus seu Coracobrachialis.
THis arises by a short and Nervous Origination from the Coracoidal process of
the Scapula, This draws the Arm upward.
near the Origination of the Deltois, and so descending, becomes somewhat long,
large, and Fleshy, and is implanted by a strong Tendon into the middle of the
Os Humeri, and does adduce it with the Pectoralis forwards to the Breast, Use.
as some would have it; the Venture hereof is perforated, and through the body
of this Muscle does pass a Nerve, which serves the rest of the Muscles; Riolan.
reckoned this Muscle to be a part of the Biceps, or of the first Muscle of the
Cubite, which does contradict Autopsy.

And I do humbly conceive that this Muscle in truth does assist the Deltoides
in bending the Arm, and lifting up the Os Humeri.

This you have at Tab. 15. at a. in its place, b. Showing the same laid bare.

Brachiaeus Internus.
THis Muscle lodges under Biceps, This bends the Cubite forwards.
but is more short and Fleshy: it arises about the middle of the Os Humeri,
near the insertion of the Deltois, and Pectoralis double, broad, and Fleshy:
partly by the Exterior, partly by the inner side of the said Bone, but
presently joining, and firmly adhering to the Bone, in its descent becoming
large till at last it terminates broad and Fleshy in the Ligament of the Joint,
as well as in the Appendices of the Cubite and Radius; Use.
This with the Biceps does very strongly contract the Cubite, lifting it up,
being an assistant to the Biceps

This you have at M. N. O. at Tab. 17. M. Showing its beginning, N. Its Venture
or Belly, O. Its large and Fleshy Tendon.

The Explanation of the Seventeenth Table.
M N. O. Brachieus Internus. R. R. S. S. Gemellus Major. Gemellus Minor you
have also in the same Table. G. H. J. K.
TAB XVII


Gemellus Major, Brachiaeus Externus, aut Longus.
THis Muscle arises doubly broad and strong, This extends the Cubite.
partly Fleshy, partly Nervous, from the lower part of the Scapula, where it
has a peculiar Cavity a little under the neck of it: and growing Fleshy
descends, and joins himself to the inner side of the Os Humeri, where he meets
with his other Fleshy Origination, and so making one, is carried down to the
inner side of the Process of the Olecranum, and is there implanted; The Use of
this Muscle is generally reputed to extend the Cubite, Use.
and is an Antagonist Muscle to the Biceps Internus, which is a Flexor and
lifter up of the Cubite: and the Biceps Externus does extend it, and put it
backward and depress it.

This and its following partner you have described at R. R. S. S. Tab. 17. R.
R. Showing its beginnings, S. S. Its double Venture.

Extensor Cubiti Breuis, vel Brachiaeus Internus.
THis is the second of the Extenders of the Cubite, This does assist the former
in its extention.
and does arise backwards Nervous from the neck of the Os Humeri, and so
becoming Fleshy, descends to the middle of Os Humeri, and does inseparably mix
himself with the former, and at length is inserted partly Fleshy, partly
Nervous into the outward side of the Olecranum, about the place we lean on.
These two Muscles as they have right Fibers given them from their beginning to
their ends, Use.
they do extend the Cubite directly, as the two former did contract it.

Veslingius says this Muscle arises from the middle of the Os Humeri, and it is
accordingly represented so in his Cuts.

This and its partner you have shown at R. R. S. S. at Tab. 17.

Anconaeus.
THis being but a small bodied Muscle, This does also extend the Cubite.
does arise from the lower and back part of the Os Humeri, being planted
between the Cubitus and the Radius, and is inserted with a Nervous Tendon
(sometimes obliquely) into the lateral part of the Ul^a, a Thumbs length below
the Olecranum or Elbow; Use.
As those two last do help forward the Cubits extention, this does help the
former, etc.

This is not to be shown or represented by Figure.

Palmaris.
THis arises round and Nervous, This moves the Palm of the Hand.
from the inward Extuberance of Os Humeri, and presently becoming Fleshy and
narrow, about the middle of the Cubite is carried somewhat obliquely, and is
turned into a long and round Tendon, and passing over the inward Ligament of
the Radius comes to the Palm and there does expand it self into a most broad
Tendon, and is laterally inserted into the first Joints of the Fingers, and is
so closely fixed to the Cutis, that it is not thence to be separated without
difficulty; Use.
The contraction of this Cutis occasioneth apprehension, and does endue the
Palm of the Hand with an Exquisite Sense, and the Skin becoming immovable by
the gripe, it occasioneth a more steady keeping of any thing therein contained.

The learned Fallopius has observed this Muscle sometimes to be double in
either Arm, Obs.
and arising from the same place, that one does end in a broad Tendon, such as
already is described, the other, in the Transverse Ligament of the Carpus.

This you have at Tab. 18. Fig. 1. at D. E. Shows where it passes into a
Tendon, b. Shows the expansion of the same Tendon, G. G. G. G. Its
Terminations; At the same Letter you have the same expressed at the second
Figure Tab. ejusd.

Caro Musculosa Quadrata.
NEar adjacent to the former, This does assist the former.
is planted a Fleshy Substance arising from the Membrana Carnosa under Mons
Lunae, where the eighth Bone of the Carpus is placed, and then marches under
Palmaris, to the middle of the Palm, and is inserted into the outside of that
Tendon that separates the little Finger from the rest; Use.
this makes the Hand hollow, and the Use hereof is perceived and declared in
large contractions of the Palm, drawing the Mons Lunae to the middle of the
Hand: this is when we would make it appear very hollow.

This you have at P. P. at Fig. 2. Tab. 18.

Flexor Carpi Interior sive Ulnaris.
THis arises sharp, This bends the Wrist.
Fleshy and Nervous from the inner Apophysis of the Os Humeri, and so running
Fleshy the whole length of the Cubite, to which it adheres, has its Insertion
at the Wrist into its fourth Bone, partly Nervous, partly Fleshy, this passes
not under the Transverse Ligament, but is only wrapped up with the common
Membrane of all the Muscles; Use.
Its Use is thus, such as are the Inflectors do possess the whole part, and do
arise from the inward Protuberance of the Arm: those that do extend, do arise
from the back part and outward Extuberance.

This you have at Tab. 18. at Fig. 1. at R. R. f. Showing its Fleshy and
Nervous beginning, g. Its end partly Fleshy, partly Nervous; This also you have
at the second Figure at the same Table, at the same Letter: K. K. Shows the
same in situ at Tab. 19. at Fig. 1. b. Showing its beginning, c. d. Its end as
formerly.

Flexor Carpi Exterior sive Radialis.
THis arises as the former from the same Extuberance, This does help the
former in its Contraction.
and so running somewhat transversly near the outer part of the Primi Digitorum
Flexores, is fixed to the Radius, and a little before it arrives at the Carpus
does become a round Tendon, which cleaving to the Transverse Ligament, runs
under him, and enlarging himself, is inserted into that Os Metacarpi which
stands before the little Finger; these two do contract the Hand.

These two working together, Use.
the Carpus, and the Hand with it is also contracted; one only working, its
sometimes moved into that side somewhat obliquely which is contracted.

This you have at Tab. 18. Fig. 1. and 2. at S. S. in situ, L. Showing its
beginning, M. Its slender and Nervous Termination, L. L. Shows the same at Tab.
19. in situ, e. Shows there its Fleshy beginning, f. The Tendon of this Muscle,
G. Shows the same laid bare at Tab. 20. Fig. 1.

Flexor Secundi Internodii Perforatus.
THe Fingers, This contra is the second Joint of the Fingers.
which are the great Messengers of Writing our Minds, and which are implanted
in us for performing of many strong and vigorous Motions, do act these by the
benefit of Muscles, by which they are both contracted, extended, and brought to
a lateral Use; We begin with the Contractors, these being seated in the Cubite,
and those generally do gain the name of Contractors which do bring the four
Fingers into a Curvation; Of these Muscles of the Fingers, this is said to be
the first, and takes its name from its Use, Use.
contracting the second Bone of the Fingers.

It arises from the inward Protuberance of Os Humeri, under the former, and so
growing broad and Fleshy about the middle of the Cubitus and Radius, somewhat
adhereing thereto marches forwards, and becomes wholly round and Fleshy near
the Wrist, where it is divided into four Fleshy Portions, from which proceeds
so many Tendons, all which are involved in one proper Mucaginous and thin Coat,
and so running internally under the Ligament, gets through the Palm, and then
does distribute to the first and second Joints of the four Fingers, as many
Tendons which are perforated a little before their insertion for the
transmission of the Tendons of Tertii Internodii Flexor This Muscle by some is
called Sublimis and Perforatus.

This you have at Q. Q. Tab. 18. at both Figures in situ, d. Shows its
Origination, e. e. Its Bivaricated Tendon, D. D. D. D. Shows the same at Tab.
19. Fig. 1. C. C. C. C. Shows it laid bare at Fig. 2.

TAB. XVIII.


The Explanation of the Eighteenth Table.
D Palmaris at Fig. 1. E. Shows where it passes into a Tendon. F. Declares
where it expands it self into a broad Tendon. G G. G. G. Shows the Termination
of these Tendons. O. O. O. O. Flectentes Pollicem. P. Caro Musculosa Quadrata.
Q. Q. Flexor Secundi Internodii Digitorum. d. Showing its beginning at Fig. 2.
e. e. Its Bivaricated Tendons. R. R. Flexor Carpi Interior, f. g. Shows its
Origination and Termination. S. S. Flexor Carpi Exterior, L. M. Shows its
Origination and Termination V. V. Extensor Carpi Exterior. X. X. Pronator Radii
Teres. Y. Y. Tertium Pollicis Internodii Flectens. Z. Z. Pars quaedam Flexoris
Tertii Internodii Digitorum.
Flexor Tertii Internodii.
THis does contract the third Joint, This contracts the third Joint of the
Finger.
and from thence does takes its name: by some it is called Profundus, as also
Perforans; it arises Membranous some part of him, from the same Extuberance as
the former, the rest from the Root of the forward process of the Olecranum,
becoming afterward exactly round and Fleshy, running under the former, and
adhering inwards to the Cubitaeus, on the outward to the Primi pollicis Flexor,
and descending about the middle of the Cubite, they divide, and make their
progress through the Fissures of the others, and are inserted into the third
Joints of the Fingers: and that a right inflection may be made by these
Muscles, and that the contracted Tendons may not rise up, and so lift up the
Cutis in the inward part of the hand according to their length, a Channel being
made out of the hard Membranes, they are inwardly included with a fatty and
Oleaginous Humor in which they have their free course of Motion.

These Muscles are allowed to contract the third Joints of the Fingers. Use.


This you have at Tab. 18. at Z. Fig. 1. and 2. This you have exactly at Tab.
19. Fig. 2. at D. D. a. a. a. a. Showing its four Tendons.

Flexor Secundi Internodii Pollicis.
THis Flexor is not seated in the Hand, This bends the second Joint of the
Thumb.
as the former, but in the Fleshy part of the Cubite: it arises round and
Fleshy from the Os Cubiti, and so marching along by the Radius to which it
adheres, as also to the Membrane that joins the Cubitus and Radius, it comes to
the Wrist, where it becomes a round Nervous Tendon, having also a proper thin
Mucaginous Membrane, and so marching forwards, is inserted into the second
joint of the Thumb by a somewhat broad Tendon.

This contracts the second Joint of the Thumb, Use.
to which it is fixed.

This you have at Y. Y. Tab. 18. Fig. 1. This also you have at P. P. Fig. 1.
Tab. 19. This you have laid bare at Tab. 20. at M. M.

Pronator Radii Teres.
THe Radius is wrought with two Motions, This brings the Wrist downwards.
the one per accidens, the other per se, and hence has it given it two kinds
of Muscles: the first from their Uses are called Pronatores, the other
Supinatores. The second of the Pronators is called Teres, so called from its
form, it arises from the Root of the inner prominence of the Os Humeri, and
from the inside of the Os Cubi^i, and is there joined by a large Fleshy
Origination to the Radius, and thence descending obliquely downwards by his
inner side a little above the middle, is implanted into him Fleshy, from whence
a Nervous Head does proceed, which is inserted into the External Head of the
Radius.

This Muscle is held to bring the Radius downwards. Use.


This you have at X. in both Figures Tab. 18. n. Showing its Origination; This
also you have at Tab. 19. Fi^. 1. At O G. Fig. 2. ejusd. Tab. you have the same
at K. d. Showing its Origination, e. Its Termination, C. C. Shows the same at
Tab. 20. Fig. 1. a. Demonstrating its beginning, b. Its Termination.

Pronator Quadratus sive Inferior.
THis is allowed the first of the Pronators, This works as the former.
it is wholly Fleshy, and arises from the lower and inner part of the Cubite
near the Radius, running over the Ligament that joins the Cubite and the Radius
transversly, and so does implant himself Fleshy into the inward part of the
Radius, with a broad beginning, much representing a Mathematical Square, having
four equal sides.

These two Muscles, Use.
while they are contracted toward their Originations, do move the Radius
forwards, and so does connect the Hand which the lower part of the Radius by
the benefit of the Carpus.

This you have at Tab. 19. Fig. 1. at I. K. Shows this, Tab. 20. Fig. 1. e. e.
Shows its beginning, f. f. Its Termination.

The Explanation of the Nineteenth Table.
FIG. I.
C C. Palmaris laid bare. D. D. D. D. Flexor Secundi Internodii Digitorum. E.
E. E. E. Shows its four Tendons. F. F. F. F. Lumbricales. G. G. G. G. Shows
these four Tendons. H. Caro Musculosa Quadrata. K. K. Flexor Carpi Interior. L.
L. Flexor Carpi Exterior. O. G. Pronator Radii Teres. P. P. Pollicem
Flectentes. Q Minimum Digitum Abducens. R. Pollicem Abducens. S. S. Carpum
Extendens Exterior.
FIG. II.
C. C. C. Flexor Secundi Internodii Digitorum laid bare. D. D. Flexor Tertii
Internodii. a. a. a. a. Shows its four Tendons. F. F. F. F. Lumbricales, b. b.
b. b. Shows their Originations. G. G. Flexor Tertii Internodii Pollicis laid
bare. c. Shows its Tendon. I. Quadratus in situ. K. Secundus Radii Teres. d.
Shows its Origination. O. Primus Secundi Pollicis Articuli Flexor. P. Flexor
Primus Primi Pollicis Internodii. Q. Pollicem Abducens.
TAB. XIX


Flexores Primi Internodii sive Lumbricales.
THese are small and slender Muscles, These bend the Fingers laterally.
arising round, long, and slender, from those Membranes which do enwrap the
Tendons of Tertii Internodii Flexores, and so passing on Fleshy, are inserted
by a round, Nervous Tendon into the first of the Joints of the Fingers, and are
best shown by raising one from his Origination, and leaving him in his
Insertion, Use.
and the other e contrario, these bends the Fingers laterally.

This you have at F. F. F. F. Tab 19. Fig. 1. G. G. G. G. Shows their four
Tendons, F. F. F. F. Shows the same at the same Tab. Fig. 2. b. b. b. b.
Showing their Originations, F. F. F. F. Shows the same in its place, Fig. 21.
Tab. 21. f. f. f. f. The beginning of these Muscles, g. g. g. g. Shows their
Tendons.

Flexor Primus, Primi Internodii Pollicis.
THe Thumb is bent or contracted in its Joints, This bends the Thumb.
and these after several ways, and hence have they their names severally
bestowed upon them, some of these being Contractors of the first, others of the
second.

This first arises Fleshy from the upper seat of the Annulary Ligament which
is in the Carpus, near the Thumb, and ascending, does encompass the first and
second Joints of the Thumb, and is inserted into the head of the first Joint
Fleshy.

This you have at Tab. 19. Fig. 1. at P. P. This you have also at A. B. Tab.
21. Fig. 1. This you have also at the second Fig. ejusd. Tab. at B.

Secundus.
THis being smaller then the former, This helps the former in its contraction.
arises Fleshy, partly from the same Ligament, and partly from Os Carpi, next
the Thumb, and running under the other, is implanted into the same Joint from
its Root, even to its middle: this is wholly lodged under the former, and is
covered over with its breadth.

These two do bend the Joint of the Thumb, Use.
and adduceth it to the Hand. Riolanus does not acknowledge this as a Flexor,
but rather does think, that the Muscles arising from the Bones of the Carpus,
and Metacarpus, to be either Adductors or Abductors.

This you have at Tab. 19. at M. M. Fig. 1.

Secundi Internodii Pollicis, Flexor Primus.
THis Muscle arises broad, This bends the second Joint of the Thumb.
thin, and Fleshy, from that Os Metacarpi that receives the Forefinger a
little below his head, and running toward his Thumb grows somewhat triangular,
and is inserted by a Membranous Tendon into the head of the second Joint of the
Thumb on the side next the Forefinger.

This Muscle by most Anatomists is allowed to bend the second Joint of the
Thumb. Use.


This you have at O. O. O. O. Fig. 1. and 2. Tab. 18. C. Shows the same laid
bare at Tab. 21. Fig. 2. This is also shown in situ at Tab. 18. at i. Fig. both.

Secundus.
THis arises with a broad and Fleshy beginning, This work as the former.
from the middle part of Os Metacarpi of the third Finger, running to the
Thumb, and is inserted into the middle of the second Joint thereof, in its
inward part.

This Muscle is said to be next to the former, and thus each do succeed one
another in place and order; and as touching their proper Uses, you will meet
them all summed up together in Quarto Musculorum Digitorum.

This you have at Tab. 18. at O. O. I.

Tertius.
THis follows the second, This does operate as the former.
and is contiguous to it, this arises broad and Fleshy from the Os Metacarpi
of the the third Finger, and is implanted into the same with the former.

This Muscle is also allowed to begin where the other ended: all these together
do make up that Fleshy Mass which our Chiromancers make use of, which you have
more fully in the next; they are contracted according to the Bone moving
toward the other Fingers, and according to their variety of Operations they do
express their diversity of Uses.

This you have at O. 3. in Tab. 18. at both Figures; This you have laid bare at
D. D. Tab. 21. Fig. 2.

Quartus.
THis arises Fleshy from the Os Metacarpi of the Little Finger about the
middle of it, This brings the Thumb to the Little Finger.
and running under the other, is inserted into the same Joint as the former.

All these Muscles are Fleshy, of which, the two contracting the first Joint,
with that abducing the Thumb, do constitute that little Hillock of the Thumb so
called by Chiromancers; but the third of the second Joint makes whatsoever is
Fleshy between the Life-Line, and the aforesaid little Hill; these are
contracted according as the rest of the Joints of the Fingers, Use.
and they working together, do bring the Thumb to the side of the Little
Finger, hereby working the Hand into a hollowness.

This Muscle brings the Thumb up to the great or Forefinger.

This Muscle running under the former is not to be shown by Figure.

The Explanation of the Twentieth Table.
FIG. I.
C C. Secundus Radii Terei. a. Shows its beginning, b. Its Termination. D. D.
Carpi Flexor and Extensor Internus laid bare. G. Externus Carpi Flexor laid
bare. K. Quadratus. e. e. Showing its beginning. f. f. Its Termination. M. M.
Secundi Pollicis Internodii Flexores laid bare. N. N. N. N. Interossei. P.
Minimum digitum Abducens.
FIG. II.
D. D. Primus digitorum Extensor. a. Shows its beginning. b. b. b. Its
threefold division, f. f. f. Shows three Tendons belonging to him. H. Pollicis
Adductor. L. M. Carpum Extendentes.
TAB. XX.


Minimi Digiti Abductor.
THe Fingers besides Flexion and Extension, This abduceth the Little Finger.
and being brought to the sides, are both adduced and abduced; then said to be
adduced when they are drawn toward the Thumb; abduced, when they are retracted
from thence: and the Muscles which do perform these Motions are many, some of
which are accounted common, others proper; the common are commonly reckoned
eight, the which from their site are generally called Interossei.

This Muscle called Minimum Digitum Abducens, is planted in the bottom of the
Hand under the Little Finger, short and strong, arising Fleshy from the fourth
Bone of the Carpus, and so extending it self by the Metacarpe, is inserted into
the outward side of the first Joint of the Little Finger.

This Muscle does abduce the Little Finger from the rest of the Fingers, Use.
and has given it this particular Use, that whilst we do apprehend Sphaerical
Figures, the same time, the Little Finger is abduced from the rest.

This is called also Hypothenar by some Authors.

This you have shown you at Tab. 19. at Q. Fig. 1. At Tab. 20. you have at P.
in this place, At Tab. 21. Fig. 1. you have it in situ, And at Fig. 2. of the
same Table it is laid bare at E. E.

Pollicis Abductor.
THe Thumb when moved laterally, This abduceth it from the Little Finger.
is either abduced from the rest of the Fingers, or adduced; this Abducens
arises Nervous near the Flexor Primi Internodii Pollicis, from the Interior
part of the Bone sustaining the Thumb; and then becoming Fleshy, implants it
self by a Membranous Tendon into the first Joint of the Thumb, and this
abduceth it from the Little Finger.

This is called also Thenar according to the Greek Idiom which names the more
protuberant parts of the Palm (...) a precutiendo. Use.


This you have at Tab. 19. Fig. 2. at Q. and Fig. 1. at R. O. Shows the same
laid bare at Fig. 2. Tab. 22. Ae. Shows the same in place, Tab. 21. Fig. 1.

Pollicis Adductor.
ADducens is that which is seen in the space between the Pollex and the Index,
This brings the Thumb to the Little Finger.
and arises Fleshy from the outward and back part of that Os Metacarpi that
sustains the Fore Finger, and is inserted Fleshy and broad to the inside of the
Thumb to the first Joint, and does adduce the Thumb to the Index.

This is called Antithenar by some Authors. Use.


This you have at Tab. 21. Fig. 2. at H. And at O. Fig. 2. ejusd. Tab. At Tab.
20. you have it at Fig. 2. at H.

Interossei.
THese Interossei are generally accounted eight, These work the Fingers
laterally.
Fleshy and small, and long, arising from the Bones of the Metacarp, according
to whose whole length they do march; when these do attain to the Roots of the
Fingers, they become Tendons, and are laterally inserted from the first to the
second Joints; there are six of these planted in the three Joints of the Bones
of the Metacarp, (viz.) two in every one, so as one is carried to the inward,
the other to the outward Finger, and another thereof belongs to the first Bone
of the Metacarp which sustains the Index, and is incumbent in that part which
respects the Thumb; the last adheres to the last Bone of the Metacarpus in the
outward part of the Hand, or in its back thereof.

These Muscles by how much they do attain the rest, Use.
do also extend the second and third Bone, which is first observed by Galen 1
de usu part. 18. and this is the reason, why the Extensor of the Fingers being
cut, yet their extension is not quite abolished: for these Interossei working
together, do very excellently perform this Extension, and as they are implanted
to the first Bone, if either of one of the Fingers be contracted, they do
extend the first Joint, if either, it either does abduce or adduce it.

This you have at f. G. H. H. H. at Tab. 2. Fig. 2. At Tab. 2. you have the
same at N. N. N. N. Fig. 1.

Extensor Carpi exterior, sive Radiaeus Extcrnus, seu Bicornis.
THis is accounted the first of the outward Muscles of the Carpus, This extends
the Carpus.
it arises from the External accuminated part of the Arm, with a broad and
Nervous beginning, then growing more Fleshy, he runs by the Radius according to
its length, and arriving half way, it marches into a strong Tendon, and is
presently inserted with a double Tendon into the first and second Bone of the
Metacarpus; and hence by reason of its double Insertion and Origination, is by
some called Geminus.

The Use of this Muscle is to extend the Carpus. Use.


This you have at Tab. 22. Fig. 1. at E. B. B. Shows the same, id. Tab. Fig. 2.
a. Shows its beginning, b. d. Its Tendinous Termination, I. K. K. Shows the
same laid bare, Tab. 23. Fig. 2. I. Shows its beginning, K. K. Its two Venters,
b. b. Declares its two Tendons produced thence, L. M. Shows them also at Tab.
20. Fig. 2.

The Explanation of the One and twentieth Table.
FIG. I.
Ae Pollicem Abducens. B. Primum Articulum Pollicis Flectentes. C. C. Abducens
Minimum Digitum. D. Part of the Tendon of the third Flexor of the Thumb. F. F.
F. F. ^^umbricales. f. f. f. f. Shows their Originations. g. g. g. g. Their
Tendons. G. G. G. G. The four Tendons of the Flexores Tertii Internodii.
FIG. II.
B. Primi Pollicis Internodium Flexor. a. Primi Pollicis Internodium Abducens.
C. C. Primus Secundi Pollicis Internodii Flexor laid bare. D. D. Secundus and
Tertius Secundi Pollicis Flexores. E. E. Duo minimi digiti Abductores. F. G. G.
H. H. Interossei. b. b. b. The Tendons thereof.
TAB XXI


Extensor Carpi Interior, sive Cubitaeus Internus.
THis arises from the Internal Apophysis of the Arm, This de^h extend the Hand.
as also from the top of the Cubite, and being dilated through the Cubite
according to his length near the Carpus, is turned into a strong and round
Tendon, by which he is inserted into a Sinus, above the lower Appendix of the
Cubite, and into the upper part of the Os Metacarpi of the Little Fingers.

That worthy Observation of these parts is, Obs.
that all the Flexors are planted in the forepart, and do arise from the inward
protuberance of the Arm, and that the Extensors are seated in the back part,
and do take their Origination from the outward Extuberance: And thus the Hand
by the benefit of the Carpus, joined with the Radius, is made either to bend or
extend it self.

This you have at C. C. Tab. 22. Fig. 2. e. Showing its beginning, f. f. Its
Tendinous end, L. M. Shows both the Extensors also at Tab. 20. Fig. 2. H. The
same laid bare at Tab. 23. Fig. 2. e. Showing its beginning, f. Showing toward
its Tendon.

Digitorum Secundi and Tertii Internodii Tensor Communis.
AS there were some Muscles which did inflect the Fingers, These do extend the
second and third Joints of the Fingers.
and others designed for contracting the Thumb, so also are there diverse
Muscles appointed for extention of the same; This is nominated as the first of
the Extenders of the Fingers, it arises partly Fleshy, and partly Nervous from
the outward Apophysis of the Arm, and becoming more Fleshy, descending between
the two Extensors of the Carpus, and then narrowing does divide it self into
three round Tendons, which are included in a common thin Mucaginous Coat, and
so are carried under the Annular Ligament, passing which, they divide
themselves, and are inserted into the first, middle, and third Fingers, at the
second and third Joints.

These Tendons do reach to the ends of the third Bone, Use.
and do lodge under the Nails, whence follows, that such sharp and girding
pains do happen in these parts when any Injury falls upon them.

This you have at D. D. Tab. 22. Fig. 1.

Minimi Digiti Tensor.
THis arises sharp and Nervous from the same part as the former, This does
assist in extension.
and for near half way is united to it, so as they seem all as one, but coming
to the transverse Ligament, it becomes a round, large, and Nervous Tendon,
which is implanted into the first, second, and third Joints of the Little
Finger.

This you have described with the rest.

The Explanation of the Two and twentieth Table.
FIG. I.
C. C. Digitorum Extensor Primus laid bare. a. a. Shows its Tendon. D. D.
Extensor Digitorum Secundus. E. Carpus Exterior Extendentium. F. Indicem
Abducens. G. Pollicis Extensor Primus. H. Pollicis Extensor Secundus. O.
Supinator Radii Brevis.
FIG. II.
B. B. Carpus Extendentium Exterior. C. C. Carpus Interior Extendentium. D.
Supinator Radii Brevis. H. Pollicis Extensor Primus laid bare. I. Pollicis
Extensor Secundus laid bare. O. Pollicem Adducens.
TAB. XXII


Supinator Radii Longus.
THis is called Longus, This brings the Radius outward.
because it obtains the longest belly of all the Muscles which do creep about
the Cubite.

This arises from the middle of the Os Humeri, and running obliquely over the
Radius, at its bottom it becomes a Membranous Tendon, and is fastened to the
upper part of the Appendix of the said Radius, inclining somewhat inwards.

If this and its Companion be contracted toward their Originations they do
move the Radius forwards* as also the Hand, Use.
the which is tied to the lower part of the Radius by the benefit of the Carpus.

This you have at Tab. 23. Fig. 1. at C. a. Showing its beginning, b. Its
Tendon, D. Shows the same laid bare at Fig. 2. Tab. 23. a. Shows its beginning,
b. b. Its Tendon.

Secundi and Tertii Pollicis Tensor.
THis arises from the same place of the Cubite as the former, This extends the
second and third Joints of the Thumb.
and ascends obliquely over the Radius, and divides its self into two unequal
parts, yet closely adhering, and is carried in a proper Channel at the Appendix
of the Radius: the upper part remaining somewhat Fleshy, yet at last becomes a
round Tendon, and is inserted into the Os Carpi which receives the Thumb; the
other being presently subdivided into two small pieces of Flesh do at length
become Tendons: the first of which is inserted into the first Joint of the
Thumb, the other by a Membrane, fixes its self to the second and third Joints
of the Thumb.

This you have at Tab. 22. at H. and I. Fig. 1. 1. At Fig. 2. ejusd. Tabul.
shows the same.

Indicem Abducens.
THis arises with a Fleshy Origination from the middle of the Cubite, This
moves the (...) laterally.
and so running obliquely to the Appendix of the Radius, it becomes two
Tendons, which by a proper Sinus in the said Appendix are transmitted under the
Annulary Ligament over the Metacarp, and the upper Tendon is carried to the
Root of the Little Finger, the other is implanted into the Root of the second
Finger obliquely, that it may abduce from the Thumb: it is accompanied with two
Extensors of the Fingers in the lower Joints, as the second and third.

This you have at F. Fig. 1. Tab. 22.

Supinator Radii Brevis.
THis being shorter and thinner than Supinator Radii Longus, The helps (...) in
(...) Motion.
arises from the Exterior part of the Ligament of the lower Head of Os
Humeri, and from the process of the Cubite; and running obliquely (outwardly
Membranous, inwardly Fleshy) does recover the middle of the Radius, and is
strongly implanted into it.

These two Muscles if they do work together, Use.
they do contract the Radius forwards and outward, and so do bring the Hand
upwards: but the one draws the part downwards, and the other draws it upwards.

This you have at O. Tab. 22. Fig. 1. D. Shows the same at Tab. ejusd. Fig. 2.
D. Shows the same at Tab. 23. Fig. 2. c. Showing its Insertion into the Radius,
E. Shows it at Fig. 2. ejusd. Tab. c. Showing its Origination, D. Its Tendon.

Primi Internodii Extensores.
THey arise Fleshy, These do extend the first Joints of the Fingers.
round, long, and slender from the Bones of the Metacarp, and so running to the
Roots of the Fingers, are laterally inserted to the first and second Joints of
the Fingers, and are to be raised as the Flexores primi Internodii; When these
Muscles are contracted to their Originations, the second and third Joints of
the Fingers, together with the help of the Interossei are primarily extended,
Use.
and in time of need, may serve to assist in oblique Motions: and wise Nature
placed these inwardly, that if by any mischance the outward Tendons might
receive any mischief, or happen to be wounded, yet by the assistance of these,
the Fingers might be extended.

This you have at D. D. Tab. 20. Fig. 2. a. Shows its beginning, b. b. b. Its
division into three Fleshy parts.

The Explanation of the Three and twentieth Table.
FIG. I.
D Supinator Radii Longus laid bare. a. Showing its beginning. b. b Its Tendon.
E. Supinator Radii Brevis. C. Shows its Origination. D. Its Insertion. H. Shows
the Ligament which distinguishes the External Muscles from the Internal.
FIG. II.
C. Supinator Radii Longus. D. Supinator Radii Brevis, c. Shows its Insertion.
H. Carpum Extendens Interior laid bare. e. Shows its beginning, f. Its Tendon.
I. K. K. Carpum Extendens Exterior laid bare. b. b. Shows its two Tendons.
TAB. XIII


Next come we to the Body it self as it lies.
Serratus Major Posticus.
TO the former Muscles of the Thorax are also added these two, These do dilate
the Thorax.
so called Serrati postici from their Actions, as also from their Indentings:
and Postici being contrary to those Serrati we have already described, and they
are also called either Superiores or Inferiores from their places which they do
possess.

This Muscle being small is inserted in the Back under Rhomboides, between
either Scapula, and upon the first pair of the Muscles of the Head, arising
very thin and Membranous; from the Spinal processes of the three last Vertebres
of the Neck, and the first of the Thorax, and in its oblique progress toward
the Unequal part of the Thorax it becomes Fleshy, and is inserted into the four
upper Ribs, by so many distinct Terminations, and by drawing them upwards does
dilate the Thorax.

This you have at Tab. 24. at C. in situ, d. d. Showing its beginning, e. e. e.
Its end consisting of three sorts of Fibers, D. The same laid bare.

Serratus Posticus Inferior.
THis Muscle is broad, This dilates the lower part of the Thorax.
thin, and Membranous, placed almost in the middle of the Back under
Latissimus, and the Aniscalptor of the Arm, arising from the Spines of the
lower Vertebres of the Back, and the first of the Loins, and marching along
transversly becomes Fleshy, and is inserted into the four lower Ribs by so many
distinct Terminations, the which drawing outward does dilate the lower part of
the Thorax. Use.


E. Shows this at Tab. 24. f. f. Shows its Origination, g. g. g. Its Serrated
Insertion, F. This Muscle laid bare.

Splenius sive Triangularis.
THis arises double: This brings the Head backwards.
First, from the Spines of the fourth, fifth, third, second, and first
Vertebres of the Thorax: Secondly, from the Spines of the five lower Vertebres
of the Neck, and so running broad and long about the third Vertebre of the
Neck, both the Originations do unite: and by oblique Fibers both Muscles do
insert themselves into the middle of the Occiput; You must take off from its
Originations, and preserve as many of its Ansulae as you can between the Spines
by running between, and recovering its Tendon; If both move, Use.
they draw the Head directly backwards, if only one move, it turns the Head
laterally.

This you have at Tab. 24. at A. A. A. A. Shows the same at Tab. 26. This you
have at B. B. also Tab. 25. Fig. 1.

Trigeminus sive Complexus.
THis is the second pair of the Extenders, This extends the Neck.
lying under the former, and is called Trigeminus, because it has allowed it a
threefold Origination, and seems to be conflated out of three Muscles running
into one: it has various beginnings, and obtains both many and Nervous parts;
it arises threefold, first, from the fourth and fifth transverse Processes of
the Vertebres of the Thorax and immediately becoming Fleshy does ascend over
the rest of those Vertebres, until he reaches the lowest Vertebre of the Neck,
where it becomes a round Tendon; Not far from thence again it becomes Fleshy,
and inserts it self into the middle of the Occiput; The second Origination is
by a short round Nerve from the same Process of the last Vertebre of the Neck,
and thence becoming Fleshy is joined to the other before its Insertion; The
third Origination is partly Fleshy, and Nervous from the transverse Processes
of the first and second Vertebres of the Thorax, and running obliquely
outward, after union with the former, is inserted into the Root of the
Mammillary Process, bestowing an Ansula upon every transverse Process of the
Neck. To find this fairly, divide the sides of Spinatus, and Longissimus Dorsi,
and his Origination will more plainly appear.

Riolanus does observe that the Fibers both of this Complexus and Splenius to
be intersected and disposed cross-ways for the better strengthening of either
Muscle. Obs.


B. B. Shows this at Tab. 24. B. B. Shows the same at Tab. 26. C. Shows the
same laid bare at the same Table.

Transversalis.
THis arises from the transverse Processes of the six upper Vertebres of the
Thorax, This extends the Neck.
and so growing thicker, is implanted externally into all the transverse
Processes of the Neck, and hence had it given it its name, and does draw the
Neck backwards: but one of these only working, Use.
they bend it obliquely downwards; between these are carried the Nerves of the
Spinal Marrow, passing out of the Vertebres of the Neck.

This you have at E. E. Fig. 2. Tab. 25.

The Explanation of the Twenty fourth Table.
A A. Triangulare by some called Splenius. b. b. Shows its first and second
sides. B. B. Trigeminus. C. Serratus Posticus Superior. d. d Shows its
Origination. e. e. e. Shows its Termination. D. Shows the same laid bare. E.
Serratus Posticus Inferior. f. f. Shows its Origination. g. g. g. Its
Insertion. F. Shows the same Muscle laid bare. G. Shows Rhomboides laid bare.
h. h. Shows its Fleshy beginning. i. i. Its Fleshy Termination. H. H.
Longissimus Dorsi. I. The same laid bare. K. K. Sacrolumbus. L. M. N. The same
laid bare.
Spinati Colli.
THis pair are long and large, This extends as the former.
possessing the whole Neck, between the Spines: it arises with many beginnings
from the Roots of the Spines of the seven uppermost Vertebres of the Thorax,
and ascending, gets a Tendon out of every transverse process of the Vertebres
of the Neck, and is firmly implanted into the whole lower part of the second
Spine of these Vertebres, and there the right and left do meet, and are so all
the way united, that they are not divisible but by the Spine; Use.
These with the former do also extend the Neck, and then the Head, either
directly, if they work together, or if they work singly or apart, it brings it
obliquely.

F. f. f. These you shall have at Fig. 2. Tab. 25.

Recti Majores.
THese are the fourth pair: These extends the Head.
this Muscle is small, thin, and Fleshy, arising from the points of the Spines
of the second Vertebre of the Neck, and ascending, are inferred into the middle
of the Occiput, and does help the motion of the third pair.

These are generally held to be the fourth pair of the Neck, and are granted to
give assistance to the former in their Extentions.

This you have at E. Fig. 1. Tab. 26. At 25. you have them at C. C. At b. b.
you have them, id. Tab. Fig. 2.

TAB XXIV.


Recti Minores.
THese pair lying under the former, These do help the former.
being of the same substance and shape, accompanied with the like ductus, do
arise from a small protuberance of the first Vertebre of the Neck round, and
ascending, are implanted as the former underneath them; by the benefit of these
Majores and Minores, if the whole pair work together, it extends the Head
directly, Use.
but if one only move, it is moved laterally.

Nature has made so many Muscles for extention of the Head, Obs.
that Man might more aptly fit himself for the Contemplation of Celestial
Bodies, and for this Motion, small Muscles were thought most requisite: and
lest they might tire or grow weary in their long dependence, Providence has
ordered to these, long Muscles, more properly adapted for a longer bowing of
the Head, or extending it to a sharper Angle.

These you have at Fig. 1. Tab. 25. at D. D. Fig. 2. ejusd: Tab. you have them
at b. b.

Obliqui Superiores.
THe sixth pair are planted under the Recti or the forementioned, These do turn
the Head about.
answering their form or shape, being but small, and arising from the outward
side of the Recti at their implantations, and obliquely descending, are
inserted into the process of the first Vertebre of the Neck: if both move, Use.
they nod, and directly backwards: if only one, it inclines the Head laterally.

These are called Obliqui from their site, and one pair are implanted above
another, either of which do lie under the Recti Extendentes, whose substance
and form they exactly do answer. Bauhinus will have these to arise in the
Occiput, and to end in the lateral processes of the first Vertebre of the Neck.

These you have at F. Fig. 1. Tab. 26. At Tab. 25. you have the same at E. E.
Fig. 1. Fig. 2. ejusd. Tabul. you have them at e. e.

Obliqui Inferiores.
THis lower pair arises longish, This helps the former.
Fleshy, and thin from the Spine of the second Vertebre of the Neck, and
obliquely ascending, are inserted with the Obliqui Superiores into the
transverse Process of the first Vertebre.

When these are contracted, Use.
they work it about the Spine circularly, whence it is, that the Head
consisting upon the same, it is also moved circularly therewith to the sides;
but because these two pair are very small, the two former pair of Extensors,
they do help those in their Motion, as also those of the right, as we have
already shown.

These you have at Tab. 25. Fig. 1. at F. And at d. d. you have them at Fig. 2.
ejusd. Tab.

The Explanation of the Twenty fifth Table.
FIG. I.
A Trigeminus. B. Splenius. C. C. Recti Majores. D. D. Recti Minores. E. E.
Obliqui Superiores. F. F. Obliqui Inferiores.
FIG. II.
a. a. Recti Minores. b. b. Recti Majores. c. c. Obliqui Superiores. d. d.
Obliqui Inferiores. E. E. Transversales Col^i. f. f. f. f. Spinati Colli.
TAB. XXV.


Longissimus Dorsi.
THis Muscle has not this name given it, This extents the Thorax.
only because it is planted between the Muscles of the Back, but being as the
longest of the whole Body: for it arises from all the Spines of the Os Sacrum,
and Vertebres of the Loins, as also from the inward part of the Os Il^on, where
it joins it self to the Sacrum, being the first and chief pair, its beginning
being externally strong and Nervous, and somewhat Acute, but within Fleshy, and
so ascending, does fix it self to the transverse Processes of the Loins, and
becomes more Fleshy; then marching on, it narrows it self, and gives a small
Nervous Tendon upon every transverse Process of the Thorax, except the twelfth,
and does insert it self into the said Process of the first Vertebre of the
Thorax, although sometimes it attains the Mammillary Process.

This is allowed to extend both the Thorax, Use.
the Loins, and their Vertebres: upon this borders the whole Sacrolumbus in its
outside, whose beginning with this is one and the same, and is also continued
from the end of the Os Sacrum to the twelfth Vertebre of the Thorax, and so
continued in its whole progress through the Loins.

This you have at H. H. Fig. 1. Tab. 24. I. I. Shows the same laid bare in the
Right side, H. H. I. You have the same at Tab. 26. b. b. The same laid bare.

Sacrolumbus.
THis Muscle lies under Serratus Posticus Inferior, The helps the form^r in
extending the Thorax.
having the same Origination with Longissimus Dorsi, and does adhere to him
externally lateral, according to its length, until it has got the twelfth
Vertebre of the Thorax, where they seem to be two, although scarce divisible by
dissection, and so growing thinner, does insert it self by two small Tendons
into every Rib of the Thorax at their Incurvation.

About these Tendons there does arise a great dispute amongst Anatomists; Use.
for some with Laurentius do think this Muscle to send forth a double Tendon,
one upwards to the lower parts of the Ribs, the other downwards to their upper
part; and these Tendons thus diversely mediating (which are manifestly seen
about the Ribs) are seen to attol the Ribs upwards in inspiration, and to draw
them downwards in expiration; The truth is, these contrary actions are not to
be reasonably conjectured to be acted by one certain Muscle: and that it may
very well be allowed, that these descending Tendons ought to proceed from some
other peculiar Muscle, here upon a diligent enquiry, we find them to proceed
from a certain Muscle substrated to the Sacrolumbus, and to this it is so
closely annexed, that it is scarce perfectly to be separated from it.

This you have at K. K. Tab. 24. L. M. N. The same laid bare.

Cervicalis Descendens.
THis takes its Origination from the third, This does extend the Thorax.
fourth, fifth, sixth, and seventh Vertebres of the Neck, and hence by
Diemerbroeck is Christened by the name of Cervicalis Descendens, thence arising
Fleshy, sending forth Tendons, somewhat downwards into the upper part of all
the Ribs, directly opposite to those Tendons of the Sacrolumbus, and these
Tendons thus intersecting themselves, do not work together but by turns; As the
Tendons of the Descendentis Cervicalis, do draw the Ribs upwards in ^spiration,
Exspiration.
so the Sacrolumbal Tendons in expiration do draw the Ribs downwards, so as
they may be moved to, and contracted by them.

As to this Muscle the Author will further satisfy you, and therefore I
recommend you to Diemerbroeck.

Sacer.
FOr the various Motions of the Back and Loins, This extends the Loins.
as forwards, backwards, and laterally, to every of the Vertebres are implanted
Tendons of Muscles; Our Accurate Dissectors of late have found four pair of
Muscles to be planted in the Back and Loins, by whose help, the strong Motions
of these parts are performed: some appointed for Contraction, others for
Extension.

This pair are so called from their Origination, because they do arise from the
Exterior part of the Os Sacrum, where they are joined to the Spine, and so
arising Fleshy, have three several Tendinous Insertions: the first into the
upper part of the transverse Processes of the Vertebres of the Loins, the other
into the Root of the same Processes, and the third into the Spine of the same
Vertebre; To find this out, you must raise Latissimus Dorsi, and Sacrolumbus
from their Membranous Originations; at Os Ileon, Os Sacrum, and from the Lumbal
Spines, and immediately under this will this appear in situ, these helping
forwards the action of Longissimus Dorsi.

This you have at L. M. N. at Tab. 26. L. M. Showing its beginning, N. Its
Termination.

Semispinatus.
THis is the fourth pair, This extends the Thorax.
arising with a Nervous beginning from all the Spines of the Os Sacrum, and
Loins, and becoming Fleshy, does bestow a Nervous Tendon upon every Spine of
the Vertebres ascending, and terminates acutely in the Spine of the first
Vertebre of the Thorax, extending it.

This by Spigelius is accounted the second pair of the Muscles extending the
Thorax. Use.


This is shown at Tab. 26. at K. K. c. c. Showing its beginning, d. Its
Termination.

Quadratus.
THis Muscle is called Quadratus from the resemblance it has with a square:
This Muscle extends the Loins.
it arises from the back part, and upper Cavity of Os Ileon, as also from the
upper part of Os Sacrum, broad, thick, and Fleshy, and so ascending over the
Vertebres of the Loins, does adhere internally to their transverse Processes,
and inserts it self being grown narrower, to the inner part of the twelfth Rib
Fleshy, and does bend the Vertebres of the Loins forwards: Use.
and one only working, it bends it obliquely forwards to the sides.

The Loins are concerned with three Motions, Use.
the which are performed by two pair of Muscles, for they are bent forwards,
extended backwards, and brought laterally, they are contracted by these two,
and extended by Sacer.

This you have shown at R. R. Tab. 26.

Psoas vel Lumbaris.
SInce Ambulation is the proper office and work of the Foot, and this being
very consistent in Firmation and Motion, (for when one Foot remains on the
Ground, the other is lifted up, and so inoved forward for the completing of
Ambulation) now for the performance of either of these Functions, its very
requisite these parts should be furnished with such Muscles as may make
forwards toward these Extensions and Contractions, as also to the promoting of
the various Motions of the Thigh, Leg, and Foot, these being according to our
pleasures either extended, contracted, adduced, abduced, and wrought or brought
about: amongst the Contractors we meet with this, as the first called Lumbaris
or (...).

It arises Livid and Fleshy from the sides of the Bodies of the two last
Vertebres of the Thorax, This bends the Thigh.
and the three uppermost of the Loins, and from their transverse Processes
descending somewhat round from the inner part of the Os Ileon; to the Os Pubis,
where it becomes a strong and round Tendon, and running through its Sinues, Use.
is implanted into the upper part of the lesser Rotator: Its Use is to draw the
Thigh upwards, and to bend it inwards; and because the Kidneys do lie upon this
Muscle, as Laurentius does observe, Obs.
over which is spread a notable Nerve, hence it happens, that such as are
troubled with the Stone, do find a sleepiness in that side of the Thigh whereon
the Stone is lodged, by its compression.

D. D. Shows this at Tab. 27. b. b. Shows its Origination, E. Its Tendon, F. F.
The Nerves which pass hence into the Thigh, G. G. G. The same laid bare.

The Explanation of the Twenty sixth Table.
A Splenius. a. a. a. Shows its Ansulae. B. B. Trigeminus. C. The same laid
bare. D. D. Transversales Colli. E. Rectus Major. F. Obliquus Superior. G.
Obliquus Inferior. H. H. I. Dorsi Longissimus laid bare. b. b. Shows the same
wholly laid bare. a. a. a. Shows its inward Face and Ansulae. K. K.
Semispinatus. L. M. N. Sacer. L. L. Shows its Origination. R. R. Lumbales
Quadrati.
TAB. XXVI


Psoas Parvus.
BEsides the former, in some Bodies is seen this Psoas Parvus, This does help
the former.
so called by Bauhine, it arises Fleshy the length of a little Finger, and is
dilated with a slender and plain Tendon above the Psoas, and ends with the
Psoas and Ileon, and embraces them very firmly; Riolan. affirms he never could
find this in Women; Bartholine writes, that he saw this Muscle arising in a
strong and Fleshy Man at the Hague, Obs.
whose beginning was Fleshy, and did equal the breadth of three transverse
Fingers; it was inserted Fleshy in the upper Posterior Margent of the Os Ilii,
Its Use.
at the Origination of the Iliacus Internus: he supposed its Use to be as a
Pillow to the former, and that whereas the Os Ileon of it self was immovable,
or that it might sustain the Os Ileon erected, lest by the standing too much
thereon, it might cause a weariness and prove burthensom.

Our Master of Anatomy, Mr. William Molins in the Year of his being Master does
mention this Muscle, in the Body then Dissected by him.

This Muscle lies under the former, but appears not very frequently.

The Explanation of the Twenty seventh Table.
A A. Shows Quadrati. D. D. Psoas or Lumbalis. b. b. Shows its Origination. E.
Its Tendon. G. G. G. The same laid somewhat bare. I. I. I. Iliacus Internus. L.
L. M. M. M. The same laid bare. O. Lividus. P. The same laid bare. R. Rectus.
T. Fascialis.
TAB: XXVII


We arrive now to the taking the Thigh off from the Trunck of the Body, by
dividing Os Ileon from the Os Sacrum, after which, will this appear as the most
proper Order of Dissecting these following Muscles.
Iliacus Internus.
THis is the second Muscle of the Thigh, This contracts the Thigh directly.
proceeding from the whole Spine of the Os Ileon semicircular broad, and
internally Fleshy, then narrowing, and growing thicker becomes Tendinous, and
passing through the same Sinus with the Psoas, is implanted into the same
Rotator a little below it. This is allowed to bend the Thigh directly, that is,
when it is raised toward the Body, Use.
so as that it inclines to no one side, and when we make a right Angle with the
Spine, then we properly say the Thigh is contracted, when sitting we sit with
contracted Thighs.

This you have at 27. Tab. at I. I. I. L. L. The same laid bare id. Tab. M. M.
M. Shows its Fleshy beginning.

Glutaeus Major.
THis is the first of the Extenders, This extends the Thigh obliquely backwards.
the which with its other two does make up the Fleshy Mass of the Buttocks, the
Skin being laid bare, this shows its broad beginning, enated from diverse
Bones: it arises from the whole Spine of the Os Ileon externally, then from
the lower part of the Os Sacrum laterally; And thirdly, from the Os Coxendix
large, and Fleshy, running obliquely down over the Juncture of the Os Coxendix;
and growing narrower is implanted by a broad and strong Tendon into the first
Impression of the great Rotator, and part of it also the Linea aspera.

Then we properly do affirm the Thigh to be extended, Use.
when it is brought outward, ( viz.) as when we stand as it were with
divaricate Thighs, or Thighs that are placed at a distance.

This you have at Tab. 28. at C. C. C. a. a. a. Shows its upper part, b. b. Its
other part, H. I. K. The same laid bare. H. H. H. The thick and Fleshy
beginning of it, 1. 1. 1. Its thick Belly, K. K. Its Tendinous Substance.

Glutaeus Medius.
THis Muscle arises under the former, This extends it obliquely forwards.
much like it both in site and magnitude, from the forepart of the Spine, as
also from the back of Os Ileon, Fleshy, broad, and semicircular, and obliquely
descending, narrows it self, and does enwrap the Juncture as the former, and is
implanted by a broad, strong and Membranous Tendon transversly into the fourth
impression of the great Rotator; Use.
This is said to extend the Thigh and draw it upwards, and laterally forwards,
as some imagine, but I humbly conceive it assisteth the Glutaeus Major, and
depresseth the Os Femoris: and after it is lifted up by the Psoas and Iliacus
Internus, this Muscle pulls it down again, and is as an Auxiliary Muscle to
the Glutaeus Major, and Minor, in the extension of the Thigh.

L. L. Shows this Muscle in situ at Tab. 28. e. e. Shows its Fleshy beginning,
B. B. Shows the same in situ, Tab. 29. D. e. f. Shows it laid bare, D. D. D.
Shows its Fleshy beginning, E. Its Fleshy Belly, F. Its Tendon.

Glutaeus Minor.
THis lies wholly under the second, (...)
arising livid, broad, Semicircular and Fleshy, about the lower part of the
back of the Ileon near the Acetabulum of the Coxendix, and so runs obliquely
forwards Fibrous, according to the Ligament that binds in the head of the Os
Femoris, and is implanted by a broad and strong Tendon into the third
impression of the great Rotator.

These three do extend the Thigh, and do draw it backwards, and so extend it.
Use.
I conceive it most probable, they all unite in pulling the Os Femeris downward
and backward, after it is elevated by the Flexors, the Psoas, and Iliacus
Internus.

This is shown at Tab. 29. at G. G. a. a. Shows its beginning, This you have
laid bare at Tab. 29. at a. a. a. b. b.

Iliacus Externus vel Pyriformis.
THis Circumagent Motion is performed when the Thigh is Circumverted; This
brings the Thigh about upwards.
which thus happens: when standing with the Right Foot firm upon the Ground, we
move the Thigh obliquely; this Motion is twofold, for its either brought
outward or inwards: outward when the Knee is moved outward, and the Heel
inwards: inwards when the Knee is brought to the Ham, and the Heel forwards;
Amongst these Circumagent Muscles this is reckoned the first

It arises thick and Fleshy from the three lower Vertebres of the Os Sacrum,
and running transversly becomes a round Tendon, and is inserted into the fourth
impression of the great Rotator, This draws the Thigh upwards, Use.
outward, and backwards, this is allowed the thickest Muscle in Human Body,
and is stuffed out with wonderful variety of Fibers.

This is shown at Tab. 28. at M. f. Shows its beginning, g. Its Tendon, H. Tab.
29. Shows the same in situ, K. Shows the same laid bare, L. Shows its
beginning, M. Its long and slender Tendon, This you have laid bare at Tab. 32.
at L.

The Explanation of the Twenty eighth Table.
C. C. C. Glutaeus Magnus. a. a. a. Shows the Circumference of its Origination.
H. I. K. The same laid bare. H. H. H. Shows its first and Fleshy Origination.
I. I. I. Its Venture. K. K. Its Tendinous Substance. L. L. Glutaeus Medius. C.
C. Shows its Fleshy beginning. M. Pyriformis. Q. Q. Marsupialis.
TAB. XXVIII.


Obturator Internus sive Marsupialis.
THis arises Fleshy and large from the Membrane internally that covers the
great perforation of the Os Pubis, This brings the Thigh round about outward.
and covering the whole inward face of that Bone and Coxendix, grows narrower,
and sends forth three or four Tendons which are carried through the Sinus of
the Coxendix, which is arched over, according to its length, with a strong
Ligament, backwards to the outward part of the Coxendix, where they are
received into a Fleshy Purse, and so making one Tendon, are implanted into the
Sinus of the great Rotator, and does make the outward Rotation; This Muscle
must be raised inwards, and got through the Sinus under the Ligament, then its
Purse will plainly appear.

This is shown at Tab. 28. at Q. Q. O. Shows the same at Tab. 2^. This you have
also, Tab. 29. at D. E. F. G. G. Shows the same laid bare, H. Shows its Fleshy
Purse.

Quadrigeminus.
THis arises Fleshy from the rising of the Os Ileon, This brings the Thigh
about backwards.
and from the Appendix of the Coxendix, and runs broad, short and Fleshy
toward the hinder part of the great Rotator, and is inserted into that space
of the Bone which is between the two Rotators; the head of ^ividus and part of
Triceps must be thrown off, before the Origination of this will be cleared, or
Obturator Externus found out.

This Muscle by Vesalius is divided into two M^scles.

These Circumagent Muscles do then bring the Thigh about, Obs.
when standing directly, and firm on the Earth we move the Thigh obliquely, and
this Motion appears double, as outward or inwards; that properly granted
inwards, when the Knee is brought toward the Poples, and the Heel carried
outward: that outward, when the Knee is carried outward, and the Heel
brought inwards.

This you have at Tab. 30. at I.

Obturator Externus.
THis has its name from its Origination, This brings the Thigh about inwards.
it arising from the outward part of the Cavity, and is subjacent to the
Pectinaeus, it arising large and Fleshy from the Membrane that enwrappeth the
perforation of the Os Pubis externally, and so running transversly to the back
part of the Thigh, becomes narrower, and is inserted by a strong Tendon into
the the Sinus of the great Rotator, Use.
and does direct the inward Rotation. You must carefully bring your Knife
inwardly about the edge of the perforation of the Os Pubis, and it will both
arise and appear the better.

This (together with the Internus) fill up the Cavity which lies betwixt the Os
Pubis and Ischium, whence it has its denomination.

This you have at Tab. 32. at H. I. K. Shows the same laid bare, C. C. Shows
the same at Tab. 30 S. Shows the same at Tab. 31. This you have also at Tab.
32. at H. in its place, I. K. Shows it laid bare.

The Explanation of the Twenty ninth Table.
A. A. A. A. Lividus. C. C. Obturator Externus. D. D. E. Obturator Internus. D.
D. Shows its broad and Semicircular head E. E. The Tendons thereof. F. F. The
Marsupium or Purse it self. G. G. Shows the same laid bare H. Shows its Fleshy
Purse. I. Q^adrigeminus. K. Seminervosus. L. Semimembranosus. M. Biceps. O.
Seminervosus laid bare. P. Shows its Fleshy Origination. Q. Its Nervous
Termination. R. Semimembranosus laid bare. S. Shows its Nervous head. V. Biceps
laid bare. X. Shows its Origination. Y. Shows its Tendinous Insertion. a. a. a.
b. b. Glutaeus Minimus laid bare. c. Pyriformis laid bare. m. m. m. Shows
Triceps in situ.
TAB. XXVIIII


Membranosus.
THe Leg has three motions allowed it, This extends the Leg directly.
it being either extended, contracted, or brought somewhat obliquely outward,
all the Extenders are implanted in the fore side of the Thigh, and these
working together, do extend it aright; This Muscle by Anatomists is reckoned as
the first of the Extenders.

It arises sharp, externally Nervous, inwardly Fleshy, from the Spine of the
Os Ileon, on that side next Sartorius, and then becomes broad, and Nervously
Membranous, enwrapping all the Muscles of the Thigh within its self; then
covering the Patella and two Focills in their outward part, is there implanted,
and does extend the Leg directly; Use.
and as some Authors will have, does somewhat abduce it outward.

As much as possibly may be, is to be kept of this Membrane in Dissection, and
the division thereof to be made in the back part.

This yon have at Tab. 30. at M. M. O. O. O. M. M. Showing its beginning, O. O.
Declaring its broad Tendon, Q R. S. Shows the same laid bare.

Sartorius sive Fascialis.
THis Muscle has its name from its daily use which is made of it by Tailors,
This bends the Leg.
and Shoomakers, who when they be at their work, do generally sit Cross-leg'd,
some call this Fascialis from Fascia, a Ligature or Swaddling Band.

It arises sharp, Fleshy and Nervous from the fore part of the Spine of the Os
Ileon, and then becoming Fleshy and broad, runs obliquely internally over
the Muscles of the Thigh, becoming Tendinous and broad at the inward Appendix
of the Os Femoris; and is implanted by a broad Tendon, as some Authors affirm,
and round, as others into the Tibia.

Riolan. Use.
writes, that this does not bend the Leg, but rather does bring it inwards, and
so he supposes does more aptly extend it; This is one of the longest Muscles
in Human Body.

This you have at Tab. 30. at A. A. B. Shows its Origination, C. Its
Termination, D. D. Shows the same laid bare, T. Shows it also at Tab. 27.

Gracilis.
THis is generally accounted the second of the Contractors: This does assist
the former.
it arises large and Nervous from the middle of the Os Pubis, according to the
length of its Cartilage, and so descending inwards toward the Ham Fleshy, does
there become a round Tendon, at the inner head of the Os Femoris, inserting it
self into the Tibia near the former.

The first and second of the Flexors are planted in the fore part of the Thigh,
Obs.
the one outward, the other inwards, the rest in the back part thereof; if
they be all contracted together, they do bend the Leg directly, but the first
four only working, they do bring it somewhat inwards, whilst the other
endeavors to carry it outward, and by this motion, the end of the Foot in
which the Toes are implanted is somewhat brought outward.

This is shown at F. F. in its place, Tab. 30. G. Shows its Commissure, H.
Shows its Insertion, I. K. L. Shows the same laid bare, I. Showing its Nervous
beginning, K. Its round Belly, and L. Its round Tendon.

The Explanation of the Thirtieth Table.
A A. Fascialis or Sartorius. D. D. Shows the same laid bare. F. F. Gracilis.
I. K. L. The same laid bare. M. M. O. O. Membranosus. Q. R. S. The same Muscle
laid bare. V. V. Triceps in either side. X. Obturator Externus. Y. Lividus. Z.
The same laid bare. a. a. Rectus in situ. b. b. Vastus Internus in situ.
TAB. XXX


Vastus Externus.
THis from its great Mass of Flesh, This also does extend the Leg.
has its name given it, and is the third of the Extenders, arising broad and
Nervous from the Root of the great Rotator, cleaving to the upper and outward
part of the Os Femoris, and so descending Fleshy to the Patella, it becomes a
Membranous broad Tendon, and mixing with the Tendon of the Rectus makes the
same covering for the Patella, carrying the same insertion with it.

This you have at G. G. G. G. in its place at Tab. 31. H. Shows the beginning
of this Muscle, I. Its Tendinous Membrane.

Vastus Internus.
THis is the fourth extending Muscle, This works as the former.
arising Nervous from part of the lesser Rotator, and from the neck of the Os
Femoris, and growing Fleshy, adheres to the Anterior, and Interior part of the
said Os Femoris, and recovering the Patella, mixeth it self with the two
former, covering the Patella, and takes its insertion in the same place as
they do.

This you have at L. L. L. Tab. 31. This you have also in its place at Tab. 30.
at v. v.

Biceps.
THis is the fifth inflecting Muscle, This does contract the Leg.
arising sharp and Nervous from the Appendix of the Coxendix, and growing
Fleshy, runs down externally, and being got half way, it attenuates and grows
Nervous, as tending to a Tendon, where it joins it self with its other head
which arises from the Os Femoris, where Glutaeus Major has its insertion, and
so growing thicker, outwardly Nervous, becomes a strong Tendon, and runs
through the outward Sinus of the outward part of the head of the Os Femoris,
and fixes it self firmly to the outward side of the upper Appendix of the
Fibula; Sometimes this Muscle is distinguished with a double beginning and
ending, Obs.
so observed by Vesalius, and therefore by him this is called Duplex.

This Muscle does bend the Leg and pull it backward. Use.


This you have laid bare at Tab. 32. at O. O. At Tab. 29. you have it at M. V.
Shows this laid bare at Tab. 29. X. Shows its beginning, Y. Shows its Tendinous
Substance, Z. Its Fleshy Mole or Substance.

Semimembranosus.
THis is accounted the fourth of the Inflectors, This bends the Leg.
arising where the former did, with a small Membranous beginning, and running
downwards by the back part of the Thigh, does continue Membranous half its
progress; and then becoming Fleshy and thick, inserteth it self by a round
Tendon into the Ham, in the inner side of the ^ibia; The first of the four
Inflectors being tied into the inner side of the Tibia, and the fifth into the
Fibula; the first makes the inward hardness in the Ham, the other, the outward.

This you have at Tab. 29. at L. You have the same laid bare at R. S. Shows its
Nervous Head, T. Its broad Tendon.

The Explanation of the One and thirtieth Table.
A A. Rectus. D. E. F. The same laid bare. D. Showing its sharp and Nervous
Origination. E. Its Fleshy Venture. F. Its strong Tendon. G. G. G. G. Vastus
Externus. H. Its beginning. I. Its Membranous Tendon. L. L. L. Vastus Internus.
Q. Q. Q. Q. Triceps in either side. S. S. Obturator Externus.
TAB XXXI


Seminervosus.
THis has its name from its Substance, This works as the former.
it being partly Nervous, and partly Fleshy, and is the third pair: it arises
small and Nervous from the same Appendix as the former, and so continuing half
way in its descent, it then becomes Fleshy, running by the back part of Os
Femoris, to the Ham, near which it becomes a round Tendon, and reflecting it
self, is inserted into the forepart of the Tibia.

This Tendon has allowed it this worth observation, Obs.
that it reaches even to the middle of the length of the Tibia, with the rest
of the Tendons implanted to the Tibia, the which do scarce descend so far.

This you have at Tab. 29. at K. O. Shows the same laid bare, P. P. Shows its
Nervous beginning, Q. Its Nervous Tendon.

Triceps.
THis is the largest of all the Muscles of the Thigh, This brings the Thigh
inwards.
yea, I may say, of the whole Body; its apparently seen to have three heads,
all which do conclude in one end: It a^iseth with three heads, the first Fleshy
and Nervous from the Appendix of the Coxendix, the which swelling, does dilate
it self into the hinder part of the Thigh, and then growing small, does end in
a round Tendon, at the inner head of the said Os Femoris; The second arises
Fleshy from the Coxendix at its conjunction with the Pubis, and terminates at
the Root of the lesser Rotator, and in the upper part of the Aspera Linea; The
third arises Fleshy from the lower part of the Os Coxendix, and is implanted
into the Linea Aspera of the said Os Femoris; To which some add a fourth, (
viz. the following called Pectineus) which seems to be a part of this.

This is a Riding Muscle, Use.
drawing the Thigh inward, and fixes the Rider to his Seat, keeping him firm
in the Saddle, and may be truly styled Musculus Pudicitiae, as assisted by the
Lividus in keeping the Legs close.

This you have at Tab. 31. at Q. Q. Q. Q. A. A. A. A. Shows it in Tab. 32. B.
Shows its beginning, D. D. D. Shows the same laid bare, E. Shows its beginning,
F. G. The division of its Tendon.

Lividus sive Pectinalis.
THis is allowed the fourth of the Inflectors, This bends the Thigh obliquely
inward.
it arises broad and Fleshy from the forepart of the Os Pubis, near its
Cartilage, obliquely descending, and is inserted by a large and short Tendon to
the inside of the Os Femoris, near its middle, so as it strongly brings the
Thigh upwards and inwards.

By Bartholine this Muscle is reckoned amongst the Adducent Muscles.

This Muscle is assistent to the Triceps, Use.
being an Adductor of the Thigh, which it pulls inward, being very useful in
Riding, keeps a Horseman close to the Saddle; and (as was before said) seems
to be a part of the Triceps, though it does not so closely adhere to it, but it
may be separated without difficulty.

This you have at Tab. 29. at A. A. A. A. B. Shows the forepart of the Os
Pubis, from whence this Muscle takes its Origination, O. Shows the same at Tab.
27.

The Explanation of the Two and thirtieth Table.
A A. A. A. Triceps. B. Shows its Origination. D. D. D. The same Muscle laid
bare. H. Obturator Externus. I. The same laid bare. K. Shows its Tendon. L.
Pyriformis laid bare. O. O. Biceps laid bare.
TAB XXXII


Gasterocnemius sive Gemellus Externus.
THe Foot has allowed its threefold motion, ( viz.) This ex^ends the Foot.
Extension, Contraction, and lateral Motion; this is accounted the first of the
Extenders, which makes the Calf of the Leg: it arises broad and Fleshy from
the inner head of Os Femoris, as also from the outward head of the same Bones;
so descending according to their Originations, they are united about midway,
and are converted into one entire, broad, strong, and Nervous Tendon, and
becomes one with the Tendon of Gasterocnemius Internus, and does insert it
self into the back part of Os Calcis, so that indeed they are but one Muscle
with a double Origination.

Vesalius does assert that the Sesamoidal Bones are Tributary to the two heads
of this Muscle, not far from their Origination.

This you have at Tab. 33. at D. E. F. G. H. Fig. 1. D. Shows its first
Origination, E. Another of its beginnings, F. Its Coherence, G. G. Shows its
large Fleshy Belly, H. Shows its large Tendon, at Fig. 2. ejusd. Tab. O. P. Q.
S. Shows the same laid bare.

Plantaris.
AS that Muscle Is called Palmaris, This moves the Skin of the Sole of the Foot.
which with its long and round Tendon does march through the whole Interior
part of the Cubite, and from thence to the Annular Ligament of the Carpus, and
is afterwards-expanded into a broad Tendon covering the whole Palm of the Hand;
so also is this Plantaris expanded through the whole hinder part of the Tibia,
with a long and round Tendon, and at length marches into the Sole of the Foot.

It arises Fleshy, round, and slender under the former, from the outward lower
head of Os Femoris, and after some Dilatation, it becomes a slender round
Tendon, and running obliquely from the outward between both the Gasterocnemii
inwards, and being joined with their Tendons near the Heel laterally, running
forwards, does insert it self (after Dilatation over the Sole of the Foot) into
each of the five Toes at the first Joint.

The Dilatation of this Muscle over the Sole of the Foot, Note.
as also its Insertions, will not be found, unless you allow it to insert it
self into Flexor Primi Internodii at its Origination in the Cavity of the Os
Calcis.

This Muscle is of as great service to the Foot as Palmaris is to the Hand; Use.
and serves to the Extention, or Expansive Motion of the Foot.

This you have at Tab. 3. Fig. 2. at I. K. K. I. Showing its head, K. K. K. Its
round Tendon.

Gasterocnemius Internus, seu Soleus.
THis arises livid, This extends the Ancle.
strong, and Nervous from the Posteriour Appendix of the Fibula, and growing
larger, adheres both to that and Tibia, and descending at half way, it becomes
narrower and Tendinous, making one with the Gasterocnemius Externus both in
Origination and Insertion; These three Muscles are united about their ends, and
do frame one very strong Tendon, implanted in the back part of the Heel, the
which by reason of its greatness, and singular strength above the Tendons of
other Muscles, obtains the name of Chorda Magna, the which being Bruised or
Wounded, (as Hipp. writes) proves Mortal or very dangerous: its by this Tendon
at this very day that our Butchers do daily hang up their Oxen by; Obs.
And that which is worthy observation as touching this, is, that if any
Inflammation does arise about this part, it brings the whole Body miserably
into consent therewith.

This you have at L. M. N. Fig. 2. Tab. 33. L. Showing its strong and Nervous
head, M. Its large venture, N. Declaring its Tendon.

Suppopliteus.
THis arises broad and Nervous from the outward head of Os Femoris, This moves
the Leg obliquely.
and growing Fleshy, runs obliquely to the back and inward part of the upper
Appendix of the Tibia, and is there implanted.

Riolan says, Use.
he sometimes has found this double; This moves the Leg obliquely outward,
and turns the Foot somewhat inward toward the other.

This you have at G. H. Tab. 33. Fig. 3. G Showing its beginning, H. Its
Termination.

Flexor Digitorum Tertii Internodii, seu Perforans, sive Sublimis.
THis arises Fleshy, This bends the Toes in the third Joints.
and long from the back part of the Tibia, running, and adhering according to
its length, to the middle of it, and there becoming a Tendon, is carried to the
Internal Matleolus, where it becomes round, and is carried under the Ligament
that proceeds from the lower Appendix of the Tibia, to the Os Calcis, and then
divides it self into four Tendons, which terminates at the third Joint of the
four lesser Toes.

The Toes of the Feet are both contracted, Obs.
extended, and moved laterally; And for these three Motions, Nature has
designed three kind of Muscles, and these are called either Flexors, Extensors,
or Oblique Movers; four of these are implanted in the Leg; as this first, the
Flexor of the Great Toe, and the Extensor of the third Joint of the Toe, and
the Extensor Pollicis; the other in the Foot.

L. L. L. L. Shows the four Tendons of this Muscle at Tab. 37. Fig. 2. B. Shows
the Tendon of this Muscle, Tab. 37. Fig. 2. D. D. D. Shows its Flesby part, E.
E. E. E. Shows its four Tendons, F. F. F. F. Shows these also and their
Originations at Tab. 37. Fig. 2. H. Shows this also at Tab. 34. Fig. 1. I.
Shows its middle part, K. Its Exquite Tendon, D. D. E. Shows the same, Fig. 2.
id. Tab.

The Explanation of the Three and thirtieth Table.
FIG. I.
D E. F. G. H. I. Gasterocnemius Externus. D. Shows is first Origination. E. A
second of its Originations. F. Its Coition or Connection. G. G. Its large Fleshy
Belly. K. Its Tendinous Insertion.
FIG. II.
G. H. Suppopliteus. G. Shows its Origination. H. Its Termination. I. K. K.
Plantaris. I. Shows its head. K. K. K. Its Tendon. M. N. N. Gasterocnemus
Internus. O. P. Q. Shows Gasterocnemius Externus laid bare.
TAB XXXIII


Tibiaeus Posticus seu Nauticus.
IT arises Fleshy from the Ligament which joins the Tibia and Fibula, This
brings the Foot inwards.
according to their length, and from both Bones backwards, becomes a round
Tendon, near the Malleolus Internus, where being bound by a strong Ligament, it
overspreads it, and recovering the Sole of the Foot, is inserted into that
lower part of that Os Tarsi, which joins it self with Os Cubiforme; Sometimes
there is seen, that it has produced two Tendons, the one implanted into the Os
Naviculare, the other into the Innominated Bone.

This Muscle is called Nauticus from the use which Seamen make of it, Vs^.
when they do run up the Shrouds.

This you have at Tab. 35. Fig. 1. at E. E. e. Showing its Fleshy beginning, f.
Declaring its Tendon, D. D. D. Shows the same at Tab. 36. Fig. 2. E. Showing
its Tendon.

Flexor Pollicis.
THe Great Toe has allowed it variety of Muscles, This bends the Great Toe.
the first of which is this arising sharp and Fleshy about the middle of the
back part of the Fibula, descending larger, nearer the inward Malleolus,
running obliquely under it, and is inserted into the last Bone of the Great
Toe; Under this Ligament lodges the Os Sesamoides.

This Tendon is seen sometimes to conjoyn with the Tendon bending the third
Joint, Obs.
running to the second Toe, and before it reaches the second Joint of the
Great Toe, requires the largest Os Sesamoides, which is in the other Joints of
the Toes.

This you have at Tab. 37. Fig. 2. c. Showing its Tendon, D. D. D. Shows its
Fleshy part, Tab. 36. Fig. 1. at N. you have it laid bare, M. Shows this at
Tab. 34. Fig. 1. N. Shows its long and narrow Tendon, I. I. Shows the same
exactly at Tab ejusd. Fig. 2. K. K. Shows its Tendon, N. Shows this laid bare
at Tab. 36. Fig. 2.

Flexor Secundi Internodii, Perforatus seu Profundus.
THis is a second of the Inflectors of the Toes, This bends the Toes in the
second Joint.
by some called Flexor Brevis, it arises Fleshy and Membranous from the
extremity of Os Calcis, and marching half way the Sole of the Foot, divides it
self into four round Tendons, which at their Insertions into the second Joints
of the lesser Toes are perforated for the transmission of the Tertii Internodii
Flexor.

This you have at Tab. 37. Fig. 1. at C. C. C. D. D. D. Showing its four
Tendons; And at Fig. 2. ejusd. Tab. you have the same laid bare at N. O.
Showing its Origination, P. P. P. P. Declaring its Tendons, Q. Shows the same
laid bare at Tab. 34. Fig. 2. N. Shows the same laid bare at Tab. 37. Fig. 2.
O. Shows its Origination, P. P. P. P. Shows the four Tendons of this Muscle.

The Explanation of the Thirty fourth Table.
FIG. I.
F G. Suppopliteus laid bare. F. Shows its Fleshy beginning. G. Its Fleshy
Termination. H. Flexor Tertii Internodii Digitorum. I. Shows its length. K. Its
exquisite Tendon. L. L. Peroneus Primus. M. Flexor Pollicis. O. Pollicem
Adducens in situ. P. P. Gasterocnemius Internus laid bare. Q. Plantaris laid
bare. R. R. R. Shows its long and round Tendon.
FIG. II.
D. E. E. Flexor Tertii Internodii Digitorum. D. Shows its sharp Origination.
E. E. E. Its slender and Fleshy Venture. F. Its Tendon. I. I. Pollicis Flexor.
K. K. Shows its Tendon. L. L. Peroneus Primus in situ. M. Its Tendon. P.
Minimum Digitum Abducens. Q. Pollicem Adducens laid bare.
TAB. XXXIV


Flexores Primi Internodii Digitorum, seu Lumbricales.
THese are called Lumbricales both from their Use, These be^ds the first Joints
of the lesser T^es.
Figure and Origination, much resembling Earthworms being put into the Hand.

They do arise round and and Fleshy from the Tendons of the Perforans and
Perforatus, and are inserted by small Tendons laterally to the first Joints of
the Toes; if you examine this well, you will find them to receive an addition
of Carnous Fibers from a Musculous Flesh seated or implanted in the inward
Cavity of the Os Calcis, and proceeding Fleshy half the Sole, there does make
these; and from it sometimes does proceed a Tendon to the first of the Toes,
and makes Secundi Internodii; and you shall also find that the Tendon of the
Tertii Internodii Flexor does run through the Body of this, and is not
perfectly divisible.

These you have at Tab. 37. Fig. 1. at K. K. K. K. F. F. F. F. Shows the same
at Fig. 2. ejusd. Tab. R. R. R. Shows their Fleshy Mass laid bare at Tab. 36.
^ig. 1. S. S. S. S. Shows the Tendons whence they do arise, T. T. T. T. Shows
their four Tendon^.

Adductor Pollicis Major.
THis arises Nervous from the inward part of the Heel, This brings the T^es
tow^rds.
and from the Ligament, which keeps that and the Talus together, and so growing
Fleshy and round, becomes Tendinous, inserting it self obliquely into the
lateral and inward part of the first Joint of the Great Toe.

This abduceth the Great Toe from the rest of the Toes; Obs.
or, as I may say, draws it inwards.

This you have at Tab. 37. Fig. 1. at E. F. F. Showing its Tendon; At Fig. 2.
ejusd. Tab. you have the same laid bare at Q. Q. M. Also shows the same at Fig.
1. Tab. 35. laid bare, O. Shows this at Tab. 34. Fig. 1. R. Shows the same laid
bare, Fig. 2. ejusd. Tab.

Abductor Minimi Digiti.
THe Little Toe has a particular Abductor allowed it, This abduceth the little
Toe from the rest.
from the Heel, arising Nervous from its External part, and growing Fleshy in
its progress, runs with a small Fleshy Tendon under the Os Metarsi, which is
immediately placed before the Least Toe, and so is inserted into the External
side of its first Joint.

This you have at Tab. 37. Fig. 1. at G. G. H. H. Shows its Tendon, I. I. Shows
the same l^id bare at Fig. 2. ejusd. Tab. L. M. Showing its Tendon, K. K. Shows
its beginning, Q. ^hews the same at Tab. 35. Fig. 1. P. Shows this at Tab. 34.
Fig. 2.

Adductor Minor, sive Transversalis Placentini.
THis by Casserius, This draws the great Toe to the little Toe.
who first found this out, gave it the name of Transversalis, because it binds
the first Joint proceeding from the Ligament of the Little Toe, and is carried
transversly Fleshy, and marches out with a short and broad Tendon inwardly, to
the first Bone of the Great Toe.

The Author of this Muscle does assign this Use to it, Use.
That drawing the Great Toe toward the Little one, it makes a hollowness in
the Foot; so as that in unequal and stony places, an apprehension as it were
being hereby made, we may tread and walk more steadily, and commodiously, this
being as a Ligament to the Foot, to keep it from slipping or sliding, and for a
more secure ambulation; for by the help of this Muscle, the Foot is brought
into that Figure, that it makes the step sure, and as it were does apprehend
the part it is set on.

This you have at Tab. 37. Fig. 4. at E. laid bare, H. Shows the same at the
Letter A. the first Toe, P. Showing the same at Tab. 36. Fig. 2. P. Shows the
same at Tab. 35. Fig. 1.

Tib^eus Anticus, sive Musculus Catenae.
THis is the first of the Inflectors, This bends the Ancle.
whose Tendon being transversly dissected or amputated, the Patient is
compelled to carry his Foot in a Sling, by the benefit of which he is able in
his passage both to lift up and inflect his Foot.

This Muscle arises sharp and Fleshy from the uppermost Appendix of both the
Focils, forwards: as also from the Ligament which binds them together, then
being dilated, is narrowed about the middle of the Tibia, growing into a strong
and round Tendon, running obliquely over the Tibia, and under the Annular
Ligament, and is implanted into the inside of that Os Tarsi that is therefore
Os Pollicis.

This Muscle I conceive governs the Foot in motion, Use.
that it does not squail to much outward.

This you have at Tab. 35. Fig. 2. at C. C. a. Showing its beginning, b. Its
Termination and Tendon, M. N. Shows this at Tab. 36. Fig. 1. O. Shows its
Tendon.

The Explanation of the Five and thirtieth Table.
FIG. I.
E E. Tibiaeus Posticus. e. Shows its Origination. f. Its Ten on. G. G.
Peronaeus Secundus. E. Shows its Tendon. M. Pollicem Adducens laid bare. N. O.
Two Interosseal Muscles. P. Transversalis Placentini. Q. Minimum Digitum
Abducens.
FIG. II.
C. C. Tibiaens Anticus. a. Shows its beginning. b. b. Its Tendon. H H.
Peronaeus Secundus. e. Shows its Origination. D. E. Its Tendon. I. I. Extensor
Tertii Internodii Digitorum K. Shows its four Tendons. L. Extensor Secundi
Internodii Digitorum. M. M. M. Shows its Tendon. N. Pollic^^ Extensor laid
bare. O. Shows its Termination.
TAB XXXV


Fibulaeus sive Peronaeus Primus; aut Posticus.
IT arises Nervous from the upper Appendix of the Fibula, This brings the Foot
outward.
and descending, it adheres to the outward part thereof, being externally
round, inwardly livid, next the Muscle red, and marching half way, it becomes a
Tendon running obliquely backward through the Sinus under the external
Malleolus, and is inserted into the Root of the Os Tarsi, that adjoyns to the
Os Pollicis.

This Muscle draws the Foot somewhat outward, Use.
and so regulateth it in Progressive Motion, that it cannot be cast too much
inward.

This you have at Tab. 36. Fig. 1. at B. C. D. D. Showing its Fleshy Belly, D.
Its Tendon, V. Shows the same laid bare at Fig. 2. ejusd Tab. L. L. Shows that
at Tab. 34. Fig. 1. L. L. Shows the same at Tab. ejusd. Fig. 2.

Peronaeus Secundus sive, Semifibulaeus, aut Anticus.
THis Muscle arises long and Fleshy from the Fibula, This bends the Ancle.
to which it adheres, and having made half its progress, becomes a round
Tendon, running by the External Malleolus, and is implanted by two Tendons into
Os Metatarsi, adjoining to Minimus Digitorum.

This Muscle is also called Semifibulaeus, it being a near neighbor to the
Fibula; As also by Spigelius is named Bicornis from its double Insertion into
the small Bone adjoining to Minimus Digitorum.

This you have at Tab. 36. Fig. 1. at E. E. F. Showing its Tendon, I. I. I.
Shows the same at Fig. 2 ejusd. Tab. K. Showing its Tendon, G. G. Shows the
same laid bare at Tab. 35. Fig. 1. H. Shows its Tendon and place of its
Insertion, H. H. Shows the same at Tab. 35. Fig. 2.

Pollicis Tensor.
THis arises Fleshy from the Fibula (or as Vesalius offers) from the outward
side of the Tibia, This extends the great Toe.
where it parts from the Fibula, as also from the Ligament that joins them, to
which it strongly adheres, and so becoming a Tendon, runs over the lower
part of the ^ibula, and under the transverse Ligament, and is inserted into the
two Joints, in the upper part of the Great Toe, Use.
and does extend them directly; sometimes this Tendon is seen divided into two:
one of which is inserted into the last Joint of the Great Toe, the other into
the Os Metatarsi which lies just under it.

This you have at L. Tab. 36. Fig. 1. b. Showing its Tendon, N. N. Shows this
laid bare at Fig. 2. Tab. 35. O. Shows its Termination.

The Explanation of the Six and thirtieth Table.
FIG. I.
B. C. D. Peroneus Primus. B. Shows its strong Origination. C. Its Venture. D.
D. Its Tendon. E. E. Peroneus Secundus. f. Shows its Tendon. G. Extensor Tertii
Internodii Digitorum. H. H. H. H. Shows its four Tendon. I. Its fifth Tendon.
L. Pollicis Tensor. a. Shows its beginning. b. Its Tendon. M. N. O. Tibiaeus
Anticus. M. Its Origination. N Its Fleshy Venture. O. Its Tendon. S. Extensor
Secundi Internodii Digitorum.
FIG. II.
D. D. D. Peroneus Primus. E. Its Tendon. I. I. I. Peronaeus Secundus. K. Shows
its Tendon. N. Pollicis Tensor laid bare. P. Transversalis Placentini. R. R. T.
T. Lumbricales laid bare. R. R. R. The Fleshy Mass from whence they do arise. S
S. S. S Shows the four Tendons whence they do arise. T. T. T. T. Shows their
own four Tendons.
TAB. XXXVI.


Extensor Tertii Internodii Digitorum, aut Longus.
THis arises with a Nervous and Fleshy beginning, This extend^ the third
Joints of the Toes.
from the outward, and forward Appendix of the Tibia and presently becoming
Fleshy, and adhering to the Ligament that joins the Tibia and Fibula, it
descends directly according to the length of the Fibula, and passing under the
Annular Ligament, Use.
it is divided into four Tendons, the which do terminate in the upper part of
the third or last Joint of the four lesser Toes, and so extends them.

The other Tendons are tied amongst or between themselves by a certain
Membranous Ligament, where they run through or over the back of the Foot.

This you have at G. Tab. 36. Fig. 1. H. H. H. H. Shows its four Tendons, I. I.
Shows this at Tab. 35. at Fig. 2. K. Shows its four Tendons.

Extensor Secundi Internodii Digitorum, aut Brevis.
THis arises broad and Fleshy from the transverse Ligament upon the top of the
Foot, This extends the second Joint.
and then appears, dividing it self into four several Muscles, which coming to
the Toes, sends forth Tendons to the second Bone of the four lesser Toes, but
chiefly to the second Joints, where they intersect the Tendons of the former.
Use.


These two are allowed to extend the four lesser Toes.

This you have at Tab. 35. Fig. 2. at L. M. M. M. Shows its Tendons, S. Shows
the same at Tab. 36. Fig. 1.



Interossei.
THese have their names from their habitations, These move the Foot obliquely.
they dwelling amongst the Bones; These Muscles do arise Fleshy from the sides
of the Bones of the Metatarsus, and are inserted by some broad, but short
Tendons, into the first Joints of the Toes outwardly, but inwards to the second
Joints thereof. The outward working, they do abduce the Toes: Use.
the inward do adduce them; they both working together, do extend them.

In the Sole of the Foot, which by some is called Vestigium, is a Fleshy Mass
observable, the which like a Pillow or Bowlster does keep warm the Tendons of
the Muscles of the Foot, the which some Anatomists, although confusedly, do
join with the Musculus Transversalis.

These Muscles you have delineated at Tab. 37. Fig. 3. at C C. C. C. C. D. D.
D. D. D. And at F. F. F. F. F. G. G. G. G. G. in the Toes by themselves.

Thus have I concluded the whole Discourse of Muscles; all I shall farther add,
is, the Enumeration of them, with their Reductions to their proper Places,
Uses, and Offices, being either Relative to the Venters or to the
Articulations, having already presented and drawn forth to you every of their
Forms and Shapes: as also shown their Originations and Terminations; leaving
you Directions, how to find out every Muscle in its order by a proper Index
made for that purpose.

FINIS.
This Table shows the Reduction of the Muscles each to their proper place.
Use and Part.
THe Forehead is lifted up by Frontalis. The Eyebrows, The upper Lifted up by
Aperiens Rectus. Depressed by Claudens Superior.
The nether lifted up by Claudens Inferior.
The Eyes, Rightly moved Upwards by Attollens. Downwards by Deprimens. Inwards
by Adducens. Outward by Abducens.
Obliquely Donwards externally by Circumagens Exterior. Upwards internally by
Circumagens Interior.

The Nose is Dilated by Primus Aperiens. Secundus Aperiens.
Contracted by Primus Constringens. Secundus Constringens.

The Lips are Lifted up by Attollens. Drawn laterally by Abducens. Drawn down
by Deprimens. Purs'd up by Labium Constringens.
The Cheeks are Drawn down by Platysma Myodes. Drawn inward by Buccinator.
The nether Mandible is drawn Upwards by Temporalis. Downwards by Digastricus.
Laterally by Masseter. Forwardly by Perygoides Externus Backwards by Perygoides
Internus.
The Ears which are moved Externally Upwards by Attollens. Downwards by
Deprimen. Forwards by Adducens. Backwards by Abducens.
Internally By Externus. By Internus.

The Tongue is moved In Constriction, By Lingual*
In Dilatation By Lingual*
Forwards by Geneioglossus. Backwards by Hypsiloglossus. Upwards by
Myloglossus. Downwards by Ceratoglossus. Laterally by Styloglossus.
The Os Hyoides is moved by Rightly Upwards by Mylohyoideus. Geneiohyoideus.
Downwards by Sternohyoideus.
Obliquely Upwards by Styloceratohyoideus. Downwards by Ceracohyoideus.

The Palate is Attolled by Sphenopalatinus. Depressed by Pterygopalatinus.
The Fauces are Dilated by Sphenopharyngaeus Primus. Sphenopharyngaeus Secundus.
Contracted by Aesophagaeus. Cephalopharyngaeus. Stylopharyngaeus.

The Larynx is Dilated When the Thyrois is Extended by Sternothyroideus.
Cricoarytenioideus Anticus.
Contracted by Hyothyrodeus.
Shut While the Arytenois is Contracted Directly by Throarytenioideus.
Obliquely lateral by Aryteniodeus.
Extended While the Arytenois is Extended Rightly by Cricoarytenoideus
Posticus. Obliquely laterally by Cricoarytenoideus Lateralis.

The Head is` Contracted by Mastoideus if both move. Laterally if but one.
Extended by Splenius or Triangularis. Trigeminus. Recti Majores. Recti Minores.
Turned about by Obliqui Superiores. Obliqui Inferiores.

The Neck is Contracted by Longus. Scalenus*
Extended by Transversalis. Spinatus.

The Thorax is moved Primarily by his proper Muscles which do Dilate in
breathing Freely the Diaphragma alone contracted. Coactively Diaphragma and
Intercostales Externi.
Constringe in breathing Freely Diaphragma alone relaxed. Coactively Diaphragma
and Intercostales Interni.

Extended as Longissimus Dorsi. which are retained in place by Serratus Minor
Postici. Serratus Major

Semispinatus. which are retained in place by Serratus Minor Postici. Serratus
Major

Sacrolumbus. which are retained in place by Serratus Minor Postici. Serratus
Major


Contracted as Musculi Recti. Abdominis.
Obliqui Ascendentes. Abdominis.

Turned about by Transversi. Secondarily by the Lumbal Muscles Contracted by
Quadratus. Extended by Sacer.

The Abdomen is compressed Laterally by Obliqui Ascendentes. Obliqui
Descendentes.
Forwards by Recti. Downwards by Pyramidales. or Sometimes by Transversi.

The Loins are Contracted by Quadratus. Extended by Sacer.
The Testicles are raised by Cremasteres. The Bladder Retains by Sphincter
Vesicae. Excreates by Detrusor Vrinae. Pyramidalis. Obliqui Ascendentes
Abdominis.

The Clitoris is Raised by Musculi Graafiani. Depressed by Musculus Labiorum
uteri contractorum.
The Anus is Purs'd up by Sphincter Any. Elevated by Levatores Any.
The Penis is improperly said to be Erected by Erectores or Directores.
Accelerated by Accelatores.
The Scapula is moved Variously by Cucullaris. Upwardly by Levator Patientiae.
Backwards by Rhomboides. Forwardly upwards by Serratus Minor Anticus.
Forwardly downwards by Serratus Major Anticus.

The Os Humeri is moved Forwards by Pectoralis. Upwards by Deltois. Octavus
Humeri Placentini.
Downwards by Rotundus. Is carried about toward the External part by
Superscapularis Inferior. Superscapularis Superior. Nonus humeri Placentini.
Internal part by Subscapularis.

The Cubite is Extended by Gemellus Major. Gemellus Minor.
Contracted by Biceps. Bra^^aeus.

The Radius is Pronated by Quadratus. Teres.
Supinated by Longus. Brevis.

The Carpus is Contracted by Flexor Carpi Interior. Flexor Carpi Exterior.
Extended by Extensor Carpi Exterior. Extensor Carpi Interior.

The Fingers are Contracted by Flexor Primi Internodii: Flexor Secundi
Internodii: Flexor Tertii Internodii:
Extended by Extendentium Digitorum.
Primus Secundus Interossei
Moved laterally by Interossei. Abductor Minimi. Abductor Indicis.

The Thumb is Contracted First by Flexor Primi Internodii. Flexor Secundi
Internodii.
Secondly by Flexores Internodii.
Primus Secundus Tertius Quartus

Thirdly by Tertii Internodii Flexor. Extended by Extensor Primus. Extensor
Secundus.
Moved Laterally internally by Adducens. Outwardly by Abducens.

The Thigh is Extended obliquely Backwards by Glutaeus Major. Forwards by
Glutaeus Medius.
Contracted Rightly by Glut^eus Minimus. Directly by Psoas. Iliacus Internus.
Obliquely by Triceps. Lividus.

Moved about Upwards by Piriformis. Inwards by Obturator Externus. Outward by
Obturator Internus. Backwards by Quadrigiminus.

The Leg is Contracted by Sartorius. Gracilis. Seminervosus. Semimembranosus.
Biceps.
Extended by Membranosus. Rectus. Vastus Externus. Internus.

Obliquely moved by Suppopliteus.
The Ancle is Extended by Gasterocnemius Externus. Internus.
Contracted by Tibiaeus Anticus. Peroneus Secundus.
Moved obliquely lateral Internally by Tibiaeus Posticus. Externally by
Peroneus Primus.

The four lesser Toes are Contracted by Perforans in the third Joint.
Lumbricales in the first Joint. Perforatus in the second Joint.
Extended by Interossei in the first Joint. Secundi Internodii Tensor. Tertii
Internodii Tensor.
Obliquely moved by Interossei. Minimi Digiti Abductor.

The Great Toe is Contracted by Flexor. Extended by Tensor. Obliquely moved by
Abductor.
The first Joints of the Toes are kept together by Transversalis Placentini.
The Skin Of the Sole of the Foot is moved by Plantaris. Of the Palm of the Hand
by Palmaris. Caro Musculosa Quadrata.


An Alphabetical TABLE of the Names of the Muscles, with the Page cited in
which each Muscle is treated on.
A.
Page A Periens Palpebram Rectus 12 Attollens Aurem 21 Adducens aurem ad
Anteriora 23 Abducens aurem ad Posteriora 24 Abducens Nasi Alas 28 Attollens
Nasi Alas 29 Abducens Labia 33 Arytenoideus 64 Anconaeus 103 Accelerator Penis
80 Adducens Pollicem, vel Adductor Pollicis Major 194 Abductor Minimi Digitorum
Manus 121 Abducens Minimum Digitorum Pedis 195 Aesophagaeus 57
B.
Buccinator 37 Biventer 41 Biceps Humeri 98 Brachiaeus Internus 100 Biceps
Femoris 176 Brachiaeus Externus, vel Gemellus Major 101
C.
Claudens sive Semicircularis Superior 13 Claudens Semicircularis Inferior, seu
Attollens 14 Claudens Nasum Externus 30 Claudens Nasum Internus 31
Coracohyoideus 42 Ceratoglossus 51 Cricoathyroideus Anticus 56
Cephalopharyngaeus 59 Cricoarytenoideus Posticus 62 Cricoarytenoideus Lateralis
63 Cremastres 79 Cucullaris 88 Cruralis 157 Caro Musculosa Quadrata 105 Musculi
Clitoridis 82 Cervicalis Descendens 151
D.
Detrahens Aurem 22 Detrusor Urinae 86 Diaphragma 87 Deltois 97 Digitorum
Secundi and Tertii Internodii Tensor 128 Dorsi Longissimus 149 Dorsi Latissimus
89 Digastricus 41
E.
Extensor Cubiti brevis sive Gemellus Minor 102 Erector Penis 80 Extensor Carpi
Exterior 125 Extensor Carpi Interior 127 Extensores Primi Internodii 135
Extensores Secundi Internodi Digitorum 204 Extensores Tertii Internodii
Digitorum 203 Externus Tympani auris 25
F.
Frontalis 11 Flexor Carpi Interior 106 Flexor Carpi Exterior 107 Flexor
Secundi Internodii Perforatus 108 Flexor Tertii Internodii Perforans 109 Flexor
Secundi Internodii Pollicis 110 Flexor primus primi Internodii Pollicis 114
Secundus 115 Flexor primus secundi Internodii Pollicis 116 Flexores primi
Internodii sive Lumbricales 117 Flexores Digitorum Tertii Internodii
Perforantes 187 Flexor Pollicis 190 Flexor Secundi Internodii Perfoforatus 191
Flexor primi Internodii Digitorum, seu Lumbricales 193
G.
Geniohyoideu 49 Gneoglossus 52 Gemellus Major 101 Gemellus Minor 102 Gluteus
Major 160 Gluteus Medius 161 Gluteus Minor 162 Gracilis 171 Gasterocnemius
Externus 183 Gasterocnemius Internus 185
H.
Hyothyroideus 60 Hypsiloglossus 53
I.
Inferior sive Attollens Semicircularis 14 Internus Tympani Auris 26
Intercostales Exte^ni 76 Intercostales Interni 77 Interossei Manus 124 Indicem
Abducens 133 Iliacus Internus 159 Interossei Pedis 205 Iliacus Externus 163
L.
Labium Inferius Deprimens 34 Par Labium constringens 35 Lingualis 55 Longus 70
Levatores Any 83 Latissimus sive Aniscalptor 89 Longissimus Dorsi 149 Levator
Patientiae 91 Lividus. 181
M.
Masseter 38 Mastoideus 40 Mylohyoideus Riolani 48 Miloglossus 50 Minimi Digiti
Abductor 121 Minimi Digiti Tensor 129 Membranosus 169
N.
Nonus Humeri Placentini 95
O.
Obliquus Descendens 1 Obliquus Ascendens 3 Obliquus Primus Oculi, vel Obliquus
Minor 19 Obliquus Secundus sive Trochaeus vel Obliquus Majorcum Trochlea 20
Octavus Humeri Placentini 99 Obliqui Superiores 146 Obliqui Inferiores 147
Obturator Internus 165 Obturator Externus 167
P.
Pyramidales 7 Par Labium constringens 35 Platysma Myodes 36 Pterygoides
Externus 68 Pterygoides Internus 69 Pectoralis 72 P^lmaris 104 Pronator Radii
Teres 111 Pronator Quadratus 112 Primi Internodii Pollicis Flexor Primus 114
Pollicis Tertii ossis Tensor 120 Primi Internodii Extensores 135 Pollicis
Abductor 122 Pollicis Adductor 123 Po^^icis Tensor 201 Psoas 155 Psoas Parvus
157 Secundi and Tertii Pollicis Tensor 132 Pyriformis 163 Plantaris 184
Peroneus primus 199 Peroneus secundus 200 Pollicis Flexor 190 Pectoralis
Internus sive Triangularis 78 Pterygo-palatinus 61
O.
Quadratus 154 Quadrigeminus 166
R.
Rectus 173 Rectus Abdominis 5 Rectus Oculi Primus sive Elevator 15 Rectus
Secundus sive Depressor 16 Rectus Tertius sive Adducens 17 Rectus Quartus sive
Abducens 18 Rhomboides 90 Rotundus Major 92 Recti Majores 144 Recti Minores 145
S.
Sternohyoides 144 Sternothyroides 45 Styloceratohyoides 61 Styloglossus 54
Stylopharyngaeus 58 Shpenopharyngaeus primus 66 Sphenopharyngaeus secundus 67
Scalenus sive Triangularis 71 Subclavius 73 Serratus Major Anticus 74 Serratus
Minor Anticus 75 Sphincter Any 84 Sphincter Vesicae 85 Superscapularis Superior
93 Superscapularis Inferior 94 Subscapularis 96 Secundus Flexor primi
Internodii Pollicis 110 Secundi Internodii pollicis Flexor Primus 116 Secundus
117 Tertius 118 Quartus 119 Supinator Radii Longus 139 Supinator Radii Brevis
134 Serratus Posticus Superior 137 Secundi and Tertii Pollicis Tensor 132
Serratus Posticus Inferior 138 Splenius sive Triangularis 139 Spinatus Colli
142 Sacrolumbus 150 Sacer 152 Sem^spinatus 153 Sartorius 170 Semimembranosus
177 Seminervosus 179 Subpopliteus. 189 Spheno-palatinus 61
T.
Transversi Abdominis 9 Temporalis 39 Thyroarytenoides 65 Trigeminus sive
Complexus 140 Transversalis Cervicis 141 Triceps 180 Tibiaeus Posticus 189
Transversalis Placentini 196 Tibiaeus Anticus 197 Tensor Pollicis 201
Triangularis 78
V.
Vastus Externus 174 Vastus Internus 175
Z.
Zygomaticus Riolani 32
FINIS.
What Faults are committed by the Press, the Reader is desired to excuse, the
Author's Occasions hindering him from so strict a Re-view of the whole Treatise
from the Press.


