(...) COMPLETE TREATISE OF Preternatural Tumors, Both General and Particular,
As they appear in HVMANE BODY From Head to Foot.

To which also are added many Excellent and Modern Historical Observations,
concluding most Chapters in the whole Discourse.

Collected from the Learned Labors both of Ancient and Modern Physicians and
Chirurgions, composed and digested into this new Method by the Care and
Industry of

JOHN BROWN, Sworn Surgeon in Ordinary to the Kings most Excellent Majesty.

Post varios casus Artem Experientia fecit, London, Printed by S. R. for R.
Clavel, at the Peacock at the west end of S. Paul's. 1678.

LIbrum hunc Johannis Brown, Chirurgi Norvicensis, de Tumoribus
Praeternaturalibus, Chirurgis studiosis utilem esse posse judicamus.

Johannes Mictlethwait, M. D. Col. Lo^d. Praeses. Daniel Whistler, M. D. Col.
Land, Censor. Geo. Rogers, M. D. Col. Land. Censor. Johannes Lawson, M. D. Col.
Land. Censor. Elisha Coysh, M. D. ejusdem Col. Censor.


bookplate Academiae Cantabrigiensis Liber



To his ever Honored Uncle, Mr. WILLIAM CROP, Chief Surgeon in Norfolk.
Worthy Sir,
THE many great Favors and daily continued Courtesies which I have received
from you, may well challenge and command a double Expression of Thanks and
Acknowledgment: and as you have ever studied how to interweave your continual
Bounty with the happy assistance of your great Art and Skill, each of these
heightning both my Advance and Profit; should I not publicly repay you the
Tribute of all imaginable thankful Acknowledgment, my hopes of ever doing well
may soon sicken, and like Liquors poured from one Vessel to another, as readily
lose their gust, and grow slat and dull. And although in these public
Addresses I may appear impertin^nt to offer my Mite to you, whose Skill in Art
is large, and whose Knowledge in Universal Learning is great; yet have I
presumed to shelter this Tumefying Brat under your Wing, and commit it to your
Patronage, not as being worthy your Acceptance, but that it may receive a kind
Value and a candid Repute by your Acceptance; whose Approbation hereof will be
stamp enough to make it pass current amongst the Generous Sons of Art. That
there may be Faults in its Conduct, I am not altogether ignorant; but these
Lapses looked on with an amicable view, will but appear as Moles in a fair
Face. Sir, be you pleased to give it your Blessing, and it shall venture the
Censure or Carping of others. All I shall further add is, that when Greatness
and Judgment shall be shrivelled to nothing, or at best into a cold
remembrance, your Generous Charity as well as your great Learning will remain
after you as living Monuments to after Ages. Sir, if you will please to pardon
this Interruption with its Imperfections, and accept the Devotion wherewith
they are offered, it will be the greatest Honor done

Your Obedient Nephew, JO. BROWN.
Norwich, Nov. ult. 1677.
To the Ingenious and Judicious Reader.
SInce I have ventured the hazard of offering the few Grains of my Knowledge
and Care to be put into the Scale of your Censure, and to be tried by the
Standard of your Judgment; and although I am sufficiently conscious I may want
somewhat of weight or measure: yet had I rather be censured for committing such
an error, than be condemned for omitting so necessary a duty; Man not being
framed to serve himself alone, he that formed him made him also a Brother to
many, and this duty be owes to them all; he being made much like the Princes
Coin, the which after having once received his stamp proves current through his
Dominions. This Tract well deserves the study and practice of a young
Surgeon, who ought to read it soberly, and practice it constantly. Whoever
therefore is bred in this Chirurgick School, or brought up in the Nursery of
Healing, let him endeavor to preserve knowledge in his lips, as well as
judgment to guide his hand. I have here acted the part of a faithful
Surgeon, who sometimes must be admitted and allowed to make the smart the
forerunner of his cure, and may be accounted excusable, though he seems to be
hard hearted in not regarding the lamentable mo^^s, and moving groans of his
afflicted Patient, not sparing his Probe until he have sounded the bottom of
the Abscess. This is a subject indeed, which is not to be touched by every
common Pen, every s^ip whereof in some cases may dislocate the Discourse, and
cause a Solution of Continuity in the Matter. The Tract is not like a gay
Tulip, clothed and tinged with variety of Colors, fair and goodly for view,
but void of smell and all apparent virtue: neither does it look like a piece of
Tapestry, which appears best at farthest; its Leaves are not lined, covered, or
filled with the thin Blossoms of Aerie Froth, or fetched from the Humors of an
Emperical Romance, but rather gathered, furnished, and delineated, with the
digested wholesome Fruits of Learning, Example, and History, most lively
resembling the delicate and sweet Rose, the which besides its virtues of
Perfuming the Air, proves no less Medicinal than Fragrant. And now to you
great Masters of Art, Brave Souls, whose Merits are above your Names, whose
Virtues are no Shadows, and whose Noble Spirits can soar far above the common
reach of Mankind, who can as well pity the Wantonness of one part of the world,
who with a varnish and gilded Frame can plume their Impudence with the various
colored Feathers of Ignorance and Boldness; as reward the other part with the
just dues and perquisites belonging to them; whose Hands are too white and
clean to receive or give any black Dirt. It Is you I may and intend to make my
Judges, who can sooner pardon a thousand Errors than others find one. I
question not but the Brightness of my Subject may have dazzled my eyes, and my
Expressions may fall low and flat, yet since the Lading is well bestowed in our
Vessel, having received your gentle Winds to breathe on it, I question not its
well sailing, and may be kept off from the Shelves and Rocks of others, who
make it their business to pass an unhappy Censure, although not capable to pass
Examination themselves. By some it may be objected, that this my Care and Pains
may look like Flowers plucked from others Gardens. The Bees admirable Work is
not to be discommended or thought the worse of, nor the Honey the meaner, for
its sucking or extracting the same from the sweet Flowers of any man's Ground. I
here have been more plentiful in Authorities, because very few of our younger
Brethren have a will to read many or great Volumes, whilst greater Masters
have less time or leisure. To you also who are of the lower Form in Practice,
this Tract does chiefly belong, it being as a guide to direct you in your whole
course of treating Tumors both general and particular, from head to foot; my
request to you is, if you find any thing worthy Collection or your Inspection,
accept it with an amicable Hand; and if you give it the time of a Survey, play
not the part of a Waterman, who Dum aliud proponit, aliud supponit. Let every
man study his Art quietly and peaceably, that he may profess it openly and
confidently, then may be expect it to have it guarded with the Lion and Crown,
and encouraged by Royal Charters and Princely Privileges. I hope this Tract
will meet with a Gentleman's Charity, whose Soul is drawn out to his Fingers
ends, who can pardon an imperfect Draught, and where he meets with too deep
Shadows, can with a light Hand and finer Pencil lessen its darkness. It may be
well reckoned amongst Vulgar Errors in our days, wherein the Mists of Ignorance
are very plentiful, the Evening of Knowledge appearing but through a small
hole, and the dark Clouds of Folly obstructing our Light of Reason; and hence
is it that the Light which we enjoy is so variously refracted by the glittering
Vices of our times, and looks much disfigured by the Glasses of Humor and
Fancy. If this may answer expectation, I am happy; if it be disliked by such
who rather do measure another man's actions by number, than by either order or
weight, I am not troubled, knowing it to be a common failing of some to be
tempestuous in Temper, and troublesome either in Judgment or Desire, as to hate
any thing they cannot themselves perform, or yield or lend a good look to
another man's Labors, because they were not christened by their Name, be they
never so lawful, good, advantageous, or honorable: To these and such others I
offer this as a Conclusion; let us all study to be quiet and peaceable, and to
do our own business for public and private good, to work with our own hands
such things as may gain afair repute and good name here, and a happy reward
from Heaven hereafter; then shall our present actions smell like the Rose, and
Eternal Bliss shall crown our end. And as I have in this Tract studied to be
profitable to thee, so let thy endeavors be to help others.

From my House in Norwich, Nov. ult. 1677. Vale.

To the Author Mr. JOHN BROWN.
SIR,
SInce you were pleased to honor me with a sight of your Chirurgical
Endeavors in this Work, I must in justice return you my Thanks and
Commendations due unto it: for though the same Subject has been handled by
others, yet have you made so good a Collection out of Approved Authors, and so
well disposed and set down the Nature and Cure of Tumors, together with
apposite Historical Observations, that the same may become of very good use,
especially unto younger Chirurgious, unto whom you chiefly designed it: and
therefore I wish you happy success herein, and also in all future Endeavors,
unto which Art and Industry shall enable you.

Your Loving Friend and Servant, THO. BROWN.

To Mr. John Brown Surgeon of Norwich, on his Treatise of Tumors.
SIR,
YOU have taken great pains in these your Collections, which having exemplified
with so many very pertinent Observations, I do encourage you in the Printing of
them: they will be of great use and instruction to all such as have not had the
opportunity of consulting the many learned Authors quoted by you, which most
employed in Arms and Sea-service cannot be accommodated with. Sir, I am

Your Affectionate Servant, KNIGHT, Reg. Chir. Principal

To his Ingenious Friend Mr. John Brown, upon his Treatise of Preternatural
Tumors.
SIR,
HAving with great delight perused your Indusrious Discourse and careful
Studies in this your Treatise of Preternatural Tumors, I must in gratitude and
civility return you my just Acknowledgment due unto it. How lively you have
examined their Causes, Signs, Presages, and Cures, no Son of Art but will
acknowledge with thankfulness: and with what admirable Historical Observations
you have adorned your Book, I need not to acquaint the Reader. All that I shall
and in justice ought to add, your Care and Ingenuity shown herein may
challenge a kind Opinion from the worst of those, who may pretend any disgust
against your Sedulous Endeavors; which is the perfect Vote of him who is,

SIR, Your assured Friend and Servant, ROB. DANIEL.

To his Worthy Friend Mr. John Brown, Surgeon in Ordinary to the Kings most
Excellent Majesty, on this his Learned and Elaborate Treatise of Surgery.
WElcome (my Friend) upon this mundane stage;
Learned Artists very scarce are, and the Age
Abounds with Dolts, which does its ills enrage.
We wanted one that would our Griefs declare,
And proper Medicines for them prepare;
And (thank our happy Stars) we have them here.
If Agues or Cut Fingers formerly
(Being cured) could raise men to a Deity;
What Is then thy due, that cur'st each Malady?
Cheap in those cloudy times were Deities,
And little skill would purchase such a Prize;
But Physic now does look with Argus Eyes.
Yet thy great Soul is such, thou can appear
Before the Presidents and Censors Chair:
Thy Work being perfect, what have thou to fear?
Were famed Hippocrates alive to write
Those Books, which first gave Greece her Physic sight,
He from this Work would humbly borrow light.
For having this learned Book men need no more;
Of useful things it is a bounteous store,
And does provide a Salve for every Sore.
Thanks then (dear Friend) for this thy worthy pains;
Cure but all Worms too in Fanatic brains,
And Immortality shall be thy Gains.
JOHN GADBURY, Student in Physic and Astrology.

The Names of the Authors concerned in this Tract of Tumors.
Paulus Aegineta, Albucasts, Avicen, Aquapendens, Aetius. Banister, Berbert,
Bayrus, Bauhinus, Benivenius. Cornelius Celsus, Crook, Cordaeus, Calmetaeius,
Columbus. Dodonaeus, Jacobus Dovonetus. Gabriel Falloppius, Fabritius Hildanus,
Fabritius de Aqu. pend. Forestus. Galen, Guido, Gesner, Osualdus Gavelchoverus.
Hippocrates, Haliabbas, Hercules Saxoniae, Hollerius. Jubertus. Laurentius,
Lusitanus, Leonellus. Montanus. Ocavus Oratianus, Jacobus Oetheus. Guilielmus
Placentinus, Ambrosius Paraeus. Rhasis, Read, Rondeletius, Ronsius, Rogerius.
Johannes Schenkius. Johannes Tagaultius. Johannes Vigerius, Johannes Vigo,
Vesalius. Whartonius.
AN INTRODUCTION TO SURGERY.
AMONGST all the liberal Arts which the wise Creator has made and bestowed on
mankind, there is none extant that carry more excellency and dignity than this
of healing: Considering either its Origin or Antiquity, its splendour of
Invention, its honor and excellency, nobility and virtue, its subject and
learning, benefit and necessity, constancy and firmness, with its liberality
and charity. As touching its Origin and Antiquity: Its Origin and Antiquity.
It came into the world almost in the same day with man, for soon after his
Birth was this sought out as both reason and history makes good, it being
generally our lots either sooner or later to make use hereof: for as soon as we
leave our mothers womb we grow subject to receive the vapors of a putrid air
and winds, and do thereby exprome diseases and sicknesses, as well as upon a
further growth we share in others arising from meats and drinks. Can we either
live well or act any thing to purpose without health? Are there not many enter
this mundane seen with sickness, and make as speedy exit without this help of
medicine? Are not our actions taken from the Soul, produced from its effective
cause, and perfected by the body as its Instrument? And since it is reasonable
to think that we can neither live nor move or yet arrive at a well being
without this Jem of Healing, ought we not also to conjecture, that it was
necessary from the first? Man was not made like an I per se I, to stand by
himself, and hear the warbling notes and pleasant music of the pretty Bird, or
see how the ground out of a grain of corn yields its increase. No, this
reasonable soul bred out of a higher spark was here planted also to labor: Non
otiandum in via, sed laborandum in vinea. And here also may we opinionize
healing and medicine were invented before other Arts, they being both of
greater necessity and use: and this reason teaches. And if this may not
please, Holy writ and sacred History will show us a great deal of its Antiquity
and Origination. Its Origination shown in a great part by Holy writ.
Amongst the people of God were always Physicians, as we may see out of Moses,
Solomon and so forth. Do we not read of Joseph ordering his father to be
embalmed, and how that he was embalmed by Physicians? Genesis 50. May we not find
scabs, sores, and blisters in Exodus 9? May we not read of s^aying and wounding
in Exodus 21? Have we not the Leprosy and its marks, the plague and its spots in
Levilicus 13? and its method of cure by applying the blood of Sparrows, Cedar
and Hy^^op, cap. 14? In Numb. 35. we read of murders and slayings, contusions
and wounds. In Deuteronomy 23. no man hurt with a Rupture must bear any public
office. In Jud. 9. we may read of a woman, which with a piece of millstone
wounded Ab^melech in the head, and brake his brain-pan; and (...) Kings 1.
Jeroho^m's hand was so withered, that he could not get it pulled in again; and
Asa in the 39the year of his Reign was so diseased in his feet, that he sought
to Physicians. Chron. 2. These Holy authorities may be enough to show its
Antiquity: the thing shows it self evidently that people before this time
were not only troubled with inward diseases, but also perplexed with outward
troubles. Moses drew the Israelites out of Egypt above 3000 years ago; and if
any will enquire, he may find there were Chirurgions; and not these only, but
Physicians also, before which time they were in great esteem and admiration;
and this was for certain that there was little or no distinction between
Physic and Surgery. About 500 years (as Avenzoar observes) before his time
amongst the Arabians were they joined together. I speak of the time where this
art of healing flourished amongst the Greeks; As to its honor and Excellency.
for the Egyptians had it much earlier, as Herodotus writes. The wise man in
Ecclesiasticus says, God made both Physicians and medicine; and wise Solomon
makes mention of Physicians healing inward diseases, and of the earth being
furnished with plants and herbs for curing outward sores and hurts. Did not our
wise Creator frame both the Physicians and plants for the good and benefit of
mankind? Did not our Blessed Savior make the blind see, the lame walk, and the
deaf hear? It is noted that an Angel of the Lord taught Tobias to cure his
father's eyes with the gall of a fish. Have not Kings, Princes and Potentates
studied, exercised and embraced this Art, some for pleasure, others for
ornament or contemplation, whilst some others make a more deep inquiry into it
for necessity of life? Amongst the Senevans Cham had a wife whose name was
Rhea, out of whom was bred Osiris, who for his knowledge in this Art was
esteemed as a God, and adored and worshipped as a Deity. Jachenus amongst the
Egyptians for inventing a way to purify the Air was renowned as a mighty one,
and by them had a Temple erected, in which he was interred. Mercurius
Trismegistus a little after Moses in the time of Joshua appeared in Physic
with great glory. Homer writes that Podalyrius and Machaon sons of Aesculapius
went into the Trojane war and exercised this faculty; hence may we learn of
what great esteem value and reverence this Art was in former times: But to look
nearer home, have we not very often times seen it kept, preserved, protected, and
propagated in the Royal palaces and and Princely families of Kings and
Potentates? Plutarch tells us, that Alexander the great was not only a Scholar
to Aristotle, but was also a very great admirer of this Art. King Mithridates
has given to the world to his perpetual same a Signal token of his diligence
and study in this Art by his Antidote Christened by his own name. May we not
read of many Reverend persons who busied themselves in studying the knowledge of
herbs thus Chirou the Centaur accounted most excellent in his time for curing
of wounds gave Century its name; and hence came our Art to take its derivation,
held by some. Gentian came from Gentianus King of the Illyricks. Avicen not
unknown to any master of Art, came out of the Lineage of the Persian Kings.
Arthemesia had its name from the Queen Arthemesia. May we not well with
admiration see the Almighty provedence working strange effects by the hands of
our Sacred King of blessed memory, and the French King in curing Scrophulaes?
Have we not seen Rebellious tumors, which scorned and trampled on medicine,
forced to yield to his touch? Running sores all in their leakages, the weak
made strong, and those members brought into good order which had formerly bin
risled and distorted, by the Sons of the most high, imprinted as badges and
true tokens of their being the only true heirs of the Imperial Crown? And as
these are the great masters of our health, ought we not to endeavor and to
defend them, and pray that they may last with us in England so long as the Sun
and Moon shall continue? Fernelins tells us there is nothing can be better
shown or drawn to the life in Physic than by example; Its learning and virtue.
for hereby may we, nay can we not be so readily deceived, the foundations
hereof for the most part consisting of Judgment and Experience: for as reading
makes a full man, conference a ready man, and writing an exact man; so also
does Experience give us the liveliest character of a knowing man. In all these
some ages have been more happy than others. Amongst the Egyptians this Art of
healing was very carefully treasured up, these like generous souls born for
public good by great care and study have left to the world examples of their
love and studies: and as the first amongst these was Aesculapius, who have writ
to posterity: yea before ever writing or printing was, this Art was so much in
esteem, that by the industry of man were their remedies marked out with
Hyereglyphick signs; out from these came those rare volumns of Hippocrates; and
he that hareth this way to find advance in his skill and judgment, may be well
said to walk in the darkness of ignorance, and fed with the Chymaerical
fallacies of fooleries and flatteries. Galen's books have been of great profit
to mankind; may we not count our selves much obliged to him for his two books
De Articulis and Fracturis? Since these have Heraclides, Diocles, Caristius,
Praxagoras, Chrysippus, Erasistratus and Hierophilus, been esteemed great
Masters of Art; after these are Asclepiades, Albucasis, Paulus, Aeginetta,
Erastus, Johannes Fernelius, Gabriel Fallopius, as so many rising Suns in their
Art, by whose resplendency have many obscured things been brought to light. Are
not in our times these following in great estimate and service to us, and with
us for ripening our knowledge, helping our insufficiencies, and assisting our
practices, as Hierouymus, Fabritius de Aqua pendente, Cornelius Celsus,
Fabritius Hildanus, Johannes Vigo, Ambroseus Parraeus, Tagaultius Berbettus,
Crook, Read, Woodhull, Low, Banister, Vigerius and the like? what therefore
ought more to be had in esteem or worth, reverence or honor, than that Art
which teaches to keep and preserve the life of man in safety health and vigor
by its learning and virtue? for may we not with ease see, as through a
Crystal, that what ever is contained in this Orb is subject to a medicinal
contemplation? Man, the heavenly coal blown up by the divine sparks of Almighty
wisdom, Its Subject.
is the subject of healing: it is this rational soul and complete body whereon
it exercises it self.

He that is the most admirable of all other Animals visible, and commands all
others, and subjects them to him, is controuled by sickness, and therefore
stands in need hereof: and this may well raise a Surgeon into admiration,
not of himself (with pride and arrogance) but of the Almighty wisdom with fear
and reverence, how that for his contemplation are all Terrene things made and
framed; how that to him is given the Judgment of knowing the virtues and vices
of herbs and plants, to keep and preserve pure the admirable harmony of man,
comparable with the Sun in its glory, with the Moon in its moisture, with the
Earth in its vegetables. And come we to view his three venters, we may see his
upper room, his animal parts, furnished with intellective faculties, his soul
arraied with an animal sense. Man's upper parts.
From this fountain comes our knowledge of our Maker, our Honor and obedience
to our King, our subjection to his Laws, our prudence for exercising the same,
and our harmony for politic societies. Here dwells our Council; and it is by
this prerogative that Justice is executed on the criminal, and Equity extended
to the just. Here dwells our science, art, strength, perfection, knowledge,
and reason. Here is placed natures chief magazine. It is here that (...), as it
were the souls eye, the commanding mistress of morality: man has this
admirable work spun of sine threads of veins and arteries. Its outward wall
resembles the element of earth, its next covering made of spermatick fibers
imitates water, that sine web spun by the Almighty hand which covers the brain,
paints out air; the body of the brain it self represents sire. This fountain
sends forth many rivulets into the back part of the brain by its trunks,
circuits, and plexures. Strange and admirable are its fabrics, as wonderful
its net, hence comes the silver Chord the wise man speaks of. Its outward cap
very prettily resembles a fair Wood clustered with young trees. The salt tears,
which trickle from his eyes, carry a lively resemblance of Dew; vapors
obscuring his sight resemble clouds and mists; the noise of the ears winds and
storms, frothy spittles carry the lively protraict of Snow, as well as
coagulated or conglobated slegm the representative of hail. A Coriza in the
nose carries the similitude of rain: sneezing resembles thunder, and the
redness of the eyes lightning. Is not the sun seen in the native heat of the
brain, as well as the moon in its watery element? Jupiter in its temper, as
well as Saturn in its melancholy? Mars in its choler, as Venus in its phlegm?
has not this upper house the eyes for its windows, the ears for its side
doors, the nostrils for its scavingers, the mouth and tongue to bespeak and
provide for its wants, and to tell its necessities, and the grinders here also
placed for mastication? Is it not by its nerves that we lift up our eye to our
maker? Jussit and erectos ad sydera tollere vultus; by its side doors does not
come in our hearing, which is our best instrument for discovering of friends
from enemies? are not its mammillary processes ordained for conveighing its
spirits and tempering its heat? is not our tongue lift up and down by its
nerves? Os sublime dedit homini, caelumque tueri. When we have considered all
these, how admirably they are framed, what various functions they perform, how
necessarily they were constructed, and with what art annexed, may we not with
old Zoroaster cry out (...); Draw but the Curtain and you may soon see a
Metamorphosis, the Seen changed, and these rare parts impaired by sicknesses
and diseases; for since Adam took the Apple from his wife, his children and
sucsessours have been very capable of being deprived of these happinesses: The
scene changed.
for come we more nearly to consider him as relative to our present discourse,
we shall find a sudden change; in his infancy we may find insects daily to
grow in his outward cap; in his youth scabs and ulcers; when having arrived at
riper years it is often times with Artheromaes Stealomaes, and Melicerides, its
Pericrane filled with Hydrocephalical Tumors, its outward wall is often times
battered and fractured, cleft and divided by fissures, bruised by Contusions,
wounded by penetrating and not penetrating wounds, its Dura matter is made to
flee from the skull, although so strongly tied and rarely wrought into it, by
fractures and incised wounds. Is not its princely palace pulled down inwardly
by Apoplexies, shaken with Palsies, threatened by Epilepsies, burnt up by fevers
and inslamations, stormed by winds, overflown by inundations, consumed by
gangrenes and sphacelus 's? are not its windows shut up by Cataracts, and
darkened by suffusions? its side doors assailed by storms, and windy ruffling
noises? its musical Organick pipes shut up by colds and deafness? Comes not
hence, as from the main Ocean, those many trunks and channels which bring in
our gouts, Dropsies and Cramps? Is not its excretory passages stopped up by
Polypus and Ozaenaes? are not the grinders forced to leave going, and the Jaw
put out of order by fractures and dislocations? when this light extinguisheth,
are not all things made into darkness? does not our reason become obscured, our
wit sequestered, our Judgment affrighted, our memory lost, our understanding
clouded, our senses banished, our tongue tied up, our taste gone, our silver
chord shirvelled, our grinders cease, our hands contracted, our Columns and
Pedestals brought low, and in a moment come to nothing? The middle Region.
In the middle Region you have natures most curious cabinet wrought with
various Rooms, wherein are locked up the vital Treasury, the wheels and
Instruments, whereby the watch of our life is always kept in motion from our
first hour to our last minuit. Here dwells the kingly heart the great master of
courage, and warrior, exercising its nectarean faculties by giving life and
vigor by its vivifying and quickening heat: and as the Sun in its Caelestial
Sphere yields lusture and beauty by its motion and light; so also is our heat,
light, life and motion upheld propagated and preserved by the heat and motion
of the heart. This part is called (...) from a word which signifies to leap;
its called Cor a Currendo, it being ever in motion; it has Lungs allowed it
for tempering its heat, and fanning its fervency: here is also a Diaphragma
distinguishing or separating the instruments of nourishment from those of life,
being as a muscle most different from all others: Its Sides and Ribs are
guarded with a Pleura inward, bred of spermatick fibers; this serves for
keeping the lungs from being entangled with the ribs: besides these is a
Mediastinum, framed as a partition wall or thick hedge dividing this trunk in
the middle, this keeps the heart up from falling. Thus may you see how
serviceable every part is for performing its office and service to the heart as
its Prince; and at the first view we might well conjecture, that this might be
framed with safety, being the only and main Engine of life. The courage abated,
and this Sun Ecclipsed.
But this also suffers its gloominess, and takes shares with all its parts of
sicknesses and diseases. How often have we seen this Prince of life, which
bestowed its vigorous influences to the body, as the Sun does to Plants, to be
ecclipsed by a cloudy slegmatick excrescensy? this watch furred and run into
dissolution by Dropsy, Worms, and insects? Is there not seen Tartarous stones
as well as coagulated slegm, the one endeavoring to dissolve this princely
palace, whilst the other stop its channels to suffocation? do not wounds and
Apostems suddenly happening here as speedily put out this candle of life? Is
not this princely palace often parcht by Fevers, surrounded with Agues, stormed
with Cardiacal Syncopes, washed away with the inundations of strange Dropsies,
poisoned with malign fevers, obstructed by phlegm? are not its flabellums burnt
up by inflammation, consumed by Asthmaes and Empyemaes, rotted by ulcers,
turned into wash-pools by Dropsies? is not here a lung often times converted into
purulent matter, and an Asthma into a Squinsey? are not our sides pricked with
a pleurisy, troubled with a Peripneumony? These and many others take up their
Quarters here: and although Physic and Surgery have the two substantial
legs of experience and Reason to defend them, yet the great knowledge hereof
must come from that great Doctor, who has Heaven for his chair, and the Earth
for his footstool. Thus have I carried you through the fortunes and
misfortunes of his middle Region. The third Region.
We arrive now to his lower and 3d room, his natural part: and here have we
most exactly represented the Liver, with its interwoven distributions of the
vena porta, and vena cava, with the vesica fellea, and its several capillary
vessels, with its meatus cisticus, its porus biliarius, and ductus communis,
framed from the separation of the gall or bilious humor from the blood, and
conveying it into the intestines; and here also may we see the Almighty
disposing variety of Organs for diversity of uses; and for its outward guard
you may see it furnished with a fleshy Armor made of muscles; under it the two
Spermatick coats of the Peritonaeum, the enwrapping and keeping warm the parts
within; these being laid bare, may we meet with a crisped kell with its curled
veins covering the bottom of the stomach and keeping it warm; under this lies
the strange Series of Intestines, strangely wheeled about, contrived with much
Art, and framed with variety of circles, here lodged for sending forth with
more expedition the excrements from the body: to see such a length of
intestines contracted about such a small mesentery, as it appears in its
natural sight, may well challenge the greatest of admiration, how finely
checquered with white and purple veins, ordered for conveighing its chyle and
keeping it warm by its blood already made and elaborated; here is also a
Pancreas tied to the guts, as a pillow to prop and keep up the veins arteries
and nerves, as well as a juice to help forward expulsion; here also is placed
the spleen, ordered to help forward concoction, furnished with arteries for
drawing away its most feculent blood, to ventilate the natural heat of the
spleen, and to invite a vital faculty to it; here also are planted the kidneys,
ordered for expulsion and avoiding of exerementitious wheyish matter, the which
being altogether unprofitable for nourishment is sent from thence by the
ureters into the bladder, and by the good laws of nature is here also placed
the bladder, ordered as a Receptacle of this urine, the which for a time it
retains, and being therewith overloaded does exonerate it self thereof. Thus
have I shown you through all the Rooms of Nature's lower Region, where you have
seen how every part is employed whilst it enjoies its true function; but these
also are robbed of their excellencies, taken off from their offices, deprived
of their faculties and laid open to the enemy, by diseases, troubles, Nature
made unnatural to it self by diseases.
wounds and Tumors, Stones and Dropsies: thus may we see the Peritoneal
spermatick sibres extended by Dropsies; the Kell burnt up and parched in long
and tedious distempers, distorted and disaffected by instammations and
Ruptures; the Intestines blown up and swelled with Collicks, pursed up and
convolved by Iliacks, torn and lacerated with Herniaes, wounded and pierced
with fistulaes; the Liver the magazine of blood inflamed, its trunks and
channels obstructed by varices and melanchollick feces, hindered in its actions
and motions by Tumors; the spleen suffer scirrhous tumors, and obstructed
with excrementitious blood; the kidneys fretted with gravel, inflamed by pain,
tormented with stones and ulcers, closed up by obstructions and Trychiacis, its
pipes stopped by phlegm, stones or gravel; the bladder suffer resolution, and
that which was made the receptacle of urine often times proving the receptacle of
stones and gravel, perplexed with Ischuries and Dysuries, pissings of blood,
preternatural tumors, abscesses, Ulcers, Caruncles and the like. Thus have I
given you a short survey of the inward parts, their beauty splendour and forms,
to which also are added their various sicknesses pains and diseases; and may we
expect in reason that the outward Coffin or Chest may fare better and be more
free from diseases than these? No sure; where the Jewels are lodged, there
generally are held the security: for as poor man is subject to outward storms
and winds, so may we as readily find him as capable to receive the impress and
stamp of diseases: In his face we may often times see a suffused eye, a hare lip,
a polypused nose; in his neck and throat strumous and scrophulated tumors; in
his mouth and throat Cancers and Anginaes; his shoulders distorted; his muscles
cut, pricked, or wounded, his nerves contracted or lacerated; his veins and
arteries ancurismated and variced; his bones luxated and fractured, and the
whole sometimes gangrenated and sphacelated; his hands, the proper Instruments
of his livelihood, corrupted with Chiragra and other Tumors; his wrist
dislocated; his very singers ends terrified with Parony chiaes and
Hypersarcocal excrescencies. May we not often times see the breasts, that first
give us suck or nutriment, suffer the torments and unhappy assailing unruly
disquiet of Cancers, Strumaes, Worms, Stones, Clefts, and the like? Is not the
Penis, the proper instrument of generation, accompanied with Phymosis, beset
with Ulcers, Caruncles, venereous and malign ulcers, whilst sometimes it is
seen to have an imperforated Glans. The Scrotum is very often times seen loaded
with pains and troubles, tumesied by Ruptures, and made capable of inflammation
and gangtene; the Hips greived with Scyaticks and running pains, pestered with
venereal aches and dislocations; the muscles of the thigh often wounded, tumesied
inflamed, lacerated, ulcerated, and abscessed, as well as its bone fractured;
the knee swelled with oedematous Tumors; the leg shortened by amputation,
occasioned inwardly by a desluxion of humors, or outwardly by some external
causes, causing gangrene, Sphacelus, or the like. Do not they and the foot also
by joint consent take share of hydropical tumors, scorbutic ulcers, gouts,
and other pains? and when we have well considered these, may we not own with
Job, man has not a part free from distemperiety? In its constancy and firmness
it is to be preferred before any other Art under the Sun: Its Constancy and
firmness.
for as it came soon after him into the world, so it never leaves him to his
dying minuit; nay it continues longer for he being dead, it serves to help his
succeeding generation. The truth of this daily experience makes good: for
although our life be but vita brevis, yet our art is Ars Longa; and although it
may be subject to change, yet this is to be better born with, being like man
with whom it is concerned: but this is more constant, life is no life without
health; and is not this our daily friend afforded us by our wise Creator for
promoting and perfecting the same? It is by this Art of healing we have our
days lengthned, by cutting off distempers, eradicating their causes, and
extripating their effects; and indeed what is health else, than the keeping of
the whole body perfect and entire? And this may then most properly be said so
to be, when all its actions are freed from the chains of impediments and pains;
for this great happiness of health is only that affection of the body, which
from the first do make every of its actions answer its nature. This made
Democritus write, that he would have every man study the Art of healing;
because as it is honest, so also it is profitable and useful for life: Its
fruit necessity and profit.
Which brings me to the next branch of it, which shows its fruit necessity
and profit. This is a field very large, considering either its order,
condition, age or sex, wanting no fruit; it is this alone that produces
health, by divine permission, a more excellent thing than which this great
world cannot boast of; to live is to be buried alive without it. No man
therefore ought to be held in a greater estimate in a Common weal, than he that
keeps the people thereof in health. This made ^^omer the Prince of the great
Poets prefer one Physician well furnished with virtues and knowledge in his Art
before many of other men. It is here alone guided by nature, that can see
distempers, and snatch them out before they take root, discharge such as are
adherent, destroy them in the bud, hinder them in their growth, repress their
vehemence, mitigate their pains, extinguish their fervor; that can restore the
semiputrid to health, recreate the afflicted, refresh the troubled, strengthen
the languishing, and bring the half dead to a whole life. But should these
fail, yet we have this to defend us before the great Doctor of our Souls; if to
the utmost of our endeavous and judgments, and these strengthened by care and
study, we use and apply the best of medicines our best knowledge can guide us
to, we have discharged our parts, and let us leave the success to that God, who
can work beyond the ways of man, whose secrets are past finding out. And this
part I will conclude with this maxim, That this Art is by so much the more
excellent and to be had in esteem, by how much it is necessary, useful and
profitable. Of its liberality and Charity our great Master has left a lively
example, Its liberality and Charity.
who had no respect to persons when he went and exercised this Art of healing.
And although in Kings and Potentates it may receive Princely rewards, and
amongst Lords and Knights fair gratuities; yet also must it be furnished with
the graces of Charity and Humility, thinking no scorn to help the meanest; this
being its rule, Quod tibi fieri non vis, alteri ne feceris; it being a maxim in
natural Morality as well as Philosophy: And as Riches may spuron to honor, and
both to the obtaining of fame and credit; so let charity and conscience command
your diligence and care in the managing the same for the poor, for they are
Gods creatures framed in the same mold; and although they be not furnished with
the same plenty of outward gifts, yet may they ore top the rich Miser or
covetous Churl in virtues and other excellencies. And let this be your
comfort, that the great Play Master, who keeps in his Register-book all thy good
actions, will not be wanting to add store to your stock, knowledge to your Art,
success to your practice, and crown your cures with credit; and when death his
Bailiff shall with his Habeas Corpus summon thee to the great Audit of the
world, the Angels will Joy in thy happiness, and eternal bliss will Crown thee
hereafter. Thus have I given you an account of the Antiquity and Origination of
Surgery, its honor and excellency, its learning and nobility, its subject,
its constancy and firmness, its fruit, necessity and profit, its liberality and
charity. We come next to know what Surgery is, and of what parts it depends.

That we may arrive at the essential knowledge of Surgery, What Surgery is.
we ought first to consider what it is, what is its subject matter, for what
end it was made and ordered, and what order ought to be kept in it. As to the
first, Cornelius Celsus calls that Surgery, which cures by the hand, being
the most evident part of Physic, to which is adjoined both Diet and Pharmacy:
Or, if you please, it is a branch of the Curative part of Medicine, which
teaches how to restore health by manual operation and medicine. Ambrose Parry
tells us, it is an Art which informs with reason how we may cure, prevent
and mitigate diseases by the help of the hand: but its most proper and
essential definition is taken from eradicating diseases by Art and manual
Operation; for as (...) has it, such medicines as are applied to Tumors,
Wounds, Ulcers, or Fistusaes, cannot so properly be said to be cured by
Surgery, because this health is purchased and procured by help of medicine
which was applied. But where an Abscesse or Impostume is opened by Incision,
bones dissocated or fractured reduced by the hand, Fistulaes dilated, Cataracts
couched, Cancers taken of by Instrument, and the like, these may well come
under the name of Surgery, it being from the use of the hand that it takes
its name: for it is derived (...) a mann and opera, and thus Surgery quasi
(...). Its end for which it was framed.
As for its subject matter I have already shown man, being alone the proper
Instrument hereof. As to its end, it was ordered and framed to repair natures
wants, to help her necessities, to make her curvations right. And to its order
and method, it is divided into Theory and Practice. Its Order and method.
The first teaches and is called science acquired by demonstration and
knowledge of the principles of Art; this carries with it the precepts of Art:
The second practice found out by Knowledge and Reason, arriving at a greater
degree of perfection by manual Operation; and this daily experience adds to its
luster and truth. It may also be divided into general and special parts. These
held general, Into general and special parts.
as the Articulations or soft parts: Those special, which teachthe right way of
Operation about Tumors, wounds, ulcers, fractures, dis^ocations, and the like.
The scope of Surgery directs the Surgeon to the well knowing and
understanding these four parts, as to remove solution of continuity, to restore
union where wanting, to separate parts unnaturally united, and to supply
defects. The first is called (...), the joining part, the second (...) the
separating part, the third (...) the removing part the fourth (...) the
supplying part. The first performed by Consolidatives, Agglutinatives, adducing
Luxated bones and curing fractures: The second acted by Incision, Phlebotomy,
or Scarrification, or Amputation; as in wry necks, hare lips, imperforated Anus
and Penis: The third is finished by extirpating tumors, as Ganglions, Cancers,
Nodes, Strumaes, Scrophulaes, Stones, Cataracts, drawing out of water from the
Abdomen or Thorax, by a Paracenthesis, Amputation, and the like: The fourth he
supplies in restoring Ruptures into their proper places, as in restoring a new
nose, and bringing the blind eye to its sight: And these are to be done Cito,
Tuto and Jucunde, suddenly without pain, safely without cheat or imposture, and
pleasantly without fear or fallacy. And that the Surgeon may perform these
with honor and repute, let him take a turn with me in the several borders of
this Chirurgick garden; In the Chirurgick garden grows things natural,
unnatural, and preternatural.
where he may first see what is natural, what unnatural, what preternatural,
thereby the better to furnish himself with Indications or Intentions against
these or any thereof. And the first that offer themselves here are the things
of nature, for whose end this first intention is appointed, Wh^ natural.
and that is health, its cause, effect, its strength and temper, all which are
to be kept in their order and beatuy: What preternatural or unnatural.
These are generally allowed unnatural or preternatural, as a disease or
distemperiety; for this is said to be a praeternatural effect of it self, and
hurting action by its cause; and this may hurt by action, hindering it, or by
accident; and then by symptoms, which follow a disease as a shadow does the
body. Three general I^tentions.
There are three general Intentions here requisite. The first arising from a
preternatural thing taking from its contrary; The first.
as union from Solution of continuity, coldness from heat, heat from coldness,
dryness from moisture, and moisture from dryness, ablation from matter
exceeding, and increasing from matter diminishing, apertion from obstruction,
and dilatation from angustness, astriction from amplification, reposition into
its proper place from whence it made its recession. And as we are to observe
this order of contrariety; so also are we well to understand it, which affect
ought first to be cured, the curing of which is the principal cause of curing
the other, The second.
and without which no perfecture. The second Intention shows, how we are to
keep those parts entire, which are placed according to nature; and to discharge
and expel those that are preternatural: and we may understand an incurable
disease these three-waies. Three ways to know how to cure a disease.
First when the disease of its own nature is incurable, as the Elephantiasis,
or confirmed: Secondly when the patient uses not such means as should be
proper for his recovery: Thirdly when the curing of one distemper threatens
another greater and more terrible. The third Intention is performed by
opportune helps and convenience, The third.
use of right and proper medicines: and these are either Medicinal or
Instrumental; Instrumental for living well, and keeping a good order, as
Pharmacy, Phlebotomy, Emplaisters, Uuguents Powders and the like. The unguents
a Surgeon should always have in readiness satisfying his common Intentions,
are these, unguent. Basilicon, to maturate and convert into Pus; Apostolorum,
to deterge and mundify; Aureum, to incarn and fill up; A^^um, to agglutinate
and consolidate; Dialthaea, to mitigate and ease pain. Instruments for all
occasions large and small, some for searching, others for cutting, for some
drawing out extraneous bodies, and others for putting or reducing parts into
their respective places: And these bring me to the Surgeon himself, which is
to be the man only engaged both in their applications and administrations; and
let us see what person he ought to be, how qualified, armed, furnished, and
exercised. To consider in what chair of honor and esteem a Surgeon is
seated, may well require his care and study, learning and excellency: and since
there is such a conjunction of the mind with the body, such a connection and
society, that they generally take shares of one another good and bad fortune,
as some deliriated with fevers, whilst others are blown up with madness by the
fury of choler; To see the wonderful effects of blood, while melancholy acts
her innumerable changes in our bodies, may well call into admiration the best
of men's knowledge, our thoughts varying according to the diversity of tempers in
our bodies. Thus are we troubled with diseases, inflamed by anger, sweetened by
love, exhilarated by joy, dejected by sorrow, tempered by sweetness, shaken by
fear; and to search out the depth of these, their originations and causes,
their diversity of shapes and postures, may well require a quick sight to
penetrate, a powerful wit to search out, a well guided reason to consider of.
He therefore that will enter this stage of Surgery, must well understand its
various scenes and acts; for its he alone guided by the provident hand and
divine assistance that can maintain and keep up our sorts and castles from the
assailing batterings of wounds and contusions, etc. and by him also may herbs
and roots, seeds and berries, gums and fruits, be made capable instruments to
banish the enemy having once made its entrance. It Is by his Art the swelling
bubbles of scalding water are dispersed, the burnings of gunpowder allaid, its
pain removed, and its black marks fetched out. Its by his Art dislocated
Articulations and fractured bones are brought into their right form and order,
old ulcers and fistuales dilated, mundified, incarned and cicatrized, Herniaes
and Stones bound up and drawn forth: and since these and many more are
committed to his care and charge, what skill, knowledge, fathoming of diseases,
and judgment, ought he to have and be furnished with to undertake this task?
Take with me this as a short character of a good Surgeon, What person a
Surgeon ought to be.
he being a man both honest and careful in his art, prudent and provident for
his patient, expert and skilful for defending himself, well learned and
educated for discourse with others, well exercised and practiced for the help
of both. He ought to be well furnished with books, these being as so many safe
Pilates to conduct him in his unknown way, and to keep him off from the shelves
and rocks of mistakes and errorsin his Art: Adorned with learning; for this
makes him appear as a Sun, whilst others less literate shine but as smaller
Stars; this conducts him to the tree of knowledge, whilst others can only boast
of their impudence and ignorance; it is this gives life to his practice,
cheerfulness to his study, and security to his conduct: And as we seldom see a
wise man gain knowledge from a fool; so is it as rare, to gain awise medicine
from an ignorant block. He ought to be well exercised in Anatomy, Exercised in
Anatomy.
for hinc discimus artem rectissime operandi and securitate incidendi: It being
as the chief pillar or basis on which Surgery planteth its foundation; this
is the great magazine, from whence she fetches her richest treasure of
knowledge. It is the knowledge of this, which brings Honor to his name, Praise
to his practice, Worth to his skill, Plenty to his wisdom, Gain to his
industry, Reason to his judgment, and a great measure of success to his
undertakings; hence he learns how and where to make right, oblique, and
transverse incisions; by this he finds out the Origination of the nerves, the
trunks and channels of the veins and arteries; here may he find the difference
between a nerve and a vein, a Tendon and a Muscle, a vein and an Artery, a Bone
and a Cartilage. These may well convince their utility, necessity, and profit
in Surgery. Well read in Physic.
He ought to be well read in Physic, by which he may as well gain the knowledge
of removing the cause, as the discharge of effects; and this gives a great
light to the well timing of diseases; for outward medicines are very often
applied with little success, when they are not conducted with a cunning hand
and a solid judgment. Besides these a Physician is not always at hand to
defend the Surgeon, or to assist him; which should upon necessity put him
upon this excellent study, which gives life to his knowledge by teaching him to
eradicate the growth of a distemper. It is his best friend at Sea, and as great
assistance in the Wars, in helping him to pull down fevers, in frightning
agues, in curing scurvies, in discharging Itches, in allaying Calentures, and
in bringing life, vigor, courage, and health, to his dying, weak, faint, and
sick Patients. He is to be armed with Instruments both great and small; the
greater for greater uses, whilst the smaller he carries as daily companions:
but of these you shall read more at large with their figures elsewhere. The
knowledge of medicine proper for him.
The knowledge of Medicine is also very proper for him, and a main wing of his
Art: it is by this that he can draw and heal, dry and close up, repel and
resolve, digest and suppurate, attract and emolliate, escharioticize and ease
pain; some of these being proper in Tumors, whilst others are more useful in
Wounds and Ulcers, but of these also in their order. And when a Surgeon has
purchased all these, thus furnished, adorned, armed, educated and experienced,
there remains yet somewhat to add to his excellency, as a quick sight, having
an eye pointed upward to fetch down a blessing upon his practice; a nimble wit
to apprehend every advantage that he may get from his Seniors; a pleasant
countenance to call cheerfulness into the Patient's cheeks; a courageous spirit
in things which he well understands, and are safe, but as wary in matters of
danger; prudent in his presages, courteous in his behavior, chaste, temperate,
not given to too much wine or venery; Charitable to the Poor for conscience and
charity, as well as to the Rich for fame and profit; furnished with
undauntedness in amputations and Lithotomy, having a steady hand to act with
evenness and without trepidancy, a hawks eye, sharp and clear to look into the
distemper; dexterous at his work. He that is thus furnished, may well assure
himself, he is in a happy estate of knowing how to remove solution of
continuity, restore union, separate parts unnaturally joined, remove
superfluous bodies, and then supply nature in her defects, taking this as his
guide, (...).

CHAP. II.
Of Humors.
SInce daily experience shows, that out of Humors Tumors do take their
Originals, our present task shall be to treat of the matter of Humors, of what
they are, how made, and how many they are, what good and mischief they do; and
then show you their Introduction in one Scheme, their general Division, and
then arrive at Tumors themselves. To understand the nature and essence of a
Humor, is and ought to be the work, study, and care of a Surgeon, as well
as a Physician; there being no disease with matter, which is not framed of a
confused mass of Humors. It his hence that all Tumors, Wounds, Ulcers, and
Fistulaes, and their differencies have their acknowledgments and distinctions;
the which is the only cause which makes both Physicians and Chirurgions run
presently to the tempering of the Blood, that is, to the correction of those
Humors which are the occasion of these Tumors. By Physicians a Humor is
taken for a thin and liquid body, What a humor is.
flowing and cruising in our body. Tagaultius does call them more properly
Humors, which are juices made by the Liver in the sanguinary mass, for its
nutrition and thinning of the blood all over our body. All these are Choler
Phlegm and Melancholy, adjoined to the Blood, scattered and sent into our veins
and arteries, the which the variety of their colors and consistence will make
good, as Galen has it l^b. Nature. Human. Of these some are natural, some not
natural. Those called natural, because so ordered according to nature, for
keeping, defending, sustaining, and nourishing the life of man: Those counted
otherwise, which act contrary to the rules of nature, and have unnatural
effects. The one again being either alimentary, proper for life and growth of
the body; the other excrementitious more proper for cleansing its sinks and
channels. As the Humor is, so also is generally seen its Color: for as Blood
is of a pure florid rosy color, so does it give color to the Muscles: It is
this that graceth the cheeks, by affording them a a share of its redness: and
as it is made of Chyle and Blood, so also does it send forth its white and red;
and by how much the red exceeds the white, by so much are the Muscles more
red than the Skin. Choler is citrine and yellow, thin and griping; and as the
four Humors do work man into a good humor, so this burns him into a
passion: it gives a lively paint of its color in the Jaundies. Phlegm is white
and washy, and so are they that have too much of it, being very cold and
subject to Oedematous Tumors, Dropsies and Agues. Melancholy is black and
masketh the whole body with an Ashy color; this is long and tedious in
executing its office, it being the most heavy an dsad part of the blood; but at
length brings forth the terrifying Scrophula, Corroding Cancer, Scirrhous
Tumors, Quartane Agues and the like: and we daily find, when it has hatched
them up to any growth, it is very long, if ever, before it be made to part with
them. Besides these there are two others: one a serous Humor which serves as
a vehicle to the blood, ordered by nature for thinning it, that it may pass to
its smallest capillary vessels. Part of this is sucked up by the kidneys, where
having made a short stay it makes its further progress into the bladder, and
there remains whilst it be loaded; the which being therewith filled, is let out
as useless and unprofitable. Besides these comes Wind taking its circuits and
turns, and in our bodies is occasioned and bred by ill digestions, crudities,
and wind: the former making watery Tumors, whilst this makes slatuous
Tumors. But that we may well understand the foundation of these Humors, let
us examine from whence they are bred, and whence they come. What blood is.
(...) or Blood as it is the chiefest and of the greatest service for life, so
ought this to take the preheminency in our discourse. How (...)
It is made from the temperate part of chyle in the stomach sent through the
small guts into the milky vessels in the mesentery, whereby nature has
ordained it a Receptaculum commune, being here planted by Divine Providence as
a bag for reserve, for the most part full, from whence passes this chyle along
the great Artery just by it, until it reaches the Subclavian vein; from
thence it marches into the right ventricle of the heart by the vena cava; and
from hence is carried into the left ventricle of the heart by the Arteria
venosa from the lungs, and is there elaborated and made pure blood, sweet of
taste, and florid in color, mild and benign. This sanguification is a similar
action and performed by assimulation; and therefore takes this chyle aforesaid
as its subject matter for this assimulation, and as they dewell together, so do
they assimulate together; and this is done by process of time, never passing to
the liver, as the Ancients dreamed, for the chyle seldom or never reaches it.
This blood, as the vital liquor, is sent through the whole body by its veins
and arteries, as its proper trunks and channels. And although at its first
appearance it shows it self pure and free, yet has it always these three
Humors adjoined to it, as three several substances; as Choler, Phlegm and
Melancholy; distinguishable one from another not only in taste sapour or
color, but also in their effects: for as Galen observes lib. de nature. homin.
the melancholy humor is acid, choler bitter, blood sweet, and phlegm having
little or no taste; and out of those being benign and pure is bred Scirrhus,
Erisipelas, Phlegmon, Blood hot and moist.
Oedema. It is hot and moist, which are the two species of its natural and
unnatural temper; and as Gal. lib. de Atra bile cap. 2. it is of a very red
color in its humor, and is made of the best of juices, and so bred from the
best of tempers, made by a temperate heat; and those are its natural tempers.
As of its unnatural, its proper substance is changed, as its thinner part
converted into Choler, as Gal. 2. de Differ. where he says, the thinner part
is converted into yellow choler, whilst the thicker turns into melancholy.
Choler hot and dry.
Next to this is choler, called by the greeks (...), it being a humor hot,
bred out of the thinner and hotter part of the chyle and blood. It has but few
spirits, somewhat of Sulphur in it, most of Salt and Earth. Its parvity of
spirits are evident, in that it is of its own nature bitter; neither has it in
it any great quantity of Sulphur, for if we view its mass carefully, it being
neither Oleaginous or pingued, neither does it soon take fire; yet it takes
Sulphur in it, being principally exalted by adustion, whence it bred this
bitterness; and although its salt excels in quantity, yet does it not gain
pre-eminence. Its phlegmatic watery substance does enlarge its liquid faculty;
its earthly parts thickeneth it, and gives it the body it bears; its heats and
dryness are sufficient signs of its being an enemy to the radical moisture, and
so unfit for nutriment, that it is declared by all to be excrementitious. This
heat is the manifest cause of its bitterness made by a perpetual digestion of
the blood; A similitude between milk and choler.
thus milk, unless often times stirred in its boiling, soon burns and turns
bitter, and as from heat and motion do colors change from white into red; as
Quinces being pale by boiling gain a red color, and chyle turned into blood by
circulation and heat; so also choler is as readily discharged of its first
taste by adustion and perpetual digestion. As to its uses, Its uses.
Aristotle will grant it no ways useful. Coryngius and some others do as much
cry up its value, offering that it serves to warm the liver, and to help
digestion. Helmontius calls it the balsom of the blood deduced from the liver
to the mesentery; but this is contrary to Anatomy: for Anatomy teaches, that
this humor is carried out from the liver, not brought into it, but only
sucked up by the Parenchyma thereof, as through a strayner. Others there are
also, as Zerbus amongst the rest, that offer, that if the bladder or gall be
removed from the liver, the substance of the liver would soon be dissolved and
melted. And to conclude this, its most proper use is to render the excrements
fluxile. What phlegm is.
The third is Phlegm, by the Greeks called (...): and this also is of two sorts,
natural, and not natural: The natural humor is cold, moist, crude in
substance, white in color, and sometimes sweet in taste: that also properly
said to be unnatural, which is void of these, and hence does it take its
several names; as that generally caled a thin serious Phlegm, which is endewed
with a waterish or windy substance; that called thick and glassy, which is
thick, viscous, and mucilaginous, and growing harder gets the name of glassy
phlegm; if it putrify and corrode, it is called salt, eruginous and corrosive
phlegm. Again ^legm is said to be natural, being made in the blood not well
digested; and hence Aristotle the 6. Top. says phlegm is the first of
indigestions coming from meats; and Gal. 2. de different. feb. cap. 6. whatever
humor in our body is cold and moist, this we call phlegm; Avicen Prima Primi
numbreth up 8 kinds of unnatural phlegm. We may well consider it in respect of
its sapour, and of its substance: of its sapour, and here are three
differencies, salt, sweet, and sour; and its insipidness may come in as well;
but in respect of its substance, there may be four coupled to the former; and
these will make up Avicens 8. Every nutrition is as an assimulation, which
nourishes that by which it is nourished: and as melancholy nourishes the
melancholy parts; so do phlegm the articulations: and as this is a cold and
phlegmatic humor, yet in process of time it is digested and made blood held by
some; yet this generation is not to be allowed reciprocally, for cold cannot be
made by heat, the humors by nature being rightly disposed; therefore neither
can phlegm be made of blood; and so will its generation prove it self no ways
reciprocal. What melancholy.
We come now to melancholy: (...) is said to be either natural, or not natural.
That natural which is the faeces or sediment of the blood, or the thicker part
thereof, whose color is black, its taste sour and sharp, generated for
nourishing the melancholy parts. The not natural which wholly does degenerate
from its own nature; it is a cold and dry humor arising out of the thicker
part of the chyle, whose species are four. 4 Species of melancholy.
First, that is properly called a melancholy humor, in whose proper substance
the blood is burnt and made putrid; and hereby is made Bilis nigra, which is
acid, and being poured on the ground like vinegar rises and bubbles up. The
second is black choler, made out of the adustion of the other humors. The
third species is unnatural, arising with a lapidous concretion. The fourth is
when other humors are mixed with this; for then it puts it into its own bitter
frame, and makes it a part of erosion. Gal. 2. de Temperament. cap. 3. says
the blood is the best of all juices, and that this is as its sediment. And 3 de
Prognost. here he tells us it has a double generation, one arising from
thick blood being as the lees of wines settling in the bottom; the other from
yellow choler being much burnt, which passes through and burns its parts. The
natural is the faeces of good blood, and a superfluity, being compared with the
blood. This unnatural is not as an Hypostasis and faeces, but more like a coal
or cinder. Helmontius calls the place, which is generally reputed to lodge
this humor, the immediate Organ of the sensative soul, of understanding,
venery, sleep, of various diseases; but these are merae nugae; but according to
our later Anatomists it is held to serve for other uses, that it may prepare an
acid juice for the fermentation of the whole mass of blood and chyle; and this
acid part of the blood it draws from the heart, and sends it prepared to the
mesentery, that thereby the remaining part elaborated from the liver may be
more pure and perfect, as Wallaeus observes; and therefore as the bladder of
gall is appointed by nature to be as a proper receptacle of choler strained in
thither by the Parenchyma of the liver; so is this settled and perfected in the
spleen, by which the spleen it self is made of a blackish bluish color, and
is acid. This acid humor mixeth it self with the blood, both with the vessels
and chyle in the stomach, and so renders them more thin; for may we not often
find, the spleen being obstructed, that thick humors do course about our
bodies? not because these thick humors are drawn from the spleen, but because
it cannot communicate its attenuating acid humor to the blood and chyle; and
whatsoever of this acid humor is unfit for nutrition, it is sent out and
discharged with the serum by urine. And having given you this general draught
of the four humors, and shown you whence they are made, and for what use, how
natural and not natur^l, I will now show their several natures, consistencies,
colors, tastes, and uses in this one following Scheme.

A Particular Scheme of Humors showing their several
Nature. Consistence. Color. Taste. Use. Blood is, As the Air, It is of a Red
Sweet It nourishes the Phlegm Like Water Of a Liquid White Sweet This serves
the Choler Resembling Of a Thin Pale Bitter This moves the Melancholy is,
Paynting Thick Black Sour This excites Appetite, nourishes

Thus have you a particular Scheme, wherein you may see the rules of nature in
well ordering these humors. I now am to conduct you to the general division of
praeternatural Tumors which arise from these and the like, it being a most
excellent Pilot for conveighing you into the knowing the main of the
differencies, effects, causes, signs, and presages of preternatural Tumors, or
an exact Master teaching the grounds and choice rules of curing every sort of
tumor.

A General Division of Tumors.
The first and general differencies of preternatural Tumors are six. Plegmone,
Erysippus, Scirrhus, Oedema.
These from Blood, Choler, Melancholy, Phlegm.


The One of the Other two Inflation, generated out of a windy matter:

The other Water, and to this belongs watery Tumors.

We begin with the Phlegmone.
(...) it is made two ways.

One made out of pure blood, and this is called Phlegmone vera:

The other out of blood mixed with other humors, and this is called Plegmone
non vera.

Out of blood mixed with other humors comes,

Erysipelatodes, Oedematodes, Scirrhodes.
Phlegmonous affects are
Panaritium, or a sharp extuberance with pain and inflammation.

Bubo, a simple in^lammation of the loose parts.

Phygethlo^, by the Greeks called Phlegmone Erysipelatodes, and Erysipelas
Phelgmonodes.

Phyma, an inflammation of the glandules.

Carbunculus or Anthrax, a Tumor without pustles.

These are the names, and differencies of its names and parts.

These often follow a Phlegmone,
Abscessus, sometimes coming without an inflammation premised.

Sinus, a profound and cavernous ulcer, which for a while has lain Obscure.

Fistula, the aforesaid Sinus stretched out at length, the which not being
speedily cured in process of time, grows hard, and runs into the substance
of a Callous.

Gangraena, an imperfect, not absolute, mortification of a part.

Sphacelus, by the Latins called Sideratio, it being a perfect corruption and
mortification of the solid parts.

(...), This is the offspring of Choler: and this is twofold,

1. True and legitimate; and here the cutis is only affected without
ulceration.

2. Not exquisite or illegitimate; where not only the cutis, but the subject
flesh is terrified.

An Illegitimate Erysipelas is twofold.
One bred of thick and sharp choler, exact and sincere; and this is called an
Erysipelas with ulceration, the second of Choler mixed with other humors; and
then this Erysipelas may be termed Either Phlegmonosum. Oedematosum. Scyrrhosum.


To these also belong,
Herpes Miliaris, bred of the thinner part of choler*

Herpes exedens, made of the sharper part of it; and this it shows by its
actions, for it both corrodes and exulcerateth the whole cutis and subject
flesh.

(...) This also comes under a double consideration.

First, as to its symptoms; for it is a Tumor rare and lax, and without pain,
bred of a flatulent and windy spirit.

Secondly, as a disease; and thus is its Origination twofold.

First, bred out of phlegm alone; for it is ^ Tumor loose, fungous, and without
pain, arising from the thinner part of phlegm: and this is called Oedema
Legitimum.

The second having other humors mixed with it, and thence Oedema illegitimum:

This most commonly bears these 3 differencies,

Oedema Phelgmonodes. Oedema Erysipelatodes. Oedema Scirrhodes.
To these also are related Hydrocele, when a waterish humor is collected in
the Scrotum.

Ascites, a waterish dropsy filling the inward membranes of the Abdomen.

Leucophlegmatia, Hyposarca, and Anasarca:

(...). This is a hard Tumor without pain.

1. Exquisite wanting sense, and admitting no cure.

2. Not exquisite, not always without sense, but the patient feels somewhat
of it. The exquisite, as well as the not exquisite, either first, from the
beginning, do increase and grow bigger; or else secondly, are so made by
transmutation.

Such as grow from the beginning are said to be those, which do breed from thick
^legm, and so are resolved into a thinner substance; or from melancholy.

Its natural for all Scirrhous Tumors to arise from Melancholy.
Some of these are pure, without any mixture; and these are called Legitimi.

Others have other Humors joined to them; and these are named Illegitimi. And
these also have their three differencies.

Phlegmonodes, Er^sipelatodes, Oedematodes.
Such Scirrhous Tumors as are bred by Transmutation, are made by Phlegmon,
Erysipelas, and Oedema.

Under Melancholy Tumors are,
Cancer, made without Ebullition; Phagoedena, with a Tumor; Malign Ulcers;
Psora; Lepra; Elephantiasis, etc.
These do border upon Scirrhous Tumors.
Painful and dangerous affects of the Arteries happening by contusion in the
Abdomen; Enchymomata, Metasmata, Aneurismes, painful and miserable Symptoms;
Varices, swellings of veins by thick and grumous blood; Chaerades, or glandular
Strumaes; Sarcocele or Hernia Carnosa, made when the flesh grows between the
coats of the Testicles. Of Inflations, are Tympanites, or the dry Dropsy.
Strange Tumors in the Penis occasioned by Winds. Pryapismus, Sataryasis, Of
the serose Tumors, may be reckoned, Hydrocele, or a watery Rupture.
Hydrocephalos, a watery Tumor of the head. Ascitis, watery Dropsy,


There are other Tumors also, which are very troublesome to mankind, bred out
of Humors; as
Epiplocele, when the Omentum falls into the Scrotum; Enterocele, when there
is an Intestinal Rupture; Enterepiplocele, when there happens a Hernia of both;
Cirsocele or Hernia varicosa, made by a twisting of the vessels; Bubonocele, or
Hernia Inguinalis; Omphalocele or Hernia Vmbilicalis.
Some also arise out of flesh, as
Sarcocele, being a fleshy Rupture; Epulis, an excrescence growing in the gums;
Parulis, small abscesses of the gums; Polypus, an excrescency growing in the
nostrils.
In the Head are,
Artheroma, carrying in it the substance of pultice; Steatoma, that of fat or
suet; Meliceris, that of Honey.
And thus have I conducted you through the whole Garden of my first scope:
wherein you have seen not only the Origination and Antiquity, Honor,
Excellency and Nobility, Learning and Virtue, the subject Matter and Subject,
the Constancy and Firmness, the Necessity and Fruit, the Liberality and
Charity, of this noble Art of Surgery: but also I have shown you what this
Art is, of what Parts it consists, and to what noble End it was framed; With
these also have I presented to you the Surgeon, and shown you how he ought
to be furnished, armed, qualified, and endued: After this conducted you to the
true knowledge of Humors, whence they were made, for what use, some of which
being and serving for building up our life and growth; whilst others, being
planted as vessels of a lower Orb, are employed for washing, cleansing, and
keeping in decency our Channels and other Rooms: With these have I adjoined the
natures, consistencies, color, tastes, and uses of these Humors; and have
concluded this Introduction with a general division of Tumors, whence you may
gain their several Affects, Causes and Differencies.



I come now to enter the Stage of Tumors, where I shall act every part in its
Order, concluding this Introductory discourse with this saying of the Poet.
Principiis Obsta: sero Medicina paratur,
Quum mala per longas invaluere moras.


OF Preternatural Tumors IN GENERAL.
CHAP. 1.
Of the names of such Authors which have writ of Tumors in general.
A Tumor by Falloppius is held to be a Preternatural disease, very difficult
because it hinders construction: and hence it may raise in us a diligent
enquiry hereof, how this first happened, what may be the best and safest way to
sail herein, what the best order to observe. But before we lanch too deep in
this main Ocean, let us take and purchase such Pilots as may safely bring us of
from the Shelves and Rocks of fears and distrusts; and amongst the Graecians
may Hippocrates and Galen well be called for assistance, who writ a Book de
Tumorib. praeter naturam; and Paulus Aegi^etta. Amongst the Latins are very
few of the Ancients. The first is Octavus Oratianus, Cornelius Celsus, the best
amongst them. Of the Arabians are Rhasis, Haliabbas, Albucasis, and Avicen.
Amongst our late writers are Gabriel Falloppius, Hieronymus Fabritius de Aqua^
Pendente, Gulielmus Placentinus, Ambrosaeus Parraeus, Johannes Vigerius,
Johannes de Vigo, Johannes Tagaultius and many others. Of our own tongue we
have Crook de Tumoribus and Vlceribus, Banister, Read, Paul Berbet, and the
like. Let these serve as a small Scheme of such Authors who have already writ
of Tumors, from whence we shall derive this method in our beginning of
Tumors, first acquainting you with the name of a Tumor; then its essence, and
causes; then its difference and symptoms, its signs and presages; and after
these its universal cures both as touching general and particular Tumors. Of
each of these in their Order*

CHAP. II.
Of the name of a Tumor.
IT has its name from the Greek (...), which signifies inflammation or
extutuberance; and hence by Celsus and Avicen, The name of a Tumor.
a Tumor is said to signify a preternatural extuberance, and by Galen is
called (...), Tumor praeter naturam; by the Asiaticks (...), as it were a
condensed or conglobated matter; by the Arabians Apostema, which by the Greeks
signifies an Abscess, which is a substance converted into Pus, or as Aqua
pendens calls it, an eminency of the body; this I call a preternatural disease,
in which some parts of the body are indecently extended, being hereby unfit for
performance of their proper action. Hippocrates does christen all Tumors with
the name of Oedema. Its difinition.
Galen appearing somewhat doubtful and uncertain, does sometimes reckon this
amongst diseases of the similar, sometimes amongst the Organick parts.
Haliabbas is of his Opinion. Guido defines an Aposteme a disaffection composed
of three sorts of diseases, aggregated into a bulk. And Avicen thus expounds
them, ill complexion, ill composition, and a common solution of Continuity
which is found in every Tumor. Tagaultius, after Guido, defines an Aposteme
to be, an Inflammation made in a member beyond its proper nature and form.
Falloppius holds a preternatural Tumor to be a Disease in magnitude, and
therefore simple and only consistent in a great extention. Fabritius de Aqua
pendente, offers a preternatural Tumor for the most part to be a compound
disease, and takes its denomination from that which hinders action. Read
calls it sometimes a Disease; sometimes holds it to be a light Affection, for
the most part incident to the Organick parts increasing their quantity by
superfluous humors. Or, if you please, after all these you may take a
preternatural Tumor to be, a material Intemperiety dissolving the Union of the
parts* and sometimes hurting them in magnitude, figure and sight.

CHAP. III.
Of the Causes of Tumors.
A Tumor is said generally to have four causes attend it, 4 Causes of Tumors.
as a Material, Efficient, Formal and Final cause. By Guido the first is called
the conjunct cause: The second, when Nature frames any part so weak, as that
it is not able and strong enough to keep the excrements of other parts out of
its territory: A third cause, when any part of its substance is too rare or
loose: and the fourth is a natural Humidity with exemplification of the part.
Another cause may be said to be the Site of the part; for the upper parts are
said to be less capable of receiving humors, than the lower part. 6 Heads of
T^mours by (...).
Falloppins offers six heads, as so many Observations of Tumors. The first,
when it begins to putrify, it spreds and extends it self speedily, and
suddenly grows into a lump or mass. Secondly, there are Humors which ^ake
Tumors, and these are either (...) or preternatural. Thirdly, when some parts
change and remove themselves (...) of their proper places into other (...)
strange places, as you (...) in Rupt^^^^ and Dissocations. A fourth is such
^^mours as are bred of waterish (...) as Hernia Aquosa, Ascitis, and the like.
A fifth when vapors wind and the like either naturally or preternaturally do
frame a Tumor. And the sixth is that which makes the body unnatural to it
self, as Sanies, Excrements, and the like. But to bring this discourse of
Falloppius to one head, you may find six Humors generally in our bodies, of
which are generated these six Tumors, as out of Blood, Choler, Phlegm,
Melancholy, Wind, and Water, Phlegmon, Erysipelas, Oedema, Observation of
Falloppius.
Scirrhus, Pneumatocele, Hydrocele. Besides these we have Insects and other
Animals, that very often times are the occasions of Tumors: as Falloppius once
observed in a Maid, who having a large Tumor about the Inguen, the Surgeon
in his presence opening the same saw it filled with Worms. Amongst the primary
causes may well be reckoned Air, for out of its Contagion arises many Tumors.
Secondly, Contaction, as a cold Stone may occasion a Tumor: A History.
and for this Falloppius brings in another story of a Woman, who sitting upon a
cold stone was afflicted with a cold Tumor. And a third may be solution of
continuity, and this proves either occult or manifest; thus after fractures we
often times find large Apos^emes to appear, and what was the occasion of Luxation
is very often also the occasion of Tumors; as too much contracting or binding of
a part may occasion a Tumor, as Gangrene, biting of Beasts, taking of
offensive things inwardly, these being sufficient matter for Humors to breed
from. The causes of Tumors are either congestion or Fluxion.
If a Humor do suddenly excite a Tumor, this is its evident cause, and the
cause hereof is either Congestion or Fluxion.

The one when bred and carried in the part only, whilst the other makes its
further progress by Fluxion, as Aqua pendens observes. And therefere as he
advises, we ought well to consider the part mit tant, and the part recipient;
for the matter does not move it self, but is moved by some other, as by the
part mittant per (...), and by the part recipient per (...). The mittant part
ought first to be strong and able to expel the supersluities, as the attractive
is made by the part recipient. And this brings me to the inward causes;
Inward causes.
and here sometimes the matter is hedged into one place, so that it cannot make
its exit: Another may be its passage out of one place into another, and this is
properly called Fluxion a Fluendo from thus ^lowing; and as intemperiety is the
cause of pain or solution of Continuity, so also is this intemperiety made
either by outward or inward causes.

CHAP. IV.
Of the Differencies of Tumors.
THE true Differencies of Tumors by Aqua pendens are generally taken from
these two Fountains, as from Humors, and the depending parts; and from these
two do arise the chief intentions in Tumors. Falloppius offers seven things as
touching the differencies of Tumors.
Falloppius does offer seven things, which belong to the Differencies of
Tumors. First a disease, when it receives more or less: Secondly the material
cause hereof diversified, and then are its Species and Differencies diverse:
Thirdly when the efficient cause, when manifold, does draw many species to it:
The fourth is the Fountain of accidents, which follows the disease: The fifth
the time, which is the cause of all the differencies of Tumors: The sixth the
subject of the Tumor: And seventhly the motion of the disease; for it is as
its owner, and moves as he moves. Besides these are we to consider of the
times of diseases; for some are short, some long, some quick, others slow; and
therefore are we well to understand their diversity of times. Hence also are we
to consider the largness or smalness of a Tumor; and its species, without the
knowledge of which we cannot be said to understand the curative method; its
causes, which are conjunct with the disease; the circumjacent parts, and the
symptoms which do follow, either from the nature or cause thereof; and lastly
the signs. And when we have thus far arrived, we are to consider the four great
Tumors in general; as Phlegmon, it being as our first to treat of, it
proceeding of blood, the Son of nature generated for the treasure of life:
Secondly, of Erysipelas, arising from choler, the fury of the gall: Thirdly of
Oedema, coming from Phlegm, the proper instruments of the joints: Fourthly of a
Scirrnus, bred of Melancholy, the lumpy and terrene mass of the rest. Of every
of these are bred various Tumors, according to their various shapes and
changes: but of these in their proper places.

CHAP. V.
Of the Universal way of curing Tumors.
HE that will undertake the curing of Tumors, ought well to understand his
curative scopes and intentions; and the well timing of Tumors is a very great
matter here. And here may we expect a Tumor either already made, or in its
making: And hence arises a double intention; the one prohibiting Fluxion,
whilst the other cure is wrought by discharging the matter already flown;
because removing of causes do hinder Fluxion. If this happen from Plethory,
breathing of a vein is very proper; whilst in a cachochymick body purging is as
useful. When a Tumor does proceed from Fluxion, From whence comes our first
intention.
we are to begin our cure from the matter flowing, and hence comes our first
intention; and this is performed by Repellers, Revellers, and Interceptives,
save only in these seven cases set down as our seven cautions by Galen. Galens
7 Cautions.
First when the matter does flow to the Emunctories or glandulous parts:
secondly, when a venenate matter flows; for this sends it more inwards and so
poysoneth the heart: Thirdly, when this matter flows Critically, not crossing
Nature in her own way: Fourthly, when Fluxion is excited in a Cacochymick body:
Fifthly, when the part, to which this matter makes its Flux, is weak, and its
heat but mean: Sixthly, when there is vehement pain, for here is more need of
anodynes; and then seventhly, when this Fluxion is near some principal part.
And as touching these curative scopes, we are first to probihit its
Origination, and by this means to hinder its augment; secondly, to understand
the quality of such things as are to be applied; for as Galen says 13 Method.
16. we do destroy the breed of a Tumor, if we well understand its cause; and
this being ablated, the Tumor is soon seen to vanish. Fluxion and congestion
are the two chief causes of Tumors; the first offending either in Quantity or
Quality, and so with violence does seize suddenly upon any member, either by
reason of its looseness or weakness; Congestion being, when a Humor is gathered
into a part gradatim by reason of this weakness of the digestive and expulsive
faculties.

CHAP. VI.
Of Phlebotomy, its manner of Operation, and where it is most properly
performed.
IN this Discourse we have many things do offer themselves to our
consideration: As when there is a fullness, Evacuation is in use; and here is to
be let out as much as is necessary: If there be a Plethory Quoad vires, here it
is to be repeated. And as touching the part which is to have the lancet
exercised on it, whether from above or below, this also is to be minded and
regarded; because Derivation, which Evacuation from the adjacent part does not,
agrees in the beginning of the cure; because this would make the Fluxion
larger, and the Attraction to the part affected greater. And if we will make
Revulsion aright, Note.
we ought well to understand the place of Fluxion, that we may happily revell
in the opposite part: Thus if the right kidney be hurt, we open a vein in the
left arm; in Tumors of the groin vena Poplitis. And if any may question our
meaning between the upper and lower parts, Galen himself gives them this
answer: All the parts above the navel, including the Liver and Stomach, are
called the upper parts; and thus have we one part of the vena Cava called the
ascendent Trunk: the other below these are properly called the lower parts.
This knotty difference between Repulsion, Revulsion, and Derivation is not very
easily untied; I shall thus endeavor to loosen it. Fluxion arising from
Expulsion shows expulsion: if it follows from the quantity of matter, this
is either to be revoked or evacuated; and hence arises this twofold intention,
Revultion and Evacuation. This being out, another thing is to be observed, the
matter that slows has three places, one from whence it flows; the second
whither, and this is to the part affected; and thirdly through what parts,
before it arrives hither. These being found out, we are to consider how to
discharge this matter, and thereby prevent its further spreading; secondly we
are to prevent the Fluent matter, which has got passage into the channels,
that it flow not to the part affected, and so run this also into a Tumor. And
the well consideration of these may well make us use study, where, and when to
make this Revulsion; and where to make evacuation. And in both of these we are
to observe Hippocrates Rule, Hippocrates his Rule.
that all be done secundum rectitudinem: and this is to be performed two ways,
as by comparing the left with the left, and the right with the right; for with
these there is held a proper consent. Thus the Liver vein has a rectitude with
those veins which ascend up to the head. Thus upon an immoderate Flux at the
right nostril by applying a cupping glass to the Region of the Liver, the Flux
does suddenly stop; if the left, by applying one to the spleen does work and
perform the same effects. Galen has also two species of Revulsion, the one
from the upper parts to the lower, from the right to the left; the second not
so exact, which we use when the matter is much, and threatens danger. Galen
also in diseases of the upper parts does revel by opening the upper veins, as
in Tumors of the head he does order the Cephalic vein to be opened: and
Falloppius says in a Squinancy he has breathed the left arm, and the Humor
presently vanished; and in some cases this is very proper. In Tumors of the
Axillaries being venenate, if we should open the lower veins we must
consequently draw its venom inwards to the heart; and vice versa, if we should
open the upper veins in a pestilential Bubo, we may well make a free passage
for the pestiferous matter to make its address to the heart, which is not only
a great fault in the Surgeon, but also as unhappy to the Patient. And thus
have I shown some of its benefits. I now come to teach the young Surgeon how
he is to use his Lancet, How the young Surgeon should open a vein.
and prepare himself for this Operation. First let him make a pretty strict
bandage, a little above the elbow of that arm which he intends to bleed; not
too strict, because he will very seldom hereupon but meet with obstruction in
bleeding, the Artery being too close girt that it cannot discharge it self into
the vein. And as to his Lancet, let him make his apertion a little sloping; or
upon placing it a little obliquely, let him get his Lancet into the vein, and
so lift it up, not penetrating too deep, lest he commit those errors which
daily are acted by ignorant Pretenders and Quackes, who often go so deep, as that
they prick an Artery, and so cause Aneurisms and pains. Let the Orifice that
you make, be neither too great or too small; the first endangering the Division
of the vein, whilst the second runs it into a Tumor. Here also is he to judge
of the goodness or badness of the Blood, and so according to his judgment may
take away more or less; and also considering the necessity of the disease, the
strength of the Patient, and the quantity and quality of the Blood. The veins
which are generally opened are these the Frontal vein, one under the Tongue,
the Cephalic, Mediana and Basilick; but of every of those in their order, and
as necessity requires. The Frontel vein is most properly opened in infirmities
of the Face, and in pains of the Head. Two veins of the Temples opened in
continual Headache, in distillations of the Head and Eyes. The veins under the
Tongue in Anginaes, Apoplexies, pains of the Teeth, the Jugulars, good in
preventing suffocation, Squinsies, Asthmaes, Dyspnaea and the like. The three
in the Arm, the first being the outward or Cephalic, this may safely be opened
in distempers of the head, as Mania and other hot passions; The second Mediana,
so called in respect of its Situation, being made both of the Cephalic and
Basilick vein, in opening of this vein is made a general evacuation of Humors;
this often times opened in pains of the breast, and Pleurisies. The third is
Basilica, or Hepatica, by some called Axillaris, this discharges those parts
which are beneath the Neck, as the Breasts, Sides, Liver, Spleen, and
Pleurisies. And this note of the three in all sicknesses, and times, except in
time of Pestilence, That vein is to be taken, which is most full and large. In
the Feet also are three veins Ischiatiea, Saphaena, and vena Poplitis: these or
some of them are generally opened in Obstruction of the Monstrues, in bringing
them down, pains, stoppings, swellings and the like. I shall conclude this with
these directions. In an Apoplexy open the Cephalic vein; if this appears not,
open the Mediana: In a Lethargy open the Frontal or Cephalic vein: In a
Squinsey those under the Tongue: In a Pleurify the Basilica, and here bleed
while the Blood does change its color: In diseases of the Lungs vena Axillaris
or Mediana: In inflammations of the Liver Basilica or Hepatica: In obstruction
of the Spleen the Basilick or Hemorrhoidal veins: In diseases of the Womb the
Sciatick vein: In restraint of Menstrues Saphaena: In pains of the Hips first
open the Basilica, then the outward malcolus below.

CHAP. VII.
Of Evacuation of matter erring in Quality.
IF a Tumor or Fluxion happens in respect of matter not only erring in
Quantity, but also in respect of Quality, that this may be discharged we are to
consider two things: First, whether this matter may be altered, as if hot
cooled, etc. Secondly to remove the subject matter hereof, and in the first, if
Plethory, Phlebotomy is proper; if less, Pharmacy is most convenient: And
herein are we to observe these two Rules, that the matter may first be educed
or sent forth being contrary to the true genus of the part, and then, if it
does still remain, to alter it. The most proper way to deal with this is by our
later writers found out, which is by discharging the body hereof by purging
Medicines, which do work both quickly and safely, ordering the strength of the
Medicine according to the vigor and strength of the Patient: If the thin
matter cannot be digested, it is to be revelled; and bow this as to be done.
and herein also are we to mind the motion of the Blood; for if it does move to
the eyes, this is to be revelled, first by Cuppingglasses without
Scarrification, Secondly that the parts ought to be rubbed for the better
thinning the Humor, thirdly frictions which are proper for revelling from the
Center to the Circumference; And Galen names the last when parts are
obstructed, we ought to obstruct with Medicines; but these are tedious,
painful, and troublesome. Our later Writers have found out better means and
methods, as by washing with warm water, which does revell by opening the pores;
another sort is by vesicatories, and these are in great use in Apoplexies,
Observat.
Rheumatisms, or Distillations; the third and last is an actual Cautery and
Fontinels, and Setons very much in use in our times. And in all these we are to
observe, that Revulsion does take its indication from that part from whence the
Humor sloweth, not from the Humor flowing, and this being known we are to
understand the parts which we are to revell.

CHAP. VIII.
Of a Tumor, the part affected drawing to it self Preternatural Bodies.
THE greatest occasion or cause of attraction in a Tumor of a preternatural
body is chiefly to be attributed to Laxity and Intemperiety of the part, and
pain. This Intemperiety is therefore first to be removed, by running it into a
better temper. And this may be executed with oil of Roses, Violets and the
like, having fine linen rags dipped therein and so applied; and these are often to
be repeated to prevent inflammation: For this use also Unguent. Rosatum
Refrigerans Galeni, Populcon, Album Camphoratum. If pain occasioneth this, we
are here to give ease by Anodynes according to Galen 13. Meth. 1. and if any
preternatural bodies offend, discharge them, either by Medicine or Instrument:
if pain comes from venom, cure this as you do venomed bodies; and herein also
are you to consider the times of the poison, for the longer it has got room
and entrance, the deeper does it imprint its venomous Qualities and Effects. In
this case Venice Treacle, Methridate and the like, are very good, Spirit of
Wine, here also is very proper. And thus are we to vary our methods according
to the variety of our Objects. In venenate distempers, in cold poisons, we use
hot Medicines; and in hot poisons on the contrary, cold Medicines, as Rue,
Frogs, Scordium and the like, commended by Dioscorides. Galen does furnish us
with many pleasant stories of poison, and amongst the rest, he does offer, that
if any be bitten with a Scorpion, if the same Scorpion be taken, opened, and
applied to the part affected, it draws out its own poison. Observat.
This generally being here observed, that before you apply any Medicine to the
poisoned part, you first well foment the part with a hot and sharp Lixivium;
and when the place begins to grow red, to apply your other Medicines, as for
example.

. A Lixivium.
Fob. Absynth. Scord. Rut. Angelic. Hyperic. Salv. Agrimon. Veronic. au. M. j.
Rosar. Rubr. m. ss. Scabios. Menth. Meliss. an. p. ij. coquantur omnia in
Lixivio q. s. colaturae add Spirit. vini lbj. with this foment the part, and
then may you use such proper and mundifying Medicines as are most requisite,
as. Vrguent. Urguent.
Basilicon. Bu^^r. recent. au. ss, Ol. Amygdal Dulc. j. Theriac. Andromach. j.
cum Vitel. Ovor. nov. ij. misce, fiat Unguent. Or this.. Pulv. Mirrh. Alo.
Aristoloch. Rot. Irid. Florentin. Angelic. an. 3j. Theriac. solut. in aqu.
vitae 3j. cum mel. q. s. fiat unguent. Or this.. Pulp. Caricar. iiij. Ferment.
act. j. Sinap. 3iij. Sal. gem. torrefact. ss. Sal. commun. torrefact. 3j.
Sapon. moll. Theriac. Catapl.
an 3j. Vitellor. ovor. no. iij. Ol. Lilior. alb. q. s. fiat Cataplasma. Or
this Emplaster of Falloppius. Empl.
. Pic. naval. j. Sal. nitr. ss. Sem. Sinap. 3ij. Caepar. Allior. sub prunis
coct. an. iij. Assafaetid. Sagapen. an. 3iij. Stercor. Columbin. iss.
Aristoloch. rotund. Dictam. Cretens. an. 3j. Ol. Lilior. q. s. fiat Empl. If
all these fail, apply live Pigeons opened to the part affected; and if these do
not answer expectation, make a speedy address to the actual Cautery. If made by
looseness of a part.
Another cause hereof is looseness of the passages, the which, unless they be
stopped, do make a Tumor: as if an Humor do flow out of several parts of the
body into one particular part, unless this be altered, it is very easily raised
up into a Tumor; if this happens with an Intemperiety, we are to mix
restringents with coolers, as thus in Fluxes of the Head, take this for a
defensative.

. Unguent.
Pulv. Rosar. rubr. Myrtillor. Balaust. Gallar. Mastich. Sang. Dracon. Bol.
Armen. Oliband. Santal. omnium an. 3j. Ol. Rosar. q. s. Cer. alb. parum Acet.
rosat. ss. misce and coquantur omnia ad aceti consumptionem, his addere possis
albumin. Ovor. no. j. vel ij. Or this.. Pulv. Santal. omn. Sangu. Dracon. Bol.
Armen. Pic. Colophon. an 3j. his add Empl. Empl.
Diapalm. j. Acet. 3j. misce, fiat Empl. And these are proper Medicines here,
and by Galen called strengthening as well as restringent Medicines, because
they strengthen by compression, as Gal. 2. ad Glauc. 14. And having thus passed
over the general Indications arising from the matter of a Tumor, and its
curative scopes as Phlebotomy and Pharmacy, we come now to treat of the four
times of Tumors.

CHAP. IX.
Of the four times of a Tumor, and first of its beginning.
THE knowledge of these times are very proper for our Diagnosis, Prognosis, and
Cure. They are four in number, Beginning, Augment, State, and Declination. That
time most properly called the Beginning, when a part begins to tumefy: thus if
a Tumor be made in a recipient part, Expulsion and Repercussion is the
Intention; and this Repercussion is nothing else but Illision and Impulsion of
the Humor, which flows either from the whole body or some part thereof into
the affected part. This Repulsion is a double motion from the part hurt, and
from another part sending to this hurt part. And here we are to advise, that
when members are loose and soft, then are we to strengthen with Medicines of a
contrary affect, Observat.
that is with such Medicines as are compact and dry. Gal. 14. Meth. cap. 17.
says that pure cold things do repel, as cold water; and he there adds that
others which are not cold yet are restringent, as Mint, Roses, Wormwood and the
like, and these he says do repel: these for the most part are to be used in
the beginnings of Tumors, but not always in every kind of Tumor; For
experience teaches us that in Pestilential or Venereal Buboes, Observat:
if in the beginning we should apply repelling Medicines, we should send the
peccant matter to the heart. In 6 cases no Repelling Medidicines to be applied
in the beginning:
In these six cases apply no Repellers in the beginning: as if it be bred by a
venenate matter, and repelling here you soon do shut up the doors of life. If
the matter be critical, yet this does not always deny Repulsion; for in a
violent Fever, in which it happens that the matter does send it self to the
membranes of the brain, in this critical case the Fluent matter is to be
repelled, lest otherwise the brain becomes inflamed. And then when this Tumor
happens either in a Cacochymick or Plethorick body. When the matter sloweth
to the emunctories, we are not to repel, as Galen advises 6. de Comp. per loc.
cap. 2. Then when the part into which this Tumor has got footing grows
weak, as Galen also has it, Meth. 13. cap. 7. And lastly when pain and
exasperation of the part is present, for then Anodynes are more proper, as
Galen cites 6. de Comp. Medic. these I have formerly shown you in the
differencies of Tumors; but this being their more proper place to bring them
into, I have also here given you their brief repetition, and in all other
causes we may and ought to come to use Repellers in the beginning of Tumors.
Avicen speaking of repelling Medicines orders us not always to use one sort
or kind thereof, but in cold cases to use hot Repellers, and in hot cases to
use cooling Repellers. Now if pain arises in the beginning, and draws
somewhat of Humor to it, here are you to use mild Repellers, these being of a
sufficient capacity to lenify the parts being stirred up by pain. Such are
Lettuce, Purslain, Trifole, Nightshade, Endive, Violets, and Plantane; these
being endued with a waterish moisture do much better in this case, than such
which are two astringent. And out of these may you frame many sorts of
Medicines by adding thereto Oil, Water, Vinegar, and the like. And of these may
you make stronger or weaker Medicines as occasion may require: as,. Malvar.
Parietar. Plantag. an. Cataplasma*
M. j. coquantur in aqu. fontin. and contusis add farinae Fabarum, Hor dei an.
iss. Pull. Rosar. rubr. ss. Ol. Chamomeli. iiij. cum decocti. praedicti q. s.
addendo fl. Chamomel. Melilot. in pulv. a j. fiat Cataplasma tepide admovendum.

CHAP. X.
Of a Tumor in its augment.
THE Augment of an Inflammation or Tumor, as Gal. has it cap. 4. lib. de
Morb. Tempor. is, when the Influx has ceased, and the part affected Tumefies
more than it did formerly. And the reason hereof by Aquapendens is, because the
blood prolapsed out of the vessels does necessarily grow hot and putrify,
whence the blood is poured out and converted into a Spirit. A^^cen says that
the Augment is then most properly to be so called, when the Tumor increases
so that it is extended. We may know when Tumors have arrived at their Augment
by their causes and Symptoms, by comparing its times; and therefore here our
intention is twofold, for that some part has already made its Flux, and other
part is still to make; and this requires two scopes, to remove the compacted
matter, and that we take away the cause hereof. We have already discoursed of
Repulsion, we more properly in this place and time speak of Digestion or
Discussion. Here Digestives are most proper.
This Digestion is an Evacuation of a thin matter gathered in a part by
insensible Evaporation, procured by the natural heat, increased by
proportionate Medicines. And this is said to be performed four ways: Four
ways of digestion.
for first, the Humor is to be made thin, then resolved into a Vapor,
afterward drawn from the Center to the Circumference, and lastly expelled or
thrown forth by the pores of the Skin; and these therefore do show that the
proper Medicine to be here used is to be a Digestive, a Medicine hot and dry in
the third degree, and of thin parts. Of these Digestives some are mild, some
strong; some simple, others compound. Of the simples are Dill, Rue, Chamomile,
Ammoniacum, Galbanum, white Lillies, Lupines, Fenugreek and the like. Such as
are stronger are Time, Origanum, Mint, Pennyroial, Hyssop, and the like. Of the
strongest sort are Sulphur vivum and Chalk, etc. Of the compounds.. Malv.
Dialth. Absynth. Lilior. Albor. an. M. i. coquantur in aqu. fontin. q. s.
colaturae add Pulv. Rosar. Rubr. ij. Pulv. Absynth. Puleg. Fl. Chamomel.
Melilot. Catapl.
an. ij. farin. fabar. Lupinar. Hord. an. iss. cum ol. Chamomel. iij. misce,
fiat Cataplasma. Ever observing this, Observe:
that according to the strength, Age, Temper, and Constitution, of your
Patient, you endeavor to regulate and order your Medicines. If the former will
not serve, you may make use of this Empl.. Farin. Fabar. i. Farin. sem. lin.
ij. Empl. de mucilaginib. i. Melilot. ss. Pulv. Sem. Cumin. Absynth. a. i. cum
Ol. Chamomel. q. s. fiat Empl. Or this.. Fol. Mal. Alth. Violar. an. M. Catapl:
i. Rad. Alth. Irid. Lilior. Alb. an. ss. fl. melilot. Chamomel. Aneth. an. p.
i. Cumin. i. Bacc. Laur. ij. Croc. i. cum Adipe Anatis Anserini Butyri recentis
ol. Lilior. an. i. M. fiat Catapl. Or this of Aquapendens.. Myrtillor. Lactuc.
Catapl:
Solan. a. M. i. Puleg. Calamenth. Hissop. an. M. ss. coctis and in aqua
contusis add Farin. Faenugraec. iij. Pull. Betonic. Chamomel. an. i. ol. Anethi
Chamomeli a. iij. cum decocto praedicto fiat Cataplasma.

CHAP. XI.
Of a Tumor in its State.
THEN is it properly said to be in its State, when it can reach to no higher
degree, the beginning of this State does carry with it some relish of the
Augment; and here therefore are Anodynes and Digestives proper being equally
mixed. In its middle you are to mix more of the Digestives; and at last to use
Digestives altogether. It is in this state, that the matter is very near
digested and converted into Pus. And these have sharp Symptoms attend them: for
while this pus is making, there are Fever and pain as two inseparable
companions that go along with it, these in its declination taking their leave
with the Tumor. Observat:
And this we are to observe, that when nature digesteth, we ought to help her
forward in her designs. But a Tumor is very often times seen to terminate into
many other diseases; and herein we are to consider the Pulsation, if it has
been long, if pain be not diminished, when the heat endures, then is its
transition to be expected; and where any one of these are, it is an evident
sign there is matter at hand, against which we must be prepared, and so mind
the symptoms, as Pain, Tension, Hardness, Heat; for these are toublesome
companions, and then are we to assist nature in the discharge hereof, taking
away their causes: which is to be performed by Medicines, as this or the like.
(...).
. Ol. Chamomel. Rosar. a. iij. farin. fabar. pull. fl. Chamomel. an. ij. Hyssop.
iss. Sapae dulcissim. 10. misce, fiat unguent. Or this Catapl.. Lapath.
Parictar. Chamomel. Melilot. Catapl.
an. M^ss. Rosar. Rubr. pug. i. fl. Melilot. Chamomel. an. p. i. farin. H^rd.
pug. iij. cum. s. q. aquae fontinae, fiat Catapl. Catapl.
Or this.. Fl. Chamomel. Melilot. an. pug. ij. Herb. Chamomel. M. i. Coquantur
omnia cum Radic. Lilior. Albor. iiij. and simul contusis add farin.
faenugraec. ij. ol. Aneth. Chamomel. an. ij. Vini albi. q. s. fiat Catapl.

CHAP. XII.
Of a Tumor in its Declination.
WHEN all the former Symptoms do abate and cease, then we generally hold we
have arrived at the Termination: and here according to Gal. cap. 1. lib. 2.
(...). we are to use purely Digestives or Discussives; and these are to be so
much the stronger, the declination of the inflammation being in its progress.
And in this part these two Cataplasms are very proper.. Hyssop. Origan. an. M.
i. coquantur in vino albo, and simul contusis add Ol. Catapl:
Lilior. Albor. iiij. Pulv. Puleg. Absinth. an. ss. Farin. Faenugraec. iss.
misce, fiat Cataplasma. Or this. Alth. Malv. an. M. i. fl. Chamomel. Melilot.
Rosar. Rubr. an. Catapl:
pug. i. Rad. Lilior. and Alth. an. i. Sem. Lin. faenugraec. an. ss. Ficuum
pingu. no. 10. furfur. farin. hord. tritic. an. pug. ij. contusa coquantur in
aqua ad mellis crassitudinem, fine addendo ol. Chamomel. Axung. Porcin. an.
iss. misce, fiat Catapl.

CHAP. XIII.
Of a Tumor tending to Suppuration.
THE true ways and methods of curing Tumors we have already shown; but it often
times does happen that a Tumor does tend to suppuration, that is the influxed
Blood is converted into pus or matter; whence does arise another method of
curing. And here Galen does propose two ways, which are performed either by
Digestion or Concoction: but the first is the best; for these two things follow
concoction, two much generation of this matter, and an Abscess made hereof into
another place. In respect of its generation its long in curing: in respect of
the Abscess the Inflammation often times does run it self into another disease;
as often times into a Gangrene as Jubertus, observed in the wife of Rondeletius.
As touching the efficient cause of Purity or Matter, The efficient cause of
matter.
Gal. offers lib. de inaequ. intemper. cap. 3. that in an inflamed part there
is found both a native and an extraneous heat; the first preserving the part,
and does administer such things to it as belong to its health and welfare; the
other Extraneous, arises from the influxed Blood, prolapsed out of the
vessels, and there putrefying, this being contrary to the former, and so does
destroy and pull down or extinguish the natural heat. The first matter is
thick, laudable, white, equal, well tasted; but if the other prevail, it
appears livid, red or black, thin, inequal, grumous. The Tumor offers it as a
sign of its tending to suppuration by its intenseness; Signs of Suppuration.
and when the inflammation is great, and the pain vehement and does daily
increase, and when pulsation joins with this Tension and this be large, when
these signs are at hand, use neither repelling Medicines nor Digestives; but
use your greatest care to assist nature in her progress of suppuration by
maturating Medicines, that is, to prepare the matter and make it fit for
expulsion, and then to discharge it when we have thus prepared it. And that
therefore we may procure the Tumor for this suppuration, and produce a good
and laudable matter, we are to increase this Quantity of native heat, by such
Medicines as are of a digesting faculty, the which ought to be of the native
heat with the part. These are to be applied from the beginning of the Augment
to the end of the vigor. Some of these are simple, as Marshmallows, ^iggs,
Chamomile, Galbanum, Bdellium, Ammoniacum, Hogs lard, Goose grease, and the
like. Of the compound may be reckoned Empl. Diachylon cum gummi, de Mucilag.
Flos. Vnguentorum, or some of these Emplasters or Cataplasms: Of which for this
use these may be applied very properly. (...).
. Empl. Diachyl. cum gum. i. De Mucilag. Parac^ls. an. ss. Basilicon. i. Croc.
i. cum Vit^l. Ovor. no. (...).
i. misce, and fiat Empl. Or.. Bdell. Ammoniac. an. ss. Solventur in Lixivio
claro, add Calc. viv. cum Axung. contrit. Catap^.
i. Sulphur. viv. ss. Alumin. ss. mel. Opt. iss. ferment veter. ij. misce..
Rad. Lilior. i. Alth. cum Rad. Malv. an. M. ss. fl. Chamomel. Melilot. an. pug.
i. Ficuum page iij. sem. lin. faenugraec. an. iij. fiat decoctum in vino albo
q. s. and colaturae add Vit^ll* Ovor. no. ij. Croc. ss. Ol. Cham. Melilot. an.
Catap^.
ij. misce, fiat Cataplasma. Or.. Rad. and fol. Alth. Malv. an. M. i.
Coquantur, and pist^^tur ut artis est, quibus add ^arin. Tritic. ij. farin.
sem. Lin. ^e^^graec. an. i. Butyr. recent. ^l. Lili^r^. alb. Unguent. Dialth.
an. iss. Croc. ss. vitell. ovor. no. ij. misce, fiat Catapl. The matter by
these, orany of these, or the like being brought to Suppuration, this is to be
discharged, and this generally is to be performed by Incision or Caustic. And
before we attempt either of these, we are well to understand whether it be ripe
enough, A method to find whether a Tumor be ripe enough to open.
and this you may thus find out. The Tumor at this time seeming by contracting
it self to appear less than it was in its state, then it draws it self to a
point, its hardness is much abated, and therefore discussed, and by touching it
with the finger we find it Fluctuatous, the heat and pain cease, the part is
changed in its color, the Cuticula is shriveled, all these being good signs of
its Suppuration. This not being all drawn out, you are to arm your Tents or
Pledgets with this or the like.. Terebinth. Venet. i. Mell. ij. succ. Ap. ss.
Farin. Fabar. v. misce, fiat Linimentum. After the Application of which apply
Diachylon cum gummi or Empl. de Mucilaginibus. All these being discharged, and
the Orifice being well mundified and deterged, your next business is by the
helps of Sarcoticks to fill up with flesh, as Unguent. Basilicon. Aureum, and
the like, and then with Epouloticks to induce a Cicatrice as with Unguent.
Diapompholigos, Desiccativum, Rubrum, Sanativum, or Diapalma. And thus have I
run through the four times of a Tumor; and because a Phlegmon does bear the
greatest share in these four times and orderings, I shall be much briefer in
its discourse and so proceed.

CHAP. XIV.
Of a Phlegmon or Inflammation in General.
IT is by all Authors granted that a Phlegmon has its four times, and that out
of Blood besides this does arise several other Tumors, as a Carbuncle,
Gangrene, Sphacelus, Pernio, Phyma, Phygethlon and several others. And here let
us first inquire what a Phlegmon is, What a Phlegmon is.
and whence derived. It takes its name (...), which signifies to inflame.
This is an Intemperiety not only of the simple but also of the Organick parts,
as Galen observes in 13. Meth. Our latter Writers do make two distinctions
about the material cause hereof, the Blood being either natural or not natural;
the natural furnished with these conditions, being of the same Blood with that
which comes from the Sanguinary mass, having in it the four Humors and these
Qualities, as being hot in action, and moist in consistence, in color red, in
taste sweet; the unnatural being denied of these good Qualities, and also
divested and deprived hereof. Whence it arises.
Thus out of pure and benign Blood arises an exquisite Phelgmon: if this
Tumor has any other humors annexed or joined to it, it occasioneth a various
species of Inflammation; as having Choler admixed, it makes Phlegmon
Erysipelatodes; if Phlegm, Phlegmon Oedematodes; if melancholy, Phlegmon
Scirrhodes. Besides these also, other accidents belong to Inflammation; for if
an inflammation does get into the membranes of the brain, it makes Phrenitis;
when it creeps into the Tunica conjunctiva, there it frames Opthalmia; when
into the Fauces, Angina; into the Pleura, Pleuritis, and so into the
Emunctuories, Bubo. Its causes may arise either inwards or outward: Its causes:
Inward causes are Plethory or plenty of Blood; and this not having its free
passage must necessarily inflame and putrify, inflamed heat in the Sanguinary
mass, and this often times does exalt it self into Fevers, the part hot and
painful does draw the Blood, and this makes up the Inflammation. Outward
causes may be said to be Aires, which do inculcate and shut in this putrid
matter; Attrition, Attraction, solution of Continuity or Luxation, Signs:
these or any of these causing pain and so Inflammation. As to the signs, when
you perceive a Tumor is soon made, and does soon increase, you may properly
judge this an Inflammation; when the patient does perceive a great heat, and
burning arising from this heat, the color of the part Florid and Red
occasioned by heat and thinness of parts, pain great, and a pulsation joined to
this pain, by reason of its hot intemperiety, when any part extends it self
upon compression, aggravation, and vellication of the nervous parts, and the
veins evidently appear, which before lay hid, when Tension is made by reason of
the constipated matter, all these are sufficient signs which may pretend to
paint out Inflammation. I shall follow Guido's method in the cure of
Inflammations; Of the cure of a Phlegmon*
as first by removing the cause, then come to the Inflammation it self, and so
to the discharging of the peccant matter: And for this he propounds four
methods, Four methods according to four times by Guido.
according to the four times; and whereas a Phlegmon has a Beginning while the
Blood is nowing, an Augment when in its Flux it is made hotter, a State when it
is converted into Pus or Matter, and a Declination when the Inflammation is
digested, resolved, and the Tumor diminished: So also the four Intentions
shall be these, first in having a respect to the order of diet, secondly to
hinder the Flux of Humors, thirdly to discharge the Matter, and then lastly to
correct and amend the Symptoms. The first does consist in moderating the Air,
and this more properly in a long inflammation: the second is ease and quiet,
because too much motion heateth the body: the third is watching and sleep; for
as the one does put our bodies into action, so the other does refresh and cool
them: the fourth and last is order of diet: a fifth may be added, which is
retention or inanition of excrements; for hard and dry excrements do obstruct,
and hence are bred sharp and malign vapors, which do course through the whole
body, and do render the inflammation more dangerous; and then actions of the
mind may take a part here also. The whole cure may be performed by Diet,
Pharmacy, and Surgery. Diet for prohibiting Inflammation of superfluous
Humors and their generation, and making them more unfit for Fluxion; and here
the Patient's diet should be thin, His diet.
moist and moderately cooling: as broths wherein are boiled Lettuce, Borage,
Bugloss, Spinach, Purslain, or Marigolds; if in Summer time, our green sauce
(as we call it) is very good being made of Sorrel; if he will drink wine, let
him mix it with three parts of water to one wine. Fluxion is discharged, if we
dismiss its causes, as Plethory, and Cacochymy; and these may be lessened
either by Phlebotomy or Pharmacy. If the Inflammation be large, and the Patient
young, strong, and full of Blood, we may safely breath a vein: Observat.
and here we are to observe, that we breath not a vein too far distant from the
part affected, both for Revulsion and Derivation; the first being to be made in
the opposite part, whilst the second is made in the same side near the part
affected. And since the body is seen seldom so clean, but that there is some
ill humors or other mixtures with the Blood, purging also is here said to be
convenient; and for this case Cassia newly extracted, Tamarinds, Sebestins, and
Syrup of Roses are very excellent: or if you please to take any of these, as
for Electuaries, Bolus, or purging potions. As. Electuar. Diacatholic. vi.
Lenitiv. ss. Cass. recent. extr. Electuary.
i. pull. Diasenn. i. Cremor. Tartar. ij. misce, and of this let the patient
take the quantity of a Chestnut every morning: or this Bolus.. Cassiae recenter.
extr. i. pulp. Tamarind. ss. misce, Bolus.
and cum Saccharo fiat Bolus. Or this Potion. Potio.
. Aqu. Endiv. Fumar. Cichor. an. i. Aq. Rosar. Damasc. vi. Electuar. Diacathol.
vi. Electuar. e Suc. Rosar. 3ij. Crem. Tartar. ss. misce, fiat potio mane
sumenda. The body being thus discharged, cooling Syrups, Electuaries or
Trochisces are very properly to be used, as Syrup of Violets, Roses, Mirtills,
Poppies, Wood Sorrel, or the like; or these following, Troch.
, Spec. Diarrhod. abbat. ij. Aromatic* Rosat. Troch. de Rhabarb. an. i.
Sacchar. candit. solut. in Decoct. Agrimon. Veronic. iiij. misce, fiant
Trochisci. Of which let the patient take a dram or two a little before Dinner.
An Electuary for this use may be this, Electuary:
. Cons. Rosar. Rubr. Violar. an. ij. Conserv. Lujul. Paralis. an. i. cum Syrup.
Oxyacanth. Granator. Violar. an. ss. misce, fiat Electuarium, of which let the
patient take the quantity of a Nutmeg at his pleasure. Clysters also may be
very necessary; and of these may this very successively be administered..
Clysters:
Rad. and Fol. Malv. Alth. Parietar. Violar. Agrimon. Veronic. an. M. i. fl.
Melilot. Chamomel. an. M. ss. sem. Anis. Faenicul. dulc. an. ss. sem.
Faenugraec. Lin. an. ij. coquantur in s. q. aqu. fontinae ad lbi. colaturae
add Sacchar. rubr. ij. Diacatholic. i. Sal. Commun. pug. i. Ol. Violar. Rosar.
an. i. Purging potion.
misce fiat Enema. Or this purging potion.. Herb. Agrimon. Veronic. Cuscuth.
Scabios. an. M. ss. sem. Anis. Faenicul. an. ij. Liquirit. ras. ss. coquantur
in s. q. aqu. fontinae ad iiij. colaturae add Electuar. Diacatholic. vi. Sir.
Rosar. solutivar. cum Rhabarb. iss. misce, fiat potio: these being all managed
with a prudent conduct according to the variety of occasions. We arrive next to
the part affected, Revulsion:
and this is to be dealt with by Revulsives, Interceptives and Repellers.
Revulsion.
And as I have already declared that Revulsion is made in the opposite part, so
such things as are here most requisite are to be hot and attractive; of this
sort are fomentations, made of Sage, Chamomile, Calamint, Hyssop, Lavender,
Pennyroial, Dill, Time, and the like; these being boiled in water, and applied
very hot, until the part looks red. Lixiviums also are here very convenient,
Vesicat^ries.
and Vesicatories, especially if the Humor be fierce and plentiful, as in
Inflammations of the eyes, these being to be applied to the neck. Aqua pendens
gives us this as the best Epispastick.. Cantharid. praeparat. i. sem. Sinap. i.
Ferment. ss. Defensatives.
Aceti Scillitic. q. s. fiat vesicatorium. After these Defensatives are to be
chiefly used, these being most properly said to be for hindering of Fluxion,
being in Quality cold and dry, fit for contracting the vessels: as. Bol. armen.
Sangu. dracon. Mastich. an. ij. Empl. Diapalm. ij. misce, expande super corio,
and apply it. A stronger than this, is. Bol. armen. Sangu. dracon. Mirtill.
Balaust. cort. Granator. Coral. rubr. Sus Cin. an. ss. Farin. Tritic. ij.
album. Ovor. no. i. cum Aceti and Olei q. s. fiat Restrictivum. Observe.
To prevent all mistakes and errors we are to be well advised, that after
Application of these Medicines we commit not that error which is too common
amongst some Chirurgions, who roll strictly upon the affected part, not
considering thereby that they both do detain the Humors, and often times by this
their ignorance or carelessness they make a fair way for the invasion of a
Gangrene into the part. The third and last way is by Repellers performed,
Repellers.
and their chief use is to hinder the Fluxion of any Humor to the part
affected. These should be cold in Quality; and so should also be either moist
and waterish, or dry and restringent: and of these some may be Plantane,
Balaustines, Roses, Dragons blood, Whites of Eggs, Vinegar, Bolarmeny, Myrtles,
and the like, as thus.. Aceti Rosati. Catapl.
iiij. Album. Ovor. no. ij. Bol. armen. sangu. Dracon. an. ij. Pulv. Myrtillor.
Rosar. rubr. an. i. misce, fiat Cataplasma. Or this,. succ. Semperviv.
Portulac. Plantag. an. i. Acet. Rosat. Vin. Rubr. an. iss. Ol. Myrtin. Unguent.
Rosar. an. i. pulv. Myrtillor. Rosar. Balaust. Bistort. an. i. misce, fiat
unguentum. Observe.
And this thing we are to observe, that these repelling Medicines, by how much
they do intercept, they are not to be applied to the affected part, but only
about it encompassing it. And this may serve for curing of Phlegmons in
General. We come next to treat of the curing of Phlegmones according to the
several times.

CHAP. XV.
Of curing a Phlegmon in its beginning.
IN the beginning of a Phlegmon, repelling Medicines are most proper, as Galen
does offer, for hindering or stopping, the matters descent or arriving to the
part affected. Question.
But lest any may object, as Aquapendens does propose, why in the beginning,
the Blood being in the smaller and capillary vessels, may we not insensibly
evacuate this matter by the affected part, as by digesting it, and drawing it
out from other parts, and by attenuating and turning it into a vapor,
Repellers being wholly dismissed? I give, being led by the same Author, this as
an answer, Answer.
we are rather to use Repellers in the beginning of an Inflammation for these
causes. By several reasons.
For first, that which flows is but small and thin, and therefore by the help
of Repelling Medicine we send this Fluxed matter to another part. Secondly,
because Evacuation by Repulsion is sooner performed, for it is by this Medicine
alone that the Blood is sent and dimissed out of the smaller into the greater
vessels. And thirdly, by these we do perform another intention, Their use and
benefit.
which is the allaying the extraneous heat. And these are to be regulated
according to the Crisis of the body; for if there be a hot crisis both of the
whole and the affected part, here are we to use mild and gentle Repellers, as
the white of an Egg, Rosewater, and Vinegar, and oil of Roses, leaving out the
Vinegar if you please, dipping fine rags herein and applying them to the
affected part: Catapl:
Or this Cataplasm,. Pulv. Rosar. i. Farin. Hord. ij. coquantur in Posca and
fine addendo parum ol. Rosar. As also on the contrary, if the crisis be cold,
the Inflammation large, we are to use stronger; and let this serve for a reason
hereof, because here is signified a great plenty of Blood, and here
conveniently may be used these following, Unguent. Another
. Unguent. Rosat. lot. in aqu. Plantag. pulv. Rosar. Plantag. an. ij. Aceti
parum, fiat unguent. Or this.. Ol Rosar. i. Aqu. Rosar. iss. Albumin. ovor. no.
ij. misce, or this Cataplasm,. farin. Hord. ij. pulv. Rosar. Plantag. Catapl.
Unguent:
Malicor. an. iss. cum succis Semperviv. Lactuc. and Solan. Oxycrat. an. q. s.
fiat Cataplasma. Or this Unguent.. Mucilag. sem. Psyll. extr. cum aqu. Plantag.
and Acet. Rosar. iiij. succ. Plantag. Solan. an. ss. ol. Rosar. i. coquantur ad
succorum consumptionem, fine addendo Vuguent. Rosat. i. misce, Catapl:
fiat unguent. Or this,. Lactuc. Malv. Plantag. an. M. ss. Semperviv. M. i.
Coquantur in Oxycrat. q. s. fiat Catapl. fine addendo pulv. Rosar. Rubr.
Plantag. cort. Granator. an. ij. Farin. Hord. iiij. misce, fiat Cataplasma; but
if the beginning does turn toward the Augment, then may you use this,. Malvar.
parietar. Plantag. an. M. iss. coquantur in aqua and contusis add farin. Hord.
ij. pulv. Rosar. R. fl. Chamomel. Melilot. an. ss. ol. Chamomel. iiij. misce
cum decocti praedicti q. s. fiat. Catapl. This here also is to be observed,
that these Medicines be often times changed, lest they do inflame the affected
part.

CHAP. XVI.
Of Curing a Phlegmon in its Augment.
GAlen. cap. 4. lib. de Morbis, does mention that for the Augment, when the
Flux cease, and the part seems more affected than it was formerly, and
therewith increases; and the reason hereof may be this, because the Blood,
which formerly was shut up in the vessels, now falls out, and does grow hot and
putrefy, an at length is converted into a vapor. And hence does arise this
Intention, the discussing of this vapor, or evaporation of this matter. And
this being discharged out of the vessels, is not to be treated with Repellers,
Cured by Digestives.
or cured thereby, as it was when it was hedged in; but rather evacuated by
Digestives. These (...) do cure by educing the Fluxed matter, and converting it
into a vapor, and so do discharge it by insensible passages or pores of the
Cutis. And of those some are simple, some compound; some mild, others strong.
Of the simples are Chamomile, Marshmallows, white Lilly Roots, Faenugreek,
Melilot, Cumins, Rue, Bays, and the like. Stronger are, Time, Origanum, Mint,
Pennyroial, Calamint, Hyssop, etc. The strongest are Nitre, Sulphur Vivum, Lyme
once extinguished. Out of these mixed with some of the former Repellers you may
make a compound Medicine, they being a like tempered are very proper here. As,.
fol. Malv. Catapl.
Absinth. Plantag. an. M. ij. Coquantur in aqua fontinae, contundentur.
Trajectis add farin. Fabar. Hord. an. i. pulv. fl. Chamomel. Melilot. Rosar.
rubr. Absynth. an. iss. Ol. Rosar. Chamomel. an. i. Oximelit. simpl. ij. misce,
Catapl. Authoris:
fiat Catap. Or,. Chamomel. rad. Alth. Aneth. an. M. ss. rad. Lilior. alb. no.
ij. coquantur omnia in aqu. Hyssop. q. s. fiat colatura, Colaturae add farin.
Fabar. Hord. Lupinor. an. ij. pulv. sem. Faenugraec. Rosar. an. ij. Ol. Rosar.
Aneth. an. iss. misce, fiat Catapl.

CHAP X. XVII.
Curing of a Phlegmon in its State.
THAT is generally related and supposed the State, when the matter can make no
further progress, that is, when very much pain is perceived, and a great heat
does accompany the part. There may a question arise, what Medicines may be here
most proper? Gal. chapt. 16. lib. 13. Method. says, that Digestives do chiefly
take place here; and in another place, chapt. 4. lib. 1. (...) does offer, that
the indication of curing a Phlegmon in its State, ought to be both Repelling
and Digesting. In the first part therefore of the State Repellers and
Digestives equally mixed are very proper; Catapl.
of this sort may be ordered such as these.. rad. Alth. iij. Lilior. alb. i.
fol. Malv. Partetar. Plantag. Chamomel. an. M. j. sem. Lin. and Faeungraec. an.
3iij. coquantur omnia in Aquae fontinae q. s. fine addendo farin. Hord. Fahar.
Lupinor. an. iss. pulv. Rosar. rubr. fl. Melilot. Chamomel. an. 3ij. Ol. Anethi
Rosarum an. ij. misce, fiat Cataplasma. Or this.. Lapath. Parietar. Malv.
Plantag. an. M. i. contundentur and coquantur, colaturae add pulv. fl.
Melilot. Chamomel. an. ss. pulv. Rosar. rubr. Catapl:
3i. misce, fiat Catapl. Or this.. rad. Lilior. alb. ij. fl. Chamomel. i.
Aneth. Calaminth. an. M. ss. coquantur in a qua fontina q. s. colaturae add
pulv. fl. Chamomel. Melilot. an. 3ij. pulv. sem. Aneth. ss. farin. Hord. Fabar.
an. Catapl:
ij. farin. sem. Faenugraec. ss. misce and cum Ol. Chamomel. Unguent. Dialth.
an. iss. fiat. Cataplasma.

CHAP. XVIII.
Of curing a Phlegmon in its declination.
IN its declination according to Galen. cap. 1. lib. 6. pure Digestives are to
be used, such as you already have ordered you in the general cure of Tumors;
and you may very well follow the same method, and use the same Medicines, as
you have already set you down there for your direction. I shall conclude this
chapter with this history. A History.
Hildanus relates of a Phlegmon in the Perinaeum equalling the bigness or
largeness of a Goose Egg, accompanied with a pricking pain, with a hardness
both of the Scrotum and penis, for which was applied this suppurating
Cataplasm. Catapl.
. rad. and fol. Alth. Malv. an. M. i. coquantur and pistentur, his add farin.
Tritic. ij. farin. sem. Lin. Faenugraec. an. i. Butyr. recent. ol. Lilior. alb.
Unguent. Dialth. an. iss. Croc. ss. Vitell. Ovor. no. ij. misce, fiat
Cataplasma, of which is to be applied warm two or three times in a day. The
abscess being broken, a great quantity of fetid and putrid matter came out for
many days together, and continued so long, that it left a large Ulcer; for the
cleansing of which was used spirit of Wine and Unguent. Aegyptiacum, over which
was applied this Cataplasm.. farin. Lupinor. Fabar. an. Catapl.
iss. pulv. summitat. Absynth. Scord. Rut. an. ij. Coquantur, and cum Oxieml.
simpl. q. s. fiat Catapl. fine addendo, dum calens est, Mirrh. Alo. an. iss.
The Ulcer by these being well deterged, and filled with flesh by a good
cicatrice and well ordering of the body, the Patient recovered to his perfect
health.

CHAP. XIX.
Of an Erysipelas.
FROM Choler arises this Erysipelas, accompanied with many other Tumors,
bred also from this Humor as Herpes miliaris, Herpes exedens, Pustulae and the
like. There is generally allowed three sorts of Choler, Natural:
natural, unnatural, preternatural. The natural is that fourth part of the
Blood, which has a hot and dry temper in it, being of a reddish yellow color,
and bitter-sweet in taste, much like tosted honey. This is one of the natural
Humors, so called for a double cause, because they perfect natures work, and
are as vehicles for nutriment and conservation of the body; for if man were
without blood he could not be nourished, if without Spirits he could not be
said to live; and were it not for this natural bilious Humor man would soon
swell into a Dropsy. Second not natural.
A second sort hereof is said to be not natural, because this yields no
perfection to the body, its substance being altogether unfit for this office of
nutriment, this has in it no bitterness or sharpness: of this sort is that of
the bladder of the Gall; and should this contain any sharpness in it it would
soon fret the guts into pieces; and besides this, daily experience shows it
is free of all Acidity, for it daily passes through the Kidneyes into the
Bladder, and then makes its exit. But this Question in the Physic Schools
has been very often times controverted. Quest.
Was not this Humor framed and ordered for deterging the capillary vessels,
that Chyle might pass to the Liver, and so the Blood hereby consequently there
made? Answ.
But this consequence may be very readily denied, for the Chyle does never
reach the Liver; and this may appear different from the other, in that it is
not so natural. Third preternatural.
There is a third sort hereof different from both the former, being neither
good to help the body in its nourishment, nor yet so mild as unnatural; which
although it do not nourish the body, yet does it not offer any mischief to it;
this is both unprofitable, and unnatural, and preternatural, always hurting
the body; and so is called preternatural Choler, which properly perse and in
se is apparently so. There is another sort of preternatural Choler, which
mixeth it self with other Humors, and does make them worse; the one having in
it Serum and Phlegm, and this is very fit and proper for obstruction. There is a
second sort does mix it self with tough viscous Phlegm, Its differencies.
and this is called Bilis vitellina; and this does promote and help forwards
obstructions. A third is burnt choler by admixture, and this does make and
frame our great pains and excoriations, whilst it does lodge in the vessels;
and when it gets out from hence, is the most apt Author of cancerous Tumors
and Melancholic ulcers. And thus much of the differencies of Choler. We now
arrive to an Erysipelas, the proper subject of this Chapter, and Guido does
give that distemper which adhereth to the Cutis the name of Erysipelas. The
names of Erysipelas.
Some of the Ancients called it Ignis sacer; ignis, because it burns like
fire; sacer, being sent as a punishment from the Sacred hand: but it is more
properly called Erysipelas, quasi (...). For as (...) does signify redness (by
some called (...)) so (...) does as well signify near. And thus may we define
it, calling it Erysipelas, because it makes all its neighboring parts red: It
is a hot Tumor, arising from the aforesaid choler, possessing some exterior
part of the body. What it is.
A true and simple Erysipelas is bred of thin, subtle, hot, and chollerique
blood; and this appearing in any one part of the body does form and fashion
this disease; and because it cannot by reason of its thinness have any
consistence in the inward flesh, it therefore does content it self with getting
into the outward parts of the cutis, and there it does exercise its terrifying
Qualities. You may know it by its hot signs, Signs.
having belonging to it a large heat, pain, a red color, or rather somewhat
turning yellowish. But because these signs are so near related to those of a
Phlegmon, Its differencies from a Phlegmon.
I shall here make a larger distinction between them. And thus it first does
differ from a Phlegmon, in that a Phlegmon does apprehend both cutis and
subject flesh; in this only the cutis is concerned. Secondly, this is much
hotter, for you see it appear as it were burnt up by its blisters, by how much
the choler is hotter than blood. Thirdly, here is less pain. Fourthly, its
redness does often times change into a blackness or blewness. Fifthly, it
yeildeth to the touch. Sixthly, upon the touch the redness does vanish.
Seventhly, here is no tension. Eighthly, it does differ from a Phlegmon, in that
it never does move from its place; whereas this spreads it self and increases
about its neighboring parts. That which does proceed from yellow choler is
mildest; Praesage.
it is a bad sign if an Erysipelas turns inwards. In Tumors, Wounds,
Fractures, and Dislocations, it is generally held mortal; or if it does tend to
suppuration it is no ways to be accounted a good sign, neither may it be
judged but very very bad, if it do possess the neighboring parts of a bone
being bare. Cure.
As touching its Cure, according to Galen in his Art medendi, whereas it is a
disease increasing in a great quantity of choler, this is to be evacuated, and
the whole Cure performed by diet, Surgery and Pharmacy. As to the first, we
are to observe that the Air be cold and moist, so naturally, or made so by Art;
let the Patients diet be cold and moist, and as this choler is thin, let him
take such diet as is cooling and thickning; and for his broths may very
properly be boiled these herbs. Lettuce, Beets, Mallows, Chichory Sorrel, and
the like. Chicken-broth here also is very good, Barley water, Ptysane, to which
may be added Borage, Buglosse, and the former, or some of them. For his common
drink he may take Almond-milks made of blancht Almonds, the cold seeds,
Wood Sorrel and the like, sweetened with Syrup of Violets, Lettuce, Lemmons,
Woodsorrel, etc. or such Juleps or Emulsions as these are very proper. The
Authors Julep herein:
. Hord. perlat. ij. fol. Lujul. Lactuc. Acetos. an. M. ss. fl. 3 Cord. an. pug.
i. coquantur in aqu. fontinae. q. s. colaturae add sir. Papaver. erratic.
Violar. an. ij. Lap. prunell. ss. aqu. mirabil. ss. spirit. Sulphur. gutt. 10.
misce pro Julapio.. Amygdal. dulc. excorticat. i. sem. 4. frigid. major. an.
ij. sem. Lactuc. Papaver. alb. Emulsion^
an. i. contundentur in mortario marmoreo sensim affundendo aqu. Hord. and
Liquirit. lbiss. in colatura solve sir. Violar. ij. Lujul. Acetos. an. i.
spirit. Vitriol. ss. misce, hujus sumat ad libitum. Let the Patient's body be
kept open by convenient clysters, Apozemes or Purges, Bleeding.
let him shun all watchings and anger. As touching Bleeding, in this case it is
very disputable, whether it be at all proper or not; but if it be convenient at
any time, and at any place, it is when it gets into the head and face, and then
are we to open the cephalic vein, for prevention of a Pleurify or Squinancy.
In an Erysipelas Phlegmonodes we have nothing which may contradict Phlebotomy;
but in other cases I think it neither necessary or safe; in that you draw
hereby the good as well as the bad blood out, and leave the thinner part of the
blood behind. And since I have given these directions to arm your self with
every instrument, which may quell or allay the heat and fury of this Tumor,
you are to keep its doors always open, and thereby discharge these peccant
Humors; and this you are to do before you apply any outward means or
Medicines. As for Simples very useful, here you may take Cassia newly drawn, of
Manna, Tamerinds, Rhubarb, Prunes, Senna; out of these and the like may also be
made many famous and excellent compound Medicines, having in them a sufficient
power to pull down the heat and fury of this disease: and here may properly be
taken such a potion as this. Potion.
. fol. Senn. i. Crem. Tartar. iss. Cinnamon. elect. ss. Spic. gr. iiij.
infundantur per noctem in aqu. Cichor. Endiv. Lactuc. an. iiij. in colaturae
iiij. solue Electuar. Diacatholic. i. aqu. Cinnamon. tenuior. vel hordeat. ij.
misce, fiat potio mane sumend. Or this of the Author, Potio purgans.
. Senn. Alexandr. ss. Rhabarb. iss. Macer. Z. Z. Caryophyl. an. i. sem. Anis.
Faenicul. dulc. Carn. omnium contus. an. ij. stent omnia per noctem in
infusione aqu. Rosar. and vini alb. an. lbss. ad iiij. colaturae add Mann.
opt. solut. ss. sir. Rosar. solutivar. i. misce, fiat potio mane sumenda. For
an Electuary take this, Electuar.
. Cass. recenter extr. vi. pulp. Tamerind. iij. Elect. Linitiv. Diacatholic.
an. ss. Electuar. e succ. Rosar. vi. Crem. Tartar. i. pulv. Rhabarb. Cinamom.
an. i. Resin. Zallap. i. misce, fiat Electuarium. Cujus sumat patiens q. nuc.
moschat. omni mane vel omni secundo mane. Pill.
. Pil. aggregativ. ij. De Rhabarb. i. Diagrid. gr. iij. cum sir. Violar. fiant.
pil. no. 20. harum sumat patiens 3 vel 4 omni mane, according to the strength
and Constitution of the Patient. Clysters here also are very useful and
beneficial, the Patient being more ready and willing to admit of these than any
of the former.. fl. Chamomel. Melilot. summitat. Parietar. Malv. Lactuc.
Violar. an. M. ss. sem. Clysters:
Anis. Caru. an. ij. fiat decoctum ad lbi. in colatura solve Electuar.
Diacatholic. vj. Sacchar. rubr. iij. Ol. Chamomel. ij. Sal parum misce, fiat
Enema. Or this,. fol. Alth. Malv. Parietar. Another.
fl. Chamomel. Melilot. an. p. i. fl. 3 cordial. an. pug. ss. sem. Lin.
Faenugraec. an. ij. coquantur omnia in Lacte ad lbi. colatura solve Electuar.
linitiv. ss. Electuar. e succ. Rosar. ij. sir. Rosar. solutivar. ij. ol. Rosar.
Violar. Another.
a. i. vitellor. ovor. no. i. misce, fiat Enema. Or this if you please..
Decoct. Malv. Violar. Lactuc. Hord. an. q. s. ad lbi. colaturae add mell.
Rosar. iiij. Sal. i. ol. Violar. iij. misce: this is very convenient for a
young and tender person. After these we arrive to Topics, and these in the
beginning should be cold and moist without any adstriction; for this would make
the Matter more sharp, and so make it to corrode and ulcerate further in: and
for performing this office I have here furnished you with these various
Medicines. Unguent.
. ol. Rosar. ij. aqu. Rosar. iiij. Albumin. Ovor. no. ij. misce, fiat
unguentum. Unguent.
Or.. Troch. alb. Rhasis sine Opio i. Plumb. ust. and lot. Camphorae, an. ss.
Unguent. Rosat. ij. Pomat. j. Unguent. alb. camphorat. Diapompholig. Unguent.
an. ij. misce, fiat unguent. Or,. Mucilag. sem. Lin. extr. in aqu. Rosar. and
Plantag. i. pulv. Lithargyr. aur. Ceruss. an. ss. Unguent. Rosat. Populeon. an.
ss. misce, fiat unguent. Or this.. ol. Violar. Rosar. an. ij. Unguent. Rosat.
iss. Litharg. aur. Unguent.
and argent. an. ss. unguent. Tuth. ij. Ceruss. vi. Camphor. i. succ. Sem.
perviv. Plantag. an. ss. misce, fiat unguent. In the application of these or
any of these this you must observe, that they are very often to be renewed, lest
by their being left too long on the part affected they rather inflame than
allay the fury and heat of the part affected; neither are they to be used too
long, lest they do extinguish the native heat of the part; and then are you to
abstain from their use, when the Patient does acquaint you his pricking pain or
heat in the part affected is not so much as it formerly was, and when the part
appears more tepid to the touch, and then thirdly, when the red color does
begin to turn into a bluish or black color. After these you are to use
Digestives, that thereby the part may get warmth and strength, which for some
time has been disabled of its native heat: and for this such a Medicine as
this is good.. farin. Hord. Orob. an. ij. farin. sem. Lin. iss. coquantur in
oxycrato, Catapl:
fine addendo pulv. Rosar. rubr. fl. Chamomel. Melilot. an. ij. ol. Aneth.
Chamomel. an. i. misce, fiat Cataplasma. Catapl.
Or this.. pulv. Absynth. Rosar. rubr. Betonic. fl. Chamomel. an. ij. farin.
Hord. Fabar. vel Lupinor. an. ij. cum Melle q. s. fiat Cataplasma. I shall
conclude this Chapter with a History of a Maid here in Norwich, A History.
who was much troubled with an Erysipelas in her breast, accompanied with a
fever, pain, watchings, blisters, and the like; she being ordered a cold and
moist diet, and her body being kept open with Chologogick clysters as often
repeated as occasion required, keeping her Room cool by often times sprinkling
vinegar thereon, and prescribing her convenient Juleps and Emulsions, I applied
to the part affected this Unguent.. ol. Rosar. ij. Cer. flav. ss. Vitellor.
ovor. no, ij. misce, fiat unguent. She being dressed three or four times in a
day, until the pricking pain abated, with this unguent, afterward was applied
this Digestive for warming and comforting the part. farin. Hord. Catapl:
i. farin. Fabar. iij. coquantur in vino q. s. tunc add pulv. fl. Chamomel.
Melilot. an. ss. Scord. i. ol. Rosar. Chamomel. an. i. vitell. ovor. no. i.
misce, fiat Catapl. and if any blisters do arise, this following unguent is
very good and proper. Unguent.
. Ol. violar. Rosar. an. ij. L^^harg. aur. ss. Thur. ij. Ceruss. Plumb. ust.
an. ss. succ. Plantag. S^mpe^^^^. an. ss. misce in mortario (...) urgnentum. Or
this. (...), (...)
aur. ii. pulv. Alumin iiss. albumin. ovor. no. i. been agitatum cum oleo
Rosar. iij. Acet. i. misce, fiat unguent.

CHAP. XX.
Of an Erysipelas in the Face.
THIS for the most part arises from the nose, it first growing red, then does
swell, and then spreads it self, and sometimes it does get into the head, and
neck. The causes which may occasion this may be said to be two, being either
inward or outward; outward as contusions, wounds, or the like, which may be
accounted capable enough to excite heat and pain; or inwardly taken too much
hot wine, spice, or the like, a hot intemperiety of the Liver, which does breed
this so plentiful a quantity of Blood, a redundancy hereof, and a Fluxion of
Humors to the part affected. (...).
The cure hereof is much different from the former; and in this we are to make
a diligent search as touching its causes, happening either by an outward or
inward occasion. If by an outward, this being removed, the Erysipelas does
cease; if from a redundancy of chollerick Blood which flows into the face,
the outward veins are to be opened; and hence do arise three intentions in this
cure, first a cooling of the hot intemperiety of the Blood; of evacuating and
discharging of this chollerique Blood; and thirdly to hinder this Fluxion. And
these are to be performed by Diet, Surgery.
Surgery and Pharmacy; by Surgery in Revulsion by Phlebotomy, which ought
to be performed in the arm in the same side; and here you may bleed
plentifully, if the patient can endure it; if not, you may repeat it: besides
this other Revulsives are good, as Cupping-glasses, Vesicatories, these being
applied to the neck and shoulders. Pharmacy does relate to the better tempering
the intemperiety; and for this you may take these as proper Medinces, being
very good and useful in this case to be used and administered, as, Electuar:
. Pulp. Prunor. damascinor. i. Crem. Tartar. i. Rhabarb. ij. Cinnamon. pulv. ss.
Santal. citrin. pulv. ij. misce, fiat Electuarium; cujus sumat patiens q. nuc.
castaneae omni mane. Or this potion, Potio:
. Tamerindor. ij. Prunor. Jujub. an. par. no. 5. Passular. enucleat. ss. Hord.
mundat. pug. i. sem. Melon, Lactuc. an. iij. fl. 3 cordial. an. pug. ss. fiat
decoctum, in colaturae vj. solve Cass. recent. extr. ss. pulv. Jalap. ss. sir.
Rosar. solutivar. ij. misce, fiat potio. Or this of the Author.. rad.
Petroselin. Faenicul. Cichor. Lactuc. incis. an. i. coquantur in aquae fontinae
ut colatura redeat ad lb. huic add vini albi lb. in his simul mixtis stent per
noctem in infusione Senn. mundat. ss. Rhabarb. i. Polypod. querc. ss. sem.
Faenicul. Anis. contus. an. ij. Epithem. Ceterach. Capil. vener. an. p. j. ZZ.
i. hujus infusionis sumato iiij. his add pulv. Jalap. ss. Crem. Tartar. ij.
sir. Rosar. solutivar. ij. misce, sumat cum costodia. As to his diet which is
the third part, let the Patient abstain from Wine, and instead thereof let him
drink Barley water, or Julep of Roses, or cooling Emulsions, such as you have
already directed you. And thus much of the inward causes. As to the outward
Applications, they ought to carry with them a moderate temper, between heat and
cold; for when heat and pain do urge, these do call for ease and mitigation;
and if pain does proceed from heat, here most properly are we to use coolers,
without astriction, as is the Decoction of Mallows, mixed with a little oil of
Violets or Roses; in the end we are to use Digestives, as we have formerly
directed and prescribed. And thus much of an Erysipelas getting into any part
of the head. A country man being vexed with an Erysipelas Phlegmonodes, A
History.
the which being anointed by the advice of a Barber with oil of Roses for some
days, (this happening in the arm) hence did arise pain, inflammation, and
other symptoms, so that at length the whole hand was correpted with a Gangrene,
the which at last being well scarrified, and such convenient Medicines applied,
as I have shown in my discourse of a Gangrene, he afterward recovered. Let
this serve as a caution to young Chirurgions, that Oil does add to the flame
rather than extinguish it, as Galen does offer in lib. 5. de Simpl. A
Gentlewoman, a person of very good Quality, A History.
had an Erysipelas all over her face, the which at length had a Herpes miliaris
joined to it, in which time the Erysipelas imprinted its marks, so as the whole
face was marked therewith; she being of a plethorick constitution, when neither
by the advice of Physicians by bleeding, purging, or application of several
external Medicines good could be done, after the applying of several Unguents
this at last being applied brought her unto her health, as,. Unguent. de
Lithargyr. i. Hydrargyr. extinct. cum succ. Limon. ss. Tuth. praeparat. iij.
Ceruss. lapid. Calaminar. praeparat. an. ij. aqu. Rosar. acet. Rosar. an. iss.
agitentur omnia in mortario and pistillo plumbeis. Of this you may read in
Observat. 34. Riverii.

CHAP. XXI.
Of Oedema.
AS the former two have their variety of diseases belonging to them, so also
has this its various companions bred of and from the same Humor; for from
Phlegm are bred, Oedema, Artheroma, Steatoma, Meliceris, Nodi in Juncturis,
Ganglion, Leucophlegmatia and the like. This Phlegm is the fourth part of the
mass of Blood, that is, the colder and moister part thereof: and if it so
happen that this does increase in quantity, What phlegm is.
the expulsive faculty being stirred up by the great plenty of this Phlegm, this
does offer very fair to the generating of an Oedema. This Phlegm is cold and
moist, and by some called pituitous Blood. And of this there is two sorts, one
Alimentary, the other Excrementitious. The first is the origination hereof, Its
name.
by the Arabians called undimia, by the Greeks (...); which word (...)
signifies no otherwise then an eminency. There are of natural or
excrementitious Phlegm these three sorts: the first being acid, so called from
its taste; the second salt Phlegm; the third glassy Phlegm, from its coldness,
thickness, and toughness. And if Phlegm does erecede from its nature by admixing
it self with Blood, it is called Oedema Phlegmonodes; if with Choler, Oedema
Erysipelatodes; if with melancholy, Oedema Scirrhodes. A great matter hereof is
a great quantity of Phlegm residing in the body, chiefly about the extreme
parts, as the hands, knees, or feet, these being the most remote from the
Fountain of heat. This Phlegm is thrown forth from the greater vessels to the
smaller, Its generation.
the which being there detained by the thickness of the Cutis, is collected in
the musculous parts, and there does form this Oedematous Tumor. It is a Tumor
soft, indolent, loose, yiedling to the touch, generated from a pituitous
matter. Definition.
It is soft and loose, Signs.
and these two come from the Humor of thin Phlegm; indolent, for it neither
does make or cause any pain, or dissolve unity; It gives way to the touch, and
is a white Aposteme, and without heat; white, being most like its object Phlegm;
without heat, being like the matter out of which it is generated, which is cold
and moist. A pituitous Humor redundant in the body is the chief cause, Cause.
to the which a cold and moist air, a phlegmatic diet, too much sleep and
idleness, and a cold dyscrasy both of Head, Stomach, or Liver may help forward
to the increase of its cause. Praesage.
And as Galen says, Comm. 46. that out of Fluxion of Humors some are cruel,
as Chollerick fluxes, and burnt Melancholy; and others are more kind, as this
Oedema: so this is a tedious and long disease, because it is cold, the native
heat being herein very weak. It is often times soft, and without pain, and so
carries the less danger; but if it be hard, and with pain, it is dangerous. As
touching its cure, here ought we first to use proper means by Retraction and
Revulsion of the Matter, and lessening of it. Secondly, because it is cold,
remove its cause by implanting heat and warmth herein. Let the Air be warm and
dry, the Diet attenuating and drying; here Wine is good because it does digest
and warm. Let his diet be of good and light digestion, as Chickens, Rabbets,
Partridges, and the like, to which may be added all sorts of spices. Let his
sleep be moderate; and let him avoid all passions of mind, and venery, and
observe that he keep a good habit of his body. After this let him use such
evacuations, as may both attenuate, open, and discharge this Phlegm. Bleeding
here is in no wise to be used, unless a Phlegmon do accompany it, Fever, or the
like. And for his use these Phlegmagogicks are very proper and convenient: as,.
Alo. lot. cum. Pill.
aqu. Majoran. Agaric. trochisc. an. i. Mastich. Cubebar. an. gr. vi. Troch.
Alhandul. ss. Cum sir. de Betonic. q. Pil.
s. fiant pillulae, dosis i. Or. Pil. Coch. ij. Aurear. i. Troch. Alhandul. gr.
Pil:
iiij cum Oxymelit. scillitic. q. s. fiant pil. no. 18 quarum sumat 2 omni
mane. Or if you will. Pil. Coch. ss. extr. Rud. i. Mercur dulc. gr. 15 ol.
C^ryophyllor. gut. i. misce, sumat mane. A potion preparing Phlegm, A potion.
. Hyssop. M. i. Menth. M. ss. Absynth. M. ss. sem. Anis. Faenicul. Calamenth.
an. ss. Rosar. rubr. ss. fiat decoctum ad lb. colaturae add Sacchar. lb. and
aromatizetur cum pulv. Cinamom. i. or this potion. Potion.
. aqu. Meliss. Bugloss. an. ij. in his in funde per noctem Rhabarb. i. Agaric.
trochisc. ij. pulv. Cinamom. ss. ZZ. ss. colaturae add Mann. ss. Cambog. gr.
iiij. aqu. Cinamom. hordeat. ss. misce, fiat potio. Or if you please this.
Potion.
. Electuar. Diacatholic. ss. Diaphaenic. ij. pull Agaric. troch. ss. solvantur
omnia in aqu. Hyssop. Rosar. damascinar. Faenicul. an. i. misce, fiat potio,
cui add sir. de Betonic. iss. And because Oedema is a disease offending partly
in quality, Topics.
partly in quantity; in respect of its cold and moist quality, we are to use
such Medicines to the part affected as are warm and dry; and in relation to its
quantity, we are to endeavor its discharge and evacuation. And since here is
required a double intention, here ought we carefully to inquire and examine,
whether Repellers mixed with Digestives are in the beginning first to be used.
Galen does satisfy us cap. 3. lib. 2. ad Glanc. that they are to be used: as
you may find him there using a piece of sponge, or linen rags dipped in
Oxycrate, to which a little salt is added, and so applying it over the part,
and then ordering it to be rolled up: for Repulsion is this roller, being dipped
in vinegar; and the sponge and the water do digest the pituitous Humor.
Question.
But it may be asked, how Digestives, being hot and dry, may or can agree with
water, which is cold and moist in digestion? Galen does answer this, Chapt. 8.
lib. 1. that water does digest: Answer.
and this we may see in the hands and feet of Fishermen, who having been much
employed in the water, you will find them both corrugated and wrinkled; which
corrugation is nothing else but the evacuation of that matter which formerly
filled up the spaces. But should an Oedema happen upon the Tendinous or Nervous
parts, Observat.
we are to use little vinegar; and for discussion of the matter this may be
very proper. Digestive.
. fl. Chamomel. Rosar. Mirtin. Absynth. Staechad. a. M. ss. Alumin. Roch. Sal.
commun. an. ss. Balaust. nuc. Cupress. an. M. i. Salv. Rorismar. Squinanth. an.
pug. i. coquantur, posca facta ex Lixivio, and coquantur omnia usque ad ae
partis consumptionem, in quo madefaciatis Spongiam; and this you are to use to
the state: Or this Cataplasm.. pulv. Rosar. Catapl.
rubr. Mirtin. Absynth. Rorismar. Staechad. an. ij. pull. fl. Chamomel. Melilot.
an. i. misce, and coquantur cum q. s. Hydromelitis, fine addendo pulv. nuc.
Cupress. Squinanth. Balaust. an. iij. Or this Cataplasm. Catapl:
. farin. Fabar. mic. pan. an. iiij. pulv. Terrae cimol. ij. sem. Lin.
Faenugraec. an. j. Bol. armen. i. coquantur in s. q. Lact. vaccin. ad
Cataplasmatis formam; fine addendo Camphor. Croc. an. i. vitell. ovor. Catapl:
no. ij. misce, fiat Cataplasma, Or this.. farin. Hord. Fabar. an. iiij. pulv.
Rosar. ru. Bacc. Laur. Mirtillor. an. i. pull. fl. Chamomel. Sambucin. Melilot.
Ivae arthritic. an. ss. fim. caprin. ij. cum vino rubro, fiat Catapl. fine
addendo Sapon. nigr. iij. applicetur bis in die. And because Quicksilver has a
very strange penetrating quality allowed it, that it can command Phlegm from the
most extreme parts of the body, it may very well and properly be here applied
and made use of; and for which this composition is most excellent.. Unguent. ex
Mer^^^:
Axung. porcin. iiij. Pinguedin. human. ij. Ol. Chamomel. Aueth. an. ij.
Styrac. Calamit. Benzoin. Mastich. an. ss. Theriac. Methridat. an. i. Argent.
viv. iss. agitentur omnia been in mortario, quibus add Ol. Spic. Salv. granor.
Juniper. an. ss. misce, fiat linimentum. With this you may anoint the part
affected; or you may apply this often in this case applied with good success by
my self. Empl.
. Empl. Diachyl. cum gum. Paracels. an. i. Oxycroc. ij. Unguent. Praescript.
ss. misce, extend super alutam, and parti admovetor. Or this.. Empl. de Ran.
cum ss. Pic. Burgund. ij. Taccamahacc. iij. Empl. Paracels. ss. misce pro usu.
It seldom or never is brought to suppuration, by reason both of its coldness,
and that it for the most part is very far distant from the Fountain of Heat:
but should it tend that way, Empl. Diachylon cum gummi, or a Cataplasm made of
white Lilly roots, Marshmallow roots, and the like, as you have already
prescribed and shown you, may do both very well here and be very serviceable. A
young Maid, about eight years of age, being much troubled with a Phlegmonous
and Oedematous Tumor in the outward part of Her lower Mandible, A History.
which came to suppuration, fearing its fecies would hinder its cicatrice,
before I could open the Abscess, I first tried by Guido's Counsel to resolve
it, who says that Apostemes being sometimes suppurated do end in resolution;
the which was confirmed by Parraeus his experiment, who averreth that he cured
a suppurated Aposteme by mixing Quicksiver with Diapalma, and so applying it:
and thus I took to an Ounce of Diapalma a dram of Hydrargyrum, and applied to
the suppurated Aposteme, and within four days it was wholly resolved: and for
discussing the suppurated matter to the following Conditions are these
necessary, that the matter be small in Quantity, thin and serous, occupying the
superfificies of the Cutis, and not penetrating; that it be in a strong and
young body, happening in the soft parts, and a convenient time of the year. By
the virtue of which Medicine, and observing of which method, a young
Gentlewoman was perfectly cured of an Oedematous Tumor, which was but little
suppurated, upon the Region of Her Loins the largness of the palm of a hand.

CHAP. XXII.
Of a Scirrhus.
OF Melancholy comes Scirrhus, Cancer Vlceratus and non Vlceratus,
Elephantiasis, Psoras and others. Our late writers do call this Scirrhus
Durities, because it is a hard Tumor destroying sense, lodging in a Member in
that Capacity, as that it produces little or no pain: or it may be called a
preternatural Tumor, having no infesting symptom. It is by some called
Apostema Lapidosum, by Avicen Sephiros. It is the only brat of Melancholy: and
this Melancholy has a double construction. For there is (...), or succus
Melancholicus, and (...) atra bilis. Between which two there is a vast
difference, the succus or juice being as the fecies or dregs of the Blood, and
is drawn from the purest part of it by the spleen: the other Black Choler,
being caused of immoderate heat and burns the parts, and like vinegar being
poured on the ground, it boyleth and raises it self from thence. There are
four species of Melancholy; 4 Species of Melancholy
first, when its species are burnt, it frames an illegitimate Scirrhus;
Secondly, when Melancholy is made preternaturally by other Humors, it does
take share of their qualities; Thirdly, when it is made thick by too much
cooling or drying of Humors; Fourthly, when it is mixed with Phlegm, Blood, or
Choler, then it makes Scirrhus Oedematodes, Burnt Melancholy made four ways.
Scirrhus Phlegmonodes, Scirrhus Erysipelatodes. There are four ways also
shown to the making of burnt Melancholy. The first is made of yellow Choler
burnt, and so representing a yellow sinder, and does burn like it; The second
is made of thick and viscid Phlegm; The third is made of burnt Blood, which is
very bitter; The fourth is made of Melancholy Juice, being both acid and
corroding. How a Scirrhus is made.
There are two kinds of Humors which do make this Scirrhus; the one being a
Crudity, as Phlegm, thick and yet not viscid; the second is vitreous matter, or
a glassy substance of Phlegm. And hence may we take a Scirrhus either to be
exquisite, or not exquisite: and therefore if Phlegm be in a great quantity, it
shapeth out Scirrhus Oedematodes; if Choler be predominant, Scirrhus
Cancerosus. Or if you please a Scirrhus is bred out of a natural melancholy
Humor, which is cold, dry and thick, and from glutinous Phlegm; Its definition.
and hence it may be defined a Tumor hard and indolent, a Tumor proceeding
from a thick and glutinous Phlegm, or a natural melancholic Humor. It may be
known by these Signs, it is a Tumor without pain, Signs.
hard to touch; if not exquisite, it is scarcely perceived. Every Scirrhus has
not pain; and this necessarily happens, because it is deprived of sense.
Melancholic Scirrhous Tumors are generally of a leaden color, but a Scirrhus
arising from a Phlegmatic Humor carries in it the natural color of the
Cutis. They take their principal Causes from the beginning of thick and tough
Humors, and collecting themselves in the parts; and that occasioned by evil
Diet generating a thick and viscid Humor, Causes:
as by reason of intemperieties of the Liver or Spleen, all such causes may be
said outwardly to generate thick juices, as a cold or dry Air, Watchings,
suppression of Menstrues, and the like. Expect to do no good on an exquisite
Scirrhus; for this always is to be suspected: If it happens about the
Joints, Presage.
Knees, or these remote parts, be not too forward to undertake them. If it be
exquisite and not turning Cancerous, yet it is hard to cure: for first, the
Matter is dried up; and then cold and compact, and so tedious; and that which
is lapidous gives no way to Medicine. Cure.
As to the cure, the external causes are first to be removed, by choosing a
thin Air, hot and moist, free from Fogs and Mists; let the Patient shun thick,
leguminous and cold Diet; let his Drink be Wine to help forward Digestion, and
warm the parts; and let him get himself clear of all passions of the mind.
After this are we to take care to remove the inward causes, by preparing the
Humor with Syrup of Apples, Bugloss, Fumitory, Hyssop, Oxymel, Balm, and the
like. This being done, we are to purge this melancholic Humor with Senna,
Polypody, black Hellebore, Confectio Hamech, etc. of these or the like may be
framed excellent compound Medicines, as this Apozeme.. rad. Faenicul.
Scorzonar. Bugloss. an. ss. cort. Tamarisc. Cappar. Polypod. Q. an. i. sem.
Anis. Faenicul. an. iss. Citr. ij. fol. Capill. vener. Scolopendr. Meliss.
Lupul. Thym. an. M. i. fl. 3 Cordial. an. pug. ij. Passular. enucleat. i.
Liquirit. ss. coquantur in s. q. aqu. fontinae, his add sir. de Cichor. cum
Rhabarbaro, de Spin. Cervin. an. ij. misce, hujus sumat. vj. omni mane cum
custodia. Potio purgans.
Or.. Veronic. Agrimon. Scabios. Fumar. Cuscuth. an. M. ss. sem. Anis. fol.
Senn. mundat. an. ij. coquantur omnia in aquae fontinae q. s. ad vi. colaturae
add Conf. Hamech. iij. Diacatholic. ss. misce, fiat potio. Or this,. Rad.
Polypod. ss. Epithym. iij. Senn. ss. Tamerind. vi. sem. Coriandr. iij. Santal.
Citrin. ij. coquantur in aqua fontina ad. 14. colaturae add Agaric. Troch. ij.
Rhabarb. iss. stent in infusione per horas 4. colaturae clarae add sir. de
Pomis ij. misce, capiat vi. omni secunda vel tertia die. Or this. Another
potion.
. Senn. opt. iij. Epithym. Rhabarb. an. iss. santal. citrin. i. sem. Coriandr.
ij. Sal. Absynth. ss. spic. Celtic. i. infunde in vase clauso per noctem in
Vini albi and aquae ex Pomis an. iiij. colaturae clarae add sir de Epithym.
ij. Pills.
Aqu. mirabil. ij. misce, fiat potio mane sumenda. Pills for the same.. pil.
Indic. ij. Coch. i. extr. Ellebor. nigr. gr. ij. extr. Castor. gr. ij. misce,
fiant pil. Or this. Pills.
. pil. de Fumar. de lap. Lazul. an. ss. extr. Ellebor. nigr. gr. iiij. ol.
Majoran. gutt. ij. cum. sir. Rosar. solutivar. Pills.
a. s. fiant pill. Or. Alo. ij. Myrrh. ss. Epithym. ss. rad. Gentian. Asar. an.
ss. Gum. Ammoniac. solut. in spirit. Vin. ss. Rhabarb. iss. Spic. i. cum succ.
Absynth. misce, fiant pil. quarum sumat ij. alternis matutinis. These being
completed, we arrive now at the part affected; and here are we to endeavor to
discharge the Matter which makes a Scirrhus. Repellers here will do no good,
for it is too thick for them; Digestives therefore, which can work by
insensible Transpiration, Digestives:
are most proper: and these at first should be mild, and in reference of its
hardness Emollients are most fit; so that the proper Indications which are to
satisfy these scopes, should be Emollients and Digestives. Of this sort may be
reckoned Unguent. Dialth. Empl. Melilot. Diachylon. Simplex, Ireatum, or cum
gummi, or Empl. de Ranis cum vel sine Mercurio, the which do both mollify,
resolve, and make thin this thick Matter. And to proceed methodically, we are
to begin with the time of the Scirrhus, then consider the strength of the
Patient, after this take care of the part affected, and these with judgment to
order your Medicines aright, as thus.. rad. Alth. iiij. rad. Lilior. ij.
coquantur in aqua fontina, Empl^
pistentur, and trajiciantur per Setaceum, addendo Ol. Chamomel. Lilior. an.
ij. Empl. Diachyl. cum Gummi solut. in ol. Lilior. iss. Cer. parum. fiat
Emplastrum.. Galban. Bdell. an. i. Ammoniae. ij. Alveor. Apiu. Oesyp. an. ij.
Tereb. venet. Pic. liquid. an. iss. Bacc. Laur. Staphisacr. Cumin. Pyrethr. an.
ss. stercor. Caprin. Ovil. Anserin. an. ij. Axung. Porcin. sev. Caprin. Cervin.
Vrsin. an. i. Ol. Chamomel. Lilior. an. iij. Cer. q. s. fiat Empl. Or this
Empl.. Empl.
rad. Breon. Cyclamin. Helen. Cucumer. agrest. an. i. coquantur in Vino albo
and Acet. an. q. s. deinde per setaceum pistentur and percolentur, colaturae
add pulv. Iridis, Myrrhae, Olibani, Mastichis, Croci, Aristolochiae rotundae
an. Empl.
iss. fl. Chamomel. Melilot. Sambuc. an. ss. Gum. Haeder. Styrac. Calamit. an.
iij. Euphorb. v. sem. Staphisacr. ij. Hydrargyr. extinct. cum Saliv. homin. ij.
ol. Lilior. de vitell. Ovor. Oesyp. an. v. adip. Auserin. Suill. Medull. crur.
vitellin. an. i. Mucilag. sem. Faenugraec. Lin. Alth. an. i. misce, and cum
Cer. q. s. fiat. Empl. Or this. Emple
. Empl. de Melilot. Bdell. Aceti scilliciti solut. ij. Castor. opt. iss. pulv.
Rad. Irid. i. Empl. de Ran. cum. ss. Ol. Chamomel. Lilior. an. q. s. fiat Emp.
And thus have I passed through the four general Tumors arising from the four
Humors. I shall conclude this with the History of a Woman of fifty years of
Age, A History.
which had frequently in Her left Mandible a fixed Scirrhous Tumor, and this
did grow to so large a bulk, that it almost hindered her swallowing; it swelled
and filled her cheeks so much with its Tumor; it began just about the extreme
process of the lower Mandible: and for the removing this Tumor, and preventing
suffocation, and endeavoring to give ease and cure to the Patient, this method
was proposed and followed, the Excrescency was to be surrounded with a thread,
and apprehended therewith, and so by degrees bringing it closer until it had
eaten it away, by which means it was wholly eradicated; by drawing out the
tooth, and with astringent and deterging Gargarisms well ordered the whole cure
was performed; this you may read in Bald. A History:
Ronsius in his Epistle 7. Another Gentlewoman having had a Contusion in her
Hand, a great pain did arise from thence, about the Carpus or Wrist with
inflation of her whole Hand; at length it degenerated into a Scirrhus of the
largness of a Hens egg, in so much that she could not bend her Fingers; her
Body being universally purged and ordered, I applied a potential Cautery to the
part; afterward I removed the Eschar, which was but lightly penetrated;
afterward applying new Escharioticks, which might penetrate deeper, I soon saw
appear a thick viscous and yellowish Matter, the which took sometime for the
getting its discharge; Sponges being clapped into it for dilating the Ulcer, the
Matter being exposed to the Air, hardened like a stone, much of which I drew
forth, and the Ulcer being well mundified, I filled it up with Flesh, skinned
it, and the Patient perfectly recovered.

CHAP. XXIII.
Of Aqueous Tumors.
I Proceed now to the other two Tumors arising from Water and Wind, out of
which watery Fountain do arise and spring up Ascitis, Hydrocele, Hydrocephalos,
Phlyctenes and the like. Now this Serum from whence these Tumors do arise, is
a collection of Water in some member of the Body, void of pain, and there is
but a small quantity hereof in healthful persons, it does stamp its various
species on its places where it inhabits or has any thing to do. Galen calls
all waterish Tumors Pustles, that have any moisture in them. And when it thus
gets into the Scrotum, it makes Hydrocele; if into the Navel, Hydromphalos.
They arise from a thin Humor, which sometimes is profitable; profitable so far
as it does perform its office, which does serve as a proper Vehicle to the
Blood; wherefore if it at any time happens that a waterish Humidity be
refunded into the Body forcing its excretion, this expels it to the Cutis
through the other parts, and does form and make these waterish Tumors. A
second may be a redundancy of this waterish Humor in our Bodies, which often
times does happen and arise from a weakness of the Kidneyes, which are not
strong enough to attract this plenty of Serum: or may be occasioned by drinking
too much Wine; for as Galen says, this waterish Humor is the excrement of
potion. Signs.
You may know it by its Splendour and Fluctuation, if you press it with your
Finger; and a particular Sign of a waterish Tumor is, that it is made with
itching, occasioned by the saltness which is contained in the Humor. Such as
comes from an evil affect either of Liver or Spleen, Presage.
is very bad and dangerous, not because of the Tumors but in respect of the
principal parts; yet they are not so dangerous as windy Tumors. Cure.
The Cure is to be performed by ablating the Causes: and if this do arise from
two much drinking, order your Patient to lessen his quantity, and abstain from
this course and habit of living, and use Driers: and if it happens from a
vice either of the Liver or Kidneyes, this is to be corrected; Hydragogicks are
most proper here; as,. Pil.
extr. Elater. gr. iij. Cambog. Resin. Jallap. an. gr. v. faecul. Rad. Irid.
gr. ii. Ol. Macer. gutt. ij. misce, fiant pillulae, quarum sumat 2 omne mane.
Or. Pil.
extr. Rud. ss. Resin. Scammon. ss. ol. Nuc. mosch. gutt. ij. misce, sumat cum
Custodia. Pill.
. Resin. Jalap. Scammon. an. gr. vj. Mercur. dulc. ss. pulv. Jalap. gr. vj. cum
syrup. Rosar. solutivar. q. s. fiant pillulae addendo ol. Caru. Chapter gut. ij.
Pill.
misce. Or these.. Troch. Alkakeng. ss. spec. aromatic. Rosat. Diagalang. an.
i. Philon. Roman. ss. pil. de succin. ss. Terebinth. venet. in aquae vitae
solut. q. s. fiant pil. quarum sumat 2 or omni mane. Or this Condite,. Cons.
Absynth. Menth. an. i. Cort. Citr. condit. iss. spec. Diacalaminth. ij. sal.
Sambuc. i. spirit. Nitr. ss. ol. Cinomon. gutt. v. Macer. gutt. 10. misce, fiat
Conditum. As touching Topics, the Humor is to be discharged by Digestives:
and here we ought to rarify the skin, that it may with ease come forth; and for
this purpose this Cataplasm is very good and proper. Catapl.
. fol. Malv. M.i. farin. Lupinor. i. ol. Aneth. Chamomel. an. ij. coquantur and
contundantur in Vino albo, fiat Cataplasma. Or if you be for a stronger, you
may use this Unguent. Unguent.
. sem. Sinap. sem. Vrtic. Sulphur. Spum. mar. Aristoloch. rotund. Bdell. an. i.
Ammoniac. ol. Aneth. Cerae an. ij. misce, fiat Unguent. Or this,. Sal. Nitr.
10. Piper. bacc. Laur. an. i. ol. Laurin. vi. Cer. q. s. fiat Unguent. If with
these they are not cured, they are to be opened, and the Ulcers to be mundified
with Resine, Turpentine, and Honey, or Vnguentum ex Apio, etc. then is it to be
impleted with Flesh with Vnguentum Tuthiae, and dry it up with Pulvis Tuthiae
Desiccativum, Rubrum, Diapompholigos, or Diapalma. Fabritius Hildanus relates
of a man of thirty years of age, A History.
very strong and of a sanguine complexion, who fell into a Leucophlegmatia:
that he swelled from the neck to his foot, his Optic nerves being obstructed,
hereby he grew blind: Upon ordering the Patient opening Apozemes, and giving
him preparative Decoctions, a great Flux of Blood fell accidently from his
Nostrils, so that he bled above four pounds, and hereby fell into a Syncope;
but being a little revived after his Flux was stopped, and his Faculties
beginning to gain a better habit and condition, beyond the use of any Medicine,
this flux perfectly cured him of his waterish Tumor. This is occasioned as the
Greeks do call it, (...), from an aluminous salt of the Liver, or some other
principal part, the which by its subtle penetrating quality does force it self
into diverse parts of the body.

CHAP. XXIV.
Of Windy Tumors.
UNTO this windy Commander do belong these several Soldiers, as Pneumatocele,
Tympanites, Priapismus, Satyriasis and the like. This Wind does carry in it a
very strange and wonderful power and force in our bodies, and is as it were a
certain Lightning scattered through the insensible Trunks, insinuating it self
into abstruse parts; for it reaches the Bones, What i^ Wind.
and does create very great trouble in our Joints; it brings greifs between
skin and bones, and does ruffle and disorder the whole Man, for where it is
compact with any other Humors, it does there make both a long stay, and does
stir up but many sad Symptoms: This shows what Wind is, whereof are bred
these Tumors. Let us now see what these Tumors are. What a windy Tumor is.
A slatulent Tumor by the Greeks is called (...), or (...), and he that is
afflicted with these is often times girded in his Sides, and stretches in his
Belly. It is often times caused of Crudities; Cause^.
and because it makes the part thick by reason of the grosness of these
Flations, it does often times make troublesome and tedious work for the
Surgeon. Its causes are flatulent Spirits, viscid, or vitreous Phlegm, and
want of native Heat; thus the heat is but small which does work it self into
these Humors, and so does somewhat dissolve them, and so does arise this
flatuous Spirit; and this being bred, does elevate the part where it once
gets footing, because it cannot work its free passage by reason of the
density of its parts. It is seen to arise in several parts of the Body, as well
inwards as outward. Here is held by Avicen a double kind of this windy Tumor:
Differencies.
the one being made by a light Vapor assimulated to Althege^^um, the which is
nothing else than a Tumefaction like to a Cachexy, this arising from the
disaffection of the Liver: and there is another Tumor arising from a windy
Vapor, and this by Avicen is called Inslatio. This is bred from Phlegm coming
from the larger Vessels to the smaller, until it has arrived at the smallest,
and at the coldest parts. Signs.
It shows it self apparent in compressing the Tumor with the Finger, and you
may then see it easily yield to the touch, as does an Oedema: Then upon this
compression it makes a noise; for Wind being kept in, and being by your Finger
pressed out from its quarters, this never parts from its place without a noise or
sound: Thirdly, it is detained in a cavity: Fourthly, as Guido does offer, it
appears lucid and splendid in its upper part. Fifthly, it is not always free
from pain: And lastly, being contained in the larger Vessels, we daily find the
great and many troubles and vexations it brings to mankind. As touching the
Cure, pray observe with me this method, Cure^
wherein we are to observe an Order, Mode, Time, and Substance, Order, this
chiefly consisting in Diet. As touching the Patient's times or eating and
drinking, that he neither eat too soon or too late, between meals, or after
supper, going to Bed and the like, or in his bed. Mode, that he neither eats
more than may reasonably satisfy his Stomach without difficulty. And to its
substance, this requires that he take notice, that he abstain from all
Phlegmatic Meats, or such Diet as has therein a slatulent or windy s^^stance,
such as may obstruct the pas^^^es, as Fruits, Pease, Beans; and let (...) shun
all windy A^^s, or other such like Liquors. A moderate exercise is very good
here, for it does recreate and refresh all the passions of the Mind, and does
diffuse, concoct and digest the native Heat through all the Body, and makes
every Member and part to perform its office and function. In the Patient's
Bread may well be ordered sweet Fennel seeds. Let his Meat be well Aromatized
and his Drink be Wine of the best sort, that may both strengthen his Stomach
and hinder the afflux of any windy Vapors ascending up to the brain, excite
the native Heat, help forward Digestion, and drive the Excrements downwards;
after these keep his body free from these flatuous Humors, by convenient
Evacuations; as by Pills, Potions or Clysters, for which these are very
convenient.. Potion.
Aqu. Meliss. Bugloss. an. iss. infunde per noct. Rh^tharb. i. Agaric. troch.
ij. Cinam. Elect. ss. Colaturae add Mann. ss. Cambog. gr. iiij. Aqu. Cinamom.
Tenuior. ss. misce, fiat potio. Or this. (...).
. Pulp. Tamerindor. ij. Cons. Rosar. pallidar. 10. Electuar. e succ. Ros^r. i.
Tartar. vitriolat. i. misce, fiat Electuarium cujus sumat q. nuc. mosc..
Galban. praeparat. cum Acet. Scill^tic. ij. Tartar. vitriolat. Mastich. an. i.
Castor. Myrrh. an. gr. 15. Croc. ss. Troch. Alhandul. i. Resin. Jalap. Scammon.
an. i. ol. Aneth. Caru. an. gutt. iij. quarum sumat Patiens 2 vel hora somni.
Pil.
Or these,. Extr. Rad. Alo. opt. Resin. Jalap. an. gr. vi. Sal. succin.
volatile. gr. iiij. ol. Lavendul. gr. ij. misce pro dosi una. Clysters also in
this place have been very experimentally of great service and use. As,. Malv.
Mercur. caul. Clyster.
rubr. Calaminth. an. M. ss. fl. Chamomel. Fursur. an. pug. i. fiat Decoctum in
s. q. aqu. fontin. ad lb. Colaturae add Diaphaenic. i. spec. Hier. picr. ij.
ol. Aneth. ij. Sal. parum. misce, fiat Enema. Or this,. fol. Alth. Malv.
Violar. Chamomel. Melilot. sem. Lin. Faenugraec. an. q. ut fiat Decoctum ad lb.
Clyster.
in quo solue Electuar. Caryocostin. vi. sir. Rosar. ij. ol. Aneth. Butyr.
recent. an. ij. M. fiat Enema. Or this,. Mercurial. Betonic. an. M. ij. fl.
Chamomel. Melilot. an. M. ss. sem. Faenicul. dulc. Cumin. Caru. an. ij. coque
ad lb. colaturae add Benedict. laxativ. ss. Electuar. Diaphaenic. Hier. picr.
an. ij. ol. Chamomel. Aneth. an. i. misce, fiat Clyster. Pouders for the same
may be these.. sem. Anis. condit. iss. sem. Faenicul. dulc. vi. Coriandr.
praeparat. ss. Cumin. Caru. Sesel. in Vino albo macerato an. ss. Cort. Citr.
siccat. Cinamom. an. ij. misce cum sacchar. alb. dupl. hujus quantitatis, hujus
sumat Cochlear. Troch.
no. i. post cibum. Or these Trochisces,. spec. Aromatic. Rosat. Electuar. de
Bacc. Laur. an. ss. Cardamom. sem. Citr. Coral. rubr. an. ss. Spec. Diacumin.
i. pulverescantur and cum sacchar. A Hippocras Wine:
q. s. and cum aqu. melissae fiant Trochisc.. Sacchar. alb. iiij. ZZ. ss.
Electuar. de Bacc. Laur. gran. Paradis. an. ij. Vin. generosissim. lb. colentur
per manicam Hippocratis, and siat vinum Hippocraticum. Or this Powder,. sem.
Coriandr. praeparat. ij. Cinamom. Pulvis.
elect. i. Margarit. Perlar. i. sacchar. Rosar. ij. misce, fiat pulvis hujus
capiat cochlearium i. in fine pastus: and thus have I furnished you with a
plentiful variety of inward Medicines. We arrive now at Topics; and here such
as can most properly evacuate this windy matter are most proper and convenient;
and before we apply any external Medicine, the parts are first to be well
fomented with Sponges or Clothes dipped into such Fomentations as these.. fol.
Chamomel. Puleg. Hyssop. Meliss. Fomentation.
Absynth. Aneth. Centaur. Calamenth. an. M. ss. Bacc. Laur. sem. Cumin. Anis.
Caru. an. ss. fl. Chamomel. Melilot. Rosar. rub. an. pug. ij. Coquantur omnia
in aquae fontinae q. s. addendo parum Aceti and Vini albi lb. and fiat
Fomentum. Foment.
Or this.. sem. Cumin. bacc. Juniper. Rut. Absynth. Chamomel. bacc. Laur. an.
i. fl. Melilot. Rosar. rubr. Chamomel. an. pug. i. fiat Fomentum cum aequal.
part. Vini and Aquae. Or this,. Betonic. Salv. Origan. Calamenth. Sambucin.
Tanacet. an. M. ss. fl. Rosar. rubr. i. sem. Anis. Faenicul. Caru. Cumin. an.
i. incidantur, contundantur and coquantur in Lixivio ad Fomentum. Cataplasms
for the same may be such as these. Catapl.
. farin. Fabar. iiij. pulv. fl. Rosar. Melilot. Chamomel. Sambuc. an. ii. pulv.
sem. Anis. Caru. Coriandr. Cumin. Faenicul. bacc. Laur. Juniper. an. ss. cum
decocto Calamenth. Malv. Chamomel. an. q. s. fiat Cataplasma fine addendo ol.
Unguent.
Aneth. Chamomel. an. ij. An Unguent for the same.. Unguent. Laurin. i. ol.
Chamomel. Rut. Anethin. an. ss. Catapl.
Spic. ij. misce. Or this Cataplasm.. farin. Fabar. Hord. Lupinor. an. ij.
pulv. Origan. Calamenth. Salv. Absynth. fl. Chamomel. Melilot. an. ij.
coquantur omnia in Vino and aqu. Absynth. an. q. s. Oximel. Simpl. ij. cum oleo
Aneth. Chamomel. an. iss. misce, fiat Cataplasma. For the same the discussing
Empl. Empl* Silv^^
of Silvius is generally reputed to be very good.. Gum. Galban. Bdell.
Ammoniac. an. ss. Thur. Myrrh. an. ij. Opii i. Solvantur omnia in Aceto
Scillitico and coquantur ad Consistentiam, tunc add Cer. Colophon. an. iij.
Balsam. Peruvian. ol. Phylosophor. an. i. ol. Lumbricor. ij. Terebynth. venet.
q. s. fiat Empl. And thus much for discussing of windy Tumors. And that Wind
is bred in the Ventricle, and Intestines Physicians have always confirmed; and
that it has crept and forced it self into other parts of the body, this thing
I have very often times seen; an example of, History:
which you may here read off. A Child about ten years old, lately distempered
with the small Pox, in so much that it had near cost her her life, for she was
so blown up with wind from the Navel even to her Feet, this getting a passage
between the Cutis and the Musculous parts. There was no pain, the inward parts
were sound and almost ^reed from the aforesaid distemper. Various Medicines
were prescribed inwardly for strengthening of the parts, and creating in them a
native heat; outwardly Medicines for discussing this Wind, and by these she
grew well. Riverius observat. 69. writes of a Child being eighteen months old,
who was much blown up with Wind, and troubled with a Fever: several Medicines
being prescribed, as Purges, Clysters, Juleps, Unctions, and the like, with the
Syrup made of a decoction of Agrimony both Wormwood and the lesser Centaury
taking a Spoonful thereof twice in a day, within three days perfectly
recovered.

CHAP. XXV.
Of a Cancer.
AND because this is a Tumor does happen very frequently in our Art, and
proves an enemy both very powerful and painful, that we may understand the
right way of dealing herewith, it generally happening in the Breast, What the
Breast is.
let us first consider the Breast it self and its parts. The Breast, according to
our Countryman Wharton, is said to be framed of a glandulous spongeous
Parenchyma, not divided into distinct conglobated Glandules, The Anatomy of the
Breast.
but is rather to be accounted a conglomerated Glandule; but in a Scirrhus and
in a Cancerous Tumor they appear knotty. It has Veins, Nerves, Arteries, and
Lymphaducts, and a porous Cavity: its Veins and Arteries come from the
Subclavians: it has its Nerves from the fifth pair, and from other
Originations: Lymphaducts are here very frequently scattered: and as touching
its Porosities or porous Cavities, these do serve for its Excretion, or its
excretory uses, they being more large in the Breast then in the common Ductus,
which is opened with many small Foramulaes, their general use is to prepare the
Milk fit for the Infant: and for the making this there is held a great
controversy, some holding the Blood to be the Prima Materia hereof, whilst
others do contend as stoutly for the Chyle to be its Origination. The first is
not to be defended; for if Chyle be to be made most properly into Blood, it may
very properly be accounted retrograde for Blood to turn into Chyle. And such as
do stand up for the Chyle to be the only substance of the Milk, How milk is
made.
they do offer this as their assertion, that the Chyle does immediately pass
through the Milky vessels into the Breast, or that it is there received into the
Veins, and thence effused through the Thoracick Arteries into the Breasts, and
that they have a power or faculty to separate the Blood from the Chyle, and to
dispose it through the Mammillary vessels into the Body, and this they call
Milk; but the way or passage which should conduct this to the Lactiferous
vessels is not yet arrived at. Our worthy Wharton's opinion is, that Milk is
peculiarly a nervous Juice, not properly constituted for the substance of the
Milk, but also for carrying a double Matter with it, as being both Chylisick,
and Spermatick; and these two do breed the greatest part of the Milk, not
immediately sent from the Ventricle to the Breasts by the Milky vessels, but
carried by or through the Ductus chyliferus into the Subclavian, thence
circuled with the Blood through the Ventricles of the Heart, and so passes
through the Thoracick Arteries, and in time of the Mother giving milk it is
refunded into the ample capacity of the Breasts, and there do separate the
Sanguineous part from the Chyle, and do reduce it through the Mammary Veins
into the Meditullium of the body. And this he offers as the chief matter or
substance of Milk, and the most proper nutriment for the Infant. And since we
daily see the young sucking Babe is nourished by alluring this Milk from its
mothers Breast by her Nipple, it is very necessary that it should contain in it
such a substance as may give it satisfaction. And as the more noble part
thereof does come from the Succus nervosus; so also ought it most properly to
be derived from hence for the Infant's nutriment: but thus much as touching
Milk. We arrive now to that which nearer concerns our enquiry, which is the
tract of a Cancer: and this by the Greeks is called (...) or (...), Its name:
by us a Cancer, from the resemblance it has with a Sea-Crab. For as the one
has expanded claws and feet in several places, being of a livid or cinerish
color; so also is this Tumor of a round Figure* of a livid Color, and
sticks or adhereth so close to the part affected as a Key to a Door, or a
claw of a Crab in its griping, having in it by some reported to carry in it
exalted Veins; but this is more fabulous then true, for not in four of a
hundred, as Falloppius observes, can you see them thus apparent. It carries
with it a train of horrid pain and heat, showing it self to view both cruel and
horrible, it arises from black Choler. As Tagaultius supposed, it arises from
the Fecies of Blood; but this is only his opinion, for this does more properly
frame and make a Scirrhous Humor; and that which to the whole body does make
an Elephantiasis, to a private or particular part does also frame a Cancer: and
where this black Choler is sharp and hot, it makes an Ulcerate Cancer: and by
reason of its thick Juice, it can neither be repelled, or discussed; for as it
slighteth and contemns the company or acquaintance of mild Medicines, so also
does it like Lard or Oil turn into a flame, rage, and fury, by the applying of
any strong or vehement Medicine. The Causes of this Atra bilis are many; for
first in the Liver is bred this natural melancholic Humor, which is called
the Fecies of the Blood, Causes*
and hence arises a Scirrhus, so this Atra bilis is made up of the adustion of
the other Humors, and without flattery is the worst of all the rest, and as it
grows more putrid, sharp, and malign, it does more speedily, violently, and
painfully create an ulcerated Cancer. Sometimes it arises from a hot
intemperiety of the Liver, which burns it, and by this burning is bred Atra
bilis. Sometimes as Galen says cap. 10. lib. 2. ad Gla^c. from weakness and
intemperiety of the Spleen, it being made incapable to attract this
melancholic Humor, in so much that it is kept up and burnt up in the body.
Sometimes it happens from a suppression of the Menstrues. Outward causes may
also affect this, as a thick, and viscous Diet, as Onyons, Leeks, Beans, Its
subject.
and the like. It may arise in any one part of the Body; sometimes it does
throw it self forth into several places, but the Breast being a soft loose part
is most subject to its Tyranny, and receiving the impress of its malicious
stamp. Sometimes it happens in the parts of the Face, Nose, Lips, Mandible,
and Tongue. Sometimes in the Inguens, and Thigh; a lively example of which I
had in a Gentlewoman, my Patient in Norwich when I writ this. Another reason
that a Cancer does soonest grow acquainted with the Breast before any other
part, is in respect of the great consent that there is made between the Breast
and the Womb, by the Veins, through which this thick and feculent Blood is sent
and dispatched; and for the same reason is it, that there have been seen so often
times Cancers of the Womb. Signs.
At its first touch it does appear hard in respect of its thick Humor; it is
of a livid Color, and the more malign the Humor is, the more livid the Color
of the Tumor is; and then painful, for here is made a solution of Continuity,
occasioned by much Matter distending the Nervous parts, Heat and Inequality; it
is hot like the Humor that breeds it. The greatest matter here to be minded
is the Hardness and Thickness of the matter; if you see a black and livid
Color in the place, and a Hardness accompany it, this is a Pathagnomonical
Sign: if you meet with a melancholy Humor and a melancholy Habit of Body, and
the Breast suspected, and the Body capable of entertaining such a Tumor
furnished with evil Juices, this gives a fair prospective to the thoughts of a
Cancer. The Cancer which is Ulcerate may well be known by these Signs: For its
Ulcer carries with it a fetid Smell, having thick, swelling, and blewlooking
Lips, horrid in aspect, and accompanied with great Pain. Presage:
In its beginning it is hard, having a bluish Color, and pricking Pain about
it. The event shows the success; for you may never expect a cure of this: if
any hopes may prompt on to proceed, it will be with a great difficulty: if you
extirpate it, there often times remains a Cancerous Ulcer, or it makes its
reversion some other way, and to some other part; so that, as wise Hippocrates
says, if the Patient be thus cured, this Cure will only be as a means to
shorten his days. We ought not to meddle with ulcerate Cancers, these by Galen
held to be altogether incurable. Cap. 5. lib. de atra bile, they coming from
black Choler; neither ought we to attempt the Cure of any other without
Amputation, the which way and method of cure does carry with it great danger
and hazard, as Celsus offers. Cap. Cure.
28. lib. 5. As to the Cure, these three things are to be minded, that we have
a great respect to the Patien'ts Diet, prescribing convenient Medicines, and
well ordering the part affected; and these are performed by Diet, Pharmacy, and
Surgery. And because the best kind of these are bad enough to be treated
with, that it may have its great force and fury stormed, and its spreading
venomous Quality the better contracted and lessened, we are here to begin our
work with universal order and method of the whole Body. The better to
strengthen the other adjacent parts, and to allay the fury and anger of this so
potent an enemy, we are first to look to the good order of Diet, which in
Quantity should be thin, although moist in Quality; and endeavor to quell the
antecedent Cause by prohibiting the generation of this Humor; and purge gently
your Patient by degrees: and in purging observe this rule, that you often
prepare the Humor; the antecedent Cause being conquered, lay Seige to the
conjunct Cause with all such Engines as may storm the force of the matter
contained in the part affected; and if any furious motion hereof may either
disturb the Quiet, unsettle the Rest, or discompose the order of this princely
Fabric, use all means to prevent the incursion of this private Enemy. And for
the first intention, it being the most proper and ready method for hindering the
augment of a Cancer and keeping it within its bounds, Purgation is as an
excellent weapon. And here may you furnish your self with many excellent
Methods, being either made into Apozems, Pills, Pouders, Potions and the like.
Apozeme.
As for an Apozeme, take this.. rad. Faenicul. Asparag. Lapath. acut.
Scrophular. Polypod. querc. Sanicul. cort. interior. Frangul. an i. Agrimon.
Veronic. Cuscuth. Cetrach. Fumar-Capil. vener. an. M. ss. fl. Genest. Sambucin.
an. M. ss. sem. Anis. Faenicul. dulc. an. i. Liquirit. rasur. War, passar.
exacinatar. an. iss. coquantur omnia in s. q. aquae fontinae ad tertiae partis
consumptionem, ad libram colaturae add syrup. de Scolopendr. Epithym. an. iss.
Aqu. Cinamom. i. misce, fiat Apozema pro tribus dosibus. Or this Potion, Potion:
. Conf. Hamech. iij. Extr. Hellebor. nigr. gr. vj. Aqu. Cinamom. ss. cum q. s.
Decocti prioris, fiat potio mane sumenda. Or this.. rad. Bugloss. Acetos.
Cichor. an. ss. Agrimon. Cetrach. Epithym. a. M. ss. Senn. mundat. iss. fiat
Decoctum ad lbi. Apozeme.
fine addendo fl. Cordial. an. pug. i. in colatura infunde per noctem Rhabarb.
elect. iij. pulv. Cinamom. iiij. exprime Liquorem, and in hac solve sir.
Violar. de Pomis an. iss. misce, fiat Apozema. Some of the aforesaid Pills
mentioned in the cure of a Scirrhus may well be used and taken here. Sudorifick
decoction.
Sudorifique Decoctions are also very prevalent here: as,. Lign. Sarsafr. ij.
Lign. Guajac. Sarsaperill. an. iss. Cinamom. ss. coquantur omnia in s. q. aquae
fontinae addendo sem. Anis. Faenicul. dulc. an. ij. rasur. Liquirit. ss. Of
these make a Decoction; of which the Patient may drink three or four times in a
day. And as touching the part affected, Repulsion, and Digestion,
Scarrification, and Section according to Galen lib. 14. Meth. are very proper
for evacuating and discharging of the repletion of Humors. As for the first
two Repulsion and Digestion, Galen does order these to be used both before and
in the time of Purgation, and then to use Digestives when the Body is
sufficiently purged, these being made and composed of such things as may not
contain any corroding Quality in them: and of the Simples may be reckoned
these, Plantane, Nightshade, Knotgrass, Lettuce, Sowthistle, Pomgranates,
Balaustians, and the like. Avicen does much commend Tutthy being washed and
mixed with oil of Roses. Paulus does commend Nettles bruised. Some do admire
the powder of Frogs, and others as much do praise an Unguent made of them.
Others have a great value for Empl. Diacalcitheos dissolved in the juice of
Nightshade and oil of Roses in Cancers not ulcerate: But for compound Medicines
take these.. succ. Solan. ol. Rosar. an. iij. pulv. Ranar. ustar. and testar.
Cancr. an iij. pulv. Rosar. Unguent.
rubr. i. Tuth. praeparat. Lithargyr. aur. pulv. Plumb. ust. and lot. an. i.
Agitentur omnia in Mortario plumbeo, and fiat Unguent. Unguent:
. Theriac. veter. i. succ. Cancror. ss. succ. Lactuc. ol. Rosar. an. iss.
Vitell. ovor. no. ij. sub cineribus coct. Camphor. ss. agitentur omnia in
mortario plumbeo and fiat Unguent. Or this. Empl:
. pulv. Plumb. Ceruss. Min. an. ij. Litharg. aur. i. ol. Lin. lbss. Cer. q. s.
fiat Empl. Or this precious Unguent so much admired by Franciscus Arcaeus in
Cancerous Tumors.. Unguent.
ol. Rosar. Omphac. lbss. sev. Hyrcin. Vitulin. Unguent. Rosatum. Populeon an.
iiiss. succ. Solan. Plantagin. and Acetos. an. iss. Vini granator. iiss.
coquantur omnia lentissimo igne ad succorum and Vini consumptionem, postea
colentur, and colaturae add Ceruss. iiss. Litharg. aur. 5. Plumb. ust.
Antimon. an. 10. Tuth. praeparat. iss. Cer. Alb. q. s. fiat Unguent. in
Mortario plumbeo. All these or any of these may be used in the beginning of a
Cancer, when it is but small; but if it has arrived at a greater bulk and
largness, this as Galen directs cap. 10. lib. ad Glaucum is not to be dealt
with, unless by Amputation: and this I think in no wise may be said to come
under the name of an exact way of cure; because it neither yeildeth the part
its native Heat, but takes away with it the sound as well as the disaffected
part. And that we may proceed more effectually in this operation when occasion
and necessity may command or oblige it, observe with me these Rules, being as
so many just Guides which will hardly fail you in your conduct: as first, that
Cancer which does adhere to the Breast or Breasts is very deplorable. Secondly,
that which does happen in the Head, Neck or Shoulders, or also in the Inguens,
all these are to be pronounced incurable. Aetius cap. 44. lib. 10. gives this
for a reason, because they creep and get in so deeply into the fleshy parts,
that they are not to be got out thence. Thirdly, although it be not thus
adherent, yet it is not without great danger. Fourthly, a worse Symptom then
any of the former, which is also seen very frequently, unless the Tumor be
wholly extirpated, cured, and cicatrized, it may either grow again in the same
place, or in some other place, and so bring a life full of grief, and a certain
dissolution of the whole in the end. Ulcerate Cancers do require Amputation by
reason of the great pain and heat they do carry with them. And that we may
proceed methodically herein, I shall here offer what Instruments are most
proper for this work, as Incision Knives, a Dismembring Knife, large Needles,
Sponges, other Needles and the like, the which you shall have more fully
afterward, I having there presented the young Surgeon with a draught
expressing his Instruments, and all other postures which he may use. And before
I set down the method of Amputation, be pleased to listen to that famous
History of Ambrose Parrey, History.
relating to a Maid of Honor belonging to the Queen Mother, who being
perplexed with a Cancer in her Breast which did equal the largness of a Walnut,
had applied to it Plates made of thin Lead rubbed over with Quicksilver, the
which although they did not cure her Breast, yet afforded her the kindness of
preventing its increase. The above nominated Lady growing weary of applying
these Leads, thinks upon a new Physician, who coming to her, very confidently
promises her a perfect cure, and rejecting these Plates as trifles, began his
cure with Emollient and heating Medicines, and added such things as attracted
pain; upon the Application of which, the Tumor did suddenly grow to a vast
bulk and largeness, and so much extended the Breast that it did break in the
middle, whence issued out an immoderate Flux; for the stopping of which he
makes present use of corrofive and caustic Pouders, by the Application of
which pains and Inflammation Place this Figure Fol. (...)

so seized on her, that poor Lady, instead of her promised health she yielded
her self to the Grave in the sight of her Physician. This I bring in as a
Caution to all younger Brethren, hoping it may direct them to use more Reason
than Passion, Study than Ignorance in their Art; and not like Mountebanks fall
on a sudden upon desperate matters, but rather with Judgment and Reason back
their Art, and secure their Reputations. I shall here briefly present you with
my methodical way of Amputation, which I used in Norwich not many years since
in a Woman whose Breast I amputated, the which being ablated weighed near two
pounds. Her Body being prepared by Apozemes and convenient Purgations, both for
hindering the Augment, and in some measure to prevent a Fever, History.
and she in every respect being made fit for the Operation, being a Woman of an
undaunted courage, never did shrink at the Extirpating of the same. Having made
ready my Restrictives of Bolarmeny, Draggons blood, Mastich, and the like, with
convenient Buttons, Pledgets, Boulsters, and Rollers, the Operation was thus
performed, by drawing through two large Needles through the body of the Breast,
armed with Silks cross ways, by the help of which I had the advantage to
elevate the Breast for the better extirpating it and its Radix. The Breast being
amputated with my dismembring Knife, I with my Fingers expressed all the Blood
from the remote parts: after this done I applied my Buttons made of Tow to the
Veins and Arteries being covered with the Restrictive, whilst others were only
dipped in Acetum and so well sprinkled with Calcanthum Rubrum: After these was
applied my large Pledget or Cap armed with a Defensative; then with convenient
Bolstrings and Rollers I performed and completed my first intention. Here let
the young Surgeon take notice as a just Caution, Caution.
that he attempt nothing of this Operation in a large and thick Breast, it being
both dangerous and no ways safe. Within two days after I took of my first
dressings, and then applied such Medicines as might remove the Eschar; the
which being ablated, I deterged the Ulcer, filled it up with Flesh, and induced
a perfect Cicatrice, and the Woman did receive a perfect Cure: But within 2 or
3 years after, whether by a blow or the like given her on her Breast I know not,
but it flew out again. A Mountebank coming to this Town promised her upon her
address to him a perfect Cure; but poor Woman she was treated after the same
manner as the Lady of Honor was, which I have already told you of, for he
applying very attracting Medicines, drew both her out of her troubles by
sending her into another world, and what she had into his own pocket. How an
ulcerate Cancer is to be treated.
If an Ulcerate Cancer might happen to our lots to be dealt with, this by
Galen's authority is not to be meddled with. But because it is cruel, and does
seem uncharitable to give no ease, if possible, to the afflicted Patient, we
may use this double Method, if any good may be epected: the first is to be
performed by Amputation or Caustic, or we are to endeavor to see what an
Issue may do being made a little beneath the Breast. By some this Powder is much
commended, which is reported to have cured many ulcerated Cancers in the Lips,
Nose, and other parts.. Atrament. Suitor. lbiss. Auripigment. Sulphur. viv. an.
iiij. Sal. gem. iij. cum Aceto misce omnia, and in vas impone, quod omni e
part lutatum ita ut fumus exire nequeat. Put it into an Oven, and keep it
there until they be all burnt and dried; this is a Caustic, and this he puts
about the confines of the Cancer, and one part being burnt therewith, he
applied it to another, so ordering it until he had burnt away all the Breast.
After which he applies this Unguent.. Mel. despumat. iiij. Sev. Hyrcin.
Limatur. Cupr. an. iss. Lithargyr. aur. i. misce, and ad ignem fiat Unguent.
Fallopius does offer this as a great secret in an ulcerate Cancer, being only
made of two things as Arsenick crystallized sublimed, whose nature is, that
being applied to a part with Lint it does so adhere to the Cutis that it cannot
be got of, unless you do take the flesh also with it. The second is Radix
Dracunculus dried, poudred, and mixed with the former Arsenick, and of these he
has had very great experience as touching their virtue and use; and this is
his Method, if a Cancer be entire and not ulcerate, scratch it with the outward
part of a reed, and apply the Medicine so as it may adhere; and he does further
advise that if this Medicine be applied without moderation it works little or
nothing, but being put together and applied, you will find them work wonderful
and strange effects. A second Method is, A second may.
that we apply no Medicine having any biting Quality in it, but rather such as
may make the Patient's life a little more pleasant and comfortable: and this we
are to do by Lenifying the pain and preventing the spreading of the Ulcer; and
for this case juice of Nightshade, and such Remedies as I have already
prescribed are most proper. I shall conclude this Tract with some remarkable
Histories of Cancerous Tumors, as that of extirpating a Cancerous Tumor at
the Eye-tooth spoken of by Fabritius Hildanus. It being a Tumor equalling the
bigness of a Walnut, Of a Cancer growing at the Eye-tooth.
hard, livid, and inequal, adhering partly to the Gum and partly to the Lip, it
had a pricking pain and other signs of a Cancer, and for cutting and
attenuating the peccant Humor this Apozeme was first prescribed.. Rad. Cichor.
cum Toto M. i. rad. Petroselin. Faenicul. an. ij. Polypod. Q. ss. Apozeme.
Cort. Frangul. i. Cort. Tamarise. Cappar. an. iss. Scolopendr. Veronic.
Betonic. Fumar. Scabios. an. M. ss. fl. Borag. Bugloss. Rorismar. Betonic.
summitat. Thym. Marjoran. an. pug. i. sem. Anis. Faenicul. an. ij. sem.
Coriandr. praeparat. i. Passular. Corinth. ss. coquantur in s. q. aqu. fontin.
and Vini albi ad med. Consumption: hujus Apozematis accipe iiss. in quibus
infunde and macerentur per noctem Rhabarb. elect. i. Potion:
Agaric. troch. Turbith. gummos. an. ii. fol. Senn. iij. sem. Anis. Crem.
Tartar. an. ij. maneant per noctem in infusione in loco tepido, in the morning
strain them off, and to the colated Liquor add Syrup. Polypod. i. Aqu. Cinamom.
ss. misce, fiat potio. The Body being thus purged, of the former Apozeme the
Patient is to drink three times in a Day. After this breath a Vein in the left
Arm, and apply Cupping-glasses both with and without Scarrification. After
these let the Patient sweat for 14 days with this decoction, as. rad. Polypod.
cort. rad. Frangul. Tamarisc. Cappar. an. i. Cetrach. Fumar. Scolopendr. an.
pug. i. fl. Cord. an. pug. i. sem. Anis. Faenicul. an. ss. fol. Senn. iss.
Coquantur in aqu. Fumar. and Scabios. ut colatura redeat ad iij. Potion.
in quibus macerentur per noctem Rhabarb. rad. Machoac. an. i. Agaric. recent.
troch. ss. ZZ. and sem. Anis. an. i. maneant in infusione per 12 horas, and
colatura solue Electuar. e succ. Rosar. ij. sir. Polypod. vi. aqu. Cinamom.
iij. misce, mane sumat. A Gargarism for the mouth was this.. Rosar. rubr. M.
Gargarism.
i. fol. Malv. hortens. M. ss. Cort. granator. ij, Balaust. Gallar. immaturat.
an. i. fl. Betonic. Scabios. an. pug. i. Rad. Scrophular. iss. coquantur in
vini rubri lbiiij. ad Tertiae partis consumptionem colaturae add Mel. Rosat.
ij. Diamoron. Mel. Violar. an. i. misce, fiat Gargarisma. The Body thus being
prepared, and the Patient having his head somewhat placed downwards, and his
mouth being opened, he comprehended the Tumor with a crooked Needle and a
double Thread; and afterward with a small crooked Knife he by degrees did cut
to the Mandible; the Tumor being cut out, for stopping the flux of Blood was
applied this Medicine being mixed with the whites of Eggs.. Farin. Volatile. ss.
Bol. armen. Oriental. Terr. Sigillat. an. iiij. pulv. albumin. ovor. sole
exsiccat. i. Pilor. Lepor. minutissime incis. i. Coral. praeparat. ij. misce,
fiat pulvis tenuissimus. And after this were applied the oil of yolks of Eggs,
to which was added a little Safforn for a Digestive, the Ulcer being digested
the mouth was often times washed with this Gargarism.. fl. Betonic. Rosar. rubr.
Alchimill. Sanicul. Pyrol. Scabios. an. pug. ij. coquantur in aqu. ad lbiiij.
in colatura solue Mel. Rosar. iij. misce, fiat Gargarisma, about the end of the
Cure he applies this powder to the Wound, and over this a thin piece of Lead,.
Tuth. praeparat. pulv. granator. Alumin. ust. an. i. By this order and
Medicines was the Patient perfectly recovered. In Schenkius lib. 1. de fac.
fol. 225. is related of a noble Matron, History:
who having the right side of her Face eaten away by an ulcerated Cancer, and
when many other Medicines had been prescribed and applied and took none effect,
she was afterward cured by applying thin and broad pieces of a young Chicken
to the part affected, the which were to be very often times renewed, by which
only Remedy she recovered her perfect health, as Cordaeus annoteth Comment. 7.
Hippocrat. lib. de Mulier.

CHAP. XXVI.
Of a Carbuncle.
THIS by the Greeks is called (...), by Avicen Ignis Persicus: for it burns
like a Coal, and carries with it the lively resemblance of a burnt Sinder; for
it is much burnt, and has a black Crustiness with it. It is a Disease composed
both of a Tumor and an Ulcer, and is bred of hot Blood, that is the thinner
part thereof, which is turned into yellow Choler, whilst the more thick does
turn into black Choler, and hence does arise this Carbuncle. Or if you please,
the thinner part is like to a Flame which ascends from this Fire, whilst the
thicker does more aptly resemble a quenched Coal. The Pustles sometimes are
many, and small as Millet-seed, the which being rent you will find a
Crustiness. The Humor which does excite these Pustles, by Avicen is said to be
thin and Choleric. Now there is a double species of this Carbuncle, the one
not being Pestilential, the other being Pestilential. The signs of the first
are an Ulcer with a Crust, which sometimes is ashey, sometimes blacker,
some-sometimes very much burnt. Signs.
The inflamed part in its Circumference is painful, for the Patients do think
they are girt up in the part affected, and as it were do carry a heavy burden
in it by reason of want of natural Heat, and Spirits. This Crustuous flesh is
circled with a livid Inflammation, and does appear much like pitch. It
occasioneth very much itching about the part by reason of the corroding Vapors
of the burnt Blood, which does excite an incredible desire of scratching. A
Fever very often does accompany it by reason of its fervor, and vehement pain,
and watchings. Signs of a Pestilential Carbuncle are these. Signs.
A Pestilential constitution of the Air, as in the time of the Plague; A
slender and as it were an unperceivable Fever, and the Patient does ofttimes
walk while he falls down dead; Thirdly, loss of the natural color of the
Face; Fourthly, the Tongue does grow black or yellow; Then the Urine thin and
troublesome; Besides these Liquid and Choleric dejections; Seventhly, a
prostration of the Appetite and vomiting; Eighthly, much hot or cold Sweats;
Ninthly, a grevious perplexity of Mind; Tenthly, difficulty of breathing and a
raw Urine. Eleventhly, pain of the Head and Vertigo; 11 sometimes deep sleeps
sometimes great watchings; 12 Syncopes, especially when Death does come to
seize; 13. the Crust which formerly was cinerish does now grow blacker; and
lastly, that which was formerly blew is now quite colored with black. Causes*
The immediate cause hereof is the Fluxion of a most vehement Blood to the part
affected, which is thus excited by a redundancy of the whole. Presage:
Gal. Com. 12. lib. 3. Epidem. does call the pestiferous the worst. The other
are also dangerous, because they do arise from vicious Humors, and do produce
a strong Fever. The part inflamed does never suppurate but by the exust Heat;
and by how much the more the larger and greater in number they are, by so much
the more tedious; and by how much the nearer they get to the Heart or any other
principal part, by so much the more dangerous. If it seizes on the Membranes
of the Brain, it causes Delirium; if the Brain it self, it proves mortal. In
the Cure hereof the Fervor of the whole mass of Blood is to be minded, and a
good order of Diet to be observed, and this redundancy of Humors wholly
evacuated; Cure;
and this to be done by Phlebotomy. And here you may safely breath a Vein until
your Patient be ready to faint, according to Galen's authority Aphorism. 23.
Sect. 1. For in a Carbuncle is a very large Inflammation. Cap. 1. lib. 2. ad
Glauc. Here arises a great dispute about the most proper place to bleed in:
for Gulielmus Placentinus will have us bleed on the opposite side for
Revulsion; and Guido does join with him. Falloppius offers, as there is a
double Humor in a Carbuncle ^lowing and already flown, so also should there be
proposed a double evacuating Method; The fluent Humor to be discharged by
Revulsion, whilst the Flux is to becarried of by Derivation. But because as it
for the most part happens, that when the mass of Blood does flow, apart of
this melancholic Humor does flow therewith, for this reason also are we to
use Pharmacy, as by ordering Manna, Cassia, Diacatholicon, Confectio Hamech,
Electuar. e succ. Rosar. and the like. Decoctions made of Scabious, Sorrel,
Cichory will do well here, used or appropriated as I have already shown and
directed in melancholy Tumors. As touching Topics, we are to mind these three
things in the part affected, as the Crust, the Inflammation tending to
blackness, and the Symptoms about the Crust. Paulus will have us here to make
deep Scarrification, that this melancholy matter may the better be got out, and
either to apply Sponges or Pledgets dipped in spirit of Wine and Aegyptiacum,
Niter or Salt to the part; these and the actual Cautery are to be used in the
great and virulent Carbuncle. But if it be not of so great a moment, I take two
Eggs and boil them on sinders until the white be hard, then I take out the
Luteum of the Egg and mix Salt with it, and so apply them hot; and thus are you
to serve it for four days: if it requires stronger use, Aegyptiacum: if it
yields not to these, use the actual Cautery; and for ablating the Eschar, take
a little Butter, Axungia, or Dialthaea or the like, let it be deterged with Mel
Rosarum, Unguent^
Turpe^tine or the like. Or with this.. succ. Ap. i. Mel. Rosar. i. farin.
Fabar. ij. misce, fiat V^guentum. Or apply to the part this Cataplasm made of
Bean meal, of Lupines, French barley, Scordium, Ru^, Wormwood boiled in Oximel
resisting putrefaction. Upon the Carbuncle apply this.. Calc. viv. i. Sapon.
moll. q. s. fiat Vnguentum, Unguen^
and let it ly upon the Ulcer for two or three hours. You need not fear pain,
for dead flesh is ever void of that; and for the removing of the Caustic you
may apply this.. Butyr. non salit. iss. vitell. ovor. no. ij. Unguent. Unguent:
Rosat. Basilic. Aurei an. i. Theriac. Andromach. ij. fiat Unguent. to be
applied upon the Eschar, and then mundify it with Vnguentnm ex Apio, then fill
up and cicatrice. As touching a pestilential Carbuncle, The Cure of a
pestilential Carbuncle:
Antidotes are to be given with Scordium, Rue, and the like in them. We are
here also to support the Heart against the invasion of this malign Enemy with
Cordials; as,. Aqu. Theriacal. ss. Tinctur. Croc. ij. Vin. Hispanic. ij.
Spirit. Lavendul. Aqu. Mirabil. an. i. Aqu. Angelic. Rut. Borag. Meliss.
Calendul. Cardu. benedict. an. iss. Conf. Alkerm. ss. cum sir. Meliss.
Caryophillor. q. s. fiat Cordiale, cujus sumat patiens cochlearia 2 vel 3 in
languoribus. And for defending its adjacent parts apply this Defensative of
Chalmaetius. Catapl.
. Bol. armen. ij. Terr. sigillat. i. Corn. Cerv. ust. Rosar. rubr. Ebor. an. i.
Camphor. ij. Cer. iss. ol. Rosar. lbss. Acet. ij. Aqu. Rosar. i. Albumin. ovor.
no. misce, fiat Cataplasma. Phlebotomy here is very proper and useful; Let the
Medicines you apply to the part affected be very potent and attractive, having
in them an Alexipharmick Quality, to which you may add Mithridatum, Venice
Treacle and the like. Cupping-glasses applied here with deep Scarrifications
are very beneficial; and if you be necessitated, unslaked Lime put upon the
part will effect the same. Histo^^
Riverius observat. 9. writes of one of four years of age who was afflicted
with a Carbuncle in the middle of his Forehead, with a red Tumor accompanied,
being black in the middle, and the whole Face tumefied; to which was applied a
Caustic to the black part; and for removing the Eschar an Unguent made of
Basilicon, to which was added some Treacle, oil of Scorpions and the Yolk of an
Egg; and to the whole Tumor was applied a Cataplasm of Arnoglossus, purging
and bleeding being afterward prescribed, a Vesicatory to his Neck, and a
Cordial ordered for supporting of his Spirits with Confectio de Hyacinth. etc.
the Fever abated, the Inflammation grew more remiss, and every thing did seem
mitigated. In this case the Vesicatory did perform the greatest part of the
Cure by deriving a great part of this virulent Humor. And to every Carbuncle I
think it very proper to apply it to all the neighboring parts, and not to use
Vnguentum ex bolo so generally used in these Tumors; because Repellers applied
to the Face in its Inflammations are more generally subject to the doing more
harm than good. And thus shall I conclude this Chapter of pestilential and not
pestilential Carbuncles.

CHAP. XXVII.
Of Epinyctis.
PAVLVS and Celsus do write this to be a very bad Pustle, having in it an ashy
or black Color, about which does grow a vehement Inflammation with nocturnal
pains joined to it. Cause.
The parts affected herewith are the outward parts of the body, which may
easily be perceived by the Humor imprinting its Color wherever it takes. It
is made of burnt Blood: The Pustles arise of their own accord with a reddish
Color somewhat tending to a lividness, sometimes to a blackness; They are most
commonly seen in young Children and aged Persons; they bring no great danger
without they be ill treated. There is three Intentions required in this Cure, a
good order of Diet being cold and moist; a discharge of the peccant Matter, and
here both Bleeding and Pharmacy are conveniently to be prescribed according to
the age and strength of the Patient; and then in applying convenient Medicines
to the affected part. Unguent.
As,. Unguent. Basilic. ij. Vitell. (...). 2 Axurg. Huma. Caprin. an ss. ol.
Rosar. iij. Croc. ss. misce, fiat Unguent. Or this Unguent. Another
. Unguent. Rosat. ij. Vitell ovor. no. i. Cer. all. parum, Acel. paul. fiat
Vnguentum. This use if Inflammation; if you be to mundify, use Vnguentum
Aegyptiacum, or ex Apio; fill up with Aureum, or Basilicon, and skin it with
Diapalma or Desiccativum Rubrum. A History.
A Wine-Merchant being troubled with black and sublivid Pustles, about which
was a vehement In^lammation and nocturnal pains, when as he could receive no
ease or benefit by other things prescribed him, by the advice of a Woman he was
ordered to anoint them with oil of Juniper, by the help of which he rested very
well, and had more ease by this than he could ever obtain by all his former
Medicines both inwardly taken and outwardly prescribed, and at length was
hereby perfectly cured.

CHAP. XXVIII.
Of Herpes Miliaris, and Herpes exedens.
THIS by Avicen is called Formica. It arises from a choleric Humor; and when
as this choleric Humor is made preternaturally thin and hot, it frames
Herpes exedens, or that Disease by Celsus called Ignis sac^r, by Avicen Formica
corrosiva, because by its corrosion it does spread it self. This preternatural
Choler mixing it self with Phlegm it forms that Herpes which has many small
Pustles in the skin, like to Millet or Hyrse-seed, and thence is called Herpes
miliaris. And since as we may apparently find that there are two sorts, the one
from Choler mixed with Phlegm, the other arising from a dust Choler; our present
discourse shall only reach to the first, the latter more properly ought to be
reckoned amongst Ulcers. Signs:
The Signs of the first are many small Pustles like Millet-seed, in the upper
part of the Cutis, and arising from the mixture of Phlegm; then they increase in
their number, the former growing old; and when they are opened or rent, the
Matter which comes forth from them is between Sanies and Pus, partly reddish,
being somewhat of a mixed Color between red and white. Causes:
All the Causes may be related to those of an Erysipelas, save only that this
Tumor is made from a redundancy of preternatural Choler; an Erysipelas coming
from natural. Presage.
Celsus does propose, that as Ignis sacer has little danger, so amongst such
creeping Diseases its very hard to cure; for sometimes there is an Intemperiety
of the Liver, which may be another Cause of this difficulty. This cure may be
performed by having a respect to the whole habit of body: and since it does not
much irresemble an Erysipelas, I do commend you thither to ^etch convenient
Medicines both inward and outward, which may do you great service in this Cure,
Herpes exedens.
The second sort Herpes exedens is so called from Erodendo; for it does not
only erode the Cutis, but does also depopulate the subject Flesh. Celsus Cap.
28. de sacro igne lib. 5. does describe its nature, when he says it is made
with an Exulceration of the Cutis, not very deep, large, sublivid, inequally
planting its self in the extreme parts. Signs.
As often therefore as we see an Ulcer to grow and increase, and to make small
Ulcers, and many small Cavities penetrating no further then the Cutis, this we
may properly call Formica Corrosiva. It is to be cured with Cholagogicks, Cure.
as the former: and whereas it is a Disease arising from a preternatural hot
and sharp Choler proceeding with Putredness, Phlebotomy is no ways proper
here, for it very often times does arise from Cacochymy, purging with Senna,
Damask Roses and the like in Whay, or good, Cassia, Manna, or ^e^itive
Electuary, or a Decoction of Sarsaperilla, China, and Guaiacum. And as touching
the part affected, these are very proper here to be used.. succ. Tabasc. iij.
Cerate:
Cer. Citrin. ij. Resin. Pin. iss. Terebinth. venet. i. ol. Mirtin. q. s. fiat
Ceratum molle. Camphor. ss Album. ovor. no. iiij. succ. Plantag. Solan. an. i.
Plumb. ust. Ceruss. alb. Lithargyr. aur. an. ij. pulv. Troch. alb. Rhas.
Unguent:
sine Op. i. ol. Rosar. iiij. Pomat. ij. fiat Vnguentum. With this let the
Patient be anointed three or four times in a day. Or this,. succ. Plantagin.
Lapath. Unguent.
acut. Solan. an. i. succ. Polygan. ij. Lithargyr. aur. i. Tuth. praeparat.
Antimon. an. ss. Alo. citrin. iij. Cer. alb. ol. Myrtill. ol. Rosar. an. parum,
misce, fiat Vnguentum, both for deterging and drying up of the Ulcer. I shall
conclude this Chapter with this History of a young Gentleman who was burnt from
his foot to his knee, but very slenderly that it did scarce hurt the Cutis,
coming to an Emprick who from the first used Empl. History.
ex Argilla Bol. armeny, with the whites of Eggs, mixed with the Juices of
Nightshade and Housleek, dipping clothes therein and applying them to the part
affected, the pain which was but small grew into a great degree by the use of
these; he became vexed with a Fever, disquiet, and afflux of Humors to the
affected part, and In^lammation of the whole Thigh, even to the Hip; and at
length a Herpes exedens correpted the whole Thigh so vehemently, that some
Chirurgions thought to have made Amputation; but at length was thus cured:
having first prescribed him this Potion.. rad. Scrophular. Cort. interior. rad,
Frangul. Fomentation.
rad. Polypod. an. ss. Herb. Fumar. Cuseuth. Scabios. an. M. ss. fol. senn.
iij. misce, fiat Decoctum in aqua ad iiij. in quibus solue Conf. Hamech. ii.
sir. Rosar. solutivar. i. misce, fiat potio; the day following he was bled in
the Basilica of the same side the Herpes was, and the Humor prepared with a
purging Apozeme against Melancholy already prescribed in a Scirrhous Tumor.
The body being thus prepared, we arrived at Topics: and here, because the
Cutis was already made hard by the use of cold Medicines formerly applied by
this Quack, there was first used this Emollient Fomentation two or three times
in a day, with which the part affected was fomented.. rad. Bismalv. cum Tot.
Lapath. acut. Screphular. an. ij. fol. Malv. Violar. fl. Melilot. Sambucin.
Melilot. an. M. i. sem. Faenugraec. ss. coquantur in aqua ad 3 partis
consumptionem. The part affected being herewith near half an hour fomented,
Catapl:
cover the parts with this Catapl.. farin. Fabar. Lupinor. an. lbss. sem.
Fenugraec. Lin. an. ij. rad. Alth. recenter coct. and cribrat. iiij. pulv. fl.
Chamomel. Rosar. Melilot. and Absynth. an. i. misce, fiat Cataplasma. With this
being applied for fourteen days, and the Fomentation continued, the hardened
Skin grew soft, the Pain allaied, the ichorous Matter which flowed out of the
Ulcer was prepared and brought to a fair Digestion, after this was sprinkled
upon the Ulcer Precipitate in powder, being washed in Plantane and Rose Water,
and over these applied this Empl. Empl:
. Empl. de Mucilaginib. Diapalm. an. iiij. De Ran. cum Mercur. i. Alumin. ust.
Calcanth. an. ss. ol. Rosar. q. s. fiat Empl. molle. And about the end this
Unguent.. rad. Scrophular. Lapath. acut. cort. Frangul. an. iiij. succ. Fumar.
Scabios. Acet. an. lbi. Pinguedin. Porcin. lbij. conquassentur Radices, and cum
succis ad eorum consumpt. coquantur, colentur, and colaturam serva ad usum..
hujus pinguedinis colatae lbi. pulv. Alumin. Vitriol. opt. farin. Lupinor.
bacc. Laur. Ciner. fuligin. an. iss. Argent. viv. extinct. ij. Theriac. i. fiat
Unguent in mortario. With this anoint the whole Leg keeping his Body open with
Conf. Hamech. etc.

CHAP. XXIX.
Of a Gangrene and Sphacelus.
A Gangrene is that which does feed on the flesh, and poysoneth it, and
imprints a strange unnatural Quality in it. By the Greeks it is called (...)
from the verb (...), that is, Exedere: What a Gangrene is.
But there are more essential Definitions hereof; by some it is said to be a
change from a natural to a preternatural Color, and by these it is called
Mortificatio; Galen does call a Gangrene the beginning of a Mortification in
the part affected, the which does so trouble and infest the neighboring parts,
that without the best of Medicine be applied by a very skilful hand, it does
speedily run it self into a Mortification. Inflammation by him also is
accounted as a very great Instrument hereof, and here begins a change of
Color, decay of Sense, a turning to Mortification. We more properly allow and
decree it the beginning of a Mortification, and that it very often times happens,
the which I have very frequently found in my practice experimentally to follow
or succed large Inflammations, and thereby do corrupt the soft parts as the
Muscles, What a Sphac^lus is.
Cutis, Veins, etc. A Sphacelus is worse than the former, for under this name
we may comprehend Syderatio, Putrefactio, Corruption, and Mortificatio. (...) by
the Greeks is held to be a most intense Disease, so is a Gangrene by the
Arabians. A Gangrene is a Disease consequent to the effect not to the cause:
Sphacelus is a Disease exeding and compressing the parts: It is a perfect
Syderation and Mortification, for a Member being corrupted with a Sphacelus is
found plainly cold and dead. While the member is in a dying posture and not
quite dead, The di^ference between a Gangrene and a Sphacelus.
it is called a Gangrene; this for the most part remains in the upper
superficies, and does only possess and affect the Muscles and soft parts: in a
Sphacelus not these only, but the Bones themselves become affected. In a
Gangrene the Skin grows red, by reason of its companion Inflammation; in a
Sphacelus it first grows pale, then livid, and afterward black. In a
Gangrene you have no very ill smell; in a Sphacelus never expect a good smell.
In a Gangrene your greatest design must be to prevent the spreading of the
Humor, and if it has got place, to prevent its growth: in a Sphacelus its
lost labor then to act or treat any other ways than by Amputation; for there
is no hope of bringing a dead part to life. It gains its Name of Syderatio from
that of Plants, being a proper passion of them; when they lose their natural
moisture, the which does afford them their full growth and beauty, this affect
is called Syderatio, as if they were struck by the Stars. 3 Causes of a
Gangrene.
The immediate Causes of a Gangrene are three. Intemperiety of the part, when
the transpiration of the Spirits are obstructed, and when both the Heat and
Spirits of the part are suffocated. Sometimes it comes by cold, and then is to
be discharged by heat; in Gunshot Wounds it does frequently happen by reason
of large Contusions; it is sometimes also bred by the carelessness of
Physicians, who in the curing of an Erysipelas in the beginning do order and
prescribe cold things, so being in Act and Power, that they are made capable to
destroy the natural Heat; often times by defluxion of Humors, or venenate
Pustles, which are left uncured; sometimes out of immoderate Dryness; other
times arising out of the Interception of the vital Spirits, and very often out
of Obstruction in the beginning of the Nerves. And since there is a
Mortification and Extinction of life, and Destruction of the native Heat, The
universal Causes both of Gangrene and Sphacelus.
let us consider which way, and out of what universal Causes this may happen.
Man's innate Heat cannot be supported without a radical Moisture, and its
Spirits justly and in their order implanted in all the parts of his body; so
that consequently upon hurting or offering any injury to this radical Moisture
its Spirits also will be resolved, dissipated and consumed; and therefore first
there is an Intemperiety occasioned out of the vehement alteration of the
manifest Quality: Secondly out of the occult Quality a malign and virulent
Substance is contracted in the Body: and thirdly the Parts are thus mutually
affected with an Interception and Suffocation of the vital Spirits. As to the
first, To the first:
Galen does observe and offer, that every thing is kept, preserved, and
propagated by its natural Heat and Temper, so that nothing can alter or destroy
this sooner than a contrary preternatural Temper and Heat; thus a Gangrene does
happen after a long and tedious continuance of an Inflammation, made either by
Affluxion or Congestion of some sanguinary or choleric Humor, the natural
Humor being dried up by the preternatural. To the second.
It may arise secondly, either from a concomitant Malignity either brought
outward to the Body, by the biting of some venomous creature, or by adhibiting
of Septicks. Signs of a Gangrene from a hot intemperiety.
In a hot Intemperiety the Pain and Pulsation which formerly were concerned
with the Pulsation is much more remiss, and the red Color of the Inflammation
does begin to change into a Lividness; here also do arise Pustules filled with
an ichorous Matter, these being all Forerunners of its tending to
Mortification; and both Heat and Blood do perfectly run to the Center, whilst
the other parts thereof do suffer Putrefaction. It arising from cold does cause
and make a great and pricking Pain. Signs of its coming from cold.
Soon after this it changes its red Color into Lividness, and makes it most
cold; afterward sending the Blood away by its Coldness, and dispatching the
native Heat, and dissipating its Spirits, does make the affected part perfectly
void both of sense and motion, a horror and trembling attending it much like
the fit of a Quartane Ague. There is generally held five Signs of a Sphacelus.
5 Signs of a Sphacelu^:
First, the affected part is much more heavy and dull than formerly it was.
Secondly, the Floridness and Redness of the part do turn into a Lividness and
Blackness. Thirdly, the part which was soft in a Gangrene grows hard in a
Sphacelus. Fourthly, the Cutis being taken up is seen with ease to separate it
self from the Flesh. And lastly, there is no exquisite sense or perfection, but
a perfect Mortification remains. We are, if we intend to cure a Gangrene
aright, to study and find out the Antecedent Cause thereof, Cure.
and from thence to take our first Intention, 1 From the Antecedent Cause.
as thus; If it happen from a fiux of hot and moist Humors, let the Patient's
Diet be cooling and drying for purging; nothing is more proper here than
Chologogicks, as Electuarium Diaprunum, Diacatholicon, Lenitivum, Syrup of
Roses and the like. Phlebotomy is very necessary also, to prevent the further
growth of Inflammation, for opening the passages, and making a more free
Transpiration: but in all sorts or kinds of Gangrenes this is not to be used;
For in a Choleric and bilious Humor we are not to attempt it, Blood being as
the bridle to check and command this Choler. 6 Intentions in applying of proper
Medicines.
In the case of applying of Topical Medicines observe these rules. The first is
taken from the Cause; for if the afflux be cold and phlegmatic, evacuate more
powerfully, and warm the Humors with Defensatives. The second is taken from
the Age of your Patient; for in a young body the Flesh and all its parts are
soft and tender, and therefore are you to order and prescribe milder Medicines
than to those of a fuller growth. A third arises from the Sex; a Child being
to be treated with more mildness and Gentleness than one of an elder age, and a
Woman more tenderly dealt with than a Man. The fourth is from the Strength of
the Patient; for you may powerfully exercise your operations on such as are of
a good and strong constitution, whereas you are more sparingly and tenderly to
use such persons as are weak and sickly. The fifth arises from the part
affected; for the Eye, Mouth, Pudenda, Anus, Vertebre, and other such sensible
parts are not to be dealt with, as you may deal with an Arm or Leg. Sixthly
the greatness of the Disease is to be much minded and regarded: If it be new
done, and the Putredness not much, A particular Cure of a Gangrene coming from
Inflammation.
nor made any deep impression, to scarrify the part lightly, and to apply
Aegyptiacum alone is enough; If it be more powerful and do threaten a
Sphacelus, here is to be made a deep Scarrification, and you are to mix Spirit
of Wine with Aegyptiacum very hot and often: These are your general rules. I
come now to the prosecution of a particular Gangrene arising from Inflammation;
1 Intention.
and here the first Intention is to be performed by Astringents or Desiccatives
as,. Bol. armen. iiij. Unguent:
Terr. sigillat. ij. Corn. Cerv. ust. and praeparat. rasur. Ebor. an. ij.
Camphor. iij. Cer. iij. Ol. Rosar. lbi. Acet. iiij. Aqu. Rosar. iij. Albumin.
ovor. no. ij. misce, fiat Vnguentum. A Cataplasm for the same is this.. farin.
Hord. Catapl.
iiij. Bol. armen. ij. pulv. Gallar. virid. nuc. Cupress. Cort. Granator. an.
Second Intention.
iss. Camphor. i. cum Oxymelite q. s. fiat Cataplasma. The second Intention is
to revel the Humors and to send and discharge them into other parts. And here
this Bolus is proper * Cass. recenter extract. ij. Elect^^r Diacatholic. ss.
cum Saccharo q. s. fiat Bolus. (...)
The third Intention is to restore the part to its former health, and this is
to be performed by evacuating the Blood, and other compacted Humors from the
part affected and therein concluded. And since I have given you the general and
particular Method of curing a Gangrene in general, I shall still illustrate it
with some examples: It being a thing of great import as touching the Life and
Limb of many a Man. And for brevities sake, because I do not desire to swell up
my book with Tautologies, or commit to your reading here any thing you shall
elsewhere find parallel, I will present you with a History of a virtuous maiden
Gentlewoman in Norfflolk near Norwich, History.
who after a long and tedious Sickness had a very large and great Inflammation
seized her Foot, the which very speedily spread her Leg, and got upwards into
her Thigh, with a great Discoloration, Pain, Heat, and Fever accompanying. My
never to be too much esteemed Uncle being sent for to this Lady, could not go
to her; I being by Sir Thomas Brown's order sent for, and finding all these
already written symptoms upon her, consulted with my self and reason, what
might be the most safe way to quit her from the ensuing danger she without
speedy help might fall into: with this Method and Almighty assistance I got her
loosed from her fears and perplexities which threatened a Gangrene. I first
anointed her parts affected with this mixture. Oil.
. Ol. Rosar. Aueth. Chamomel. a^. ij. Acet. Acer^i^n. i. misce, and having
finished this Embrocation, I applied to all the inflamed parts this Cataplasm.
Catapl*
. farin. Fabar. lbss. farin. Hord. Lupinor. an. iij. pulv. Rosar. rubr. i.
pulv. fl. Chamomel. Melilot. Sambuc. an. i. farin. sem. Fenugraec. iij. Croc.
i. Bol. armen. ij. Corn. Cerv. ust. ss. Camphor. iss. pulv. herb. Rut. Scord.
Absynth. Scabios. Virg. aur. Agrimon. Veronican. iss. pulverisentur omnia and
misceantur cum Vin. and Aqu. fontan. an. q. s. his addendo Acet. Rosat. ij. and
coquantur ad Cataplasmatis formam, fine addendo ol. Rosar. Aneth. Chamomel. an.
ij. By the application of this Cataplasm within three or four days the enemy
began to take his leave of her. I continued every day anointing and applying
this Cataplasm to her. After this upon the back part of her Foot a new flux of
Humors began to make their incursion, and there they made two Ulcers, in which
were contained a great quantity of thick cold indigested Matter lying very
deep, and there spreading it self, much resembling a Coar or Eschar, for the
removing and taking away of which I ordered this Fomentation, with which the
whole Foot was fomented eight or ten times one after another, for three Weeks
or a Month together.. fol. Rut. Scord. Absynth. Veronic. Meliss. Betonic. Salv.
Hyperic. an. M. i. Tormentill. Chamaedr. Virg. aur. Laur. Rorismar. an. M. ss.
fl. Rosar. rubr. Chamomel. Melilot. an. M. ss. coquantur omnia in Aqu. fontanae
lbvi. Vini albi lbvi.. ad med. Consumptionem, fine addendo Alumin. Roch. ss.
With this was bathed the Leg and Foot very often times every day. The Ulcers I
dressed with this. Decoction.
. Spirit. Vin. ij. Aqu. Absynth. composit. i. Aegyptiac. ss. pulv. Myrrh. Aloes
an. ss. Camphor. i. misce. With this Decoction were they washed very often:
after this was applied Vnguentum ex Apio for deterging it. By these means I
discharged these preternatural Matters; and then I digested the parts with this
Digestive.. Digestive:
Tereb. venet. lot. in aqu. Rosar. iiij. mel. Rosat. iij. farin. Lupinor. Lolii
an. ij. Ol. Rhod. iss. pulv. Myrrh. alo. an. i. vitell. ovor. no. ij. coquantur
lentissimo igne, fine addendo Theriac. Andromach. ij. Croc. ss. misce, fiat
Vnguentum. Sometimes I applied this Cataplasm.. farin. Fabar. iiij. Ca^apl.
Sal. marin. iss. pulv. Scord. Rut. Absynth. an. i. pulv. Rosar. sem.
Faenugraec. an. iij. farin. Hord. iss. Camphor. ss. pulv. fl. Melilot.
Chamomel. an. iss. coquantur lentissimo igne in Oxymelite q. s. fine addendo
pulv. Myrrh. Aloe. an. iij. misce, fiat Catapl. This being as excellent a
discussive Cataplasm as may or can be used. After I had deterged it, I filled
it up with new Flesh by applying Unguent. Basilicon ss. Aurei ij. his addendo
pulv. Myrrh. Alo. an. ss. And so I continued until I perfected the Cure by
producing a Cicatrice with Unguent Diapompholigos with a little Vnguentum
Rubrum mixed. Dodonaeus in his 53 Observation does report of a Child of six
years old having both his Hands and Feet correpted with a Sphacelus coming up
to his Knees, and reaching each Elbow, upon whom death speedily did seize.
Albucasis lib. 2. cap. 87. does relate a very strange story of one who having a
little blackness appearing in his Toe, History.
did very speedily over spread his whole Foot; and seeing it extend it self so
much with pain and adustion, for the prevention of its further growth, stopped
it by taking off the Foot at the Ancle. Sometime after the same Patient
complained of a Tumor which happened in his Finger, who coming to ask his
advice about the same, and having followed all directions as was thought most
proper to be used, as cleansing the Body, and purging the superfluities by a
good order of Diet and habit of Body, and the like, yet none of these took
place, but this Curruption still spread until it got him hold by the Hand: he
being by the Patient desired to make Amputation of it for fear it might serve
him as did his Foot, he refused it, hoping by other Remedies, and advantage of
good Medicines, to put a stop to its increase, and to quell its fury; but these
were spent to no purpose: the Patient being both of a Cacochymick Body, and
weak, and perceiving no help by these, was willing to have his Arm taken of,
the which being performed, the Patient perfectly recovered and grew very well.
Another pious person, a Gentleman of good descent, having been let blood in his
right Arm by an unskilful Surgeon, was perplexed with a Gangrene and
Sphacelus: and here advice was given that he might abstain from strong
Remedies, the Nerve being pricked, for this would only subject it to the
increase of pain; and therefore such mild Medicines were ordered, which might
have a drying Quality in them to parch up this serous Humor, such as this..
Terebinth. venet. lot. in aqua Plant aginis ij. Bol. armen. pulv. ij. simul
incorporentur. In this case also our Balsom is accounted a most excellent
Remedy, thus composed.. Ol. Rosar. iss. ol. Terebynth. iij. suce. Plantag. ss.
sem. Hypericon. contrit. M. ss. Tuth. praeparat. iij. Calc. decies lot. in aqua
Plantaginis ij. Antimon. i. sevi Hircin. Vitulin. Verm. terrestr. in vino lot.
iss. coquantur simul; dempta Tuthia, in Cyatho decoctionis Hordei ad consump.
and Vini and aquae, colentur, rursumque igni admoveantur, addendo fine Tuthiam,
and fiat Linimentum cum Cer. alb. and Croc. an. ss. and serva ad usum. These I
produce as Introductions to my future Discourse as touching the order of
Amputation, which is very material in the true and methodical proceedings in
Surgery, and the only Remedy left to secure the whole, by ablating of the
disaffected part. And that I may use all the sweet Methods to procure the young
Student into a fair compliance and affection of his Art, and that he may quit
the repute of a Quack, and defend himself against the calumnies that daily do
shroud themselves under the pretenses of ignorances and mistakes, let him with
me observe this my often experienced Method, both used in the Wars in his
Majesty's service at Sea, and not only in England, but also in France and
other places, with good success and credit. I have also in this Chapter set
down what Instruments the Surgeon ought to have in readiness to perform this
office of Amputation, what Method he ought to proceed in, how he ought to be
furnished, how prepared with Rollers, Bolsters, Pledgets, Buttons,
Restrictives, Sawes, dismembring Knives, dividing Knives, actual and potential
Cauteries, Needles, Sponges: and after these have been all made ready and
fitted for your intended purpose, you are to make ready your Restrictive, with
which you are to arm your large Pledget, which is to cover the amputated part
with, being made of Bolarmeny, Amber, Dragons blood, Mastich, red Roses, Powder
of Hares hair, with Flour, Vinegar, oil of Roses, and Rose Water; with this you
are both to cover your large Pledget, and also to spread your Chin-band (as it
is generally called) which is to be laid above as a Defensative to hinder the
Defluxion of Humors; and then to arm your Buttons with Calcanthum or calcined
Vitriol; then to have Cordials in a Place this Figure Fol: 20^

readiness. A lively Portraict of this operation you have here expressed in
this Figure. And supposing the Leg was to be amputated, having all your
Instruments and other things made ready, you are first to make a strict Bandage
by Roller four Fingers beneath the Knee, and a little below that with your
dismembring Knife divide or cut the Muscles and other parts from the Bones, by
guiding it round with all expedition; then having your dividing Knife in
readiness, separate the Membrane which lodges and keeps between the two
Fossils; and then with your Saw divide the Bones. And while you are going to
perform this Operation be sure you be furnished with two Assistants at least,
one to hold the Leg which is to be amputated steddily, whilst the other does
contract or gripe the upper part to prevent a large flux. And that your Patient
may not droop, you are to have in readiness such like Cordial as this,. Aqu.
Cinomom. Spirit. Menth. aqu. Mirabilis an. Cordial:
ij. Aqu. Theriacal. ss. aqu. Meliss. Acetos. Calendul. an. i. Confect. Alkerm.
ss. cum sir. Caryophyllor. and Lujul. an. q. and. fiat Cordiale. The Leg being
taken of, you are next to apply your Buttons being armed with Calcanthum; over
these lay your large Pledget covered with the Restrictive; after these your
Bladder to enclose the former; and then with convenient bolstring and Rollers
perform your first Intention, observing that your Patient be presently
committed to his Bed; and after this endeavor to correct all ensuing
accidents. On the third day you may loosen your Patient, and open it; then
apply such things as may remove the Eschar, as Unguent. Basilicon, Aureum,
Dialthea, Axungia or Butter; Then cleanse the part with Spirit of Wine and
Aegyptiacum, if occasion require; Then digest with Aureum, or Basilicon, adding
to them a little powder of Mirh, Aloes, the Yolk of an Egg, and a little
Turpentine, fill it up, and Cicatrice it with Basilicon mixed with Rubrum
Desiccativum, or Diapompholigos, or the like. By the use of these Medicines
within a very few years I cured a Child of about five or six years of age at
Wootton in Norfolk, History.
who by an unhappy mischance had a Gangrene, and afterward a Sphacelus
correpted his Arm above the Elbow. The Child by a fall fractured both the
Radius and Vlna, a Country man being sent for to reduce it, after he had
finished his Operation, whether by two strict Bandage, or another fall
occasioned this, I cannot certainly justify, but the poor man being much amazed
at the sight came to Norwich for me; where seeing how far it had spread, we had
no other way to save the Patient's life but by Amputation, the which being
performed, and the same Method being observed, the Child was perfectly cured,
and still remains in health. And thus much of preternatural Tumors in general.

OF Preternatural Tumors IN PARTICULAR* And first of those of the Head.
CHAP. XXX.
Of Artheroma
I HAVE omitted several other Tumors, which by most Authors have been ranked
amongst Generals, and have them contracted amongst others in their particular
places, where they generally or for the most part are reputed to take their
abode: and of these I begin with such which frequently do possess and inflict
the Head, and so then gradually usher in all such as do affect the rest of the
parts of the Body even to the Foot and Toes. Of these which do afflict the Head
are reckoned Artheroma, Steatoma, Meliceris, Ta^pa, or Testudo, Hydrocephalos,
Tinc^, Psydracium: all these being most commonly allowed to border and inhab^^
upon the outward, What Artheroma is.
and inward, and upper part of the hairy Scalp and Cranium. Of the first of
these is Artheroma, which is an Abscess containing in its Cistus or bagg Matter
much resembling that of Pultice, arising from mixed Humors, in which is Phlegm
as its chief Agent, from whence it gains its white Color. It is also
accompanied with other Waterish qualities, eroding the parts, being much like
Whey. It is a longish round sublated Tumor, being pressed with the Finger not
readily yiedling, nor yet making retrogradation the fingers being taken off.
The Curative Intentions here are the same with those of all other Abscesses:
Observa.
Yet here is to be observed, that the Curation of all Abscesses is contained in
the Discharge and Evacuation of the Matter, the which is either Sensible or
Insensible; the Insensible to be cured by Digestives, the Sensible to be
ablated by Section. Care.
These being proposed, we are to cure Artheromaes by Septicks, as Verdegrease,
Chrysocolla, Arsenick, Orpiment, Lime, Chalk and the like: or this.. Calc. viv.
ij. faec. Vin. combust. Nitr. liquid. tossed. ij. Min. i. Lixivio terantur, and
ad mellis substantiam reducantur. If it yeildeth not to these, or you find it
ripe for the Instrument, use this Method, place your Patient in a good form for
your Operation, let his Head be shaven about the place where the Artheroma is;
'then mark with ink how far or long you intend to make your Incision, which
should be quite through the whole Tumor, the which sometimes does require a
cross Incision, as that you pass it as far the other way, if it be large. Here
use your Incision-knife, it being for this purpose the most proper and
convenient Instrument; Observe.
and here are you carefully to observe that you only divide the upper Cutis,
and that you perform this so dexterously, that you do no ways touch the Cistus
of the Artheroma; and that you may do this more promptly, you are to have
Spunges in readiness to dry up the Blood, that the part may better show it
self. The Section being made, separate the Cistus either with a Probe or some
other convenient Instrument, the which for the most part you may do with ease:
separate it from the Cutis with your Incision-knife; but in the lower part,
that you may divide the Vein or Artery that gave it its being, origination, and
growth. After you have discharged the Matter, and the Cistus, apply this
following Digestive. Terebinth. venet. i. pulv. Thur. i. Myrrh. i. Ol. Hyperic.
i. Ol. de Vitel. Ovor. History
q. s. fiat Vuguentum. In this City of Norwich I thus cured A French Man's Wife
of several Artheromaes which possessed her Head, one of which was very large
and soft, the which I opened with making a cross Incision, having well prepared
and purged her Head with Cephalicks, as Extractum Rudii, Pillulae Aureae, and
the like: After this I opened the Abscess, and discharged the Matter, ablated
the Cistus; and this being removed, I perceived a small Capillary Vessel upon
the taking away of the Bag to spin and spend its Blood which streamed out, the
which I speedily stopped by the application of some of his Majesty's Stiptick
water, which I applied to the part by dipping a small Pledget of Lint (the
which answered my expectation) and so bound it up: The Day following I dressed
her again with Spirit of Wine, and Elixar Proprietatis, by the application of
which within few days the Woman was perfectly cured; her large Abscess
discharged; her other small ones, which were six (the which I believe were fed
and nourished by the same small Arterial Branch) were by degrees dispersed, and
at length vanished. Coming to the same Patient not many Weeks after to enquire
how she was, I found the rest perfectly were gone, which gave me satisfaction
of my conjecture: for upon the escharotizing of this Branch not only their
growth were hindered, but also a perfect banishment procured of the whole, and
(to the praise of the Highest) she remains very well without any fear of a
new growth of the same.

CHAP. XXXI.
Of Steatoma.
THIS is an Abscess having in it the substance of Fatt or Sewet, small at
first, but in process of time growing larger: It is a Tumor round, not
elevated, but depressed; and Aetius does add, it adhereth firmly to the Skin:
Its substance is not fluid, but compact and coacted: It is not therefore
contained in one Bag, as the former, but is lodged between two Coats. And when
it is in the Head, it does contain in it a Matter resembling Sewet, a large
Basis, and does not yield to the touch; when it is in other parts, it is seen
to contain in it Matter much like Fatt, more like this than Sewet; neither is
its color there so white: It is generated, as is Sewet, by reason of the
Intemperiety of the place, or by reason of ill Blood. They are scarce ever
cured, but by manual operation. If the Vesicle be broken, and you do not draw
all out, it will leave either a Fistula, or a foul Ulcer. As touching its Cure,
in respect of its hardness, broad Basis, multitude of Sewets, it is only to be
handled as other Abscesses; this Sevum is to be wholly separated from the
Pericranium, lest the Abscess do make a fresh return. Here may you make a cross
Incision, if it be large, and take care of touching the Vesicle, lest you make
a faetid smell and ulceration: This being performed, press out your Cistus, cut
off the branch that fed it, and have a care that the least particle remains
not: this being done, cleanse it, and use your greatest care to produce a
Cicatrize. There was a Gentleman, who was troubled with a Steatoma in his
Inguen, History.
weighing near forty pounds, his whole Body redounding with pituitous Blood; a
good and thin Diet being prescribed, ordering him to abstain from all viscid
and thick food, as Milk, Cheese, and the like, and prescribing him a
Honey-drink, in which Ginger and Time were boiled, and outwardly applying such
Medicines as may discuss this Phlegmatic matter, as Fomentations and the like
being every Night and Morning repeated, and preparing the Humor with Oxymel of
Squills, and then by intervals ordering him to take some of these Pills of
Aloes Rosatae 5. Troch. de Agaric. ij. Turbith. gummos. ss. Squinanth. rad.
Asar. an. gr. 5. ZZ. ss. Cinamom. i. Rhabarb. ss. Troch. Alhandul. gr. 15. cum
Oxymelit. Scillitic. q. s. fiat massa pillul ^rum. dosis a ij. ad i. And this
Oil being outwardly applied as. Ol. Philosophor. Latern. lss. Thur. Mastich.
gum. Arabic. Terebinth. venet. an. iij. pistentur, and per alembicum distilla,
and fine distillationis addatur Sal. ex ciner. Cerr. and iterum distilla, quod
pro usu reserves. By these this great Tumor was dissipated and digested; this
you may read of in Langius Epistol. 4. lib. 3.

CHAP. XXXII.
Of Meliceris.
THIS Abscess has a Matter contained in its Cistus much resembling Honey, and
is thus by Aetius described; It is an Abscess enclosed in a Nerveous Coat,
containing a Matter like Honey, wanting pain, having a round Figure, easily
yielding to the touch, and the finger being taken off it does as speedily turn
into its former condition. Its Cause.
The cause hereof is a mixed preternatural Humor. And although every Abscess
contained in a Bag has Matter going along with it, yet are these divided into
four Modes or Forms: hence in a Meliceris, because it is soft and thin, its
Phlegm is mixed with a greater quantity of Choler than in an Artheroma, or
Phlegm, out of which is made this Meliceris. Cure:
This is to be cured three ways, by Digestives, Causticks, or Amputation. As
touching the Septicks or Causticks, we have already treated in Steatoma: we
shall here more properly treat of Digestives, the which because they do
discharge this Matter perporos cutis, they ought to be powerful and strong, and
to exceed in their vigor more than in those Abscesses which are enclosed in
Bags. Whence in small and moist Melicerides a Decoction Pulegii, Calamenthae,
Hyssopi and Melissae made and applied hot with a Sponge is here accounted very
proper: but if stronger be required, you are to make a stronger Lixivium, in
which boil the aforesaid Herbs, and apply it to the part affected: or for the
same you may use this of Aetius, which he has in his 15th Book,. Sal.
ammoniac. Spum. argent. li. Cer. Terebinth. Galban. Opoponac. an. i. Rubric.
Synopic..vi. Acet. heminam. misce; Or this,. Diachyl. 12. pull. Irid. ij. misce.
or Diachyl. cum gummi, to which may be added a little powder of Ireos. Empl.
Emplastrum Alexandrinum here also is much commended, thus made. Sal. Ammoniac.
Litharg. Cerus. an. i. Galban. Opoponac. an. iiij. Sem. Sinap. ss. Ol. veter.
iiij. Cer. Terebinth. an. i. misce, fiat Emplastrum. If this Method succeeds
not, we are to come to the use of Suppuratives: And of these some may serve for
the prohibiting the egress of Vapors, and not only obstructing, but also
keeping in the inward native Heat: others do not only obstruct, but do also
heat, and by the calefying quality do rarefie and thin the parts; of the same
qualities should our most proper Medicines be framed, as this of Rhasis..
Farin. Sem. Lin. ij. Faenugraec. ss. pulv. Sem. Caul. i. Mucilag. rad. Alth. q.
s. fiat Empl. In the last place I take crude Figs, and beat them in a Mortar,
and to these I add a Snail, and beat with them, and order this Medicine to be
laid on, and so kept on, until it falls off of its own accord. After you have
made it fit to open, discharge the Matter, as I have directed you in the other
two Chapters; then apply Digestives, convenient Detersives, Sarcoticks and
Epouloticks. Amongst all these three Tumors I must acquaint you, that it is
not very frequent for the putrid Matter to exalt it self in these Tumors of
the hairy Scalp; and therefore Causticks are the most proper Instruments to
occasion this, but here not to be used. Langius lib. primo Epistol. 38. Writes
of a Woman, who having an Ulcer in her Matrix had also a Meliceris accompanying
it; and when it gave the greatest hope to the Surgeon of its consolidation,
History.
a new Ichor began afresh, and forced it self out; she being thought to be
bewitched, by good Prayers and divine Ejaculations the Woman had her Ulcer
spontaneously consolidated and cured.

CHAP. XXXIII.
Of Psydracium.
THIS is a yellowish sharp Pustle, out of which, if it be pressed, comes a
Moistness according to Celsus. Galen seems to place it sometimes amongst the
Tumors of the Eyelids, sometimes he will have it a Tumor of the Head. Whence
its Name:
It is called Psydracium, either because it is seen to appear sharp in the
Head, or else because it does contain in it a great quantity of a waterish
humidity. These do arise from mixed Humors; and by how much the whiter they
are, this shows they have more Phlegm in them, the harder come from Choler, and
the sharp and small from Water. Cure.
The Cure is to be performed by moderate Coolers, and Discussives; Coolers as
for allaying and tempering the heat of Choler, and Discussing in respect of
Phlegm: here also are to be observed a good order of Diet, a good respect to the
habit of Body to keep it open, and by purging it from its Phlegm and waterish
Humors as this.. Pil.
Extr. Rud. i. Pil. Coch. ss. Resin. Jallap. Pil:
gr. vi. misce: or this,. Pil. sine quib. aur. Indic. an. ss. Resin. Scammon.
ss. misce for two doses. The part affected is to be treated with Coolers and
Discussives, as are Mallows, with Barley Meal and Cicers being made into a
Decoction, or some of my discussing Cataplasm already prescribed, or this.
Catapl.
Farin. Fabar. i. Hord. ij. coquantur posca ad formam Cataplasmatis, in fine
ebullitionis add pulv. Rosar. rubr. ss. post unam ebullitionem ab igne remove,
tunc misce album. and vitel. Ovor. no. Ol. Rosar. parum, misce, fiat
Cataplasma. If the Psydracium be ulcerated, and a moist Humor comes from
thence, apply this. Litharg. aur. i. Ceruss.ss. Alumin. ij. fol. Rut. cum Aceto
and Oleo simul mixed. fiat Vnguentum, with which anoint the Skin; and having
well embrocated it with this, you may conclude your Cure with this Liniment..
Lithargyr. aur. Ceruss. pulv. an. ij. Sulphur. i. Ol. Rosar. q. s. fiat
Linimentum: And lastly, aqua Scahiosa is by many held to be most excellent here
Alome being added to it.

CHAP. XXXIV.
Of Hydrocephalos.
THIS is a proper Tumor of the Head, arising for the most part from Water, and
hence does it take its name. This is a Distemper which does very often come into
the World with young Infants, being either bred with them in the Womb, or else
so as they are bringing into it. It may also be occasioned by a careless, or
ignorant, or unhappy Midwife. It may well be called a Cephalic Dropsy, for it
does contain in it a proper Waterish substance, known by its indolency,
softness, its easy yielding to touch, but chiefly from its inundation of Water
running out of one place into another in its compression. These Tumors do
often times vary; its differencies.
for in some they are small, whilst in others they do appear very large; It is
a peculiar Disease in the Head of young Children, the which arises from too
much Humidity of the Head; for which very Cause they which are much troubled
herewith, do seldom live long, as both Galen, Aetius, and Paulus do observe.
This Tumor by Galen in Libr. Its Definition.
definitionis is thus designed, as being a collection of waterish Humors, or
feculent Blood in some parts of the Body, which does force it self up to the
Head. And here is a double meaning to be explained; the one, whereas he calls
it not only a collection of a Serous Humor, but also of a feculent Blood, as
when the Head and Cranium suffers an outward Contusion or Collision, and the
Veins by this Collision do sprinkle their Blood between the Cutis and
Pericrane. This Blood here thus putrefying does make a most soft Tumor; and if
a serous aquosity were collected, the which by daily experience may well be
offered to happen, from a Contusion thus happening it may frame a
Hydrocephalos. Aetius lib. 6. cap. 1. will have that a Hydrocephalos may be
generated from a Feculent or bloody Matter, the which being changed into a thin
substance. A second of Galens is, that a Hydrocephalos is a collection of an
aquous Humor in some part of those Bodies, which have a forcing quality
toward the Head; out of which it may be conjectured, that Galen does offer,
that Hydrocephalos to be a Disease of some part of the Head, not a Dropsy of
the whole Head; and this is confirmed by Aetius and Paulus, who treating of
Hydrocephalos do allow four species hereof: First, when this Humor gets
between the Brain and Membranes: Secondly, when it lies between the Membranes
and the Skull: A third between the Bone and the Pericrane: And Lastly, when
between the Pericrane and the hairy Scalp. Signs:
I have already shown you part of its Signs; that it is a Tumor soft in touch,
whitish in color, indolent, turgid, much like a Pillow to other parts, easily
yielding to touch, and as speedily filling up its former made vacancy, the
Finger being removed. If it arises from a Contusion, it does appear first red,
and does carry pain with it, as Aetius does write; but being afterward changed
into a thin substance, it does spread it self without pain. In those where it
happens between the Pericrane and Bone, they answer plainly the rest; for
here it is hard in Tumor, and very painful, by reason of the distention of the
Pericrane; If it happens (as sometimes it does) between the Membrane of the
Brain and the Skull, it will be a Tumor, but not yield to compression, nor
soft to touch. Here it makes the Infant soon to give way to it, and to yield
up its Ghost. Causes.
Its Causes may be said to be sometimes outward, sometimes inward. One of the
outward may be said to be that which is mentioned by Paulus in Children newly
born, who had their Heads but ill bound up by their Midwives; Another is
contusion, or collision, or ruption of one or many Vessels; Another cause is a
cold Air, or too much Water, or thinness of its passages or Vessels, out of
which this Serum or matter do recide, as Aetius has it; or also too cold or
waterish Milk, which it may suck from the Nurse: these may be said to be the
inward Causes hereof, as when the Brain is too much cooled, or the matter being
here first collected, and hence sent to the Brain. Every Hydrocephalos is very
slow in its motion, as Aetius does prove. Lib. 6. Cap. 1. For it has a cold
Brain inwardly from its beginning, arising from its inward Cause, and also an
outward by and from its outward Cause, by reason of its delay and contaction.
Two Species of a Hydrocephalos.
To draw all these to one head, there is to be allowed two Species of a
Hydrocephalos: One in which this waterish Humor is contained and made by an
inward Cause, that is out of an abundant collection of this serous matter in
the Body: The second does not contain the sincere Serum, but as it were a mixed
feculent Blood, the which does eat it self out of the lacerated Veins, arising
from Contusion or some other outward Causes. As to its Presage, Presage.
Paulus Aetius and Galen do offer, that if this Humor be collected between the
Brain and its Membranes, it is mortal; in other parts it may admit Cure, by
curing its Causes, and removing its Effects. But here, as well as in other
parts of the Body, the Rules of Celsus and Galen are to be observed; every
Disease is so much the more dangerous, by how much it gets into a greater bulk
and bigness. As touching its Cure, Cure.
we shall begin with that which is extant between the Hairy Scalp and
Pericrane: And herewe are to observe, that every Hydrocephalos is to be cured
by discharging of this waterish substance, which is to be performed by purging
the whole, and cleansing the affected part. And with this we are to begin with
general Cephalic Purgings; in which Case may be used these and the like for
Pills: as. Pil. Coch. ss. Resin. Jallap. ss. Cambog. gr. iiij. misce. These are
to be given to such as have arrived at Manhood; Children may be prescribed
Syrup of Roses solutive, Syrup of Cichory with Rhubarb, Syrup of Buckthorn
Berry and the like, either by themselves, or given with a Decoction made of
Betony, Fennel-Seeds, Anisc-Seeds, Asparagus, Liquorise, and the like. Sweating
here also is very proper, for which you may make a Decoction of Sarsafras,
Sarsaperilla, Guaiacum with Seeds, etc. Hence are we to warm and strengthen the
cold and moist Brain: and this is to be performed by Insensible Evacuation, the
which I much better approve of than of a sensible; because it is neither so
safe nor so secure, for often times times here, as well as in making a
Paracenthesis, the Patient dies in few days after the Operation, if not at the
Operation. For discharge of this contained Matter, by reason of the thickness
of the Cutis, this is to be rare^ied and softened; and for this purpose this
Fomentation is very proper, in which we may dip Sponges and apply to the part,
as. Malv. Melilot. Aneth. an. M. i. Rad. Alth. i. fl. Chamomel. Decoction:
Melilot. Rosar. rubr. an. M. ss. coquantur omnia in Vino albo q. s. and fiat
Colatura, in hac colatura im^uatur Spongia and parti admoveatur. In such which
are large, to these you may add Roch Alume or Sal Armoniack, and boil with
them, and so apply them. Gulielmus Placentinus does offer Discussives as to be
here most proper, Oil.
and does order this.. Ol. Aneth. Chamomel. an. ss. pulv. Sulphur. ss. misce.
Fallopius on the contrary does as much esteem of Repellers, wherewith he does
declare he has done very strange things, and says, that only by the help of
Oil of Roses and of Oil of Myrtils he has cured several Hydrocephalick Tumors
in four days space. Sometimes he does add to those two Oils green Cypress
leaves and Wormwood bruised, and with this he frames a Liniment. History.
Amatus Lusitanus writes, that he cured a Child of a Hydrocephalos in three
days with this following Unguent.. pulv. Absynth. fl. Melilot. Chamomel. an.
ij. Butyr. recent. Unguent.
Ol. Chamomel. an. iiij. Cer. flav. q. s. fiat Vnguentum. Or here also may you
safely use this Unguent.. Ol. Laurin. Costin. an. ij. Ol. Spic. de Laterib. an.
i. Sulphur. Sal. commun. Alum. Unguent:
ust. an. ss, Terebinth. ij. misce, fiat Vnguentum: Or this Cataplasm,. pulv.
Absynth. Origan. an. i. Mell. lss. Empl.
Sal. ss. misce, fiat Cataplasma: Or this Emplaster of Empl. de Bacc. Laur.
Sulphur. and Ammoniac. of each equal parts. If it yields not to these, but
you be forced to Section, be sure your part be ripe enough and fit for your
Knife: and when you make it, let it not be made too deep, but make it through
the middle, as Paulus does order, if it be small; if large, then are you to
make a transverse Incision like the Letter X, and afterward get out all the
Matter, cleanse it, and follow its Cure, as I have directed you formerly in
Artheroma, S^eatoma and Meliceris. But before you proceed to this operation,
consider with your self these Inconveniences, which may follow and ensue, that
whilst you let forth this Serous Matter, you do let in Cold and Air, which do
extinguish the native heat of the Brain. I rather assent in such desperate
Cases to the opinion of ^abritius, by letting out this matter by degrees, by
making a small Orifice, and therein placing a silver hollow Pipe, which is shut
up with a Silken Stopple, by the drawing forth of which you may let out as much
or as little as you please, in the same method and manner as you use it in a
Paracenthesis; through this Pipe also may you inject any convenient Liquors, or
Decoctions; And this partly sensibly, partly insensibly this Humor may both
with ease and safety be drawn forth. And if it should arise from any Rupture of
the Vessels, in which not only the Serous Humor, but also feculent Blood is
contained, these are to be both discharged, discussed, incised and attenuated;
and for this you may dip a Sponge in Posca, or Wine and Vinegar, and apply it.
Barley Meal and Oxymel well mixed together may be very properly applied here. I
shall here give you some strange Examples, by which you may easily perceive,
how soon our natural Fabrics may be pulled down and washed away, even at our
first appearance on this mundatory Stage. History.
Vesalius writes, that he saw a Girl of two years old, whose Head was larger
and greater than any Man's Head, occasioned thus by this sort of Tumor, and the
Cranium not bony but membranous, and that there was nine pound of water did run
out from this Tumor. History.
Leonellus de Morb. Pueror. Cap. 14. saw a young Child, which had its Head so
much swelled with Water, that one might see through its outward Scalp the
sutures of the Skull; the cause of this great quantity of Water thus expending
it self out from the Skull was occasioned by the Midwife and Nurse, the one in
the extracting of the Child from the Womb, whilst the other did second it by
compressing its Head too strictly, whence the Commissures were cut and opened,
and the Humidity it self, which was in the Brain, came to the outward covering
of the Head, and thither pressed out its Humidities; and this was the occasion
of this tumesied Head. Rhasis does write, that he saw a Child, whose Head did
so increase in length and bulk, that its Body could not carry it: and it ceased
not its augmentation, until the Child ceased not to live. This you have Cap. 3.
Lib. de morb. Pueror. Forestus relates of a Child being brought to him, having
a very great Head occasioned by this Distemper, and this was his Curative
Method: He commanded the Nurse that he might have a drying Diet, it was often
times purged with Pills of Hiera Picra, and was anointed with this Unguent..
pulv. Absynth. Chamomel. Origan. an. iij. pulv. Unguent:
Myrtillor. Rosar. rubr. fl. Melilot. an. i. Ol. Chamomel. q. s. fiat cum
Bntyro and Cera q. s. ad formam unguenti: After the anointing with this, these
Powders were sprinkled on its Head, made of Myrtils, Cloves, Roses, Cinnamon,
and Chamomile, by the benefit of which it was perfectly cured. And to conclude
this, Montanus de Infant. page History.
8. relates of a Smith, who had his Head tumesied to that greatness, that it
did exceed the bulk of an Oxes head, and that it obscured the whole Face with
the Nose; he ordered a stick to be put into his Mouth, that he might obtain a
free breathing, and by keeping every kind of a thin Diet, and just Methods to
carry off and remove the Humor, this Tumor at length abolished and vanished.

CHAP. XXXV.
Of Talpa or Testudo.
THIS Disease is thus so called from the resemblance it has with a Mole, which
dwells and inhabits in the Earth; for this is a creeping Humor, and gets
between the Cutis and Pericrane. It differs a little from Ficus, because as
that is a Tumor arising from mixed Humors; So is this elevating the Skin into
a Tumor. It often times does so closely adhere to the Cranium, that it fouleth
it. It differs from a Ficus, in that it is larger and bigger, and therefore
is longer in its coming to suppuration; for it is made of thick Humors. Its
Causes are various, Its Causes
as salt and nitrous Phlegm mixed with Choler, or a putrefactive Water. In
Children it does breed most from sweet Phlegm. Sometimes it does breed of Phlegm
and Blood together, but seldom of Melancholy. We ought to be very careful and
circumspective in Administering our Medicines here, because here we meet with
both Humor and Fluxion; the Body therefore is to be prepared and purged, the
Humors corrected, and the Peccant Matter discharged: and for these Pil. Aur.
Coch. Aggregativ. Extract. Rud. Pil. sine Quibus, these or any of these are
very useful and profitable. Masticatories, and Sternutatories, are here very
convenient: and to the affected part we are both to use Emollients, and
Digestives. If in the beginning of the use of Emollients the Humors may any
wise rebel, quell their fury by Digestives, as by mixing Diapalma and Minium
with a little Betony together. Stronger are Lilly-roots with Honey, Narcissus,
Ireos with Honey, or the like applied. If it yields not to these, it does
show it self tending to Suppuration; the which when you perceive, you are not
to disturb it, but rather help it forwards in its operation, by applying Empl.
Diachyl. cum gummi Mucilagin. Flos Vnguentor. In other Cases we are to use
Digestives; as. Caepar. Digestive.
coct. sub cinerib. no. iij. Vitel. ovor. indurat. no. iij. Mucilag. Alth.
Faenugraec. Lin. an. i. Ficuum contus. no. 10. Farin. Fenugraec. Lin. an. iij.
fiat Cataplasma, sub finem addendo Axung. Porcin. q. s. then let it be opened,
and discharge all the Matter; then cleanse it with Meal of Lupines and Honey,
or Unguent. ex Apis, and generate Flesh with Vnguentum Basilicon or Aureum, and
dry up with this or the like: Unguent.
. Tuth. praeparat. Rosar. rubr. an. i. Balaust. Bol. Armen. an. ss. misce cum
unguento Diapompholigos, and fiat unguentum. Guido in his Chirurgick Tract.
History.
2. Doctr. cap. 1. relates of a Man who had an ulcerated Talpa upon the
Musculous part of the Head, the which corrupred, and fretted the Cranium so
far, as might with ease be perceived the motion of the Pannicles: more of which
you may read in the aforesaid Tract.

CHAP. XXXVI.
Of Tinea.
THIS is a Disease of the Head, Three sorts hereof.
possessing the hairy Scalp. Of this there are three sorts, The first hereof by
Galen said to be furfurous or squamous, for upon scratching it there do fall
off many squamous Dandriff fleaks: A second called Ficus, it somewhat
resembling the inward part of Figs: A third by Galen called Achor, and this
commonly is called corrosive and ulcerous. All these species do arise from a
corrupt Humor, erring more or less in quantity or quality. The first comes of
the mildest sort, the second is more corrupt, and the third is more putrid than
the two former. If this Disease do forbear to show it self, until the party
which is therewith perplexed is arrived at the Age of Man, he may both purge
and bleed; Cure.
and for this effect such Pills and Potions, as I have already prescribed in an
Erysipelas, may with advantage be used here. As touching Topics, let them be
emollient and discussive; as Marshmallows, Lilly-roots and the like; a
discussive Fomentation and the like: Scarrification and applying of Leeches,
are here also very profitable: and afterward anoint the part with this Unguent
of Guido. Unguent.
. Ellebor. alb. and nigr. Atrament. Suitor. Latharg. aur. Calc. viv. Vitryol.
Roman. Alumin. gallar. virid. fuligin. Ciner. faec. Vin. ust. Argent. viv.
extinct. an. iij. Aerugin. Aer. ij. fiat pulvis, incorporetur in succo Borag.
Scabios. Fumar. Oxylapath. Acet. an. quart. i. Ol. antiq. li. coquantur usque
ad succorum consumptionem, in fine decoctionis add Pic. liquid. ss. Cer. flav.
q. s. fiat Vnguentum. This is by all Authors held as a most excellent Unguent
in scall'd Heads. The Crusteous or Ficous is to be fomented so long, as until
the crusts do fall away, and for this Nasturtium tritum cum Axungia Porcina do
make all fall off in 24 hours. Or this of Ambrose Parrey.. Pic. nigr. ij. pulv.
virid. Aeris, Vitryol. Roman. an. i. Sulphur. viv. ss. coquantur omnia in aceto
acerrimo q. s. fiat Vnguentum. This is to be laid on for three days, and
afterward to be removed, this being our general way used in St. Thomas
Hospital in London, the place from which I took my First Fruits of Surgery,
under that Worthy Master Hollyer, by all allowed a most excellent Lithotomist
and Operator in London. As to the third, deterge it with Vnguentum Aenulatum
cum Mercurio, Aegyptiacum, of each ss. Vitriol. alb. ust. pulv. i. misce, fiat
unguentum. And when the business has been thus successively treated, for
easing of pain, and smoothing the Skin, anoint the parts with this following
Unguent.. Camphor. ss. Alumin. Roch. Vitriol. Roman. Sulphur. viv. Fuligin. an.
vi. Ol. Amygdal. dulc. Axung. porcin. an. ij. misce, fiat Vnguentum. History:
Hercules Saxoniae relates in his Observations of a Woman troubled with a
Disease possessing the Hairy Scalp, called Tinea, who by frequent washings of
her Head recovered her health, but in the interim she endured a continual pain
thereof, and Fever, the which were not to be conquered by any Revulsives,
Derivatives, or Purgatives, and in thirty days after she dyed; and upon opening
the Cranium, the half of the Brain with its Membranes were found putrid, and
filled with a yellowish Ichor much resembling Urine.

CHAP. XXXVII.
Of a Ficus.
THIS has its Name from the resemblance it has with a Fig, for it carries in
it as it were the Seeds of a Fig. This sometimes does arise from the Head, and
does descend into other parts; sometimes it is wholly in the Head. Our present
Discourse shall be only of that which does possess the Head, the which being
rent will yield a fair prospective of the Seeds of a Fig. It is by Paulus
called an ulcerous eruption, hard, and red; with pain. Hyppocrates does number
it amongst Tumors. It is therefore a Tumor, because it does soon degenerate
into an Ulcer, as Galen has it. 5. De Med. per Locum c. 4. It is a Tumor
generally in the Head, especially of Children. It is made of mixed humors,
Cause.
as thick Blood, Phlegm, and Serum, because it is a red Tumor, round in the
Head, and by its Phlegm mixing with it comes this serosity; and hence it is
that these sort of Tumors do so suddenly run into Uucers, if not suddenly and
well cured. Cure*
In its Cure are we to prohibit its Ulceration, for it soon exulcerates, if not
well cured. And here we are to begin with purging and cleansing the Body from
these Humors by Pil. Coch. Aggregativ. Sine Quibus, and the like, and by
Diaphoreticks to dry up this moisture; the part affected is to be discharged of
this Serum, and prohibiting suppuration. And therefore to Children troubled
with such a Disease you may use such a Medicine as this,. Aqu. Marin. vel aqu.
fontan. in qua imponatur Sal M. j. in his coquantur herbae Saliv. Rosar. rubr.
Absynth. an. M. ss. cola. In this you may dip Sponges, and apply them warm to
the affected part, and afterward lay this Plaister-wise, Take Figs being
boiled in Water to the form of a Pultice and apply them. If you require
stronger Medicines,. Alumin. Roch. Calcanth. ust. an. part. aequal. sqam. Aer.
dupl. Glut. in Aceto diluatur, and cum reliquis imponatur. If it be
exulcerated, apply Ceratum Citrinum, Sem. Lin. trit. cum aqua. Let it be
deterged with the pulp of Figs, to which may be added a little burnt Alume: and
skin it with Desiccativum Rubrum or Diapompholigos. ^^story.
There was a Minister of forty years of Age, who was much perplexed with a
Scirrhous Tumor at the great corner of his Eye, the largeness of a Chestnut,
being of a livid color, intertexed with many capillary Veins. The Body being
well purged, and a good Diet ordered, and being let Blood on his left Arm, the
same side where this Tumor possessed, the Tumor was extirpated with a pair of
cutting Forcipes. After which was applied the white of an Egg mixed with Rose
water: then following were applied Anodine, Abstersive, and very drying
Collyriums, often time^ repeating the Purgations, and Administering cupping
Glasses to the Neck and Scapulaes; and to the Forehead was applied this first
being Anodine, and afterward this second being very drying. The first was
this,. Mucilag. sem. Cydonior. and Plantag. cum aqu. Rosar. extract. Lact.
muliebr. an. ij. Camphor. Croc. an. ss misce, apply i^ warm. The second this,.
A^u. Plantag. Rosar. an. iij. Tuth. praeparat. (...). ust. and praeparat.
Ceruss. lot. an. (...) fiat Collyrium. By the benefit of these, and observing
his prescribed Direction he was perfectly cured.

CHAP. XXXVIII.
Of a Cataract.
I NOW proceed to Tumors of the Eyes, and under this Head I shall comprehend
Suffusio, Hordeolum, unguis Oculorum and Encanthis. Suffusio or Cataract by the
Greeks is called (...), and this is an affect of the Eye, whose cause is as it
were a concreted glassy Humor gotten between the Cornea and the Chrystalline
Humor, clouding it and obscuring its Species of Objects, sometimes covering
the whole Pupil, whilst at other times it is seen only to cloud but half
thereof. And according to its more or less spreading, it does either in process
of time wholly abolish, or partly diminish the sight. And as Platerus does
observe, it grows in length of time to the thickness and hardness of an
excocted Egg. It is often times made by a concretion of a Phlegmatic Humor,
Cause.
bred either between the Coats of the Eye, or its Pannicles or Spots: It
arises also from an influx of Humors; or is occasioned by some outward
Action, as a Blow, or Fall; or thick and fumid Vapors arising from the
Stomach, and so getting into the substance of the Brain, are from thence sent
and diffused into the Eye, and at length do there contract its concretion. It
may arise also out of weakness and cold. Celsus lib. 7. cap. 7. says, that
there is a space or distance between the Cornea and the Wea, and in this empty
space, as he does imagine, lodges this Cataract or Suffusion, and there takes
its Origination. Paulus lib. 6. cap. 21. says, that a Suffusion is a
Concretion of an idle or sedentary Humor in the Cornea near the Pupilla; but
this carries not so full a measure of truth as the former. Galen 10. de usu
partium cap. 1. and 4. offers that this Humor does grow between the Cornea
and the Crystalline. Yet Fabritius ab aqua pendente does affirm, that in the
three persons which he has couched, and that in all People which he has seen
use the same Operation, the Needle has been applied backward under the Wea
before the Suffusion would appear: and therefore it is probable, as he
mentions, that behind the Foramen of the Wea this Humor should consist,
because if it did grow in its Circumference, it could not be dilated. Where
this Cataract is confirmed, and comes to maturity, Sign.
we may with ease perceive the thin Membranes visited with a strange Species of
a thin clouded Pupil, variously colored according to the diversity of Humors,
as sometimes with white, or black, or bluish, yellow, red, or green; and by
these or any of these the Eye is often times clouded and deprived of its sight.
If it do possess half the Pupil, it takes away but half; but when it creeps and
overcasts the whole, it does cause perfect blindness. Cure.
Its Cure is to be begun with a good order of Diet, and convenient Medicines,
and Instruments artificially prescribed and applied: Abstaining from Wine and
such hot things, as may disturb the Brain; Shunning phlegmatic Diet, and such
as is of a flatulent and pituitous Juice. If the Patients Bread have some
Fennel-seed put into it, it will be so much the better; for this is generally
reputed not only to help the sight, but also is very advantageous for
dissipating of cloudy Vapors. Bleeding, Purging, Frictions, are here very
useful; Masticatories chewed in the Mouth are proper; Cupping Glasses and
Vesicatories applied to the Neck and Shoulders are here also very requisite for
Derivation; Pills and Potions for purging the Head of these phlegmatic Tumors
are wonderfully helpful. For Purging Means or Methods take some of. Pil.
Pil. Sine Quib. i. Pil. de Cynogloss. iss. Ol. Faenicul. gutt. iij. cum sir.
Betonic. q. Pil:
s. fiant pillulae. Or these. Alo. optim. ss. Turbith. gummos. Hermodact.
Agaric. recent. trochiscat. an. ij. Diagrid. i. ZZ. Caryophyllor. an. ss. Croc.
Sal. gemm. an. gr. vij. pulverisentur and cum Syrup. de Staechade q. s. fiat
Massa pillalar. hujus sumat a ss. ad ij, Potion.
etc. A potion for the same.. Sen. ss. sem. Anis. Caryophyllor. an. ss. fol.
Menth. Betonic. an. M. ss. Summitat. Thym. Paralys. Anth. an. pug. ss.
coquantur ad iiij. colatura infunde Agaric. recenter troch. ij. Cinamom. ss.
misce fiat potio. For outward Medicines there are innumerable by most Authors
already mentioned: amongst the best of them all may be reckoned this, very often
times used by my self with good success.. A Medicine of the Authors.
Succ. Haeder. terrestr. Chelidon. Bellid. an. ss. Aqu. Rosar. albar. i. pulv.
Sacchar. condit. albissim. ss. Mix these, and being made lukewarm let the
Patient wash his Eye often times in a Day. it both attenuateth, dissolveth, and
penetrateth. And these are the most powerful intentions in this proposed scope.
But if all these should fail, and this Cloud do still increase and grow
thicker, leave off the use of external Medicines, and let it grow until it be
full ripe for manual Operation, and this you may gain by observing this Method;
the sound Eye being shut, if the other be well rubbed with the Finger, the
Pupil will presently dilate, and diffuse it self, and will very speedily return
into its place, figure, color, and State, and this by some is reputed to be
ripe enough for manual Operation. Those Cataracts are by most Authors held to
be incurable, which do arise out of a sharp and tedious Disease, and having
with them great pains of the Head, or that which comes by a vehement blow or
stroke; such as are black, green, livid, yellow, or of a Quicksilver color are
hardly curable. On the contrary, such as have a Chestnut color, or resemble
that of the Sea with some White, are cured without much difficulty. And since
it is not such an easy Operation, but may and has puzzled the best Oculist and
most exact professor of this Art, consider that this Cure by couching is not
always successful: But as it often times happens well, so also has it its
intervals of bad success; for by these the Grapy Coat is too much diduced,
sometimes rent, whence follow its amplification; or distorted, often after
Place this Figure Fol. (...)

this do follow inflammations and loss of sight. Therefore how careful,
faithful, and diligent ought the manual Operator be, who undertakes this so
curious an Art, the only piece to be admired of all Surgery? And here ought
we to consider and understand the Coats, Muscles, and Humors of the Eye, so
that not one part of the Eye may be injured by your operation: We ought also to
consider and observe, how these parts are connexed together, while we move the
Needle upwards and downwards. And having given you this as a Caution or
monitory Introduction, I come now to teach you the way of performing this
Chirurgick Operation, a lively Protraict of which here you may see expressed,
with all its necessary Chirurgick Instruments belonging and appertaining
thereunto. Your Patient having both his Body and Head well cleansed, and all
other accidents which may yield any appearance of obstructing your Operation,
you are to remove, and then bind up the contrary Eye, and place the Patient to
the best advantage, both for his ease, and your better sight, and executing
your Operation; and having your Needles both sharp and round pointed ready
fixed, and fitted for your use, and your other Dressings fit to be applied,
then with an intrepidant Hand and undaunted Courage thrust through your Needle,
so as that it may enter the Ad^ata in the middle, charging your Patient to turn
the Eye toward his Nose, thrusting it near half a strawes breadth from the
Iris into the Cornea; and having got it safely in, you are to work it unto the
hollow of the Eye; and when the Needle has touched the Cataract endeavor to
press it gently with the Cataract downwards, and this you are to do so often
until you see the Pupil quite discharged of its Cloud, and with that strength
as to keep it down, that it may not rise up again; and order your Patient not
to stir his Eye; for if it sticks below, and returns not again, you may be
confident of a perfect Cure. Then is the Needle to be brought up again, not to
be taken out presently. Upon which done, and your Needle taken away, close up
the Eye with all speed, by applying to the Eye some linen Clothes dipped in Rose
water, the White of an Egg, and a little Alume mixed together, taking as an
Observation, that you beware of hurting the Crystalline Humor, and the sound
Coats in the Operation, Observe:
and with convenient Bolsters and Rollers complete the rest of your Operation;
after this get your Patient to Bed, and order him to ly high with his Head,
from all Noise; and let your work be done with sobriety and carefulness,
acquitting your selves of all Mountebank gestures and impostures. Let his Diet
be Barley water, Ptysans, Gellies, poached Eggs, and the like: At the eight day
you may remove your Dressings, and then wash the Eye with Rose water, being
made lukewarm before you apply it to the Eye; and for some season, order your
Patient to wear a piece of green Silk over his Eye, that it may not have the
full Air come to it, but by degrees; and let this serve for your couching
Method. I shall conclude this Chapter, wishing all success to the manual
Operator, leaving this also with him to have in his remembrance, that it is the
Eye alone which is Man's greatest Guide in this World, and therefore let
Conscience and Charity persuade all Men that tender any thing of good, not to
meddle with this Cure or way of curing, unless he be well Skilled and exercised
in the Art, and understands the Parts and Coats very well, lest he comes off
with no more Credit than that Mountebank, of whom Montanus Consil. 81. writes
the Story, I will here give you as a just example of impudence in these
Locusts. A Person being troubled with an Opthalmy in part of the Cornea of the
Eye against the Pupil, History.
the which being but very small and scarce discernable, an Emperick coming
under pretense of giving ease, applies an Apple which had been roasted on hot
Embers thereunto, and ordered to let it remain on until the next Day; that
Night the pain ceased, and the Patient slept well; Upon which the Mountebank
began much to praise his Skill, and himself with hopes of a speedy Cure; but
taking off his rare Medicine, the Waterish Humor followed it, which preceded
the Crystalline, so that contrary to his boasting expectation, the Patient was
made blind in this Eye. A Day will hardly suffice to reckon up those mischiefs
and injuries, which are daily done by these Quacks and Mountebanks. A Woman of
thirty years of Age (as Riverius in his 100. History.
Observations writes) having a confirmed Cataract, and being for a whole year
blind, recovered her sight, her Body being well purged and cleansed, by the
benefit of Quarcitanes Opthalmick water; for the same I have often times used the
Juice of Celandine, Daisies, Rose water and Sugarcandy with very good success.

CHAP. XXXIX.
Of Hordeolum^
THIS is a small extuberance, by the Greeks called (...) from the resemblance
it has with Barley, and (as Celsus says) this is included in a Husk or Coat,
and does contain in it somewhat which is hard to suppurate. This Tumor by us
in England has generally given it the Name of a Stiony. It generally grows
in the upper part, and in respect of its smalness it may sometimes be
discussed, sometimes digested: Discussed by laying hot Bread or Wax to it; when
you have digested it, open it with an Incision knife or Lancet, and let out
every part of the Humor which is contained.

CHAP. XL.
Of Vnguis.
ALTHOUGH this by the Greeks is called (...), yet this is not so easy by us
understood or described: for if we may conceive the whole Fibrous Membrane
arising in the greatest Angle of the Eye, and produced above its White to the
Cornea, and sometimes extended as far as to the Pupil, we may view and perceive
this lively expressed adherent in this part. Celsus does often times say, that it
arises from part of the Nostrils, and sometimes from part of the Temples, and
where it touches the Pupil it adhereth to it. Paulus affirms this is without
much difficulty to be discussed, as by applying thereunto white Wine and White
Wine Vinegar mixed together, or Eyebright and Sugar, or Fennel-water, Niter or
Salt. If it has had a long time to grow, and comes to any perfection, as
Celsus directs, it is to be cut out, Celsus Method.
for which he uses this Method: Let the Patient be placed in a convenient
State with his Head somewhat downwards on one one side, that you may come the
better at the Tumor, and let him be so held and placed, as that he do not
disturb your Operation; and then with a sharp Hook, being a little bent or made
crooked, apprehend the Unguis, and with a small Needle and Thread draw through
it, and so by compression eat it off. Paulus' s Way.
Paulus's way is thus: He uses a strong and long Horses hair, and with this he
does comprehend the Unguis, and so in a short time does eat it off. And here
ought we to take care how we apply our Silk, or Hair, or any other thing, with
which we do or may intend to eat of those, lest when we come to the Angle, the
Caruncle it self benot cut off also, and so there happens another Mischief by
the Greeks called (...), out of which a Humor does always flow. After it is
clean taken away, Paulus would have a little fine Powder of Salt sprinkled on
it, mixed with the White of an Egg, and so applied upon Cotton or Lint; We
rather approve of Pompholix being poudred both for deterging and drying, and
over all to put a little Sheeps Wool. Celsus does put over his Liniment, being
made of Honey; but the true and more proper way is, to use more drying
Medicines, such as have no corroding quality, History.
or do stir up any Inflammation. A Girl of ten years old being much perplexed
with a tedious and troublesome weeping at the right Eye, to which convenient
Medicines not being applied, the Humor that made its course thither grew
sharper, after which followed an Inflammation, and an Erosion of the Pupil;
hence the Pupil grew into a great, thick, hard, and white Cloudiness, which
depraved the Sight, by its long continuance, there being but little hopes left
of doing good to this Patient; yet by the request of her Friends, and
persuasions, by these following Medicines, she following directions recovered
her sight: to the Front was applied this Defensative.. Defensative.
Farin. Hord. ij. pulv. Rosar. rubr. nuc. Cypress. Gallar. Cort. granator. an.
iij. pulv. fl. Betonic. Euphrag. an. i. misce in mortario cum aqua Betonic.
Euphrag. and Acet. and Abumine ovi, fiat defensativum. Into the Eyes was
instilled this Collyrium.. Collyrium.
Mucilag. Sem. Cydonior. cum aqu. Rosar. extract. j. Aqu. Foenicul. Euphrag.
an. ij. Mel. Rosar. ss. Tuth. praeparat. and Corn. Cerv. ust. and praeparat.
an. ss. Camphor. gr. iiij. With this Collyrium and a good Diet, with a good
Order in purging being observed, and by the benefit of a Seton she recovered
her perfect sight. If the Collyrium be not strong enough, you may add Extract
of Celandine to deterge the thick and viscid Matter which sticks to the Pupil.

CHAP. XLI.
Of a Polypus.
WE come next to the Nose, where we may meet with a Polypus, the which by
Paulus lib. 6. cap. 25. Is said to be a Preternatural Tumor arising in the
Nostrils; so called from the resemblance it has with the Fish Polypus, as
Galen has it, and also from its substance, it being made of a Phlegmatic and
viscous substance. Its proper place, wherein it inhabits, is the Nostrils,
where it both obstructs the Nostrils Respiration, and in some measure does
hinder the Speech. Celsus does add, that where a Polypus is thus produced as
that it reaches the Fauces, they which are correpted herewith are soon
suffocated. What a Polypus is.
This Tumor is like White flesh soft, filling the Nostrils, not uniform, but
does appear as many Caruncles knotted or joined together, or hanging one on
another, some coming to the Cartilages, some to the Bones either of the Nose,
or Spongy Bones. Albucasis lib. 2. says, that it arises from a phlegmatic
matter, and has no Veins for its nourishment. Whence it is most likely it is
made of pituitous Blood, which flows to the Brain, Cause.
and is thence sent through the Nostrils. There are many Differencies hereof,
Differencies
as Paulus Albucasis and others do own, for sometimes it is hard, adherent,
livid, painful, and cancerous, not to be cured with Instrument. Another sort is
soft, loose, white, indolent, bordering only on the Cartilages of the Nose, or
to the Bones, or to its Spongeous Roots, being pendulous. It is so pendulous,
as it often times is seen to hang out beyond the Nose. Sometimes it is drawn
upwards, sometimes it passes the other way to the Fauces. Hyppocrates does
describe all its Differencies, de Polypo, and the manner of curing. Celsus' s
way.
Celsus does order us to put up a sharp Iron through the Nostril, made in form
of a Spatula, and with this to resolve the Polypus from the Bone, taking all
care that the Cartilage be not hurt, and being cut with this draw it out.
Paulus 's way.
Paulus opens the Nostrils and delateth it, and with a Spatula made in form
of a Myrtle leaf, does cut it out orbicularly: But I shall not hang on either
of these. These do show the Nostrils to be free from a Polypus, if breathing
through the Nostrils be free, and without any Obstacle. I rather with a great
satisfaction admire and approve of Fabritius de Aqua Pendente, whose Method and
Instrument is both safe and harmless, which Operation is made with safety and
with repute; for this Instrument does apprehend, cut and draw forth the
Polypus, the which are the three chief intentions in this Cure. And besides
these advantages it keeps and defends all the other parts of the Nose in safety
and harmless. It apprehends and draws it out without effusion of Blood, for it
neither cuts nor divides no other Veins or Vessels, than such as are spread or
interwoven into these Caruncles, of which this Polypus is made. I shall, after
I have presented you with its commodities, show you the exact Figure of this
Instrument; it cures suddenly, safely, without pain, and danger. This
Instrument does perform these Four Intentions, it apprehends, cuts or separates
it, separateth its relics, and does induce a Cicatrice. It has an edge to
cut, and apprehends like Forcipes, and therefore is to be made like a pair of
cutting Forcipes: It apprehends and draws forth like Forcipes: it presently
separateth the Polypus from the Bone; and for the last we only blow up
restrictive Powder: And thus have I shown you its Four Intentions. It cuts
inward to prevent all trouble and danger, and it brings this commodity with
it, it shows to every one apparently what it has done. In the Cure of a
Polypus certainly could there be never a better framed.

Falloppius has an Instrument made of Silver like a Pipe for this purpose,
into which he puts a Wire, with which he does apprehend the Polypus, and with
this he draws it to the root thereof, and by a close contraction of this Wire
he divides and draws forth the Polypus; but if the Polypus be too hard, he
draws it forth with this, and cuts it with an Incision Knife. I have here also
set down its Figure, so that if any desire to use it, here may they see its
shape and form.



Johannes Paulinus in his his Observations does relate of a Countryman, History.
who had such a large Polypus descending to his Palate, or in the Glandule
hardened in the Larynx, that he was almost suffocated, and could scarce speak or
swallow. Baynius in lib. History.
5. cap. 3. says, that he cured the Secretary of a Reverend Cardinal of a
Polypus, which not only stopped the Nostril, but also at sometimes hanged out
beyond it, by this Method of applying a Caustic at the end of a leaden
Instrument, the which being made hollow at its end for receiving the Caustic,
and not bigger than to put up into the Nostril, with which the Patient himself
was to hold it with the Caustic next to the Polypus for the space of one whole
hour; and then this being removed, he applied Butter, until the Eschar was
ablated or removed also; and thus he as often renewed the Caustic, and
afterward applied a convenient Medicine for ablating the Eschar, as until he
had quite extirpated the Polypus. A true Figure of Falloppius Instrument you
have here expressed.

CHAP. XLII.
Of Parotis.
WE arrive now at a Tumor of the Glandules of the Ears called Parotes: And
before we explain any further hereof, it will be here necessary that we
understand what a Glandule is. It is a Spermatick Parenchyma included in one
common Membrane, What a Glandule is.
and with many private. And these may more properly be said to be Spermatick
than Sanguinary, they being furnished with four kinds of Vessels, as Veins,
Arteries, Nerves, Lymphaducts. And since we have shown what a Glandule is, let
us further inquire into the nature and substance of this Parotis. What the
Parotides are.
These are Glandules seated behind the Ears, and do fill up the whole substance
thereof in the back part; they are more hard and viscid than the Mamillary
Glandules. It is from these do come the Salival Ductuses: and by Falloppius are
said to be ordered for receiving some superfluities of the hard branch of the
fifth pair, and to send them into the Veins refocillating the inward and
outward Ear by its Heat, and to explete the same in its Circumference. This
Tumor, which preternaturally gets into the Glandules and these Emunctuory
parts, they being loose and spongeous, and so the more capable for the
reception of Excrements) has inflammation generally as its companion, both
sharp and painful. As it is also often times seen to arise from a viscid Humor;
so also does it very frequently succeed a long and tedious Disease, the which
sometimes does terminate hereby, throwing some of its Venom hereinto. It is
tedious in cure, it arising from a thick and viscid Humor. Its Cure.
It is to be cured by good order of Diet; and if plethory appear, use
Plebotomy, and then to discharge such peccant Humors as do occasion it. Galen
advises us not to use Topics here, as we do in other parts; for it is not to
be repelled in its beginning, lest hereby you give the Enemy a deep impression
into your Patient, and so increase more Pain and Danger; but rather to attract
and draw forth the Humor: But if Fluxion be large, Pain sharp, and thence
Fever and Watching follow, here may we use Repellers; and by Galens Authority
we are to use Digestives mixed with Repellers: Catapl.
as. farin. sem. Lin. Hord. Fabar. an. ij. coquantur cum decocto Melilot.
Chamomel. fine addendo Ol. Rosar. Chamomel. q. s. fiat Catapl. Or. Butyr. sine
Sal. ij. Ol. Chamomel. Aneth. an. i. Dialth. ss. Cerae parum, Unguent.
misce, fiat Vnguentum. The pain being ablated, come to the use of strong
Resolvers, such as this;. rad. Alth. Breon. an. iss. fol. Rut. Scord. Origan.
Veronic. an. M. fl. Melilot. Chamomel. an. pug. 1. Coquantur in Hydromelite,
Catapl.
trajiciantur fine addendo farin. Hord. Fenugraec. Lupinor. an. i. pulv. Irid.
iij. Ol. Rut. Chamomel. an. i. misce, fiat Cataplasma. A Woman of thirty years
of age being perplexed with a Parotidal Tumor behind her Ears, History.
in which beginning was no Fever, neither did she keep in; but about the
fourteenth day of her Disease her Tumor grew to a great bulk, and the matter
was plainly prepared, but by reason of the toughness of the Cutis, it was kept
in longer than it ought to have been: At length being broke, the Woman fell
into a few swounding vomitting Watchings, with pain of her Back and Kidneys;
yet little or nothing came out of the Abscess, neither did she spit up any:
Within a few days she dies. Hence may a Surgeon learn that Abscesses be
either in the Emunctuories, or their neighboring parts, that they do not break
them, until they of their own accord break.

CHAP. XLIII.
Of Epulis and Parulis.
THIS is a Hypersarcosis, or fleshly Excrescence of the Gums, gathered at the
roots of the Teeth, and does Tumefie with Pain, Heat, and Redness; it pours
fourth a saline and fetid Sanies, and often times runs into a Cancer, which
ought to be understood out of the property of its extraneous Heat; and that
which is not painful may be revelled, the manner of which may be this way acted
and performed, by tying a double Thread about it, and bringing the same every
day straiter, until you have wholly eaten it away: when it is off, you are to
burn the place by applying a Caustic thereunto, being sent thither through a
Pipe, but so safely that it hurts none of the adjacent parts. Parulis is a
Tumor of the Gums with Inflammation, which is very often resolved, and
sometimes suppurated; It is made of hot Blood. This may be cured by prescribing
in the beginning convenient purging, bleeding, and cooling and repelling
Gargarisms, as Plantain, Roses, Adderstongue, Nettles, Sage, and the like,
being boiled in Water with Alume, to which add some Syrup of Mulberries and
dried Roses; If it tends to Suppuration, further its progress by putting in
here Marshmallow roots, Figs, Mallows, and the like. And being made ripe, open
it with your Incision Knife or Lancet, and cleanse the Ulcer with Mel. Rosarum,
Wormwood or the like: If it be scirrhous, and proves very stubborn, draw out a
Tooth where it fixes: and by this means you will both discharge it from its
root, and have no reason to fear a new growth. Placentinus Chirurg. History.
lib. 5. cap. 20. cured a Gentlewoman of a very large swelling which was in her
Gums in the upper Mandible, the quantity of which Flesh was very much above the
Teeth swelled to the bigness of a Goose Egg. He removed this in four times
applying an actual Cautery, and removing some of the Teeth about it with some
part of the Mandible: He let it bleed in a great quantity, at length he stopped
the Flux with Vitriol applied on Cotton or Lint, pressing out all the clotted
Blood with his Fingers, and so perfectly cured her within eight days.

CHAP. XLIV.
Of Ranula.
THIS Tumor by the Greeks is called (...), by the Latins Ranula, it lodging
under the Tongue: It is occasioned by a moist, pituitous, gross, and thick
Substance, falling from the Brain into the Tongue, much resembling in it the
Substance of the White of an Egg, being somewhat of a more yellowish Color.
And here observe, if the party be plethorick, breath a Vein under the Tongue,
and use proper and peculiar Gargarisms for this purpose, and anoint it with
some restringent Unguents, or rather open it with some red-hot Iron Instrument
being sharp, the manner of which is thus: Get a bended hollow Ironplate which
has a hole in the midst; making the Patient to hold open his mouth, you must
so fit it, that the hole is to be just upon the part which you intend to open;
with the Instrument open the part, so as you may hurt none of the circumjacent
parts; when you are ready to burn it, thrust your Thumb under the Patients
Chin, that you thereby may somewhat elevate the Tumor, and hereby you may open
with more certainty. Being thus opened, throw forth the contained Matter; after
which wash the Patients Mouth with Barleywater and Sugar of Roses; and thus may
the Ulc^r be safely cured. Gulielmus Placentinus does order only Aqua Aluminosa
to be held under the Tongue, in which has been boiled a little Myrrh. Gesner
in Histor. animal. lib. 2. page 51. writes, History.
That a Physician related to him, that he saw a Tumor under the Tongue the
breadth of two Fingers, which hindered the speech, and that this Tumor was
cured by drawing a Needle through it, and afterward opening it with a sharp
Instrument; the which being done, came out matter from thence much like that of
an Artheroma, resembling coagulated Milk to the quantity of as much as would
fill two hands; the which being discharged, he ordered the Patient to gargarize
his Mouth with Aqua mulsa, and sent into the Ulcer of the same by a Syringe,
and the Body being well purged, and by the use of Restringents the Patient
perfectly recovered.

CHAP. XLV.
Of Strumae and Scrophulae.
THIS Tumor does arise with much ^ase from too much fibrosity, thickness and
viscidity of the nutritive Succus, and for this cause only is it that this
Juice is so difficultly despersed into all the parts of the Body, and therefore
must confidently redound in some place, and with ease lay its first grounds and
Foundations of a Tumor. There is held a great difference between Strumae and
Scrophulae; and by Dr. Wharton in his Book De glandulis, the one of these is
called by him Wenns, the other the Kings evil: Scrophula signifying the first,
and Struma the latter: Scrophulae are soft, Wenns hard: the first pale,
carrying in them the color of the Skin, the second having a redness turning to
lividness; Scrophulae soft and not much penetrating, Strumae immovable and
deeply fixed: the King's Evil swellings generally increase into a great bulk and
magnitude; and besides their glandulous Fleshes they do carry in them several
sorts of Juices in their little Bags, the which do help much forward their
growth and bulk. It is credible that these concreted Juices are as some
rejected Excrements thrown from the glandulous Flesh in its nutrition; for
these Glandules have no excretory Vessels, and therefore necessarily they
should carry their Excrements in their Bags: And this is one reason of their
growth. Secondly, the Blood effused from hence through the Arteries is more
plentiful, than that which is reduced through the Veins; and hence therefore
may there arise another reason of its growth. Thirdly, The Nerve which keeps
here is but small, and that makes them so dull; and hence is it that, were the
parts pricked with Needles, the Patient would not much complain of pain. Now as
touching Strumaes, these are not always seen to run into a bulk or magnitude,
Descript^on of Strumaes.
but sometimes they increase, sometimes they lessen, and at length do vanish.
These Tumors do receive their proportion from the reductory Vessel, and are
discriminated from its first genus, here is nothing found besides Nerves V^ins
and and Arteries. And by how much the Veins are better capacitated and enabled
to convey and carry off that which is sent them from the Arteries, by so much
also are these Strumatous Tumors less capable of running into bulk, than such
as are Scrophulated. And how these Tumors are translated from one place into
another, I attribute chiefly to the Nerves in their Operations, these being
most proper Messengers to carry to and fro. Now if there be any matter carried
to the Emunctuory Vessels or Glandules, and be there excerned, the Struma does
soon lessen, and sometimes does wholly vanish, and is very often seen by
applying of Hydrargyrical Medicines or Salivation to consume and waste away,
these having in them a very powerful influence of making the Nerves spit forth
their Humidities into the Emunctuory Glandules. And hence by Paulus and Celsus
these are said chiefly to arise in three places more especially, as in the
Inguens, Axillaries, or about the Neck or Throat, but most chiefly about the
Neck and Throat, because here they be nearer the Head, their Fountain, from
whence they draw their phlegmatic Matter to their conglomorated Glandules.
Signs.
Some of these Strumaes do succeed other Distempers, whilst others do breed of
themselves: Sometimes an outward Cause may occasion them, as by applying too
hot resolving or too drying Medicines. Presage.
As to their Presage, we ought here to consider their different places where
they make their abode; for these are also either small or great, loose or fixed,
few or many, painful or without pain, arising from Phlegm or Melancholy: Some
being in the inward part of the Neck, whilst others do border on the outward:
Some terrifying young Children, whilst others do lay their impresses on people
more aged: And by how much they are more movable, by so much are they with less
difficulty cured; yet take them at the best, the Surgeon will find work
enough to get well off, and clear them with repute. Such as adhere to the Bones
are incurable; there are three ways of eradicating them: Three ways to
eradicate them.
Either when the Radical Moisture, which is carried and reserved in their
several Cystuses or Bags, is sucked up by the Nerves, or the affluxed Blood
reduced by the Veins, or a free transpiration brought to the part affected. The
first and main cause of this translation is the Nerve, which does bring and
breed the first rudiment of a Struma out of its matter, and to help forwards
this work, both Veins and Arteries are as its Assistants. The curing also of
these Diseases are very difficult, in that most generally such as are troubled
with these swellings outwardly, they also have them inwardly. Cure:
As to the Cure, the thick Lympha is to be incised, tempered, and evacuated;
the Glandules softened; the Humor, if possibly, either to be discussed or
suppurated, and at length, if no otherwise to be overcome, is to be treated
with Escharioticks. And first let the Body be well purged with Phlegmagogicks.
Pil.
As. Alo. lot. cum aqu. Majoran. Agaric. troch. an. i. Mastich. Cubebar. an.
gr. vi. Troch. Alhandul. ss. cum Syrup. de Betonic. q. Pil.
s. fiant pillulae. Or these,. Pil. Coch. ij. Aurear. i. Troch. Alhandul. gr.
iij. cum Oximelit. q. s. fiant. Pil. Or. Turpeth. optim. Zinz. Hermodactyl.
Diagrid. Sacchar. an. parts aequal. misce, fiat pulvis, of which the Patient
may take from a Dram to a Dram and a half with Oximel once in a Week, Powder.
in the Morning. Or this,. Turpeth. Zinzib. Sacchar. alb. an. i. detur cum
vino. If the Patient be of a pretty good Age and strong, he may take this..
Pulv. Turpeth. ss. Hermodact. i. Zinzib. condit. ss. mix them for use. Pil.
Cochiae, Sine Quibus, Trochisc. Alhandul. and the like, are here very good and
proper. Sweating also here is very advantageous, and taking inwardly of acid
things is good: Or you may prescribe this Powder. Powder.
. Ciner. Spong. marin. Oss. Saep. Piper. long. Cinamom. Sal. gem. Pyreth. nuc.
Moschat. Cupress. Gallar. cort. Querc. fl. Rosar. rubrar. an. ss. misce, fiat
pulvis, dosis a ij. ad i. Or this,. Lap. Spong. iij. Sal. gem. ij. Tartar.
vitriolat. j. misce, fiat pulvis, dosis iss. vel ij. And to the part affected
such things as are proper for a Scirrhus, are here also as prevalent; but such
things here are more peculiarly to be added, which may more powerfully resolve,
as these which have been applied with most excellent success. Aqva.
. Ol. Philosophor. (...). Thur. Mastich. Gum. arabic. Terebinth. venet. an.
iij. pistata simul per Alembicum distillentur, tandem distillationi addatur
Salex cinere Sevi, and iterum distilla, and serva in vitro ad usum. Or,.
Galban. Bdel. an. i. Ammoniac. ij. Scord. Alveor. Apum Oesyp. an. ij.
Terebinth. venet. Pic. liquid. an. iss. bacc. Laur. Staphis acr. Cumin. Pyreth.
an. ss. Stercor. Caprin. Anser. Alth. an. iij. Axung. Porcin. Sev. Caprin.
Vrsin. an. 3ss. ol. Chamomel. Lilior. an. ij. Terebinth. venet. ss. Hydrargyr.
iss. misce, fiat Emplastrum,. Ol. Laurin. i. pulv. Ceruss. cum aqu. laevigat.
i. Alumin. Roch. ss. Sal. commun. ij. misce, fiat unguentum. Unguent.
Or. farin. Fabar. Orob. an. ij. pulv. flor. Chamomel. Melilot. Rosar. rubr.
an. iij. Ol. Irin. Unguent. Dialth. an. i. succ. Rut. ss. Catapl.
misce fiat Cataplasma. Or. farin. sem. Lin. Fenugraec. iij. farin. Orob. i.
fl. Melilot. Chamomel. Sambuc. an. iij. fl. Anthos. iiij. pulv. Irid. ss.
coquantur in vino mulso, tunc add sub finem ol. Lilior. q. s. fiat Cataplasma.
Or this, Catapl.
. rad. Alth. iiij. rad. Lilior. ij. flor. Melilot. Chamomel. an. pug. ss.
coquantur, pistentur and percolentur, postea add pinguedin. Gallin. Dialth.
an. i. medul. 'Pomor. sub. cineribus coct. iij. Ol. Chamomel. Lilior. an.
Catapl.
q. s. fiat Cataplasma. And for this also the resolving Emplaster in Scirrhous
Tumors is here very excellent, it being by me very often times applied with good
success. Barbett writes of a Maiden of fourteen years of age, A History.
who was very much afflicted with many and grievous Diseases, as swelled Lips,
and several ulcered Glandules in her Neck and Parotidals, and much tumefied
with Scirrhous swellings, so that she could scarce move her Neck, and by this
following Method he recovered her: First ordering her a Decoction of Guaiacum,
prepared with attenuating and opening Ingredients, of which she took three
Ounces for Four days, into which was dropped of Spirit of Sal. Ammoniac. eight
drops, and once in a Week she took this Powder.. pulv. Jalap. ss. Tartar.
vitriolat. gr. 5. Ol. Faenicul. gutt. ij. This wrought with her three or four
times: outwardly was applied Empl. de Ranis cum Merc. Ol. Rutae and Fuligin.
malaxat. And to the ulcered Glandules Unguent Basilicon: then Balsamum
Sulphuris: and she within three or four Months was restored to her perfect
health. Or this Emplaster may be well used.. Empl. de Ran. cum Merc. ss. Gum.
Galban. ij. Sacchar. Saturn. Sal. volatile. Ammoniac. an. ss. malaxentur Oleo
Rutae q. s. fiat Empl. Sometimes these Strumaes will not yield to Resolution,
but do much rather incline to Suppuration; that is, when any other Humor is
mixed, which gives it a greater Heat, as Blood and Choler: and when it takes
its course this way, we are to help forward with such Suppurating Medicines, as
may speed it in its operation; such as be Marshmallows boiled in water,
Diachylon cum Gummi, De Mucilaginibus, and the like: or instead of those take
some of these following compounded Suppurating Medicines. Catapl.
. Bdell. Ammoniac. an. ss. dissolvantur in Lixivio, add Calc. viv. cum Axung.
contrit. i. Sulphur. viv. ss. Alumin. ss. Mel. optimi iss. Ferment. veter. ij.
misce, fiat Cataplasma. Catapl.
Or this;. Caepar. and rad. Lilior. albor. sub cinerib. coct. an. iiij. farin.
Tritic. ij. Axung. Gallin. Anser. an. q. s. vitell. Ovor. n.. 1. Croc. ss.
misce, fiat Cataplasma. Catapl.
Or this;. farin. Fabar. Tritic. an. i. farin. sem. Lin. Foenugraec. an. ij.
Ficuum contus. iss. Axung. veter. ij. Croc. i. misce, fiat Cataplasma. Being
suppurated it is to be opened by a Caustic or Incision: and for a Caustic
there is none better than sublimated Arsnick; and upon applying it defend its
neighboring parts with a Defensative, discharge the Matter, and remove the
Eschar, fill up with Flesh, and then skin it. I shall conclude this Chapter
with one Patient of my own (though on this subject I could offer many, having
had the honor of obtaining the Touch from His Majesty's hand) for many, most
of which I have had afterward to conclude their cure: amongst the rest in this
City of Norwich was one Mr. Rootees son, much perplexed with Scrophulous
Tumors, which tended after His Majesty's Touch to Suppuration, who after
having his body well purged, and the Humor well prepared, his Neck from his
Ears was environed with these small filled bags of Phlegmatic Matter: over
these I applied Emplastrum Diachylon cum Gummi ij: De muci^aginibus i.
Emplastrum de Ran. cum Merc. ss. Unguent. Dialth. vj. misce. With this or the
like Emplastrum was his whole tumefied part covered, and having brought it to
Suppuration, I drew forth all its matter which was contained; then I mundified,
digested, and incarned all the parts, and the Patient (I bless God) remains in
perfect health to this day.

CHAP. XLVI.
Of Bronchocele.
THere is a Tumor (as Celsus calls it) between the Cutis and the Windpipe,
which the Greeks call (...). This is not a Tumor in the Glandule, but arising
upon the Aspera Arteria. It Is thus called (...), which signifies Aspera
Arteria, and (...) Tumor; and therefore by Celsus is said to be a Tumor
arising between the Cutis and Windpipe, and by him is numbered amongst
Abscesses, whose Matter is lodged in a Bag or a Coat, which is dull Flesh
somewhat like Honey or Water. Celsus does here also propose two sorts of
Medicines, as Caustic and Instrument, by burning Medicines, so as that the
Cutis and Bladder may be burnt, and thus the Matter discharged: but this is a
great deal of trouble to a little purpose; and therefore he more readily comes
to Incision. And here he orders a direct Incision to be made into the Coat, so
as the vicious matter may be separated by the Finger; after which let it be
well mundified with Vinegar, to which add some Salt or Nitre: and in every
Abscess we are to take notice, that there is a small Vein or Artery that does
feed it, and its Membrane whereto it does adhere to the sound part; in the
other part it is free. If any Patient should come to your hand with such an
Abscess, be always careful of these four Intentions, as in the ordering your
Patients Diet, in preparing and purging the antecedent Matter, in removing the
Matter contained in the Tumor, and in applying convenient Topics. Let his
Diet be thin, his Air hot or temperate: for purging these may serve. Pil.
. Pil. de Agaric. Pulv. Hier. Colocynth. an. ij. cum syrup. de Stechad. q. s.
^i^nt pil. dos. a i. ad iss. In this case Sweating is also good. And as to
Surgery, you may use this Ungu^nt and Emplaster: Unguent.
. Sulphur. Sandarach. an. ss. Euphorb. i. cum Cerae and olei q. s. fiat
Vnguentum. After anointing herewith apply this Emplaster:. Empl.
Rad. Ireos, Sal. Gem. an. i. Terebinth. q. s. Diachyl. cum Gummi Apostolor.
an. i. misce, fiat Emplastrum. If these will not do, Rogerius does advise us to
make a double Seton, so as that the Humor may slow out by degrees. In old
people very commonly the Larynx is so attenuated, and the Muscles as it were so
dried up, and as it were discharged of their Fleshy Substances, that it happens
frequently in chewing, that some part of the Aspera Arteria is seen to fall:
and this was verified by Osualdus Gabelchoverus de observationibus suis,
Histo^y.
who writes of an old Gentleman that could not take down any liquor, as Beer,
Wine, or any liquid substance, but a great part of his Aspera Arteria would
slip; yet he could take and eat his meat very well without any hindrance. The
same I knew of one Mr. Goodman a Minister here in Norfolk, a man of about 40
years of age, who could eat his meat very heartily without any let or
disturbance; but when he has had occasion to drink, was forced to bend himself
forward, and by degrees let his liquor pass down very moderately, lest a part
of his Windpipe should slip out, and so prove very troublesome to him. I have
been often in his company, when I have both seen him use this Method, and also
taken all care to prevent the falling down or relapse of his Aspera Arteria.

CHAP. XLVII.
Of Angina.
IT is called Angina from (...), which is all one to S^rangulo, the which does
signify every Affect both of the Jaws and Throat, whereby Breathing is
hindered; or if you please, it is that Affect of of the Throat, the Larynx being
overstraitned by some inward occasion, so causing Suffocation. It is a very
acute Disease, and is an Inflammation of the Fauces. Of this there are two
sorts, one Legitimate, the other Illegitimate. To the one a Fever is a
continual companion; but it has nothing to do with the other. Three species of
a true Squinsey.
There are three species of a true Squinancy: one with Inflammation, and not in
the Fauces, neither apparent in the Neck, but in the Throat; and this brings
speedy danger of Suffocation. A second accompanied with a manifest Phlegmon,
with no Tumor or Redness in the the Neck. A third, when the Neck seems to be
inflamed with the Fauces, having along with it Tumor, R^^ness, Heat, Ca^ses.
and Pain. The inward Cause is Blood abounding, and often times peccant; the
which does not alone raise this, unless more vitiated by a sharp and four
Lympha. The outward Causes are evident, Cold, Fish-bones being received the
wrong way, cold Drinks, and too much Repletion. A Bastard Squinancy is made by
a pituitous Distillation falling upon the Fauces and Muscles of the Neck,
exciting a Tumor, without Redness, Heat, and Fever. Signs.
Of these are ^^de three Differencies by some Author^* and these they christen
with three (...) names, as Cynanche, Parasynanche, (...)che: but these are but
of small moment toward our increase of Knowledge. The Diagnostick Signs are,
when the Patient cannot move his Neck, and breaths with difficulty, neither
can he well swallow, and finds a pain and heat in his Jaws. That is accounted
most dangerous, Presag^.
which with the most speed does threaten Suffocation, and yet is neither
perceived in the Cheeks, neither does it any ways appear in the Neck, yet there
is felt a vehement pain, and the Spirits scarce seem to be drawn; for often times
this Suffocation does happen the first day. There is no Squinancy with safety,
and the lesser the Tumor, the greater the danger: and Hippocrates lib. 4.
Aphor. 34, 35. says, if the Humor of the Angina be carried to the Lungs, it
makes its exition before the seventh day; otherwise the Patient grows in
danger of Suffocation. And if it has made its efflux without leaving any evil
symptom in this time, the Flux being converted into Matter, this is to be
suppurated and not kept here; for where it is not cleansed from hence the
Patient does very readily run or fall into a Consumption. This Lympha and Bilis
is to be tempered in the Blood, Cure:
and to be very speedily revelled and derived; and therefore are we first to
breathe a Vein in the right Arm; and this is as often to be repeated as necessity
may offer. And if this will not do, breathe a Vein under the Tongue; but this
is to be performed at the beginning: then cool the body with Clysters or
Purges, and let your Patient have convenient Gargarisms prepared for him:
^argarism:
as,. fol. Rosar. rub. Balaust. an. pug. 1. cort. Granator. ss. fol. Querc. m.
1. Alumin. ust. i. coque ex aqua ferreata (...). add syrup. Diamor. iiij.
misce. In the end you may order this discussive Gargarism: Gargarism.
. rad. Liquirit. cort. Granator. an. ij. fl. Balaust. fol. Rosar. rub. an. pug.
1. Jujub. no. 12 Ficuum no. iij. Passular. Corinth. iij. coque in aqua Hord.
(...). in his solve syrup. cap. Vener. Mel. Rosat. an. iss. misce. This
following also in the beginning is very proper.. fol. Ros. rub. Sambucin. an.
M. j. coquantur in Cervisia tenniore q. s. fine addendo Alb. graec. j.
colaturae (...). add Sacchar. Saturn. ss. Sal. Prunell. i. Or this Cataplasm:
Catapl.
. rad. Alth. Lilior. albor. an. j. Nid. Hirundin. no. j. Ficuum Dactylor. an.
no. iiij. Caepar. vj. coquantur ex aqua Hord. and colaturae add farin. Tritic.
sem. Lin. an. i. Faenugraec. Alth. an. iss. vitellor. Ovor. n.. ij. Croc. ij.
ol. Chamomel. ij. misce, fiat Cataplasma. Galen does report of one troubled
with a Squinancy, History.
after having used many proper Remedies, and these failing, this at last
recovered the Patient; he ordered the Excrement of a Boy well dried and
powdered, and mixed Honey therewith, and with this he anointed the Jaws of the
Patient, and in the space of half an hour the Abscess did break, and the man
was restored to his perfect health. Aetius cap. 5. lib. 6. says, that Agarick
does suck up hidden Abscesses, and does draw them outward. And Jacobus
Dovonetus apolog. lib. 3. cap. 2. writes, that having a young Gentlewoman much
troubled with a Squinancy, he cut a little Agarick in pieces, and put them into
a Decoction made of Marshmallows, Figs, with a little Ginger, and a fourth part
of Wine and Water, to which he added a little syrup of Marshmallows: this
Potion he gave to the Patient, and ordered her that she might not swallow it,
but hold it for some time in her mouth; she following his directions, whilst
he was but discoursing with another, a great quantity of white Matter came out
at her mouth, and after this some putrid; this being discharged she came to her
perfect breathing, and got off from her Fever and all other bad Symptoms, and
perfectly recovered.

CHAP. XLVIII.
Of a Tumor of the Tonsils.
THese Tonsils are by the Greeks called (...), amongst the which is reckoned
the Columella. And Nature has placed two Glandules at the root of the Tongue,
much resembling in figure and shape an Almond, and therefore by some these are
called Amygdals. And before we proceed any further in this Discourse, What the
Amygdals are, (...) how made.
let us take a more curious view of them, and see for what uses they were
framed; and then if being either hurt, tumefied, inflamed or ulcerated, how
they ought to be cured. They are as it were framed out of a cold, concreted,
oleaginous, and malleous Substance, save only that it is thicker and more
firm, they being of a yellow color, soft in touch, but in being boiled hard,
spongeous, and porous. They have belonging to them Veins, Nerves, Arteries, and
proper Cavities: Veins and Arteries from the Jugulars; Nerves from the third
and fourth pair. Each has its proper Ductus allowed it, opening into the
Mouth, and very many small Glandules dispersed from thence about the whole Root
of the Tongue. Through all those Foramulaes is our mucous Substances expressed,
and thence disposed through the Root of the Tongue. Uses?
Their Uses are various, as being first the chief Organs of Tasting; They being
the chief Organs of Tasting.
for the same Membrane which covers all the parts of the Mouth, does also
take this Glandule into it. Secondly, it is the Excretory Iustrument, for its
office is to separate the Mucous or Pituitous Matter which falls from the
lower part of the Brain, especially through the Nerves of the third Pair, and
so to refund this into the Fauces and Mouth. Thirdly, this moisteneth and
keeps soft the Jaws, Larynx, Tongue, Oesophagos, and makes the Tongue so
voluble, and the Oesophagos the better capable to perform its office of
Deglutition. Fourthly, in plentiful Catarrhs of the Brain, the Nostrils being
obstructed, they do imbibe into their spongeous substances the Matter, which
might otherwise have been disposed the other way. And lastly, they help toward
the Concoction of the Ventricle by their Fermentative Faculty; for these with
much ease do contract Acidities, which is the great Agent in Fermentation, and
its chief cause. All these are worthily allowed by the curious hand of Dr.
Wharton, in his Book De Glandulis. Now if this Saliva be spent or consumed by
violent Fevers, the Patient does soon begin to grow impotent and weak, unless
the Tongue and Mouth be kept moistened by some cooling Decoction or other; for
these Glandules are planted in a hot and moist place, and therefore the sooner
subject to Inflammation. Into these also with Blood do flow a pituitous Matter,
crude and viscid; and this being condensed by Cold, does elevate them into a
Tumor. Aetius tells us, it may happen in a young body by drinking too much
sharp Wine, and by eating very often of too sharp Meats. With these Glandules
do frequently their neighboring Glandules of the Larynx join in Tumor, and
then the Patient is ready to suffocate. It is very apparent both to sight and
to feeling. Cure.
This eminent danger may be both prevented and resisted by Purging and
Phlebotomy, Cupping glasses, Vesicatories, applied to the Neck and Shoulders,
then wash the Mouth and Throat with this Gargarism: Gargarism.
. Rosar. rubr. Plantag. Balaust. an. i. summitat. Papaver. Myrtin. an. i. Bol.
armen. i. fiat Gargarisma. Another.
Or this:. fol. Plantag. acetos. Hyssop. an. M. i. gran. Sumach. ss. Cort.
Granator. Rosar. rubr. an. pug. i. fiat decoctum ad lbi. in quo solve syrup.
Moror. iss. Lap. Prunell. iss. misce. Or, Another.
. fol. Salv. Plantag. Rosar. rubr. an. M. ss. Cort. Granator. Balaust. an. pug.
1. Santal. rubr. Bol. armen. an. i. Betonic. M. i. coquantur in aqua fontana ad
lbi. colaturae add sir. Myrtin. Sambuc. an. iss. Sal. Prunel. i. misce. These
Trochischs are also very proper to moisten the mouth and parts with, Trochisc.
and also to allay Heat and Inflammation.. Spec. Diatragaganth. frigid.
Diapapaver. an. i. Bol. armen. praepar. ij. Amyl. succ. Liquirit. an.. Sacchar.
candit. ij. cum syrup. Papaver. erratic. q. s. fiant Trochisci, to be dissolved
in the mouth. Or this:. Aqu. Prunel. Plantag. Rosar. rubr. an. iiij. fol.
Rosar. Cort. Grantor. Balaust. fol. Plantag. Ophi^gloss. an. Mss. sem.
Cydonior. i. coquantur omnia simul, and colaturae add syrup. Diainor. i.
Granator. q. s. ad aciditatem. To the outward Region of the Neck apply this
Cataplasm: Cataplasm.
. rad. Alth i. Scabios. Sambuc. Rosar. rubr. fl. Chamomel. Melilot. an. M. ss.
sem. Alth. iss. coquantur ad mellis consistent. pistentur and his add farin.
sem. Lin. Foenugraec. an. ss. ol. Rosar. Aneth. Chamomel. an. i. misce, fiat
Caplasma. Pills proper for purging the Patient may be these: Pil.
. Pil. aur. i. Extract. Panchymagog, Croll. ss. ol. Cinamom. gutt. ij. Diagrid.
gr. i. cum syrup. Rosar. q. s. fiant Pil. A very convenient Electuary may be
this:. Electuary.
Stercor. canin. alb. aq. Rosat. lot. and pulv. iss. Sacchar. Rosat. ss. syrup.
Violar. Moror. an. i. ol. Amygdal. dulc. recenter extract. ss. pulv. Irid. i.
spec. Diatragagant. ss. ol. Foenicul. Chapter gut. ij. misce, History.
fiat Electuarium. Dodonaeus Observe. cap. 16. tells of a young Child two
years of age, who was troubled with an Inflammation of her Glandules; and
whereas she could have nothing applied to her by reason of her youth, Nature
found out a way to discharge this Matter. There are bred in the Neck under the
Ear simple Tumors, the which being opened with an Incision Knife, this Matter
flowed out, and thus was she freed and discharged from this Abscess of her
Tonsils. Forestus has also another History of a Woman, (lib. 15. Observe. 27.)
who having swallowed the Backbone of a Fish, and sticking in her Throat, so
that it had near suffocated her, the which could neither be removed, neither
could she eat or drink without great difficulty; upon prescribing and taking of
this following Eclegma she recovered. It was made of Figs, Marshmallow-roots,
Mallow-seeds, Currants, Sebestens, and Jujubes, mixed with Syrup of Violets,
the which he ordered her to have continually in her Mouth; and by applying such
a Cataplasm as you have already prescribed outwardly, she speedily got
discharged of this Bone, and recovered.

CHAP. XLIX.
Of Empyema.
THis is most properly called Empyema, when there is a collection of purulent
Matter got into the cavity of the Thorax: and if this within 40 days be not
expurged by Spitting, Urine, or the like, it does either produce Suffocation or
Phthisis. The Matter which fills the cavity of the Thorax, and does so frame
it fit for Suffocation, is threefold, it being either Phlegm, Water, or purulent
Matter. If this Matter be collected either in the Thorax, or in any other part,
and be transmitted from the Head, and so phlegmatic; from the Liver, and so
serous; and srom the Thorax, and so purulent; as also from the Squinzy
suppurated from the Fauces: but if it proceed from the Thorax, it does always
come from an Abscess, and makes Repletion. This may also arise from the
Pleurisy, if the Aspera Arteria has not perfectly discharged its Matter.
Signs.
Its Signs are an obtuse pain, with Commotion of Humor contained in the Thorax
with Fluctuation. And as a most certain Sign it has some Humor appearing
outwardly, lodging between the Ribs and the Exterior parts. Or if you will,
this Humor is discerned by its Tumor, accompanied with Pain, Heat, Weight,
Noise, and Fluctuancy: for it swells, and appears with a certain bluishness
in the place outwardly where this Matter is collected; this is an infallible
Sign, as clear as the Day, the which I have seen very often never to fail. The
Native Heat being corrupted is the occasion of this change of Color. It does
rend and fret its Muscles by its Matter, and it breaks into them; the which
Matter being discharged, the patient finds some ease, but there remains a
small and sinous Ulcer, which is very hard to cure. Such persons as are
herewith perplexed, when they lie on their contrary side, the other part does
seem to be very heavy and depressed, and are very apt to cough, and be soon
weary of this posture. There is a manifest Noise and Fluctuation apparent in
the Side affected when the Patient does turn himself, unless the Matter be
thick, or so plentiful that it fills up the whole capacity of the Thorax, and
does thereby hinder it. And here are we to observe, that this Disease at the
best is not easily to be cured, neither can the whole Matter be discharged by
Salivation; therefore does require more than an ordinary help. Out of
Hyppocrates Counsel the Patient is to be nourished with Milk and Euchymick
Meats, and the Matter must be digested, and to deferr for fifteen days from
Ruption; the which fifteen days being expired, it is to be speedily opened
either by Incision or Caustic, lest it do injury to the Viscera, and do weaken
the Faculties. When you make your Section, let it be between the fourth and
fifth Rib, tending from the lower parts upwards; and by this Method may you
prevent all fears of injuring Nerve, Vein, or Artery. Make neither Incisions,
nor apply any Causticks right downward, but according to the Fibers of the
Intercostal Muscles. This being performed, you are sparingly or by degrees to
let forth the Matter, both for keeping in the Spirits, and preserving vigor
and strength in your Patient. The Matter being thus educed, the Wound is to be
healed with all convenient speed, for keeping safe of the inward parts. For
which purpose such a Decoction as this is very excellent.. Herb. Decoction.
Sanicul. Veronic. Pyrol. an. M. j. Consolid. major. Sarracenic. Botrys. an.
pug. ij. fl. Borag. Bugloss. an. pug. j. sem. Anis. Foenicul. dulc. an. ij.
Cinamom. iij. Jujub. no. 6. Sebesten. no. 4. Dactylor. no. 4. coqu. omnia in
aqua Hord: Hujas sumat iiij. cum pulv. ocul. Cancr. ij. misce. Another for the
same.. rad. Chin. iiij. Symphyt. Tormentil. Irid. an. j. Capil. Vener.
Tussilagin. Scabios. Marrub. Hyssop. an. M. j. flor. 3. cord. an. pug. j. fl.
Paralys. Betonic. an. pug. ij. fl. Auth. pug. iss. Caricar. pinguid. iij.
Liquirit. ij. scm. Anis. Coryander. an. vj. infundantur omnia per noctem in
aquae fontanae lbjj. and coleniur: colaturae add Mellis lbj. misce, hujus
sumat omni mane. Trochischs made of Saccharum Rosatum and Diacodium Tabulatum
do very well here. When your Eschar is out, and you have procured a small
Orisice, you may inject into the part such a Decoction warm as is this:. fol.
Salv. Hyperic. Scabios. Veronic. Virg. aur. Centaur. Absynth. an. M. ss. Rosar.
rub. pug. j. Alumin. Roch. ij. coquautur omnia in s. q. aquae fontanae,
colaturae add Mel. ij. misce. You may meet with an Observation of a pleurisy
turned into an Empyema in River. History.
obsevat. 79. centur. 1. of a young man about 20 years of age, who fell into a
pleurisy, so painful that he could not lie on either side of his Bed, but
only walk upwards. Many Remedies were prescribed in the Consultation of three
physicians, and the patient was let blood above ten times; yet the Affect
persevered. Although the pain of the Side sometimes seemed to cease, yet both
his pain returned and a Fever with it. This Fever continued to the five and
thirtieth day, then the Side began to swell, and proved painful to the Touch,
suffused with redness; it was judged a pleurisy turned into an Empyema; and
for this reason suppurating Cataplasms were ordered, by which the Tumor might
increase its bulk, and the peccant Matter endeavor to discharge it self. But
the opening of this Side being procrastinated too much, the Abscess broke
inwards, and the Patient did spit out some of this Matter with ease by
coughing, which appeared very laudable, and not at all fetid; and this he did
for many days in a great quantity. After the Abscess brake outwardly, it was
with ease converted into either Side, because he found and felt a great pain in
the pained Side: which thing is noted by Hippocrates in Prognostic. Having past
the eighth day of its running, this purulent Excretion ceased, and he only
vomited up Phlegm: then he perceived the pain again in the same Side, so as it
turned not to the sound: then was conjectured that there was a new Collection
of Matter in the Side, and he being prepared for the discharge of the same, the
Empyema was opened by a Caustic being laid on the Side, and Matter for a long
while came from the Side, and at length the Patient perfectly recovered.

CHAP. L.
Of a Tumor of the Diaphragma.
THE Diaphragma has two sorts of Tumors belonging to it, and either of them
do bring the Patient in danger of death; the one long, the other short: for by
the Excrements forcing here they may make a Tumor both with or without a
Fever. If without a Fever, from the beginning pain and difficulty of breathing,
a small and a hard Pulse, and these Excrements we are to allow to be thin and
crude, and thence do follow a Tension of the Bowels, because the Muscles are
extended to the Diaphragma. And if a Fever be joined to these Tumors,
Experience does satisfy, it is not sharp; and it arises from the too long
contention of Excrements in the part affected. An Inflammation of the
Diaphragma beginning, there necessarily does follow a Fever; and in respect of
the Affect, because the Tumor is made of hot matters, and in relation to the
part affected by reason of its near bordering upon the Heart, there do
generally follow from this Inflammation, Pain, and Difficulty of Breathing: and
therefore, as Galen says, Breathing here in this case is small and frequent,
(lib. 5. de loc. affect.) sometimes Convulsions do succeed these Inflammations.
When such a Tumor of the Diaphragma is offered to you for cure, let your first
Intention be to discharge the Matter or Substance that is lodged. And because
the Origination of this does generally arise from Fluxion, this also is to be
prohibited, and this is done by discharging the fluent Matter. If you take them
in the beginning, they may give some hopes of Cure: but if they be of any long
continuance, they admit of no Cure; because they generally hurry the Patient
into a Consumption, and will not be taken hold of by the best of Medicines.
Cure.
As to the Cure, the first Intention is to discharge this Matter by well
purging and clearing the Body of its Excrements: and here such things are most
proper as can discharge both Phlegm and Water; such as is Elaterium, Radix
Sambucinus, or the like. Phlebotomy is no ways proper here; for the peccant
Matter is cold, and therefore Discussives are here most convenient. And these
may be said to be of two sorts; some to be administered inwardly, whilst others
are outwardly to be applied: and these ought to be both emollient and relaxing,
as Butter, Fats, Marrows, and the like; and these are to be ordered according
to the Humor and the Strength of the patient; first beginning with mild
Medicines, and then proceeding with such as are stronger, as Oil of Chamomile,
Dill, and the like. Here also you may use Emplasters and Unguents, as of
Mallows, Marshmallows, Lilies, with Linseed, Fenugreek seed, etc. preserving
and desending the inward parts with such things as can discuss, as Treacle,
Methridate, History.
Sarsaperilla, etc. I once saw in a Gentleman a Tumor bred in the Diaphragma
out of crude and thin blood, in which pain and difficulty of Breathing, a hard
and small pulse were present, the Matter and Humor was cold, and tough, and
crude, and this showed it Mortal, for it brought him into a Consumption, and
the Abscess breaking he did spit up Blood and much indigested Matter. These
Tumors, although they are bred of a thin and cold Matter, yet in the place
affected they thicken; and for the performance of this there is required pain,
difficulty of Breathing, a hard and a small pulse, little or nothing changing
it self, no apparent Tumor showing it self: and if to these Tumors a Fever do
join it self, as Experience does often times show it does, it is not sharp, yet
they bring Death with them; and when they persevere, and are not resolved, they
bring the patient into a Consumption, and so lay him even with the dust, as it
did the aforesaid Gentleman.

CHAP. LI.
Of Exuberancy of Milk.
MAny Women in their first days, after being delivered of their Burden, have a
great redundancy of Milk, because much Blood is sent thither, and not taken
away or sucked out: for the helping of which it is thought by some, that
Repellers are very proper to be applied before such Women be delivered, and so
to hinder the address of Blood thither; for after this much Milk being
received, it cannot afterward be so well repelled, but ought to be discharged
by the Breasts, or drawn out by Sucking, or otherwise. It may be prohibited, if
the Blood do not flow violently, by these Medicines following; Liniment.
as,. Bol. armen. j. Sangu. Dracon. Oliban. an. ij. Ol. Rosar. ij. Cer. acet.
an. parum misce, fiat Linimentum. Or my Emplaster often times used in this case
with good success. Empl.
. Emplastr. Diapalm. ij. Ol. Rosar. ss. pulv. Sangu. Dracon. j. misce. Or this;
Another.
. Ol. Myrtin. ij. Amygdal. dulc. ss. Terebynth. Venet. ij. pulv. Mastich. Bol.
armen. Coral. Sangu. Dracon. an. j. pulv. Myrtil. Balaust. Rosar. rubr. an.
ij. pulv. Salv. Betonic. an. j. misce, and cum cerae citrinae q. s. fiat
^mplastrum. A Schirrus does often times proceed from coagulated Milk in Women;
History.
as it fell out in a young Woman, whose left Breast, while she was giving her
Child suck, was wholly correpted with an Inflammation; the which being allayed,
a large Tumor and Hardness remained, which gave me suspicion of a Scirrhus.
Her Body being well purged with a lenitive purgation, the Breast and its
circumjacent parts anointed with Oil of Roses, to which was added a little
Vinegar, and this for some days was used, afterward the whole Breast was
anointed with this Liniment: Unguent.
. Empl. de Mucilaginibus ij. ol. Lilior. Amygdal. dulc. pingued. Gallinae an.
j. Gum. Amoniac. solut. in Acet. scillitic. and colat. ss. misce, fiat
Vnguentum. Over which was applied this Cataplasm: Cataplasm.
. fol. and rad. Alth. q. s. incidantur minutissime, postea coqu. in aqua, and
mortario pistentur, fiatque cum farin. Fabar. Axung. Porcin. Gallinae and
proprio decocto Malvar. Cataplasma. By these Medicines, and the Body being well
purged, and a good order of Diet observed, the hard Tumor grew soft and
resolved; and to the Ulcer I applied powder of Precipitate, and over this Empl.
de Ranis cum Merc. And with this method beyond expectation she recovered her
perfect health.

CHAP. LII.
Of a Caruncle in the Yard, and its manner of Extirpation.
AMongst the most dangerous and frightful Affects which do seize on Humane
Body, The Causes of a Gonorrhaea.
this of a Gonorrhaea may be well reckoned: and this is excited by many causes;
for Acrimony and Thinness of the Sperm may be one cause so that it does
continually flow. An Imbecility of the Testicles does give another great
suspicion hereof. Another Cause amongst some is attributed to Coition with a
Menstruous Woman. Often times it happens by overstraining the inward parts; a
thing very frequent in snch who being in their Drunken fits do act beyond their
power of Reason. If the Seed therefore which is thus thrown forth be pure, and
is not in any respect tinged with any strange quality, and is void of all fetid
smell, this either does show and express a plenty thereof, or a weakness of the
Retentive Faculty, or Convulsion of the Spermatick Vessels. But if it be
accompanied with any other vicious Humors, and furnished with thin ill Juices,
and appears with another color strange to its own proper nature, and yields
a smell which shows no good Concoction, this first of all does calefie, and
by its acrimony does corrode, pricketh, and invadingly ulcerateth. And this
Ulcer does much differ from that which exercises it self in the Bladder, and
thus may with ease be distinguished: where the Neck of the Bladder is
ulcerated, the pus or Matter does as it were compactly precede the Urine it
self; and the pain between making water is most mightily sharp about the
ulcerated part. On the contrary, the Bladder it self being ulcerated, there is
no pain felt, nor Matter pissed forth, secreted by the Urine, but comes along
with it. The Urine does yield a strange strong smell where the Bladder is
affected with an Ulcer. When the Urinary passage is ulcerated, the Yard is very
painful and heavy, and bends downwards. An U^^er contracted in the Neck of
the Bladder, or in the cavity of the penis, unless it be both speedily and
knowingly cured, does convert it self into preternatural Caruncles, by which
the Urinary passage is obstructed: For as out of most pure Blood the best Flesh
is generated; so also vicious Juices enwrapping or keeping company with the
Ulcers, there is often times seen a spongious Flesh to grow and breed. And
therefore when we have arrived at the sure knowledge, that this unnatural Guest
has made his entrance into these quarters, which we may speedily find out by
the search of a Candle, and to gain advantage of this Disturber of the Humane
peace, we ought, if Plenitude be a main wing of its vigor, to discharge this
by Evacuation. And here let the Patient use a thin Diet; if the Juices be sharp
and thin, thicken them, so as that they may give strength to the Spermatick
Vessels; if we do here find or meet with any weakness, strengthen them. And for
clearing this Method, observe with me these Curative scopes. First, loosen the
Body with emollient Clysters made of Mallows, Violets, Pellitory, Lettuce,
French Barley, and the like, adding thereunto Cassia in the end: After this
breathe the Basilick Vein (...) the right Arm. These two being premised, let
the Thighs be washed with a Decoction of Red Roses, French Barley, Violets, red
Poppies, and the like. Let the Kidneys, Spine, and Testicles be cooled with
this.. Unguent. Rosat. Refriger. Galen. an. j. ol. Violar. ss. pulv. Rosar.
rubr. Santal. Citrin. Spod. an. j. Camphor. gr^iij. Acet. Rosat. gutt. aliquot.
As to the part affected, deterge it first with a Decoction of French Barley, in
which have been put some Mel Rosarum: this being made lukewarm is by a Syringe
to be injected into the Yard. Then produce a Cicatrice with this following.
Injection.
. Aqu. Rosar. Plantag. an. iiij. Sacchar. candit. j. Ceruss. Lithargyr. aur.
Alumin. Roch. an. iss. Camphor. ss. misce, fiat injectio. Trochisci albi Rhasis
do here also very well; but if you have a mind to dry more powerfully, add to
the former a little Aegyptiacum. Shun all strong Diuretics, which may force or
drive the Humors to the ulcerated parts; and such things are especially to be
used, which have a quality in them to lessen the pain. For this purpose Lac
Amygdalatum is very good. A Hyposarcosis in the Neck of the Bladder, or in any
part of the Urinary passage, may be collected out of the great difficulty of
Urine, the which comes not only out by drops, but by forcing, and endeavor to
perfect this: So that sometimes upon a great straining, while the Patient makes
water, he has a Laxity joined with it. Neither can that Urine come right,
which has its passage obstructed by a Carunculous Flesh: Neither does it
easily come forth, unless it be compressed with the Hand. Often times there is
seen such Obstruction, that unless the Catheter be called in use, there is no
coming forth of Urine to be expected. There is a twofold Method in curing of a
Caruncle of the Yard; A double Method in its Cure.
the one is performed by Instrument, the other by Medicine. A Fomentation for
this purpose may be this: Fomentation.
. fol. Malv. M. j. rad. Alth. Ap. Faenicul. an. iij. sem. Lin. Cydonior.
Foenugraec. an. j. fl. Chamomel. Staechad. Melilot. Puleg. Origan. an. pug. ij.
Caricar pingu. iss. coquant^r omnia usque ad radicum dissolutionem, and cum hoc
foveatur radix penis. Or else dip Sponges herein, and apply them to the part
affected. After it is thus fomented, it is to be absterged with such an Unguent
as this: Unguent.
. Unguent. Dialth. Agrip. Oesyp. Butyr. an j. ol. Amygdal. dulc. Lilior. albor.
Chamomel. an. ij. Ammoniac. iss. Succ. Ap. iij. Mucilag. semin. Foenugraec.
rad. Alth. Lin. an. ij. boil them all until the consumption of the Juices,
then add the Fats, and strain it off, and to the strained Matter add a little
white Wax. Here also are you to make use of searching Candles made of white
Wax. And for this Affect a Leaden Probe is excellent good, for that whereas
besides that it is an Anodyne, so also has it a very drying faculty. When
these fail, we come to the use of a Catheter, but this without a very
respective care and steady hand does very often occasion strange Hemorrhagies,
and so thereby does frequently bring fear both to the Physician and the
Patient. But should such a Flux as this appear, this may with ease be stopped
by injecting into the Passage with a Syringe some Plantane water and Rose
water, to which the White of an Egg should be added. Here also are you to
mind, how upon applying your Candle, what part thereof is either bent, or
bruised, or compressed; for upon this part is to be applied your Medicines you
intend to use: and for this purpose Philips Emplaster is reputed to be a most
excellent and sovereign Medicine in this Affect, because it heals the
adjacent parts, and keeps them whole and safe; but that which grows with the
Ulcer it takes away without pain. This is its description: Empl^
. Aerugin. Auripigment. Chalcat. Alumin. Roch. an. ij. his add Acet. acerrim.
perfus. inter duos marmoreos and fiat pulvis subtibissimus, exponantur Soli.
Then put it into fresh Vinegar again, after dry it as formerly: let this be
done for 8 or nine times, until it has lost all its Acrimony and Mordacity.
This Powder being thus made, take of Litharge of Gold ij. Oil of Roses iiij.
with which boil it, being mixed with the former, to the consistence of an
Emplaster. This is to be put at the end of a Searching Candle or Leaden Probe,
so as that it falls not off. This is in much esteem for this Affect. But
because all Bodies have not one and the same constitution and temper, therefore
are Medicines to be changed accordingly: and after the Application hereof you
are to inject into the part affected Goats Milk, or other Milk, or Rose water;
to which may be added a little Camphire; and these to be applied until the
pain cease. You may know when the Caruncle is extirpated, when out of its
inordination it is perceived about the ulcerated part, and also out of the
copiousness of the effluent Matter; the which also, whilst it is extracted,
the Candle does appear as if it were wholly imbued with it: and after this, if
the Urine flow liberally, freely, quickly, and copiously, and in its right
method, there will be left but little occasion of doubt, but your Patient will
do well, it being discussed and extirpated. The Ulcer is to be discharged by a
Liquor sent into the part affected through the Syringe: as,. Centuaur. maj.
Apii Caud. equin. an. M. ss. Hord. contus. j. coquantur in aquae fontanae lbij.
ad consumpt. med. colaturae add mel ij. and utere. The Ulcer being cleansed,
you are to induce a Cicatrice, as with this or the like.. Aqu. Plantag. Rosar.
rubr. an. iiij. Ser. Lact. caprin. ij. Ceruss. vj. Alumin. Roch. Marmor.
candidissim. Spod. Crystal. an. iss. Camphor. j. fiat pulvis subtilissimus. And
this is the whole Method which is and ought to be used for a Caruncle. Unto
these also might I add Phymosis and Paraphymosis; but Fabritius Hildanus has
writ most exactly hereof, and thereto do I commend the curious Surgeon.
History.
I shall conclude this Chapter with this History of a Gentleman, who fell into
a suppression of Urine by a tumefied Caruncle in his Yard, generated by an
impure and immoderate Coition. A Surgeon being sent for to search him with a
Catheter occasioned a great Flux of Blood: the Patient being in much pain, and
thus suppressed in his Urine grew into a Fever; for prevention of which I
breathed a Vein, afterward ordered an emollient and cooling Clyster, and
anointed the Perinaeum and all its adjacent parts with a cooling Unguent: after
this I prescribed him a Vomit of Sal Vitrioli, by virtue of which he vomited up
much pituitous Matter, and in the second Vomit went out an Ounce or two of
Urine, whereby he found himself somewhat cheared; and thus by degrees his
Bladder was altogether unloaded within 4 or 5 hours, and the part affected
being cured with S^l Prunella, Injections and Clysters, such as you have
already prescribed, the Patient recovered. History.
Riverius in his 14 Observat. writes that Charles the Ninth, King of France,
being much afflicted with this Distemper, was by these following Medicines
cured; for which Cure was given 200 Pieces of Gold.. Cass. recenter extr. ss.
Suc. Liquirit. j. Electuar. e succ. Rosar. ij. Aq. Lupul. iiij. fiat potio mane
sumenda. And for ten days after he drank of this Decoction half a pound.. rad.
Liquirit. Alth. Sebest. Passul. an. M. iss. Alth. malv. Apii. Petroselin. an.
ss. aqu. fontan. lbij. coquantur ad mediae consumpt. After which were applied
these two Unguents.. ol. Rosar. lbij. Ceruss. Venet. iiij. Camphor. ss. Tuth.
aqu. Rosar. lot. and praeparat. ss. Lithargyr. praeparat. iij. pulv. Antimon.
opt. iss. Op. Thur. mascul. vel Oliban. Mastich. Alo. Epatic. an. ij. misce,
servetur in pixide plumbeo. The second for Consolidation was this;. Unguent.
Rosat. and aqu. Rosar. lot. Unguent. alb. Camphorat. an. j. Pomat. ss. misce.
Keep thief for use. The way of applying these is at the end of a Searching Wax
Candle, it being rubbed over with Oil of sweet Almonds; and if there be a
double Carnosity, then apply the first Unguent to both of them for fifteen or
twenty days; and as it seems to dissolve, and to turn into pus, then abate
the applicacation of the first; the Urine coming free and with ease, and for
eight or ten days afterward, apply the second, until no further Matter come
forth. Hitherto has our Discourse treated of the Parts as they arise from the
Head even to the Penis; the next which we shall produce are the variety of
Herniaes or Ruptures, and these as they arise shall offer themselves, with
their several Forms, Shapes, and Places, their Causes, Signs, and Cures, and
Differences; and shall begin with an Intestinal Rupture, and so proceed to the
rest in their order and form.

CHAP. LIII.
Of Ruptures in general.
WE arrive now to Herniaes or Ruptures, the which for the most part do dwell on
the Hypogastrick Region. And whereas other Humors have allowed them three
Causes, as being bred either out of an Influx of Humors, or Decumbency of
Parts, or Congestion: All these have their lively Forms and Shapes in the
Tumors of the Testicles; for Tumors are made here either by Humors flowing,
as Inflammations, Erysipelaes, Oedema, and Scirrhus; or from the Decumbent
Parts; or from Congestion, as from Water, or any other Humor. These kind of
Tumors are better and oftener cured by Surgery than Pharmacy. And as they
are various in their Places, diverse in Shapes, and manifold in Forms; so do
these, and every of them, make various Intentions and Indications for the
Surgeon. And that every thing may fall successive to the wish both of
Practiser and Patient, in this place it will be very proper to know well and
understand the Parts framing the Testicles, they being as the chief Causes and
Effects of most of these Ruptures. Celsus lib. 7. cap. 28. does account the
Testicles to be Glandulous Bodies, wrapped about and twisted with various
Vessels, Coats, and Ligaments. By the Greeks they are called (...), as being
two in number, and these are the Authors and Workmen of the Seed; for they have
allowed them a vernaculate faculty of attracting and educing the Spermatick
Matter from all the parts of the Body. The Coats of the Testicles are four, the
first called Epididymis, immediately enwrapping the Testicles, from whence it
takes its Name: the second Elythrois, so called (...), or quasi rubro similis,
or vaginalis: the third Dartos, (...), because it is easily excoriated, and
lies next the Scrotum: the last is the Scrotum it self. To these Testicles
also belong Vasa deferentia and Vasa praeparantia, the Cremaster Muscles, and
the like. This may serve as a brief Anatomy of the Testicles and its
neighboring parts. We proceed now to the various Differences of Ruptures,
before we treat singly of each by it self. And here be two kinds which do offer
themselves, Bubonocele and Oscheocele, to each of which is bestowed its proper
name, for (...) signifies inguen, and (...) Scrotum, as also (...) Tumor. Thus
have we Bubonocele represent Hernia Inguinalis, and Oscheocele Tumor Scroti.
There are many Differences of either, according to the Discriminancy of the
Conjunct Causes and Tumefying Substances. Of Bubonocele are only properly said
to be two, Epiplocele and Enterocele. Oscheocele has six, Enterocele,
Epiplocele, Pncumatocele, Hydrocele, Sarcoccsle, and Cirsocele. Enterocele is
called Hernia Intestinalis, Epiplocele Hernia Omentalis, Omphalocele Hernia
Vmbilicalis, Pneumatocele Hernia Ventosa, Hydrocele Hernia Aquosa, Cirsocele
Hernia Varicosa, Sarcocele Hernia Carnosa and Hernia Humoralis, this being bred
from a Repletion of the Testicles with unnatural Humors. Or (if you please)
there are generally allowed eight Ruptures, one complete called Bubonocele,
when an Intestine or the Omentum descend no lower than the Inguens; the second
a complete Hernia, when they penetrate into the Scrotum, the Tunica Vaginalis
being opened, or the Peritonaeum; If the Intestine descends, it makes
Enterocele, if the Kell Epiplocele, if a Tumor be made by a waterish Rupture
Hydrocele, if by Wind Pneumatocele. If a Fleshy Substance grows within the
Scrotum Sarcocele, if the Veins be repleated beyond measure, and be dilated in
the Scrotum, Cirsocele. To these Avicen does add Exomphalos, or a Prominency
of the Navel; and of these he offers these four species to follow, as
Enteroepiplocele, Hydroenterocele, Hydrophysocele, and Hydrosarcocele. Every
Rupture does demonstrate its Signs and its Causes; Presages and Cure we shall
offer in their proper places, beginning first with Enterocele or Hernia
Intestinalis, an Intestinal Rupture; before which as an Introduction it will be
most proper to discourse of Bubonocele, it being as a leading Card to the rest.

CHAP. LIVE.
Of Bubonocele or Hernia Inguinalis.
CElsus and Paulus, lib (...). 18. will have this reckoned amongst Ruptures,
and there does call these Varices of the Groin, and a Tumor of Inguen. Paulus,
lib. 6, cap. 66. affirms it an Intestinal Rupture of the Inguen only or
simply, that is, when the Intestine does not descend any further: by the Greeks
called (...). And here the large Veins which are in the Groin may so swell, and
prove so varicous, that they may create a Rupture here, so as this proves a
Chirurgical Affect. But before I proceed any further in this Chapter, be
pleased to consider those many Errors, which are committed by unskilful
Surgeons, who very frequently do take Venereal Buboes for Inguinal Ruptures,
and so do cut for the Intestine without either Wit or Honesty, or else do
prejudice to the great Vein there ordered by Nature, and thereby bring danger
of death. But that you may the better understand the difference, consider with
me, that if you perceive a soft Tumor in the Inguen, from the beginning you
may well suspect a Dilation being made by the Intestine; a Bubo in the
beginning being hard, especially being Venereal. It being a Rupture, if the
Patient lie on his back, the Intestine falls inwards with ease, and the
Tumor does vanish; and upon the Patients rising it returns with as much ease:
In a Bubo there is always a contained Tumor. But arriving to the matter of our
present Discourse, a Bubonocele does most generally gain the name of being the
beginning of an Intestinal Rupture more properly, than the name of a Rupture;
the Intestine first making its fall through the Inguen, before it enters the
Scrotum, and so does necessarily dilate it: And therefore Paulus says, that
the Intestinal Rupture of the Inguen does precede a Rupture elsewhere; for if
the Peritonaeum be made intense in its lower part by Wind, or any other cause,
and the Intestine makes its turgid way thither, being also filled with Wind; or
by being filled with Excrements, and thereby forces it self, it makes this
Bubonocele; the which by Paulus requires a double method of Cure, the one
being to be performed by Incision, the other by Ustion. The first of these by
Paulus is thus performed: He cuts upon the tume^ied place in a straight line
the length of three transverse Fingers, and so passes through the Membrana
carnosa, and then makes so deep an Incision, until he finds the Peritonaeum
bare, and the Fat also being ablated and removed. Celsus will have this done
with courage, and the Incision to be made to the middle Coat, which makes the
Vagina; afterward he with a Probe does depress the Peritonaeum, and so as that
the Intestine be compelled inwards; and having lodged his Probe, and compressed
the Peritonaeum, he by Sutures does draw the lips of the Wound together; the
which being done, he takes out the Probe, and cures the remain as you do simple
Wounds. This is Paulus Method, which is performed by Suture, binding up only
the Cutis, as by Astriction. The second of his, which is performed by Ustion,
is both cruel, painful, and terrible, contracting the Cutis by the strength and
force of the Fire, and making a contracted and hard Ciccatrice, and by this
means do depress the Tumor, and will not suffer the Peritonaeum to lift it
self upwards. But leaving these, a well made Truss is much better, performs
its business with more ease, gentleness, and satisfaction; this having in it
the faculty of prohibiting the soft Tumor, by compressing the Distention of
the Peritonaeum, and hindering the Impetuosity of the Intestine: to which Truss
we usually six a Quilt or small pyramidal Pillow, it sometimes being made in
form of a Myrtle Leaf: and after the Reduction this being sown to the Truss is
to be applied to the part affected. In some cases here this may not be
convenient; as should there happen a Varix in the Groin, and the Veins tumesie,
the Veins by this being compressed by the tying of both its ends up; and if the
preparing Vessels be varicosed, if they be bound up, the Generation of the Seed
would be hindered. And therefore in this case Restringent Medicines are more
proper, as Balaustians, Cypress Nuts, Lignum vitae, Galls, Pomgranate Rinds,
Red Roses, Medlers. Women for the most part are troubled with a Bubonocele,
because the Womb falls from the exterior Coat of the Vterus, and so does
produce Hernia Vterina, as Casparus Bauhinus observes, Lib. 2. Anatom. Observe.
62. Fabritii you may read of a new married Woman, who in respect of an ill Diet
and bad Habit of Body was perplexed with the Itch, and not long after growing
big bellied, and having a hard burden, there followed a Prolapsion of the
Vterus; she coming to him for advice and help, he orders her this following Bag
to be applied for three or four days to the part affected, and to carry it
always about her, by the benefit of which she was speedily cured. The things
which were put in it were these, and thus ordered. Fol. Plantag. Salic.
Mespilor. Querc. Prunor. Sylvestr. summitat. Rosar. rubr. an. M. j. rad.
Tormentil. Consolid. major. Bistort. an. j. Nuc. Cupres. Balaust. an. ss. sem.
Anis. iss. incidantnr and contundantur omnia grosso modo pro sacculo intertexto.

CHAP. LV.
Of Enterocele or Hernia Intestinalis.
BEfore I proceed to the Cure of a perfect Intestinal Rupture, I shall begin
with that which has the Peritonaeum relaxed or dilated. The Intestine does
descend, either because this Coat is either dilated or rent. The Signs of a
Dilation are, because the Intestine does not suddenly descend, but does remain
in the Orifice; then it does not descend to the bottom of the Testicle, the
Tumor is equal and profound. The Signs of its Coat being rent are, a sudden
Descent of the Intestine, an unequal Tumor, a speedy Relapse of it into the
bottom of the Testicle. Celsus cap. 14. lib. does offer these as Signs of an
Intestinal Rupture; the Tumor sometimes increasing, sometimes lessening;
increasing, either because a greater part of the Intestine falls down, or
because it is more repleted than it ought, sometimes by Wind, sometimes by
Excrement. If the Tumor do increase, because the Excrements are fallen into
the Intestine, then Scarce it is to be expected to be drawn forth again; then
is there pain in the Scrotum, Inguen, and Abdomen; because here is made a
solution of Continuity, whereby the Stomach is affected, and thereby throws
forth Choler, afterward green or black, then Excrement, and after these
follows an inflammation of the Testicles. A second Sign, the Tumor is not
painful, sometimes it wholly vanishes, and being compressed it with ease
returns into the Abdomen, and with as much ease falls out again with some
noise, the Tumor being light, lubricous, and round. Most times the Ileon falls
down, yet sometimes the other Guts come out with it, and do fall into the
Scrotum. But this happens not by a simple Distention of the Peritoneal
Process, but it must necessarily burst in all great Ruptures. This often times
happens in Children by falling, leaping, vomiting, coughing, any vehement
motion, crying, concussion, or the like. The Duodenum and Rectum cannot fall
into the Scrotum, this Anatomy sufficiently makes good. The Jejunum is tied by
the Liver by the Meseraick Veins, and the Colon knit to the upper parts; and
here is no Rupture without division of these. The Caecum, because it is
slippery in the right side, and separates from the rest, does easily fall into
the right side of the Scrotum, the Peritonaeum being either rent or dilated;
and this Galen allows Com. ad Aphorism. 3. sect. 4. lib. 6. Epidid. Into the
left side the Ileon also is subject to fall into the Scrotum, and thus there
may be a double Enterocele, one of the Caecum, another of the Ileon. This of
the Ileon is the most dangerous and terrible, because by this is intercepted
the distribution both of the Chyle and Nutriment, and the secretion of the
Excrement, which is the necessary office of the Ileon as touching preservation
of Life: besides this an intolerable pain is excited, and is often times
inflamed, whence follows a Gangrene, into whose sympathy of affection are all
the rest of its neighboring parts drawn. Here is also made the Iliaca Passio,
after which follows vomiting both of Chyle and Excrements, this being as the
Harbinger or Forerunner of Death. Now as touching Dilatation according to
Avicen two things are required, How the Intestine is to be reposed.
the one a reduction of the Intestine upwards into the Abdomen or Belly, the
second preventing its coming forth again. The first is easily resolved, if the
Intestine do not much fall out, or it be not swelled with Wind, or filled with
Excrements, for then it may with ease be driven in by the Fingers, laying your
Patient on his Back, with his Legs somewhat elevated, and a little asunder: but
if it be filled with Excrements or Wind, then are we to use another Method, by
using of hot Baths, Cataplasms discussing Wind, and by prescribing lenifying
Medicines, for which use and purpose take these as proper Engines to work
this;. rad. Alth. ij. Cataplasm.
Lilior. albor. j. fol. Malv. Violar. Parietar. an. M. ss. fl. Chamomel.
Melilot. Rosar. rubr. an. pug. ij. coquantur omnia in aquae q. s. Colaturae
add farin. Fabar. Hord. an. ijss. farin. sem. Lin. Fenugraec. an. j. ol.
Rosar. Chamomel. Aneth. Axung. Capon. an. j. misce, fiat Cataplasma. This is to
be applied when the Excrements are indurate. When the Wind swells them up use
this Unguent:. Unguent.
ol. Chamomel Rut. an. j. ol. Aneth. Lilior. an. vj. Spirit. Vin. ij. Cer.
flav. q. s. fiat Vnguentum. And for a Bath use this as very excellent:.
Bislingu. Plantag, Polygon. nuc. Cupres. cort. Castanar. German. Hypocyst.
cort. Granator. Capular. Gland. rad. Symphit. major. an. M. ij. Gallar. M. j.
aqua fabror. in quo ignita extinguuntur lb 20. Decoction.
infundantur per horas 24. and deinde lento igne redigantur ad 3 partis
consumpt. and ante ab igne removetur, add Acet. Optim. lbiij. serva ad usum.
This Fomentation is most proper when the Intestine does lodge in the Inguen; a
Cerate for the same of a Venetian Physician: Cerate.
. Theriac. opt. Bol. Armen. Sangu. Dracon. in gutt. Alo. Succotrin. an. ss.
misce in mortario cum Terebynth. Venet. vel cum pice navali pro Cerato. For
purging in this case Electuarium Diacatholicon and Powder of Rhubarb are very
proper Medicines. Here also may you order Manna, Syrup of Roses, with
convenient Decoctions, and the like. The Intestine being reposed, you are to
use all restringent things after the applying of the former Bath, and such as
have an agglutinating and drying quality, such as are Rupturewort, Betony,
Compfrey, Solomon's Seal, Plantane, Balaustians, Red Roses, Pomgranate Rinds,
Cypress Nuts, Bol. Armen. Dragons Blood, Mastich. Amber, Coral, Olibanum, out
of which may be framed Powders, Electuaries, Pills, and the like. A Decoction
of Sarsaperilla, Guiacum, and Sarsafras, are here also proper. The outward
Topics should also have the same saculties and virtues, being made of Galls,
Cypress Nuts, and the like. Here also Empl. Adherniam is very good. Avicen does
praise this; Empl.
. Nuc. Cupress. acac. Balaust. Gallar. immaturat. an. j. Myrrb. Thur.
Sarcocoll. Tragaganth. Gum. Arabic. an. iij. Sangu. Dracon. Mummiae an. ij.
terantur cum Aceto. Or this accounted better: Empl.
. Malicor. Bol. Armen. Sangu. Dracon. an. j. Tegul. pulverisat. ij. pulv.
Bislingu. ijss. cum albumine ovi modico aceti and Colophon. fiat Emplastrum.
Empl.
Or this Empl.. Empl. Adhern. Great. Dei an. j. pulv. Sang. Draco. Osmund.
Regal. pulv. Oliban. Guaiac. an. iss. cum parum Ol. Myrtillor. fiat Empl. A
purging Apozeme to give the Patient may be this: Apozem.
. Osmund. Regal. Hernar. an. M. j. rad. consolid. major. Bistort. an. iss.
Hypericflor. M. j. sem. Anis. ij. conquantur omnia in vino rubro, and colaturae
lbiss. add syrup. consolid. major. iij. vel 4 pro Apozemate. These two
Emplasters of Hollerius are much commended applied outwardly: Empl.
. Mastich. cort. Thur. Nuc. Cupress. Myrrh. Sarcocoll. glutin. pisc.
Icthiocoll. an. ss. solvatur Icthiocolla in Aceto and fiat Empl. super corio
extendatur. Or this: Empl.
. Balaustian. iss. Gallar. ss. rad. Asphodil. rad. Narciss. vel rad. Arnogloss.
and Betar. an. iss. coquantur in vino, fiat Emplastrum. All things being
performed, the Patient conveniently purged, the part affected well fomented,
and proper astringent Medicines being applied, after the reposition of the
part, we are after this with convenient Bolsters, and Trusses to finish our
business, and these are to be kept on so long, until the lacerated Peritonaeum
be so firmly united either together again, or to the Muscles of the Belly, that
there can be no fear of any more Relapse. A general example of all Trusses I
will show you at the end of this Tract, their various Forms and Fashions for
single or double Ruptures. Histo^y
I shall conclude this Chapter with an History of a Proctor, whose Intestine
falling into his Scrotum, he afterward fell into an Iliaca passio, the
Intestine being so filled and stuffed up with dried Excrements, that hindered
its ^^position* and after many Remedies had been used for nine days in vain, he
ordered the party to be opened to the production of the Periteuaenm, where the
Intestine was choked up, lest the Continuance of this Distemper might create a
Gangrene; and following Celsus Opinion when he offers, Satius est anceps
remedium experiri, quam certo exitio aegrum exponere. Upon which Consultation
it was agreed, the Patient being conveniently placed, to make an Incision even
to the production of the Peritonaeum, after which was sent in a small Silver
Pipe, round at one end, and hollowed at the other, and into the Cavity whereof
this Incision was made to that length which was requisite; after this was the
Intestine reduced, and sent into the Belly, then was the Process sown up, and
the Wound of the parts healed up by Gastroraphia, and with Conglutinating
Medicines the remainder of the Cure was performed, and the Patient perfectly
cured.

CHAP. LVI.
Of an Intestinal Rupture, the Peritonaeum being rent.
HEre are required the same Scopes as were discoursed in the former Chapter;
the Intestine is to be reposed, and care taken that it comes not out again,
the which is performed if the Rupture be united and agglutinated. Pure drying
Medicines for this purpose alone take no place, but such as have a glutinous
and viscid quality, mixed with a dryness; these are most operative and useful,
as such as was in the last Chapter prescribed by Hollerius; or for this Affect
take some of these: Cerate.
. Oliban. Sang. Dracon. Bol. Armen. Mastich. an. vj. Alo. Epatic. Thur. alb.
Mumm. an. iij. lento igne fiat Emplastrum. Or these of Aquapendens: Empl.
. Terely. ^th. iss. Cer. Thur. Myrrh. Icthiocol. carn. cochlear. an. j. gluten
triduo in aceto macerat. inde in mortario plumbeo levigetur ac conteratur, post
igne liquescat, ac caeteris misceatur. Another.
Or this:. Resin. arid. Ammoniac. Thur. Bitumin. Sulphur. vin. an. part.
aequal. terantur terenda, lique. fiant liquanda, deinde Sulphur adjiciatur,
applicetur vel linteo vel corio; and let it remain on so long until it
spontaneously fall off. Oil.
An Oil for the same:. Sarcocoll. Thur. Mastich. Sangu. Dracon. an. ij.
Terebinth. Venet. vel Resin. lbss. Gyps. pulv. lbj. stent in fimo equino per
dies 40, and tunc distillentur, and ex hoc locus inungatur. A Bath for the same
is very excellent, such as is this:. fol. Myrtil. Rosar. immaturatur. Bisling.
Consolid. major. an. M. ss. Balaust. Plantag. cort. Granator. an. iij.
Caryophyl. iss. coquantur omnia in aqua fontana a lbviij. ad lbiiij. and
coletur After this apply some of the former Emplasters, and then truss your
Patient up. And this is the Methodical way of ordering your Patients. And in
your Proceedings you ought also to take respect to the Habit of your Patients
Body, by purging all such Humors as may seem to disturb our Undertakings; and
here may be ordered inwardly several sorts of Medicines, as either Bolus,
Syrups, Pills, Electuaries, or the like, being ordered according to the
strength, capacity, age, and constitution of your Patient; for which use you
may take some of these:. Electuar. Linitiv. ij. Spec. Hier. picr. ij. mix them
with Sugar, and order it for a Bolus for your Patient to take some every
morning. This Syrup is also excellent:. Syrup.
Syrup. Betonic. Mel Rosar. an. ij. Decoct. Betonic. Bisling. Cichor. an. iij.
misce. An Electuary for the same:. Electuary.
Limatur. chalyb. praeparat. decies cum aceto lot. and totidem cum aqua Rosar.
iij. Mastich. alb. ij. pulv. Rad. consolid. major. Pilosell. an. iij. Sacchar.
Rosat. lbj. cum syrup. e succ. Plantag. q. s. fiat Electuar. hujus sumat ss.
per dies 30. Pills here also very proper: Pil.
. Alo. succotrin. Agaric. praepar. Rhabarb. Pilosell. an. ii. cum Terebinth.
Ven. q. s. fiant Pil. Let these serve for a Taste of inward Medicines; for
outward Medecines avail but little, if there be not well observed a good order
of Diet, in which we are to take care both for the Patients quiet and rest. But
if these fail, A second Method by Adustion.
and will not answer expectation, Avicen advises us to use a second Method,
which is performed by Adustion, making a strong impression by the hot
Instrument, which may hereby contract the Cutis, and also hinder the descent of
the Intestine. But in this Operation take special care of not touching the
Intestine with the Iron; for should this happen, it would or might bring danger
of Death to your Patient. This is to be performed by many small pungent red hot
Instruments, keeping also all the Seminary Vessels safe and secure from injury,
the which being any ways hurt, the Generation of Seed would consequently be
impedited. Some of these should be semicircular, whilst others ought to be
more pungent, having a very sharp point, ever beginning the Ustion from the
upper part, so descending through the whole Region of the Rupture. A third
Method is Incision.
A third Method is Incision, and this is two fold, the one performed by the
Surgeon, of which we will first treat; the other of an Emperick: the first
Cure being performed without extraction of the Stones, the second with it. In
the first let the Patient stand and hold his Wind, that the Tumor may more
evidently appear; and when you intend the Operation, you are first to mark the
place, with Ink where you intend to open or incise, then are you to make your
Incision through the length of the whole dilated Vaginal Coat, the Vagina being
elevated either with the Finger or small Hooks, then with an Incision Knife you
are to make a Diametrical Incision, both to the Membranes and Vaginal Coat rent
or dilated, then with a firm, thick, and crooked Needle, you are to make a
Suture according to the length of the whole Dilatation in the dilated Vagina,
drawing a thick and strong Thread (the inward Vessels of the Seed inwardly
remaining safe and entire) through, the Coat is to be agglutinated, without
extraction or hurting of the Testicles; then let the Patient be put to Bed, and
after this apply such things as are agglutinative, then induce a Cicatrice, and
keep your Patient well trussed. The fourth Method.
The fourth and last Method is performed the Emperical manner, and this is with
Extraction of the Testicle, a way very useless and dangerous. It is thus
repeated by Paulus, cap. 65. lib. 6. The Patient being placed with his Head
downwards, the Intestine being reduced, part of the Abdomen being compressed by
an Assistant, and the Patient being bound make an oblique mark in his Groin,
after this make a deep Incision, so that the Testicle may come forth with the
Spermatick Vessels, the which the Surgeon having in his hands, let him
separate all the Coats, and draw forth the Testicle through the same Orifice,
all the other parts being taken aside with small Hooks, let them be sown
together or tied, after this above the place tied take them off, and with an
hot cauterizing Iron being there instantly ready, cauterize the mouths of the
Vessels, hereby hindering all Flux; besides which you will find the parts
sooner agglutinated: the which being done, they leave a long Thread remaining,
applying Digestions inwardly. After this they make a Cavity in the Scrotum, and
there applying a Digestive, they use Butter, to which they add Frankincense,
the Yolk of an Egg, and a little Turpentine; then they study the generation of
Flesh with Basilicon, Aureum, Vnguentum de Betonica, or the like, and induce a
Cicatrice with dried Lints and Unguents, Diapompholigos, Diapalma, Desiccativum
rubrum, History.
etc. I shall conclude this Chapter with a History of Hildanus, who writes of a
Gentleman, which for many years was troubled with an Intestinal Rupture,
distended by Wind, having a great pain of his whole Belly, continual Vomiting,
Watchings, Restlesness adjoined to it; for whom this Clyster was first
administered: Clyster.
. Rad. Alth. Malv. cum toto, fol. Violar. Parietar. fl. Chamomel. Melilot.
Sambuc. an. M. j. sem. Fenugraec. Lin. contus. an. ss. sem. Anis. Foenicnl.
Caru. Cumin. an. j. incidantur and contundantur omnia, postea indantur in
sacculo ejus magnitudinis qua totum Scrotum cooperiri possit: the which being
sown up, boil it in twelve pounds of Water. Take of this Decoction lbj. in
which dissolve of Electuar. Diacatholic. j. Vitel. Ovor. n. ij. Butyr. recent.
ol. commun. an. iij. misce. fiat Enema. After the Bag being pressed out, apply
it to the Scrotum, and this repeat very often by dipping it into the Decoction,
and so pressing it out, and applying it warm. Within half an hour after the
Clyster was injected, there was administered the same Decoction, by which the
Scrotum began to grow lax, and the Patient being put into his Bed, with his
Head placcd supinely or downwards, and his Feet upwards, his Intestine was
reduced; and for keeping it in its place he applied to the Scrotum this
following Restringent Bag; A Restringent Bag.
. Rosar. rubr. Absynth. vulgar. prunor. sylvestr. Caud. equin. fol. salv. Mosc.
Quercin. an. Mss. Cort. Querc. ij. sem. Foenicul. Anis. an. j. incidantur and
contundantur, postea indantur in sacculo; which is to be sowed up, and boiled
in red Wine, and afterward applied. The day following he prescribed this
Purge: Purge.
. Rad. Foenicul. Petroselin. Gramin. Polypod. Querc. an. ss. herb. Agrimon.
Veronic. Cuscuth. an. M. ss. sem. Anis. Foenicul. an. ij. fol. Senn. mundat.
ss. coquantur ut colatura redeat ad iiij. in quibus solve Electuar. Diacatharm.
Diaphaenic. an. iij. aqu. Cinamom. Hordeat. ss. misce. After this was applied
Emplastrum ad Herniam, and a convenient Truss: and by these Helps and Remedies
he was perfectly cured.

CHAP. LVII.
Of Epiplocele or Hernia Omentalis.
THis (...) so called by the Greeks from Epiploon or Omentum may happen in
either side of the Scrotum, and may not very easily be reduced. This Rupture is
occasioned by the Dilatation of the middle Coat only, not because of the
Peritonaeum being rent, by reason no great part of the Omentum descends, it
being annexed to the bottom of the Ventricle, Colon, and Spine. This therefore
is chiefly generated by the Coats Dilatation, especially the Omentum being
armed with Fat, which gives a more easy cause to this Relaxation and
Dilatation, although not to its Ruption. Signs.
Signs of an Omental Rupture are these; the Tumor is always the same, unequal
to touch, soft, and slippery in respect of its Fat, it lies more in the Os
pubis than in the Scrotum, and is small in Tumor. Its Curative Scopes are two,
to reduce the Omentum inwards, which is performed by the Hand, and to hinder
its exition; and this is done by Pharmacy. And because this Dilatation
generally is occasioned by Moisture, or the Fat relaxing this Rupture;
therefore Restrictives are the most proper Medicines in this place required;
and here take Aquapendens his Emplaster:. Alo. Malicor. in vino austero elixat.
succ. Hypocystid. Thur. glutin. fabror. an. parts aequales, gluten passo
incoquatur ad integram dissolutionem, post teratur in mortario, and cae^era
addautur. As touching the rest, this Cure dissereth not much from an Intestinal
Rupture, and therefore Trusses, Caustic, or Incision may upon occasion be
used, observing Celsus Rule, lib. 7. cap. 25. If a small part of the Omentum
descend, this may properly be reposed; but if a great part, this is to be
burnt, or dealt with so that it falls off: yet this is not to be attempted
very readily, because this Rupture is seen very often beyond expectation cured.
I shall shut up this Discourse with two or three pleasant Histories, very
convenient for this purpose and matter. History.
Hollerius relates of a pious youug man, who died Ileous, from a Prolapsion of
the Ileon with the Omentum into the Scrotum; the which Body being diffected,
the Ileon was wholly found gangrenated by reason of Inflammation, which was
conceived to be by this Prolapsion. Another.
Columbus lib. 15. Anatom. writes, he saw above a pound of Omentum in the
Scrotum. Another.
Jacobus Oetheus lib. Observat. propr. writes of a young Gentleman, who having
been troubled with an Inguinal Rupture, and the Intestines often times falling
into the Scrotum, he at length found somewhat else fall into it also, it being
no part of the Intestines, but the Omentum which swelled the Scrotum at this
rate; and the Signs hereof were, he had neither Cholical Pains, nor Motions,
nor Fever, nor Obstructions of the viscera. That part of the Omentum which was
lapsed, by application of convenient Fomentations, Emplasters, and Ligature to
the part affected, they were well reposed, the Patient soon felt ease, and in
process of time received a perfect Cure.

CHAP. LVIII.
Of Exomphalos or Hernia Vmbilicalis.
EXomphalos is made by the Peritonaeum being either relaxed or rent; and hence
often times happens that the Omentum and the Intestines do fall into its place.
If it happens by the Omentum, it retains the color of the Cutis; and there
will appear a soft and almost indolent Tumor, and is reposed without any
noise; but happening by the Intestines, it appears unequal, and upon its
Reduction it makes a Murmuration. If it happens from Flesh, it appears hard;
if from Wind, soft: and this by the Learned called Exomphalos, by us a Navel
Rupture, proceeds from the same Cause as the former, and may be treated with
the same Curative Method; save only in this place you are to mind, that you
cover the whole Rupture with hard, and thick, and large Bolsters, that hereby
it may sufficiently be kept in. If it happens that it proves a flatuous Tumor
of the Navel, cure it as you do Physocele; if a waterish Tumor, this is to be
thus treated, by making a small Incision, and keeping it open so long as until
you have discharged the whole Water. Hildanus in his Centur. 3. Observe. 64.
relates of a pleasant story to this purpose; so does Benivenius tell us of a
strange one: the last I will produce first, because that of Hildanus I intend
to give according to the Author himself, with his Figures and Method how to
make and apply the outward Dressings and Ligatures. History.
Benivenius chap. 6. Abditis, relates a strange story of John Binus, who had a
Son whose Navel grew out like a Man's penis, four fingers in length, and as it
were had a Coat of the Testicles joined to it, out of which sometimes Spirits
did fly, the which many Physicians saw; whereupon some of them judged, some of
the Intestines had thrust themselves out; others, the Omentum; others
attributed it to Wind and Humors; but at length it was concluded, that it was
a Fleshy Excrescency, and for the taking this off there was a strict Bandage
made, the which was every day contracted or bound closer, until the whole was
eradicated; the which being removed, the Patient recovered his perfect Cure and
Health. History.


This of Fabritius Hildanus is of a noble and pious Martron in Germany, in whom
not only the Navel it self, but a little above the Peritonaeum, and some part
of the Abomen, it hung down dilated into a great Bag; in this Bag also not
only the Omentum, but somewhat of the Intestine was contained. Sometimes a
murmuring was there perceived; and then pain was present, sometimes proving
very vehement, otherwhile more remiss, according to the quantity of Winds then
present. She affirmed to him, she got this Affect in the time of her
Childbearing. Of the rest, because Prolapses of this sort, of the Navel or
Abdomen, can be seldom reduced into the Belly; or if they might be, they are
not there retained without great difficulty; they produce wonderful troubles to
the Patients that are therewith vexed, when they by reason of the weight do
draw their upper parts downwards. For this purpose he has invented a new Bag,
by which this Extuberance may as well as possibly be drawn upwards, and so
elevated, that the grieved Patient may bear the burden with much less trouble
and incommodiousness. This is to be made of a strong doubled Cloth fitted to
the Thorax, so as that it descends no lower than the first Bastard Rib, and so
backwards to the Thorax from the Region of the Omoplates, making a Ligature on
either side placed two fingers breadth, and perforated in several places, to
fit it the better to the Thorax. To this Ligature is to be annexed this large
one with the Bag, so as it may be lifted up or taken down, according to the
will and pleasure of the Patient; by the benefit of which holes this may be
done. This Figure you may see very fairly described in this following Leaf,
together with the Bandage, with Figures directing how to make and use it.



CHAP. LIX.
Of Hydrocele or Hernia Aquosa.
HYdrocele or Hernia Aquosa do either possess the whole Scrotum, or part
thereof. This Aqueous Humor is not collected in the Scrotum, but in the
Membrana Erythrois, containing the Testicle, for into this a thin fluid Humor
does make its influx, being much of the consistence of Urine, distending this
Erythroidal Membrane; and the subsistence of the Testicle in process of time is
also corrupted by its acrimony. By Aetius Leonidas this Aqueous Tumor is said
to be loose, and without pain, the which is not to be eased by any Cataplasms,
Fomentations, Emplasters, or Unguents. There Is one only Remedy which must
discharge it, and that is Section or Incision: and this is very manifest and
apparent, because the Seminal Vein of this part arises not from the Cava, as
do the right, but from the left Emulgent. The Kidney being by this evilly
affected, not performing its proper function, part of the Urine, the which the
Emulgent protracts to it self, whenas it cannot descend to the Bladder from the
ill-affected Kidney, it falls into the Membrance Elythrois, and here breeds
Hydrocele; and this being sublated with the Testicle, this Humor can no longer
remain here, as Dodonaeus observes, cap. 39. Causes.
Observe. The Causes hereof may be many, some being occult, others manifest;
occult, as this waterish Humor being gathered from the repleted Vessels. Guido
adds a Vice of the Liver herein or Spleen, by reason of which there is a Liquor
collected in the Hypocondries, which with ease does make its descent manifest,
as Percussion, Collision, Fraction of Vessels which are in the Testicles; for
the Blood which flows into the Vessels is changed and turned, by reason of the
weakness of parts, into an aqueous substance. Percussion and Collision, Signs.
and the like, are its Signs; the Tumor vanishes if Hunger has preceded. If
the Habit of the Body be ill, this Hernia proceeds from the ill accident of
some Bowel; if not hence, it may from too much Liquor, for Repletion is made by
too much Potation. Aetius takes the Causes from the Humor it self, the which
if it be yellowish and pale, the Hernia will appear from the Repletion of the
Vessels; if feculent, from Percussion; if white, from a Vice of the Liver or
Spleen; the Veins of the Scrotum are tumefied; if it be compressed, the Humor
flows into the Vessels which formerly were empty. It shines and appears very
bright, and is soft, light, and clear, by viewing it, and applying a Candle on
the opposite part. It is a particular Dropsy; and as a general Dropsy is bred
by a collection of Matter, as in a Critical Abscess, by drinking more freely of
Water than can be discharged by Vomit, by Generation, by interception, or
alleviation of a Sanguisick Faculty. So a Hernia aquosa and flatuosa do either
come by a primogene affection, or by succession of some other Distemper: and
for this reason Hollerius does prescribe here such things as are to be given in
either kind of Dropsy, this sometimes happening between this and the
Erythrois, sometimes between the Erythrois and Dartos. As touching the Cure,
Cure.
all Causes are to be removed, the ill Habit of the Body corrected, from too
much Drink the Patient ought to be prescribed, the plenty of this watery Humor
to be discharged and evacuated, and the whole Habit of the Body amended. And
for the performance of these, Purgatives, Diaphoreticks and Diuretics are very
proper instrumental Weapons to discharge this invasive companion, of which I
have already presented you with many in my Tract of Aqueous Tumors. Topics.
As touching outward Applications, these ought to contain in them a power to
discharge this Water contained in the Testicles, this to be performed either by
Repellers driving it back, or by educing it by the part affected, Empl.
or by Scarrification. Hollerius does offer this as an excellent Plaster, being
made of fresh Cows Dung, adding thereto a third part of Bol. Armen. Fomentation.
and Dragons Blood. A Fomentation for the same may be this:. Lixiv.
Barbito^sor. iiij. in his coquantur Cumin. iiij. Rut. Absynth. Puleg.
Petroselin. Apii an. ss. Sal. j. with this let the part affected be fomented.
Or this: Another.
. Cumin. Bac. Laur. sem. Sesel. Rut. an. j. fiat Decoctum in vino rubro, and
fiat Fomentum. Or for this use take this Cataplasm; Catapl.
. Stercor. Vaccin. ij. Sulphur. Cumin. an. ij. Empl. de Bacc. Laur. pulv.
Juniper. Anis. an. ij. misce, and cum pauco mellis fiat Cataplasma. Or these;.
Cumin. Baccar. Laur. fimi Columbin. Castor. an. part. aequal. coquantur cum
oleo Rosarum and pauc. Cerae. First apply your Baths, then anoint the part
affected, and afterward apply your Caplasms. If these fail, we are to come to
Apertion, which may be used two ways, either by Incision or Caustic; if by
Caustic, the place is to be cauterized in the place where the Water is, and
then after it is once discharged, a new Collection is to be prevented. And here
Galen does order the part to be kept open for a long while, by placing in a
Silver Pipe into the affected part. Guido makes a Seton, and keeps it a long
while. Celsus teaches the place of Incision, saying, If it be a Child that is
herewith troubled, it is to be laid open in the Inguen, and the water to be
drawn upwards. If in one of a greater age, this is to be opened in the bottom
of the Scrotum, and that way the water to be let out; taking this as Advice,
that water is not to be left long in the Scrotum, lest by its delay there it
does the Testicle injury; or hereby there grows a Hernia carnosa. The Body
being well prepared for your Operation of Incision, and a good order of Diet
prescribed, let the Patient be well placed, then in the upper part even to the
Tunica Erythrois is the Scrotum to be incised; this is somewhat to be separated
in its outward part from the Membrane it self. And because the Water wholly is
contained in this Coat, so the Testicle swims therein; and lest this Water
should descend, with a crooked Needle and double Thread the whole Coat is to be
apprehended (besides the Seminal Vessels) and then to be moderately bound and
tied; after this divide the Membrane in the lower part of the Ligature
lengthways, and draw out the water or liquor contained within; then with a long
Tent, it being of a moderate thickness, being dipped in the White of an Egg, to
which some restrictive Powders have been added, apply it to the side of the
Testicle, and about the lower part of the Scrotum, anointing the Inguens and
Abdomen with Oil of Roses: the day following let this Digestive be applied;.
Terchinth. lot. ij. Cer. nov. ss. Gum. Elem. j. ol. Rosar. and Amygdal. dulc.
ss. ol. de vitell. Ovor. ij. dissolve Gummi lento igne cum ol. Terebinth. and
Cera cum pauxillo Oleorum liquefactis, fiat Vnguentum, fine addendo Croc. j.
With this let the Tents be armed, which are to be put into the Orifice;
afterward apply a mundefying Powder to cleanse the Ulcer, and keep it open for
near two months; and then close up the Wound with a Cicatrice. I conclude with
a History of Hildanus, History.
who writes of a Commissary 40 years of age, a man strong and of a good Habit
of Body, vexed for many years with a watery Rupture, unto whom both many inward
and outward Medicines were prescribed and applied without any success; and it
growing to a great bulk, that it occasioned a large Tumor in the Scrotum, and
proved so painful that the Patient would rather yield to any Method which could
give appearance of ease; his Body being prepared, and a good order of Diet
ordered him, with administering Purgings, and their reiterations, with Bleeding,
etc. he being conveniently placed, the Scrotum was opened in the upper part of
the Coat Erythrois, and this on the fore part somewhat separated; and because
the whole Testicle did swim in water, which was contained in that Coat, that
the water might make no further descent, with a crooked Needle and double
Thread, the whole Coat and Seminary Vessels were moderately taken up and bound;
after this in the lower part of the Ligature the Membrane was divided
lengthways, and by degrees was drawn forth some pounds of Water, after which
was applied a Pledget long and thick enough, dipped in the White of an Egg,
Bol. Armen. and the like, then was applied the same Digestive I formerly have
described, and with this were armed the Tents and Pledgets, and over these
Vnguentum Basilicon; and with all care the Ulcer being mundefied, digested, and
filled with Flesh, it was skinned, and the Patient perfectly recovered.
Riverius relates another story of a Child of 15 months old, who was troubled
with a watery Rupture in his right side of his Testicle, with Matter contained
in the Dartos, equalling the bigness of a small Egg; and this he had almost
from his first coming into the world: how he received his Cure I will commit
you to the Author himself.

CHAP. LX.
Of Pneumatocele or Hernia ventosa.
THis windy Rupture does happen with and without a Dropsy; if with a Dropsy,
cure the Dropsy, and the Rupture will be dismissed; if without a Dropsy, we
are to use Topical Medicines, and these ought to be Digestives, and purge the
Body from the phlegmatic and windy Humors, and if possibly gain a digestive
faculty in the Stomach, and these you have already prescribed in Tumors
arising from wind. This Tumor is known from the former, because it is more
lucid and red than it; the Veins are puffed up, and the splendor appears more
bright than the former, and is suddenly framed, and as speedily discharged. And
having already furnished you with Medicines for discharging the Antecedent
Cause, we now arrive at the Conjunct Cause, which is this flatuous Spirit got
into the Scrotum, or its Coats; the which we shall thus endeavor to discharge
by outward Medicines, as Fomentations, Oils, Unguents, Emplasters, Cataplasms,
and the like, neither here using Caustic or Incision For Fomentations you may
use these: Foment.
. Origan. Calamenth. Puleg. an. M. ss. sem. 4 Calid. major. sem. Vitic. Bacc.
Laur. Juniper. sem. Cumin. an. ij. fl. Melilot. Chamomel. an. pug. ij. Sal. ij.
coquantur in s. q. vini albi ad 3 partis consumptionem. Another.
Or this:. Lixiv. Barbitonsor. iij. Cumin. Bacc. Laur. an. ij. fol. Laur.
Rorismarin. Rosar. rubr. Meliss. Menth. Majoran. an. M. j. Sal commun. iiij.
with this bathe the part affected with a Sponge. Another.
Or this:. Acet. fortissim. ij. in quibus coquantur rad. Pyreth. Staphis. ac.
Bacc. Juniper. Laur. Cumin. an. ss. fol. Laur. Haeder. terrestr. Salv. Thym.
Rorismarin. an. pug. j. bathe also with this the affected part; or with this:
Another.
. sem. Cumin. Bacc. Laur. Rut. Chamomel. Bacc. Juniper. Absynth. an. i. misce,
fiat Fomentum, cum aqua and vino mixta. Oils.
Oils for the same are these:. ol. Rut. Laurin. an. iss. ol. Petrol. i. ol.
Spic. Terebinth. an. ss. misce. Or, * ol. Chamomel. Rut. an. i. ol. Aneth.
Nard. an. iij. spirit. vin. ij. Cer. q. s. fiat Vnguentum. Unguent.
Or,. ol. Castor. Rut. Euphorb. an. vj. Unguent. Martial. ss. misce. Catapl.
Or for Cataplasms take these:. sem. Cumin. Bacc. Laur. sem. Sesel. Rut. an. i.
stercor. Bovin. j. Sulphur. viv. Cumin. an. ij. mel. q. s. fiat Cataplasma. Or
this; Another.
. Farin. Fabar. iiij. sem. Danc. Cumin. an. ss. Bacc. Laur. Juniper. an. ij.
fl. Chamomel. Melilot. Rosar. rubr. and Lavendul. an. pug. j. Salpug. iss. cum
vini albi q. s. fiat Cataplasma. Or, Another.
. Farin. Fabar. ss. sem. ^^nugraec. cumin. an. ij. sem. Apii Rui. an. j. fl.
Chamomel. pug. ij. pulv. Rui. Absynth. Scord. Rosar. rubr. ad. ss. c^quantur
omnia in vino albo q. s. fine addendo Oximelit. Scillitic. q. s. fiat
Cataplasma. Empl. Empl.
de Bacc. Laur. is here also very good; or this mixed Emplaster:. Empl. de
Melilot. de Bacc. Laur. de Ran. cum Merc. an. iij. nitr. Cumin. Sulphur. Calc.
viv. Sal. an. j. ol. Laur. and Cerae q. History.
s. fiat Empl. Benivenius cap. 81. Abditor. writes of a Person of Quality, who
having his viscera and Stomach so filled with Wind, that it proved very
troublesome to him; and when the part was compressed, there was perceived no
exition: and hence not only the Bowels and the Breast, but the Scapulaes also
were extended with incredible pain, and the Spirits very narrowly con^ined; all
convenient and proper Medicines being prescribed and used without any effect,
the third day the Gentleman dies; the dead Body being dissected, the
Intestines and the other viscera were seen to be much swelled and puffed up
with wind, and in the left Ventricle of the Heart was found a hard Callosity
equalling the largeness of a Nut, and these two were generally held to be the
only Causes of his Death.

CHAP. LXI.
Of Sarcocele or Hernia carnosa.
THis is a Tumor contra naturam, which is generated about the Testicles out of
a Scirrhous Flesh; or it is a Tumor bred out of the defluxion of thick
Humors, which are collected between the Coats of the Testicles, and they there
not assimulating, there often times grows as it were a Hyposarcosis, often times
Varices accompany the Tumor, and these are very troublesome; and these Humors
being thick and viscid, bred from Phlegm and Melancholy, as they breed Scirrhous
Tumors in other parts, so also do they generate a hardness in these. Signs.
It is known by its Hardness, Asperity, Inequality, and Indolency. It arises
from Melancholy, it having a sublucid color. If it arises from Phlegm, it does
not differ from the color of the Cutis. If it arises from burnt Melancholy,
it has a pricking pain, and the Tumor is inequal, in some places soft, in
others hard. If the Tumor be not confirmed, cure it as you do a Scirrhus, by
using Emollients, then Discussives; but the last seldom does any good here. But
if these fail, you are to come to Section; but if it be Cancerous attempt
nothing. Matthiolus affirms, that he has absumed a Sarcocele by the only
using of Pulvis Radicis Anonidis being taken for many months. But if it yields
not to Medicine, Incision is the next remedy; and this way or method is not
void of danger, the Testicle being either left in or taken out. And by the way
we are to consider, that if any fleshy substance grows about the Coats or
Testicles, this is wholly and absolutely to be taken away in this case for more
safety; the Vessels are therefore to be drawn out and tied, and afterward
incised and cauterized: for to leave any part hereof, does more represent the
ignorance of a Quack, than knowledge of an Artist; for no Son of Art will give
the advantage of a new growth, whenas he may well prevent any appearance of the
same by a careful managing of his Operation, and taking care of preventing all
accidents; for a small quantity, but left remaining, will soon run up (like a
rank Weed) to a great bulk, and this in a short time grows worse and worse. If
the Tumor be not very hard, the Surgeon comprehending the whole Tumor,
that is the whole tumefied Substance in the Testicle, every way encompassing
it, let him make his Incision even to the Tumor above the Scrotum; then abduce
the Testicle from the Scrotum, drawing a strong Needle and Thread through the
middle Process above the Region of the tumefied Testicle, and then drawing it
back again through the same part of the Process; then tie both of them; these
being performed cut off the whole Process, the Testicle being concluded with
it. It being ablated, apply a Repercussive Medicine, and strengthen the
neighboring parts with convenient rollings and bolsterings, and heal up your
Ulcer as you do others. Fabritius Hildanus tells a very pleasant story of a
young man, History.
who embracing his Mistress in Veneral Ceremony, he being near ready to eject
his Spermatick succus, was prevented of his intended purpose by a Messenger
which rushed in unawares, by opening the Chamber door, and disturbing him in
his pursuit, on which his Sperm receded, and was retained. Upon which a pain
seized on his Groin, his Testicles tumefied, and the pain began to be remiss in
his left Testicle, and the Tumor vanished, and returned to its former state;
but about the right the Tumor continued, the which in process of time turned
into a great fleshy Rupture; and he being called to the Patient amongst other
Physicians in consultation, saw not only Flesh about the Testicle concreted,
but found it also extended with serous Humors, so that it equalled near the
largeness of a Child's Head.

CHAP. LXII.
Of Circocele or Hernia Varicosa.
THis is nothing else than a Dilatation of the Veins in the Testicles,
conglomerated in manner of Varices: and these (as Celsus and Paulus write) are
either the Veins of the Scrotum, or those in the Membranes of the Dartos, or
those which do nourish the Testicle: and therefore Celsus advises, if the
Rupture be in the Scrotum, you are to apply thin and sharp Instruments to the
Veins, and with these the Veins are to be cauterized, and there to be most
cauterized where most variced or twisted. The general Curative Method here is
the same to that prescribed in curing of a Scirrhus; Intentions.
the Intentions here are three, to repel the flowing Humor, to discharge and
dry up that which has already slowed, and to astringe the dilated Vessels. Now
Astringents do satisfy these two scopes; for as being cold and restringent,
they repel the fluent Humor; as being drying, they dry it up; and by its
Astriction do also bind up the dilated Vessels. And for this Affect,
Balaustians, Red Roses, Pomgranate Rinds, Juice of Hypocystus, Bol. Armen.
Dragons Blood, Mastich, Olibanum, Glue, Amber, and the like; these, or any, or
some of these mixed with the White of an Egg and a little Vinegar, may very
well be used here: but if these do no good, come to the use of Incision or
Caustic, and here are we to be very careful in only cauterizing the parts
where they are thus twined or twisted together; after which done remove the
Eschar, then deterge and digest it. But if the Veins of the Dartos be tumefied,
you are to make your Incision in the Groin, and the Membrane is to be drawn
through there with the Testicle, and after this separate the dilated Vessels
from the Coat either with your Fingers or a convenient Instrument; then tie up
the Vessels, and cut them off under your Ligature; then repose or reduce your
Coat and Testicle. And if the Rupture be in the Erythrois or Tunica vaginalis,
and either two be dilated, proceed in the same Method as in the Dartos; but if
it be between the inward Coat and the Testicle it self, make your Incision in
the Inguen, draw out the Vessels, amputate the Testicle, and cauterize the
parts. And this is Paulus his Method and Distinction. As touching Hernia
Humoralis, take this brief Description of it: It is framed out of a Confusion
of many Humors in the Scrotum, Hernia Humoralis.
or between the Coats which enwrap the Testicle. Often times also it is seen to
be bred in the proper Substance of the Testicles. You are to cure this as you
do the former. And thus much of Ruptures.

CHAP. LXIII.
Of a Venereal Bubo.
WE arrive now at the Inguens, where we may meet with these four following
Tumors, Bubo Venereus, Pestiferus, Phyma, Phygethlon; of each of these in
their order. These Glandules have their proper names as well as others, and
hence is it that they are called Bubones, by us in England called the Popes
eye, in veal and mutton. They are held to be eight in number and very large.
There is held to be a great commerce between the Nerves and these Glandules:
for it is very credible that the Nerves do conveigh somewhat hither, as their
excrementitious succus, and also do send hither any nerveous quality that at
any time does perplex them; but they do not unload themselves into these as
into their excretory ports, but into their adjoining vessels; and hence it is
that they are placed at the greater division of the vessels: neither is it less
probable, that they take somewhat from hence as a nutritive juice, the which
being allured by a similar attraction of the Glandulous substance, the
Lymphaducts to pour out their Lympha here, and by the benefit hereof these
Glandules do separate one and leave the other: And this is confirmed by their
sweetness and delicacy, they having a familiarity with the nutrive Succus. And
the reason they are so large and numerous is, because the Crural Nerves had
need to have such large Organes for discharging their superfluities. We come
now to their Diseases with the Affects; these being either simple or not malign
Tumors, or pestilential or venereal Tumors. The Causes of all which may be
reduced to two. The first being the hindrance of the Circulation of the Blood,
and hence arises a Tumor by reason of the continuity and impetuous afflux of
the Blood from the heart through the Arteries, and by reason of its making no
reflux from these through the Veins: An evident example we have hereof in
Contusions of the Glandules and in their Obstructions. A second common Cause
arises generally from the Nerves themselves, spitting forth their superfluous
Humidities being either here vicious in Quantity or Quality: now these are 2
common causes. Every special Tumor has its specific causes and differences:
and thus if these superfluities only err in quantity or quality, as in
viscidity, thicknes, or the like, it frames a simple Tumor: If from a malign
quality, there arises a Tumor being of the same nature (as malign;) and thus
being either venereal or pestilential it occasioneth a venereal or pestilential
Tumor. Causes.
We are now to enquire of the efficient causes of this venreal Bubo: and this
poison oftimes is communicated to the Liver, and hence is sent into the
Inguens, as its proper Emunctuories, and hence arises these venereal Buboes.
The chief matter of which they are bred is of a part of thick, cold and viscid
Humors, which may well be perceived by the hardness, whitenes, ilnes of pain,
and color of the Tumor. Sometimes they arise from a hot, sharp, and choleric
Humor with a great pain, and a conjunct heat, and these make them so often to
run into Ulcers, being both virulent and corroding. Cure.
As to the cure, never-use digestives, lest the thinner part being resolved,
the thicker excrement lies and increases inwards; much less Repellers, for
these do drive the virulent matter inward; and therefore Attractives and
Suppuratives here only do take best place. The Tumor being made ripe, open it
with a potential Cautery. As touching the cure of the whole body, neither
purge, bleed, or keep any order of diet. Make your orifice not very large, but
so as you may lodge in it a pretty handsome large Tent for discharge of this
peccant Matter, you may keep it open for 20 or 30 days according to the
greater or lesser quantity of Matter. This being discharged, we may both
prescribe purging, bleeding, and a good order of diet. It being discharged,
cleanse it well, fill up with flesh, and skin it. And thus may you cure the
kinder sort of a Venereal Bubo: but if it proves more rebellious, then instead
of Suppurating Medicines we should come to the use of Cupping Glasses every
other day, and after these to apply Diachylon cum gummi mixed with black Soap,
and these will maturate the most rebellious Buboes; and having brought it thus,
deterge the Ulcer by keeping it a long while open, and freed of its peccant
Matter; then fill up with flesh, Hist.
and skin it. Hildanus tells us of one, who in an impure coition with a Strumpet
had all his genital parts so dilated, that a malign Vapor passed to the next
immediate Veins, and afterward coursed through the greater to the Liver, and
so infected the whole mass of Blood, hence were generated many crudities
instead of Blood. And as nature is always careful to defend her noble parts,
and to vindicate them from blemish and injury, she generally sends these
Humors to the Ing^ens, as to its Emunct^ories: and here they breed these
Tumors we call Buboes, which were made of a hot and sanguinolent matter, the
which with ease came to suppuration; others there be which being generated of
could and thick Humors do require a longer time to suppur ate, and a greater
diligency to cure, the Matter was sharp and malign, and many Medicines being
used both inwards and outward with small success. The Tumor appeared but
small, and was very hard, and after having applied many attractive Cataplasms
and Emplasters, by the benefit of a Caustic it did break, out of which for six
or seven days space it did run near ten pound of Matter. About the Rotator of
the Thigh broke out several Abscesses, out of which did also run such a great
Quantity of Matter for some months, that many thought him scarce curable, but
by care and convenient Medicines he recovered. History.
Schenkius relates of a noble man about 30. years of age, who having recreated
himself in Venereal embraces with a young noble woman being filled well both
with wine and venery had soon after his fullness of pleasure an implacable pain
about his Hips, and in his left Groyn did grow a large and red Tumor, the
which after wards turned it self into an Ulcer to which applying Diachylon cum
gummi and such like Medicines it was speedily brought to suppuration; the which
being opened a great quantity of Purulent Matter came out much like to that of
Pultice; his Spirits almost being exhausted, he fell into a consumption,
accompanied with a Hectic, and afterward within a little while leaves the
world with his pain. I write this as a Caution to young Chirurgions, that they
do not supress such Venereal Buboes, or leave any Venenate or Virulent matter
to lodge in such Tumors or Abscesses, they at last turning to Fistulaes, if
not bring a Consumption with them, and so Death.

CHAP. LXIV.
Of a Pestilential Bubo.
THis Tumor by the Arabians is call- Althois. It is a Tumor long, and moveable,
in its Vigor sharp with a mucronated Turbination, immovable and deeply fixed
in the Glandules, in which the Brain exonerates it self into these Glandules
somewhat of its venenate and pestiferous Matter, as to those which are in the
Throat and Ears, the Heart to those which are under the Axillaries, and the
Liver to the Inguens. It consists of a thick and viscid substance, as a sharp
Anthrax ^ixing an Eschar in the part. Of these are two conjunct Causes, the
Efficient is strength and vivacity of the expulsive Faculty of these principal
parts, which expulsion is made by these to the Emunctuories. The material Cause
is corrupt Blood deprived of its proper Nature, Effence and benign Quality, and
altogether altered and changed from its pristine Substance, that it turns an
enemy to its nature. And here ought we to enquire into the cause of this
Corruption. It is to be noted in an Inflammation and Erysipelas the fluent
Blood is good, because it is not expelled, only aggravated in Quantity: This is
expelled in respect of its ill Quality. Causes.
Galen gives this as a Cause, as Corruption, when that be received be of an
evil juice, they being of the worst Nutriment. Another Cause is corruption of
Air, the which being attracted does force it self into the Spirits, and so
corrupt the whole Mass of Blood. we do own a Pestiferous Bubo to be an
Inflammation of the Glandulous parts: and here therefore we are to mind the
whole color of the Body; For in a Pestiferous Bubo this is sometimes changed.
Signs.
Another sign is a dry and black Tongue; another is a thin and waterish Urine,
his Excrements very fetid, because this putrid Heat does corrupt them. In a
Pestiferous Flux there is often times a Choleric Flux adjoined, and the
Excrements are of various colors, frequent Vomiting and stinking Sweats, a
general Itch over all the Body, pains of the Head, oftimes Delirium, great pain
and griping in the Stomach, by reason of the putrid Humors sent thither from
the Guts; then Syncope and at last Death. Presage.
In this case Death is generally to be presaged, the disease being so potent
and forcibly assailing the natural Fort, that it cannot long hold out. As to
the Cure; Cure.
First cure his Air, this being as a main Actor in this Tragedy, and therefore
sprinkle his room with Vinegar, or burnt Tarr, etc. let his Diet be thin,
because his Humor is thick; all Passions are to be shunned; Venery ^led from
as the greatest enemy, because it is a great disease. Galen orders Venae
Sectio; and in every putrid Fever you may see him ordering Phlebotomy as you
may see it in 11. Meth. cap. 14. And in a Pestilential Bubo there is
concomitant a putrid Fever; and therefore Bleeding is very requisite. Besides
these, the common signs of the Bloods offending in Quality requires Bleeding:
But this is to be done and performed both warily and judiciously; for in some
cases it is by no means to be admitted, as in the Small Pox appearing, or
Buboes; for by Venesection here we send the peccant Matter inwards to some
noble part, and so instead of quenching we rather add Fuel to the Fire. And in
purging be sure you observe to mix somewhat of an Alexipharmick to strengthen
the Parts. As to the outward Applications, Epispasticks, Cupping Glasses and
the like Medicines, are the only proper Instruments to abate the Fury and fetch
forth the Malignity. Sometimes Causticks also do take goop place here, anointing
the Skin first with Oil of Lilies, that the more loose the Skin be made, the
deeper the impress the Cupping Glass may make. And being thus brought to
Suppuration apply Venice Treacle or Mithridate plaster-wise. Or for this use
you may use this Unguent.. Unguent.
Unguent. Dialth. iss. Ol. Scorpion. ss. Mithridat. Solut. in ^q. vitae ss.
this hah in it a discussing Quality. Or this, Another.
. Unguent. Basilicon. iij. Ferment. acr. ij. Ol. Lilior. alb. Chamomel. an. ss.
Theriac. Andromach. cum vitellor. Ovor. n^. ij. misce fiat Vnguentum. A
Vesicatory applied under the Bubo is very proper: As if it were in the Throat
apply a Vesicatory to the Scapulaes; and after they have performed their work,
cut them open, and discharge the Matter, and keep them open for some time, by
applying Beets, or Ivy-leaves, or Melilot-plaster to them. These may be ufed if
your Patient lives to use them: But this is very rare, for they seldom are
cured, they dying the first day, and very few living beyond the fourth. I shall
conclude this Chapter with this History related by Petrus Bayrus lib. 20. cap.
8. of a Woman which had a Pestilential Tumor bred behind her Ear, and he being
sent for about eight hours after it was perceived, it grew into a large Bulk
in that time with much pain, the pain afterward began to cease, but the Venom
descended to the Heart, and did horribly trouble and vex it; neither could she
believe herself to live an hour: being by his directions ordered to smell to
Vinegar and Rose Water; after this she was bled on each Cephalic, first
Breathing a Vein on the contrary Side, then on the distempered Side. Then was
there applied a large Ventose to the Part affected with a deep Scarrification,
reiterating its application: And when there was drawn near half a pound of
Blood by this Ventose, the Patient began to find her self somewhat better and
to have some hopes, and found manifestly that the Venom receded from her Heart
by these Frictions, Odours, Cordial Powders, and Potions and the like; that by
Divine Blessing and help of these Remedies she perfectly recovered. Hollerius
says live Oysters being applied to Pestilential Buboes do attract all the
Venom from them.

CHAP. LXV.
Of Phyma and Phygethlon.
IN cap. 1. lib. 2. ad Glauc. Phyma is said to be a Tumor in a Glandule, which
increases with some Vehemence, and hastes to Suppuration; for (...) agrees
with all sorts of Tumors arising out of the Earth: and these happen not only
in the Inguens, but very often in the Axillaries; for these Glandulous Bodies
being very loose are the most apt to give Entertainment to all strange
Appearances, Fluxions and Tumors, particularly in the Groins, because of their
depending Site, strong Motion, and humid Redundancy. After here having
prescribed a convenient Diet, and the general Method, which we have already
shown you in a Bubo, we are to apply Digestives to the place affected, and then
Suppuratives; and the Tumor being by these made ripe, we are to discharge the
Matter either by Caustic or Instrument; and the rest of Cure perform, as you
have already directions in curing of a Bubo. What Phygethlon is.
Phygethlon is an In^lammation and part of Erysipelas, or an inflamed
Erysipelas; and this you are to cure by Phlebotomy, Purging, and Diet. As
touching the affected part, you had better apply Digestives than Suppuratives,
because this Tumor has a mixture of Choler: and hence it is that Galen. lib.
6. Simpl. does praise Atriplex, and the Leaves of Garden Mallows, and a cold
Cerate, and is at length to be cured with mild Discussives. Lusitanus Cent.
History.
6. Curat. 82. tells of a young Gentleman troubled with a Phygethlon under
his Axillary, the which did spread to a very large bigness, in process of time
it grew soft and livid, and so proceeded with Pulsation, that both Physician
and Surgeon conjectured Matter to be lodged in it; and therefore by a
general consent it was opened; but the Success was miserable, for it was scarce
opened but the Blood flew out impetuously, with a great noise of Spirit, upon
which the Patient presently dies with his inclining downwards, and he speedily
departed this miserable Life.

CHAP. LXVI.
Of the Hemorrhoides.
HEmorrhoid is a Compounded word (...), which signifies Sanguis, and (...),
fluo; and this is a Flux of Blood. The Veins of the Anus only gain the place
of their dwelling and being: or they are Tumors encompassing the Veins of the
Anus, excited by the great in^lux of Melancholy Blood, resembling somewhat of a
species of a Varix. Some of these at certain times do open themselves, and so
do discharge and exonerate the Blood: others there are that only tumefie. Some
are hidden, others more manifest. Such as flow, they pour out almost all Blood
mixed with a yellowish Serum, which is as a Vehicle to make its more speedy
exit, and by its acrimony does make a more speedy opening of the Vessels. Such
as do not flow, do either lodge in some small Bladders, and by some called
Vesicales; and these are made by the influx of Phlegm and Serum, resembling
Grapes, from whence they are called Wales, from the efflux of Blood, being
laudable in quality, but bred by a copious Redundancy. They are different in
their Magnitude, some being large, others small; in their multitude, some
having many Orifices, others few; in their Figure some narrow, some broad; in
their Color, some being of a blackish color, others more red; in their Place,
some being in the Anus, others in the Sphyncter, others bordering upon the
right Gut; in their Constitution, some being mild, others more cruel and
painful. Their Origination.
These Hemorrhoides arise (as both the ancient and modern Anatomists allow)
from the Splenetick branch, deducing its issue from the Porta produced
downwards toward the Rectum, and then carrid backwards to the Coccix, and
there to be inserted and propagated. But from the Vena cava there are two
Branches produced from the Os sacrum or Coxendix, and sent to the Anus; the one
from the right, the other from the left part, the which are disseminated
through the Muscles of the right Gut and Anus, and do there constitute these
Hemorrhoidal Veins, here pouring forth their Blood: and this is confirmed with
good reason, for the rectitude of the Vessels, the Blood flowing downwards by
its weight must necessarily fill its Vessels, and being girt up or constringed,
being thus filled by the Muscles, does make way for this Apertion. And to give
a better light to the well ordering and curing of both sorts, let us make an
exact Anatomical Inquiry about these parts. These Hemorrhoidal Veins again have
an Artery belonging to them to feed them, this Blood first coming from the
Porta to the Anus; for from the great Branch of the Porta is this carried to
the Spleen, and thence through the Mesentery is it sent to the right Gut. These
Veins are only two, arising from the Cava and the Porta for this cause,
because these serve, as do the other Veins of the Body, for nourishing the
parts with Blood: and thus are the parts of the Anus nourished therewith (This
was a thing unknown to the Ancients;) and therefore it is necessary that the
Melancholy Blood should this way be discussed; for by this Passage only is
Melancholy best discussed, and the Schirrus of the Spleen cured. Besides these,
these also are by nature as Scavingers to cleanse the feculent Blood, and make
a sound Body; and when therefore she cannot perform these, we make our speedy
address to Phlebotomy: and the Evacuations thus made we daily find to yield
great comfort and ease to the troubled Patient. Besides, these not being kept
open, a man having a great quantity of Melancholy Humor lodged in him, the
whole Body will hereby be less capable to undergo any other Method which may be
prescribed. And lastly, in Malign Fevers, being lodged in the larger Vessels,
and there putrefying the Blood, these most properly ought to be opened, being
nearer related to the affected part, where more good may be expected than from
the Arm. Should these be stopped, they breed a Consumption in the Lungs, a
Dropsy in the Liver, by suffocating the Liver as it were in its native heat;
and if they flow immoderately, the Blood being evacuated the Liver is cooled,
thereby is excited a Dropsy, and a decay of the whole Body. For this
immoderate Flux take these:. Unguent.
pulv. Alo. Thur. Balaust. Sangu. Dracon. an ss. misce cum albumine Ovi, fiat
Vnguentum. Or this:. ol. Rosar. Cer. alb. nov. an. j. Axung. Porcin. ij. pulv.
Plumb. alb. iss. liquefiant praedicta, and supra marmoream injiciantur, tunc
add plumbum. Another.
Or this:. Axung. Porcin. ol. Lin. an. ij. succ. Taps. Barbat. Cynogloss. an.
ij. coquantur ad succorum consumptionem, postea add Sacchar. Saturn. ss. and
cum pulv. sem. Lin. q. s. fiat Vnguentum. Another.
Or this:. Tuth. praeparat. Coral. rubr. Plumb. an. iij. Lap. Calaminar.
Lithargyr. aur. an. ss. ol. Rosar. iss. succ. Taps. Barbat. iss. misce, fiat
Vnguentum. Or if Pain, Heat, or Acrimony be urgent, you may use some ot these:
Another.
. ol. Rosar. ij. Ceruss. ss. Lithargyr. aur. ij. Cer. nov. iij. Opii ss. vel j.
misce, fiat Vnguentum. Or this:. Another.
Thur. Myrrh. Croc. an. j. Opii j. fiat Vnguentum cum ol. Rosar. and Mucilag.
sem. Psyl. addendo vitellor. Ovor. no. j. Or this: Another.
. ol. Rosar. Olivar. Myrtin. an. ij. succ. Plantag. Milii an. ij. Acet. j.
coquantur ad succorum consumptionem, tunc add Bol. Armen. Sangu. Dracon. Thur.
Chalyb. praeparat. and pulv. an. j. Cer. flav. q. s. fiat Vnguentum. Or this:.
Vitellor. Ovor. no. j. ol. Rosar. Violar. an. q. s. fiat Vnguentum, addendo
Unguent. Rosat. Popul. an iij. misce. Amatius Lusitanus Cura. History.
3. Cent. 5. writes of a man about 45 years of age, who was formerly vexed
with a Venereous Disease, from whence came from him every month Blood through
his Hemorrhoids, as the Menstrues in Women elsewhere. He had such a plentiful
Evacuation of Blood, the which when he failed of his accompanied time
performing its duty by these Veins, he vomited much Blood out of his mouth,
being of a yellowish red, without Cough or Fever: and for the preventing of
which evil he comes to advise with Lusitanus, who advised him to be cheerful,
and to the parts he orders 4 Leeches to be applied, the which extracted six
Ounces of Blood; after this prescribed him a good Diet, and cooling Syrups, as
Syrups of Endive, Fumitory, Woodsorrel, and the like, for some days together;
and taking a purging Potion of Manna, Rhubarb, with Diaphoenicon, etc. with
this order the Blood followed its former course, and the Patient grew well.
Oethius writes also of one, who, when his Flux was obstructed below, he did
every month spit Blood at the mouth, as you may have it lib. Observat.

CHAP. LXVII.
Of an Aneurism.
THis is a soft Tumor* yielding to the Touch, made by Dilatation or Relaxation
of an Artery: Every Artery, except those which are dispersed through the Brain,
have allowed them a double Coat, the inward of which being either corroded or
rent, the outward may extend so much as to cause an Aneurism. Aneurisms may be
made by Anastomasis, Diapedesis, Ruption, Erosion, or Wound of the Arteries. It
happens in most parts of the Body, but chiesly in the Throat. It is a
Swelling increasing by degrees, and has the same color with that of the Skin,
a continual Pulsation. If it be small, Its Causes.
it easily yields to the Touch. It is difficult in Cure. If it be large, and
in the Axillaries or Inguens, in which the Vessels are large, here expect no
cure. Incision very often times causes such a Flux of Blood and Spirits, that it
both discharges Art and Life very speedily. This too often happens by the
imprudence of an ignorant Surgeon, by pricking of an Artery instead of a
Vein, and so occasioning this Pulsation, Pain, and Tumor. Some allow inward
Causes, as Intension of the Spirits, Contusions, Concussions, Obstructions,
these being accounted as the chief of the inward Causes. Some also do add
Melancholy Blood to be a Cause hereof lodged in the Veins and Arteries; but the
most usual sign of its Causes is drawn from the ignorant Surgeon, who by
pricking too deep does wound the inward Artery, the which is not easily to be
cured by reason of its Spermatick Substance and Motion; and thus the Blood by
degrees is percolated out of the Arteries, and making a Cavity for it self
forms this Aneurism, the Matter hereof being a Spirituous Blood made by
Dilatation, the outward Matter is made by Grumous Blood thus raised together.
It generally receives these two Methodical Scopes in its Cure, viz. Pharmacy
and Surgery; and where the one takes not, the other must be attempted. The
first are Repellers and Restringents, and convenient Ligatures, or Lead
strictly bound over the part; or such an Astringent as this may serve the turn,
A restri^gent (...).
as,. Pulv. Bol. Armen. Terr. sigillat. an. ij. Pulv. Rosar. rub. Sang. Dracon.
an. ij. Gallar. immatur. nuc. Cupress. an. i. misce, and cum Albumine Ovi,
parum Aceti and Oleo Rosarum fiat Restrictivum. Let this remain on for two or
three days. These are to be used in small Aneurisms, but in large Aneurisms not
happening in the Head or in the Groins, they are accounted Mortal, according to
Aetius, lib. 15. cap. 10. Some Artists do tie up the Artery both above and
below, and then divide between these two Ligatures; but this Operation is
dangerous, painful, and troublesome, and seldom brings any benefit. But to
preserve Life I would rather, if it happen in a place where it may lawfully be
performed and exercised, have Amputation made; and before you begin this, be
sure to purge the body with Cassia, Manna, and the like; and order cooling
Juleps, Emulsions, and Hordeate Decoctions, and keep the Body open by Purging
and Clysters. Hildanus in his 44 Observat. History.
relates of a young Gentleman, who being troubled with the Itch, upon which
sending for a Barber to breathe a Vein for him, he pricked the Artery instead
of the Basilick Vein; whence did arise an Aneurism. For the ablating of which
above a month was used variety of Medicines to little or no purpose; the
Tumor equalled the bigness of a Goose Egg; it was pale and hard, in which was
so perfect a Pulsation, that it elevated the Dressings and Rollers, as they
might with ease be perceived. He could not extend his Arm; his pain was not
great, but only when he would extend it. Seeing how desperate it was, he was
very unwilling to undertake its Cure; but being persuaded by the Prayers,
Desires, and Requests of the Patients Friends to take it in hand, he used this
Method, a good Order of Diet being prescribed, to the part affected was applied
Emplastrum de Cicuta, and this Clyster was administered;. Rad. Alth. cum Tot.
fol. Violar. Malv. Parietar. Mercurial. an. M. j. fl. Chamomel. Melilot. an. M.
iss. coquantur in aqua s. q. ad tertiae partis consumptionem, in j. colaturae
solve Benedict. Laxativ. j. Mel. Mercurial. ij. ol. commun. iij. Sal. pug. j.
misce, fiat Enema. The next day was ordered this Apozeme for digesting of this
Melancholy Humor; Apozem^.
. Herb. Lapath. acut. Rad. Polypod. Q. Petroselin. an. j. Herb. Agrimon.
Veronic. Cuscuth. Fumoterr. summitat. Lupul. a. M. j. fl. 3 Cordial. an. pug.
j. Liquirit. War. passar. Rhaharb. Rapontic. an. j. sem. Faenicul. Anis. an.
ss. coquantur in aqua fontana s. q. ad tertiae partis consumptionem: hujus
colaturae accipe j. syrup. de Fumoterr. Epithym. an. ij. Aqu. Cinamom. iss.
misce, fiat Apozema, pro tribus dosibus, to be taken for three mornings.
Afterward was prescribed this Purging Potion;. Decoct. praescript. viij. in
quibus infundantur and macerentur Rhabarb. optim. ij. Senn. mundat. j. in
dimidia part hujus Decocti solve Diaturbith. cum Rhabarb. j. syrup. Rosar.
Solutivar. j. misce, fiat Potio. Empl. de Cicuta was every day renewed, and
afterward he took this Purge;. Confect. Hamech. iss. Extr. Cort. Esul. ss.
aqu. Cinamom. ss. misce fiat Potio. After this the Tumor began to lessen, and
then was applied this Emplaster;. Empl. Diapalm. ij. Empl.
pulv. Mastich. Rosar. rubr. Myrtilor. Radic. Symphyt. major. an. j. cum q. s.
ol. Rosar. fiat Emplastrum. After this he applied a small Knot often times
doubled, and this was joined to the Ligature, and this was for repressing the
Tumor, and for dilating or throwing out of the coagulated Blood: and by these
Remedies, and by Gods blessing, he perfectly recovered the use of his Arm.

CHAP. LXVIII.
Of a Paronychia and Pterygion.
ITs place and seat is generally at the Fingers ends; here it fixes it self,
and from hence does it send forth its pains. Its Figure.
Its Figure is longish, somewhat Oval. what it is.
It is a Preternatural Tumor apostemated, small and scarce perceivable,
beginning at the Fingers ends, arising from a hot, venenate, and nitrous Blood,
and often times places it self between the Bone and the Periostium. At its first
appearance it is mild and gentle; but afterward grows fierce and troublesome,
causing pains, Fevers, sometimes a Caries and Putrefaction of the Bones. It Is
called Paronychia, because it is a Distemper (...), marching to the roots of
the Nails. Its differences from Pterygion.
Fabritius de Aqua Pendente makes no difference between Paronychia and
Pterygion. Pterygion is a Hyposarcosis or Excrescence of the Skin, and this
does not immediately reach the Nail. Aeginetta cap. 81. lib. 3. shows the
difference, where he calls Panaritium an Abscess fixing it self about the roots
of the Nail; Pterygion to be an Increment of Flesh spreading out of another
part of the Nail. Its Signs.
The Blood of its nature is hot here, being kept in and denied a Difflation,
Redness arising from this great Heat, Pain from this Intemperancy, and Solution
of Continuity by this violent Matter, distending and aggravating the nerveous,
tendonous, Its Causes and manner of breeding.
and membranous parts. These are sometimes said to be bred by an inward cause,
occasioned by a nitrous, sharp, choleric, venenate, fervid, and most thin
Blood or Humor; the which is infixed in the affected part. External Causes may
be Contusions, after which follows an Ecchymisis of Blood under the Cutis, or
between it and the tendonous parts, or between the Bone and Periostium; this
Blood being putrefied, large Inflammations increase, and Pain and other
Symptoms appear. The Generation of this nitrous Blood is to be hindered, and
that it may not flow is to be intercepted and revelled; and that which has
already flown is to be weakened by Repercussives or Suppuratives; but of these
in their order. Revulsives.
Revulsive Medicines are such as are to be applied to the opposite part, and
these are hot and attracting; amongst which may be reckoned Scarrification,
Friction, Vesication, and the like. Interceptives
Interceptives, commonly called Defensatives, have a Stiptick Faculty, shutting
the Mouths of the Vessels and by the Coldness and Stipticity they thicken,
coagulate and hinder the Flux of Blood: Repellers.
Of either of these you may find various in my former Tracts Of Repellers these
are Cold, Moist and Restringent, and do repel the in^^uent Blood, and hinder
its coming to the part affected. So long as you have any hopes of repelling an
Humor, follow this freely; where this is not to be done, come to the use of
Suppuratives. Take this one for all, Catapl.
in this place most proper.. Pulv. rad. Bismalv. Consolid. Major an. ss. sem.
Lin. Foenugraec. an. iij. Malv. Alth. an. mj. Plantag. Hyosciam. an. mss.
Vngul. Rosar. rubr. mj. Farin. Hord. Lol. an. iss. fl. Melilot. Chamomel. au.
pug. ij. pulv. Gallar. Melicor. an. ij. Bulliant simul in lacte vaccino vel
aqua fontana Caepar. Sub. cinerib. coct. ss. fine addendo Ol. Rosar Myrtin. an.
ss. Lilior. albor. Chamomel. an. i. Vitellor. Ovor. History.
n^. Croc. ss. misce, fiat Cataplasma. Fabritius Hildanus uses a decoction of
Cows milk here, wherein were boiled Mellilot flowers, Chamomel flowers,
Quinch-seed and Lin-seed, and so Fomented the part: after which he opened the
Skin, the which being opened dropped one or two drops of a reddish thin
Substance; this being discharged, he applies a little Venice Treacle which was
dissolved in Aqua vitae, and with this the pain soon vanished. The Incision
being made, we are to Mundify the part with Mel rosarum, unguentum ex Apio, or
Aegyptiacum. For this use also Precipitate is very good. Glandorp is fearful of
using these sharp Medicines, these being very subject to cause Pain; and so he
prescribes Anodyne Mundifiers, as Oil of St. John's Wort, affirming that this
does both Digest and Mundify the compact Matter, lenify the Pains, deterge and
incarn. Very often a Caries of the Bone follows a Paronychia: and here most
drying Medicines are most proper, as Falloppius his Powder.. Pulv. Rad.
Peucedan. Irid. an. i. Euphorb. i. misce. As curing a Pterygion; ^^ Pterygian.
Having already acquainted you that it is nothing else but a Hyposarcosis about
the Nail, and this shows its own Indication, which is to ablate the
superfluous Flesh: and for this cause Unguent. Egyptiacum or Alumen ustum or
Praecipitatum is excellent good. Or this. Unguent.
. Unguent. Populeon. iss. Alumin. ust. ij. misce. Or this. Unguent.
Diapompholig. ij. Alum. ust. i. or the like. And thus much of those.

CHAP. LXIX.
Of Nodes of the Legs.
THese very often happen after a long continued venereal Disease, the which do
not show themselves very speedily, but in what plases so ever the lurk in, they
creat very great and Nocturnal Pains, being and having in them a contrary
quality to most of other Tumors to bereave the Patient of his rest by
perplexing him more in the Night than in the Day. These Tumors are hard, bred
from a hard, Phlegmatic, thick and viscid Phlegm, which are not to be discussed
but by hot Medicines, and such as have a Faculty of making the Nerves spit
forth this Matter contained in them, these carrying with them an Emollient and
lenifying quality; and hence may you confidently make use of such Medicines
here as I have set you down in my Tract of a Scirrhus, adding thereto Argentum
vivum: Empl. de Ranis cum Merc. is very proper here also. In the whole time
your Patient lies under your hands take care that he be ordered a sober Lie,
shunning Venery as the greatest enemy imaginable. It proves much better, if it
have not touched the Bone, than if it had: but suppose it should get thither,
and foul it; this is to be Scaled either by actual or potential Cautery, the
which being removed, apply such convenient Sarcotick drying Medicines, as may
produce a new Skin over this: And for this affect, Powder of Myrrh. Aloes,
Ireos, Euphorbium, Gentian, Aristolochia rotunda and the like are proper. I
have seen these very frequent in St. Thomas Hospital in Southwarke, and
sometimes here in Norwich, where I have met with the Signs very exact, painting
out Pains and Aches, and nocturnal vexations as continually, as the Day leaves
it self to be shut up by the Clouds of the Night.

CHAP. LXX.
Of Tumors and Apostems of the Knee.
AFter long and difficult Diseases Tumors are often seen to breed in the Knees;
and by how much the longer they are in breeding, by so much the longer expect
will be the getting of them extirpated. They bring sharp and bitter pains with
them, because these Humors are crept into very sensible parts, as Membranes,
the which do both distend and rack them. The Cure hereof is difficult, because
this Humor is seldom seen bred but in Cacochymick Bodies, and such as are of
an evil habit of body; and then because the part affected is cold and weak,
being far from the Fountain of Heat. Sometimes it is made by Flatuencies, crude
and serous Humors; the which do flow and mix themselves betwixt the nervous
parts and Membranes. As to the Cure, if it proceed from Blood, order a thin and
cold Diet; and for Revulsion Venesection is good; and here observe your 4 times
in its Cure. But if it comes from a waterish Matter, the Body is to be purged
by Phlegmagogicks; and for your Topics apply such Medicines as have in them an
incisive, attenuating, rarifying, and a powerfully drying quality, as these:
Catapl.
. Farin. Orob. and Hord. Lent. and Lol. an. j. furfur. ss. fl. Chamomel.
Melilot. Sambucin. summitat. Absynth. Scabios. Veronic. an. pug. Stercor.
Caprin. lbss. Sapae ij. ol. Rut. Chamomel. Aneth. an. iss. coquantur in Lixivio
vel in aqua Absynth. composit. cui addere possis Oximelit. Scillitic. q. s.
fiat Cataplasma For this Affect this Emplaster is also held. to be good:.
Diachylon cum Gummi Paracels. an. ss. Oxicroc. ij. Melilot. ss. Empl. de Ran.
cum vel sine Merc. iij. misce, fiat Emplastrum. A Maid of 18 years of age
falling on the Ground hurt her Knee, History.
out of which did arise a large In^lammation, accompanied with many pains; by
applying Empl. ex Argilla, Bol. Armen. Bran, the White of an Egg, and a little
Vinegar, the pain somewhat abated, and the Inflammation grew remiss. About the
Rotula a very large Tumor did arise, which was also very hard, in so much that
without great pain to the Patient it was not to be contracted. Hence was
collected, that there was Matter gathered about the Rotula, and a very large
Tumor did arise, which was also very hard, in so much that without great pain
to the Patient it was not to be contracted: And for the Cure hereof this Method
was used, that the Blood and Humors might be lessened, and their Afflux to the
part affected prohibited; a drying and thin Diet was prescribed, and the
Patient afterward thus purged; Potio purgans.
. Herb. and flor. Betonic. Scabios. Cuscuth. Agrimon. Veronic. an. M. ss. sem.
Anis. j. fiat Decoctum in s. q. aquae fontanae, in iiij. solve Diacatholic. vj.
Electuar. e succ. Rosar. ij. misce, fiat Potio. After this a Vein was breathed
in the Arm, out of which was drawn 10 Ounces of Blood; then was prescribed a
purging Apozem made of opening Roots; Agrimony, Veronica, Majoram, Rosemary,
and the like, being made into a Cataplasm, was afterward applied to her Knee;
then was applied this Cataplasm; Catapl.
. Farinae Hord. farinae Fabar. an. iiij. pulv. Rosar. rub. Bacc. Laur.
Myrtillor. an. j. pulv. fl. Chamomel. Melilot. Sambuc. Inae. Arthritic. an. ss.
fim. Caprin. ij. cum vino rubro q. s. fiat Cataplasma, fine addendo Sapae iiij.
apply it warm twice in a day. This was used for 3 weeks, and the Apozem
prescribed and taken; and by these and a good order of Diet the pain ceased,
and the whole Tumefication vanished. But in the lower part of the Rotula there
was perceived a manifest Hardness, for the emolliating of which all care was
taken, but in vain; at length was applied a potential Cautery to this lower
part, the breadth of the Tendon, then was the Eschar removed by this Liniment:
Unguent.
. Unguent. Basilicon. Butyr. recent. sine Sal. an. j. ol. Amygdal. dulc. and de
vitell. Ovor. an. ss. ol. Rosar. j. misce, fiat Vnguentum, fine addendo vitell.
Ovor. no. j. Croc. ss. This being removed, there was found a thick viscid
Matter lodging in the lower part of the Rotula, and by applying of Pulvis
Aluminis usti cum pauxillo Praecipitati, taking great care that the Tendon
might come by no injury or detriment, the Ulcer was mundified, and afterward
was induced a perfect Cicatrice: and by these means the Patient perfectly
recovered.

CHAP. LXXI.
Of an Abscess of the Foot.
THe Foot as well as the Hand is troubled and perplexed with viscous and
strumatous Tumors, often times planting themselves in the Joints, sometimes
making the Bones bare and foul. The only way to cure this Evil is to discharge
the Matter by Resolution, and if possible not to open it. At the end of the Toe
there often times falls a sharp pain, arising without any manifest cause, not
without some inward occult Malignity, without Tumor or Redness, depriving it
of sense or motion; and hence often times the end of the Foot being destitute of
its native heat and color, is affected with a Lividness and Blackness, and in
process of time does terminate into a Gangrene and Sphacelus; this more
frequently happening more in aged people than in youth; because as the parts
themselves are a great way from the Fountain of Heat, so also are aged people
less capable to help toward the producing of this Heat into those parts; and
therefore in such cases let it be your first Intention to apply warm and
comfortable. Medicines here. If they run into a Gangrene, treat it as I have
already directed you in the cure of a Gangrene. Hist.
Hildanus writes of a young Gentleman, who upon too much walking had a Tumor
occasioned in his Foot, and for want of convenient Medicines thereto applied,
there speedily happened an Inflammation, and within a very few days a very
large Phlegmon accompanied with great pain and Fever; yet by this following
Method his Patient was eased and recovered. To him first was prescribed a thin
Diet, then was ordered this Purging Potion:. Potion.
Electuar. e succ. Rosar. ij. pulv. Rhabarb. ss. cum syrup. Rosar. solutivar.
j. and Decoct. Agrimon. Veronic. Rad. Lapath. acut. Cort. interior, rad.
Frangul. and sem. Anis. fiat Potio. The day following he breathed a Vein in the
Arm: the Hip, Knee, and all the inflamed parts, were freed from Inflammation by
this following Unguent; Unguen.
. ol. Rosar. ij. ol. Lumbricor. Axung. Human. an. ij. misce; and afterward was
applied this Cataplasm: Catapl.
. sem. Cydonior. Foenugraec. Alth. an. ij. pulverizentur and macerentur in aqua
calida, tunc add farin. Hord. iij. pulv. Rosar. rubr. ss. coquantur s. q.
aquae fontanae ad Cataplasmatis formam, fine addendo vitella ovorum no. ij. cum
albumine. Apply this, and renew it as often as occasion requires. By these the
Pain abated, the Matter began to show it self, and by Basilicon being applied
to the part it was discharged, and by the use of the Cataplasm the Patient was
perfectly recovered. Thus have I carried you through the whole Discourse of
Preternatural Tumors, both in General and Particular; in which I have with all
care and industry endeavored to show you their Definitions, Differences,
Causes, Signs, Presages, and Cures.

Si quid novisti rectius istis, Candidus imperti; si non, his utere mecum.

FINIS.
An Index of the Chapters.
AN Introduction to Surgery 1 Of Humors 34 A particular Scheme of Humors
45 A general Division of Tumors 46 Cap. 1. Of the Names of such Authors which
have writ of Tumonrs in general 55 2. Of the name of a Tumor 57 3. Of the
Causes of Tumors 59 4. Of the Differences of Tumors 62 5. Of the Universal
way of curing Tumors 64 6. Of Phlebotomy, its method of Operation, and where
it is to be most properly performed 66 7. Of Evacuation of Matter erring in
Quality 72 8. Of a Tumor, the part affected drawing preternatural Bodies to it
self 74 9. Of the 4 Times of a Tumor, and first of its Beginning 78 10. Of a
Tumor in its Augment 81 11. Of a Tumor in its State 84 12. Of a Tumor in its
Declination 86 13. Of a Tumor tending to Suppuration 87 14. Of a Phlegmon or
Inflammation in general 91 15. Of curing a Phlegmon in its Beginning 100 16. Of
curing a Phlegmon in its augment 103 17. Of curing a Phlegmon in its state 105
18. Of curing a Phlegmon in its declination 106 19. Of an Erysipelas 108 20. Of
an Erysipelas in the Face 119 21. Of Oedema 123 22. Of Scirrhus 132 23. Of
aqueous Tumors 140 24. Of windy Tumors 145 25. Of a Cancer 153 26. Of a
Carbuncle 175 27. Of Epinyctis 182 28. Of Herpes miliaris and Herpes exedens
184 29. Of a Gangrene and Sphacelus 190 30. Of Artheroma 208 31. Of Steatoma
212 32. Of Melicoris 215 33. Of Psydracium 218 34. Of Hydrocephalos 220 35. Of
Talpa or Testudo 231 36. Of Tinea 234 37. Of Ficus 237 38. Of Cataract 240 39.
Of Hordeolum 249 40. Of Vnguis 250 41. A Polypus 253 42. Of Parotis 258 43. Of
Epulis and Parulis 261 44. Of Ranula 263 45. Of Strumae and Scrophulae 265 46.
Of Bronchocele 275 47. Of Angina 278 48. Of a Tumor of the Tonsils 283 49. Of
Empyema 288 50. Of a Tumor of the Diaphragma 294 51. Of Extuberancy of Milk
297 52. Of a Caruncle in the Yard, and its manner of Extirpation 300 53. Of
Ruptures in general 310 54. Of Bubonocele or Hernia Inguinalis 314 55. Of
Enterocele or Hernia Intestinalis 319 56. Of an Intestinal Rupture, the
Peritonaeum being lacerated 327 57. Of Epiplocele or Hernia Omentalis 334 58.
Of Exomphalos or Hernia Vmbilicalis 337 59. Of Hydrocele or Hernia Aquosa 341
60. Of Pneumatocele or Hernia Ventosa 349 61. Of Sarcocele or Hernia Carnosa
352 62. Of Cirsocele or Hernia Varicosa 356 63. Of a Venereal Bubo 359 64. Of a
Pestilential Bubo 365 65. Of Phyma and Phygethlon 370 66. Of the Hemorrhoides
372 67. Of an Aneurism 378 68. Of Paronychia and Pterygion 383 69. Of Nodes of
the Legs 387 70. Of Tumors and Apostems of the Knee 389 71. Of an Abscess of
the Foot 393
FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 6. line 18. read call. l. 27. put out and. p. 12. l. 8. r. environed. p.
16. l. 24. r. site. p. 22. l. 3. r. l. e. p. 28. l. 5. r. perfect cures. p.
46. l. 16. r. Erysipelas. p. 84. l. 11. r. this has attended it. p. 96. l. 9.
r. Electuar. Diacatholicon. vj. p. 98. l. 17. r. Succin. p. 188. l. 14. r.
Chamomel. in many places r. aqu. fontanae. p. 225. l. 18. r. often ti^es only.
p. 229. l. 13. r. ceased to live. p. 232. l. ult. r. Unguent. ex Apio, p. 237.
l. ult. r. Ulcers.


