SACRED POEMS, OR Brief Meditations, Of the day in general and of all the
days in the week.

Psalm 90.12. Teachus (O Lord) so to number our dayes' that we may apply our
hearts unto wisdom.

printer's or publisher's device

LONDON, Printed by E. Griffin. 1641.

TO The Right Worshipful, his Honored, and loving Master Sir JAMES CAMBELL
Knight, and Senior Alderman of the City of London; one of his Majesty's
Justices of peace for the said City, Mayor of the Staple at Westminster,
President of the Hospital of Saint Thomas in Southwark, and Governor of the
Company of Merchants trading into France:
EDWARD BROWN, Presents these fruits of his Poetical Meditations: with his
daily prayers to God, for increase and continuance of health, and Prosperity
in this Life; and eternal felicity in the life to come.
RIght worshipful: I have been very bold,
My mind to you though rashly to unfold,
At this time, since I mean no more to write,
Such fruitless lines, to come unto your sight:
I Am bold to use a learned Poets skill;
(Though far unfit for my unlearned quill)
Only to manifest my thankful heart:
For what God, by you, on me, does impart.
Therefore I pray; accept this little Book,
Yet I acknowledge, it is not worth your look;
Because it is framed by unskilful wit,
And yet again, the matter that is in it,
Would crave inspection of judicious eyes:
But that my infant Muse, could not devise
To frame, compose, and write, such learned Rimes
As fit your worth (in these most curious times)
And sacred things, which I here take in hand
To illustrate; which well to understand,
Declare, and (fully) to describe the same,
Would 'maze the head, of the most learned Brain.
Then how can I, that am in wit so bare,
In any wise, such holy things declare?
Yet what the learned, from Gods word have shown,
I have presumed, herein to make known;
To manifest, how I spend my spare time
In Poetry, although by ragged Rhyme.
Therefore, because I know you only are
My dearest friend and have of me great care,
I here present you this my little skill,
Full of Affection, void of smallest ill;
And if you please, to read it to the end
I hope it shall not justly you offend;
For at the first, when I began to write,
I did compose it for mine own delight;
But when I read it I therein did see,
A little spark of sacred Poetry,
Also, I have observed, you do of late,
Delight to read, more then in former state.
This did induce me to become so bold,
My Talent in your lap thus to unfold,
Prayi g your Worship herein to pass by
The faults I do commit unwittingly:
For Gods great aid herein, I Will render praise,
And of your courteous Candor rest always,
Your humble and Grateful Servant, EDWARD BROWN.
An Acrostick Proem. To his kind and Loving Master and virtuous Lady.
SIR,
IN this small Book, (though rudely) I have shown
According to my Art, and skill,
Many unfruitful fancies of my own:
Each of them shows my true good will.
Since better pledges I have none,
Can make thy Gratitude well known.
And I do hope, you will accept this mite,
More for the intent, then for the thing;
Because I writ it, only for delight,
Endeavoring thereby to bring
Little sweet Honey to the Hive,
Like to the Be; to show I thrive.
Rashly herein, I do confess I take
A skillfull Learned Poets quill,
'Cause I unlearned am, nor know to make
Holy Sonnets free from ill
Every verse does show my folly,
Little worth, in Melancholy.
Charge me therefore with what is writ amiss,
And if that any good is done,
My God of that, the only Author is,
Because the Fountain makes streams run,
Even to refresh our minds, and make us ^l^st*
Like to Gods Saints: And thus I ever rest,
Your Faithful and Obedient Servant, EDWARD BROWN.
Praesentatio Gratificationis 25. dic Martii. 1640.
THis day some say; did our Lord God begin
This Worlds round Globe to make and to c^eate;
And in this month comes in the fragrant spring,
Therefore the learned, almost in every state,
Begin their Books, and Reckonings on this day;
To show how precious time does haste away.
Therefore I also, though my learning's small,
Begin this year to show my thankful heart,
My light grew dim, my Oil was wasted all,
But Divine Bartas helped me in part:
For out of his Nonesuch, and holy week,
I was feign many flowers for to seek:
Which I Inserted in my weekly days,
And by a Prick, you will know my sacred Pelf;
Because I would not take unto my praise,
Another worth to my unlearned self,
I borrowed his, to make this presentation,
A perfect, and complete Gratification.
A Prayer to God.
OH Holy God, Thou know my heart is vain,
My words are sinful, and my works profane:
And men of Bethshemesh, because they did
Look in the Ark, by thee were stricken dead;
And Uzza, but for staying it upright,
When it did shake, thou there to death did smite;
How dare I then presume to write or speak
Of holy things, being so vile and weak?
Yet I do know by thy most sacred writ,
I must acknowledge the great benefit,
I have received from thee, and thereof talk
As I do stand or go, or sit or walk;
Therefore I crave of thee assisting might,
For out of darkness, thou can make true light
To shine and blaze, O be thou ever still,
Guider and framer of my perverse will:
That thy bright glory may shine in these Rimes,
To stir up better wits in aftertimes,
To frame, compose and make a perfect story,
Of temporal blessings and eternal glory.
19. Psalm ult.

Let the words of my mouth and the Meditations of my heart, be (now and ever)
acceptable in thy sight O Lord; my strength, and my Redeemer.

A MEDITATION OF THE DAY.
HOw frail and Brittle is the life of man!
He that lives longest lives but a span;
Our precious time so vainly we do spend,
That as a day it comes to an end.
The morning of our life is childish youth,
The noone time is our Manhood at full growth;
The evening of our Life is froward Age,
And thus we walk on in our Pilgrimage;
The dawning of our life we waste like Boys,
In foolish vanities and Idle toys;
The middle of our age, our strength and might.
We should enforce to serve God day and night:
That so at last, when this lises day shall cease,
We in the Earths cold Bed may sleep in peace;
Thus fatal sisters three take daily pain
To spin, to weave, and cut man's life ^n Twain,
Kind hearted Clotho, spins man's life to strength;
Discreet Lachesis weaves its breadth and length,
And cruel Atropos with her sharp knife.
Does cut the Thread of his Age loathed life;
Lo thus, this life is but a summer flower:
Springs up, spreds bravely, and sheds in an hour;
And Proteus-like we often do shift our shapes
From Kids to Goats, from Goats to wrinckled Apes;
For Man's lif's water closed in Brittle Glass;
Sin brought in death, and death as he does pass,
Survayes this water weakly wal'd about,
Then breaks the Glass, so runs the water out;
Oh that I could be like the glorious Sun,
Who does rejoice his lightsome Race to run,
And shines brighter to the perfect day:
Then should I likewise in a virtuous way
Begin, and in the same still persevere;
Thus should I spend the day, the week, and year.
Of the Morning Light.
FIrst in the morning when I open mine eye,
If it be light, me thinks I do epsy
A glimps of Glory: But if darksome night
Be not orepast, then do I close my sight,
And musing think of that eternal horror,
Where is no comfort, but dismaying rerrour;
Then do I muse on the material lights
That God prepared has to help our sights;
The Sun, the Moon, the Stars and twinkling Tapers,
That men invent which vanish into vapors;
And with these Temp'rall lights, me thinks I see
That spiritual light has great Affinity,
And this Spiritual light's Illumination
From Divine knowledge by Gods Inspiration,
The hea^hens knowledge is much like the light,
That men do make to help their darkened sight,
Whereby they know there is a God, that he
Does punish vice, Crowns those that virtuous be;
The Jews light's the Divine and holy Law,
Which as the sages star their hearts might draw
And drive to Christ, whom they do daily see
In Types and figures shaddowed to be;
The Papists Knowledge is most like the Moon,
Which they do borrow from the Gospells Sun.
But Truth's so wrapped in blind errors lap.
As clouds their light and shows their hard mishap;
But knowledge in our Land is like the rays
Of the bright Sun which shines at noone days,
Freed from all foggs and mysts of E^rours vain,
And unto all men open clear and plain.
Oh what confused horror dread and fear,
Should we in our distressed bodies bear,
If but deprived of light for a few days;
Wherefore we have great cause to give God praise,
Not only for this temp'rall changing light,
But much more for the glorious Gospells sight.
Of Up rising.
WHen I do hear the dauntlesse watchful Cock,
And that same Bell which rings at five a clock.
There comes into my mind, the fearful call
Of the last Trump, which then shall summon all
Mankind to rise out of the earths cold Bed;
And when that when I do rear my drowzie head,
I musing think of the most glorious sight
Of Saints and Angels in the Celestial light;
Oh Lord (I pray) G^ant I may daily rise
From sins loathed Bed, and foul impieties,
That I may walk as a Child of the day,
In virtuous light and in a pious way,
That at the last, when this ^raste flesh shall be
Disrobed of corruption, and set free
From Passions thrall, which now in me are bred,
I may with joy lift up my troubled head,
And in a moment, in celeshall light,
Behold the luster, and the glorious sight
Of our good God, who is in persons three,
And yet in Essence but one God is he;
Of putting on Apparel.
WHen I array my self, then do I muse,
How in a spiritual habit, I should use
To deck and cloth my self, so, every day
That I might never fear the fatal fray,
Of the worlds Baits, and the frail fleshes Charms,
Which may allure and bring me in the Arms
Of Satan's power, who does daily seek
Me to devour; that am both poor and weak;
First on my heart I should fast fix the Love
Of God and holy things that are above,
Then should I gird my Loins with truths sure cord
Which I must gather from Gods holy word:
Then should I arm my Breast in warlike state,
With righteous life, as with an Iron plate,
And on my head I should keep sure and fast
Salvation, as a Helm that ay will last;
And for the feet of my corrupt affections,
I should have shoes of such Divine directions,
As in the sacred Gospel written are,
My ways in Piety thus to prepare:
Then with good works, take up the shield of faith,
Which will (as the most holy Scripture says)
Blunt, dull, and beat back all the fiery Darts
Of Satan's malice, whose aime's at the hearts
Of poor weak Men: thus should I armed be
Against that wrathful watchful enemy.
If that I were thus armed strong before,
And yet behind were naked thin and poor,
I thought that I might wounded be behind.
But to prevent this I should bend my mind,
To be as watchful with a restless eye,
As my foe's careful, quick to see and spy,
Both where and how he lays his treacherous traynes,
That so I might frustiate his too great pains,
By taking in my hand the two edged Sword,
Of Gods keene-cutting and sharpe-piercing word,
And therewith cutting off this Hidrae's head,
Which not (so) pruned would so hugely spread,
That almost no resistance could be found,
To bring this great Goliath to the ground;
If I could daily thus my self adorn,
And in this habit, dress me every morn;
Then should I neither dread the cold nor heat,
Of chilling Poverty, or fiery threat
Of wrathful Tyrants, neither would I fear,
Sin, death or hell over me should dominere;
But I should always be in blissful plight,
Well Clothed and healthful as a Child of light;
Oh Lord (I pray thee) Cloth me with thy spirit,
That I may neither fear cold Winters night,
Nor Summers heat: so let me ever be
Clothed with Christ; my wedding garment's he.
Of Man's Labor.
AS I do walk abroad, my mind's at strife,
To see how all men, in this mortal life,
Take care and travel to prolong their days,
Upon the earth by many several ways,
And how Artificers with nimble wit
A hundred Rarities compose and fit
For several uses, how the husbandman
Does plough and sow, and Reap, and thresh, and fan*
Most like the Ant in Summers scorching heat,
Who labors hardly for his Winters meat:
Another he tugs hard against the tide,
His laden vessel longst a Rivers side;
The Merchant he does take great care and pains,
To venture far, and sometimes gets small gains;
The Trades man in his dark shop puts to sale,
His broken wares with many a famed Tale:
And preachers they do cry to beat down sin,
Till they be hoarse, and little good they win;
The Magistrate should strive with all his might
The guilty to adjudge, the wronged to right:
The Scholar he does set his Brains and wit
To get some knowledge, though small benefit;
And thus each man in his peculiar way
Is troubled and incombred every day,
To get provision for this brittle life,
Although sometimes with envy and much strife;
Oh happy then are they who now are dead!
From all these troubles they are ever freed,
Yet by this same I can most plainly see
What Portion Adam left posterity,
That by hard labor and their bodies sweat,
They all must labor to procure their meat.
And he that does not thus for his provide,
It is not fit on earth he should abide,
But like a careless Idle slothful droane,
Out of the Hive It Is fit he should be thrown:
For why should he of the sweet Honey eat,
That the poor Be with labor hard did get;
If we do (as we should) take such great pain
To prop, preserve this life, that is frail and vain;
Oh how should we then put our selves to task
To get and gain that life, which ay will last!
If for our bodies health we often will spare
Our most delicious and delightful fare,
Shall we for our Souls health grudge or repine
To fast from sin or else refuse to dine?
If for our profit we the pains think small
To bend and crouch, to prate, to cry and call;
Shall we think much unto the Lord to pray
With hearty voice and humble mind always?
If the poor Smith does think it no great Toil,
Over the fire in smoke to burn and broyle,
Shall we, if when the Lord thinks good to try
Our constant faith, in flames refuse to dye?
Oh Lord, I do confess my feet are slow,
My heels are heavy, and refuse to go
Into thy holy house, thy word to hear,
And in my body I sloths Image bear:
My hands are Idle, and my eyes are lazy:
My heart is dull, my lips to laud thee crazie;
Wherefore (I pray) Infuse into my mind,
Such heavenly grace, that I may be inclinde
To labor and take care for heavenly food,
More then for any fading earthly Good.
So when this life shall cease, I may be blessed,
And live with God in a perpetual rest.
Of Eating and Drinking.
IF that our bodies want due food to eat,
How do we labor straight to find out meat?
Or if with cruel thirst we be possessed,
Till we find drink we cannot be at rest,
Oh this should teach me after Grace to long,
Which is the Souls Refection to prolong
My spiritual life, and never be at rest,
Till with such meat and drink my Soul's refresht*
And when I do behold the great provision,
For earthly Bodies from Gods loving Mission,
How that all creatures for our food are slain,
Oh Lord (think I) If for this life that is vain,
There Is such provision in such sundry kind,
For life eternal, to refresh the mind,
There Is as great plenty and as various store,
Of spiritual dainties, If not far much m^re;
My daily food should be Christ's holy body,
Which by the mouth of faith I swallow wholly,
To strengthen and refresh my sinful mind,
That I may at the last true comfort find;
My drink should be my Saviors precious blood,
Which quenches sinful thirst; and does much good
For all my sins, It would wash quite away;
Oh this should be my bread and drink all day,
That at the last, when as the dismal night
Of death shall come, in heaven I may shine bright:
My Salt should be the sanctifying Grace,
Of Gods good sp'rit, which I should ever place,
Upon the Table of a pious heart,
That I there with may season every part
Of all my sinful thoughts, my words and deeds,
And every evil lust which in me breeds;
Yea this should be the ordinary food
Of my poor soul for her eternal good;
But yet at several times there is sundry dishes
Of Beasts, of Birds, of diverse Herbs and fishes.
In prosperous state there is the loving Hind,
Who having eased his fellows goes behind:
The charitable Storke and temp rate Swallow,
The loving Prawne and pearl fish, they may follow
In this same mess, to teach men of great might
Gentle sobriety to do poor right.
But if Adversity become our state,
The first dish is a Lamb immaculate,
The patient Sheep, the gall-lesse harmless Dove,
In this same mess should likewise have our love.
The Industrious Be, the nimble painful Ant,
The milke-white Lilly this mess should not want;
And many other things of precious kind,
Which I can hardly bring into my mind.
And all to teach, that in a cause that is good,
It is a glorious thing to spend our blood,
And to bear patiently Gods chastising hand,
Like Job at last more strenuously to stand,
At all times else, there is much spiritual meat,
For our poor souls. But I cannot repeat
One half or quarter of this great variety,
It is enough if I can find saciety
In the least crum of any heavenly Grace,
That after I have finished this life's race,
I may in heaven keep a continual feast
With Christ my Savior in eternal rest.
Of the Night.
HOw soon does darksome night succeed light day;
By this I know I have not long to stay
In this frail life, which does so quickly have,
That as a day it self does spend and wast:
But what need I to fear deaths ghastly face,
For I am young, and in a healthful case.
I have not yet arrived to high noone,
For I in years am scarsly thirty one:
Yet what of that? for this same very night
God may bereave me of to morrowes light:
For cruel death, with his impartial knife,
Does cut the thread of man's most wretched life,
Before that ten or twenty yeere's expired
In this frail life, whereby I am required
To take due notice, that ere long may be,
Deaths dart may make as quick dispatch of me.
And now because I undertake to write
Of the similitude of darksome night,
I do desire of God that I could tell
Blind errors paths, and the dread pains of hell,
My self thereby to warn to take great heed
That in blind errors ways I may not tread:
For they will lead me to the dark Abyss
Of doleful horror where no comfort is:
And error in its selfe's so smooth a way,
That the best falls in it every day.
It is a maze, which if we once get in
Out of the same it is hard to get agin,
And he that in it very often wanders,
Shall find a troop of crooked sly Meanders.
But I will bring them into these two kinds;
Errors in life, ignorance of men's minds.
And here at first my senses are at strife,
For who can tell the errors of this life?
To such a countlesse number they do grow,
That my Arithmeticke them cannot show.
The errors that in my poor soul are bred
Do far exceed the hairs upon my head.
If my sins rise to such a sum alone,
Who can the total of all sins make known?
Under sev'n Captains they do march in fight,
Pride, lechery, and envious hateful spite,
Cruel man-killing wrath, beastly excess
In meat and drink, sloth, greedy cov'tousnesse.
These are the chief ways: but there is many more
Crooked bypath that lead men to the door
Of utter darkness, for they do delight
To act their deeds in the dark, and out of sight.
So Hazael, when he was left alone,
Killed Benhadad, that it might not be known.
Achan did also hide his thievish pelf,
Because that none should know it but himself.
The Adulterer waits also for twilight,
That he may act his sin out of men's sight.
And the deceiver in his dark shop vents
His broken wares, that none knows his intents.
And every sinner does even hate the light,
Because it shows sins deformed sight.
But I have here almost forgot to write
Of blindfold ignorance that hates the light:
Yet under two sorts I can briefly show
How she likewise in crooked ways does go.
The one constrained, the other's wilful blind;
And these I call the errors of the mind:
Their case is pitiful that never heard
True saving knowledge, but from it debard:
Such are unfaithful Jews, Turks, Infidels,
Blind Papists, and many rude nations else.
That as yet never saw the glorious sight
Of sacred Truth, showed in the Gospel bright.
But others that do wilfully refuse,
Such are the Jesuits, and the leained Jews,
And Protestants, who like the Israelite,
This holy Manna greatly scorn and slight:
There is a woe denounced against them,
As was' against Bethsaida and Corazin.
As in the day wild beasts do keep in caves,
Because the light should not descry their ways;
But in the Night, then do they hunt and range
After their preys, most cruel, fierce and strange:
So in the dawning of the Gospels light,
When that Star Edward in this Sphea^e shined bright.
The murderous Papists, cruel, fierce and fell,
In caves and holes were then constrained to dwell.
But when the Moon began her head to rear,
In this blessed Isl^nds glorious Hemispheare,
This light eclipsed was, and there did swarm
Papists, like Locusts, which did do great harm
Unto Gods Church, by faggots, fiery flame,
To show in smoky darkness they remain:
For such apparently walk in the dark,
Because they greatly do mistake the mark
Of saving Truth, whose path-wayes are most bright.
But here I must remember now to write
Of that same darkness which for ay does dwell
In that most horrid doleful place called hell.
And it is no wonder, though I fear to show
What horror in that dark Abyss does grow:
For thought thereof does make my heart to ache,
My body tremble, and my hand to shake:
Besides, it passes all that I can think,
How shall I show it then with Pen and Ink?
For I am weak in judgment, sick in brain,
Then why should I adventure so in vain
To describe that no man can well express,
Though never so learned, yet nevertheless
By some conjectures learned men can tell
What horrid darkness is in that same Cell.
And what from Gods Words literate men have shown
I will not fear in this place to make known.
First I will write of the great cause of fear,
Then of the punishments that are used there,
Besides the Majesty of God offended,
The mercy we receive, and have mispended,
The long forbearance of his wrathful stroke,
Should unto godly fear our hearts provoke,
Fear to offend him by our grievous crimes,
Fear to displease him in all place and times:
The very darkness which is in that place
Would in dread horror even confound our face:
For if the stoutest man should be alone,
Naked and bare in a dark place unknown,
And there should hear the noise of ugly spirits,
Hissings of Serpents, and the dismal sights
Of tortured souls, would he not quake and fear,
Although no stripes he on himself did bear?
And such thick darkness was the Egyptians night,
Who in three days could not descry the light.
But now to be tormented in the dark,
It Is past expression, Pray fit down and mark.
Oh! wretched man, come, sit thee down by me,
Think with my thoughts, and see what I do see;
As Bal^'m showed to Balack Isacks race,
So will I show thee the most damned trace
Of hellish torments from the learned fables
Of Poets old, yet take them not for bables.
For I do hope in thee and me 'twill breed
Such godly fear, that so we may take heed
To shun those ways that lead us to the place
Where Is utter darkness, and no light of Grace.
M^thinks I see grim Pluto calls his Court,
With Proserpine he sits in dreadful sort
Upon a chair of fire, in ugly form,
As black as hell, yet was a Star o'th morn:
Then I see Cerberus that triple dog
Who seems more terrible than Gogmagog:
'Then after him from fiery Phlegeton
'Comes Alecto, Meger', and Tesiphon.
'Oh then what hear I? wondrous thundering blows,
'Alas, what yells, what howles what dismal shows?
'There Echo made whole hell to tremble troubled,
'The drowsy night her deep dark horrors doubled,
'And suddenly Avernus gulf did swim
'With Rosin, Pitch, and Brimstone to the brim,
'And ugly Gorgons, and the Sphinxes fell,
' Hidraes and Harpies 'gan to yawne and yell,
'One lifting's lungs, hisses, and barks and brayes;
'This howles, that yels, another roares and neighs.
'Such a black song, such a confused sound
'From many-headed bodies does rebound,
'Like Guns astuns, with round round-rumbling thunder,
'Filling the air with noise, the earth with wonder.
Till at the last, pawsing a while they staid,
And suddenly with great confusion made
A flight at man, all at intestine strife,
Who might most torture his detested life.
Then at command of Pluto's dreadful call
Each one unto his work did quickly fall,
And then I saw proud Icarus tumbled down,
Under fiends feet that wrought above the crown,
And all because he thought to sore on high,
His waxen wings were cut, and he did ly
Despised, contemned, dishonored and disgraced,
Although on earth he was so highly placed.
See drunken Tantalus does rore for thirst,
Yet to his chin in water so accursed
He lies and howles, and cannot get a taste
And dying lives, yet's dying life does last.
See how the Glutton cries, and longs for meat,
Yet Sodom's Apples he does daily eat.
It seems they do not fill his hungry maw,
But look, I pray, see how that beast does gnaw
Upon the envious wretch, see how his heart
Is eaten by the Viper, and each part
Of all his body is so thin and bare,
Nothing but skin and bones upon him are.
See how that lazy slave does turn the wheel,
And yet that ugly fiend does make him feel
The smarting lashes of his knotty whip,
Which makes his hands to work, his legs to skip.
But see the lecherous man even shake for cold,
And yet in flames of fire I him behold.
Oh horrid torment! never yet descryde
That one should frieze by such a fire side.
The covetous wretch I saw crammed to the full
Of burning brimstone. Oh it is wonderful
To mark how he is paid in the same coin
That did oppress the weak, the poor purloyne.
But hark, what hear I? doleful shrikes and cries
Of him that is alway's killed, yet never dies.
Its strange (me thinks) so many dangerous darts
Should not destroy their bloody murderous hearts:
But it is not strange, for the great God above
to show his justice and express his love,
To choose a place as well for to torment
The wilful sinner and impenitent,
As to prepare a place of heavenly state,
For his dear friends that are regenerate.
If then the Lord himself shall go to rear
A place of torments, who shall that declare?
For if when God made fire for our delight,
It is so fierce, there is none would if he might
Gain a whole Kingdom, hold his hand therein,
But for one hour. Oh then, what pain is in
The fire of hell! To which if I compare
The fire we have, it seems but painted air:
Ours is for comfort, that is to torment;
Ours must be fed, else of it self it is spent;
That needs no fuel, but does burn for ay:
Ours gives light, and shines as bright as day,
That Is always dark, and is in its right place;
Ours ever shifts, and does ascend apace:
Ours does consume and rids quick out of pain,
That consumes not; once there, never out again:
Our's soon extinct; that never does abate
H^s heat, And yet (as I did show of late,
And as Christ says) they shall gnash teeth and shake,
For very cold will make their bones to quake.
And as that fire is of such wondrous might,
So does that darkness far exceed our night.
Now could I show the universal pains,
And all the eternal torture there remains,
How Cerberus does strongly keep hels door,
That none comes out, but may come in the more,
And how that Charon with dread horror grim
Over the Stigian lake his boat makes swim
Filled full of souls whom he has got off shore,
O'r Sulphry Stix and makes them cry and rore;
I should but all this while show pain of sense,
But there is great damage in lost excellence,
Which is as great (as learned men do show)
As pain of sense. But yet I do not know
How to describe the loss of that bleft sight
Of Gods bright glory in celestial light.
At thought whereof the damned have a worm
Which on their conscience gnawes and makes them mourn,
And when they think of that same heavenly light
That they have lost, this worm does give a bite
Which causes them to tear their flesh and hair,
And if they could, themselves in pieces tear.
Then do they wish for mountains, hills and rocks
To fall upon them, with such pondrous knocks,
That they might kill them; which when they deny,
They do begin to howl, lament and cry,
And marvel, saying, what has our pride got?
What profit has glory of riches brought?
How easily might we have escaped this place
By living well, and seeking help of grace?
Oh! if on earth we now could live again,
We would fear God alone, and count as vain
All other things in the vast worlds round ball,
And Gods bright glory should be all in all.
And thus they do repent without amends,
And still their pain begins, and never ends;
Then cease your talk of Pluto's darksome den,
That Is but the idle fantasy of men,
But this is true, which in Gods word is shown,
That hellish pains to mortal man's not known,
Yet I do wonder, that such learned skill
Should so divinely drop from heathens quill:
For as in Pluto's cave they well have shown,
Hels torments, as in Scripture is made known,
So heavenly bliss in Jupiters high court,
And in Elysium fields they make report
In their prophanest fabled histories,
By Hercules they show Christ's victories,
Long before Christ was borne, which makes me muse
That they should know almost as much as Jews,
Who were Gods chosen; but where do I go?
This in some other place I mean to show.
And now, that I am thus come out of hell,
Safe and unhurt from all those furies fell,
In the last place I did intend to write
Of the great benefits we have by night.
But my dull Muse grew barren, thin and bare,
I therefore borrowed his whose fruits are rare.
'The night to temper days exceeding drought,
'Moystens our air, and makes our earth to sprout.
'The night is she that all our travels caseth,
'Buries our cares, and all our griefs appeaseth.
'The night is she, that (with her sable wing,
'In gloomy darkness hushing every thing)
'Through all the world dumb silence does distill,
'And wearyed bones with quiet sleep does fill.
'Sweet night, without thee, without thee (alas!)
'Our life were loathsome, even a hell to pass:
'For outward pains and inward passions still,
'With thousand deaths, would soul and body kill.
'Oh Night! thou pullest the proud mask away,
'Wherewith vain actors in this worlds great play,
'By day disguise them, for no difference,
'Night makes between the Peasant and the Prince,
'The poor, the rich, the Prisoner and the Judge,
'The foul and fair, the Master and the drudge,
'The fool and wise, Barbarian and the Greek;
'For Night's black Mantle covers all alike;
'He that, condemned for some notorious vice,
'Seekes in the Mines the Baits of Avarice;
'Or, swelting at the furnace, fineth bright,
'Our Souls dire sulphur, ^esteth yet at night:
'Hee that still stooping tugges against the Tide
'His laden barge along a Rivers side,
'And filling shoares with shouts, does melt him quite,
'Upon his Pallat rests yet at night;
'He that in Summer, in extremest heat,
'Scorched all day in his own scalding sweat,
'Shaves with keen Sith, the glory and delight
'Of motly Meddowes, rests yet at night,
'And in the Arms of his dear Pheere forgoes
'All former troubles and all former woes;
'Onely the learned Sisters sacred Minions,
'While silent night under her sable Pinions,
'Folds all the world, with painlesse pain they tread
'A sacred path, that to the heavens does lead;
'And higher then the heavens their Readers raise
'Upon the wings of their immortal lays.
And now (me thinks) I hear the clock does chime,
Which does inform me that it is high time,
Me to uncloth and so to go to bed,
For this days work has troubled my weak head.
Of unclothing.
HOw vain a thing it is to vant in Pride,
Of brave Apparel, may be quickly tried:
For had old Adam never fallen from Bliss,
Of use of Clothes we nere had had much miss:
And he devised but leaves to hide the shame,
Which on himself by his foul folly came:
And God himself when he did undertake
Some brave apparel for poor man to make,
To hide his shame, his liv'ry was but skin,
Of some poor beast, this Adams sin did win.
Wherefore the man that of brave Cloths is proud,
Does as a Beggar with a voice most loud,
Extol and magnify his Rotten Rags,
Which hide his sores, and set them forth as flaggs
For all to gaze at, and to wonder why
He should set out his stinking Bravery.
Wherefore the Godly always did not care,
What Clothes upon their bodies they did bear;
So it would keep them from the heat and cold,
They were content, and I do read of old,
The Saints Apparel, they arrayed were,
Was made of Goats skin, and of Cammells hair.
But men are now so curious for their back,
They Will Rob and spoil all creatures ere they will lack:
From one they will take his wool to make them cloth,
From others skin and fur: nay they are not loath,
To take the Excrements of the poor worm,
Which they into brave Silk and Satin turn,
Then do they beg of fish, Pearl for the Neck,
And find in Sea-sands precious stones to deck
Their sinful bodies, then they take great pains
To Digg and delve in Earth for Golden gains;
And when they have this borrowed Treasure got,
About the streets they jet, and frisk, and trot,
Provoking others thus to look on them,
Deeming themselves better than other men.
But greater folly than this is not known,
For one to boast of that is not his own.
Yet thus have I too often done, and was glad
When I brave Cloths upon my body had;
Therefore I Will now put off this Pedlers pack,
Which all this day has burdened thus my back;
Could I as quickly put off my foul sin.
And in new Robes of Grace my Soul put in,
As I can cast these filthy Rags aside,
That from men's eyes my sinful shame does hide,
Then should I be received a welcome Ghest,
Of Christ my Savior, to his glorious feast,
Where Angels, Patriarchs and Prophets old,
Apostles, Martyrs, and the Saints do hold,
A feast of Joy, thus should I then be blessed,
In Robes of Glory in eternal Rest.
Of Sleep.
Sleep is the Image and Picture of Death,
In which we seem senseless and void of breath;
The Bed seems as the Grave in which we lay
Our bodies mould which turns to dust and Clay;
And to the Saints death's truly but a sleep,
That does refresh their minds and safely keep,
Their wearyed Souls, which when they were awake
I mean alive very great pains did take,
To serve the Lord, for which they hated were,
By wicked men, who bended all their care,
To persecute, oppress, and do them wrong,
Therefore they do greatly desire and long,
To be dissolved and to be with Christ,
In whom their joy and quiet does consist;
Besides Christ warmed has the earths cold bed
For his beloved, when he laid his head
To rest three days therein, and has often called
Death but a sleep, once to a Jew enthralled
Four days in grave: then did he groan and weep,
And said, friend Lazarus does sweetly sleep;
And of the Ruler Iayrus his dead daughter,
He said she slept, which moved some to laughter,
And holy Martyrs went as cheerfully,
To take their death, as in Rose beds to ly,
Because they knew death to be but a sleep,
Which does refresh their Souls, and bodies keep
Safe and unhurt unto that glorious day,
When they shall rise to live with Christ foray;
But unto wicked men, death is a Terror,
Which to remember, fills their Souls with horror;
If then the thought of death their minds affright,
How will they be amazed to feel his might,
When he does strike them with his deadly Dart,
How loath will then the Soul from body part,
Because like friends they lived on Earth in Joy,
Well clad, well fed, and felt not much annoy;
Now if a man to mortify one part
Of his weak body, In such deadly smart
Is put unto, that makes him groan and cry,
Oh then what will be the great misery,
For him to suffer, when through every limb
He feels deaths pangs fiercely assayling him!
First from extreme parts, Fingers, Feet, and Toes,
Then Legs and Arms, and so in order goes
Through every Joint, Vein, Muscle, Sinew, Bone,
Till at the heart it rests, and there alone,
(Like a besiedged Prince) his Soul looks out,
For help of friends, whom she did little doubt,
Would so forsake her, in her extreme need,
To wit, Youth, Physic, helpless friends indeed:
Then does she greatly fear tremble and quake,
Expecting hourly, when the fiend will take
Her wretched self: And then when she does see
The flattring Doctor parted with his fee,
The weeping of his wife, the loss of all,
Jewels and brave apparel, that is not small,
Grief and vexation to his wretched mind,
That all his wealth he so must leave behind,
Which he did gather with such grief and ca^e,
To serve the Lord he had no time to spare:
And lastly, now to think what will become,
Of Soul and body, how the noisome worm,
Serpents and Vermin shall take for their food,
That dainty body which he thought too good,
To tread on earth or to come in the air,
This will almost drive him into despair;
But when he thinks his Soul must come before
Hearts searching Judge, and when he sees the score,
Of his great sins, which his own conscience shows,
And has not where to pay, for well he knows,
He did not show his faith by living well,
And therefore does deserve nothing but hell:
Which when the Soul does think on, slavish fear,
In wicked men do bring them to despair,
Which causes them to fret, to howl, and cry,
To think how bliss they lost, in hell they will lie
For evermore, in torments past expression:
But all this while I have made a digression,
From what I did intend at first to write;
It seems I am misled by darksome night,
Of bad men's deaths, in which they cannot sleep,
For hellish fiends their Souls awake do keep;
Therefore I Will pray to God, that he may keep
My Soul and body, so that I may sleep
In rest and peace, in bed as in my grave,
And that in Mercy he would freely save,
Both Soul and body to that blessed day
Of resurrection, that in heaven always
I may with Saints and Angels shine as bright,
As does the Sun, and praise God day and night.
Of the week.
THe wisdom of the Lord did first compose,
The week into seav'n days, as Moses shows,
Thereby to teach us how to spend our time,
In Meditation of his works divine.
And in three weeks God has his great works shown,
The first is of the worlds creation,
In which the power and might of God appears;
The next is preservation in the years,
And ages since, till this same very hour,
And the third week does show his love and power,
In the Redemption of all-fallen mankind.
But I am weak in body, dull in mind,
So that not one of these I can declare,
As is befitting, for the best that are
May come far short in such a sacred theme:
Therefore I only do intend and mean,
To show each several days denomination,
And therein touch the works of Gods creation.
And in this place I now will briefly speak,
Of man's frail life, in David's general week;
For he divides the life of Mortal men,
Into sev'n parts, till threescore years and ten;
And therein I will show how precious time
Is vainly spent, each age in one short Rhyme.
The first ten years man is a harmless child,
And as a Lamb his life is meek and mild;
But after that (Goat-like) he skips and Joys,
In foolish vanities and Idle toys,
And so till thirty man's an untamed Colt,
Heady, and from all goodness does revolt;
And until forty he is a sturdy Bull,
His limbs are strong, with blood his veins are full,
But after that, his courage will not fail;
For as a Lion then he will prevail:
And then at fifty he is a crafty Fox,
And Lawyer-like gets money in his Box.
And so till sev'nty by Industrious pains,
Woolfe-like he is greedy to increase his gains;
But after that he feels his bones to tire,
Therefore much like the Dog he loves the fire,
And keeps at home like to the wyly Cat,
Where he delights to sit, to prate and chat;
Thus does the Carnal man waste his life's week,
And seldom does after true Riches seek;
I mean the wealth, which beyond Age will last,
And still endure after this life is past:
Therefore the Sages, That did first ordain
And gave unto each day It Is several name,
Did well at first the nimblest Planet place,
And last of all that of the slowest race,
To show that man in youthful blithfull plight
In Grace and virtue should take most delight:
For painful age cannot so well hold out
As lusty youth, yet still should go about,
In virtues race, and not out of it start,
Till death does strike him with his deadly dart;
Therefore I Will pray, that with the glorious sun,
I may rejoice in virtues Race to run,
And with old Saturn therein persevere,
So should I well conclude the week and year.
Sunday or Dies Dominicus.
IN the Beginning and the Birth of time,
God made his glory and his power to shine,
In framing of the earth and heavens bright,
And the first day, God did create the light;
'Before which time, there was a confused heap,
'A formelesse Chaos did together keep,
'A gulf of gulfes, a body ill compa^t,
'An ugly medley, where all difference lackt:
'Where the elements lay jumbled altogether,
'Where hot and cold were jarring each with either;
'The blunt with sharp, the danke against the dry,
'The hard with soft, the base against the high;
'All all was void of beuty, rule and light,
'All without fashion, soul and motion quite.
'Fire was no fire, the water was no water,
'Ayre was no air, the earth no earthly matter.
'This was not then the world: 'twas but the matter,
'The Nurcery whence it should issue after;
Yet Gods great power did keep this darksome mass,
And on the waters did his spirit pass.
'And he no sooner said, Be light, but lo
'The formlesse lump to perfect form 'gan grow:
'And all illustred with lights radiant shine,
'Doft mourning weeds, and decked it passing fine.
'All hail pure lamp, bright, sacred, and excelling
'Sorrow and care, darkness and dread repelling:
'Thou worlds great Taper, wicked men's just terror,
'Mother of Truth, true beauties only mirror,
'Gods eldest daughter, Oh! how thou art full
'Of grace and goodness? Oh! how beautiful;
'Sith thy great Parent's all-discerning eye
'Doth judge thee so: and since his Majesty
'(The glorious maker) in his sacred lays,
'Can do no l^sse than sound thy modest praise.
'But yet, because all pleasures wax unpleasant,
'If without pause we still possess them, present;
'And none can right discern the sweets of peace,
'That have not felt w^rs irksome bitterness;
'And Swans seem whiter, if swart Crows be by,
'(For contraries each other best descry.)
'Th'Alls Architect, alternately decreed,
'That Night the Day, the Day should Night succeed:
'So morn and evening the first day conclude,
'And God perceived that all his works were good.
Therefore the learned, that each day did name
In the whole weeks (as I conceive) did aim
At the great works of God in the creation,
And so according set the Planets station.
For, first they set the Sun bright Phoebus hight,
Who is the fountain and the spring of light.
Also the Pots call him by the name
Of bright Apollo, whose illustrious fame
Was very great, he was the son of Jove,
He and Diana (his dear sister) strove
Within the Matrix of Latona fair,
And these two days and nights directors are:
Apollo for his skill in Poetry,
Physic and Music and Divinity
Was honored as a god by heathen men,
Such was the ignorance of those times then.
But why that others call Sol burning hot
Flaming bright Tytan, my weak judgement's not
Able to show; but sure his mighty power
His names do show, even every day and hour.
He governes Princes, and great men of state,
And is the Plannet that is most fortunate.
He is the days bright eye and heart of heaven,
For God placed him in midst of Planet sev'n,
And in three hundred threescore days and five,
Does to the period of h^s race arrive:
By him we measure out to us and ours,
Years, ages, seasons, months, days, minutes, hours,
And therefore well placed in the front of time,
But I have him eclipsed in this ^ude rhyme.
Therefore I Will now conclude, lest Phaeton like
For taking such a task great Jove may strike
Me in his wrath: therefore I Will have away,
And speak a little of the Lords blessed Day.
Me thinks, none should make it a scruple, why
We disagree from Jews solemnity
In keeping of the sacred Sabbath Day:
They Are in the old, and we in a new way:
They have the old Law, and we have the new,
For state of Christians differs from the Jew.
Old things are past, and new are come in place,
Then why should we follow the Jewish race?
Besides, our Savior is the Lord of days,
And therefore for his meritorious praise
Its very fit he should a day ordain
His worship and his statutes to maintain:
For in this world each Prince his subjects draws
After his lore, for still New Lords new Laws.
So now new Sacraments, new Heaven, new Earth,
New Testament, and Sabbath Day sets forth,
How we do differ from the Levites law,
But of the moral we still stand in aw.
We know that shadows now are past away,
Because from death their substance rose this day:
For now the ceremonies of the Jews
Do cease, yet on this day we always use
To rest from labor, and vain idle sport.
And to the Lords House we should often resort,
There both to hear Gods Word divinely taught
By learned men, and also as we ought:
There we should pray, and sing with hearty cheer,
And not as some do, sleep when they should hear.
Then after Sermon we should call to mind,
What good instruction we therein did find,
Into what parts, what doctrines, and what uses
Was made thereof, to check the gross abuses
Of man's frail nature, and the consolation
Weak man does need to stablish his salvation.
If I could thus the Lords Day sanctify,
Delighting thus to hear, sing, pray purely,
And on the Lord set my whole mind and heart,
That all this day he might not from me part;
If I could as the Sun begin to shine,
From youth to old age in all works divine;
If I could so distinguish and divide
Blind errors ways from truths bright paths well tried,
And well approved of God, and all good men,
For graces splendour I might shun the den
Of utter darkness: then I should be blessed,
And keep a Sabbath in eternal rest.
Monday, or dies Lunae.
THe next day after God had made the light,
He spread heavens curtains glorios in our sight,
' That Huge broad length, that long broad height profound
'Th'infinite finite, that great moundlesse Mound,
'I mean that Chaos, that selfe-jarring Mass,
'Which in a moment made of nothing was,
'Was the rich matter and the matrix, whence
'The heavens should issue, and the elements.
'Now, the elements, two twins (two sons, two daughters)
'To wit, the fire, the air, the earth and waters,
'Are not compounded; but of them is all
'Compounded first, that in our sense can fall:
There Is no material substance but does bear
Within it self fire, water, earth and air.
And God to each his place has well assigned
According to its nature, breed and kind.
'Earth as the lees, and heaviest dross of all
'(After his kind) did to the bottom fall:
'Contrarywise, the light and nimble fire
'Did through the crannies of the old heap aspire
'Unto the top; and by his nature, light
'No less than hot, mounted in sparks upright;
'But lest the fire (which all the rest embraces)
'Being too near, should burn the earth to ashes;
'As chosen Umpires, the great All-creator,
'Betweene these foes placed the air and water:
'For one sufficed not their stern strife to end,
'Water, as cousin did the earth befriend.
'Ayre, for his kinsman fire, as firmly deals:
'But both uniting their divided zeales,
'Tooke up the matter, and appeased the brall,
'Which doubtless else had discreated all.
The air, as modern, and the elder Sages,
Have fitly parted it into three stages.
The upper's seated next the fiery vault,
And by the learned very hot is thought:
That which we touch with times does variate,
Now hot, now cold, and sometimes temperate.
But middle Region's far from fire set,
And therefore very cold, and little heat.
In ayrie clouds God bottles up the rain,
Which gratifies the Ploughmans toil and pain:
The air ingenders milk white snow and hail,
Mist, dew and ice, in season will not fail,
In diverse vapors their effects are strange,
But in the air they keep a constant range.
For in the Summer of a several kind
They do produce Frogs, Toads, and the swift wind,
Whose whisking beesome does brush clean and sweep
The cloudy curtains of heavens stages steep,
And sometimes they do make the earth to rock,
To shake and tremble like a weather-cocke.
And when I do consider lightnings flash,
Its rare effects my sense in pieces dash.
A man was once going out of his door,
He saw a fire passing him before,
Which he did follow, to see where 'twould go;
But he will never trust Ignis fatuus so,
For he had like so far to lose his way,
That he could hardly find it the next day.
When I do sometimes look into the skies,
Me thinks I see a hundred prodigies,
Composed of exhalations in the air,
But the true cause thereof none can declare,
Though by nice will, and deep conceited strains,
They give a guess, but it is not worth their pains;
For the great God of heaven sometimes delights
From top to toe, to alter natures rites,
That his strange works to nature contrary
May be forerunners of some misery:
Such are the blazing Comets, fiery star,
That threaten earth with famine, plague and war,
Three Suns, three Moons at once, green blew gilt bow,
Gods judgments and his mercies forth to show.
But I almost forget the firmament,
Although it was the chief of my intent,
Their number and their nature here to show,
And how their whirling Orbs about do go.
Yet of their number many a writer varies,
Yet most agree, that there a ten round stories.
In several Orbs they place the Planets sev'n
After the fixed Stars and Christ ^^n heaven.
Lastly, the highest Orb of all the ^out
Is the first mover, which whirles all about.
But there is none that can relate the solace,
Or boundless vastness of The Imperial Palace,
'Where life still lives, where God his Sises holds,
'Inviron'd round with Seraphins and Souls,
'Bought with Christ's precious blood, whose glorious flight
'Yet mounted earth above the heavens bright.
Neither do I know rightly how to write
What wa^ers are above the heavens bright:
For I (too bold) will not ask how, or why
God placed water so exceeding high.
I must believe it for Gods Word does show,
Above the heavens God made waters flow.
'I'll rather give a thousand times the ly
'To my own reason than but once defy
'The sacred voice of th'everlasting Spirit,
'Which does so often and so loud aver it;
Besides, when sinful men did God provoke,
In Noabs days these windows he set open.
And by these Seas drowned cattle men and beast.
In this example I Will sit down and rest.
So morn and even the second day conclude,
And God perceived that all his works were good.
Now, why the Sages when they named this day,
Called it Lucina's day I cannot sae,
Except it be because her wax and waine,
Do cause the waters ebb and flow again.
Fair Phoebe she of all the Planets bright
Is most infirm, because she borrowes light.
By Poets she is called Diana chaste,
Yet she her love on fair Endymion cast,
Constant in love she her swift course does run
Throughout the Zode twelve times for once the sun.
Diana was goddess of chastity,
And therefore I do see small reason why
The vulgar should affirm a man on's back,
Within the Moon should bear a Pedlers pack.
Besides, I think no woman could be chaste,
If that a man within her were well placed.
Luna does govern Seamen, Fishers, Hunters,
Chaste maidens and wise Matrons, whose encounters
Or unchaste meetings with uncivil men
Are never used: but my unlearned pen
Has so outrun my judgment and my wit,
The uses of this day I quite forget.
Besides, amazement and astonishment
At Gods great works, I am by this day bent,
Advised to learn my waters to divide
Of charity free from vain glorious pride,
And to distinguish my repentant tears
From those for loss of worldly things in fears.
And as the Moon I borrow all my light
From God, whose glory in me shines bright.
And as the Moon, so I in virtues race,
Should still go forward, though dark be my pace.
And though by frailty I may sometimes fail,
Yet godly constancy should ever prevail.
Tuesday, or dies Martis.
'THis day The Almighty's bounteous Majesty
'(willing t'enfeoffe man this worlds Empiry)
'Commanded Neptune straight to marshall forth
'His floods apart, and to unfold the earth,
'And presently the Sea to it self betook,
'Mount after mount, field after field forsook;
'And suddenly in smaller caske did tun
'Her waters, that from every side did tun:
'And has imprisoned them in bounds of brass,
'Which (to this day) the Ocean dares not pass
'Without his license, for, The Eternal, knowing
'The Seas commotive and inconstant flowing
'Thus curbed her; and against her envious rage
'For ever fenced our flowry-mantled stage:
'So that we often see those rolling hills,
'With roaring noise threatening the neighbor fields,
'Through their own spite to split upon the shore,
'Foming for fury that they dare no more.
'Also God powered the water on the ground
'In sundry figures; some in fashion round,
'Some squa^e, some cross, some long, some Lozenge-wise,
'Some triangles, some large, some lesser size:
'Amid the floods (by this fair difference)
'To give the world more wealth and excellence.
'And though each of these arms (how large soever)
'To the great Ocean seems a little river:
'Each makes a hundred sundry Seas besides
'(Not sundry in waters, but in names and tides)
'To moisten kindly, by their secret veins,
'The thirsty thickness of the neighbors plains:
'To Bul-warke Nations, and to serve for fences,
'Against th'invasion of Ambitious Princes:
'To bound large kingdoms with eternal limits,
'To further traffic through all earthly Climats,
'T'abridge long Jorneyes, and with aid of wind,
'Within a month to visit either Inde;
'Most wisely did The Eternal All-creator,
'Dispose these Elements of earth and water,
'For since the one could not without drink subsist,
'Nor the other without stay, bottom and list,
'God intermixed them so, that the earth her breast
'Op'ning to the ocean, the ocean winding pressed,
'About the earth a thwart, and under it:
'For the world's Center, both together fit,
'For if their mixed Globe held not certainly,
'Just, the just midst of the worlds Axletree,
'All Climates then should not be served aright,
'With equal counterp^ize of day and night:
'The Horizons il-level'd circle wide,
'Would sag too much on the one or the other side
'Th' Antipodes, or we, at once should take
'View of more signs then half the Zodiake:
'The Moons Ecclipses would not then be certain,
'And settled seasons would be then uncertain.
'This also serves for probation sound,
'That the earth and waters mingled Maise is round.
'Round as a Ball; seeing on every side,
'The day and night successively to slide.
'Seas liquid Glass round boweth every where,
'With Sister earth, to make a perfect Sphere.
'And yet this Globe (which we so much admire)
'Seemes but a point compared to the upper Spire,
'Sith the least Star which we perceive to shine,
'Above dispersed in th'Arches Christalline,
'(If, at the least, starre-Clarkes be credit worth)
'Is eighteen times bigger then all the earth:
'whence, if we but substract what is possessed,
'(From North to South, and from the east to west)
'what does remain? Ah! nothing (in respect)
'Loe here, O men! wherefore do you neglect,
'Heav'ns glorious kingdom: Lo the largest scope
'Glory can give to your Ambitious hope.
'Loe here is the Guerdon of Man's glorious peines:
'A needles point, a Mote, a Mint he gains,
'A Nit, anothing (did he all possess;)
'Or if than nothing any thing be less.
'And certainly it is Gods only power,
'That does uphold and keep earth's branchy Bower,
'For though it hang in the air, swim in the water,
'Though every way it be a round Theater,
'Though all turn round about it, though for ay,
'Its selfs foundations with swift, Motions play,
'It rests unmovable: that the holy race,
'Of Adam there may find fit dwelling place.
'The earth receives man, when he is first borne:
'Th'earth nurses him; and when he is forlorn,
'Of the other Elements, and nature loathes him,
'Th'earth in her bosom with kind burial clothes him.
'Oft has the air with tempests set upon us.
'Oft has the water, with her floods undone us,
'Oft has the fire (the upper as well as ours)
'With woeful flames consumed our Towns and Towers:
'Onely the earth, of all the Elements,
'Unto mankind is kind without offense:
'Onely the earth did never jot displace,
'From the first seat assigned it by Gods grace:
'When God, whose word more in a moment can,
'Then in an age the proudest strength of Man,
'Had severed the floods, levelled the fields,
'Embast the Aalleys, and embost the Hills;
'Change, change (quoth he) O fair and firmest Globe,
'Thy mourning weed to a green gallant Robe;
'Cheere thy sad brows, and stately garnish them,
'With a rich fragrant, flowery diadem;
'Lay forth thy locks, and paint thee (Lady like)
'With freshest calours on thy sallow Cheek;
'That air, and water, and the Angels court,
'May all seem jealous of thy praise and port.
'No sooner spoken, but the lofty Pyne,
'Distilling-pitch, the Larch yield Turpentine,
'Th'ever-green Box, the Gummy Cedar sprout,
'And the Airy Monntaines mantle all about:
'The Mast full Oak, the useful Ash, the Holm
'Coat changing Cork, white Maple, shady Elm,
'Through hill and dale ranged their plumed rancks,
'The winding Rivers bordered all their Bancks,
'With flice-sea Aldars, and green Osiers small,
'With trembling Poplars, and with Willowes pale;
'And many Trees beside, fit to be made
'Fewell, or Timber, or to serve for shade,
'The dainty Apricock (of Plums the Prince)
'The velvet Peach, gilt Orange, downy Quince,
'Already bear grav'n in their tender Barks,
'Gods powerful Providence in open ma^kes;
'The sweet-sent Apple, and astringent Pear,
'The Ch^rry, Filbert, Walnut, Meddeler,
'The Milky Fig, the Damson black and white,
'The Date, and Olive, aiding Appetite
'Spread everywhere a most enlightfull spring,
'And everywhere a very Eden bring I
'Here, the fine Pepper, as in clusters hung:
'There Sinemon and other Spices sprung;
'Here, dangled Nutmags, that for thrifty pains,
'Yearely repay the Bandons wondrous gains;
'There grows (the Hesperian Plant) the precious Read.
'Whence Sugar Sirrups in abundance bleed;
'There weeps the Balm, and famous Trees, from whence,
'Th' Arabians fetch perfuming Frankincense:
'There, th'amorous Vine calls in a thousand sorts,
'(With winding Arms) her spouse that her supports:
'Here for our food, Millions of flowery grains,
'With long mustachoes, wave upon the plains;
'Here thousand fleeces, fit for Princes Robes,
'In Se'rean forests hang in silken Globes:
'Here shrubs of Malta (for my meaner use)
'The fine white Balls of Bombace do produce;
'Here th'azure-flowred Flax is finely spun
'For finest Linen, by the Belgian Nun:
'Here fatal Hemp, which Denmark does afford,
'Doth furnish us with Canvasse, and with Cord,
'Cables and Sails; that, winds assisting either,
'Wee may acquaint the East and West together,
'And dry-foot dance on Neptunes watery front,
'And in adventure lead whole Towns upon 't,
'Never mine eyes in pleasant springs behold,
'Th'azure Flax, the gilden Marigold,
'The Violets purple, the sweet Roses stammell,
'The Lillye's snow, and Panseye's various Ammell,
'But that (in them) the Painter I admire,
'Who in more colors does the fields attire,
'Then fresh Aurora's rosey Cheeks display,
'When in the East she ushers a fair day.
'God not content to have made these plants ours,
'Pretious perfumes, fruits, plenty, pleasant flowers
'Infused Physic in their leaves and Mores,
'To cure our sickness, and to salve our sores.
'Blew succ'ry, hanged on the naked Neck,
'Dispells the dimnesse that our sight does check.
'About an Infants neck hang Peony,
'It cures Alcydes cruel malady.
'If fuming bowls of Bacchus, in excess,
'Trouble thy brayns with storms of giddiness;
'Put but a Garland of green Saffron on,
'And that mad humor will be quickly gone;
'Th'inchanting charms of Sirens blandishments
'Contagious Aire-ingendring Pestilence,
'Infect not those that in their mouths have taken
' Angelica that happy counter-baen,
'Sent down from heaven by some Celestial scout,
'As well the name and nature does avow'c;
'So Pimpernell held in the patients hand,
'The bloody Flix does presently withstand:
'And to conclude, whether I walk the fields,
'Rush through the woods, or clamber up the hills,
'I find God everywhere: thence all depend,
'He gives frankly, what we thankly spend.
'But the earth not only on her back does bear,
'Abundant Treasures glistring every where,
'But inwardly she is no less fraught with riches,
'Nay rather more (which more our Souls bewitches)
'Within the d^epe folds of her fruitful lap,
'Such boundless mines of treasure she does wrap,
'That th'hungry hands of humane Avarice
'Cannot exhaust with labor or device;
'For, they be more then there be stars in heaven,
'Or stormy billows in the Ocean driven,
'Or ears of corn in Autumn on the fields,
'Or Savage Beasts upon a thousand Hills,
'Or Fishes diving in the silver floods,
'Or scattered Leaves in winter in the woods.
' Slate, Iet and Marble shall escape my Pen,
'I overpasse the Salt-mount Oromene:
'I blanch the Brine-quar hill in Aragon,
'Whence (there) they powder their provision.
'I'le only now embosse my Book with Brass,
'Dy't with Vermilion, decked with Coperasse.
'With Gold and Silver, Lead and Mercury,
' Tin, Iron, Orpine, Stibium, Lithargie;
'And on my Gold work I will only place
'The Crystal pure, which ^oth reflect each face;
'The precious Ruby, of a sanguin hew,
'The seal-fit Onix, and the Sapphire bl^w,
'The Cassidonie, full of circles round,
'The tender Topza, and rich Diamond,
'The various Opal, and green Emerald,
'The Agath by a thousand titles called,
'The skie-like Turqisez, purple Amethists,
'And fiery Carbuncle, which flames resists.
'But, shall I baulk th'admired Adamant?
'Whose dead-live power, my reasons power does dant,
'Renowned Loade-stone, which on I^on acts,
'And by the touch the same a loft attracts;
'Attracts it strangely with unclasping crooks,
'With unknown Cords, and unconceived hooks,
'With unseene hands, with undiscerned Arms,
'With hidden force, with sacred secret charms,
'Wherewith he woes his Iron Misteresse
'And never leaves her till he get a kiss;
'Nay till he fold her in his faithful bosom,
'Never to part (except we, love-lesse loos'em)
'With so firm zeal and fast affection,
'The stone does love the steel, the steel the stone;
'And though sometime, some make bate come betwixt,
'Still burns their first flame; it is so surely fixed:
'And while they cannot meet to break their minds,
'With mutual skips, they show their love by signs,
' (As bashful suitors seeing strangers by
' Parley in silence with their hand or ey.)
'Nor is the earth only worthy praise eternal,
'For the rare Riches on her back external,
'Or in her bosom: but her own selfs worth,
'Solicits me to sound her praises forth.
'All-hail fair earth, bearer of Towns and Towers,
'Of men, Gold, Grain, Physic, and fruits and flowers,
'Faire, firm, and fruitful, various, patient, sweet,
'Sumptuously clothed in mantle meet,
'Of mingled-colours; lac't about with stoods;
'And all imbrod'red with fresh blooming buds,
'With rarest Jemmes richly about embost,
'Excelling cunning, and exceeding cost:
'All-haile great heart, round base, and steadfast Root,
'Of all the world, the worlds strong fixed foot,
'Heav'ns chastest spouse, supporter of this All,
'This glorious buildings goodly Pedestall.
'All-haile dear mother, Sister, hostess, Nurse,
'Of the worlds Sovereign: Of thy liberal purse,
'W'are all maintained, matchless Emperesse;
'To do thee service with all readiness.
'The Spears, before thee bear ten thousand Torches:
'The fire, to warm thee, folds his heatfull arches,
'In purest flames about the floating cloud:
'Th' air to refresh thee, willingly is bowed
'About the waves, and well content to suffer,
'Milde Zephyrs blasts, and Boreas bellowing rougher,
'Water, to quench thy thirst, about the mountains,
'Wraps her moist arms, Seas, Rivers, lakes and fountains.
'So Morn and Evening the third day conclude;
'And God perceived that all his works were good.
But by this writing I declare my Birth,
How like a Mole I do delight in earth.
Therefore I Will leave this Trash and haste away,
And show how furious Mar does rule this day,
Yet it is strange: for he is God of war,
Discord, dissension, and delights to jar.
He governs Knights, Captains, and bloody Soldiers,
Alchymists, Surgeons, he rules all disorders,
In Butchers, Sergeants, Hangmen, the stout thief,
Who many times heaps the poor true man grief.
And all this day I writ no harm to be
In fields, in woods, in hills that I could see.
But it is to show how vainly men do use,
Gods creatures good, and how they do abuse.
Iron and steel they make to kill and slay,
Herbs, metalls, earth cast many men away.
When dull Physicians void of learned Notions
For greedy gain make poisoned salves and potions;
And for Golds luster many do not fear,
To loose their limbs, and last the halter were,
'To pick a lock, to take their neighbors purse,
'To break a house, or to do something worse,
'To cut his Parents Throat, to kill his Prince,
'To spoil his Country, murder innocents;
'Even so profaning of a gift divine,
The drunkard drownes his Reason in the wine;
'So fale-tongu'd Lawyers, wresting Eloquence,
'Excuse rich wrong, and cast poor innocence,
'So Antichrists, their poison to infuse,
'Mis-cite the Scriptures, and Gods name abuse:
'For as a Cask, for want of use grown fusty,
'Makes with his stink the best Greek Malmesey musty,
'So Gods best Gifts, usurpt by wicked ones,
'To poison turn through their contagions.
It Is not these creatures, but it is man's amiss,
'Hath made Sin mount unto the hight it is:
'But, as the sweet bait of abundant riches,
'Bodyes and Souls of greedy men bewitches:
'Gold gilds the virtuous, and it lends them wings,
'To raise their thoughts unto the raiest things.
'The wise not only Iron well apply,
'For household turns, and tools of husbandry;
'But to defend their Country (when it calls)
'From foreign dangers, and intestine bralls.
'Brave-minded Mars, (yet master of misorder,
'Delighting naught but Battles, blood, and murder)
'His furious coursers lasheth night and day,
'That he may swiftly pass his course away,
'But in the road of his eternal race,
'So many rubs hinder his hasty pace,
'That thrice the while the lively Lyquor-God.
'With dabling heels, has swelling clusters trod,
'And thrice has Ceres shav'n he^ amber Treffe,
'Ere his steel wheels have done their business.
Oh Lord, I pray, grant I may make such use,
Of all thy creatures without base abuse,
That I with temperance may take and eat
Wheat, herbs, and fruit which are delicious meat,
And that the love of wine may near intox,
My head and mind to make me catch the Fox:
And though (like Mars) many do me oppose,
For men and devils may become my foes,
Grant me such courage I may never fear
Any but thee and still move in thy Sphere,
That having lived on earth Godly and well,
I may with thee in heaven for ever dwell.
Wednesday or Dies Mercurii.
GOd having now the Worlds wide curtain spread
About the Circuit of the fruitful Bed;
'Where (to fill all with her unnumbred kin)
'Kind natures self each Moment lies in:
'To make the same for ever admirable,
'More stately-pleasant, and more profitable:
'He the Azure Tester trimmed with Golden works,
'And richly spangled with bright glistring Sparks.
'He that to number all the Stars would seek.
'Had need invent some new Arithmetique;
'And who, to cast that reckoning takes in hand,
'Had need for counters take the Oceans sand:
'Yet have our wise and learned Elders found
' Foure-dozen Figures in the heavenly Round.
'For aid of memory; and to our eyes,
'In certain Houses to divide the skies,
'Of those are twelve in that rich Girdle grift
'Which God gave Nature for her New-yeares-Gift,
'(When making all, his voice Almighty most,
'Gave so fair Laws unto heavens shining host)
'To wear it biar, buckled over-thwart her
'Not round about her swelling waste, to girt her.
'This glorious Baldrick of a Golden tindge,
'Imbost with Rubyes, edged with Silver frindge,
'Buckled with Gold; with a Bond glistring bright,
'Heav'ns biaz-wife environs day and night,
'For from the period, Where the Ram does bring
'The day and night to equal ballancing,
'Ninety degrees toward the North it wends,
'Thence just as much toward Mid-heav'n it bonds,
'As many thence toward the South, and thence
'Toward th'yeares Portall, the like difference.
' Nephelian Crook horn with brass Cornets crowned,
'Thou buttest bravely against the Newyears bound;
'And richly clad in thy fa^re Golden fleece,
'Do'st hold the first house of heavens spacious Meese.
'Thou spy'st anon the Bill behind thy back:
'Who least that fodder by the way he lack,
'Seeing the world so naked, to renew't,
'Coats the infant earth in a green gallant suit;
'And without Plough or Yoke, does freely fling
'Through fragrant pastures of the flowery spring
' The Twins, whose heads, Arms, shoulders, knees and feet,
'God filled with Stars to shine in season sweet,
'Contend in course, who first the Bull should catch,
'That neither will nor may attend their match.
'Then Summers guide, the Crab comes rowing soft,
'With his eight Oars through the heavens azure loft;
'To bring us yearly, in his starry shell,
'Many long days the shaggy earth to swell,
Almost with like pace leaps the Lion out,
All clad with flames, bristled with beams about;
Who with contagion of his burning breath,
Both Grass and grain to cinders withers.
The Virgin next, sweeping heavens ature Globe,
With stately train of her bright Golden robe,
Mild-proudly marching in her left hand brings
A sheafe of Corn, and in her right hand wings.
After the Maiden, shines the Balance bright,
Equal divider of the day and night:
In whose gold beam, with three Gold rings, there fastens
With six Gold strings, a pair of Golden basens.
The spiteful Scorpion next the Shale addressed,
With two bright Lamps covers his loathsome breast;
And fain, from both ends, with his double sting,
Would spet his venom over every thing;
But that the brave Halfe-horse Phylirean scout,
Galloping swift the heavenly Belt about,
Ay fiercely threats, with his flame-fethered arrow,
To shoot the sparkling starry viper thorough.
And the hoary Centaure, during all his race,
Is so attentive to this only chase,
That dreadlesse of his dart, heavens shining Kid
Comes jumping light, just at his heels unspid.
Mean while the Skinker, from his starry spout,
After the Goat, a silver stream pours-out;
Distilling still out of his radiant fire
Rivers of water (who but will admire?
In whose clear channel might at pleasure swim,
Those two bright Fishes that do follow him;
But that the Torrent slides so swift away,
That it out-runs them ever, even as they
Outrun the Ram, who ever them pursues,
And by returning yearly, all renewes.
Besides these twelve, toward the Artick side,
A flaming Dragon, does two-Beares divide;
After the Wainman comes, the Crown, the Spear,
The kneeling Youth, the Harp, the Hamperer
Of the hateful Snake (whether we call the same
By Esculapius, or Alcides name)
Swift Pegasus, the Dolphin, loving man;
Jove's stately Eagle, and the silver Swan:
Andromeda, with Cassiopea neere-her,
Her Father Cepheus, and her Perseus deerer,
The shining Triangles Medusas Tresse,
And the bright Coachman of Tindarides.
Toward the other Pole, Orion, Eridanus,
The Whale, the whelpe, and hot breathed Sirius,
The Hare, the Hulke, the Hydra and the Boule,
The Centaure, Woolfe, the Censer, and the foul,
(The twice foul Raven) the Southern Fish and Crown,
Through heavens bright Arches brandish up and down.
Thus on this day working the eight azure tent
With Artlesse Art, Divinely excellent;
The Almighties fingers fixed many a million,
Of Golden Scutchions in that rich Pavilion:
But, in the rest (under that glorious heaven)
But one a piece, unto the several sev'n,
Least, of these lamps the number-passing number
Should mortal eyes with such confusion cumber,
That we should never, in the cleerest night,
Stars diverse course see or discern aright:
And therefore also, all the fixed Tapers,
He made to twinkle with such trembling Capers;
But, the seven lights that wander under them
Through various passage, never shake a beam.
Or, He (perhaps) made them not different;
But th'hoast of Sparks spread in the Firmament,
Far from our sense, through distance infinite,
Seems but to twinkle, to our twinkling sight,
Whereas the rest, nearer a thousand fold,
To the earth and Sea, we do more brim behold.
For, the heavens are not mixtly enterlaced;
But th'undermost by the upper be embraced.
And more or less the Rundells wider are,
As from the Center they be near or far,
As in an Egg, the shell includes the skin,
The skin the white, the white the Yolke within,
Now like as in a Clock that is well tended,
Just counterpoize, Justly thereon suspended,
Makes the great wheel go round, and that anon
Turns with his turning many a meaner one,
The trembling watch and th'Iron Maule that chimes,
The entire day in twice twelve equal times:
So the grand heaven, in four and twenty hours,
Surveying all this various house of ours,
With his quick motion all the Spheres does move,
Whose radiant glances gild the world above,
And drives them every day (which swiftness strange is)
From Gange, to Tagus, and from Tag to Ganges.
But th'under-O^bes, as grudging to be still,
So straightly subject to another will,
Still without change, still at another pleasure,
After one Pipe to dance one only measure;
They from-ward turn, and traversing aside,
Each by himself an oblique course does slide:
So that they all (although it seem not so)
Forward and backward in one instant go,
Both up and down, and with contrary paces,
At once they post to two contrary places.
But now the nearer any of these eight,
Approach the Imperial Palace walls in height,
The more their circuit, and more days they spend,
Ere they return unto their Jorneyes end.
It Is therefore thought, that sumptuous Canopye,
The which th'unnigard hand of Majesty,
Powdered so thick with shields so shining clear,
Spends in his voyage nigh sev'n thousand year.
Then follow Saturn^, Jupiter, and Mars,
Divine Apollo, Venus's bright Cars.
So swif^ly follows, whose doves go not far
From splendant Phoebus glory beaming Car:
Then witty Mercury and Luna last
In her Carreer, does make a monthly have.
Now, should I write how the Latonian twins
The year, the month, the week and day begins.
First how the sun about the world rides ay,
How all do live by virtue of his Ray:
How, even as man (the little world of Cares)
Within the middle of his body, bears
His heart (the spring of life) which with proportion
Supplyeth spirits to all, and every Portion.
Even so the Sun his Golden Chariot Marches
Amid the six lamps of the six low Arches,
Which seele the world, that equally it might
Richly impart them beauty, force and light;
Six heavenly Princes mounted evermore
Wait on Sols Coach, three behind. three before,
Besides the hoasts of the upper twincklers bright,
To whom for pay, he gives only light:
And how he cheareth every living thing
With light and heat, but my muse days not sing
His honored praises, for I Am like the moon,
In borrowing light from a diviner Sun.
Therefore I Will veil my front under his shine,
Least I ecclips him by this work of mine.
So m^rn and Evening the fourth day conclude.
And God perceived that all his works were good,
Why this is called the day of Mercury,
(Who is of Eloquence and Memory,
The God by Poet called, and rules the Muses,
Merchants and each one that the Pen often uses,
Ambassadors, the Princes humor pleaser,
To end his course takes near a twelve months leisure.
For all the while his nimble winged heels
Dare little bouge from Phoebus golden wheels.
He Is fained to have wings on Arms and feet,
To show his speed (for message he is meet)
I cannot tell except it be to show
How swift the motion of the Plannets go,
How by the force of the first moving heaven
With speedy have their flaming Cars are driven:
Now as that grand heaven by his powerful force,
Does move the under nine in their swift course:
So of my self, I know I cannot move
To any good. It is the Lord above,
That drives me forward in the way of Grace,
That in bright Glory I may have a place,
There to remain, even as a glorious star,
Which happy Bliss does pass man's reason far.
Thursday or Dies Iovis.
IN vain had God stored heaven with glistring studs,
The Plain with grain, the mountain tops with woods,
Severed the air from fire, the earth from water.
Had he not soon peopled this large Theater
With living Creatures: therefore he began
(This Day) to quicken in the Ocean
In standing Pools, and in the straggling Rivers,
(whose folding Channel fertile Champion fevers)
So many Fishes of so many features,
That in the waters one may see all creatures,
And all that in this, All is to be found;
As if the world within the deeps were drowned,
Seas have (as well as Skies) Sun, Moon, and stars:
(As well as air) Swallows, and Rooks, and stares
As well as earth, Vines, Roses, Nettles, Millions,
Pinks, Gilly-flowers, Mushromes, and many millions
Of other Plants (more rare and strange then these)
As very Fishes living in the Seas:
And also Rams, Calfes, Horses, Hares, and Hogs,
Wolves, Lions, Urchins, Elephants, and Dogs,
Yea men and maids: and (which I more admire)
The Mitred Bishop, and the cowled Friar:
whereof example (but a few years since)
Were shown the Norwayes, and Polonian Prince.
As a rare Painter draws (for pleasure) here
A sweet Adonis, a soul Satyr there:
Here a huge Cyclop, there a Pigme Elfe:
Sometimes no less busying his skillful self;
Upon some ugly Monster (seldom seen)
Then on the Picture of fair beauties Queen,
Even so the Lord, that, in his works variety,
We might the more admire his powerful deity;
And that we might discern by different features,
The various kinds of the vast Oceans Creatures;
Forming this mighty frame, he every kind,
With diverse and peculiar Signets signed.
Some have their heads grovelling betwixt their feet,
(As th'inky Cuttles and the many-feet:)
Some in their breast (as Crabs) some headless are,
Foot less and Fin-lesse (as the banefull Hare,
And heatfull Oyster) in a heap confused,
Their parts unparted, in themselves diffused.
Then for their bulk, the Orke, Whirlepoole and Whale
In greatness pass the largest ships that sail.
Me thinks I see the Dolphin swiftly pass,
And the rare Tortoise whose shell seems as brass,
Which the Arabian makes in sted to stand,
For hulke at Sea, and for a house on Land.
The dainty Salmons, Chevins thunder-sca^'d,
Feast-famous Sturgeons, Lampreyes speckle-starr'd,
The adulterous Sar^us, and the loving Mullet,
The banefull Crampfish, which when in her Gullet,
She has received the sharp deceitful hook.
'Suddenly spues into the silver brook
'Her secret-spreading, sudden-speeding bane;
'Which, up the line, and all along the cane,
'Creeps to the hand of the Angler; who withal
'Benumm'd and senseless, suddenly lets fall
'His hurtful pole, and his more hateful price,
'In a deep sleep upon the ground he lies.
'A firmer league of friendship is not seen,
'Than is the Pearle-fish and the Prawn between;
'Both have but one repast, both but one palace,
'But one delight, death, sorrow, and one solace:
'That lodges this, and this remunerates
'His Landlords kindness, with all needful cates.
'For while the Pearle-fish gaping wide does glister,
'Much fry (allured with the bright silver luster,
'Of her rich casket) flocks into the Nacre;
'Then with a prick the Prawne a sign does make her.
'That instantly her shining shell she will close,
'(Because the prey worthy their pain he knows)
'Which gladly done, she ev'nly shareth out
'The prey betwixt her, and her faithful scout:
'And so the Sponge-spie, warily awakes
'the Sponges dull sense, when repast it takes.
But why do I thus search in Thetis lap
For fishes kind, when I am far unapt
To imitate their virtuous quality:
Therefore into the air I mean to fly,
And there I see the only Phenyx fly,
So fair a creature dazel'd has mine eye:
'Such form, such feathers, and such fate God gave her,
'That fruitful Nature breeds nothing braver:
'Two sparkling eyes; upon her crown a crest
'Of starry sprigs (more splendent than the rest)
'A golden down about her dainty neeke,
'Her breast deep purple, and a scarlet back,
'Her wings and train of feathers (mixed fine)
'Of orient azure and incarnadine.
'He did appoint her fate to be her Phere,
'And deaths cold kiffes to restore her here,
'Her life again, which never shall expire,
'Untill (as she) the world consume with fire.
'For she becomes out of a sacred fire,
'Her own selfe's heir, Nurse, Nursling, Dam and Sire,
'Teaching us all in Adam here to die,
'That we in Christ may live eternally.
'Next her the Swallow sweepeth to and fro,
'As swift as shafts fly from a Turkish bow,
'When (use and art, and strength confedered)
'The skillful Archer draws unto the head:
'Flying she sings, and singing seeks every where.
'She more with cunning, then with cost may reere
'Her round-fiont palace in a place secure,
'Whose plot may serve in rarest Arch'tecture.
'The pretty Lark climbing the welkin clear,
'Chants with a cheer, here peer I near my dear;
'Then stouping thence (seeming her fall to rue)
' Adieu (she says) dieu dear dear adieu.
'Th^ Sp^^ke, the Linot, and the Goldfinch fill
'All the fresh air with their sweet warbles shrill.
'But these are nothing to the Nightingale.
'Breathing so sweetly from a breast so small,
'So many tunes, whose harmony excels,
'Our voice, our vials and all music else.
'The Storke, still eying her dear Thessaly,
'The Pelican consorteth cheerfully.
'Praise-worthy pair, which pure examples yield
'Of faithful father and officious child:
'Th'one quites (in time) her Parents love exceeding,
'From whom she had her birth and tender breeding
'Not only brooding under her warm breast
'Theire age-chill'd bodies bedrid in the nest;
'Nor only bearing them upon her back
'Through th'empty air, when their own wings they lack,
'But also, sparing (this let children note)
'Her daintiest food from her own hungry throat,
'To feed at home her feeble parents, held
'From forraging, with heavy gives of eld.
'The other kindly for her tender brood
'Teares out her bowels, trilleth out her blood
'To heal her young, and in a wondrous sort
'Unto her children does her life transport:
'For finding them by some fell Serpent slain,
'She rents her breast, and does upon them rain
'Her vital humor; whence recovering heat,
'They by her death, another life do get:
'A type of Christ, who sin-thrall'd man to free,
'Became a captive, and on shameful tree
'(Selfe-guiltlesse) shed his blood, by's wounds to save us,
'And salve the wounds the old Serpent firstly gave us,
'And so became, of mere immortal, mortal,
'Thereby to make frail mortal man, immortal,
'There's the fine Pheasant, and the Partridge rare,
'The lustful Sparrow, and the fruitful Stare.
'The lustful Sparrow, and the fruitful Stare.
'The chattering Py, the chastest Turtle-Dove,
'The grezell Quoist, the Thrush that grapes does love)
'The little Gnatsnap (worthy Princes boards)
'And the green Parrat fainer of our words.
'The ravening Kite, whose train does well supply
'A rudders place, the Falcon mounting high,
'The Mar'in, Lanar, and the gentle Tercell
'Th' Ospray and Saker with a nimble Sarcell
'Follow the Phoenix, from the clouds (almost)
'At once discovering many an unknown coast.
'In the swift rank of these fell rovers, flies
'The Indian Grissin with the glistering eyes,
'Beake Eagle-like, back sable, sanguine breast,
'White (Swan-like) wings, fierce tallons, always pressed
'For bloody battles; for with these he tears
'Boars, Lions, Horses, Tigers, Bulls and Bears.
The fear of him has made me quite forget
Night Birds and Water, Fowls, and I as yet
Have writ nothing of Peacocks stalking grave,
Nor mighty Estridge, nor the Eagle brave,
Nor thousands more of famous Birds that be
Within the air never descried by me:
For hitherto, what I have boldly writ
Is all but borrowed from more learned wit.
But this I do acknowledge is mine own,
To fit the Planets, and to make it known
Wherefore they govern every day in the week:
But on this day I Am most of all to seek.
Why Jupiter should bear such rule and sway,
To move the Sages place him on this day,
For he was Saturn's lofty son and heir,
And as a Plannet in his high careere.
His Tinnen Chariot shod with burning bosses
Through twice six signs in twice six twelve months crosses.
He rules o'r Princes, Preachers, Bishops, Priests,
Judges, and those that in deep Council sits.
But as he is a God of the air and sky,
Therefore I think over the birds that fly,
Our elders placed him on this day, and so
Because his brother Neptune does not go
Among the number of the wandering seav'n,
He has the power of fishes to him given.
Now will I praise the Lord for all the good
Nourishment we receive from the air and flood,
From fowls of the air and fishes of the Sea,
Whose copious choice and number end leffe be.
Yet with such food our corpse are daily fed,
And on our tables plentifully spread.
And I will pray to God, that I may learn,
From fish and fowls that I in them discern:
For some are presidents of love and piety,
Others of prudence, and of grave sobriety.
And lastly, I admire Gods wondrous power,
In peopling this most vast and fearful bower,
With such variety of sundry creatures,
Of admirable kind, and dainty features.
O Lord, I pray, grant I may ever sing
Thy praise, like warbling birds in welcome Spring,
And that in waters of thy Word I may
Delight as fish to swim there night and day,
And there to learn such knowledge of thy grace,
That I in glory may find resting place:
Where I shall sing a song among the blessed,
And live with God in a perpetual rest.
Friday, or dies Veneri^.
'HAving the last day ventured forth so far,
'On Neptune's back (through winds and waters war)
'I'll row this stroke, the harbor to recover,
'Whose shoares already my glad eyes discover.
' Of all the beasts that this day God did build
'To haunt the hills, the forest and the fields:
'I see (as Viceroy of their brutish bend)
'The Elephant the Vant-gard does command,
'Worthy that office; whether we regard
'His towred back where many soldiers ward,
'Or else his prudence, where withal he seems
'Tobscure the wits of human-kinde some times.
'Neer the Elephant comes th'horned Hirable,
'Stream-troubling Camel, and strong necked Bull,
'The lazy-paced (yet laborious) Ass,
'The quick proud Courser, which the rest does pass
'For apt address; Mars and his Master loving,
'After his hand, with ready lightness moving,
'When out of hand, will self advance, and bound,
'Corvet, pace, manage, turn, and trot the round.
'In a fresh troop, the fearful Hare I note,
'The oblivious Coney and the brouzing Goat,
'The slothful Swine, the golden fleeced sheep,
'The light-foot Heart, that every year does weep.
'But, of all beasts, none steadeth man so much
'As does the Dog; his diligence is such:
'A faithful guard, a wachfull sentinel,
'A painful purvey'r, that with perfect smell
'Prov des great Princes many a dainty mess,
'A friend till death, a helper in distress,
'Dread of the Wolf, fear of the fearful thief,
'Fierce combatant, and of all hunters chief.
'There skips the Squirrell, seeming weatherwise.
'Without beholding of heavens twinkling eyes;
'For, knowing well which way the wind will change,
'He shifts the portal of his little grange.
'There's the wanton Weazel, and the wily Fox,
'The witty Monkey that man's actions mocks.
'The sweat sweet Civet, dearly fetched from far,
'For Courtiers nice, past Indian Tarnassar,
'There the wife Bever, who pursued By foes,
'Feares off his coolings, and among them throws;
'Knowing the hunters, on the Pontik heath,
'Doe more desire that ransom, than his death:
'There, the rough Hedgebog, who to shun his thrall,
'Shrinks up himself as round as any ball;
'And fastening his slow feet under his chin,
'On's thistly brisles, rowles him quickly in:
'But the eye of heaven beholds naught more strange
'Than the Chamelion, who with various change
'Receives the color that each object gives,
'And (foodlesse else) of the air alonely lives.
'Oh! who is he that would not be astound,
'To be (as I am) here environed round
'With cruell'st creatures, which for mastery
'Have vowed against us endless enmity?
' Phoebus would faint, Alcides self would dread,
'Although the first dread Python conquered,
'And the other vanquished the Erymanthian Boar,
'The Nemean Lion and a many more.
'What strength of arm, or artfull stratagem
'From Nile's fell rover could deliver them,
'Who runs and towes, warring by land and water
Against men and fishes, subject to his slaughter:
'Or from that furious Dragon, which alone
'set on a Roman army; whereupon
'Stout Regulus as many engines spent,
'As to the ground would Car^hage walls have rent.
'What shot free Co^slet, or what counsel crafty,
Against the angry aspick could aslure them safety.
'Who (saithfull husband) over hill and plain
'Pursues the man that his dear Pheet has slain;
'Whom he can find amid the thickest throng,
'And in an instant venge him of his wrong.
'What shield of Ajax could avoid their death
'By the Basilisk, whose pestilen^iall breath
'Doth pierce firm Marble, and whose banefull eye
'Wounds with a glance, so that the soundest dye.
'From Serpents escaped, yet am I scarce in safety:
'Alas! I see a Legion fierce and lofty
'Of Savages, whose fleet and furious pace,
'Whose horrid roaring, and whose hideous face
'Make my senso senseless, and my speech restrain,
'And cast me in my former fears again.
'Already howles the wastfull Wolf, the Boar
'Whets foamy fangs, the hungry Bear does roar,
'The Cat-fac'd Ounce, that does me much dismay,
'With grumbling horror threatens my decay;
'The light foot Tigre, spotted Leopard,
'Foaming with fury do besiege me hard;
'Then the Unicorn, the Hyena tearing-tombs,
'Swift Manticho's, and Nubian Cephus comes;
'Of which last three, each has (as here they stand)
'Man's voice, man's visage, man-like foot and hand.
'I fear the beast bred in the bloody coast
'Of Cannibals, which thousand times (almost)
'Re-whelps her whelps, and in her tender womb
'She does as often her living brood retomb;
'Then th'monstrous Porcupine there bids me battle,
'On whose rough back an host of pikes does rattle.
'But (courage now) here comes the valiant beast
'The noble Lion, King of all the rest;
'Who bravely minded, is as mild to those
'That yield to him, as fierce unto his foes:
'To humble Suitors neither stern nor statefull;
'To benefactors never found ungrateful:
' There Is under Sun (as Delphos God did show)
'No better knowledge, that our selves to know:
'There is no theme more plentiful to scan
'Than is the glorious goodly frame of man.
'For in man's self is fire, air earth, and Sea;
'Man's (in a word) the worlds Epitome
'Or little map: which here my Muse would try
'By the grand pattern to exemplify:
But my dull Muse shall not eclipse thy shine,
From whom I borrow all these words divine.
For I can little of man's nature speak,
But what I take from thy creation weak:
For here and there I take a little taste
Of thy sweet Nectar, my tart lines to cast
In such a heavenly smooth delicious mould,
As with the Word of God may firmly hold
Due correspondence: and make plain to sense
The wondrous works of Gods Omnipotence*
'Now God that supreme peerless Architect,
'When of mere nothing he did first erect
'Heav'n, earth and air, and seas; at once his thought,
'His Word and deed all in an instant wrought:
'But when he would his own selfe's type create,
'Th'honour of nature, the earths sole potentate;
'As if he would a council hold, he cites
'His sacred power, his prudence he inviteth,
'Summons his love, his justice he adjournes,
'Calleth his goodness, and his grace returns,
'To (as it were) consult about the birth
'And building of a second god, of earth;
'Or rather he consults with his own Son,
'(His own true pourtrait) what proportion,
'What gifts, what grace, what soul he should bestow
'Upon his Viceroy of this Realm below.
But of 's particular parts I will not speak,
It is enough in this my borrowed week
In general to write a little story
Of soul and bodies first created glory.
They that desire more of the same to know,
Learned Du Bartas will divinely show.
'Th' Almighty Father, as of watery matter,
'It pleased him make the people of the water,
'So of an earthly substance made he all
'The slimy Burgers of this earthly ball;
'To the end each creature might (by consequent)
'Part-sympathize with his own element.
'Therefore, to form this earthly Emperor
'He did take earth, and by his sacred power
'So tempered it, that of the very same
'Dead shapelesse lump did Adams body frame:
'Yet not his face down to the earth-ward bending
'(Like beasts that but regard their belly ending
'For ever all) but toward the azure skies
'Bright golden Lamps lifting his lovely eyes;
'That through their nerves, his better part might look
'Still to that place from whence her birth she took.
'And this most peere-lesse learned Imager,
'Life to his lovely picture to confer,
'Did not extract out of the elements
'A certain secret Chymick Quinte slence:
'But, breathing, sent as from the lively spring
'Of his divinen^sse some small riverling,
'It self dispersing into every pipe
'Of the frail Engine of this Earthen type.
'In brief, it is but a breath: Now, though a breath
'Out of our stomachs concave issues;
'Yet of our substance it transporteth naught:
'Onely it seems to be simply fraught,
'And to retain the purer qualities
'Of the inward place whence it derived is,
'Inspired by that breath: this breath desire
'I to describe; who so does not admire
'His spirit, is spriteless^, an^ his sense is past,
'Who has no sense of that admired blast.
'Yet wot I well, that as an eye perceives
'All but it self, even so our soul conceives
'All, save her own self essence; but the end
'Of her own greatness cannot comprehend.
'Yet as a sound eye, void of vicious matter,
'Sees (in a sort) it self in glass or water:
'So, in her sacred works (as in a glass)
'Our soul (almost) may see her glorious face.
'Mans complete nature, imitates the best
'And fairest works of the Almightiest,
'By rare effects bears records of its lineage
'And high descent; and that Gods sacred Image
'Was in man's soul engraven, when first his spirit
'(The spring of life) did in man's limbs inspire it:
'For as Gods beauties are past all compare,
'So is man's soul all beautiful and fair.
'As God's immortal; and is never idle:
'Mas soul^'s immortal; and can brook no bridle,
'Of Sloth, to curb her busy intellect,
'He Ponders all; she poizeth each effect,
'And man's mature and settled Sapience
'Hath some Alliance with Gods providence:
'God works by reason; man his rule, God's glory
'Of the heavenly Stages; man of the earthly story;
'God's great High Priest; man his great Vicar here,
'God's Sovereign Prince; and man his Viceroy dear.
'O man! as soon as God had framed thee,
'Into thy hands he put this Monarchy;
'Made all the creatures know thee for their Lord,
'And come before thee of their own accord:
'And gave thee power (as Master) to impose
'Fit sensefull names unto the host that rows,
'In watery Regions; and the wandering herds,
'Of Forest people, and the painted Birds.
'O too-too happy! had that fall of thine
'Not canceld so the Character Divine.
'But since our Souls now-sin-obscured light
'Shines through the Lanthorn of our flesh so bright,
'What sacred splendour will this Star send forth,
'When it shall shine without this veil of earth?
'The Soul here lodged, is like a man that dwells;
'In an ill Air, annoyed with noisome smells;
'Never in health, not half an hour together:
'Or (almost) like a Spider, who confined,
'In her webs Center, shook with every wind;
'Moves with an instant, If the buzzing fly
'Stir but a string of her Lawne Canopie,
'Yet without woman man's but half a man,
'But a wild wolf, but a Barbarian,
'Brute, ragefull, fierce, moody, melancholic,
'Hating the light; whom naught but naught could like:
'Borne solely for himself, bereft of sense,
'Of heart, of Love, of life, of Excellence.
'God therefore, not to seem lesle liberal,
'To man, then else to every animal;
'For perfect pattern of a holy Love,
'To Adams half, another half he gave,
'Ta'en from his side, to bind (through every age)
'With kinder Bonds the sacred Marriage.
'For, God empal'd our Grandsires lively look,
'Through all his Bones a deadly chillness struck,
'Siel'd-up his sparkling eyes with Iron bands,
'Led down his feet (almost) to Lethi sands;
'In Brief; so numm'd his Soul's and Body's sense,
'That (without pain) opening his side, from thence
'He took a Rib, which rarely he refined,
'And thereof made the mother of mankind:
'Graving so lively on the living bone,
'All Adams beauties; that, but hardly, one
'Could have the lover from the love descried,
'Or known the Bridegroom from his gentle Bride:
'Saving that she had a more smiling Eye,
'A smother Chin, a Check of purer dye,
'A fainter Voice, a more enticing face,
'A deeper Tresse, a more delighting grace,
'And in her bosom (more then Lily-white)
'Two swelling Mounts of Ivory, panting light.
'Now, after this ptofound and pleasing Trance,
'No sooner Adams ravished eyes began glanc^,
'On the rare beauties of his new-com half,
'But in his heart he began to leap and laugh,
'Kissing her kindly, calling her his life,
'His Love, his stay, his rest, his weal, his wife,
'His other-selfe, his help (him to refresh)
'Bone of his bone, flesh of his very flesh.
'Source of all Joys! sweet Hee-shee coupled one,
'Thy sacred birth I never think upon,
'But (ravished) I admire how God did then
'Mike two of one, and one of two again.
'O blessed Bond! Oh happy marriage!
'That do the match twixt Christ and us presages!
'O chastest friendship, whose pure flames impart
'Two souls in one, two hearts into one heart!
'O holy knot, in Eden instituted
'(Not in this earth with Blood and wrongs polluted,
'Profan'd with mischiefs* the prescene of Hell
'To cursed creatures that against heaven rebel)
'O sacred Covenant, which the sin-lesse Son
'Of a pure Virgin (when he first begun
'To publish proofs of his dread power Divine,
'By turning water into perfect wine,
'At lesser Cana) in a wondrous manner,
'Did with his presence sanctify and honor;
'By thy dear favor, after our decease,
'We leave-behind our living Images,
'Change war to peace, in kindred multiply,
'And in our Children live eternally.
'By thee, we quench the wild and wanton fires,
'that in our Soul the Paphian shot inspires:
'And taught (by thee) a love more firm and fitter,
'We find the Mel more sweet, the Gall less bitter,
'Which here (by turns) heap up our humane life
'Ev'n now with joys, anon with jars and strife.
'This done, the Lord Commands the happy pair
'With chaste embraces to replenish fair,
'Th'unpeopled world; that while the world endures
'Here might succeed their living portraitures.
'He had imposed the like precept before,
'On th'irefull droves that in the deserts roar,
'The feth'red flocks, and fruitfull-spawning legion,
'That live within the liquid Crystal Region,
'Thenceforth therefore, Bears, Bears ingendered;
'The Dolphins Dolphins; Vultu^es, Vultures bred;
'Men, men: and nature with a change-lesse course,
Still brought forth Children like their Ancestors.
'So morn and evening the sixth day conclude,
'And God perceived that all his works were good.
Now'tis apparent why the smooth faced wench
Upon this day has the pre-eminence,
Of other plannets, for she governs those
That unto venery themselves dispose,
As fiddlers, Players, Jewellers, Dyers,
Painters, Dancers, whores, and Cupids Squiers:
Her birth was rare: she came of the Seas frath,
Produced by Saturn, for when he was wrath,
He cast his Fathers members in the Sea,
Of which (as Poets say) came this fair she,
'Faire dainty Venus, whose free virtues mild,
'With happy fruit gets all the world with child.
'Whom wanton dalliance, dancing and delight,
'Smiles, witty wiles, Youth, love, and Beauty bright
'(With soft blind Cupids evermore consort)
'Of lightsome day opens and shuts the Port:
'For hardly dare her silver doves go far,
'From bright Apollo's glory beaming Car,
O Lord, how wondrous are thy works Divine!
How in all creatures does thy glory shine!
This day a lone does thy rare works declare,
Thy goodness unto sinful men who are
Deprived, bereaved of that most glorious form,
With which thou did this day his soul adorn.
O grant that I may labor to repair
Thy Image in me, and in Christ seem fair,
And that like Venus in fair virtues race,
Igoe not far from Christ the Son of Grace:
But keep ( I pray) my body and my mind
From sinful lust O rather let me find,
A virtuous, Careful, honest, loving Mate,
In Joy and peace to spend this mortal state.
Saturday or Dies Sabbati.
THe cunning Painter, That with curious care,
'Limming a Land escape, various, Rich, and ra^re,
'Hath set a work, in all and every part,
'Invention, Judgment, Nature, Use, and Art;
'And has at length (t'immortallize his name)
'With weary Pencill perfected the same;
'Forgets his pains; and, inly filled with glee,
'Still on his Picture gazeth greedily.
'First, in a Mead he marks a frisking Lamb,
'Which seems, (though dumb) to bleat unto the dam,
'Then he observes a wood, seeming to wave:
'Then th'hollow bosom of some hideous cave:
'Here a highway, and there a narrow path:
'Here pines, there oaks torn by tempestuous wrath:
'Here from a craggy Rocks steep-hanging Bosse
'Thrumm'd half with Ivy, half with crisped Moss)
'A silver Brook in broken streams does gush,
'And headlong down the horned Cliff does rush,
'Then, winding thence above and under ground,
'A goodly Garden it bemoateth round:
'There on his knee (behind a Box-tree shrinking)
'A skillfull Gunner with his left eye winking,
'Levells directly at an Oak hard by,
'Whereon a hundred groaning Culvers cry;
'Downe falls the Cock, up from the Touch-pan flies,
'A Ruddy flash that in a moment dies.
'Off goes the gun, and through the Forest rings;
'The thundering Bullet, borne on fiery wings:
'Here, on a green, two Striplings, stripped light,
'Run for a prize with laboursome delight;
'A dusty cloud about their head does floe
'(Their Feet, and head, and hands, and all do go)
'They swelt in sweat; and yet the following rout
'Hastens their haste, with many a cheerful shour.
'Here six pyed Oxen, under painful Yoke,
'Rip up the folds of Ceres winter Cloak.
'Here in the shade a pretty Shepherdess,
'Brings softly home her bleating happiness;
'Still as she goes, she spins; and as she spins,
'A Man would think some Sonnet she begins,
'Here runs a River, there springs forth a fountain,
'Here vailes a Valley, there ascends a mountain,
'Here smokes a Castle, there a City fumes,
'And here a Ship upon the Ocean loomes.
'In brief, so liv'ly Art has nature shaped,
'That in his work, the workmans self is rapt,
'Unable to look off; for looking still,
'The more he looks, the more he finds his skill:
'So th'Architect (whose glorious workman ships,
'My Cloudy Muse does but too-much eclipse)
'Having with Pain-lesse pain, and careless care
'In these six days, finished the Table fair
'And infinite of the universal Ball,
'Rested this day, to' admire himself in all:
'And for a season, eying nothing else,
'Joyes in his work, since all his work excells
'(If my dull, stutting, frozen eloquence
'May dare conjecture of his high intents)
'One while, he sees how the ample Sea does take.
'The liquid homage of each other lake;
'And how again the heavens exhale, from it,
'Aboundant vapors (for our benefit:)
'And yet it swells not for those tribute streams,
'Nor yet it shrinks not for those boiling beams;
'There sees he th'O ean, peoples plenteous broods,
'And shifting courses of the (...) and sloods;
'Which with inconstant glances night and day,
'The lower Plannets forked front does sway.
'Anon, upon the flowery Plains he looks,
'Laced about with snaking silver Brooks,
'Now, he delights to see four Brethrens strife,
'Cause the worlds peace, and keep the world in life:
'Anon, to see the whirling Spheres to roll,
'With restless dances about either Pole;
'Whereby, their Cressers (carried diverse ways)
'Now visit us, Anon the Antipodes.
'It glads him now, to note, how th'Orbe of flame,
'Which gires this Globe, does not enfire the frame:
'How th'aires glib-gliding firmelesse body bears,
'Such store of fowls, haile-stormes and floods of tears,
'How th'heavy water, pronest to descend,
'Twixt Air and earth is able to depend.
'And how the dull earths proplesse massy Ball,
'Stands steady still, just in the midst of all.
'Anon his nose is pleased with fragrant sents
'Of Balm, and Basil, Mirrh, and Frankincense,
'Thyme, Spiknard, Hysop, Savory, Cinnamon,
'Pink, Violet, Rose, and Clove-Carnation.
'Anon, his ear's charmed with the melody
'Of winged consorts-curious harmony:
'For, though each Bird, guided with Art-lesse Art,
'After his kind, observe a song apart,
'And yet the burden of their several lays
'Its nothing but the heav'n-Kings glorious praise.
'In brief th'Almightie's eye, and Nose, and Ear,
'In all his works, does naught see, sent, or hear,
'But shows his greatness, Savors of his grace,
'And sounds his glory, over every place.
'But above all, Man's many beauteous features
'Detaine the Lord more then all other creatures:
'Man's his own Minion; Man's his sacred Type:
'And for man's sake, he loves his workmanship:
'Not that I mean to feign an idle God,
'That lurks in heaven and never looks abroad,
'That crowns not virtue, and corrects not Vice,
'Blind to our service, deaf unto our sighs;
'A Pagan Idol, void of power and Piety,
'A sleeping Dormouse (rather) a dead Deity;
'For though (alas) sometimes I cannot shun;
'But some profane thoughts in my mind will run,
'I never think on God, but I conceive
'(Whence cordial comforts Christians souls receive)
'In God, Care, Counsel, Justice, Mercy, Might,
'To punish wrongs and Patronize the right:
'Sith Man (but Image of the Almightiest)
'Without these gifts is not a man, but Beast.
'God is not sitting (like some Earthly state)
'In proud Theater him to recreate
'With curious objects of his ears and eyes
'(Without disposing of the Comedies)
'Content to have made (by his great word) to move
'So many Radiant Stars to shine above;
'And on each thing with his own hand to draw.
'The sacred text of an eternal Law:
'Then, bosoming his hand to let them slide,
'With raines at will, whether that Law shall guide:
'Like one that lately having forced some lake,
'Through a new Channel a new course to take,
'Takes no more care thenceforth to those effects,
'But lets the stream run where the ditch directs.
'The Lord our God wants neither diligence,
'Nor love, nor Care, nor power, nor providence,
'Hee proved his power, by making all of naught
'His diligence, by ruling All he wrought:
'His care in ending it in six days space;
'His love in building it for Adams race,
'H^^ providence (Maugre Times wastfull rages)
' Preserving it so many years and Ages.
'For, O! how often had this goodly Ball
'By his own greatness caused his proper fall?
'How often had this world deceast, except
'Gods mighty Arms had it upheld and kept?
'God is the Soul, the life, the strength, and sinnew,
'That quickens, moves, and makes this frame continue.
'God's the maine spring, that makes every way,
'All the small wheels of this great Engine play*
'God's the strong Atlas, whose unshrinking shoulders
'Have been and are heavens heavy Globes upholders.
'God makes the fountains run continually,
'The days and nights succeed incessantly:
'The Seasons in their season he does bring,
'Summer and Autumn, Winter, and the Spring:
'God make's the earth fruitful, and he makes the earth's
'Large sides not yet faint for so many births.
'God makes the Sun and Stars, though wondrous hot,
'That yet their heat, themselves inflameth not;
'And that their sparkling beams prevent not so,
'With woeful flames, the last great day of woe,
'And that (as moved with a contrary wrest)
'They turn at once both North, and East and West:
'Heav'ns constant course, his heast does never break:
'The floting water waits at his beck:
'Th' Aire's at his call, the fire at his command,
'The earth is his; and there is nothing famed
'In all these kingdoms, but is moved each hour,
'With secret touch of his eternal power.
'God is the Judge, who keeps continual Sessions,
'In every place to punish all transgressions;
'Who void of Ignorance and Avarice,
'Not won with bribes, nor wrested with device,
' Sans fear, or favor; hate, or partial Zeal;
'Pronounceth judgments that are past appeal.
'Himselfe is judge, Jury, and witness too,
'Well knowing what we all think, speak, or do:
'He sounds the deepest of the doublest heart,
'Searcheth the Reins, and sifteth every part:
He sees all secrets, and his Lynx-like eye
(Yer it be thought) does every thought descry:
His sentence given, does never prove in vain;
For, all that heaven, earth, air and sea contain,
Serve him as Sergeants; and the winged Legions
That soar above the bright star-spangled Regions,
Are ever pressed, his powerful ministers:
And (lastly) for his executioners,
Satan assisted with the infernal band,
Stands ready still to finish his command.
God (to be brief) is a good Artizan,
That to his purpose aptly manage can,
Good or bad tools: for, for just punishment,
He arms our sins, us sinners to torment.
And to prevent th'ungodly's plot, sometime
He makes his foes, (will nill they) fight for him.
Though then, the Lords deep wisdom, to this day,
Work in the worlds uncertain certain sway.
Yet must we credit, that his hand composed
All in six days, and that he then reposed;
By his example, giving us behest
On the seventh day for evermore to rest:
For, God remembered that he made not man
Of stone or steel, or brass Corinthian:
But lodged our soul in a fra^le earthen mass,
Thinner than water, britler than the glass.
He knows our life is by naught sooner spent.
Than having still our minds and bodies bent.
A soldier that a season still has lain,
Comes with more fury to the field again:
Even so, this body, when (to gather breath)
One day in sev'n at rest it sojourneth;
It recollects his powers, and with more cheer
Falls the next morrow to his first career,
But the chief end this precept ayms at, is
To quench in us the coals of covetize;
That while we rest from all prophaner arts,
Gods Spirit may work in our retired hearts;
That we down-treading earthly cogitations,
May mount our thoughts to heavenly meditations.
Following good Archers guize, who shut one eye,
That they the better may their mark epsy.
For, by The Almighty, this great holy day
Was not ordained to dance, to mask and play,
To slug in sloth, to lash out in delights,
And loose the reins to raging appetites:
To turn Gods feasts to filthy Lupercalls,
To frantike Orgies, and fond Saturnalls:
To d^zle eyes with our vainglorious splendour,
To serve strange gods, or our ambition tender;
As the irreligion of loose times has since
Changed the prime Churches chaster innocence.
God would that men should in a certain place
This day assemble as before his face,
Tending an humble and attentive ear
To learn his great names dear-dread loving-feare:
He would that there the faithful Pastor should
The Scriptures marrow from the bones unfold,
That we might touch with fingers (as it were)
The sacred secrets that are hidden there.
For, though the reading of those holy lines
In private houses somewhat move our minds;
Doubtless, the doctrine preached does deeper pierce,
Proves more effectual, and more weight it bears.
He would that there in holy Psalms we sing
Shrill praise and thanks to our immortal King,
For all the liberal bounties he bestow'th
On us and ours, in soul and body both:
He would that there we should confess his Christ
Our only Savior, Prophet, Prince and Priest,
Solemnizing (with sober preparation)
His blessed seals of reconciliation:
And in his Name, beg boldly what we need,
(After his will) and be assured to speed;
Since in the exchequer of his clemency
All goods of fortune, foul and body ly.
He would this Sabb^th should a figure be,
Of the blessed Sabbath of eternity.
That the grand Iubile, the feast of feasts,
Sabbath of Sabbaths, endless rest of rests;
He would this day, our soul (sequestered)
From busy thoughts of worldly cares) should read
In heavens bowed arches, and the elements,
His boundless bounty, power and providence,
That every part may (as a Master) teach
th'illiterate, rules past a vulgar reach.
The world's a Schole, where (in a general story)
God always reads dumb lectures of his glory.
The world's a book in Folio printed all
With God's great works in Letters capital.
Each creature is a page; and each effect
A fair character, void of all defect.
Hear this dumb Doctor, study in this book,
Where day and night thou may at pleasure look.
And thereby learn uprightly how to live;
For every part does special lessons give,
Even from the gilt studs of the firmament,
To the base center of our element.
The reasons why the Sages on this day
Do place the Planet Saturn, to bear sway
Are most conspicuous, hence I Will show his birth;
Coelum begot him, Vesta brought him forth,
He was produced of the earth and sky,
Being the foundation of the progeny,
Of heathen Gods, as Pluto, Neptune, Jove,
And Venus her fairefelfe, goddess of Love.
The time he lived was called the golden age;
For, earth brought fruit without the Plowes tillage,
Men peaceful were, and did to rest repose,
But by his sons there much contention rose:
Ingenious Saturn Spouse of memory,
Father of the age of gold though coldly dry,
Silent and sad, bald hoary wrinckle faced,
Yet art the first amongst the Planets placed;
And thirty years his leaden coach does run,
Yer it arrive where his carere begun.
He governes Moors, Monks and the ancient Jews.
Decrepid old men, and all those that use
To work in Leacher, earth, or on a grave,
To show that men's desire is rest to have.
Therefore the use of this day shall be this,
To contemplate of heavens glorious bliss;
You heathen Poets, henceforth let be dumb
Your fabled praises of Elysium;
For, the Almighty made his blissful bowers
Better, far better, than what is feigned of yours.
Yours but a shadow, and a fabled story,
But this is perfect real solid glory:
For never any eye, nor ear nor heart
Could see, hear or perceive of the least part
Of that great glory, yet I do admire,
How heathen men so highly should aspire:
For in their fained stories they suppose,
Strange blessings love on their just men bestows.
Great Jove is he that rules the air and sky,
And is adorned with great Majesty.
In his right hand is the Amalthean horn,
But in his left, thunder and furie's borne.
He can command all other heathen gods,
Rewarding Virtue, Vice correct with rods.
With thundering storms he makes the earth to shake,
And in his fury Pluto's self to quake:
But in his clemency he powers down
Sweet Honey Nectar, Virtues head to crown
His palace he does keep in royal sort,
For all the Gods attend upon his court.
Pallas for wisdom, Venus for beauties grace,
Mercury there for eloquence has place,
Bacchus for joy, Vulcan the fiery God
For zeal: for love Cupid has there abode.
Pan and Apollo with their music shrill,
Do all heavens Court with blissful pleasure fill.
Thus are Pandora's, or the virtuous blessed,
And live with Jove in a perpetual rest.
But whither do I run out of my story,
Thus to insist on heathens f^ined glory?
O! let me now with eye of faith behold
A glorious city all of beaten gold.
The walls of Jasper, and the gates shined bright,
Being twelve in number, each a Margarit:
The streets and lanes were paved every one
With gold, inlaid with pearls and precious stone.
There is no need of Sun or Moon, or Star,
For Christ's bright glory passes all these far
Who sits in the midst, and shines clear and bright,
There is no darkness, nor no dismal night.
And from Christ's throne, a stream of water clear,
Does flow as Crystal, and there does appear,
Upon each bancke the Tree of life to grow,
Which bears perpetual fruit, there is no woe,
No grief nor sorrow, nor the dreadful fear
Of death or danger, as we live in here.
This Citie's breadth and length both equal are,
Twelve thousand furlongs, each it is four square:
And there the Saints keep a perpetual feast,
With joy and rest that cannot be expressed.
Thus is this happy place described by John,
In the last Tract of his blessed vision.
By the most glorious things, that we do know
The glorious blessedness thereof to show.
Now learned Dwines say man by his creation
Has in three places his abode and station:
The first is in a narrow darksome place,
The second's in this fair worlds mantled face.
Coelum Empyreum is the last, which is
In life to come, place of eternal bliss.
Now, what proportion this life does surpass,
The life we had in that most narrow place:
The same and much more to the Saints are given
In that most glorious happy place called heaven:
For this worlds globe compared to heaven bright,
Is but a point, a prick void of true light:
So I conclude, as this world does exceed
My mothers womb wherein she did me breed,
For beauty, pleasure, joy, delight and bliss,
So does that palace far surmount all this.
And as a living man in wit and strength,
Beauty and learning bodies, breadth and length,
Does far exceed a child in's mothers belly,
So, and much more Saints in this royal City
Do far excel men on this earthly st^tion
In beauty, knowledge, and in true salvation:
And as great horror would a Saint be in,
To come from heaven to earth to live in sin:
As a man grown would fear to go again
Into his mothers womb, there to remain:
And as the nine months there compared unto
An old man's life is little: even so,
And more, Eternity does pass all time
That men here live, why should I then thus rhyme,
To make conjecture what the learned are
Ignorant of, and I in wit am bare,
Therefore I Will leave to speak of this blessed place,
And view the jewels in this golden case:
First, there is the presence of the Lord of hoast^.
I mean the Father, Son and holy Ghost,
The Fathers Majesty and glorious might,
And Christ at's right hand decked with wondrous light.
The Spirit in milk white robes of sanctity,
One God in three, and three in unity;
On either side a quier of Angels sings,
Archangels, Cherubins and Seraphins,
The souls of righteous men and blessed Saints,
Apostles, Prophets, Martyrs, Innocents,
There shall appear with crowns upon their heads
For their victorious acts and worthy deeds;
These keep a Sabbath in eternal jest,
Such glorious joy can never be expressed.
There Is rest, no toil, there is joy without all pain,
Peace without strife, content that is not vain.
There Is safety without fear, bliss without end,
O! that God would my poor soul thither send.
For here I labor, and have seldom peace,
Content's a rare thing, vain lasts never cease;
But there I should hold a perpetual feast,
Sing such a sacred song as heaven likes best,
Wear such a crown as never should decay,
Possess a dwelling that never falls away,
Fully enjoy God, and see his bright face,
Whose presence only makes a happy place.
Therefore the godly say, it is small pain
Hell torments to endure, this to obtain.
Therefore I humbly pray I may so here
Upon the earth live, that I may appear
After my soul has put off's mortal case,
Pure and unspotted in this resting place;
(...) should I truly keep a Sabbath day,
And in bright glory ever rest for ay.
(...) with the Prophets, and Apostles zealous,
(...) Constant Martyrs, and our Christian fellows,
(...) faithful servants, and his chosen sheep,
(...)w'n I hope (within short time) to keep.
FINIS.

