THE BROVVNIST HAERESIES CONFVTED THEIR KNAVERY ANATOMIZED, and their fleshly
spirits painted at full, in a true History of one Mistress Sarah Miller of
Banbury in Oxfordshire.

WHEREIN IS CONTAINED THE PREACHING OF a Barber, his zeal toward this new
sister, how the the spirit of the flesh moved him, how she granted, how she
fell and, and how by the mercy of God she was released of all.

Printed in the year, 1641.

THE BROVVNIST HAERESIES CONFVTED THEIR KNAVERY ANATOMIZED, and their fleshly
spirits painted at full, in a true History of one Mistress Sarah Miller of
Banbury in Oxfordshire.
TO discourse of those sundry sects which now are sprung up amongst us like so
many weeds in a pleasant garden is not my intent; neither will I unfold their
heretical and erroneous opinions in which they daily more and more persevere,
but I have pitched my meditations on such a corrupt Sect which is enough to
fill the world with wonder.

It was in a town called Banburie, in the County of Oxford, a place always
too much encumbred with Brownists and Separatists, where dwelt a Gentleman of a
very honest and upright heart, who had a daughter about the age of nineteen,
she was witty, but withal proud, which the devil always inyeigled her with,
that it might prove a cloud to eclipse all her other virtues wherewith it had
pleased God to endue her with.

This Gentlewoman (to the intent she might make her self merry) changing her
apparel, and disguising her self as much as possible she could, went to a
place where these Brownists did commonly hold their conventicles, that she
might behold and see the manner of their living, and how they were affected in
their Religion. Now she having beforehand heard of some part of their uses, she
met with a Sister of the holy Sect, and saluted her after this manner.

Well met sister, I pray you can you resolve me what Brother teaches day; the
holy Sister replied she could not tell, but she heard than a very honest man,
a Chimney-sweeper, was appointed for the same purpose, a man to whom it had
pleased God to give abundance of the Spirit, but I heard again he was
dismissed, because he went in black like our corrupted Popish Scholars: but
will you walk Sister, I persuade my self that we shall have a worthy man,
because it is Mr. Bryans turn to elect the man for to day.

Together they go, and this holy Sister conducts this Gentlewoman to a very
large stately Barn, where was a very great company met together where the
Teacher for that day being a most Reverend Barber, had placed himself in a
Sciffe, such a thing as men carry Hey or Straw in, where after such postures as
they use, (as making changlings faces, stroking the Beard, picking the
nostrils, and such like) according as the Spirit moved him, he began his
prayer as follows;

O God which art our Lord, our Redeemer, our Savior, the very breath of our
nostrils, we are now become before thee, we are here present before thee, we
kneel before thee to beg, to ask, to crave a gift, a benefit, a blessing from
thee; Thou know, O Lord, O God, O Christ, that we do serve thee in all
sincerity, in all truth, in all righteousness, and that we are sincere and true,
and righteous, and that we are hated and persecuted by the Babylonish whore
for thy sake, but we are willing to bear all, to undergo all, to stand to all
persecutions to the death. And now, O Lord, O God, O Christ, we are come, met,
and kneel here together, holy Brothers and holy Sisters, we pray thee, we
beseech thee, we desire thee that thou would so ordain it that we may
fructify here among our selves, and not suffer these our holy sisters to
defile themselves with the wicked. Now when he had ended a whole hours prayer,
repeating the 3. part of it an hundred times, he delivered his Text, which was
taken forth of Samuel, the words were these, Is Saul also among the Prophets,
from which he gathered that the people thought that Saul had not been inspired
by the Spirit, and they held none lawful to be among the Prophets but those who
were inspired by the Spirit, now (dearly beloved brethren, said he, Holy
brothers and Holy sisters attend and mark,) we hold the very point which they
did in those days, for surely no man is fit for this holy service, but a very
devout man, and who is familiar with the Spirit, and for this one reason may we
set our selves with all might and main against those Scholars, as Bishops,
Deanes, yea and Deacons which strive to construe the Scriptures according to
the of the Hebrew, Greek, and Latin, which last Language stincks like a piece
of beef a twelve month old, yet never salted.

Thus he went on as if he had bin mad, infinitely railing and rauing against
Learning and Languages, especially that of the Beast. Now when he was about the
middle of his discourse (as all thought) turning up the white of his eyes in
devotion, he perceived this strange sister, at whose first gaze the spirit
began to move him indeed, but it was that of the Flesh; to be brief, he
thought every minute an hour, till he could draw to some end, and so dismiss
them, that he might but single out this new holy sister, but he had gotten
himself into such a wood of discourse, that it was impossible for him to find
any gap for to escape: At length he seeing no remedy, he fell down as if he
had svouned, whereupon the Brethren male and female run with all diligence to
see what was the matter, which he perceived (like a counterfeit Rascal) rose
up and told them he not very well, and so closed all with an extemporie prayer,
and they departed.

This cunning leacherour watching which way this Gentle woman went, made such
haste after her that be over-took her, and she being by her self till he came
unto her, began to court her after this manner.

Holy sister, when I was teaching to day, I espied you amongst the rest, but
far more zealous then the rest, lest I was deceived with an outward appearance,
and withal I viewing the perfections of body wherewith you are endued also, it
struck me into such a quandarie, that in truth and sincerity I svvounded as
you savv, in the place where I taught: now verily it is love to your zeal
wherewith you do abound, that does enforce me to sue to you, holy sister, for
favor. It seems this was not the first time that he had loved zeal, he could
play the loving Orator so well, but woed, and she at length granted, being
overcome with his entreaties, and the spirit of the flesh speaking on his side
she granted, and at that time lost more then she could ever gain again with
Ganges riches, her maiden head I mean; for it was forty vveeks after plainly
seen.

After she had kept them company about seven or eight days, she returned
toward home, but with a sad and pensive heart; for what she had done began
to prick her to the quick. She had not been at home long, but her father and
mother began to take notice of this strange alteration in their daughter, yet
made as if they did not; But not long after her pensive sorrovv was turned into
mad tricks, for she would fling, and break things, if any one sought to
restrain her, she would scratch and bite, and in her madness those were all
her words; I Am damned, I Am damned.

Master Miller (for so was her Father called) took great griese to see his
daughter, whom he loved so entirely, in such strange mad sits, using those
words before repeated, which maded is very heart bleed, sent his man to Oxford
to one Mr. Gill, a reverend Divine his Friend, desiring him that he would take
the pains as to come over to him to Banbury: his Man went, did his Message,
and without any stay Mr. Gill took horse, and away he went to Banbury, where,
Mr. Miller after many kind salutatio is, began and told him the whole
discourse, as you have heard already, as far as he himself knew, and she
being in her Fits, Mr. Gill desired to see her, and to talk with her, which
was most willingly granted, he had no sooner entered the Chamber that he saw
her, but she cried out, I Am damned, I Am damned, avoid Satan, avoid. Which, Mr.
Gill appeased presently with good words, and began to talk to her, and for the
space of half an hour she heard him quietly, but then she interrupted him,
and called for wine, saying, she was dry; all this while, Mr. Gill followed her
with good admonitions how to live, and how to gain heaven, if she would follow
it, She made him answer, that what he spoke was as false as God was true, and
having a Venice-glasse in her hand filled with wine, she threw it to the ground
which these words, That it was as impossible for her to be saved, as for that
Glass to re-bound into her hand unbroken, which contrary to the expectation of
all the beholders, the Glass did. Well, said this Gentlewoman, I will trust in
the Lord my Redeemer, and so began to relate the whole story which you have
already heard to Mr. Gill and her Father. Reader, this I have published, that
you may read and rejoice and take heed, and that the Brownist may see their
divellish Heresies, and repent.

FINIS.

