Prison Thoughts, WRITTEN BY Tho^: Browning CITIYEN AND COOK OF LONDON.

Who has been a PRISONER in Ludgate, ever since the Twelveth day of August,
1680.

Dum Spiro, Spero; in Deum, Adjutorem meum. London, Printed, and are to be Sold
by the Author, in Ludgate (who is still a Prisoner there.) Anno 1682.

To the Worshipful Geo. Dashwood, Esquire Dame Margeret his Wife, the Lady
Elizabeth Hare their Daughter; John Pery, Esquire Mrs. Katherine Browning my Wife,
where ever she is, and to all that are related to their Families, Grace and
Peace.
NOtwithstanding my many great Troubles, I have had some retired Thoughts in my
Adolescens, which are here brought to public View, and do desire you to
Patronize the same. If you and others shall find such benefit by reading them,
as I have done by writing the same, my ends are answered. Time was, when I had
no Thoughts of putting my self in Print, but, Necessitas non habet Legem. These
are my first Fruits as an Offering to the World, which pray accept. I do intend
another suddenly, which perhaps may be more acceptable, and sell better than
this. My weak Endeavors shall not be any whit wanting therein.

Who am Your Most Humble and Obedient Servant in the Lord, Thomas Browning.
Nosse Teipsum. Vivat Rex, Curret Lex, Floret Grex. Finis Coronat Opus.
A Copy of a Letter sent to my Wife;
My Admiration,
IN my Fifty Eighth Letter I sent you some Verses, and this is my Fifty Ninth,
where you may find an Epistle, which pray peruse. It is in vain to expect any
Approbation from you, having never yet received one Line in Writing from your
Hand. And perceiving that you are resolved neither to see, nor send to me, I do
think that this may be the last time that I may trouble you in Writing: only
remember that you have abused, neglected, slighted, and robbed a most Indulgent
and loving Husband; for which I pray God to give you a hearty Repentance,
before it be too late, and there be no means left to help your self; as
likewise all those who have unlawfully, and very maliciously advised against me
without any Cause. And if you, or they have any Pretenses, I do hereby dare
either to make them known to me, or the World; assuring that mine shall shortly
be made known in Print, with as much Severity as Truth will bear, who am still
you Loving, though most Abused Husband,

Thomas Browning.

Prison Thoughts, etc,
OH despised, despised, despised; rejected, rejected, rejected, and Destroyed
by you, my own Dear Wife, whose Name is Katherine Browning; I pity, I pity, I
pity, and shall not cease Praying for you Day and Night, that you may be
converted: when you hear of Brownings Death, occasioned by your means, you may
shed a tear for him, if there be any Grace in you; none ought to despise their
own Flesh; Whom God has Joined together, let none put ader: And if you had not
gone from me, you might have been Mistress of our Company; they have chosen an
old Master this year in my stead. Take heed of these dreadful Sentences: You
that are filthy, be filthy still. There remains no more Sacrifice for Sin, but
a fearful looking for of Judgment, Fiery Indignation, and fierce Anger of the
Lord: with a, Go ye Cursed into Everlasting Fire, prepared for Devils and
Damned Spirits. From which Place, Good Lord deliver us. My Epistle begins: Few
and evil have been the days of my Pilgrimage, I have had for Inheritance the
Months of Vanity, and painful Nights have been appointed unto me; and do know
that hereafter is laid up for me a Crown of Righteousiness, and not for me
only, but for all them who love the appearance of the Lord Jesus: Therefore all
the days of my Life will I wait as a Hireling till my Change shall come. For I
desire to be Dissolved, and to be with Christ, and do long to remove out of the
Body, to dwell with the Lord; For I do know that if this Earthly House of my
Tabernacle were destroyed, I have a Bulilding given of God, that is a House not
made with Hands, but Eternal in the Heavens: Therefore I sigh, desiring to be
clothed with my House which is from Heaven: and I do heartily look for, and do
hope, that in noth ng I shall be ashamed, but that with all confidence Christ
shall be magnified in my Body, whether it be by Life or Death, for whither I
live, it is to the Lord, or whether I die, it is to the Lord, therefore whether
I live or die, I am the Lords. To Him therefore be Praise and Glory for
evermore. I have fought a good Fight, I have kept the Faith, and do know in
whom I have Believed, and am persuaded that he is able to keep that which I
have committed to his Charge: Against that Day, the Lord will quicken my mortal
Body, and make it like to his own Glorious Body: Yea, though after my Skin,
Worms destroy this Body, yet I shall see God in my Flesh, whom I my self shall
see, and mine Eyes shall behold, and none other for me, though my Reins be
consumed within me, therefore I willingly lay down my Life, and commit my Soul
unto God, as unto my faithful Creator. How excellent is thy Mercy, O God,
therefore do I trust under the Shadow of thy Wings. O blessed is the man whom
thou do choose, and causest to come unto thee; he shall dwell in thy Courts,
and shall be satisfied with the Pleasures of thine House, even of thy Holy
Temple, thou shall give him drink out of the Rivers of thy Pleasures; for with
thee is the Well of Life, and in thy Light shall we see Light; send me
therefore thy Light and thy Truth, and let thy good Spirit lead me unto the
Land of Righteousness. Carry me, O Lord, by thy Mercy, and bring me in thy
Strength to thy Holy Habitation. Plant me in the Mountain of thine Inheritance,
even in the Place which thou have prepared, and the Sanctuary which thou have
Established, that I may see the Goodness of the Lord in the Land of the Living.
Let me behold thy Face in Righteousness, and let me be satisfied with thine
Image, for in thy Presence is the Fullness of Joy, and at thy right Hand are
Pleasures for evermore: Into thy Hands, O Lord, I commend my Spirit, for thou
have Redeemed it, O Lord God of Truth. Lord Jesus receive my Spirit. The end of
the upright man is Peace. As many as walk according to this Rule, Peace shall
be upon them, and upon the Israel of God. Now unto Him that is able to keep us,
that we fall not, and to present us faultless before the Presence of his Glory
with Joy, to God only-wise be Glory, Majesty, Dominion, and Power, both now and
ever, ever, ever, Amen.

Ludgate, The 12th of April, 1682.
For my most Esteemed Mistress Katherine Browning, These.
This was sent to her Aunt Madam Margaret Dashwood by the hand of Mr. Joseph
Steed, her Nephew, to be conveyed as is Directed.
SHall there be nothing left me but a Grave?
Shall I at last no other Dwelling have?
Oh let not Flesh and Blood take note of this,
For if She do, 'twill poison all her Bliss.
Could She but meditate on such a thing,
She would have little cause to laugh or sing;
It is a Death to her to think of Death,
How she shall rot, and loose her loved Breath.
Yet the great Jew that wisely could discrie
What things were not, and what were vanity,
What pleased the Soul, and what the Flesh did pain,
Did never think the thought of this was vain.
Then let my Soul, though Flesh and Blood, repine,
Ponder on that, shall make them both Divine;
But why, O foolish Flesh, shak'st thou at this,
Shrink'st thou from that which thy best Physic is,
Thou art Earth born, from it thou did descend,
And here grown Sick, thou can not easily mend,
Till t'ward thy Native Country thou repair;
And draw thy Meditations that cold Air.
Change but this Air, and think upon thy End,
Thy Sin will lessen, and thy Soul will mend.
For as at Sea, when Clouds put out the Stars,
When Winds from Heaven, and Waves from Earth make Wars,
And mad brained Sailers all the Decks over whelm,
The Pilate sadly sitting at the Helm,
Better directs the Ship where it should go,
Than all their wild Endeavors can: even so
When through the Worlds dark Storms we send,
One quiet Pilot sitting at the End:
One thought of Death our Course more right does guide,
Than all the vain Works of our Life beside.
These thoughts will make those which our Souls blood quaff,
Like Horseleeches strow'd ore with Dust, fall off.
If then to think of Death be so, Oh why
Should any think it is not good to die?
That of all things that Mortals fear and shun,
Does hurt or grieve us least when it is done:
This it the Port, this is Sins perfect Cure,
Till our Grave cover us, we never are sure*
This only last remains, thither let us have,
Since Flesh and Blood still longs to know what is last:
It ever has belonged to Mortal Wights,
That several Heads take several Delights,
Some unto good, and some to bad have will,
But leaving that which I delight in: ill.
I joy in three which few can discommend,
And most desire next to a constant Friend;
And these are they that draw me most along,
A well writ Book, a Picture, and a Song;
But as for Wealth, in which most take delight,
I get it not, nor of it do I write;
But of those things endeavor brought me to,
I somewhat know, and somewhat I can do,
And these I love, and they do love to be
With such as love and seek their company:
But will they stay with me, Oh no, alas,
They were beloved long time before I was:
And when their Lovers died, they would shroud and spread,
Nor will they go with me when I am dead:
Some Learned Friend perhaps may on my Hearse
Scatter some Lines, and strew the Cloth with Verse;
Painting perchance may gild some Flag or Banner,
And stick it on my Coffin for mine Honor;
Music may sing my Dirge, and tell all Ears
I loved that Art which now their Senses hears.
And when it is done, and I no more can have,
Nothing will tarry with me but the Grave:
And it is most just, for here I did receive them,
I found them when I came, and here I leave them.
But will the things I want, and others have
Accompany their Owners to the Grave?
Will Beauty go; and strength in Death appear,
Will Honor, or proud Riches tarry there?
They all say, nay, for let grim Death draw near,
Beauty looks pale, and Strength does faint for fear:
There Is little Lust or Pride in naked Bones,
And Honor sits on Cushions, not cold Stones;
Nay, ask our Friends, that when we are in Health,
Would die for love of us, or for our Wealth.
Mark what they set their Hands to, view it well,
Your Friend till Death, but once being dead, fare well.
Naught then will tarry but the Grave, for note,
How of a man new dead men talk by Rote;
This was his Wife, says one, this was his Land.
This was his Friend, that was his Building, and
This was his Wealth, that his chiefest Bliss,
And thus they talk a while of what was his:
But walk the Churchyard, and thou shall have
Report, till Doomsday, say, this is his Grave:
If Kings and Queens then can no more procure,
Naught but my Grave will tarry with me sure.
Why therefore should I strive to get such Things.
Since what the World contains no Surety brings,
Like men that clasp at Spirits, catch the Air,
So while we look after the things seem fair,
And gripe at all the World to serve our Lust,
It through our Fingers slips, and leaves but dust;
Yet still the nearer Death we grow in Years,
This scraping Humor in us more appears,
And drowns not till we sink, so must it be,
For dying men will grasp at all they see
While they can see, when Sense fails, farewell all,
The World's too heavy, then they let it fall.
Though we are born clutch-fisted, when we die
We spread our Palms, and let them slip by;
And then when nothing else will with us stay,
We must our selves remain with Earth and Clay;
Since all I want here, God gives, and I have,
What can I more expect now but my Grave?
Here must we be, and where else shall we rest?
Is not a man's own House, to sleep in, best?
If this be all our House, they are to blame,
That brag of the great Houses whence they came;
And evermore their Speech they interlace,
I and my Fathers House, Alas! Alas!
What is my Fathers House, and what am I*
My Fathers House is Earth, where I must lie,
And I a Worm, no man, that fit no room,
Till like a Worm I crawl into my Tomb
This is my Dwelling, this my truest home,
A House of Clay best fits a House of Lome;
Nay it is my House, for I perceive I have
In all my Life, never dwelt out of a Grave;
The Womb was first my Grave, whence since I rose
My Body Grave-like does my Soul enclose,
Dying each Night, lies buried in my Bed,
My Body like a Corpse with Sheets o'respread,
Over which my spreading Teastures large extent,
Born up with Antiques, makes my Monument;
And over my head perchance such things may stand,
When I am quite run out in Dust and Sand;
My close low builded Chamber to my Eye,
Like to a Chapel shows, wherein I lie,
While at my Window pretty Birds do ring
My Knell, and with their Notes my Obits sing:
Thus when the days vain toil my Soul has wear'd
I in my Body, Bed, and House, lie buried.
Then have I little cause to fear my Tomb,
When this wherein I live is my Grave become;
Nay, we do not only our selves intomb,
But make for others, Graves in our own Womb,
Creatures of Sea and Land we in them bury,
And at their Funerals are blithe and merry,
Who groan to serve us thus, and die unwilling,
How can we then live long, who live by killing?
Methinks we should neither eat nor drink,
But strait to dig our Graves we should bethink;
For since by their dead Bodies we are fed,
I wonder all this while we are not dead:
It is an old said Law, yet still in request,
When Belly is full, then Bones would be at rest.
Well, have we fed the Flesh? and from Sins Cup,
Have drunk Iniquity like water up;
The Creatures we have eaten flead and shorn,
The Fruits from Earth to feed us, we have torn.
Are we not satisfied, Oh sure it is best,
That after all we get our Bones to rest,
And no where can the Flesh true slumber have,
But in our truest home, our homely Grave;
There we sleep sound, there let the Tempests roar,
The Worlds proud Waves shall dash on us no more
W're all deluded, vainly searching ways,
To make us happy by the length of days:
For cunningly to make's protract this breath,
The Gods conceal the happiness of Death;
We are at home, and safe, whatever comes,
Let them fight on, we shall not hear their Drums;
Let those be doted on, now love, or hate,
It shall not grieve us, though they prove ingrate;
Yea, let them praise, or rule, we lie aloof
Out of their reach, our sleep is Cannon proof;
And we but sleep, for as we close our eyes,
Each night we go to Bed in hopes to rise;
So do we die, for when the Trump does blow,
We shall as easily awake we know,
And as we after sleep, our Bodies find
More fresh in strength, and cheerfully inclined;
So after Death, our Flesh here dead and dried,
Shall rise Immortal, new and purified;
If this be true, why make we no more have,
It Is time to sleep, day fails, Night draws on fast,
Let Us get us home, for as the Evening Sun,
Looking us in the face when day is done
Makes us cast longer Shadows, so when Death
Looks in our face through Age and claims our Breath,
We cast his shadow long off from our sight,
Yet may we know right well it is almost night,
And when we see night come in frowning Skies,
What man will not go home, if he be wise?
Here let him come, this House is of such fashion,
The Tenant never shall pay for Reparation,
There shall the Due not wet him, Cold not harm him,
There shall no Summer weather over warm him.
From thence he will find, when thither he is gone,
A private Walk to Heaven for 'mself alone:
Why do we not then go? Are Flesh and Blood
The hinderers that clog us from our Good?
Oh! rye thy self at home, and cast off those,
What wise man ever went to bed in's Clothes?
Shall we that know how after this Life ends,
An Everlasting one for us attends,
Grieve to lay down these rags for Earth to keep,
That we a while may take a nap of Sleep.
Then were we worse than children: for but say,
That they to morrow shall have Holy Day,
They Will straight to bed, and put off all Apparel:
Then cease, my Flesh, with Heavens Decree to quarrel,
And with these words reduce thy Thoughts that come,
He that dies first, shall only first go home;
But when thy Flesh hither to thee prepares,
Say, as when thou go to bed, thy Prayers;
Since he most often forgets himself in Death,
That thinks not of his God that gives him breath;
Invoke his Mercy e're thy rest thou take,
For as thou fall'st asleep, so shall thou wake;
This House, of which before we have been telling,
Is but a sleeping Chamber, not a Dwelling:
For when thou wak'st, this House no more shall hold thee,
But that whereof the blessed Apostle told thee,
Saying, If this our earthly House shall once decay,
We have a House not made by hands with Clay,
But in the Heavens. Eternal blessed is he,
Whom thou, O Lord, admittest there to be,
He(...)thy Courts shall dwell, thy Temples store
Shall in thy House fill him for evermore;
But stay, my Soul, thou can not yet come thither,
Thy Wings are clogged, and thou more strength must gather;
Mean time till from the Earth thou get'st free scope,
Even in thy Grave thy Flesh shall rest in Hope.
Meditations on Sleep.
THe Night is come like to the Day,
Depart not thou, great God away;
Let not my sins, black as the Night,
Eclipse the luster of thy Light;
Keep still in my Horizon, for to me
The Sun makes not the Day, but thee;
Thou whose Nature cannot sleep,
On my Temples Sentinel keep,
Guard me against those watchful Foes,
Whose Eyes are open while mine close,
Let no Dreams my Head infest,
But such as Jacobs Temples blessed;
Whilst I do rest, my Soul advance,
And make my rest an holy Trance,
That I may, my rest being wrought,
Be wak't into some holy thought,
And with an active vigor run
My Course, as does the nimble Sun;
Sleep is a Death, Oh make me try,
By sleeping, what it is to dye;
And as gently lay my head
On my Grave, as now my Bed;
How ere I rest, great God, let me
Awake again at last with thee;
And thus assured, behold I lie
Securely whether to wake, or dye;
These are my drowzy Days, in vain
I do now wake to sleep again:
Oh come that hour, when I shall never
Sleep no more, but wake for ever.
Thus shall I take leave of the Sun,
Desiring sleep till the Resurrection.
Against Drowziness.
Permit not sluggish sleep
To close your waking Eye,
Till you with Judgment deep
Your daily Actions try;
He that his sins as Darlings keeps,
When he to quiet goes,
More desperate is, than he that sleeps
Among his mortal Foes;
At Night lie down prepared to have
Thy sleep thy Death, thy Bed thy Grave,
On Patience.
Patience is the Poor man's Walk,
Patience is the Dumb man's Talk,
Patience is the Lame man's Thighs,
Patience is the Blind man's Eyes.
Patience is the Poor man's ditty.
Patience is the Exiled man's City.
Patience the sick man's Bed of Down.
Patience is the Wise man Crown.
Patience is the live man's Story.
Patience is the dead man's Glory.
When your Troubles do control,
In Patience possess your Soul.
FFormerly, when I have seriously thought and remembered my Vow in Baptism, it
has made me courageous to fight against the World, the Flesh, and the Devil,
which has made me often take up Resolutions, that I would scorn to be a
Coward: but as Fools make a mock at Sin, so have I deceived my self by too
eager pursuing Worldly Vanities, thinking to have found undermoon Comforts,
till I found my self beset with Snares, and that there were bitter things
written against me, which pierced me with sorrows, and I was almost in despair,
had I not been sustained with these Comforts following, which has since much
refreshed me, and vanquished the Tempter, so that now I do rejoice in God my
Savior, and the Lord has thus spoken. Oh my Beloved, why fear thou, and
art so cast down, and disquieted within thy self? Do thou well to be angry
with my Chastisements? And why art thou offended that I should make thee like
my self? Causing thee to walk in the way of inward and outward Griefs, which I
did tread before thee. Why refusest thou to take up my Cross and follow me, and
to taste of that Cup which I drank before, and for thee? (The Soul) Oh Lord,
give me of thy Spirit, and all trouble with thee, or for thee, shall be sweet
unto me. What ever thou did, Oh Lord, it was for me; and if I were so
disposed, as I should, then would I be content to bear all that thou my God
should be pleased to lay upon me. But alas! it is my cursed Corruptions that
makes me think thy Cross my Burden. Lord therefore uphold me by thy Grace,
that I may count thy Yoke easy, and find joy in these Sufferings with thee.

The Lord. I know the Cause of thy Grief and Terror to be the Consideration of
thy Sins. But I pray thee, Why look thou so to thy Sins, that thou look
not to my Mercies? Why would thou so extol thy evil Deeds, that thou should
extenuate my rich Mercies, or any way compare the one with the other? Was it
for thy good Deeds that I did first enter into Friendship with thee? And
think thou now that for thy evil Deeds I will utterly forsake thee? Seeing
it is among my Praises, that the Work which I have begun, I will perfect it. I
like it well indeed, to see thee grieved for the Sins thou have committed
against me: But I would also have thee comforted in the Mercies that I have
showed thee: Call to mind my Works of old, and what I have done to thee since
thou can remember. How cared I for thee in thy young and tender Years? Look
back now and see. Did not the Angel of my Presence lead thee when thou had no
wisdom nor strength to govern thee? Did not I then begin to acquaint thee with
the Knowledge and Fear of my Name? Can thou deny now that my Mercy preserved
thee from many Sins whereunto thy Nature was prone, and ready to have declined?
And when thou sinnedst, with what long patience have I waited thy turning, and
how lovingly have I winked at thy Transgressions? And when I had given thee
Grace to repent of thy Sins, and to seek for my Favor and Mercy for the Sins
of thy youth, with a melting heart and a mourning eye. Can thou deny that I
have filled thy Heart with my Joys, and made thy tongue to burst out in singing
and glorying Speeches? And why then will thou not trust in my Mercies to the
end?

(The Soul) I were, O Lord, most unthankful if I should not confess, that many
a time in the multitude of my thoughts, thy Mercies have comforted me. But
alas! I have not answered thy Loving Kindness; for after many Mercies received,
I have sinned against thee contrary to my Light; and my sins are now before me,
witnessing that I am unworthy to taste of the sweetness of thy Mercies any
more. (The Lord) Is my Mercy only for a Day, or a Year? Or is it for ever and
ever toward those that I have made mine in Christ Jesus? Will thou restrain my
Mercies, and limit them within thy narrow Bounds, as to think they cannot be
extended over all thy Transgressions? Will thou measure my Mercies with so
narrow a span, as to think that I have no more to give than thou have to
receive. Is it not among my Praises, That I am able to do exceeding abundantly,
above all that my Children can ask, or think, of me. Know thou not, that as
the Heavens are above the Earth, so are my Thoughts above thine? Have thou not
considered that my Mercy is above all my Works? How much more then is it above
thee, who art nothing in comparison of my mighty Works? And if it be above
thee, how much more above all thou can do. Why then will thou match thy Sins
with my Mercies? If I require such Mercy in my Children, that I will have them
to forgive one another, not only seven times, but seventy times seven times.
What pity, compassion, and readiness to forgive is in my self. Therefore my
Beloved, despair not for the multitude of thy Sins; but be comforted with my
Promises of Mercy. I have made them without Exceptions of Sins: For albeit they
were Sins of Scarlet, they shall be made white as Wool. I have made them
without exception of Persons. For whosoever shall depart from his Wickedness
and turn to me, I will receive him. Let this threefold Universality of my
Promises sustain thee, that thy Infidelity contract not my Mercy into narrower
bounds than I have extended them. (The Soul) Be merciful, O Lord to my
Infidelity. I believe in part, Lord, help my Unbelief. Establish and confirm my
unstable heart with thy good Spirit. My Conscience does in such sort condemn
me, that I stand in fear of thy Justice; for thou art greater than my
Conscience, and wilt much more condemn me, if thou do enter into Judgment
with me. (The Lord) Oh my Beloved, consider that the Cause of thy present
Unquietness is, because with the one Eye thou look to thy Sins, and my
Fathers Justice, and with thy other Eye look not to me, in whom his Justice
is satisfied, and thy Sins punished already. Tell me, I pray thee, Think
thou in thy self, to get such a Holiness of thy Disposition, that which shall
exempt thee from the Fear of his Justice? Or art thou content to seek it in me?
If in thy self thou seek it, remember what thou art doing. Will thou have
the Lord bound and obliged to thee? Will thou be thy own Savior? Or shall it
be said, His Mercy Saved thee not. If no misery were in thee, whereupon should
his Mercy be manifested? And if thy disposition in the Earth be such as it
should be, then what remains, but that the Praise of his Mercy should fall to
the ground. Turn thee therefore to me, and seek thy Life in me. If thou will
know what is thine, thou art a Sinner. Let my Praise be reserved to my self. I
am thy Savior. Esteemest thou that my words are ineffectual, or that there is
no force in my Suffering. Countest thou thy Sins so deadly, that my Merit and
Virtue cannot cure them: Will a Physician pour out a rare Ointment either where
no need it, or where it cannot profit: and think thou that my Father would
have my Blood to be shed in vain. If his Justice terrifies thee, remember his
Justice was satisfied in me, and that he pronounces this Sentence Himself;
This is my Beloved Son in whom I am well pleased. I came into the W^^ld, not to
call the Righteous, but Sinners to Repentance. Tarry not from me because thou
art a Sinner, but for that Cause come unto me, and I will refresh thee

(The Soul) Oh Lord, I know there is a cleansing and reco^^ding Virtue in thy
Blood. That Life is in thy Death. But ^^^ll I fear my Sins deserve that thou
should never apply thy Virtue, nor thy Merits to me: for alas, I find that
the Old man is lively and strong in me; and that the motions of Sin have power
in me to bring forth Fruits unto Death. (The Lord) Be not I pray thee injurious
to thy self in the work of my Grace in thee; Complain not of thy Corruptions.
But that thou may give unto me my own praise. Can thou deny but thou have
felt my Power working in thy Soul? Have I no^ sprinkled thy Conscience many
times with the purifying and pacifying Blood of Christ, from which has flowed
to thee such a witnessing of good things, such a sense of Mercies, as for the
time has filled thy heart with Joys, and thy mouth with Songs of Praise? Have
I not stirred thee up sometimes with great fervency to call upon the Name of
the Lord? Have I not made thee to give Christ's Name a public Testimony with
thine own disadvantage? And how often has thy heart been effectually moved at
the hearing of my Word, in such sort, that it wrought in thee a holy Remorse,
and an inward Contrition for Sin, which has broken out into tears? Have I not
made thee to wrestle against thine inordinate Lusts? Have I not given thee
Strength many a time to stand against Satan's Temptations? Whereas if I had left
thee to thy self, how often had thou been made a Prey to thine Enemy?
Remembrest thou not that the Tempter has often assaulted thee? But I have
withdrawn the occasion of Sin: and when the occasion has served, did I not
restrain and hold back the Tempter? Yea, when both the occasion and Tempter
were present, have I not filled thy heart with the Fear and Love of my Name,
and so kept thee from sinning against me? And whereas many times of thy
weakness thou have offended, Did not I with a melting heart and mourning eye
raise thee again, and renew my former familiarity with thee? So that thou can
never say, from the first hour that I begun to renew thee, that I have suffered
thee to lie in thy Sin, as I have done others that are S^rangers to my Grace;
and many notable Effects of my working in thee, thou can not deny. Are not
these the undoubted Tokens of my Grace in thee? Will Nature do such things?
May thou not feel by these, that I have begun to apply to thee Christ's Merits
for the Remission of thy Sins, and Christ's Virtue for quickening thee to a new
Life? Therefore think of thy self as barely as thou will; but let the Work of
my Grace be esteemed by thee according to the excellency of it. Be humble and
cast down when thou look on thine own corruption. I find no fault with thee,
but I rejoice and am glad of the new Workmanship which I have begun in thee.
Indeed if there were nothing in thee but that which thou have by nature, thy
state were very miserable: but seeing thou find a new Workmanship in thee,
be comforted. Art thou in Darkness, that there is no Light in thee? Or does Sin
possess thee, that besides it, also there is not a Will in thee to do Good, and
a Love to Righteousness. If thou say that thou have no Sin in thee, thou art
a Liar. And if thou say thou have no other thing in thee but Sin, thou art
also a Liar. And think thou that seeing I have begun to translate thee into
my Light, and to make thee a new Creature, think thou that I will leave thee
till I have done, till I have done my Work in thee. Therefore my Beloved give
not such ear to Satan and thy own Corruptions, as to take this Testimony
against me, or make thee think that my Pledges which I have given thee, are not
worthy of Credit, that by them thou should be assured of my Mercy. (The Soul)
I cannot deny, O Lord, but that many times I have felt the sweetness of thy
heavenly Consolations, which have greatly rejoiced my Soul. But alas! my grief
is so much the more, that by my own Defaults I should now be deprived of them:
for I have grieved thy Holy Spirit; yea, I have done what I could to quench
him, and therefore it is, that the Comforter who was wont to refresh my Soul,
is away, nor can I feel his Presence with me as before. (The Lord) Because I am
not changed, therefore it is that ye, O Sons of Jacob, are not consumed: many
are the Changes indeed whereunto you are subject, but I remain the same, and
there is no shadow of alteration with me. Be not therefore afraid, O my
Beloved, neither esteem thy self to be rejected of me; albeit that sometimes I
hide my face from thee. All my ways are Mercy and Truth to mine. It is for thee
that sometimes I go from thee, and it is for thee that again I do return unto
thee: for if I come, it is for thy Consolation, that continual heaviness should
not oppress thee by thy manifold Temptations. How often have thou found this
when thou were sick of Love: I have strengthened thee with Flagons of my own,
and comforted thee wi^^ my Apples: my Fruit has been sweet in thy mouth, and I
^a^ put my Left Hand under thy Head, and with my Right Hand I have embraced
thee. But least the greatness of my Consolations should exalt thee to disdain
thy Brother, and offend me, by imputing that to thy own disposition, which thou
have of my Dispensation, I have again withdrawn these glorious feelings from
thee; give me the Praise, that I know best what is expedient for thee. Had my
Servant St. Paul need to be humbled with the Buffets of Satan, least he should
be exalted above measure by the greatness of his Revelations? And have not thou
need, that by thy inward Exercises I should hold thee humble? If my Comforts
were always present with thee, thou would think thy Heaven, thy permanent
City, were here on Earth, and so cease to enquire for a better to come; thou
would take the place of thy Banishment for thy Home, and thy Earnest for thy
Principal Sum which I have promised thee. Consider this wisely with thy self,
and albeit I laugh not alike on thee at all times, and fill thee not always
with Joys, yet I always love thee; for whom I love, it is to the end; If I
close the Door of my Chamber upon thee, it is not to hold thee out, but to
leave thee to knock: If I cover my self with my Veiles, that thou can not see
a glance of my Countenance, it is only to stir thee up to seek me: and if
sometimes I seem to go from thee, it is to provoke thee to follow me, that thou
may make have from Earth to Heaven, where thou shall enjoy me without
Intermission. Was Joseph so wise, as to conceal his tender Affections from his
Brethren, till he had brought them to an humble acknowledgment of their Sin:
and was he again so loving, that when he saw them humbled, his Affections were
inflamed, and compelled him to reveal himself unto them. And think thou that
I am less wise and loving in dealing with mine. I gave at first, sharp Answers
to the Petitions of that Woman of Canaan; and so will I sometimes seem to deal
roughly with those whom I love, and to be angry even with their Prayers, but in
the end I will make my Love manifest to them, and with my endless Mercies
embrace them. (The Soul) Suffer me once again, Lord to speak, that thou may
answer me, and I shall complain no more. If we saw that such were our
Dispositions, as thy most Holy Word does require in us, then should thy
Comforts rejoice us. But alas! How far am I from that which I should be; my
strength is infeebled, therefore do my inordinate Affections oftentimes
overcharge me. If I turn me to pray, I cannot for the hardness of my heart: the
contrite Spirit, the melting heart, and mourning Eye are gone from me: If I
seek Comfort in thy Word, I find it not; I am troubled also with doubtings,
Armies of Fears and Terrors are against me, and all through the weakness of my
Faith, and partly for want of that Light which should inform me, my Infidelity
abateth me, to think that thy Visitations came from thine anger, and causes me
to answer the Errors of my Conscience as if they were just Accusations, and
partly for want of that apprehending and applying Virtue that is in Faith: I am
spoiled of my Comfort that thy Word has offered unto me. Therefore, O Lord,
have pity on the desolate State of my poor Soul. (The Lord) Let not, my
Beloved, the consideration of thy Wants, Defects, and Imperfections discourage
thee; remember that the measure of my Grace which I have given to my Saints
upon Earth, I have called it an Earnest-Penny, and First Fruits of the Spirit,
to tell them, that what ever Grace they have gotten, it is nothing in
comparison of that which they will get: seek not that therefore in Earth which
I have resolved no ways to give it thee, till thou do come to Heaven. Thy
Blessedness in this Life stands not in a saciety and full enjoying of that
which thou would have in a hungring and thirsting for it. If I had pronounced
them happy and blessed, that are now satisfied with righteousness, then thy
wants might have most justly discouraged thee; but I called them blessed that
hunger. If thou therefore do follow after Sanctification, and art weary of
the servitude of thy sins; if thou should seek comfort in my Word, and
could sind none of these at the first as thou would; yet remember that I
have promised to fulfill the Desires of those that fear me: if it does grieve
thee that thou can not pray at all times alike, remember that my Children are
often times ill Judges of themselves, and that their Estate is not always to be
measured by their feeling; for many Prayers may be made by them to me by my
Spirit, with sighs and sobs that they themselves are not able to express, yet
are known to me, and are like loud crying Voices, which I cannot but answer.
(The Soul) Oh my Soul, content thee with the Lords Dispensations, and doubt not
but all thy Wants and Desires that are holy shall once be satisfied, remember
how careful thy Savior was of the People that followed him; I have compassion
(says he) on these People, because they have nothing to eat, they have
continued with me already three days, I will not let them depart fasting, least
they faint by the way. O most sweet and comfortable Speeches, they seek not
from him, and he is careful to give them. If he was so careful to satisfy
their bodily Necessities, will be neglect the Spiritual Necessities of his own
chosen Ones: they followed him three days, and he counted it a long time; they
are to go from Him, and he fears lest they should faint. Oh my distrustful
Soul, will thou once learn to trust in the Mercies of thy God assuredly? Will
not he satiate thee who seeks Him? Will not he answer thee who cries unto Him?
Will he not care for thee who have waited upon Him, not only three days, but
many Years? And will he let thee faint in following of Him, who would not let
them faint in going from Him. O sweet Savor! happy are those that trust in
thee: Lord, therefore inerease my Faith in thee, that nothing may ever be able
to sunder me from thee. (The Lord) As for the weakness of thy Faith, which I
see is the ground of all thy trouble, it proceeds either from the want of
knowledge, or else from the want of Application. It is indeed a special benefit
to have the Mind enlightened with true Light: seek therefore my Light to shine
into thee, by continual Prayer, and scarching the Scriptures, that thou be not
troubled with the Error of Conscience, as if it were a just Accusation: I have
set Conscience indeed to be a Warner unto thee, but then shall thou take heed
to her Warnings, when they are warranted by my Word: if the error of
Conscience terrify thee in any thing, and make thee think that thy Crosses and
Visitations do come from mine anger, go and inform Conscience better by my
Word: remember, Whom I chastise, I love. And when I chastise thee, I am not
seeking satisfaction to my Justice, what marvel, such Thoughts disquiet many.
Consider, I pray thee, that notable Promise of mine made to my Servant David,
and in him, to all the rest of my Saints; If they break my Statutes, I will
visit their Transgressions with Rods, yet my Loving Kindness will I not take
from them, neither alter my Covenant for ever. (The Soul) Oh Word full of
Comfort, my Soul, forget it never; that when his Rods are laid upon thee, yet
his Loving Kindness is not taken from thee, and though thy Transgressions be
many, yet will he not alter his Covenant with thee: remember it, I say, that it
thy trouble thou give no more place to the Misconceptions of Gods Workings with
thee, as Godly Job thought in his trouble, that the Lord was pursuing him for
his Sins, and made him possess the Iniquities of his Youth; which as yet
appears by the Course of that History, was not the Lords Intention. So have I
thought many times, that the heavy Hand of the Lord laid on me, had proceeded
from his Wrath, as if he had shut up his Mercy in displeasure for ever: but
Lord, let thy Mercy and Light abide with me, that I sin no more with such
distrustful Motions against thee: and now Lord, speak on further to thy
Servant, for thy Comforts have refreshed me, and rejoyeed my Soul. (The Lord)
As for the weakness of thy Faith, which I see is the ground of all thy trouble,
it proceeds either from the want of Knowledge, or else from the want of
Application. It is indeed a special benefit to have the Mind enlightened with
true Light; seek therefore my Light to shine into thee by continual Prayer, and
searching of the Scriptures, that thou be not troubled with the error of
Conscience, as if it were a just Accusation. Now concerning the weakness of thy
Faith in the Apprehension and Application of my Promises: remember that I am
He, that Will not break the bruised Reed, nor quench the smoking Flax. What
smaller thing is there than a grain of Mustard Seed? Albeit if the measure of
thy Faith were no more, yet have I not excluded it from the participation of my
Promises. A loving Father will delight to be holden by the hand of his
Children; and know thou not, that as a Father spares his Son, so will the
Lord spare them that fear Him. Have thou not read, that although the Faith of
my Servant Jacob was very weak, as thou may perceive by the great fear he
conceived of his Brother Esau; yet his weak Faith was able to hold me till I
blessed him. Be not therefore discouraged; for although thou can not lay hold
of me by the hand of strong Faith, if thou can but touch the Hem of my
Garment with thy finger, thou shall draw virtue out of me. Consider also with
thy self, that the Faith of my Children is never greater, than when their
feeling is weakest, and least perceived. It is easy for every one to believe
in the midst of great Feelings, and unspeakable Joys: but when a man can feel
no sensible Comfort in me, and yet believe and trust in me, and still believe
and wait on me for Comfort, certainly the Faith of that man is great: and such
was the Faith of my Servant, who in his greatest troubles gave me this answer,
Albeit thou should slay me, O Lord, yet both against Sense and Feeling will I
trust in thee. And did not also that Woman of Canaan, with an invincible Faith
cleave to my Mercy, even then when she had no feeling of Mercy; and I gave her
no favorable answer? For which, in the end, I called her Faith a great Faith.
(The Soul) O my Savior, thou art the Strength whereby I stand in Temptations.
Cursed be he that would make my Soul to conceive wrongfully of thee. Be
merciful, O Lord unto me, and never let the malice of my Enemies prevail over
me. Sweet Jesus, keep the Heart that through thy own Grace would fain keep
thee. And now, my Soul, remember, that this is but the time of Fighting; the
time of Triumphing will come. Why then shall the continuance of these restless
Assaults disquiet thee? If thou had never been Victorious but once in all thy
Life time, yet what Mercy had it been, that the Lord in the midst of the Battle
should make thee to Triumph. But thou can not deny but that many joyful
Victories now, and before has the Lord given thee? Therefore, my Soul, rejoice
and return to thy former rest, for the Mighty God has been beneficial unto
thee: and account every one of these Temporal Victories to be a Pledge to thee
of the full and final Victory that once thou shall enjoy over all thine
Enemies, when the God of Peace shall tread Satan under thy Feet. O Lord, if
such Comforts be in the Cross, what is in the Crown? And if thou give us such
Joy when thou take us into thy Hand to correct us with thy Rod, Lord, what
will thou make us to find when thou shall embrace us in thy Arms, and kiss us
with the Kisses of thy Mouth? Oh that these Feelings might ever abide with me.
What trouble would not be easy, when thy Comforts are present? Surely, O Lord,
all trouble vanishes so soon as thou do begin to glace upon my Soul.
Therefore, O my Love, my Light, my Life, my Joy, my Crown, my Glory, my
Strength, my Help in time of need, stand thou on my side, and I will not fear
what mine Enemies can do unto me. O happy time, that I ever knew thee: blessed
be the Name of the Lord for evermore: O Enemy Satan, albeit thy Enmity be
trouble some unto me, yet I thank my God through Jesus Christ, that thou art
against me, and that he has put me in the Warfare to fight against thee; when
I consider that in Paradise the Lord proclaimed irreconciliable Enmity between
thee and my Blessed Savior, the Seed of the Woman, Christ Jesus, I account my
Hope happy, that thou art against me, and that Grace is given unto me to fight
against thee; for thereby I know that I am none of thine: but I do stand on
that Side whereof Christ is the Captain, all his Saints are Soldiers, and the
Victory is most certain. O deceitful Serpent, if I have found such Error
arising of those Sins which foolishly I did by thy Inticements, what should I
have found if I had followed thee in all the rest? From which the Lords
preventing Mercy did keep me. I have learned by Experience, that thou art a
faithless false Traitor, thou do tempt a man to Sin, and then for the same
Sin that he did by thy Instigation, thou art the first that does accuse him.
The Lord confirm this good Purpose of my Heart, that I never hearken any more
to thy lying Words, and suffer not my Soul to be circumvented by thy lying
Snares, which are deceitful. And as for the Work of my Salvation, seeing it is
a Work that my God will work in despite of thee, wherefore shall I regard thy
Testimony. Thou did put in question, Whether my Savior were the Son of God?
And what marvel if thou do say to his Children, that they are none of his. Is
there any Truth so undoubted, but thou dare deny it at any time? Why shall I
therefore at any time enter into a disputing with thee any more? My Salvation
stands not in thy questioning, nor in my answering, but in the Lords
unchangeable Decree of Election: if thou shoulst speak for me, yet should I not
be the better; neither if thou speak against me, am I the worse. When thou
did confess that Jesus was the Son of God, he rebuked thee, and thought it
not Honor to Him for to have thy Testimony. When thou did cry out, that Paul
and Silas were the Servants of the Most High God, albeit thou spakest the
Truth, yet did they not accept of thy Testimony. So although thou would say
to me, that I am not the Elect Child of God, shall I think my self ever the
more unsure for that: and if on the contrary, thou should deny it, I am
therefore the more sure of my Salvation. Speak what thou will, thou art always
a Liar, like thy self, as thou have been from the Beginning. Cursed of the Lord
art thou in all thy ways, and with all thy Confederates. Cursed are all they
that are in Friendship with thee. And Blessed for ever be the Lord, who has
delivered me from all thy Deceit and Tyranny. Blessed be thou, O Lord, that it
has pleased thee to visit the base Estate of thy Servant, to sucoour me in my
distress, and to comfort me with thy Mercies, Lord, evermore feed me with this
Manna, and refresh me with the Springs of the Water of Life: show at all times
some of thy Mercy to me, that my Enemy Satan, who labors to disquiet me, may
be ashamed, because thou art with me always to succor me. If ye will mark and
consider, you shall find that the Children of God, in all their Temptations,
are not so much Doers with their Will, as Sufferers against their Will: this
Cogitation coming in my Mind, suddenly Comfort did spring in the midst of my
Trouble; God giving me Grace to understand that these Motions wherewith I am
troubled, were not so many Actions done by me; for in truth, I do neither like,
nor allow of them, but as Spiritual Oppressions of my Enemy, who still warreth
against me sometimes with Armies of Fears, sometimes with Armies of Doubtings,
and with Armies of unclean and wandering Motions, and sometimes with Bands and
Troops of Worldly Cares, making Invasion upon my Soul, and laboring to quench
the sparks of Spiritual Life, which the Lord had begun in me; therefore answer
for me, O Lord, for I suffer Violence, my Enemy would oppress me, but Lord, my
hope is ever in thee, succor me with thy strength, and I shall live; and Lord,
impute not to me any of those sinful Motions which mine Enemy raises against
me, and in me to destry my Soul. Consider this wisely, O my Soul, and remember
it; God that has entered thee into this Warfare, and is a Spectator and Helper,
will never reckon up to thee Satan's Deeds for thine, and learn thou wisely how
to distinguish them, and faint not for them, but comfort thy self as long as
thou art able to stand to thy Pretestation, that thou do suffer Violence in
them, and can say with the Apostle, This is not I, but Sin that dwells in
me. O Lord, deliver me from the rage of this Tyranny; many a time have I looked
to have been swallowed up of him, but thou have sustained me. Blessed be my God
for ever, and the Lord be my strength to the end. O Lord, how can it be
possible that my Soul can live here in this absense from thee, or walk in the
midst of these continual Snares, or stand against these raging Temptations,
except it please thee now and then to she^ thy Face unto me. Joseph 's State in
Prison was not so heavy as mine, his Temptations in Potiphar's House were not
so continual as mine are And Daniel 's Fear in the midst of the Lions, was no
greater than mine, who every day tasted of a thousand Deaths. Jeremiah in a
dark Dungeon, was not vexed with such Horrors as daily gather themselves
together about, and against me; the only comfort of my Soul is in the multitude
of thy Mercies; thou were with Joseph, and therefore the Prison was the more
pleasant to him than Potiphar 's Palace. Thou were with Daniel, and therefore
the raging Lions were peaceable to him. O Lord, be with me, and increase thy
strength in my Soul, and it shall live, though the time be not yet come that I
shall appear in thy Presence, and see thee, yet Lord, let me have in this Land
of my Pilgrimage those glances of thy sweet and loving Countenance, that may
sustain me; for thou, Lord, art able to let me see as much joy in thy sweet
Face, in one hour, as may sustain me for ever: and without this sight, how can
my Faith but fail, my Hope but hover, and my Life but languish? Therefore, O
Lord, hide not thy Face from my Soul for ever: but as thou do acquaint my
Soul with Troubles, so let me see at all times, that as my Sufferings do abound
in me, so my Consolations may abound through Jesus Christ. I know thou always
beholdest me in Mercy, but Lord, let me see that thou look upon me, that I
may feel thy Mercies sweet unto my Soul; and let me find every day by good
Experience, that Jesus Christ is formed in me, and enable me to live a holy
Life here, so that I may live with thee a happy Life hereafter in thy Heavenly
Kingdom for ever.

IF thou art Learned, be also pious, for Learning sanctified, is an Ornament to
Grace: but Learning corrupted is an Advocate for the Devil. Call in mind, and
oftentimes examine thy self; arcounting thy self by thy Thoughts, Words, and
Deeds, especially after much Business, Discourses, Pastimes, etc. Silence is
commendable in things that appertain not to thee, to the end thou may the
better call to mind the Sufferings of a Crucified Savior. If God has blessed
thee with an Estate, relieve thy Brother, and so live as having little, yet
possessing all things: for remember that Meat, Drink, and Clothes are the
Riches of a Christian; and since Christ gave Himself for thee, well may thou
give some Fruits of thy Labor to those that are his; let Death be oft-times
the Subject of thy Meditations, yield thy self wholly to God, if thou art poor,
and have nothing to requite him with, but thy Prayers and thy self; yet if thou
give thy self to his disposal, thou then give all thou have; the Apostles
left their Ships and their Nets; the poor Widow gave only her two Mites to the
Poor-mans-Box, and she was preferred before a wealthy Craesus. He easily
disposes all things of this World, that does but remember that he must dye, In
open Assemblies use not always Spiritual Things, least thou shall be thought
singular, except thou may edify others, and by thy Example, stir them up to
the like: on all Occasions prefer the Glory of God and his Service above all
things; be a Comfort to the afflicted, reconcile Differences, visit the Sick
and Imprisoned, and forget not to relieve the Poor and Needy; above all things
have fervent Love, for Love shall cover a multitude of sins: fast one day in a
Month, or oftener, if the strength of thy Body will bear it, and remember to
distribute thine Alms; for fasting and Alms are the Wings of Prayer; if
Perturbations or Discontents arise in thy Mind, apply thy self to Prayer, go
not to thy Rest in Wrath, least thou give the Common Enemy to Mankind an
opportunity to surprise thee; beware of inordinate Cares, least you dishonor
or deny God; for such Cares are needless, brutish, bootless and heathenish.
What need we care, when our Heavenly Father knows that we have need of these
things, and says, Be careful for nothing, but let us cast our Cares upon him,
for he cares for us: consider the Fowls of the Air, and Ravens that he feeds,
they toil not. Which of you by taking care, can add one Cubit to his Stature,
or Penny to his Estate; for after these things the Gentiles seek: repent daily,
let not the Devil have the Flower of thy Age, and God the Bran. The Spirit of
Prayer is far more precious than Treasures of Gold and Silver. Despise not the
Ministers of Christ, for Christ is the Word, and they are his Ambassadors of
it. God requires we should mortify our Lusts; for Prayer without that is the
Service of a Hypocrite: Sin brings shame and sorrow, but Pity has the
portion of everlasting Joys. Let us cloth our selves with everlasting
Righteousness, it is the safest Armor against the Darts of Satan. The two
Roads that lead to Heaven, are Innocence and Repentance; Sin is the Christians
greatest Sore, and Repentance the surest Salve: Who then would want the rare
Jewel of Repentance, since if ye seek; ye shall find? Thy Soul is Spiritual,
thy Body is Flesh; make not then Flesh of thy Spirit; for an habitual
Familiarity with corrupt Lusts, perverts it into the basest Flesh: God has
made Man a lovely Creature, do not thou make thy self a Monster: he dignifies
thee at first, to glorify thee at last. Then let not Carnality deprive thee of
thy Blessings; with thy Sins God will not own thee: if thou lust, thou have
lost the sense of Honor and Glory: study to recover it by Grace; thy Soul is
Immortal, and cannot dye, thy Body is Mortal, and must dye: let not thy Body
then be preferred before thy Soul, which has but a Lease for Life; then let
not a moment be preferred before Eternity; study not to satisfy thy Body and
neglect the Salvation of thy most precious Soul. It is madness to seek the
welfare of the Body, and thereby Eternally to ruin both Body and Soul: for so
the Immortal is made most damnably Mortal, and dies to Bliss, and the Mortal
miserably Immortal, and ever living to Woe: remember thy Soul is the Noble Part
of humane Nature; wherefore to set thy Affections on Earth is infinitely below
thee. Such is thy Nobility, thy Arms are thy Mind and thy Will, which were
created to embrace Mercy, Truth, Justice, Charity, etc. With all the Virtues of
a Heavenly Life: thy Body is Servant to thy Soul, let it tread upon the Earth,
for that is likewise its Subject; let not then the Soul, which is the Sovereign
of the Body, set its Heart upon that Earth on which its Subject sets its Foot.
In thy Soul is the Image of God, let it not be stained then with the similitude
of a Beast; let Reason, not Sense divert thee, a rational Will, not the
Appetite of a Bruit: he that lives a negligent and careless Life, does what he
can to out do the Devil in his own undoing; for God has given him Reason, and
his depraved Nature acts against it. If thou would be in Eternal Bliss, act
like Man, but appear like God, for Heaven has no room for Beasts of the Earth;
a wicked Spirit has deformed thee, let a Holy Spirit transform thee; every
Child of God should maintain his Fathers Likeness, that he may enjoy his
Inheritance. Thy Soul is the Spouse of God, the great Creator is its Husband;
no Creature is worthy to be thy Match or Mate; then consult thy Honor; if thou
love the World, and imbracest the Earth; can thou hate Adultery with men,
and be an Adultress to God; let not a Strumpet stand in thy sight; but
especially suffer not thy Heart to run after Vanity a whoring: if thou fallest
into evil Company, that shall court thee, let not the Devil woo thee. O my
Soul, thou Beloved above all Creatures, that have God for thy Husband, Heaven
for thy Dowry, and Earth for thy Service; suffer not Hell to be thy Pander to
dote upon the World, let thy Heart be a Habitation for God and Heaven: thy Soul
is the Lord of thy Body, take then thy Bodies Homage, not thy own ruin; let
thy Soul act the Will of God, and command the will of thy Body to act thine:
let not thy Body be thy God, lest thou be a Devil to thy self; thy Soul is an
Angels Peer, let it not be a Companion for Satan; let not thy Lordship be sold
for Slavery and Misery; if thou maintainst not thy Right, Hell must be thy
Harbor, Torments thy Terror, and wicked Spirits thy Company. Thy Soul under
God is the supreme Sovereign of thy Body; be not then a Subject to thy Subject;
let not the Law of the Members be the Law of the Mind, for the Senses are
Handmaids to the Soul, and she is the Princess of Heaven, thy Soul is a
freeborn Child of Eternity, Heir of Immencity, the Daughter of Almighty God,
who is beyond all the Bounds of Time and Being: to whom then oughtst thou to
pay thy Duty, but to him alone: thy Body is but a Prison to the Soul, thou art
enclosed in the Wall of Mud, and Gates of Sense: Can there be more pleasure in
a Prison than in a Palace? Shall a bodily restraint be preferred before the
Spirits Liberty? Can thou count thy Bondage to be thy Bliss? Are Chains of
Iron to be esteemed before the Treasures of Gold? Are Fetters better than
Freedom? Earth is but a Jayl to Heaven; then be not so rash as to prize thy
Jayl before thy Liberty and Delivery, least thou art cast into the Jayl from
whence there is no Redemption. It is most just, that the Soul which prizeth the
Devils Chain before Gods Liberty, should have the Devils Prison instead of Gods
Palace, and be for ever his Slave in Hell, that would not be Gods Servant for
a Time on Earth. Then O thou Beloved Dove of God, fly to thy Celestial Home:
belime not thy Spiritual Wings with slime and mudd; in Heaven is thy Treasure,
and where can thou sind more Tre^sures to invite thee? Be not like the Crow,
to feed upon Car^^on; or like the Blind Beetle, to place thy Blessedness in
Boggs, Make not sale of thy self, to buy a Jayl, when thou partest with a
Palace for the purchase, and becomest a Familiar to Bolts and Shacles: thy
Soul is Gods Jewel, and thy Body is the Casket; then keep thy Body clean, that
thy Soul may be the better preserved; it is a bright Diamond of Heaven, a spark
of the very Divinity, and a Ray of the Divine Glory, set for a time in the Foil
of the Flesh, til it pleases God to take it to himself, and keep it for ever
in his Cabinet. O let not thy Soul, that transparent Diamond, be an Ornament
for the Devils Finger, when it may sit at the Right Hand of God, where there
are Pleasures for evermore. Thy Soul is the Purchase of Christ, and bought with
no less than the Blood of the Only Begotten Son of God: then sell not that for
a Trisle which cost thy Savior so great a Price. It is better to enjoy the
Riches of Eternity, than to purchase that which is but Vanity, for a moment. If
thy Body be distempered, then thou requirest Physic, if it be wounded, thou
sendest for a Surgeon; if naked, it must have Clothes; and if hungered, it
must have Food; for these thou should depend upon God, for he knows all
these Things are necessary, and will give so much as is convenient of them to
thee. But when thy poor Soul is sick of Sin, has wounds of the Spirit, is
stripped of its Innocence, and starved for Grace, no Regard is given thereunto,
not considering, that though thou usest humane Helps, yet it is God that gives
the Blessing, and is the Physician both of Soul and Body. That Soul which acts
the Part of a faithful Servant to the Lord, shall have a double Reward, the
Crown of a Saint, and of a Sufferer. The Soul is Spiritual, but Sin makes it
Carnal; the Soul is Immortal, sin is the Death of the Soul, and being
contaminated therewith, it makes us die unto Grace, and to live in Grief: the
Soul is noble, but sin makes it ignoble^ the Soul is Lord, but sin inslaves it:
the Soul is Sovereign, sin brings it into subjection: the Soul is Godlike, sin
makes it beastial: the Soul is the Spouse of God, sin makes it the Strumpet of
the Devil: the Soul is the Jewel of God, sin casts it into the Devils Fire: the
Soul is a Freeborn Citizen of Heaven, sin keeps it in perpetual Imprisonment:
the Soul is Gods Purchase, sin cheats God of his due, and the Soul of Eternal
Bliss. Would thou be truly perfect, Love God with all thy Heart, and thy
Neighbor as thy self. Let thine Eye be always upon God and thy self, and thou
shall never see him without Goodness, nor thy self without Misery^ none shall
see God so much as he is visible, neither shall any love God so much as he is
amiable. He that does not covet to love God more and more, can never love him
enough, to whom God is all in all, the World, and all the Delights of it ought
to be nothing at all. Let us be what God will, so we be but his, and let us not
be what we will our selves against the Will of God. In the Service of God there
is nothing little enough to be rejected. And to meditate much upon God is good,
but the Souls great Advancement is Virtue, and it consists in much loving of
him: he to whom alone is pleasing, is displeased at nothing but that which
displeases God in Divine Matters: a generous Soul finds greatest Contentment
in believing things most difficult; all our Actions take their value from their
Conformity to the Will of God. Love and Suffering are the greatest Duties we
owe to God, they being the two Causes for which he dyed for us: he that
neglects his own Will, complies best with Gods Will. So love thy Neighbor here
upon Earth, as thou may enjoy his Love in Heaven: thou can not love thy
Neighbor too much, but thou may make too much show of thy Love to him; one
great Argument of our Love to our Neighbor, is to bear with his Imperfections;
we should never endure to hear any more evil spoken of him than of our selves;
we should never undervalue any Person; the Workman loves not that his Work
should be despised in his Presence especially: wherefore beware, for God is
present every where, and every Man and Woman in the World are his Work. It is a
Spiritual Injustice to desire co know the Secrets of others; and to conceal our
own. We ought not to love our Neighbor only because he is good, or because we
hope he will be so, but because God has commanded us so to do: In holy Duties,
we should speak little, think much, and do more: it is a great evil not to do
good: the Just man never dies unprepared; for he is prepared for Death who
perseveres in Justice to the End. Confidence in an unfaithful man, in time of
trouble, is like a brooken Tooth, or a Foot out of Joint: as he that takes
away a Garment in cold weather: and as Vinegar is upon Nitre so is he that
sings Songs to one that has a heavy Heart: it is no shame to be poor, though
some count it acrime; Nature brought us so into the World, and so we must
return: do thou want things that are necessary, grumble not, perchance it was
necessary thou should want them: however, if thou seek them, let it be by
a lawful Remedy or Means. If God do not bless thy Endeavors, yet do thou
bless him, that knows what is best for thee. Thou art God's Patient,
prescribe not to thy Physi^ian; art thou caluminated, examine thy own
Conscience: if thou find it spotted, thou have a just Correction; if not
guilty, thou have a very fair Instruction; use both, and so shall thou distill
Honey out of Gall, and make to thy self a secret Friend of an open Enemy; if
thy Enemy be hungry, give him Bread; if thirsty, give him Drink; thou thereby
shall heap Coals of Fire upon his Head, and a Reward into thy own bosom.
Charity makes God our Debtor, for the Poor are his Receivers. Have thou an
Estate, and would increase it, devide thy Riches to the Poor; these Seeds
that are scattered do bring forth their Increase; but such as are hoarded up,
they dye: Correction without Instruction makes the Master a Tyrant, and the
Servant a Novice: That man is a complete Conqueror that can subdue his own
Passions: faithful are the wounds of a Friend, but the Kisses of an Enemy are
deceitful. Arm thy self against a professed Adversary; but he that dissembleth
Frindship, strikes beyond a Caution, and wounds above a Cure: from the one thou
may deliver thy self, but from the other, Good Lord, deliver thee. A man that
flatttreth his Neighbor, spreads a Net for his feet: the Touchstone tries
Gold, and Gold tries Men: virtue must be the guide of all Qualities, otherwise
the Professors thereof are undone. As the Servants of God are known by their
two Virtues, Humiliation and Charity; so the Servants of the Devil are known by
their opposite Vices, Pride and Cruelty. The best way to keep good Acts in
memory, is to refresh them with new ones: to boast is but vain, since the
greatest Conqueror is but the measure of his own shadow, and shall find it no
longer than it was before his Victory: believe not Soothsayers, for Prophecies
are never understood till they are accomplished. The World is a wide Prison,
and every Day is an Execution day; our Stomachs are very common Sepulchers of
Birds, Beasts, and Fish; they all die to feed us. Lord, with how many Deaths
are our Lives patcht up, and how full of Death is the whole Life of Man; beware
of too much Drink; where Drunkenness is, and does reign, Reason is banished
into Exile, Virtue is made a Stranger, and God himself is become an Enemy;
Blaspemies are accounted Wit, and Oaths are Rhetoric, and Secrets are made
open Proclamations. Whosoever will arrive at a new Life, must pass by the old
Death of the old; he that is truly humbled, never thinks himself wronged; the
good Man is well contented with a moderate Estate, not so much taking notice of
those that have more, as those that have less in this World, than himself. He
that most mortifies his natural Inclinations, receives most Spiritual
Inspirations: to shun the accidental Troubles of this Life, is to meditate
often upon Eternity. It Is the great misfortune of man to desire those things
which he should only use. To have a desire not to be poor, and to receive the
Inconveniences of it, is too great Ambition; for, it is to desire the Honor of
Poverty, and the Commodity of Wealth. There is no way happily to end a true
Spiritual Life, better than daily to begin it. He that would have a Part with
Jesus glorified, must first take part with Christ crucified: we should live in
this present Evil World, as if our Souls were in Heaven, and our Bodies in the
Grave. In the death of our Passions consists the Life of our Souls. It is not
Humility to acknowledge our selves miserable, that is only to be a Beast: but
it is Humility to desire that others should esteem us so. There is no reason to
be given for the Fault we commit in Sin; for the Fault would not be Sin, if it
were not against Reason. Virtues have not their full Growth, but when they have
Desires to bring forth Advantage; which like Spiritual Seeds, serve to bring
forth and produce new degrees of Virtues. We should never speak of God, or the
Things which concern his Service, carelessly, or by way of Common Discourse or
Entertainment, but always with a great respect and humble mind. We should fear
the Judgments of God without Discouragement, and encourage our selves without
Presumption. The ready way for the Soul to have Peace with its self, is to
obtain his Peace with God; we may perform many Holy Actions, and yet not please
God, if we neglect to do what he requires of us, no more than a Painter, in
representing an Eagle, pleases him that desired a Be. Let us never look on
our Crosses, but through the Cross of Jesus Christ, thereby we shall find them
pleasant, and have fresh Desires to be afflicted; Desire to obtain the Love of
God, makes us to meditate, but that Love once obtained, makes us contemplate.
The Fear of the Lord is the Beginning of Wisdom; and the Price of Wisdom is
above Rubies. Oh let my Prayers be set before thee as Incense, and the lifting
up of my Hands be as the Evening Sacrifice, O Lord, my Strength, and most
mighty Redeemer. Oh my Soul! What fearful tremblings are these that have seized
upon thee now? So that the Thoughts of God, that have been, and ought to be thy
greatest Comforts, are now become thy Amazement: Whence is this miserable
Altaration, that thou must behold nothing but Judgment in the Father of
Mercies, and Anger in the Fountain of Love? What has provoked him that
delights to spare, to be resolved to punish? Surely my Sins are very many, for
it is not a few that will insense him, and they have more than ordinary
Aggravations; for he is not so highly displeased at small Offenses, and
certainly I have often committed them, and long continued in them; for he
begins not to frown upon the first Misdemeanour. Alas! Alas! the Cause is too
apparent, my Sins are both very many, and exceeding great; frequently repeated
with heinous Circumstances, and of long continuance; I have despised Mercy, and
now am like to feel Judgment, most miserable Wreth that I am. I have tired out
the Patience of a long-suffering Father, and have run away from the Embraces of
a Loving Savior, and have rejected the Offers of a most indulgent Holy Spirit;
so that now I fear I have stopped up the Fountain of his Mercy, and unsealed the
Treasure of his Vengeance; and I ought to wonder how God could spare me so
long, then why he should strike me now, since many have been cut off for fewer
and lesser sins. I see that I have deserved most justly to suffer the worst of
Evils. And therefore shall esteem it an incomparable Favor to be only
corrected with Temporal Afflictions, if I might be so excused; but it is a
fearful thing to fall into the Hands of the Living God. Therefore, O Lord, my
Flesh trembles for very Fear of thee, and I am afraid of thy most heavy
Judgments, yet I know no way to escape them. To deny my Sins, were great
Impudence, and to Excuse them, will be Apparent Hypocrisy, and to be concealed,
is impossible; to be found intolerable; I am miserably confounded; but was
never any in this sad Case before, that I might receive some Advice and Comfort
from them? Yes surely, the Church has presented me with a King and a Prophet,
both dear to God, whose Fears were greater, though their Sins were less, and
their danger not so great as mine. Yet these in the midst of their Fear,
considered their Sins as the only Cause of their Evils, and accordingly they
freely confessed them, bitterly lamented, and exceedingly humbled themselves
for them, not striving so much to avoid them in the Punishment, as to obtain
the Pardon of their Offenses; knowing that the guilt once removed, thou would
totally spare them, or gently chastise them for their good; where they rendered
themselves up into thy Hands, rather aggravating, than extenuating their Sins,
and yet humbly begging that they might be corrected in Mercy, and they found
the Benefit of it. Go to then, O my Soul, and do thou likewise, thou have
occasioned Gods Wrath by the Breach of his most holy Laws. O do not increase it
by mistrusting the blessed Gospel; thou have forsaken him by Sin, do not run
from him by Despair; for the faster that thou runnest from his Mercy, the
sooner thou shall be sure to meet with his Justice; delay no longer, but go in
before he sends for thee; accuse thy self before thou art Indicted; and confess
thy Sins freely before the Witnesses be called out against thee; pass sentence
on thy self before the Judge come to condemn thee. I cannot expect wholly to
escape; but it will be a great Favor if I meet only with a Sickness instead of
Death; Losses in my Estate, instead of loosing my God, and my Soul both, for
ever. I will not therefore desire my Heavenly Father altogether to lay aside
his Rod, but only to use it gen^ly, that I may by this smart be warned against
those future sins that would bring me to utter Ruin. O Lord, rather chastise
me than dis-inherit me, and those Stripes shall be welcome which come in an
exchange for Eternal Torments. For thou who do change thy Sword into a Rod, I
hope will be so compassionate in thy Afflictions, that I shall only feel what
my destempered Soul needs to recover it, and my Flesh and Spirit cannot bear;
not what my Sins deserve, and thy Justice might exact; wherefore I will no
longer hide my sins, but by an humble and hearty Confession will declare that I
hate them more than I fear to fall into thy most merciful Hands: and I hope
hereafter, that I shall so fear to offend, that I shall be freed from those sad
Expectations of thy heavy Wrath, which Wisdom God grant me, for my Savior
Jesus Christ's Sake. He that has a Request to make, that is considerable, to
an Earthly King, must not approach without a Present in his Hand: but my great
Request is to the King of Kings, to whose Laws I have been disobedient, false
to his Government, refractory to his Summons, and ungrateful to his former
Favors: and what can I offer him that needs nothing? and what can I give him,
whose both my self, and all that I have are? His Favor inheed is so sweet, so
desirable, and so universal a Comprehension of all happiness, that I could
freely give all I have, or may procure, for the Purchase of it. But the whole
World is Vanity to him, neither can such Triffles blind his Eyes, or bind his
Hands, buy his Mercy to the Unworthy, or avert his Judgments from the Sinner. I
would methinks expose my Body to the sharpest Torments, my Soul to the heaviest
Sorrows and my Life to the cruellest of Tyrants, and would account it a happy
purchase if I were sure of his Everlasting Mercies afterward. But it cost more
to redeem a Soul; I can give nothing but what is his already, and I can suffer
nothing but what I have deserved: What then? O where shall I have a
Peace Offering which may not be despised: I am told that there is nothing more
acceptable than a Broken Heart. It Is strange, Can a Heart polluted with the
Guilt, and inflamed with the Power of Sin, slow to begin, and unable to perform
any thing that is good, but vigorous to desire, and unwearied to pursue all
evil. Can a Heart shaken with Fears, torn to pieces with Terrors, and even a
Terror to it self, miserable and poor, blind and naked, can this Heart be a
fit Sacrifice for so Glorious and All-seeing, so Holy and Pure a God? Can he
like that whieh I abhor my self? Alas! it cannot be. But let me recall that
rash and hasty word, for he has said it who best knows what will please
himself; and if he vallues it, then it is worthy; for the true worth of any
thing is to be judged by his Esteemation of it: who knows but such a broken
Heart may be a greater Evidence of his Power and Mercy, a fitter Instrument of
his Praise and Glory, a plainer Table to describe his Grace, and draw his Image
on, than any other. Such a Heart I have, and if this will serve, I am happy; I
will give it freely to thee, O Lord, who despisest not the meanest Gifts, if
there be sincerity in the Giver. It was broken before with Fear, but now it
will be dissolved with Love. I am ashamed it is no better, but thy Mercy is the
greater in accepting it, and it will become better by being thine. Oh how am I
filled with Admiration on the Freeness and Fullness of thy Mercies, in
comparison of which the greatest humane Compassion is, and seems to be Cruelty.
I dare proclaim it, that in thee are all the Mercies in the World united, and
thou art Mercy it self in the highest Degree. If my Disobedience, and my
Negligence, Contempts, and Ingratitudes could have separated thee from thy
Mercy, I had now met thee in thy Fury, taking Vengeance without Pity; for I
have seemed to live as if I had designed to dare thee to turn thy self away
from me, and to try thy utmost Patience; the least part of which business would
have turned my best Friends in the World against me; but behold the Mercies of
my God continue still. O let me have the shame of an ungrateful Sinner, and let
thy Name have the Glory of an inexpressable Pity, even to those who are almost
ashamed to ask Pardon? yea, let me, to whom thou have showed so much
Compassion, have the Honor to be an Instance of thy Goodness to all the World.
And have I such a Father, Why then do I lie still with this Load of Guilt upon
my Soul? And with this heavy Burden of Sorrow upon my Spirit? What do I get by
these Complaints, but waste my Time, and double my Misery by sad Reflections? I
can neither have Help from my self, nor any Creature, but my Father alone, to
whom Mercies are as proper as Miseries are to me; and if I through Fear and
Sorrow sit still here and starve, I show not so much Pity to my self as he
would have for me, if he saw my distress. Wherefore I will arise and go to him,
though I think that I shall scarce have the face to ask him more, since I spent
the last so ill; I shall be ashamed to tell him how base I have been: but as I
was not ashamed when I did evil, so I must have shame when I suffer the shame
of its desert, I will go bathed with Tears, blushing for shame, accusing my
self, and relying on the Bowels of a Father, and will beg only so much Mercy as
may banish despair; and if I may have this, will be content, tho I be not
entertained with assurance and certain Expectations; for the least favorable
Look is more than I have deserved: yet behold, upon the first sight of the
returning Prodigal, who came unsent for driven home by his own Miseries, his
tender Father runs to meet him, takes the Words out of his Mouth, and receives
him with all the Demonstrations of his Love, and the Carresses of his dear
Affections: and is my God less merciful; he who has invited me so often, and
promised me so largely; I have done ill to stay so long; but I will go now, low
in my Desires, and high in my Expectations, sorrowing for mine Offenses, and
begging his Mercies; and I hope, though I carry no merits of my own to his
Justice; yet I carry mise^y enough to make his Bowels of Compassion yearn upon
me, and then I cannot perish. Is it possible I should be all this while deluded
so grossly, as to imagine my Eyes to be opened, my Ways direct and full of
Light; when indeed my Eyes are shut, my feet are wrong, and my Mind is
overspred with Egyptian Darkness, of a stupid Ignorance. Thy Word, O Lord, is
a Light to my Feet, and a Lanthorn to my Paths; not only to show me which is
the right way, but to let me know when I am in the wrong. But I have given my
self to false Guides, who least I should enquire after the right way, would
never acquaint me that I was wandering from it; had I followed them still, I had
stumbled ere this on the threshold of Hell, whilst I expected to have arrived
at the Gates of Heaven. O blessed be thy Name, I now see that I have been
straying from the Fountain of all true Happiness, and have been in vain seeking
Content where it is not to be found, till the Disappointment drives me to seek
it where it is to be had: if I had not been a Stanger to my own Heart, I had
not been so far out of the right way: but I have supposed my self to be clear,
only because I never considered wherein I was guilty, and have flattered my
self with the pleasing Thoughts of my own Innocence, so that I have been so
secure, as if I had been really guiltless; I have been glad to spare my self,
and have flattered my self with the pleasing Thoughts of my own Ignorance, I
have been glad to spare my self of a further Enquiry, most foolishly accounting
this a Peace which was no other but want of a sense of my own danger. I find my
chief design has been to seem to be good, and to persuade my self that I was
so, that I might be the more at quiet in the ways of Evil, and might not be
accused of my own Conscience, and allaramed by the most dreadful Threatenings;
which I supposed did not belong to me. But alas! how miserable would the end of
that self-deceit have been. For thou, O my God, did see, and would have
condemned me for all my Blasphemous Thoughts, and Repinings against thee; my
malicious and envious Thoughts against thee and my Neighbor; thou heardst all
those vain and filth words that I uttered with my Mouth; those deceitful,
unjust, and cruel uncharitable Works which I committed with my Hands thou
saw; yea, all that Formality and Hypocrisy, Ambition and Pride, Lust and
Covetuousness that lay in the secret Corners of my Heart, was apparent in thy
sight, and what did it avail me not to see them; thy Vengeance would have once
as certainly, and more terribly, because it was not expected. It is strange I
should not see this vast heap before; but surely I have shut my eyes wilfully,
lest I should discern that which I was loath to believe, and unwilling to
amend, but now I see my Inquities by thy Mercy, and believe I have offended
thee as much by my Hypocrisy in the concealing them, as by my Disobedience in
committing them; therefore I will ingeniously confess, because the graciousness
of thy Nature, the truth of thy Promises, and the Satisfaction of the Lord
Jesus, are sufficient to procure a Pardon for me, who dare so trust in thy
Mercy so far, as to become my own Accuser. Yea, my God, since thou has^ so
graciously convinced me of the Evil and Damage of those Courses I have taken, I
will not rest in a bare Confession that I am in the Wrong, but by thy Grace,
will turn me into the Right Way, and will utterly forsake all these my Follies:
thy Mercy indeed, is great enough to forgive me upon my Humble Acknowledgments;
but to live in my Sin, is as inconsistent with my Happiness, as it is with thy
holy Laws. Therefore, O my Soul, he that desires thy Felicity, will not forgive
the old Score, unless thou cease to run further in Debt^ Do thou not see,
that whilst thou go on in Sin, thou art in the Way unto Eternal Death; and
beside, art already dead to all Divine Comforts, as to the sense of them, and
Buried alive in Lusts and Pleasures; thy Flesh intombs thy precious Soul, that
is thus made wretched, and the Grave-Cloths of vile Affections, binds the Hand
and Foot from moving toward God, or breathing in the pure Air of Heavenly
Meditations, and can thou like to stay in this filthy Place still, when thou
did not see thy Misery; no wonder if thou countedst this Dungeon and Vault, a
Palace; but now thou must abhor it, when Jesus calls, and says, Lazarus, come
forth. Do thou find, the more thou followest these, the less thou love God,
and have seldom any Converse with him, slower Motions toward him, and meaner
Thoughts of him; return then from these Evil Paths, for now thou know the
dead are there; do not only seek a Pardon from him, but desire a Communion with
him, who is thy Strength and Life, thy Joy and Happiness, and will be glad of
thy Recovery; that forgetting all thy Unworthiness formerly, he will make thee
happy hereafter; there is nothing can hinder thee, unless thou love thy Sins
so well, that thou will not forsake them; and carest so little for God, that
thou had rather dye without him, than live with him Holily here, and
Eternally Happily hereafter; it had been well with my Soul, if all this while
my safty had been equal to my Confidence; for none ever thought themselves more
secure, tho there was no other ground for it, but only because I was not
resolved to take the pains not to behold my Danger. I have multiplied my
Transgressions, and lived in Sins unamended, yea, un-repented of, and therefore
have had the drawn Sword of Divine Vengeance hanging over my guilty Head, by
the slender thread of my uncertain Life, which every thing can snap in sunder;
yet have I wilfully shut mine eyes, choosing rather to feel the Eternal Smart
of it, than to behold the dreadful sight which would have long time terrified
me into an amendment, and have snatched me from under the approaching Ruin.
What prodigious Folly has seized on me? What stupid Lazines has benumbed me?
Are the Pains of escaping, greater than the Pains of Suffering? Or will the
Blow be the lighter, because I resolve neither to see it, nor avoid it? Awake,
my Soul, while there is a Possibility to prevent thy Ruin; thy Sins are so
numerous and so heinous, that thou can not be ignorant of them, the
Threatenings of Gods Wrath are so plain and positive, that thou may see
plainly, that they aim at thee; thy Conscience cries so loud, that thou can
not but hear it, and Gods Holy Spirit pleads still so powerfully, that thou
must take so much Pains to exclude these Friends as would serve to turn out thy
Enemies: surely God gave me not Wit and Understanding, to make a plauceable
Cover for the eyes of my Conscience, or to contrive Bulwarks of Excuses, to
entrench my sins in safety, and yet I, unhappy Wretch, have been ingenious in
nothing so much as in plotting the Ruin of my precious Soul, and designing to
perish undisturbed: behold, and blush to see how, and where holy David lies
covered with Shame, and drowned in his Tears, quite overwhelmed with Sorrow,
not able, through Fear and Sorrow, to take his Eyes off that one Offense,
whilst thou, a far greater Sinner, art careless and unconverted; he sets his
sins before his own Face, and God he throws them behind his Back: when the
sight of them will not conduce to the obtaining of my Pardon, but the
Aggravation of my Eternal Misery, the sight of them indeed is most unpleasant,
the Object odious and ungrateful, but the Benefit will most abundantly
recompense the Trouble; and if I behold them now so as to repent of them, I
shall see them no more for ever; I will Imitate therefore this holy Man, and
ever view the Guilt and Danger of them, that I may humbly confess them with
Sorrow, and obtain a Pardon for them, my wretched Heart has taken pleasure in
the Committing them, and it shall have Vexation in Reflecting on them, for I
will not take my eyes off from them, till the horrid Aspect of my grievous
Iniquities have humbled my Soul for them, and turned my Heart against them. O
Blessed Jesus, that know the Necessities of all, thy Universal Commands to
Repentance to all men, methinks seems to be peculiarly directed to me, who have
neglected this most necessary Duty: hitherto thou, O Lord see my Danger, and
pittiest my Approaching Ruin; I Bow my Head and Heart, and neither can, or
dare disobey so gracious and loving Advice, so useful and necessary a Warning:
thy bare Words has been sufficient to command Obedience from me, who do expect
Eternal Salvation by thee, but thou art pleased further to convince me; I do
believe, dearest Jesus, the Benefit is great, if I shall turn now while thy
Grace is offered so freely to all People; I know the danger is dreadful, if I
delay any longer, since it is certain, that thy Kingdom shall come, but
uncertain, now soon either Death shall Arrest me, or Judgment surprise me in
such Delays: I have great cause to bless thy Name, that neither of these have
happened yet unto me, though I have even excluded thee out of my Heart, and
entertained my Sins there; yet Lord, thou call on me still, and now I am
making what have I can. O remember not how long I have staid, but consider how
little time I have left, and by the help of thy Grace, make my Work short and
easy, proportionable to my Time and Strength. I confess that I knew before,
but I never considered it till now, and now I dare not stay, but through thy
help, I come. O do not cast me off, for thy Mercies sake. Oh my Soul, thou art
surely seized with a strange Distemper, which resists the Efficacy of the
choicest Remedies; the Plaster which cures others, does not avail me; I
confess my Offenses every day on my bended Knees, but my Faith is Weak; my Hope
Wavering; my sense of Gods Love very small, so that I am almost tempted to live
like those that are unconverted, and unconcerned whether they sin, or no;
because I find no Benefit by all my Humiliations; and this Temptation had
prevailed, if I had not seen, that since others receive some Advantage by these
means, the fault is in me, and not in them, nor in the God whom I Serve, he
cannot deny his Promises, falsify his Word, nor reject those when they come,
who come upon his Courteous Invitation. O where then is this accursed thing
that restrains Gods Mercies, blasts my Endeavors, and puts me upon Injurious
Thoughts against Heaven, and Atheistical Resolutions of totally neglecting
those Holy Things: the Matter of my Duty is good, for God commands it; the
Benefit is great, for many have found it to be so; but, Is it done in a right
manner? The failing may be there: I have been more careful to kneel reverently,
look sadly, sigh grievously, and tell the Almighty a Story of my Sinful Life,
with Addresses becoming a Penitent, but this comes far short of what God
requires, even a Broken Heart, and a Contrite Spirit; for I have been so
concerned to seem sorrowful, that I have not endeavored really to be so. O my
God, thou that searchest the Heart, and tryest the Reins, thou have seen my
Heart untouched in the midst of these Pretenses; I have not been smitten with
the Odiousuess of my Sins to thee, nor the Danger to me, and therefore I have
not fully renounced them, nor yet absolutely returned to thee and thy Ways, and
therefore thou have not blessed my Confessions, which have been rather looked
upon by me, as an Indulgence to go on, since my former were so easily pardoned,
than an Engagement to forsake mine Iniquities; but now I see my Vileness in
making so slight Addresses for so great a Favor; I discern my Folly to cheat
my self of so considerable a Blessing, and my Sloth to slip so many fair
Opportunities by my deceitful Behavior before thee. O Lord, I have deceived my
self, I am hugely ashamed, that having offended so dear and loving a Father, I
have not been really concerned more, and having so gracious a God to turn to, I
am yet so far distant from him; if I want Pardon or Peace, the blame must be
upon my own Negligence, for thou art apt to give, and ready to forgive, long
before thou punishest Sinners, but soon entreated to receive Presents, and do
most joyfully lay aside thy Resolutions of Judgments, when we promise our
Purpose of Amendment. O my Soul, will not this real Goodness of thy God shame
thy Hyppocrisy? Will it not pierce thine Heart to see whom thou have offended,
and thaw thy Hopes to behold him whom thou art turning to: his Holiness is
mixed with Long-suffering, his Justice with Mercy, his Decrees allayed with
Limitations, and is it fit to approach him without Love or Fear, Hopes or
Desires, Gratitude o^ Admiration? Or, Is the Forgiveness too mean a Favor,
that it deserves no more Hearty Applications; sure enough mine Hyppocrisy has
hindered my Pardon, wherefore I begin to detest it, and hereafter I will look
more to the Disposition of my Heart than the Posture of my Body; I will set him
before me whose Love I have abused, and whose Patience I have tried, who is so
gracious as to spare me, and so willing to be Reconciled to a most ungrateful
Wretch, that when I come to him, I may have my Eyes filled with Tears, and my
Cheeks with Blushes, and my Heart with Sorrow; I will remembe^ who I am that go
so, that my Heart may be hum^^e, and what I go for, that I may be earnest, and
who I go to, that I may be full of Faith and Hope, so tha^ my Addresses may not
be in vain, but that all these gracious Attributes may be made good unto me for
Jesu, Sake, to whom be Glory for ever.

Thomas Brownings 's Prayer
O Lord, prepare my unprepared and sinful Heart by thy Holy and Blessed Spirit
to Pray unto thee; for Jesus Christ his Sake, pour down into my Heart thy
Spirit of ^race, Supplication, and Humiliation; good God, do away mine
Iniquities, and remember my Transgressens no more, help me to pour out my Soul
before thee, under a deepsence of, and a true sorrow for all my Sins which I
have most wickedly and grieviously committed against thy Divine Majesty from
time to time, help me to pray with the Spirit, and with Understanding, let thy
Spirit help my Infirmities with Sighs and Groans that cannot be expressed;
strike my Heart with an Awe and Dread of thy Majesty; help me to approach thy
Presence with Re^erence, a Godly Shame and Holy Trembling* there is no secret
Thoughts afar off; help me to confess my Sins with a true Sorrow for the same,
help me to depart from all Iniquity, that it may not be my Ruin, let me hate
all Sin with a perfect Hatred, and avoid the very Appearance of Evil; let me no
longer regard any Iniquity in my Heart, least it prove my undoing, knowing that
the very Hope of the Hyppocrite stall perish, but work in me a Godly Sorrow for
my sin, which may cause a true Repentance unto Salvation, never to be repented
of, and for Jesus sake, accept a Morning Sacrifice of Prayer and Praise, which
I do desire at this time in all sincerity to offer to thy Divine Majesty,
humbly begging the Assistance of thy Grace. O Eternal, Almighty, and most
Glorious Lord God, in whom I Live. Move, and have my Being, thou art the Mighty
Majesty of Heaven and Earth, thou art the great Creator and Governor of all
Things, who did make all Things by the Word of thy Power, and do uphold the
same by thy Providence, who art the Omnipotent God, Dwelling in the highest
Heavens, and have Eternity for thy Habitation in that Light which is
inaccessable, to whom no mortal Eye can approach, Infinite in all thy
Attributes, before whose Glorious Presence the Angels, Cherubims, and
Seraphims, those spotless Creatures do cover their Faces, and the Elders do
cast down their Crowns, Worshipping thee continually; thou art Glorious in
Majesty, Fearful in Praises, doing Wonders, God over all, Blessed for
evermore, from Everlasting to Everlasting, Infinitely Happy in the Enjoyment of
thine own Perfections, and need not the Services of any of thy Creatures,
and have an innumerable Company of Angels, Archangels, Cherubims, Seraphims,
with the Spirits of Just Men and Women made Perfect; all the Heavenly and
Celestial Host continually Celebrating thy Praise, crying, Holy, Holy, Holy
Lord God Almighty, which Was, which Is, and which is to come. O where shall I
appear that am Vile, Sinful, Dust, and Ashes? For Jesus Sake have Mercy upon
me, I confess that I am very sinful by Nature, and more vile by Practice, who
am of the Seed of Evil Doers, and have been a Transgressor from the Womb, that
I was Conceived in Sin, Brought forth in Iniquity, and my Life has been as a
continued Act of Sinning against thee, as if I had been born for no other
Purpose, but to dishonor, displease, and disobey the God that Made me, and to
destroy that Immortal Soul for whom Christ dyed, and the Lord world Save: thou
have been very Gracious and Merciful to me in my Creation and Preservation; but
above all, in the Lord Jesus Christ, the Fountain and Foundation of all my
Mercies, and through whom I have Hopes of Eternal Salvation. It is a Faithful
Saying, and worthy all Acceptance, That Jesus Christ came into the World to
Save Sinners, Of whom I am chief, and I am never able sufficiently to Admire,
Adore, and Magnify thy great Name, for thy Infinite Love in the Lord Jesus,
thy Mercy, Goodness, and Condescension has appeared in this, that thou who art
the Mighty Majesty of Heaven and Earth, a God of all Power, Omnipotency it
self, should find out a way to reconcile those great Attributes of thy Mercy
and Justice, through the Blood of thy Only Begotten Son; that so poor, lost,
and undone Mortals might be Eternally Saved, and this thou have declared unto
me Jesus Christ Crucified, and for me, who am less than the least of thy
Mercies; and this thou have made known by thy Holy Gospel. O the Height,
Length, Depth, and Breadth of thy Love in Jesus Christ, it is above my
Apprehension and Comprehension, it is past my finding out; let it be Matter of
Eternal Praise in the Heavens: and through him thou have been pleased to afford
me the means of Grace and Salvation in very plentiful manner, thy Sabboths,
thy Word and Ordinances, thy Holy and Blessed Spirit to assist me, the Checks
of my own Conscience, and the Light of Nature to instruct me, I have had Line
upon Line, Precept upon Precept, here a little, and there a little, often
hearing a Voice within, and behind me, saying, This is the Way, walk in it.
Thou have lengthened out my Days, and afforded me a large time to Repent, in
exercising thy Patience and Long-suffering toward me, I have had large
Experience of thy Goodness to lead me to an Amendment of Life; and though in
all Times, Ages, and Places, thou have showed thy self highly displeased with
Sin and Sinners, yet thou have been pleased to spare me; and I have aggravated
my Sins with heinous Circumstances; the Angels when they sinned, were cast
down, and are reserved in Everlasting Chains of Darkness, made Monuments of thy
Justice, Wrath, and Fury, and there was never any Means found out for their
Recovery: Jesus Christ took not upon him the Nature of Angels, but the Seed of
Abraham; my first Parents were banished out of Paradise for their
Transgressions, and the Old World for their Sin were drownded; Sodom and
Gomorhea, once famous Places, for their Sins, felt, the Divine Vengeance by
Fire from Heaven, and were consumed with an utter Overthrow, yet thou have
spared me, the chief of Sinners. O Lord, grant that thy Severity toward
others, and thy Goodness toward me, may lead me to an Amendment of Life, or
how shall I escape to neglect such great Salvation. O Lord, thou have been very
gracious unto me, by keeping me Mercifully in my Infancy, Childhood, Youth,
Riper Age, Manhood, and Age: thou have taken Care of me, when I took none of my
self; I have been Fed, Clothed, and Led along by thy good Hand of Providence,
thou have given me a Healthy Body, a Sound Mind, and a Large Memory, my
Diseases have been Cured, I have been Fed both with the Upper and Nether
Springs; thou have not only given me Things convenient for this Life, hut
likewise the Mercies of Grace and Salvation leading to a better Life, even to
Life Everlasting; thou have preserved me in Prison beyond my Desert, contrary
to my Expectation, when the World frowned upon me, and I was forsaken by my
Relations, then the Lord was a Sun to comfort, and a Shield to defend me; thou
have been my present Help in time of Trouble, my exceeding great Reward, my All
in All, my God Alsufficient, thou have compassed me about with thy Salvation,
Songs of Deliverance, thy Special Favors; yea, thou have prevented me with thy
very Loving Kindness; I have been both Loaded and Clothed with thy Mercies, as
with a Garment, and they are more in number, the very kinds of them, than I am
able to reckon up. O Lord, thou have not only given me a Being, but a
comfortable and well Being, to make me the more fit to Serve thee; thou have
kept me from many Deaths and Dangers; in the time of War thou did preserve me
from the Peril of the Bloody Sword; when I deserved as much as any, to have
been cut off the Land of the Living; thou have preserved me by Land and by
Water, and in Foreign Parts, from many Evils that I have been subject to; thou
have kept me in the Times of Centagion and Visitation, from the Noysom and
Devouring Pestilence, and other Distempers; many that lived with me, are gone
to the Grave before me; and as they are dead, I am dying, not knowing what a
Day may bring forth; my Breath is in my Nostrils, and goes out every Moment,
and whenever it shall be stopped, I must dye, and turn to dust, then after
Death there is no Repentance, this is the Opportunity of Life, the Day of Grace
and Salvation, which if neglected, I can never have another; it is therefore of
everlasting Concernment to improve the present Opportunity, because it is
appointed for all Men and Women once to dye, and then to Judgment, and as Death
leaves, Judgment will find, as the Tree falls, so it lies; there is neither
Desire nor Invention in the Grave where I am going. O Lord, thou have been very
merciful to preserve me in the Calamities of Fire, and have wonderfully
Protected and Provided for me ever since; and thou have been merciful to me
indeed, to preserve me against my own Will. I am a Living Monument of thy
Mercies, a Brand snatched out of the Burning Flame; thou have given me my Life
for a Prey, and I have not lived to thy Praise; but like a Vile, Wretched,
Vuworthy, and most Ungrateful Creature, I have sinned against thee both in
Thought, Word, and Deed. The Sins of my Thoughts have been more than I can
think; those of my Words, more than I am able to express, and the Sins of my
Deeds have been innumerable, my Life has been an Act of open Rebellion against
thee; I am guilty of Sins by Omission, Commission, Ignorance, and Wilful
Disobedience, Having left undone those Things which I ought to have done, and
committed those Things whith I ought not to have done; I have sinned against
Heaven, Thee, my Relations, and against the Motions of thy Blessed Spirit,
having made a Show of Godliness; I have denied the Power of it, and have called
upon the Name of Christ, but have not departed from Iniquity; I have given evil
example unto others, by living contrary to what I have Professed, and have
quenched and grieved the Mations of thy Holy Spirit, which should have sealed
me up unto the day of Redemption; I have Committed all Impieties with
Greediness, and have aggravated my Transgressions with hanious Circumstances;
for I have sinned, not only against the Law, but against the Gospel, not only
Ignorantly, but Wilfully and very presumptiously against the Checks of my
Conscience, and the Light of Nature, insomuch that my own Heart does condemn
me, and thou art greater, knowing all Things. I have abused thy Mercies,
despised thy Judgments, and turned thy very Graces into Wantonness, insomuch
that my Iniquities are gone over my Head, and my Sins have covered me, I have
nothing to plead for my self, but Guilty, Guilty, Guilty of the Breach of all
thy most Holy and Righteous Laws, I have forfited my Right to all that is Good,
and have made my self liable to all Evils, both Temporal, Spiritual, and
Eternal; it is even a Miracle of Mercy that I had not long ago been taken off
in my Sin, and for my Sins, and have been made so Hellfull as I have been
sinful, and have had my Portion given me with Hyppocrites, Unbelievers, and
those that loves, and makes a Lie in that Lake which burns with Fire and
Brimstone, there to be tormented with Devils and Damned Spirits for evermore,
that instead of praying unto thee, and calling on thy N^^e in Mercy, I am not
howling amongst the Damned in an irrecoverable State that thy Patience is not
ended toward me, and the D^or of Grace shut everlastingly against me; thou
might justly long ago have said unto me, I would have healed thee, and thou
would not: I would have Saved thy Soul, but thou have despised my Salvation;
I would have made thee happy, and thou have refused; therefore thou that art
filthy, be filthy st^ll, there remains no more Sacrifice for Sin, but a fearful
looking for of Judgment, Fiery Indignation, and the Fierce Anger of the Lord,
the Most Mighty God; therefore go thou Cursed into Everlasting Fire, prepared
for the Devils and their Angels. It had been but just with thee, O Lord, thus
to have dealt by me, and thou might have Glorified thy Justice in my Just
Condemnation, and Eternal Damnation; but there is Mercy with thee, that thou
may be feared, and thy tender Mercies are over all thy Works, and Mercy
pleases thee; it is, because thy Compassions fail not, that I am not consumed.
O what shall I say unto thee, thou Preserver of Men? Whether shall I go, or to
whom shall I fly? It Is thou alone that have the words of eternal Life, and
there is n^ Name under Heaven by whom I can be Saved, but by the Name of Jesus
Christ; and it is against thee, O Father; thee, O Holy Jesus; and thee, O Holy
and Blessed Spirit; that I have sinned against the Holy and Blessed Trinity in
Unity, and Unity in Trinity. Jesus Christ was wounded for my Transgressions,
that by his Stripes I (...) be healed; and I have wounded him afresh by my
Sins: The Chaste sement of my Peace has been upon his Shoulders, and he that
knew no Sin, was made a Curse unto Sin for me, that I might be made the
Righteonsness of God in him. He was pierced through with many Sorrows, and his
precious Side was pierced with a Sphere, and his most precious Blood was spilt,
that my Soul might be Eternally Saved, and I have pierced him again by my Sins.
Jesus was Crucified, and dyed the bitter and Cursed Death of the Cross, that I
might be Blessed and Everlastingly Saved, and I have Crucified the Lord of Life
afresh, and have put him to open shame. O help me to look upon him whom I have
pierced, and mourn over him, that I may be in bitterness of Spirit, and g^ieve
because I cannot grieve enough for my Sins, and because I have grieved the
Motions of thy Holy Spirit. Oh work in me a hatred of all sin, which is the
cause of all Evil, and help me to avoid the very Appearance of it: O Lord, thou
have given some Encouragement for poor penitent Sinners to come unto thee, and
graciously invited them, saying, Come unto me all ye that are weary and heavy
Laden, and I will give you Rest; seek, and ye shall find; knock, and it shall
be opened unto you; call upon me in the Day of Trouble, and I will hear thee
and deliver thee, and thou shall glorify me. Oh Lord, I come, I seek, I call,
I cry, beseeching thee for Jesus Christ his sake, to let me find rest unto my
Soul; Open unto me the Gates of Salvation, and be ye opened ye Everlasting
Gates, that the King of Glory may come in, and deliver me from the Intolerable
Burden of my Sins. Help me to Glorify thee here, that I may be Glorified with
thee to all Eternity: Lord, thou have promised that, Thou will not break the
Bruised Reed, nor quench the smoking Flax, nor despise the day of small
Things: but have mercifully styled thy self, to be a God hearing Prayers: and
none of the Sons of Jacob ever sought thy Face in vain. And thou have
graciously declared thy self to be, the Lord, Merciful, Gracious, of Patience,
and great Goodness, who pardons Iniquity, Transgressions, and Sins, for thy
own Names-sake; and, thou desire not the Death of a sinner, but rather that
he should turn from his Wickedness and live: and have promised, That at what
time soever a sinner repents him of his sin from the bottom and ground of his
Heart, thou will put away his Wickedness out of thy sight, and remember his
Transgressions no more. And it is a faithful Saying, worthy of all Acceptance,
That Jesus Christ came into the World to save sinners, Of whom I am chief. O
Lord, I Believe, help my Unbelief, help me to Believe, Repent, and Obey; for
Jesus sake, have Mercy upon me, and work in me a godly Sorrow for my sins,
which may cause a true Repentance unto Salvation, never to be repented of; and
for thy Names-sake, pardon all my sins; for thy Mercies-sake do away my
Iniquities; for thy Promise sake do not remember my Transgressions any more.
And for Jesus Christ his sake seal a free and a full Pardon of all my sins unto
my Soul. Say That thou art become my Salvation. And let the blood of Jesus
cleanse me from all sin. Oh this is a great Request, I beg, who am unworthy of
the least Mercy; but I beg of thee for the sake of Jesus, he is thy Beloved Son
in whom thou art well pleased, and through whom thou can not be offended; he
is my Savior, and died to save me: according to the multitude of thy
Compassions in the Lord Jesus, deal with me in the pardoning of all my sins;
and let not sin nor Satan whom thou hate, destroy the Work of thy hands, my
Immortal Soul for whom Christ died; furnish me with the Graces of thy Holy
Spirit, and give me Believing Grace and Mercy, Repenting Grace and Mercy,
Pardoning Grace and Mercy, Restraining Grace and Mercy, Comforting Grace and
Mercy, Renewing Grace and Mercy, with Confirming Grace and Mercy. Oh renew me
in the Spirit of my Mind, help me to redeem time, because I have misspent much
precious time already, and because the days are evil, make me consider the
shortness and uncertainty of my time; I have but a Moment to work for Eternity:
e're long Death will come, and I shall be in a future state then time will be
no more; and many have been taken off in their, sins, and for their sins, that
are now in an Eternal state of Woe. O teach me in this my Day, to know the
things that belong to my peace, before they are hid from mine Eyes; my day is
already far spent, and my Night is at hand, I do not know what a Day may bring
forth, let me not therefore any longer defer my Amendment of Life after so long
a time; as it is called to day, help me to up, and be doing, and work while it
is called to day, before the Night comes, when none works; help me to work out
my Salvation with Fear and Trembling, and let me be very diligent to make my
Calling and Election sure, the one thing needful, even the Salvation of my
Immortal Soul, which is of everlasting Concernment; that whatever I miscarry in
I may not be mistaken in the great business of my Eternal Happiness; to that
end I most humbly pray thee again for Jesus Christ's sake, to free me from the
Power of all sin, especially, those that my Nature is most prone to, such as do
beset and overtake me daily; and be pleased to discover unto me the
Deceitfulness of my own Heart, which is very naughty, and above all things,
deceitful and desperately wicked, the Thoughts and Imaginations of my Heart
have been evil, and only evil continually. O Lord, create in me a Clean and New
Heart, renew a right Spirit within me, sanctify my Nature, and help me to
sanctify thee, the Lord of Hosts, and make thee my Fear and Dread, that thou
may be unto me a Sanctuary; O be pleased to convince me of thine
Omnisciency, and Omniprescency, strike me with an Awe and Fear of thy Presence;
make me to consider, that wherever I am, and whatever I am about, thou
know it, who art a God of purer Eyes than to behold Sin with the least
Approbation, and that I have always about me an Immortal Soul, and that it is
against thee that I have sinned, who art a Sin-hating, and a Sin-revenging God,
and that I must very shortly appear naked before thy dreadful Tribunal, to
render an Account for all things done in the Flesh, and (...) r^ceive my
Eternal Doom from the Righteous Judge of ^ll the World, O ^ea^h me with the
Robes of Christ's Righteousness, le^ his Meritorious Death and Passion satisfy
thy Justice for my Sins, let the Blood of J^^us cl^anse me from all sin, and
make me circumspect in time to come, let me be Sober, Watchful, and Vigilant,
because my Aiversary the Devil goes about as a roaring Lion, seeking whom he
may devour continually, and my poor, weak, fr^il Nature is ready to yield to
every Temptation and Suggestion, not able to think a good Thought; O let thy
Grace be sufficient for me, let it shield me from all hurt, cloth me with the
Righteousness of my Jesus, let me be girt with Truth, and always shod with the
Preparation of the Gospel, but above all things give me the Shield of Faith,
the Breastplate of Righteousness, a Helmit of Salvation, with the Sword of the
Spirit, whereby I may be able to fight against the World, the Flesh and the
Devil, resisting the Fiery Darts of Satan, fighting against Principalities,
Powers, and Spiritual Wickedness in High Places; let not the Gates of Hell, nor
Powers of Darkness prevail against me; but let the Grace of God, which has so
plentifully appeared toward me, teaching to deny all Ungodliness and Worldly
Lusts, defend me; O let me be redeemed from a Vain Conversation, help me to
bring forth fruits meet for Repentance, worthy an Amendment of Life, and let
thy Holy Spirit seal me up unto the Day of Redemption, make me holy here, that
I may be happy hereafter. Oh make me such a one as thou would have me, and
enable me to evidence unto my self the Assurance of my Justification by the
fruits of my Sanctification; thou have promised, That what soever shall be
asked in thy Sons Name, according to thy Will, shall be granted. Now Lord, I
know that this is thy Will, even my Sanctification; for Jesus sake, sanctify
me thorowout, and write upon my Heart, Holiness to the Lord, make me walk
according to the Pattern of my Jesus, who was Humble, Holy, and Obedient to thy
Will in all things, even to the death of the Cross; make me to consider that I
was Redeemed, and bought with a Price, not of corruptible Things, as Silver and
Gold, but with the precious Blood of Jesus Christ, therefore let me live to the
Praise of him that has so dearly bought me with his most precious Blood, let
me walk like one that is Redeemed and Translated from Death to Life, as one
whose Life is hid with God in Christ, that when he who is my Life shall appear,
I may also appear with him in Glory. O help me to walk as an Adopted Son of the
mighty Majesty of Heaven and Earth, the Holy God; as an Adopted Brother to the
Holy Jesus, my Loving Savior, Mighty Redeemer, and the Captain of my
Salvation; as one that is in fellowship with God, the Holy Ghast, the Blessed
Spirit, my Mighty Comforter, daily Sanctifier and ^reserver, Oh help me to walk
as one that is in Communion with, and related unto the most Holy and Blessed
Trinity. Let me never turn to Folly more, nor dare to sin any more, nor
dishonor my Heavenly Relations, but help me to walk worthy of the Price of my
High-Calling, pressing hard to the Mark, adorning my Profession, walking in all
Well-pleasing, daily growing in Grace from strength to strength, til I shall
appear in Zion in perfect beauty, in Glory make me to persevere, be constant
and faithful to the death, that so I may receive a Crown of Life,
Righteousness, and Glory that fades not away. To that end and purpose, O God,
wean me from the World; take off my Affections from all perishing Vanities,
make me Heavenly Minded, whilst I am about Earthly Business; let my
Conversation be above, where the Lord Jesus sits at thy Right Hand, making
Intercession for me; let me be in earnest for thy Honor and Glory, and the
Salvation of my Immortal Soul. O let me be upon the Wing Heavenward, and carry
me on upon Divine Principles, help me to strive to enter into the Straight
Gate, Narrow is the Way that leads to Life and few there be that find it: Broad
is the Way that leads to Destruction, and many there be that go in thereat; and
if the Righteous shall scarce be Saved, where shall the Sinners and Ungodly
appear? Come Holy Ghost, Eternal God, Proceeding from the Father and Son, take
Possession of my Soul, throw down all the Strongholds of Sin and Satan, bring
me over unto a Universal Obedience in all Things to thy Heavenly Will. O that
my Ways were directed to keep thy Commandments, then shall I not be ashamed,
when I have respect unto all thy Holy and most Righteous Laws, which are not
grievous, as Flesh and Blood, the World and Devils would persuade me; thy Ways
are Peace, thy Paths, Pleasantness, in thy Presence is Fullness of Joy, and at
thy Right Hand are Rivers of Pleasures for evermore then let it be the joy of
my Heart, and rejoicing of my Soul to do thy Will, help me to hate the Garment
that is spotted with the Flesh, shed abroad a Divine Love into my Heart, and
lay a Holy Constraint upon me to please thee in all Things. O make me consider
what great Things the Lord has done for me, who was once a Child of Wrath, a
Firebrand of Hell, Heir to Eternal Death and Damnation, but now by the Grace of
God in Jesus Christ, am become an Heir to an Eternal and Glorious Kingdom; O
let me be led unto it which way my Heavenly Father pleases, it being assured
to me by the great Charter of Heavenprecious Promises, sealed by the Blood of
Jesus, the New Name, and the White Stone. O make me to know what the Lord has
done for my Soul and Body; my Soul is Redeemed from Hell, and my Body from the
Grave, and both Body and Soul from Eternal Damnation, and all by the Blood of
my Jesus; and my Vile Body shall be made a Glorious Body, and my Mortality
shall put on Immortality, be swallowed up in Life, and I shall be a Coheir
with my Blessed Jesus. O what shall I render unto the Lord for all his
Benefits; help me to take the Cup of Salvation, and praise the Name of the
Lord, let me speak to thy Praise, and live to thy Praise, let my Heart be
enlarged to show it forth in my Generation, and let it be Matter of Eternal
Praises in the Heavenly Quire, when I shall there be joined with Saints,
Angels, Archangels, Cherubiens, Seraphims, the Spirits of Just Men and Women
made perfect, all the Heavenly and Celestial Host to sing Hallelujahs and a New
Song unto thy Divine Majesty, for thy Love in Jesus Christ; and in the mean
time be pleased to accept of a Morning Sacrifice, which thy poor Creature does
desire to offer up in Praise at this time, with all humble sincerity, most
earnestly begging the Assistance of thy Grace: blessed be thy Name for keeping
me all my Days for my Creation, Preservation, and above all, for ever ever,
ever; blessed be thy Name for the Lord Jesus Christ, the Fountain of all my
Mercies, and through whom I have comfortable Hope and Assurance of Eternal
Salvation. O let Christ be formed more and more in me, and blessed be thy Name
for all Temporal Favors, for keeping me the Night past, for refreshing me with
the Comforts of Rest and Sleep, and have kept me from all sad Accidents, when
thou might have made my Bed my Grave, and my Sleep my Death, but blessed be
thy Name, whose Compassions never fail thy poor Creature, who have raised me
this Morning in good Condition of Health, Strength, Mind, and Memory, and being
thus brought to the beginning of this day, defend me, O Lord, in the same by
thy Almighty Power, grant that I may fall into no Sin, nor run into any kind of
Danger, but that all my Doings may be ordered by thy Governance, to do that
which is righteous in thy Sight, through Jesus Christ. O Lord have mercy upon
thy whole Church, enlarge the Kingdom of Grace, hasten the Kingdom of Glory,
send forth thy Word with thy Power through the whole World, propagate the
Gospel, and hasten the Kingdom of Glory; remember thy Ancient People, the Jews,
bring in the Fullness of the Gentiles, give the Heathen for thy Sons
Inheritance, and the utmost Parts of the Earth for his Possession, let all
Kingdoms of the World become the Lord Christ's, and let every Scepter submit to
his Royal Scepter, that the Earth may be filled with the Knowledge of the Lord,
as the Waters cover the Sea: and be g^atiously pleased to bless this Sinful
Nation of England, pardon our Crying Sins, heal our Breaches* compose our
Differences, give us a true Repentance and Amendment of Life, and be merciful
unto us. O Lord save the King, pour down the choicest of thy Blessings upon his
Head and Heart, make his Life long, and his Reign prosperous, keep him from the
hands of his Enemies, let his Life be prerious in thy Sight, give him Wisdom
and Courage from above, make him as an Angel of God, to go in and eut before
the People over whom thou have set him, and when thou shall put an end to his
Mortal Life, Crown him in thy Everlasting Kingdom in Glory, Bless him in his
Royal Relations, our Gracious Queen Katherine, James Duke of York, and a^l ^he
Royal Family; endue them with thy holy Spirit, enrich them with thy Heavenly
(...), prosper them with all Happiness, and bring them to thy Everlasting
Kingdom B^ p^eas^^^ to bless all our Privy-Councellors, Rulers, and Judges,
teach our Senators Wisdom, and the true Fear of the Lord, make them Zealous for
thy Honor and Glory, the Advancement of true Religion, Piety and Virtue, the
Honor and Safety of the King and Kingdom. Bless all the Magistrates of this
Realm, give them Grace to execute Justice and maintain Truth; and be pleased to
pour down a double Portion of thy Blessings upon the Ministers of thy Word and
Sacraments, the Clergy of this Land, by what Names or Titles soever they are
dignified or distinguished, make them found in their Doctrine, and Exemplar in
their Lives, let them shine like Stars in the Firmament, and let their Light so
shine besore Men, that seeing their good Works, others may glorify thee, the
Heavenly Father; and O Lord look down in much Mercy upon all Degrees of Men,
Women, and Children of this Nation, grant that we may all live in thy Faith and
Fear in due Obedieuce and Loyalty to the King and his Laws, and in
Brotherly-Love and Affection to one another; O Lord, bless all my Relations,
especially my Wise and Child, pardon their Sins, and save their Souls, make
them near and dear unto thy self, season their tender Years with thy Grace and
Fear, be their satiable good in every Condition; and if it be thy blessed Will,
bring us together again, that we may Serve thee better than sormerly we have
done; and if it shall seem good unto thee, O Lord, find out a way for my
Deliverance out of Prison, not mine, but thy Will be done, O God. I have found
that thy Service is perfect Freedom, and thy Favor is better than Life: help
me to order my Conversation aright, that I may see more of thy Salvation; let
my ways please thee, that my Enemies may be at Peace with me; however, let all
tend to the purging out of Sin, making me more fit to enjoy Communion with thee
here, and eternally hereafter; vouchsafe, O Lord, to keep me this day without
Sin, keep me in thy Fear, di^ert me in thy Truth, let thy Spirit lead me, that
I may not offend with my Tongue, let me be silent rather than sin, and never
repine at thy Providence, fit me for my future Being, make me mindful of Death,
and let me always have the Assurance of thy Favor, which is better than Life.
G God, whose Nature and Property is ever to have Mercy, and to forgive, receive
my humble Petitions, and though I am tied and bound with the Chain of my Sin
yet let the great pittifulness of thy Mercy loose me, for the Honor of my
Advocate and Mediator Jesus Christ, to whom with thee, O Father, thy Holy and
Blessed Spirit, be ascrided and given from the bottom of my Heart, and from all
Creatures, all possible Honor, Glory, Power, Praise. Might, Majesty,
Adoration, Dominion, and whatever can be Imagined or expressed from this time
forth, and for evermore, Amen.

Our Father which art in Heaven: Hallowed be thy Name: Thy Kingdom come: Thy
Will be done in Earth as it is in Heaven. etc.
FINIS.

