REPORTS, OF Diverse Choice CASES in LAW. TAKEN By those late and most
judicious Prothonotaries of the Common Pleas, RICHARD BROWNLOW, and JOHN
GOLDESBOROUGH. Esqrs.

WITH DIRECTIONS HOW TO proceed in many Intricate Actions, both Real and
Personal, showing the Nature of those Actions, and the Practice in them;
excellently useful for the avoiding of many Errors heretofore committed in
the like Proceedings; fit for all Lawyers, Attorneys, and Practisers of the Law.

Also a most Perfect and exact Table, showing Appositely the Contents of the
whole Book.

Solon: (...).

LONDON, Printed by Tho: Roycroft, for Matthew Walbancke, at Grays-Inne Gate,
and Henry Twyford, in Vine Court in the Middle Temple, 1651.



THE PUBLISHER TO THE READER.
THese Reports coming unto my hands, under the Commendations of men of so much
sufficiency in the knowledge of the Laws, I could do no less then fear that
it would prove too obvious a neglect of Common good to keep them in the dark,
therefore here I present them to the World, to the end that all men may take
that benefit by them now being in Print, which some few only have hitherto
enjoyed by private Copies. And indeed I think I shall put it beyond dispute,
when I name the two worthy, and late famous Prothonotaries, Mr. Brownlow, and
Mr. Goldesborough, whose Observations they were, that they will both profit and
delight the Reader, since there are contained under these heads, viz. Actions
upon the Case, Covenant, Account, Assise, Audita querela, Debt, (upon almost
all occasions) Dower, Ejectment, Formedon, Partition, Quare Impedit, Replevin,
Trespass and Wast, Many excellent conclusions, as well of Law, as of the manner
of pleadings, Demurrers, Exceptions, Essoins, Errors, and the qualities of many
Writs, with other various and profitable Learning, in which may be found the
number of the Roll, for so many as have had the luck of a full debate and
definitive sentence. And for the rest, though there is no Judgment in them, so
as to determine what the Law is, yet at least they will afford a very
considerable compensation for the Readers pains, by opening unto him such
matters as are apt for Argumentation, and may acquaint his Genius with the
manner of Forensall Disputations, from which benefit, to detain you any longer,
will deserve a Censure; therefore I remit you to the matter it self, which I am
confident (the Printers faults excused) will easily effect its own praise
beyond my Ability.

SPECIAL OBSERVATIONS AND RESOLUTIONS OF THE JUDGES OF THE COMMON PLEAS.
Upon several Actions upon the Case, there depending and adjudged.
PEdley versus Langley, Hill. 14. Ja. rotulo; the Plaintiff Case for words, You
are a Bastard, tried by the Country.
brought his Action for these words, You are a Bastard, for your Father and
Mother were never married. The Defendant pleads that the Plaintiff was a
Bastard, and justifies the words laid: and it was held by the Court, that this
Issue should be tried by the Country, and not by the Bishop, as in other Cases.

SMayles one of the Attourneys, etc. versus Smith, for these words, Judgment
arrested, because the Plaintiff did not averr that he was an Attonrney at the
time of the words spoken.
he, meaning the Plaintiff, took corruptly five Marks of Brian Turnor, being
against his own Client, for putting off and delaying an Assize against him: and
after a Verdict, exception was taken against the Declaration, for that the
Plaintiff did not expressly allege that at the time of speaking the words, He
was an Attorney, but laid it that he had been an Attorney. The Court held the
words would bear Action.

MAle versus Ket, Hill 14. Jac. rotulo 1506. for these words, William Case for
words which d^d amount to but petty Larceny.
Male did steal my Corn out of my Barn. Judgment for the Plaintiff. The Court
held that an Action would lie for these words, You are a Thief and have stolen
a Cock, which was but Petty Larceny.

COwte versus Gilbert, Hill. 10. Jac. rotulo 3176. Thou art a Thief, and have
stolen a Tree. Judgment, that the Plaintiff should take nothing by his Writ.
The like, Thou art a Thief, and have stolen my Maidenhead; no Action.

HArding versus Bulman, Hill. 15. Jac. The Plaintiff declares, that in such a
Term he had brought an Action of Case against B. for scandalous words, to which
he pleaded not guilty; and at that Trial gave in Evidence to the Jury, to take
away the Plaintiff Credit and Reputation, that the Plaintiff was a common
Liar, and recorded in the Star Chamber for a common Liar, by reason whereof,
the Jury gave the Plaintiff but very small Damage, to the Plaintiffs Damage of,
etc. The Defendant pleads not guilty. And it was moved in Arrest of Judgment,
that the Action would not lie. And of that opinion the Court seemed to be.

BRidges one of the Attourneys, versus Playdell, for words, You, meaning the
Plaintiff, have caused this Boy, meaning A. W. then present, to perjure
himself. Judgment for the Plaintiff.

STone versus Roberts, Mich. 15. Jac. rotulo 635. for these words, Thou art a
Witch and an Inchanter, for thou have bewitched For calling one Witch, no
Action will lie.
Stronges Children; no Action lies but if thou say, Thou art a Witch and have
bewitched Children, and that they are wasted and destroyed; they are actionable.

SCarlet versus Style, Trin. 14. Jac. rotulo 541. for these words, If Felony be
committed, good cause to arrest one for it, but not to speak words to defame
one.
Thou did steal a Sack and Curricomb, and I will make thee produce it; and
thou did steal my Fathers Wood, and did give it to a Whore. The Defendant
justifies, that such a day the Goods were stolen, and there was a common fame
and report that the Defendant had stolen them, and upon that report the
Plaintiff did vehemently suspect that the Defendant had stolen them, and
thereof did inform a Justice of the Peace, and complaining of the Defendant to
the Justice, and informing him of the Premises, did speak the words before
mentioned. If a Felony be committed, it is good cause to arrest one for Felony,
but not to speak words to defame one.

If there be two Issues in several Counties in Trover, and one is tried, and
Judgment and Execution of the Costs and Damages; and afterward the other
Issue is tried, and Costs thereupon, the last is erroneous, as to the Costs.
Broccas Case.

Note, Trover was brought against Husband and Wife for Goods, A Feme covert
cannot convert.
which came to the hands of Husband and Wife, and the Conversion was alleged
to be by the Husband alone, for the Wife could not convert. And the Court held
that the Action would not lie against the Wife.

MOse versus Canham, Mich. 6. Jac. rotulo 508. The Plaintiff declares, Action
upon the casebrought upon a collateral consideration, and good.
that one Levet was indebted in such a sum, and for the payment thereof had
delivered to the Plaintiff diverse Goods of the said Levets: the Defendant in
consideration that the Plaintiff would deliver to the Defendant the said Goods,
promises to pay the Plaintiff the money due from Levet: and exception was taken
to the Declaration, for that the certainty of the Goods were not expressed, and
for that the consideration was but collateral. Another Exception for that the
Plaintiff might grant the Goods over, but the Court held the contrary. And
Judgment for the Plaintiff.

SMith versus Bolles Sheriff of London, Pasc. 9. Jac. rotulo 1353. Judgment
reversed by Writ of Error, because Sheriffs name was omitted on the venire fac.
In case for that the name of the Sheriffs were omitted, on the venire fac. And
for that cause one Judgment given for the said Smith was reversed by Writ of
Error. And for that Misprision Smith brought such Action of the Case.

HArris versus Adams, If thou had had thy Right, thou had Case for words
not actionable.
been hanged for breaking of Paches House; the words not actionable.

Thou art a Thief, thou have stolen the Town-beam, meaning the Town of
Wickham: Sergeant Hutton of opinion the Action would lie.

STephens Attorney, versus Battyn, for words, Thou have cozened Gase for words.
M. Windsor of his Fee, and I will sue thee for it in the Star Chamber, for
that thou did not come for Windsor. Judgment for the Plaintiff. Trin. 11.
Jac.

BRadley versus Jones, Trin. 11. Jac. rotulo 3390. The Plaintiff brings A man
shall not be punished for mistaking the Law.
his Action upon the Case for unjust vexation. The Defendant had exhibited
Articles against the Plaintiff, to have the good Behavior against him, and
took his Oath before Doctor Carry one of the Masters of the Chancery: and
afterward the Defendant ceased prosecution there, and obtained from the Kings
Bench a Supplicavit, to have the good Behavior there. And the Court was of
opinon, that the Action would lie, because he prosecuted in the Kings Bench and
not in the Chancery. But the Court said, that if he had prosecuted in the
Chancery, though the Articles had been scandalous, yet no Action would have
lain; for a man shall not be punished for mistaking the Law, for he may be
misadvised by his Counsel.

BRooks versus Clerk, Pasch. 11. Jac. rotulo 307. Action brought for these
words, His Son Brooks has deceived me in a Reckoning for Case for words.
Wares. And his Debt-book which he keeps for Sale of Wares in his Shop is a
false Debt-book; and I will make him ashamed of his Calling. Hubbart and
Nichols against the Plaintiff, and Warburton for the Plaintiff.

Pasch. 11. Jac. rotulo 2147. Action of the Case brought for a Nuisance for
building the Defendants House so near the Plaintiffs, that a great part of it
superpends. And the Plaintiff in the conveying his Title, shows a Lease for
years made to him, if the Lessor should so long live, and does not aver the
Life of the Lessor, but says, that by virtue of the Demise the Plaintiff has
been and then was thereof possessed, and adjudged sufficient.

MOrton versus Leedell, Hill. 10. Jac. rotulo 1783. Action of the The like.
Case for these words, He, meaning the Plaintiff, is a lying dissembling
Fellow, and a mainsworn and forsworn Fellow. And Judgment for the Plaintiff
after diverse motions.

THomas Attorney versus Axworth, Pasch. 11. Eliz. rotulo 352. The like for
Words.
Action of the Case for these words, This is John Thomas his writing, and he
has forged this Warrant, meaning a Warrant made by Buller Sheriff of that
County, upon a Capias prosecuted out of the Court of Common Pleas by M. H.
against the Defendant, and directed to the Sheriff.

ROw versus Alport, Mich. 11. Jac. rotulo 1527. Action upon the Case brought
for suing in the Admiral Court, for a thing done upon the Land, and not upon
the high Sea.

BRay versus Ham, Trin. 13. Jac. rotulo 1994. Action of the Case for these
words, Thou art a cozening Knave, and thou have cozened me in selling false
Measure in my Barley, and the Country is bound to curse thee for selling with
false Measure, and I will prove it; and thou have changed my Barley which I
bought of thee. And the Plaintiff sets forth in his Declaration, that he was
Bailiff to W. C. and H. C. of certain Lands in P. for three years; and during
the said time, had the care and selling of diverse Corn and Grain growing upon
the same Land: and after Trial and Verdict for the Plaintiff, it was moved in
Arrest of Judgment, that the Action would not lie; but the Court were of a
contrary opinion, and Judgment was given for the Plaintiff.

BRown versus Hook, Pasch. 13. Jac. rotulo 234. Action of the Case Judgment
arrested, because the Plaintiff omitted to show in his Declaration the words
were spoken of himself. The Defendants Justification adjudged naught, because
he justified for words that were actionable.
for these words, Brown is a good Attorney, but that he will play on both
sides. And it was moved in Arrest of Judgment, that those words would not bear
an Action, but the Court held they were actionable, but did not give Judgment,
because the Plaintiff did not show in his Declaration, that the words were
spoken of himself.

STober versus Green, Mich. 11. Jac. rotulo 1^91. Action of the Case for these
words, Thou did keep and sell by false Weights, and in 24. s. bestowing, thy
Weights were false two Ounces, and thy Man will be a Witness against thee, and
I will prove it. The Defendant pleaded that the Plaintiff occupied one Shop,
and kept unlawful Weights, and by such Weights sold, by reason whereof he said
these words, Videlicet, Thou did keep and sell by unlawful Weights, and in
24. s. bestowing, thy Weights were false an Ounce and three quarters, and thy
Man, etc. And traversed the words in the Declaration, and it was adjudged a
naughty Traverse, for that the words in the Bar, and justified by the Defendant
are actionable.

AGar versus Lisle, Mich. 11. Jac. rot. 318. Action of Trover brought To do a
thing allowable by Law is no conversion.
in Yorkshire, the Defendant justifies for Toll at Darnton in Durham, and
traverse, etc. The Court doubts of his Traverse, being only for the County of
York, whereas it ought to be any where else generally. And Hobart said, the Bar
was naught, because in the justification, no conversion was sufficiently
alleged. And note, that if a man does a thing which is allowable by the Law,
as to distrain Cattle, and impound them, that is no conversion; but if he work
them it is a conversion.

Austin versus Austin, Trin. 10. Jac. rotulo 3558. In Troyer, the The
Defendants Justification amounted but to Noguilty, and adjudged naught.
Defendant pleads, that before the time that the Plaintiff supposes the Goods
to come to the Defendants hands, one S. A. was possessed of the Goods, and
amongst other Goods sold them to the Defendant, but kept them in his own hands,
and afterward sold them to the Plaintiff, by reason whereof the Plaintiff was
possessed, and afterward looses them, and they came to the Defendants hands,
who converts them, as it was lawful for him to do. The Plaintiff demurs, and
it was held a naughty Bar, for it amounts to a Non cul. And Cook doubted
whether the Court should compel the Defendant to plead, Non cul. or award a
Writ of Injury. And a Writ of Inquire was awarded.

ALlyns versus Sparks, and al. Trin. 8. Jac. rotulo 1606, Action of Judgment
arrested, for want of certainty in the Count.
the Case brought for stopping up the Plaintiffs way, and the Plaintiff
declares that one H. B. was seized of the Manor of M. of which two Acres were
customary Land, and that the Lord of the Manor had for himself, and his
customary Tenants for the said two Acres, a certain highway in, by, and
through, etc. And that the Lord of the Manor granted the said two Acres to the
Plaintiff, and that the Defendant made and erected one Ditch and Hedge, by
reason whereof the Plaintiff lost the benefit of his way; and after Trial and
Verdict, for the Plaintiff it was moved in Arrest of Judgment, because it did
not appear in the Declaration to what Village the common way led to. And it was
held a good Exception and Judgment arrested: but if it had been unto a common
way there, or in such a Village, it had been good.

KEnt versus Prat, Hill. 7. Jac. rotulo 131. Action upon the Case, Judgment
arrested, for that the consideration was not valuable.
the Plaintiff declares, that Prat was Rector of the Church of S. And that Kent
was lawfully possessed of the Parsonage-house, and that there were diverse
strifes between the Plaintiff and Defendant for the said Rectory: and that the
said Prat, in consideration that the said Kent would surrender the
Parsonage-house, and the Gleab-land, which were then sowed by Kent, he
promised, etc. And after Trial it was moved in Arrest of Judgment, that the
Surrender was not a valuable consideration, because it did not appear to the
Court that Kent had any Estate but at will, which is determinable at the will
of the Lessor, and so he surrendered nothing, but if these words had been in the
count, viz. of the Demise of the said Prat, For a term of diverse years, it had
been good, though the certainty of the years had not been expressed.

SMailes versus Belt, and uxorem, Hill. 1. Jac. rotulo 1372. Action upon the
Case, for words spoken by the Woman, Videlicet, Thou art a Theif, and a
mainsworn Theif, and a Verdict for the Plaintiff, and moved in Arrest of
Judgment, that the Action would not lie, but Judgment was arrested, because
the Issue was Quod ipsi non sunt cul. and it ought to have been that the Woman
was not guilty.

YArdley Attorney, versus Ellyll, Mich. 11. Jac. rotulo 1252. Action Case
forwords, for calling an Attorney Bribing Knave.
upon the Case brought for these words, Your Attorney, meaning the Plaintiff,
is a bribing Knave, and has taken twenty pounds of you to cozen me: the
Plaintiff laid a Communication, such a day and place by the Defendant with one
B. which B. had before that time retained the Plaintiff to be his Attorney,
concerning the Plaintiff, Hubbart and Nichols held the words actionable,
videlicet, for the first word, Bribing Knave, and that the last words did not
extenuate or weaken the former: if the words touch him in his Profession, the
Action will lie, for it is against the Oath of an Attorney. Birtridge is an
old perjured Knave, and that is to be proved by a stake parting the Land
between M. and C. One Judge for the Plaintiff, and two for the Defendant.

COrnhill versus Cowler. Trespass upon the Case brought against Baron Judgment
arrested being mis-tried.
and Feme for words spoken by the Woman; the Baron and Feme plead Quod ipsi in
nullo sunt cul. de praemissis, and the Jury find that the Woman was guilty,
and Exception taken after Trial to the Issue and Verdict, and they were both
aided by the Statute of Ieofayles. But another Exception was, that the Action
was laid in Suff. And the Addition in the Writ was A. C. de C. in Com. Essex,
and in the Declaration the Plaintiff alleadges, that the words were spoken at
C. in the County aforesaid, which was in the County of Essex, and so a
Mistryall.

CHimery versus God. Action upon the Case, upon a promise to discharge and save
harmless the Plaintiff against all manner of persons, and shows a Suit for
Tithes in Norwich Court, and the Defendant replies that the Plaintiff was not
damnified, and the Plaintiff rejoyns that he was damnified, to wit, at S.
aforesaid, which was in the County of Suffolk, where the Action was brought,
and the Court held the Cause was mis-tried, because the Suit was in Norwich,
and ought to be tried in Norwich, and not in Suffolk, and these words Apud, S.
praedictam were idle.

TIllet versus Bruen. for words, Trin. 12. Iac. The Plaintiff shows a Suit in
Colchester Court, and a Trial there before the Bailiff, and that the Plaintiff
gave in Evidence his knowledge; and the Defendant willing to defame the
Plaintiff, as if he had given false Evidence, said of the Plaintiff, Thou art
as much forsworn, meaning in the Evidence aforesaid by the Plaintiff, upon his
Oath in Form aforesaid given, as God is true; and moved in Arrest of Judgment,
that An inuendo. will not maintain an Action.
the Inuendo would not maintain the Action, and so adjudged.

LAmpleigh versus Braithwaie, Mich. 13. Iac. rotulo 712. Action upon the Case,
in which the Plaintiff sets forth, that whereas the Defendant had feloniously
killed a Man, and after the Felony committed did earnestly request and solicit
the Plaintiff that he would labor and endeavor to obtain from the King, for
the Defendant, a Pardon for the Felony, upon which the Plaintiff at the
instance and request of the Defendant, by all lawful ways and means possible,
did often, and by many days labor and endeavor to obtain, etc. Videlicet, by
riding and journeying at his own cost and charges, from L. unto the Village of
R. where the King then was, and from thence back again to L. to obtain, etc.
The Defendant afterward at H. in confideration of the Premises, did assume
and promise to give the Plaintiff an hundred pounds of lawful money, when he
should be required: and a Verdict for the Plaintiff, and moved in Arrest of
Judgment, for that it did not appear that the Plaintiff had spoken to the King
for a Pardon, nor done any thing, or obtained a Pardon: and Judgment was given
for the Plaintiff; Wynch said, the Promise was subsequent to the Request; and
good; for although the Defendant had no good by it, yet because the Plaintiff
was at costs and labor, and it was at the Defendants request, sufficient to
maintain the Action. If I request one to do a thing for me, and make no
promise, and after you let me know that you did such a thing for me, and then I
promise to discharge or pay you, this is a good consideration, although the
Promise go not with the Request; otherwise it is where a man does me a courtesy
without any request. And Hobart took this difference between a consideration
executed and executory; for where Non assumpsit is pleaded Difference between a
promise executory and executed: quod nota.
to a consideration executed, the Plaintiff needs only to prove the Promise;
for where the consideration is executory, the Defendant may take Issue as well
for not performing the consideration executory, as upon the Promise.

GLover versus Tailor, Hill 13. Iac. rotulo 852. Action upon the Non cul.
pleaded where Non assumpsit should have been pleaded, and adjudged a good Issue.
Case, for ill using a Horse, so that the Horse died, and the Defendant
promised to re-deliver the Horse. The Defendant pleads Non cul. And after a
Verdict it was moved in Arrest of Judgment, because he did not plead Non
assumpsit. And it was held a good Issue.

MArshall versus Steward, Mich. 13. Iac. rotulo 1134. Action upon Action of
case for words, upon the statute, of 1. Jac. against Invocation of Spirits.
the Case reciting the Statute of 1. Iac. against Invocation, etc. for these
words, The Devil appears to thee every night in the likeness of a black Man,
riding on a black Horse, and thou conferrest with him, and whatsoever thou do
ask he does give it thee, and that is the reason thou have so much money, and
this I will justify. Judgment for the Plaintiff.

In Trover Judgment by Nihil dic. and Exception taken to the Declaration, to
stay the filing the Writ of Inquiry, because no day of the conversion was in
the Declaration, and by two Judges held naught. Mich. 14. Iac.

PArker versus Parker, Hill. 12. Iac. rotulo 426. In Trover after a Ehe
Imparlannce role supplied by the Issue being perfect.
Verdict, it was moved in Arrest of Judgment, that the imparlance Roll was
entered with Spaces for the possession and conversion, but both those Spaces in
the Issue were filled up, and held good. The Imparlance was entered. Mich. 12.
Iac. rotulo 547.

WHitepain versus Cook, Pasch. 12. Iac. For words, Thou art a Rogue, and I will
prove thee a Rogue: no Judgment.

STone versus Bates. A man may well encourage one that was robbed, to cause the
Felon to be indicted, and accompany him to the Assizes, and this shall be
lawful for to do, without incurring the danger of an Action upon the case,
upon conspiracy; but if he knew that he was not robbed, then he is in danger of
the Action upon the case.

COpe and his Wife administratrix, Plaintiffs, versus Lewyn, Trin. Judgment
arrested, for not showing the Letters of Administration.
12. Iac. rotulo 1714. An Action upon the case brought upon a promise made to
the Intestate, and in the Court omits to show the Administration: and after
Trial, that Fault moved in Arrest of Judgment; and the whole Court was of
opinion, that he should not have his Judgment, for it did not appear that he
was Administrator; for at the Common Law no Administration lay, but the
Ordinary ought to have the Goods.

HArvey Attorney, versus Bucking. Mich. 12. Iac. rotulo 842. Judgment
arrested, for that the Communication did not appear but by the Inuendo.
Action of the case for slanderous words, He, meaning the Plaintiff, showed me
first a Bill of forty pounds, without a Seal, meaning the said Bill by the
said E. as aforesaid, sealed and delivered; and afterward he showed me the
same Bill with a Seal, and he, meaning the Plaintiff, has forged the Seal of
the same Writing, meaning the Seal of the said Bill by the said E. as
aforesaid, sealed and delivered. The Defendant traverses the words, and a
Verdict for the Plaintiff, and it was alleged in Arrest of Judgment, that
the Declaration was naught, for that it did not directly appear that there was
any communication between the Plaintiff and Defendant concerning the Bill, but
only in the (inuendo) which will not maintain the Action, and Judgment
arrested.

MOrton versus Leedall, Hill. 10. Iac. rotulo 1783. Action upon the Action of
the Case for calling a man mainsworn fellow.
case for these words, He is a lying and dissembling Fellow, and a mainsworn
Fellow. And a Verdict for the Plaintiff. And afterward it was moved in Arrest
of Judgment, that the Action would not lie, but at length Judgment was given
for the Plaintiff. And Sergeant Hutton cited the like case, adjudged int. and
Barnes, He is a mainsworn Villain. (...) Skipwash

SKipwash versus Skipwash, Hill. 14. Iac. rotulo 3472. Action upon Moved in
Arrest of Judgment, because no Demand alleged, but not allowed.
the case, that whereas the Defendant in consideration that the Plaintiff would
marry one A. B. did assume to pay the Plaintiff twenty pounds when he should,
after the Marriage, be thereunto requested: The Plaintiff alleadges no special
Demand: and that Fault was moved in Arrest of Judgment. Hobart and Wynch were
for the Plaintiff, Warburton for the Defendant.

JOtham versus Ball, Hill. 12. Jac. rotulo 1920. Action upon the case Judgment
arrested, for incertainty in the Declaration.
for slanderous words, Videlicet, Your Master Euseby, meaning the Plaintiff, is
a Rogue, a Rascal, and Forger of Bonds; the Plaintiff laid a Colloquium
between the Defendant and one R. G. And after Verdict moved in Arrest of
Judgment, for that it did not expressly appear, that the said R. G. at the time
of speaking the words was Servant to the Plaintiff: and Judgment was stayed by
the Court.

COddington versus Wilkin, for words, Trin. 12. Iac. He is a Theif, By a
general Pardon both Punishment and Fault taken away.
and why will you take a Theifs part: spoken 1. Martii 10. Iac. The Defendant
justifies the words, because the Plaintiff stole Sheep. The Plaintiff by way of
replication sets forth a general Pardon granted such a time, and further says,
that if any Felony were committed it was before the general Pardon made; and
shows himself to be a Subject, and no person excepted in the Pardon. The
Defendant demurs. The Court were of opinion, that by the Pardon both the
Punishment and Fault were taken away; and that the wrong was done to the King
by the Common Law; and the King being the supreme Head, if he pardons, the
party is cleared of the wrong. As if a Villain be infranchised, he from
thenceforth is no Villain.

Note, if a man upon good consideration promise to become bound to another by
his Obligation to do an Act: and if he do not become bound, Action upon the
case will lie against him: and the Plaintiff is not bound to tender him an
Obligation, but the Defendant has took it upon himself to do it.

RIchards versus Carvamell. Action of the case brought, and counts for
non-payment of money at the Plaintiffs next coming into the Promise upon
condition, notice not necessary.
County of Somerset; and avers, that such a day he came into the County of
Somerset, Videlicet, apud T. in Com. Somerset, and that the Defendant, though
often requested, has not paid. And Exception taken because the Plaintiff did
not allege in his count, that he gave notice to the Defendant when he came
into the County of Somerset, but not allowed, and Judgment given for the
Plaintiff. And Nota.
note, when a man assumes to pay money, or do any thing upon condition, the
Defendant may take Issue upon the condition, and needs not plead Non assumpsit,
but if he pleads Non assumpsit, then he confesses the performance of the
condition, which mark.

Austin versus Jarvis, Trin. 13. Jac. rotulo 2180. The Plaintiff declares,
Judgment arrested, for incertainty in the Count, and for that the promise was
made by an Infant.
that such a Day and Year he bought of the Defendant a Horse for a piece of
Gold of the value of 22. s. by him to the Defendant then in hand paid, and for
a 11. l. to be paid to the Defendant at the Day of Death or Marriage of the
Plaintiff, which should first happen, for payment of which 11. l. the Plaintiff
should bring to the Defendant one sufficient man to be bound, together with the
Plaintiff to the Defendant: the Defendant in consideration thereof assumes to
deliver the said Horse to the Plaintiff, when he should be thereunto requested:
and the Plaintiff avers, that such a Day he brought the Defendant one
sufficient man, Videlicet, I. A. de B. Yeoman, to be bound together with the
Plaintiff to the said Defendant for the payment of the said 11. l. and shows
that he requested the Defendant to deliver the said Horse, yet the Defendant
has not delivered him, according to his promise. The Defendant pleads Non
assumpsit. And a Verdict for the Plaintiff: and moved in Arrest of Judgment,
for that the Plaintiff at the time of the Contract was an Infant, and that he
could not perform his promise by reason of his Infancy, and therefore the
promise void; and another Exception, for that it was not alleged in what sum
the Plaintiff and his Surety offered to be bound; and Judgment was, that the
Plaintiff, Nihil capiat per breve.

JAcob versus Songate, Trin. 9. Jac. rotulo 2776. An Action upon the
Justification for calling a man perjured, dis-allowed, because he was t
convicted.
case brought for this word, Perjured. The Defendant justifies that it was
found by Verdict, that the Plaintiff was perjured, but no Judgment entered upon
that Verdict. And whether the Plea were good, being there was no Judgment, was
the Question: and it was adjudged no Bar, because no Judgment was given in the
first-Action: and so Judgment entered for the Plaintiff.

CRuttall versus Hosener, Pasch. 16. Iac rotulo Action of the case for these
words, He, meaning the Plaintiff, has caught the French Pox, and brought them
home to his Wife. And Judgment for the Plaintiff.

THornton versus Iepson. The Plaintiff being a Currier brought an Action of the
Case will not lie for calling a Currier Barretor.
Action upon the case for these words, He is a common Barretor; but the words
would not lie for a man of that Profession, but would lie for a Justice of
Peace or Lawyer.

IReland versus Smith, Hill. 9. Iac. rotulo Action upon the case For this word
Papist no Action will lie, unless spoken of a Bishop.
brought for these words, You Norgate take part against me with Ireland, who is
a Papist, and has gotten a Pardon from the Pope, and can help thee to one, if
thou will. The Plaintiff laid a communication between the Defendant and
Norgate, and alleadges himself of the age of 40. years, and not above, because
it might appear to the Court that he was born within Queen Elizabeth's Reign.
The Court held the Action would not lie, as it was adjudged in Halls case, and
for this word Papist no Action will lie.

If I deliver my Goods to you to keep, and I request them, and you deny the
Delivery of them; now an Action of Trover will lie, otherwise Nota.
it is without a Denial; if I distrain Cattle, I must not use them.

WArter versus Freeman, Mich. 15. Iac. rotulo 1941. Action upon Action of the
Case for double prosecution of a fieri sac.
the case brought for that the Defendant sued out a Fieri facias upon a
Judgment which he had against the Plaintiff, upon which Judgment the
Defendant had before sued out a Fieri facias, and the Sheriff of Oxford had
upon the first Fieri facias returned, that he had levied the Debt and Damages,
and that they remained in his hands for want of Buyers; and the Defendant
knowing that the Sheriff had levied the Debt and Damages, and intending to
charge him, again prosecuted another Fieri facias, and that the Sheriff had
again levied the said Debt and Damages, and has paid the Debt and Damages to
the Plaintiff, to wit, at Westminster, in Com. Middlesex, where the Action was
brought; and Judgment after Debate was given for the Plaintiff, though the
Defendant alleged that the Fieri facias was an Act in Law, and so no cause of
Action against him.

PArkhurst versus Powell, vic. Denbigh, Mich. 15. Iac. rotulo Upon a non est
invent. returned upon an Outlary, where the party escaped, the Plaintiff has
his Election where to bring his Action.
An Action of the case for a false Return of a Capias utlagat. and declares
that he prosecuted a Capias utlagat directed to the Sheriff of Denbigh, where
the Defendant inhabited, and delivered the said Writ to the Sheriff to be
executed; and the Defendant being then in the company of the Sheriff, and might
safely have arrested him, did not, but suffered him to escape, and returned
that he was not to be found; and upon Not guilty pleaded, it was tried in the
County of Middlesex, where the Action was brought; and moved in Arrest of
Judgment, that the Trial ought to be in Denbigh, because the not arresting
was the principal matter, but because the Action was grounded upon double
matter, the Plaintiff had his Election to bring his Action, either in the
County of Denbigh or Middlesex, by the whole Court.

BLand versus Edmonds, Pasch. 16. Jac. rotulo 444. Action upon the Judgment
arrested for want of an Averment.
Case brought for these Words, Videlicet, George Bland is a troublesome Fellow,
and he did combine with thee to trouble the Country, and I hope to see thee at
the next Sessions indicted for Barratry, or for sheep-stealing, as George Bland
was at the last Sessions, for Bland was indicted the last Sessions for
sheep-stealing. And it was held by the whole Court, that those Words would not
bear an Action, the Plaintiff laid the Words to be spoken to one Jo. Eagle:
and the Declaration was held naught and insufficient, because it was not
averred, that the Plaintiff was not indicted at the Sessions.

BRadshaw versus Walker, Hill. 16. Jac. rotulo Action upon the case brought for
these words, Videlicet, Thou art a filching Fellow, and did filch from A. B.
4. l. And Judgment that the Plaintiff should take nothing by his Writ; for it
shall not be intended that he stole the money.

ADams versus Fleming, Hill. 16. Jac. rotulo 890. Action of the Judgment
arrested for the incertainty of the Count.
case brought for these words, Videlicet, He has forsworn himself before the
Council of the Marches (meaning the Council of the Marches of Wales) in the
Suit I had against him there, and I will sue him for Perjury there. And after
Verdict for the Plaintiff, moved in Arrest of Judgment, that the words were
not actionable for their uncertainty, because the Court could not take notice
that they had authority to hold plea in matters of record.

Judgment for the Plaintiff for these words, Thou art a false forsworn Knave,
for thou did take a false Oath before a Judge of Assise to hang a man.

GOre versus Colthorpe, Trin. 5. Jac. rotulo The Declaration was For collateral
matters which are not Duties, a Request is necessary.
in consideration that the Plaintiff would give credit to E. C. then servant to
the Defendant for any thing the said E. should deal for, to the use of the
Defendant, with the Plaintiff, promised that he would see the Plaintiff
contented that which the said E. should deal for with the Plaintiff, for the
use of the Defendant any way, when the said Defendant thereof (after it should
become due) should be requested, and a special Verdict by which it was found
that the Defendant promised to see the Plaintiff contented, that which the
above named E. C. should deal with the Plaintiff, for the use of the said
Defendant any way. The Judgment of the Court was that the Verdict did not
maintain the Declaration, because for collateral matters which are not Duties,
a Request is material, and are not like a Duty as for Debt, which is due, and
no Day of payment expressed, that shall be alleged to be when he shall be
thereunto requested generally. For if I sell my Horse for ten pounds, and no
Day of payment, that shall be alleged in the Count, Cum inde requisitus
esset. And one case of Peter's was cited, which was grounded upon a promise made
in this manner, Marry my Neice, and when I come from London I will give you
100. l. and the Action was brought in this manner, Videlicet, in consideration
that he would marry, A. promised to pay the Plaintiff 100. l. after he returned
from London, when he was thereunto requested: and for these words, when he was
thereunto requested, the Action was maintainable.

HInch versus Heald, Trin. 17. Jac. rotulo Action upon the case The word Witch
will not bear an Action.
for these words, Videlicet, He is a Witch, and has bewitched me: and the
Court held the Action would not lie, for he might bewitch him by fair words, or
fair looks.

GReen versus Harrington, Trin. 17. Jac. routlo 953. The Plaintiff declares
that the Defendant such a Day was indebted to the An implied promise where it
is upon the reality will not lie, except upon a collateral cause.
Plaintiff in 10. l. for Rent due to the Plaintiff for one year ended at
Michaelmas then last past, for diverse Lands in H. demised to the Defendant by
the Plaintiff, the Defendant in consideration thereof promised to pay the
Plaintiff the said 10. l. when he should be thereunto requested. The Defendant
pleads Non assumpsit: and after Verdict given for the Plaintiff it was moved in
Arrest of Judgment, that there was no consideration to maintain the Action,
because an Action of Debt lay upon the first Contract being in the realty; for
upon an implied promise no Action will lie where it is in the realty, except
there be a special promise made upon a collateral cause, Videlicet, If the
Plaintiff had threatened suit for the said 10. l. and the Defendant, in
consideration that he would forbear to sue, promises to pay, etc. and the like:
for if a man be bound in a Bond to pay money, and the Day past, now an Action
of the case will not lie for that money, except there be a collateral promise:
and so in the like cases: and Judgment was given against the Plaintiff.

Michaelmas 17. Jac. It was adjudged in the Kings Bench in an Action upon the
case, Videlicet, whereas the Defendant was indebted An Indebitat. assumpsit for
money ruled, good without expressing for what.
to the Plaintiff in 10. l. (without expressing the cause for which the Debt
grew due) the Defendant in consideration that the Plaintiff at the special
instance and request of the Defendant, then and there had given Day to the
Defendant, until a time to come, to pay the money, the Defendant promised to
pay the money, that the Action was maintainable, without expressing the cause
for which the Debt was.

Hill. 17. Jac. rotulo 2722. Action of the case brought for these words, Thou
art a perjured Knave, and I will make thee wear Papers for it: the Defendant
justifies the words, and shows that the Plaintff was a Churchwarden, and took
his Oath to exercise that Office; and whereas one Article made, was, that he
should present whether the Churchyard was repaired or no, and he knowing it,
did not present it.

Action of the case brought for these words, Thou art a scurvy perjured Knave;
the Action will lie.

WIlson versus Sheriffs of London, Hill. 17. Jac. rotulo 3069. The Action
against the Sheriffs of London for discharging one who was arrested, coming to
defend a suit depending there. The Court cannot discharge one arrested, except
he be arrested in the face of the Court.
Plaintiffs declare upon an escape made upon a Capias ad respondendum, after
the Defendant was arrested: the Defendant pleads a Custom in London, that the
Mayor and Sheriffs of London have used to enlarge Prisoners that were arrested,
in coming, and returning from their Courts, having Causes there depending; and
set forth a Plaint in London against the Defendant, and that he was arrested,
and appeared, and pleaded to Issue; and as he was coming to the Court to defend
that Action, he was arrested, as is supposed, in the Action upon the case
brought against the Sheriffs; and show that he was brought to the Court, and
enlarged by the Court: and the Court held, that if a man were arrested in the
face of the Court, the Court might discharge him, otherwise not.

PAin versus Newlin, Mich. 16. Jac. rotulo 3042. Action upon the Judgment
stayed for variance between the Count and Writ to inquiry.
case brought upon a promise and Judgment, by Nihil dicit: and at the return
of the Writ to inquire, the Defendant moved in Arrest of Judgment, and showed
that the Day of the promise was supposed in the inquiry to be, Anno Domini
1614. And in the Declaration it was made 1617. and for that variance, Judgment
was stayed.

BElcher versus Hudson, Hill. 6. Iac. rotulo 132. The Plaintiff declares,
Release by the Husband, pleaded in Bar to an Action brought by the Wife after
his Death, for money to be allowed her after his Death, and adjudged no Bar.
that in consideration that the Plaintiff at the request of the Defendant would
marry one T. M. his familiar Friend, the Defendant promised to pay the
Plaintiff yearly after the Decease of the said T. M. 40. s. for her
maintenance: and the Plaintiff averrs the Marriage, and that she survived. The
Defendant pleads that the said T. M. in his life time after the Marriage, etc.
did release to the Defendant all Actions as well real as personal, and all
Demands and Challenges whatsoever, from the beginning of the World unto the
Date thereof: to which Plea the Plaintiff demurrs, and adjudged a naughty Plea.

BOx an Attorney against Barnaby. Action upon the case for these Action for
calling an Attorney Champertor.
words, George Box is a common maintainer of suits, and a Champertor, and a
Plague of God consume him, and I hope to see his Body rot upon the Earth like
the Carkase of a Dog, and I will have him thrown over the Bar next Term, and I
will give a Beech to make a Gallows to hang him: and Judgment given for the
Plaintiff, for this word Champertor, and no other.

Trin. 14. Iac. Action upon the case for these words, She is an arrant Whore,
and had two Bastards in Ireland: and Judgment by the whole Court, that the
words would not bear an Action.

YOrk versus Cecill, Mich. 14. Iac. Action upon the case brought by A. Tanner
for these words, Thou art a bankrupt Knave: and the Court held that the Action
would not lie: but Quaere.

Skaif versus Nelson, Mich. 12. Iac. rotulo 1106. Action upon the The Roll
mended after the Record was certified by Writ of Error, it being the Clarks
misprision.
case brought for words against Husband and Wife, spoken by the Wife, and
Judgment was entered for the Plaintiff, and in entering of the Judgment it
was made, Et praedicta, E. (being the Woman) in misericordia, which was naught,
for it should have been both the Husband and Wife in misericordia: and after
the Record was certified by Writ of Error; Sergeant Richardson moved that it
might be amended, because the Judgment Papers were right, and so it was
ordered to be amended according.

SMails an Attorney versus Moor, Hill. Iac. rotulo 753. Action He is a forging
Knave, spoken of an Attorney actionable.
upon the case for the words, He is a forging Knave: and the Court held that
the words were actionable, for he alleged in his Declaration, that he was an
Attorney of the Common Pleas, and so being touched in his Profession, the
words would bear an Action: and if a man said of a Bishop, that he was a
Papist, the Action would lie; because Religion is his Profession, and so he is
defamed.

STeward versus Bishop, Trin. 14. Iac. rotulo 769. Action upon the Employed
words will not bear an action.
case for these words, James Steward (meaning the Plaintiff) is in Berwick Gaol
for stealing of a Mare and other Beasts: and after a Verdict for the Plaintiff,
it was moved in Arrest of Judgment, that the words were not actionable, and so
it was adjudged, for that he did not directly say, the Plaintiff was a Thief,
but only implied,

Hill. 15. Iac. rotulo An Exception taken to a Declaration in Trover brought by
an Administrator, because he declares, that Trover brought by Administrator, as
of his own goods, and adjudged good.
whereas he was possessed of diverse Goods and Chattels, as of his own proper
Goods, and should have said, as was pretended, as of the Goods and Chattels of
the intestate at the time of his Death; but the Exception was overruled by the
Court.

Exception to an Action of the case brought, and the Plaintiff declares, that
whereas the Plaintiff had delivered the Defendant unum statum salis Anglicae, a
Bushel of Salt, pretending that (statum) had another proper signification, but
because it was showed to the Court that (statum) by one Dictionary was Latin
for a Bushel; Judgment was given for the Plaintiff.

In Trover it is usual to prove no more, but that you requested the Demand and
demall makes a Conversion.
Goods, and the Defendant refused to deliver them, this is a Conversion. When a
Justification arises upon a Sale, then I need traverse no more but the place
alleged, and not go to the whole County, but where it is a transitory,
Trespass, as for Battery, taking of Goods, and the like, then the whole County
must be traversed.

CAtford versus Osmond, Mich. 16. Jac. rotulo 1063. Action of Trover The
Sheriff justifies by virtue of a Process out of the Exchequer, to levy of the
Occupiers of S. Lands 59. s. arrear upon the said Lands.
brought for two Steers, the Defendant being an Attorney of the Common Pleas
justifies the taking as Undersheriff, by reason of Process from the Exchequer
to levy of the Occupiers of the Lands of diverse persons in a Schedule in the
said Writ named the Debts therein specified, and does not recite the Schedule;
and he being Undersheriff took the Steers in the Land of the Plaintiff, which
was lately one Stones, who was Debtor to the King in 59. s. being behind upon
the Land: and Exception was taken, for that it was not directly alleged that
the Land such a Day was the Land of the said S. The Writ commanded to levy the
sums in the said Schedule mentioned; and if they could not, to take their
Bodies; and it was adjudged a good Warrant to levy of the Occupiers of the
Lands that were the said S. 59. s.

Coals versus Flaxman, Hill. 14. Jac. rotulo 2175. Action of the case Common
appurtenant cannot be divided.
brought for disturbing the Plaintiffs Common. The Defendant pretends Title to
the Common by reason of Common appurtenant to certain customary Land, of part
of which he conveys a Title to himself, but not of the whole: and the Question
was, whether it were Common appurtenant, or appendant? and if appurtenant it
could not be divided.

KEymes versus Moxham, Trin. 15. Jac. rotulo 559. Action of the Mis-triall, the
Venn being mistaken.
case brought for a promise made at C. for the Delivery of a Mare, which the
Plaintiff delivered the Defendant to plow his ground in P. And shows the
Defendant did so excessively and immoderately labor and work the said Mare,
that the Mare died. The Defendant confesses the promise, and that the Mare at
the time of the Delivery was infirm, and that he worked her moderately, and
traverses the excessive laboring of the Mare: and after a Verdict, it was
moved in Arrest of Judgment, that it was mis-tried, because the Venn was of C.
which was naught, and there was no place alleged where the excessive
laboring was; for the Venn ought to come from that place where the laboring
was.

HArbin and his Wife versus Green, Trin. 14. Jac. rotulo 2263. Judgment
arrested, for a mistake of the Jury.
Action upon the case brought for not grinding his Corn at the Plaintiffs Mill,
and shows that the Bishop of Salisbury was seized of four customary Mils,
called A. in his Demesne, as of Fee in right of his Bishopric; and prescribes
that all Inhabitants and Residents within the City of Salisbury, holding any
ancient Mesuages of the said Bishop in right of his Bishopric, were time out
of mind used, and ought to grind all their Corn whatsoever spent in their
houses, or exposed to sale in the said City, at the said Mils, of the said
Bishop, and no where else, without the license of the said Bishop, and to pay
Toll therefore to the said Bishop, his Successors Bishops, or their Farmors for
the time being; and in consideration thereof, the Bishop, his Successors, or
Farmors for the time being of the said Mils, time out of mind have been used
and accustomed at their own charges, from time to time to keep and maintain a
Servant expert in grinding, as well by night as day there attending, to grind
their Corn as soon as conveniently might be; and the Plaintiff shows that such
a Day the Defendant was, and yet is, an Inhabitant, in one ancient Mesuage in
the said City, held of the Bishop, and so possessed, intending to deprive the
Plaintiff of the profit of his Mill, did such a day grind diverse sorts of Corn
in other Mils, without the Bishops leave, to his damage of, etc. The Defendant
pleads Non cul. The Jury find the Defendant guilty for a longer time, then the
Plaintiff had interest in the Mill, and gave Damages entire, and upon a Motion
in arrest of Judgment adjudged naught.

GResley versus Lother and his Wife Executrix of R. B. and declares In
consideration the Plaintiff would agree, the Testators son should marry the
Plaintiffs daughter, adjudged a good consideration.
that communication was had between the Testator in his life, and the Plaintiff
concerning a Marriage to be had and solemnized between one T. B. son and heir
apparent of the said R. B. and Jane Daughter of the Plaintiff, and heir
apparent of John F. deceased, the said Testator such a Day and Year in
consideration that the Plaintiff at the special instance and request of the
said R. B. then and there would agree that the said T. B. should marry the said
J. promised to pay 20. l. and adjudged a good consideration.

GOwland versus Mason Hill. 17. Jac. rotulo Action of the case for these words,
I charge him with Felony for taking of money out of the pocket of Henry Sparry,
and I will prove it: and the Court was divided in opinion, whether the words
would maintain an Action or no.

SMith and his Wife versus Stafford Executor of Stafford, Hill. 15 Jac. rotulo
906. Action of the case brought upon a promise made to the Woman when she was
sole, in consideration the Woman would marry the Testator, he promises that if
the Woman should over-live the Testator, that then he would leave her worth
100. l. and they averr that she did marry him, and after the Husband died, and
did not leave her worth 100. l. and the Defendant pleads Non assumpsit, and
found for the Plaintiff: and it was moved in Arrest of Judgment, that by the
Inter-marriage the Promise was drowned, and released. Three Judge^r the
Plaintiff, and one for the Defendant.

The like Observations in Actions of Covenant.
DRury versus Allen, and al. Mich. 6. Jac. rotulo 926. Action of Covenant
brought against Administrators. The breach was, for not repairing Houses by the
Administrators, according to a Covenant made by the Intestate. The
Administrators plead diverse Judgments given against them in Bar of the
Covenant, and that they have not Assetts over.

HAre versus Savill, Trin. 7. Jac. rotulo Action of Covenant Rents arrear, no
Plea in Covenant.
brought upon an Indenture, upon a special Covenant to pay Rent at certain
Days therein specified and reserved. The Defendant pleads that no Rent was
behind. The Plaintiff demurrs to that Plea: and it was held by the whole Court
to be a bad Plea in Covenant; for by that Plea the Defendant confesses the
Covenant broken, and that Plea tends but in mitigation of Damages.

MOrdant versus Wats, Pasch. 17. Jac. vel 7. Jac. rotulo 1532. Action of
Covenant brought for a Rentcharge granted for the life of an Estranger, and
for half a Year after to be paid at the Feasts of the Annunciation of the
Virgin Mary, and Saint Michael the Archangel, and allege that the Estranger
died in February, and that the Rent was not paid at the Feast of the
Annunciation, and so the Covenant broken: the Defendant demurres, pretending
that the Rent was not due until half a year after the Death of the Estranger,
and not at the Feast, but the Court held the contrary. And if the Grantee had
died, his Heirs should have had it, during the Life of the Estranger, because
it was payable to him, his Heirs and Executors. If I grant an Annuity for Life,
and twenty years after, these are two several Difference between Covenant and
Debt to bring an Action.
Grants, and the Executor shall have it after the Death of Tenant for Life. And
Sir Edward Cook said, When an express Covenant is made to pay the Rent at
diverse Days, an Action of Covenant will lie before all the Days of Payment be
past; but an Action of Debt will not lie Difference between Covenant and Debt
to bring an Action.
until all the Days be past, and that in such case Debt does properly lie
upon a Grant of an Annuity for life or years, H. 7. Eliz. rotulo 908.

LAm versus Tresham, Hill. 7 Jac. rotulo 2145. The Indentures of Breach
assigned in default of the Party that never sealed the Indenture of Covenants.
Covenant were made between T. Tresham E. Lord Stourton, Meriel, T. and the
Defendant, and the Lord Stourton and Meriel never sealed the Indenture, and
mention thereof was made in the Count, Videlicet, which Lord Stourton and
Meriel were parties to the said Indenture, but never sealed. The Case was Sir
T. T. conveyed one Lease to the Lord Stourton, and he to the said Meriel, and
by the Indenture brought into the Court, it was covenanted, that the said T. T.
M. and L. or one of them at the time of the ensealing and Delivery of the said
Indenture, was lawfully possessed of, and in the Manor of, etc. And covenant
that the Defendant, his Executors, and Assigns, might and should quietly have
and enjoy the said Manor clearly and absolutely freed and discharged, or
otherwise upon request saved harmless from all Incumberances and former
Bargains by the said T. S. E. M. and the Defendant or any of them: and the
breach was, that the Plaintiff was damnified, for that the said M. that had the
State did not seal, and adjudged good.

PYot versus Lord Saint-John, Mich. 7. Jac. rotulo 3214. The Plaintiff had the
Reversion of two Houses, one in Fee, and the other for years, and makes a Lease
for years, with Covenant for Reparations of both Houses, and Question was,
whether the Plaintiff should have one Action, or several Actions, and adjudged
that he should have a joint Action for both.

FIsher versus Ameers, Hill. 8. Jac. rotulo 1061. Action of Covenant Covenant
lies against the first Lessee upon breach of Covenant made by the Assignee.
brought against the first Lessee after he had assigned over his term for not
repairing: and the Question was, if an Action of Covenant would lie against the
first Lessee upon a Covenant to repair the Houses, etc. who had assigned his
term to another, whom the Lessor had accepted for his Tenant, and received the
Rent, and he suffered the House to be consumed by fire, and if the Covenant by
such Acceptance were gone as Debt, for the Lessor is barred of his Action of
Debt for Rent against his first Lessee, after he has assigned, and the
Difference between Covenant and Debt.
Lessor accepted the Rent of the Assignee. If I covenant, that I, my Executors,
Administrators, and Assigns, shall pay the Rent, if I assign over my term,
and the Assignee pay the Rent to the Lessor, yet the Covenant lies against the
first Lessee, otherwise it is where Rent is reserved, and no Covenant to pay
it, there, if the Lessor accept the Rent of the Assignee, the Action will not
lie against the Executor of the Lessee, and Judgment after a Demurrer for the
Plaintiff, that the Action would well lie.

WAlter versus Decanum and Capitulum Norwici, Trin. 9. Jac. Covenant upon a
void Lease is good.
rotulo 1414. Action of Covenant brought upon an express Covenant in a voidable
Lease; and the Question was, whether the Covenant be good, the Lease being
void; and it was adjudged, Trin. 10. Jac. that the Action would lie, although
the Lease were void: and Mapes case was cited, which was, Mapes made a Lease of
a Parsonage of D. for seven years, and did covenant to save the Lessee harmless
against B. the person, etc. in that case it was held, if the person sue the
Covenant by right or wrong, an Action lies upon the Covenant: and Sir E. Cook
said, that if the Lease were originally void, yet the Action of Covenant would
lie; for else a great mischief might happen; for a Dean might as to day make a
Lease to one, and keep it secret, and to morrow make another, and covenant to
enjoy it, and so avoid the second Lessee. If a Lease be good at the beginning,
and become void after, their terminus, is the number of years, otherwise, where
it was void at the first, if a Dean and Chapter make a Lease contrary to the
Statute, and reserve a Rent, it shall not be void against them, so long as the
Dean lives, but against his Successor. The Lease in question was not void, but
voidable. A Covenant in Law shall go to lawful eviction, although the Lease be
void. A Covenant real to Warrant and Defend, there must be a Title paramount,
and a lawful eviction. Covenants for Lessees shall be taken beneficially for
the Lessees.

BRight versus Cowper, Trin. 9. Jac. rotulo 638. Action of Covenant Action
would not lie, because if the Covenant was not performed, Piracy is no excuse
to perform a Covenant.
brought upon a Covenant made by the Merchant with a Master of a Ship,
Videlicet, that if he would bring his Freight to such a Port, then he would pay
him such a sum, and shows, that part of the Goods were taken away by Pirates,
and that the residue of the Goods were brought to the place appointed, and
there unladed, and that the Merchant has not paid, and so the Covenant broken:
and the Question was, whether the Merchant should pay the Money agreed for,
since all the Merchandises were not brought to the place appointed: and the
Court was of opinion, that he ought not to pay the Money, because the agreement
was not by him performed.

CRockhay versus Woodward, Hill. 15. Jac. rotulo 2001. An Action of Covenant
brought upon this Writing, Videlicet, Memorandum that Judgment arrested for
default in the Declaration.
I John Woodward do promise and assume unto B. C. to pay to him such Moneys, or
other Goods, as Josias my son shall imbessell, mispend, or wrongfully detain of
his, during the time of his being Apprentice with him within three Months next
after request to me in that behalf made, and due proof made of such
imbesselling, or wrongful detaining, in witness, etc. and the Plaintiff shows
that the Defendants son did imbessell Goods of his Masters, and showed what
Goods, and left out in his Declaration these words, Videlicet, and due proof
likewise made of such imbesselling or wrongful detaining. The Defendant
demands Oyer of the Writing, and pleads that he did not imbessell; and it was
tried for the Plaintiff, and after Trial Exception taken, because the
Plaintiff did not allege any proof made, and for that reason Judgment was
arrested.

BRagg Assignee of Bragg, versus Wiseman, Executor of Fitch, Mich. A Covenant
in Law shall not be extended to make a man do more then he can.
12. Jac. rotulo 538. Action of Covenant brought, and the case was this, that
Fitch and his Lady were seized of Land in right of his Wife for term of her
life, and join together in a Lease by Deed indented, in which were these words,
demise, and grant, and afterward Fitch dies, the Lady enters, and avoids the
Lease, and makes a new Lease to a stranger, whereupon an Electione firm is
brought against the first Lessee, and Judgment thereupon, and the first Lessee
put out of Possession: whereupon the first Lessee brings his Action of Covenant
against the Executors of Fitch, upon the words, demise and grant. The Defendant
demurrs. The words were, have demised, granted, and to farm letten for years,
if the Wife should so long live; and Judgment for the Difendant. A Covenant in
Law shall not be extended to make one do more then he can, which was to warrant
it as long as he lived, and no longer. The Law does not bind a man to an
inconvenience. If Tenant for Life make a Lease for twenty years, and covenant
that the Defendant shall enjoy it during the term, that shall be during his
Life, for the term ends by his Death; but otherwise it is, if the Covenant
be during the term of twenty years, by the word, Demise, an Action of Covenant
lies, although he never enter, and this word Demise implies as much as Dedi
and concessi. An Action of Covenant brought, for that the Defendant covenants
to bring again a Ship, Perils and Damages of Sea only excepted, and he to
excuse himself, says, that the Hollander in a warlike manner by force and
arms took the Ship: and much doubt was where the Issue should be tried; and
the opinion of the Court was, that the Action should be tried where it was laid.

COwling versus Drury. Action of Covenant brought, for that the Defendant did
not pay a Rent with which the Land was charged; the Defendant replies, he was
to enjoy the Land sufficiently saved harmless, and answers not the Breach, and
adjudged a naughty Bar by the whole Court.

SElby versus Chute, Trin. 11. Jac. rotulo 3804. Action of Covenant A Suit in
Chancery, no Disturbance.
brought, and the Breach was alleged, that the Plaintiff should quietly enjoy
the Land demised to him, and he shows that Chute exhibited a Bill in Chancery
against him, pretending the Lease was made in trust, and it was decreed to be
otherwise: and whether the exhibiting this Bill was a Breach of Covenant, there
being no Disturbance at Common Law, was the Question: and the Court were of
opinion, that it was no Breach of Covenant, for it was no Disturbance at Common
Law, nor Entry; and the Law could not take notice of it: and Judgment for the
Defendant.

HOlder versus Tailor, Pasch. 11. Jac. rotulo 1358. An Action of Judgment
arrested for defects in the Declaration.
Covenant brought upon this Covenant, that the Lessee should repair the House,
provided always, and it was agreed that the Lessee should have such necessary
Timber to be allowed and delivered by the Lessor: and the Breach was, that the
House wanted Reparations, and that so many Loads of Timber were necessary, and
that the Lessor allowed them according to the form and effect of the Indenture;
and a general Request laid, and Exception was taken to the Declaration, for
that the Plaintiff did not allege a special request to the Defendant: and
that it was laid in the Declaration, that a stranger brought the Timber, which
was held to be naught by the whole Court, for it amounted to an Entry upon the
Lessees Possession.

Exception taken to a Breach laid in Covenant for Repairs, because it was
generally alleged, and not showed in what, but being after a Verdict it was
helped by the opinion of the whole Court.

TIsdale versus Essex, Trin. 12. Jac. rotulo 2131. Action of Covenant Breach
that one entered, and shows not by what Title, and naught.
brought upon these words, covenant, promise, and agree, that the Lessee should
quietly occupy and enjoy the Lands demised, for and during the term of seven
years: and the Plaintiff shows that an Estranger entered upon the Land, and
shows not that he entered by Title; and the Court was of opinion that it was
naught, because it did not appear that he had a good Title to enter, Dedit and
concessit, imply a Warranty for Life; and Judgment was given for the
Defendant, because the Breach was naught.

HIcks versus Action of Covenant brought, and the Land alleged to be in
Weston, alias, Weston Underwood, and the Venn was de visu de Weston Underwood,
and it was alleged by the Defendant, that the Venn was mis-awarded; because
it was not of Weston only, but the Court was of a contrary opinion, that it
was well awarded, and Judgment for the Plaintiff.

CAstilion and al. versus Smith, Exec. Smith, Trin. 17. Jac. rotulo 1849.
Action of Covenant brought against the Defendant, and the breach of Covenant
alleged to be in the time of the Executor: and the Judgment was entered of
the Goods of the Testators: the Breach was for plowing of Land contrary to
Covenant.

RIdent versus Took, Hill. 13. Jac. rotulo 3516. Action of Covenant brought to
discharge the Plaintiff of a single Bill, in which he was bound for the Debt of
the Defendant, and he alleadges for Breach non-payment, and a Suit and recovery
at Law for the Money which remained in force. The Defendant pleaded, that he
paid the Money at the Day, and thereof gave the Plaintiff notice, before the
purchasing his Writ, the Plaintiff demurs; and the Court held the Plea naught,
and Judgment for the Plaintiff.

Actions upon Account.
WIlloughby against Small. An Action of Account brought Release cannot be given
in Evidence upon a Plea, that the Defendant was never a Receiver of the
Plaintiffs Money. In Account the Process are sum. Attaint and Distress. In
Account two Judgments, and upon a Nichil Process of Vlamy lies.
against the Defendant, as Receiver of the Plaintiffs Money. The Defendant
pleads, that he never was Receiver, where he has a Release from the Plaintiff,
whereby he shall lose the benefit of his Release, for that he cannot give that
in Evidence upon such Issue.

The Process herein is Summons Pone and Distress, and upon a Nichil returned
upon the Summons pone, or Distress, the Outlary lies, the Process is returnable
from fifteen Days to 15 Days, and an Essoin lies.

In this Action there are two Judgments, the first Judgment is, that the
Defendant shall account, because he has not accounted before in this first
Judgment, the Plaintiff shall not recover Costs or Damages, but a Capias ad
computand. shall issue, and if a Non est inventus shall be returned thereupon,
then an Exigent: and when the Defendant by the rigor of the Law is imprisoned,
yet the Court does in favor of the Defendant take Bail, for he shall account
before Auditors, which the Court shall appoint, which shall be the Officers of
the Court to audit the Account; and he shall appear from day to day before the
Auditors at every day and place assigned by the Auditors, until the Account
shall be determined; and before the Auditors the Plaintiff or Defendant may
join Issue or demurr upon the Plea pleaded before the Auditors, and if any of
the parties shall make Default, and shall not appear, then if after Appearance
the Defendant shall not plead, or if he shall join Issue, or join in a
Demurrer, the Auditors shall certify that to the Court, and the Court shall
proceed to the matter certified by trial of the Issue, if it be joined, or by
arguing the Demurrer as the cause shall require: and if the Plaintiff shall
make Default, or shall not prosecute, or if the Defendant shall not answer,
they may commit him to the Fleet; and if Verdict pass for the Plaintiff Costs
and Damages shall be recovered, by reason of the inter-pleadings; and the
Plaintiff shall recover his Goods or Moneys demanded, with his Costs and
Damages; and a Fisa, or Elegit or casa, shall be awarded, and if a Non est
inventus be returned, then an Outlary after Judgment.

An account against a Bailiff of Lands shall be brought in the Account against
a Baily local.
County where the Lands lie.

In every case in account where an Attachment may be returned, an Essoyn lies.

Where the Defendant is charged to account for Moneys received The Defendant
may wage his Law if the Receipt be per manus proprias.
from the hands of the Plaintiff, the Defendant may wage his Law, and likewise
for Goods delivered to be sold, but it is otherwise where the Receipt is by the
hands of a Testator, or of any other then the Plaintiff.

That after a year and a day after Judgment given, every Action Nota.
shall be revived by Scire facias, which is given by the Statute; for all
Actions at Law, if the Plaintiff shall not obtain his Execution within a year
and a day, he shall be driven to bring a new Action.

Or if a Defendant be charged as Receiver by Indenture, he shall not be
admitted to plead, that he was not a Receiver.

If the Plaintiff die before the second Judgment, the Writ shall abate, In
Account the Writ abates the Death.
and no Scire facias lies for the Executor, if the Defendant die before the
second Judgment.

If two be adjudged to account, and a Ca. and exfa. issue, and one appear, and
the other be outlawed, he that appears shall account alone, for that the
Plaintiffs Process is determined against the other: and so if one die, the
other shall account alone; and if one be adjudged to account, and will not, he
shall be committed to the Fleet.

That if I deliver Goods to one, to the value of 100. l. to traffic Nota.
with for my use, and he sels them for 10. l. I have no remedy, but if my
Bailiff buy a thing for 10. l. which is not worth it, he shall not be allowed
it.

Account lies not before a Sheriff, for that he can assign no Auditors. Nota.


If two be jointly possessed of Goods, one of the two deliver the Goods for
Merchandise, he only shall bring the Action.

An Account lies not against an Executor or Infant. Nota.


An Account lies not for a Park of Deer.

Matter that is in discharge of an Account shall not be pleaded in Matter in
discharge of the Actions shall not be pleaded in Bar.
Bar of the Action, for the Judges are Judges of the Action, and not of the
Account.

If Money be delivered to render an Account, (an Account lies) but if it was
delivered to keep until the Plaintiff shall require; Account does not lie, but
Detinue.

If the Plaintiff account upon Witness of the Receipt, the Defendant Nota.
shall not wage his Law.

If an Account shall be brought for Goods, in the Declaration the Nota.
Plaintiff declares, that they were in his house, whereas indeed they were not,
it is good.

HArrington versus Dean, Hill. 10. Jac. rotulo 3230. Action of Account
Judgment in Account upon a special Verdict.
render brought against the Defendant for the Receipt of Money by the hands of
one Rotheram for 200. l. The Defendant pleads that he was not a Receiver for to
render an Account: the Jury find it specially that Rotheram was indebted to
the Plaintiff in 200. l. and the Plaintiff required the Defendant to receive
the said 200. l. and the Defendant required Rotheram to pay the 200. l. and
Rotheram upon Request to him made, desires the Defendant to borrow of any
person 200. l. and to pay the Plaintiff, and find that the Defendant did
borrow 200. l. of one Stanhop to pay the Plaintiff; and Rotheram became bound
to Stanhop for the payment of the said 200. l. and that the Defendant appointed
his Wife, to pay the Money to the Plaintiff; and if upon the whole matter, etc.
and Judgment was given, that the Defendant was a Receiver.

THe Earl of Cumberland against Hilton. The Clerk that entered Misprision of
the Clerk amended after Verdict.
the Cause had omitted the Charge which was for 400. l. and it was omitted in
the Roll, and Nisi prius: and after a Verdict, Excepon taken, and amended by
the Court.

Assise.
IN an Assise Trin. 29. Jacobi, rotulo 27. brought against Thacker No Tenant at
the time of the Writ purchased, nor afterward, and if, etc. no Disseisin.
and Elmer: the Defendants come and say, that there was no Tenants of the
Tenements put to the view of the Recognisors of the Assise aforesaid, nor at
the time of purchasing the Writ, to wit, such a Day, nor any time after; and
this they were ready to verify, and pray Judgment; and if so, then they say,
that they have done no injury or Disseisin of the Tenements with the
appurtenances to the said W. T. and put themselves upon the Assise; and the
said W. T. does so likewise, therefore the Assise was taken between them; and
thereupon the Recognisors of the Assise say, that the said E. E. at the
purchasing of the original Writ of the Assise, Videlicet, such a Day were
Tenants of the Tenement aforefaid, with the appurtenances, as of his Freehold;
and that the said W. T. was seized of the Tenements aforesaid, with the
appurtenances in his Demesne, as of Fee until the said E. did unjustly, and
without judgment disseise the said VV. but not by force and arms; and assess
Damages to 12. d. and for Costs 6. d. and Judgment given that the said VV.
should recover his Seisin of the Tenements aforesaid against the said E. by the
view of the Recognisors of the Assise, and his Damages, etc.

An Assise brought, and the Grant was of the Herbage and Pannage, Note upon the
Kings Grant.
etc. and whether this were good or no: some held it void, for the incertainty
of the Grant, when it should begin; Sir Edward Cook held the Grant good; for if
the King make a Lease for Life, and grants the Land without reciting the
state to one for life, this is a good Grant for Life of the Reversion, to begin
immediately after the Death of the Tenant for Life.

Trin. 7. Jacobi, rotulo 35. An Assise brought for the Office of a View to be
there where the Office is performed.
Harald, at the Funeral of the Earl of Exceter; and the great Question was,
where the view should be made; and it was alleged, that it should be made in
the place where he exercised his Office, but the Court doubted of that; but
they were examined of the view made in the Abbey of Westminster, being the
place where the Funeral was performed; and the Court were of opinion, that in
Dower, where Tithes are demanded, no view lies, for of things that are
invisible, no view lies, but the Tenant in such case shall be denied it.

SIr William Saint Andrew brought an Assise de Darrein Presentment, Another
Writ brought, and hanging, a good Plea in abatement.
against the Archbishop of York, the Countess of Shrewsbury, and F. H. for the
Church, of O. in the County of Not. The Archbio p and H. appeared, and the
Countess did not appear; and though the Countess made Default, yet the Assise
was not taken against her by Default, but a re-summons was awarded against the
Countess, and the same Day given to the Archbishop, and H. and a Habeas
Corpora against the Recognisors. And note, the Tenants that appeared pleaded in
abatement, that a Writ of Quare impedit, for the said Church was hanging in
such a Court between the same parties, and the Assise was brought afterward:
and with this agrees the Register; and it was adjudged a good Plea. The Writ
was returned in this manner, Pleg. de prosequend. John Do, Richard Roo. The
within named Archbishop and Countess are attached, and either of them is
attached, per Pleg. H. S. N. J. And the within named H. has nothing in the
Sheriffs Bailywick, by which he may be attached, nor has a Baily within his
Liberty, nor is therein found: and the residue of the Execution, etc. and
Judgment given, that the Writ should abate: and the like was in the Earl of
Bedfords case, where two Quare impedits were brought one after another, and the
last Writ abated.

J. Lovelace versus Baronissam Despencer, and R. Harvey Clericum, Assise taken
by default against Harvey, and the other Tenant pleaded in abatement of the
Assise, that there was a Quare impedit depending.
Trin. 12. Jac. rotulo 74. de Darrien Presentment for the Church of M. And the
said H. being solemnly exacted came not: and the Sheriff made a Return, that he
was summoned by J. O. and W. C. and therefore the Assise was to be taken
against him by Default, but the said Baromsh. by T. her Attorney, faith the
Assise ought not to be so taken, and confesses the said J. was the person last
presented, but conveys a Title to her self of the Manor: to which the
presentation belongs, and that being so seized, the Plaintiff in the Assise by
usurpation presents the Clerk in the Count, whereupon the Defendant brought a
Quare impedit, and hanging the Writ, the Clerk in the Count dies, and the
Plaintiff presented the Clerk that made Default, who by virtue of that
presentation is yet Parson of the said Church, by which she is seized of the
Advowson, as in her former Estate; and so she says, that the Presentation of
the said J. by the said L. made, ought not to prejudice her: and a Demurrer
upon this Plea; and that the Assise should remain to be taken, etc. for want of
Recognisors; and the Sheriff was commanded to distrain them, etc. and Judgment
given, that the Plea was good: but quaere of the Nota.
Declaration, whether sufficient, because it was not alleged, that he that
presented was seized of the Advowson.

Pasch. 8. Jac. rotulo 31. An Assise brought for the Office of Clock-keeper of,
and it was held, that it must be an ancient Office, and because they could not
prove that it was an ancient Office, the Plaintiff was nonsuit, and the
Plaintiff showed a Grant of the same in E. 6. time, but that was held no
ancient time.

Pasch. 6. Jacobi. It was held by the whole Court, that an Assise of The King
cannot create an Office to the Queen, who may bring an Assise.
Sadler to the Queen would not lie, being granted to one by the King, but was
held void by the whole Court, for the King cannot make an Officer to the Queen,
and by the Patent no place was expressed where he should enjoy and exercise his
Office, and take the Profits, and therefore the Jury could not have the view;
and for that cause an Assise cannot be taken: and if the King should grant the
Office of Usher to his Son the Prince, an Assise would not lie.

An Assise brought against Demetrius, the Plaintiff was nonsuit; and Demetrius
moved to have Cost, and it was denied by the whole No Costs in a nonsuit in
Assise*
Court, because an Assise is not within the words of the Statute.

Audita Quaerela.
BIrd versus Kirton, Trin. 13. Jacobi, rotulo 3118. An Audita Quaerela brought,
and the case was this, Bird and Milles were bound to Kirton, and Kirton makes a
Bond to Milles in the sum of 100. l. that if Milles be not sued upon the first
Bond, then that shall be void; and it was alleged, that Kirton did both sue
Milles and Bird, and that he had no notice of the second Bond, that he might
have pleaded it, and so pretends that the second Bond should be a Defeasance of
the first; and Judgment was given for the Defendant.

BEck brought an Audita Quaerela, and surmises the matter following, The Court
was denied a Supersedeas, the surmise being only matter in suit.
that Boon Administrator of C. brought his Action of Debt upon an Obligation,
and before Judgment, that Administration was revoked, and Administration
granted to another, and notwithstanding the Revocation, he procured Judgment,
and the second Administrator released, and the rest brought an Audita Quaerela
upon that Release, and the Court would not grant a Supersedeas, because the
Revocation was but matter in fait, for that Revocation was not under Seal; and
the first Administrator might appeal.

Cases in Law, and Notes.
IF a Writ of Covenant be brought against two, and if one acknowledge Nota.
the Fine before one of the Justices, and the other acknowledge by Dedimus, or
before another Justice, that Fine cannot be proceeded upon these two
acknowledgements by the opinion A Writ of Covenant brought against more then
acknowledged, and prayed to be amended, and denied.
of the Court.

A Writ of Covenant was brought against three men, and their Wives, and only
two men and their Wives acknowledged the Fine, and the other Husband and Wife
never acknowledged, and the Fine was sued, as a Fine acknowledged by all, and
it was desired the Fine might be amended, and the Man and Wife that did not
acknowledge might be put out, but the Court would not grant it.

If I make a Lease for years, reserving Rent, during the Life of A. Lease made
to one during the life, two if one die the Lease is ended.
and B. if one of them die, the Rent is gone. If I make a Lease for Life,
reserving a Rent to me and my Executor, neither the Executor nor the Heir shall
have the Rent, Justice Walmsley held this difference in making a Lease to two,
during their Lives, if one die, the other shall have it; otherwise it is if it
be made to one during the Life of two, and one of them die, in this case the
Lease is ended: and there is difference between a reservation of Rent and
Lease, for Reservation is according to the will and pleasure of the Lessor; and
Justice Walmsley said, if a Lessee for years grants a Rent to A. during the
Life of B. and C. this Reservation is good, although one should die, which Sir
Edward Cook denied: and Judgment was given for the Plaintiff, in Hills case.

If I make a Lease for years, reserving a Rent, and then I grant, demise, and
to farm let, Reversionem domus, for years, and the Rent, to Nota.
have and to hold the Reversion, and the Rent from a time past, if the Lessee
cannot get an Attornement, yet it is a good Lease in Reversion, and shall take
effect after the end of the first Lease habendum terram and habendum
reversionem est terra revertens, and no difference.

If the Husband with his own money purchases for his Wives A case of Jointure.
Jointure, Land to them and the Heirs of their two Bodies, the Remainder in Fee
to the Wife, and they have Issue two Sons, and the Husband dies, and the Wife
suffers a Recovery to the use of the youngest Son, the eldest Son
notwithstanding shall have the Land, by the Statute of Joyntures.

Hill. 6. Jac. If I set-out my Corn, and after take it away, the Parson Nota
been.
may sue me in the Spiritual Court, or bring an Action of Trespass against me:
but if the Parson sue in the Spiritual Court a stranger for taking away the
Tithes which were set out, this is a Praemunire in the Parson.

Tenant at will shall pay his Rent when he holds over his term, Difference
between Tenant at will and sufferance.
but Tenant at sufferance shall not pay any Rent, if a man hold over his term,
and pay his old Rent, he shall be accounted Tenant at will.

For one joint Debt, for one Contract, you cannot plead Nil debet, Joint Debt
and Contract cannot have several Pleas. Nota.
for part, and demur for the rest; for he pleads Nil debet, and the matter in
Law is reserved.

Licet saepius requisite, is a sufficient Request upon a Bond, because it is a
Debt.

Unto an Action brought against a man upon a Bond, pleads Denis Nota.
age: the case was this, that when the Obligation was sealed and delivered, the
Defendant was of full age, but at the time when the Bond bore Date, he was
under age; and at the Assizes the Judge there ruled, that at the time of making
the Bond, was when the Bond was sealed, and not when it bore Date.

The Court were of opinion, that where a Bishop holds Land discharged Nota.
of Tithes, and he makes a Feofment of the Land, the Feoffee shall be
discharged of Tithes; and the like, if the King has ancient Forest-land
discharged of Tithes, and the King grants this Land, the Grantee is discharged
of Tithes; and it is a general Rule, that he which may have Tithes, may be
discharged of Tithes.

If I let Land for years, reserving Rent, if I command one to put his If I
command one to do a Trespass, an Action will lie against him.
Cattle into the Land, I cannot distrain them, for my commandment is a wrong,
and an Action of case will lie against the commandor.

If I make a Lease, and bid the Tenants cut down the Trees, yet I may have an
Action of waste against my Lessee. In Sir Cheydens case, the commandment to
take Possession was void, unless he had commanded him to expel the Tenant, and
then he might join either to distrain, or bring an Action of Debt, for the
Lease was made by him and two more.

28 H. 8. If I make a Lease to the Husband and Wife, covenant to Wife not bound
to perform Covenants of the Lessee.
do no waste, or repair Houses, and the Husband dies, and the Wife surviveth,
and holds in, if the Wife commit waste, or not repair the House, no Action
lies against the Wife; but to such a Lease the Wife is tied to pay the Rent,
or to perform a condition made by the part of the Lessor, but not observe or
perform Covenants of the Lessee.

Pasch. 10. Jacobi. The Court much doubted, whether one that had Nota.
a Park, and was used to pay one Shoulder of Deer for all manner of Tithes, and
the Park is dis-parked, should now pay Tithes in kind or not.

For Wool and Lamb, no Action upon the Statute for not setting No Action for
small Tithes.
out of Tithes, for they are no predial Tithes: and no Action lies upon this
Statute for small Tithes.

An Administration granted durand. minori aetate execut. is not within
Administration granted during minority not within the Statute 21 H. 8.
the Statute of 21 H. 8. And by the Civil Law the Judge may after
Administration by him granted, revoke it, and grant it to another. And if an
Administration be granted to a Feme Covert, yet she shall sue in their Court as
a Feme sole. One Briefly married an Administratrix, and entered into Bonds for
the Intestates Debts; and afterward the Wife leaves her Husband, and refuses
the Administration, and it was granted to another, and now B. prays a
Prohibition, for that he may be sued for Debts, and denied by the Court, until
he be sued. This Administration was first granted by Doctor B. and after by him
revoked, and a new granted by him to the Wives Brother, and afterward he
revoked that, and established the first Administration and the Appeal.

A Feofment in Fee by Deed indented, Rent reserved, it is good; but without
Deed cannot reserve Rent.

If Land be devised by three, upon condition to pay them 100. l. Nota.
equally to be divided, and one of them dies, his Executor, or Administrator
shall have the Money: and so it is, if one were bound to pay Money.

The Commissary granted Administration of the Intestates Goods Ordinary cannot
make a Divident of themselves.
to the Wife, and did make a Divident of his Estate to some of the rest of his
Kindred: and this was-held not to be warranted by Law, and more then the
Ordinary could do; because the Administratrix is chargeable to pay all Debts
and Promises of the Intestate, and to bring up his Children, which she cannot
do, if the Goods be taken away; Vbi delinquit ibi punietur.

If a Copyholder of Inheritance accept a Lease for years of his Copyhold, the
Copyhold is gone by the opinion of the whole Court.

If a Legacy be granted of Land, this shall not be sued for in the Legacy of
Land shall not be sued for in Court Christian.
Spiritual Court; but if one by Will devise Land to be sold for payment of
Legacies, this shall be sued for in the Spiritual Court by the opinion of the
whole Court.

If two Fulling-mils be under one Roof, and a rate-tithe paid for Nota. For
Tithes.
the Mils, and after you alter these Mils, and make one a Corn-mill, your Rate
is gone, and you must pay Tithes in kind; or if you have but one pair of
Stones in your Mill, and pay a Rate for them, then if you put on another pair
of Stones, new Tithes must be paid in kind.

If one in Fee make a Lease for Life, and after grants a Rentcharge, if the
Grantors Cattle come upon the Ground, I may distrain Nota.
them, although I cannot distrain the Tenant in Possession, but the Grantor
cannot avoid it. If the condition of a Bond be to discharge a Message of all
Incumberances, then one may plead generally, that he did discharge it of all
Incumberances; but if it be to discharge it of such a Lease, then I must show
how.

If a man devise his Trees to his Executors to pay his Debts, the Executor must
in convenient time cut down the Wood. And so if a Nota.
man sell his Trees, the Vendee must sell them in a convenient time.

If I grant you out of my Manor, 10. l. per ann. and recite but five pounds,
the Recital shall not diminish the Grant. And so if I grant Recital shall not
enlarge the Grant.
you ten pounds out of my Manor, and recite 20. l. this shall not enlarge it.

If I infeoff two of Land, habendum to me in Fee, and habendum to the other in
Fee, they are Tenants in common.

In the Court of Wards, one Dymack was a Purchasor by Bargain Nota.
and Sale, and before inrolment D. dies, and after his Death the Indenture was
enrolled; the Question was, whether his Son shall be in Ward for the Land; and
it was adjudged, that he is Heir to the Land, and is in by the Statute of 27
Eliz. of Bargains and Sales, and not by the Statute of Uses.

My Lord Hobard held, that if an Executor pay a Bond made upon Money paid by an
Executor upon a usurious Contract is a Devastavit. Proportiament of Rent.
a usurious Contract, it shall be a Devastavit in the Executor: and if he be
bound to present one to a Church, and he present one upon a Simonaical
Contract, the Bond is broken.

Hill. 10. Jac. Resolved, if one make a Lease of a Manor, reserving Rent, and
afterward the Lessor grants the Reversion of forty acres thereof; now if an
Action of Debt be brought by the Grantee, he may aver the rate of the Acre: and
if the Defendant plead Nil debet per patriam, the Jury shall rate the value,
and although the value be found less by the Jury then the Plaintiff surmiseth,
yet the Plaintiff shall recover after the proportion.

For Acts in Law no Attornement is necessary: as if a Lease made No Attornement
necessary for Acts in Law.
for years, reserving a Rent, which is assigned to a Woman for Dower, she shall
have the Rent without Attornement. In Cambels case upon an Elegit returned,
that the Lessor was seized in Fee, and that by virtue of the Judgment the
moity was delivered to the Plaintiff; and for the Rent reserved upon the Lease
for years before Judgment.

If a man top a Tree under the growth of 21. years, and suffer the Nota. For
Tithes.
body to grow; and afterward when the boughs are grown out again, he does lop
and top it again, I shall pay no Tithes, although the Tree was not privileged
at the first cutting, by the opinion of the whole Court.

If a Debt be recovered in a Court of Record, that Debt cannot be Nota.
assigned over to any man by the opinion of the whole Court, Mich. 10. Jac.

Pasch. 14. If Money be to be paid, upon proof made, there the trial Note how
far Proof extends.
shall be the proof to be made before: but if it be to pay Money within 3.
Months after proof, there proof must be made first: but if it be upon proof
before A. then proof being made before A. this extending proof shall tie the
party: but Warburton held the contrary, and he resembled this to a surmise to
have a prohibition, which is no binding proof, for the Jury may pass against
the proof in the surmise: when a Bond is to pay Money upon proof, this is a
legal proof by Law, if it be laid generally to be paid by proof; if it were by
proof before two Justices, or two Aldermen, this shall be intended a sufficient
proof, when the Action shall be brought upon the Bond, and if the Defendant
say, that due proof was not made, then they shall say, that before the two
Justices, etc. it was proved by testimony before them, and then the Judges
shall judge whether it be a sufficient proof or not.

If I devise Lands to my Executors for three years, for the payment of my
Debts, this is Assetts in the Executors hands; but if I devise Nota, Difference.
my Land to be sold for the payment of my Debts, it is no Assets before it be
sold.

Mich. 9. Jacobi. It was held in the Common Pleas by the whole Court, that in
the Kings case, the consideration of the Money paid, is Nota.
never to be proved. Likewise in a common case of Bargain and Sale in
consideration of Money paid, where in truth none was paid, yet it is good, and
the Bargainee is not tied to prove the Payment, for the Bargainer may have an
Action of Debt.

If a Legacy be granted out of Leases, and a Suit in the Spiritual Nota.
Court, for this shall not be prohibited, but otherwise it is, if it were out
of Fee Simple Lands.

HEle versus Frettenden. Resolution upon two Cases upon the Statute Nota.
of E. 6. for not setting forth of Tithes, Videlicet, A man possessed of Corn
sels it, and before two Witnesses sets out his Tithes, and afterward privately
takes away his Tithes: and the Parson sues him upon the Statute of treble
Damages, for not setting forth of Tithes: and the Defendant proves by
Witnesses, that he set forth his Tithes, yet this Fraud is helped, for the
words are without fraud or deceit. In the second case, one secretly sels his
Corn to one who was not known, and afterward the Vendee commands the Vendor to
cut the Corn, which he does, and takes away the whole Corn without setting
forth his Tithes; and the Question was, who should be sued for the Tithes: and
the Court held the first Vendor should be sued, for it was fraudulent.

If a man be found guilty of Felony, and after receives his Pardon, Nota.
he shall not be Legalis home, to pass upon a Jury.

If a Venire facias be against an Archbishop, the Venire facias shall be Tam
milites quam alios liberos, etc. because he is a Lord of the Parliament.
Copyhold land extendable upon Statute of Bankrupt. Being a member of the
Cinque Ports will not free one from Arrest. Difference of things that are in
Prender and that are in Render.


If a man be obliged in a Statute staple, his Copyhold Land is not extendable,
but it is upon a Statute of Bankrupt.

If a man have Common in three Acres, and purchase one of the three Acres, his
Common is extinct.

If a man of the Cinque Ports shall come to London, he may be there arrested,
and shall not have the Privilege of the Cinque Ports.

Difference between those things which are in the Prender, and such things that
are in the Render; for if I take not such things as are in Prender according to
my Prescription, it is void. If I have Estovers in Woods to be taken every
other year; if I omit to take them every other year, I cannot take them in the
third year. But for Rent, and such other things that are in the Render, I ought
to have it when ever I demand it, as it best pleases me. And note, that in such
Nota.
case one prescribed for eight Loads of Wood to be cut and taken, as
appertaining to a Message, which was held naught by the whole Court, for the
Prescription should be laid for Estovers to be employed upon Repairs of the
said Message, or to be spent in it: for a man cannot prescribe to have a
Prescription to come and cut down my Wood, which is as much as I that have the
Freehold can do. For the claim to take and sell my Wood cannot be good. And
the Court held it a good Prescription, to prescribe to have Common every other
year, although you show not the Commencement, as to show what time of the year
when it begins. If a man has Common of Pasture, in diverse Closes and parcels
of Ground, where he has some Land of his own, there, and in all other cases
where one is to prescribe, he need not to make his Title to every piece, but to
say, he has Common in loco in quo, etc. int. alia, and need not to speak of
the rest of the Land in the residue of the Field, because he has Land of his
own. Common appendant belongs to arrable Land, not to Pasture Land.

If two Issues be joined, and in the awarding the Venire facias, Omission in
awarding the venire of these words, Quoad triand. etc. held good. Local things
shall not be made transitory.
these words, Videlicet, Quoad triandum tam exit istum quam praedictum alium
exit superius junct.) were omitted, and after a Verdict such Default was moved
in Arrest of Judgment; and the Exception overruled, and held good,
notwithstanding that omission.

The whole Court were of opinion, that local things shall not be made
transitory, by laying the Action in a foreign Shire, as for Corn growing in one
Shire, and an Action of Trover brought in another.

COmes Cumbr. versus Comitem Dorset. It was moved by the Defendant, A Tales
prayed by the Defendant upon the Plaintiffs Distring. in another Term, but
denied.
that whereas the Plaintiff had prosecuted a Distring. Jur. and only eleven of
the Jury appeared, and the Inquest remained to be taken for want of Jurors: and
that at such time neither Plaintiff nor Defendant desired a Tales; and
afterward the Defendant in another Term prayed a Tales of that Writ which the
Plaintiff had prosecuted, and the Court denied to grant it, because he prayed
not a Tales when the Distress was returned; and if he would have a Tales, he
must purchase anew, a Plur. distring. and if then the Jury fill not, the
Defendant may pray a Tales, and the Court ought to grant it. And note, upon the
first Habeas Corpus the Defendant shall not have a Tales, but in Default of the
Plaintiff.

IF the Chamberlain of the County Palatine of Chester make an insufficient If
Chamberlain of Chester make an ill Return, the Sheriff shall be amerced. No
Distress in a Court, Baron but by Prescription. Actions upon penal Statutes,
not within the Statute of Jeofailes.
Return to the Court of Common Pleas, upon a Writ issued out of that Court; the
Sheriff shall be amerced, because the Sheriff is the Officer responsible to the
Court.

The King has power to make and create a Leet anew, where none was before. A
Distress is incident of Right, but in a Court Baron a Prescription must be laid
to distrain.

J. Rogers versus Powell. My Lord Cook held that the Surrender of a Copyhold
in Tail is not any Discontinuance: and Justice Foster of the same opinion.

In Doctor Husseys case in a Ravishment de guard, wherein the Judgment is
penal, the Habeas Corpus was denied by the Court to be amended, being a blank
Writ after a Verdict, but was adjudged Error. For the Proviso in the Statute of
Jeofailes, 18 Eliz. excepts Actions upon penal Statutes.

One Jury was impannelled of the Town of Southampton, and called Nota.
to the Bar, and made Default; and the men of that Town showed to the Court a
Grant made to the Inhabitants of that Town, that no Return should be made of
the men of that Town to be of any Jury, and prayed the Allowance of their
Charter, and the Court appointed them to plead their Charter, and it was done
accordingly.

TRier versus Littleton. A special Verdict was found, whether Fraud or not
Fraud; and the Jury did not find the Fraud expressly, Judges not meddle with
matters of fact.
but they found Circumstances that the Deed might seem thereby to be
fraudulent; but the Court will not adjudge it Fraud, where the Jury do not
expressly find the Fraud; for the Judges have nothing to do with matter of
Fact; and so by the whole Court no Fraud.

Tenant for Life, Remainder for Life, Remainder in Tail, Remainder in Fee, the
first Tenant for Life suffers a Recovery, the Remainder in Nota.
Tail is barred, although the second Estate for Life be no party. Baron and
Feme seized of the Wives Land for Life of the Wife, Remainder to the Husband
and Wife in Tail, and afterward the Husband does bargain and sell the Land by
Deed enrolled, and a Precipe is brought against the Bargainee, and he voucheth
them in Remainder: this is a good Recovery to bar the Estate Tail.

If an Information be brought against three upon the Statute of Information
against three, and two appear, may declare against those two.
Maintenance, and two of them appear, and the third does not appear, the
Plaintiff may declare against the two that do appear, before the other appears,
for it is but a Trespass and Contempt, as in Trespass and Conspiracy; but it is
otherwise in Debt upon a joint Contract, for there the Plaintiff cannot declare
against one until the Process be determined against the other by the opinion
of the whole Court.

If Judgment be entered in Trespass of Oct. Hillarii, the Writ to inquire Nota.
of Damages may bear test of any other Return of that Term, besides of Octab.
Hillarii, for the Term is as one Day, and so has been adjudged upon a Writ of
Error in the upper Bench; but it is otherwise held in the Common Pleas.

If a Bargain and Sale be void in part, it is void in all.

If an Officer or privileged person of the Court of Common Pleas, sue another
privileged man of any other Court whatsoever, yet he of the Common Pleas that
first sued, shall force the other privileged person to answer in the Common
Pleas; but if a privileged man be sued with another as Executor, no Privilege
lies. Summons and Severance lies between Executors, Plaintiffs; and if one of
the Executors be outlawed or excommunicated, he may be demanded, and if he
comes not, shall be severed by an award without Process, after he has
appeared, and the other shall proceed without him; but if he had not appeared,
then Summons, and Severance shall issue out against him.

FLetcher versus Robson. An Extent upon a Statute Merchant issued Return of a
Sheriff insufficient upon a Statute Merchant, for omitting, that he had no
other Lands, etc.
out against Robson the Cognisor, and the Sheriff returned, that the Cognisor
was possessed of diverse Goods, and seized of Lands, which he delivered to the
Cognisee, and that the Cognisee accepted of the Land; and because the Sheriff
did not return, that he had not any other Lands, Goods, or Chattels, it was
adjudged insufficient, and a new Writ awarded; but many held, that in the case
of a Cognisor it was well enough, but not in the case of a Purchasor. If one
knowledge a Statute, and after a Judgment is had against the Cognisor, now
against the Cognisor the Statute shall be preferred, Nota.
but not against an Executor. If a man plead a Bond, knowledged to the King in
the Exchequer, it must be averred to be a true Debt. If a Debt be assigned to
the King, in this case no priority of Execution. If one staul a Debt by 20. s.
a year, this shall not stay my Execution: the Court were of opinion, that an
Extent would not be good at Barwick, for the Writ runs not there.

If a Judgment be given in a Court of Record, it shall be preferred A Statute
first acknowledged shall be preferred before a Judgment, afterward retained.
in case of an Executor before a Statute: But if a man acknowledge a Statute,
and afterward confess a Judgment; and if the Land be extended upon the
Judgment, the Cognisee shall have a Scire facias, to avoid the Extent upon the
Judgment, otherwise in case of Goods, for therein first come first served: for
if I have a Judgment against one, and afterward he acknowledges a Statute,
and by virtue of the Statute the Goods of him (being dead) were taken in the
Executors hands, then upon the Judgment a Scire facias was sued, and
afterward a Fieri facias, of the Testators Goods: it was held, that the Goods
first extended were lawfully extended, and shall be good.

A Judgment was had against Sir Fr. Freeman, and an Extent came to the
Sheriff, and afterward, and before any thing was thereupon done, one Fieri
facias against the Executor upon a Judgment, given before the acknowledging
the Statute, was delivered to the Sheriff, and the Question was, whether the
Extent or Fieri facias shall be first executed. And note, if the Land be first
extended upon the Statute, and afterward an Elegit, upon a Judgment obtained
before the acknowledging the Statute, come also to the Sheriff, the moity of
the Land extended shall be delivered to the Plaintiff upon the Judgment.

HIll. 15. Jac. The case of Villainage is within the Statute of Limitation, The
case of Villainage within the Statute of Limitation.
and in the case of M. Corbet it was held, that the Prescription of the Seisin
of the Plaintiff and his Ancestors, as Villain, was more then needs, and the
Issue thereupon taken was good by the whole Court, after Exception taken
thereupon: and Judgment was given for the Plaintiff.

In every Elegit the Sheriff must return, and set out the moity distinctly,
Nota in Elegit.
unless they be Tenants in common, and in that case he must return the special
matter. An Extent issued out against one Greisley by the name of Greisley
Esquire, who was at the time of suing out the Writ made Knight and Baronet, and
it was naught, and the Plaintiff prosecuted a new Writ.

MIch. 10. Jacobi. A Tenant by Statute Staple or Elegit, that has Two
Inquisitions taken at several Days by several Juries upon one Writ, naught.
extended an Abbots Lease, or a Lease made out of an Abbots Lease, is not bound
to show it, because he comes in by Act of Law: but any other that comes in
under the Lease, must show it, by the opinion of the whole Court. And note,
that in Hillary 10. Jac. two Inquisitions taken at several Days by several
Juries upon one Statute Merchant, were adjudged naught; one was taken of the
Land, and the other for Land and Goods: and Extent of the whole fourth part was
naught, for it should be of the moity of the fourth part: and mark, Nota.
it was of a Lease, which was but a Chattell, and the Sheriff might have sold
it as Goods, but seeing he had extended it, in this case he should receive
benefit but as in a common Extent.

COmyrrs versus Brandling. A Lessee that had a Lease of the value All Goods and
Chattels bound by the Test of the Elegit, and cannot be sold afterward.
of 100. l. and after the Test of the Elegit, and before the Sheriff had
executed the Elegit, assigns his term to one, who assigns it over to the
Plaintiff in the Scire facias, and afterward, and before the last Assignement
the Sheriff executes the Elegit, and delivers the Lease to the Plaintiff,
tenend, etc. for satisfaction of the Debt, which came to but 43. l. 6. s. 8. d.
and it was held by all the Judges, that the Sheriff could not deliver the Lease
at another value then what the Jury had found it at; and the Sale made by the
Sheriff is as strong as if it had been made in open Market: and that all the
Goods and Chattels are bound after the Test of the Elegit, and cannot be sold
by the Owner after the Test of the Writ.

If a later Extent be avoided by an ancient Extent, after the ancient Extent is
satisfied, the later Extent shall have the Land, according to his first Extent,
without any re-extent, by the opinion of Sergeant Hutton, if the Husband charge
the Lease of the Wife, and dies, the Wife shall hold the Land discharged.

HIll. 12. Jac. The Earl of Lincoln against Wood, the Earl of Lincoln Audita
Quaerela and Bail put in in the Chancery, and held good.
did arrest Wood, upon a Capias, upon a Statute Merchant, Wood being in
Execution, obtained in the Chancery an Audita Quaerela, and did put in Bail
there, and had a Supersedeas, and was discharged of his Imprisonment; and the
Audita Quaerela, and Bail sent into the Common Pleas to be proceeded on. The
cause of the Audita Quaerela was grounded upon the performance of the Defeasons
of a Statute; and after this case was debated for the Bailment of Wood, and
held by the Court to be good, it was allowed of.

If the Act for Dissolution of Monasteries had not given the Land The Act of E.
6. for Dissolution, reaches only to such that are regular.
to the King, the Founders ought to have had them. And if an Hospital or
religious House is impeached upon the Statute of Superstitious uses, it must be
proved to be regular, for they must be religious that are dissolved, by E. 6.

JOules versus Joules Alderman purchased Land of one, against whom a Judgment
was given long before the Purchase, and the Vendor afterward became unable to
pay the Judgment, and long after the Plaintiff in the Judgment purchased a
Scire facias against the Defendant, and had Judgment against the Defendant by
Default, and afterward had an Elegit, and by virtue of that the Sheriff
extends the Land of Joules the Purchasor, who prays the aid of the Court,
because the whole Land was not extended, but he was forced to bring his Audita
Quaerela.

If I make a Lease for years, reserving a Rent during my Life, and Nota.
my Wives Life, if I die, the Rent is gone, because she is a stranger, she
shall never have the Rent, because she has no Interest in the Land; if one of
them die, nothing can survive to the other, and a Limitation must be taken
strictly, otherwise it is by way of Grant, that shall be taken strongly against
the Grantor.

If 2. Tenants in common join in a Lease for years, to bring an Ejectment, Nota.
and count Quod cum dimisissent, etc. that is naught, for it is a several Lease
of their Moities, and you must declare, Quod cum, one of them demised one
moity, and the other the other moity, and good.

If a Tenant in Socage has Issue, and die, his Issue being under the Nota.
age of 14. years, the next Friend of the Heir, to whom the Inheritance cannot
descend, shall have the Guard of the Land, until the Heir come to the age of
14. years, and he is called Guardion in Socage, and in pleading a Lease for
Life, you are never to allege the place where the Lease was made, because it
passes by Livery, which was executed upon the Land. He that pleads a Demise,
ought to show that the Lessee entered, and he that pleads a Descent, ought to
show that he entered: and an Exchange is a good Plea in Bar, but it shall never
be adjudged a good Exchange, except this word Escambium be used in the Charter
of Exchange.

HOpkins versus Radford. A Defendant shall take no benefit of his Nota.
own wrong. In Sir James Harringtons case, the Original was returned Quinque
Pasch. and the issue joined that day, and the Venire facias returned that day,
and held naught by the Court upon the first motion. A future Lease cannot be
surrendered but drowned.

For things in Action a Deed of Gift is void, as Debts without Specialty, Deed
of Gift for things in Action.
although he say, Goods, Chattels, and Specialties, but for other Debts by
Specialty, and Goods, it is good; and for the Debts in Action after the Death
of the Party Administration is to be granted, and the Administrator is to have
the Goods.

RAiner versus Mortimer. One had Judgment upon a Scire facias Supersedeas
granted, because Capias ad satisfaciendum was not returned.
to have Execution, and a Capias ad satisfaciendum returnable, 15. Martini, and
that Writ was returned Album Breve, and a Testatum thereupon, and the Defendant
taken, and this matter was moved to the Court, and a Supersedeas prayed, that
the Testatum issued out erroneously, because the Capias was not returned; and
it was granted by the whole Court, because the Capias was not returned.

One seized in Fee may bargain and sell, grant and demise Land to others, and
their Heirs, to the use of one for years, because he has a Nota.
Fee-simple, but Lessee for years cannot bargain and sell his Lease, to the use
of one for years.

If a Marriage is intended between two men, and one of them in consideration
that the other has upon the Marriage, assured Land to Nota.
his Son, he does assume to pay to my Son such a Sum, immediately after the
Marriage; if the Money be not paid, the Son must have the Action, and not the
Father.

MIch. 5. Jacobi. 61. One Jury-man appear in Court, and when he A Juror who
has appeared, cannot be passed by, and to swear others.
came to the Bar to be sworn, he informed the Court that he was eighty years
old, and prayed to be discharg^d, and the Court could not grant it, nor pass
him by, and swear others, without committing Error, except the Parties would
consent; for it is Error to skip a Juror who is returned, if he appear, and
therefore the Juror was drawn by the consent of the Parties.

TRin. 6. Jacobi. Upon a Levari facias out of a Court Baron, Goods Goods cannot
be sold upon a Levari facias, in a Court Baron without a Custom.
cannot be sold without a Custom to sell the Goods: and if Goods be attached
by Pone out of a Court Baron, the Defendant shall not lose his Cattle;
otherwise it is, if it be a Process out of the Common Pleas, then the Defendant
loses his Cattle, for not appearing: if you lay, that you have a Court time
out of mind to be held before a Steward, you must show what Pleas you have
used to have Conusance of.

A Sheriff returned but 21. only upon a Venire facias, and at the Sheriff
returned but 21. upon a Venire facias, and naught.
Trial ten only appeared, and a December tales was awarded, and tried, and
Verdict for the Plaintiff; and this matter was moved in Arrest of Judgment,
for that the Sheriff had returned but 21. and the Court were of opinion, that
if 12. of them had appeared, that it had been good notwithstanding; but because
10. only appeared of the principal, therefore it was naught; and Judgment
arrested for that cause. If a Juror be sworn of the principal, and the Jury
remain, Nota.
when the Jury comes again, he shall be sworn again.

TRin. 6. Jac. rotulo 251. Dunnall versus Giles. A special Verdict, Judgment,
that it was a good Devise.
and the Question was, a man being possessed of a term, devises the whole
term to A. for Life, and if he dies within the term, to B. during the
minority of C. and that C. when he comes to full age shall have the Remainder
of the term, and held a good Devise. To devise Land, or Term, or Lease, all
one, it is an Executory Devise. If one surrender Land to the use of an
Estranger, that is, to resty the use in Reversion, for the Land is in him
immediately. If a man has a Rent in esse, you cannot grant that in Reversion
after your Death; but if I surrender to the use of one after my Decease, is not
good, by his opinion of Warburton and Daniel.

If the Sheriff shall by virtue of a Fieri facias levy the Debt and The
property is not altered, upon the Sheriffs taking of goods upon a Fieri facias,
but remains in the Defendant. Nota.
Damages of a man, and make a Return, that the said Goods remain in his hands
for want of Buyers: the Property remains still in the Defendant, although the
Sheriff has Possession of the Goods. A Sheriff may sell Goods levied upon a
Fieri facias out of his County.

In Watermans case, the Issue was, whether a Copyholder in one Town had Common
in Land lying in another Town, and the Plaintiff shows that he is Lord of the
Hundred of C. within which Hundred one of the Villages lie: and prays a Venire
facias of the Town next adjoining to the said Hundred; and it was granted, and
tried, and Exception to the Trial, for that the Venire was not of both
Villages.

An Alien born being no free Denizen may defend and bring a Writ Alien born no
Plea in a Writ of Error. Nota.
of Error, and it is no Plea to say, that he is an Alien born.

Note, by the Common Law the Lord of the Manor may come and take away a Tree
cut down upon the Copyhold Land by his Copyholder, without laying a special
Custom for it.

If there be an unlawful Marriage, as the Brother does marry his Issue cannot
be bastarded after Death.
Sister, and they have Issue, and one of them dies before any Divorce had
between them; now after the Death of one of them, the Issue cannot be
bastarded, as in Cordies case, 39 E. 43. 22 E. 4.

After a general Imparlance one cannot plead an Outlary in Bar to an Action of
Trespass or Case, but it must be pleaded in abatement, except he be outlawed
after the last Continuance; for you shall plead nothing in Bar but what goes
to the pit of the Action; now the Damages in Trespass or Case are not forfeited
by Outlary, as Debt, because of the incertainty.

To the Owner of the Soil on both sides of the way, of common Nota.
right belong the Trees that grow in the Lane, whether he be Lord or
Freeholder. The best badge of truth, is the usage of taking the profit of the
Trees.

11 H. 4. rot. 80. Where the Court, ex officio, should inquire, and that Where
the principal is omitted cannot be supplied by Writ.
omitted, the Court may supply it; but where an Attaint lies, that is not to
be supplied, as in a Valor Maritagii, the value is the point of the Writ, and
if that be omitted by the Jury, never to be supplied by Writ. Cheyneys case,
Valor Maritagii, and intrusion were at the Common Law before the Statute, and
the Statute does but enlarge the Common Law; for by the Statute the Judgment
is otherwise then at the Common Law.

It is vain to plead the Execution of a Writ of Seisin upon a Recovery, Nota.
but to plead that he did enter.

MIch. 10. Jac. If I purchase Land by a name, and allege it to be in a wrong
Parish, or Shire, it is good, notwithstanding the King could not grant
precedence in public things.
mistake by the Court.

A stranger shall be bound by a Law made for the public good, but he must
come within the place where it was made.

The King cannot grant precedence in public things, as to go by Nota.
Water, or by passage on the Land, as by Coach: if a Bond bear Date Super altum
mare, then it must-be sued only in the Admiral Court; otherwise it cannot be
sued there.

Every Bishop has his Cathedral and Council, and the Council and Bishop there
decide matters of Controversy, the Prebends have their names from their
affording of help to the Bishop, and in time of the vacancy of the Bishop, the
Archbishop is Guardian of the Spiritualties, and not the Dean and Chapter.

TRin. 14. Jac. rotulo 1810. Birtbrook versus Battersby Exception raken after
Trial. The Action was laid in Westmerland, and the Jurata written at the end
of the Record, was Ebor. ss. ura. Inter, etc. and recites the Day of Trial in
the County of York, and the place where the Trial was, at York, and prayed
that it might be amended, and it was granted to be amended, by the whole Court.

INt. Bullen and Jarvis. The Venire facias was made in this Form, Videlicet,
Liberos and legales homines de B. and it should have been De vicineto de B. and
it was notwithstanding held good, and amendable by the Roll; for it shall be
intended, that the Jurors are inhabiting in the Town of B. although the Sheriff
returns the Jurors of other places, and none of them be named of B. and the
Venire facias was returned by. A. B. Ar. without naming him Vic. and it was
amended by the Court.

GRiffin versus Palmer, Trin. 15. Jac. rotulo 924. Issue taken, whether Ancient
Demesne tried by Doomesday Book.
the Lands contained in the Fine were ancient Demesne or not, pretending they
were parcel of the Manor of Bowden in the County of Northampton, which was
pretended to be ancient Demesne, and the Doomesday Book was brought into the
Court, and by that Book it appeared, that the Manor of Bowden was in the
County of Leicester, and not in the County of Northampton, but the Council
affirmed, that the Manor was both in the County of Leicester and Northampton,
but it valued not, for the Doomsday Book was against the Plaintiff.

The Court was moved to amend a Venire facias, which was Album The Venire
facias was Album Breve, and denied to be amended.
Breve, but the Court would not grant it, although the Sheriffs name was put to
the Pannell; but if the Sheriff upon the Venire facias had returned, that the
Execution of that Writ did appear in a certain Pannell annexed to that Writ,
and had not put his name to the Writ of Venire facias, but to the Pannell, in
such case the Court would have amended the Venire facias.

Lessee at will cannot grant one his Estate, if one occupy with Tenant Lessee
at will cannot grant over his Estate. Note, difference between Tenant at will
and sufferance.
at will, this is no Disseisin, to the Lessor. If a Tenant for seven years
suffer Trees to grow above the age of 21. years, they are Timber, and it is
waste to cut them. Tenant at will shall pay his Rent, when he holds over his
term, but Tenant at sufferance shall not pay any Rent. If a man holds over
his term, and pay his old Rent, he shall be accounted Tenant at will.

If one being sick, gives Notes to make his Will, and after by infirmity Nota.
of sickness he becomes so weak that his memory fails him, and these Notes
are made into a Will, this is a good Will, otherwise it is, if he become
lunatique after the Notes given.

MIch. 15. Jacobi. One Warter was committed to the Fleet by the One committed,
bailed, being no cause expressed.
Lord Treasurer of England, and the Prisoner was brought to the Common Pleas by
Habeas Corpus, which was returned, and no cause of the Commitment expressed,
and for that cause the Prisoner was set at liberty, and bailed.

TRinity Term 15. Jacobi. Hanson one of the Attorneys of the Common Pleas
delivers a Note to the Sheriffs Clerk, of the names Attorneys name put out of
the Roll for a mis-demeanour.
of diverse Jurors that were to be returned, and of diverse others that were not
to be returned, in a case concerning one Butler, and for this Offense he was
put out of the Roll of Attorneys.

In Spilmans case; if I have Estovers in Land, and cut down Estovers, Nota.
and a stranger takes away the Estovers, I shall have an Action against him
that takes them away, although he have there Common of Estovers also.

If the Husband sow the Ground, and die, the Executors and not the Heir shall
have the Corn; but if the Father sow the Land, and Nota.
dies, or the Heir sow the Land, and the Wife recover Seisin in Dower, she
shall have the Corn.

The setting open a Shop on the Sabbath day is punishable by Statute Law, and
so is a House of Bawdry, and not to be dealt with by Nota.
the high Commissioners.

So long as the Land is occupied by him that has the Fee-simple, which did
formerly belong to the Order of the Cistercians, it shall pay no Tithes, but if
he let it for years or life, the Tenant shall pay Tithes.

HIll. 11. Jac. rotulo 90. A Recovery was had upon a Writ of Entry in le post,
for a common Recovery between Hartley and Towers, Writ of Entry filed after the
Death of the Tenant.
in the County of Bucks; the Attorney who prosecuted the Recovery, by
negligence did not file the Writ of Entry, which was prosecuted orderly, and
all Fees paid, when the Recovery was passed. And in Easter Term, 14. Jac. it
was moved that the Writ of Entry might be filed, and it was granted, although
the Tenant was dead, the Writ of Entry was returnable, Octabis Purificationis.

MIch. 14. Jacobi. My Lord Hubbard, Justice Warburton, and Winch, held, that
when there were but three Judges of the Common Pleas they might argue Demurrs,
and if two of them were of one mind, and one of the other, the Judgment
should be given according to their opinions.

My Lord Cook said, that for the Body of the Church, the Ordinary Ordinary to
place and displace in the Church.
is to place and displace; in the Chancell the Freehold is in the Parson, and
it is parcel of his Gleab; Tpespass will lie by the Heir for pulling down the
Coat-Armor, etc. of his Ancestors, set up in the Church. A Pew cannot belong to
a House.

Fraud shall never be intended, except it be apparent and found, and Fraud
shall never be intended, except apparent and found.
that conveyance which at the time of the making was good, shall never by
matter ex post facto be adjudged to be fraudulently made, for before primo
Eliz. at the Common Law. A conveyance made for natural affection without
valuable consideration is not to be avoided; none shall avoid it, but such as
come in upon valuable considerations.

Lands devised to one in Tail upon condition, that he shall not alien, Nota.
and for Default of such, the Remainder to R. in Tail, this is a Condition, and
no Limitation, by the whole Court; and the Heir at the Common Law may enter for
the Alienation.

Matters of instance which are between party and party, as for High Commission
nothing to do with matters of instance for Tithes.
Tithes, and Matrimony, are not to be dealt withal by the high Commissioners,
if they proceed inverso ordine, that cannot be helped in the Common Pleas but
by superior Magistrate, if they be Judges of the cause.

If one in Norfolk come within another Dioces, and commit Adultery Nota.
in another Dioces, during the time of his residence he may be cited in the
Dioces where he committed the Offense, although he dwell out of the Dioces, by
Cook, Warburton, and Winch.

If the King grant Lands to A. and his Heirs Males, and does not Nota:
say, of his Body, he is but Tenant at will, Tamen quaere.

A Deputy of an Office for Bribery cannot make his Master be punished Master
shall not be corporally punished for his Deputies Offense. Nota.
corporally, but pecuniarily, equity shall not bar me of the benefit of Law.
Note, the Probate of Wills and Administrations did not belong to the Ordinary
originally, but to the Common Law.

If two Aliens be at Issue, the Inquest shall be all English; but if between an
Alien and Denizen, that Inquest shall be de medietate Linguae, 21 H. 6. 4. A
Judgment given against a dead person is not void, but Error, 28. Ass. 17.

A Juror was committed to the Fleet, For making his Companions Nota.
stay a whole Day and a Night, having no reason for it, and without the Assent
of any of the rest of his Fellows, and after was bailed, but not until the
Court was advised, 8 E. 3. 75. In a Writ of Estate Probanda, every Juror ought
to be of the Age of 42. years.

If I grant Land to one, and his Heirs, in the Premises of the Deed, Nota.
Habendum, to him, and the Heirs of his Body, he shall have the Land in Tail,
and the Fee-simple after the State in Tail, when the Estate is certain in the
Premises, the Habendum shall not control it.

If one make two Executors, one of seventeen years of Age, and One at seventeen
years old may be an Executor.
the other under Administration, during the minority is void, because he of
seventeen years old may execute the Will of Administration, during the
minority, in such case be granted; and the Administrator brings his Action, the
Executor may well release the Debt. Pigot and Gascoins case.

If a Record go once to Trial, and warning given, if the first Attorney No new
notice needs if the Attorney be living. If no place of Payment be in a Will,
must be a Request.
be alive, the Plaintiff is not tied to give warning again, but if the Attorney
be dead, he is.

If no place of Payment be in a Will, which appoints Money to be paid, there
must be a Request to pay the Money, for he is not bound to seek all England
over for him; otherwise it is, if it were by Bond.

In every case where the Plaintiff might have Judgment against the Defendant,
there if the Plaintiff be nonsuit, the Defendant shall have his Costs, if the
Plaintiff be nonsuit.

TRin. 11. Jac. In cases of remitting causes from the inferior Judge, Nota.
the Archdeacon cannot remit the cause to the Archbishop, but he must remit
it to his Bishop, and he to the Archbishop.

It was held by the Court, that one might distrain for a Legacy. In a special
Verdict the Plaintiff must begin to argue first.

OLive versus Hanmer. A Writ of Error was brought upon a Warrant of Attorney
filed upon a motion, after Writ of Error brought, and Error assigned.
Judgment by Nil. dicit, for want of a Warrant of Attorney, and the Record
certified, and a Certior are to the Clerk of the Warrants, and Error assigned
for want of a Warrant. And the Court was moved, that a Warrant might be filed,
and it was granted, and a Warrant filed accordingly.

Pasch. 12. Jac. An Action was brought against Baron and feme: and Nota.
an Attorney appeared for the Husband alone, and the Court held, it was the
Appearance of Baron and feme in Law.

PAsch. 12. Jacobi. Sheriff versus Whitsander. One Judgment was Warrant of
Attorney filed after Writ of Error, by Order of Court.
confessed in Trin. 42. Eliz. rotulo 504. And afterward in Trinity Term 43.
Eliz. the Defendant brought a Writ of Error bearing Date the 12. of May, Anno
43. and upon that Writ the Record was certified 25. May, and afterward Error
was assigned in the upper Bench, for want of a Warrant of Attorney by the
Defendant. And Mich. 43. and 44. Eliz. the Warrant of Attorney was received,
and entered upon Record by Order of Court of Common Pleas. And the like was
Pasch. 2. Jac. rotulo 1956. Int. Bathgrone and Smith, and the like, Mich. 1.
Jac. rotulo 1306. Inter Smith and Kent.

CRane versus Colpit. Question was, whether the Attornement of Attornement of
an Infant is good.
an Infant be good or not: and by the whole Court it was held good by three
Reasons; First, he gives no Interest. Secondly, it is to perfect a thing.
Thirdly, he is a Freeholder.

IT was held in the case of Gage an Attorney, who as an Administrator An
Attorney ought to have no Privilege as on Attorney.
brought an Action of Privilege, that his Privilege ought not to be allowed.
And after a Bill was filed against Drury an Attorney, as Executor, and held,
that the Bill would not lie, but in both cases the Suit should be by Original.

BEarbrook versus Read. The name of Confirmation must stand, for Sir Francis
Gaudy was christened Thomas, and confirmed Francis, by that name he must be
called.

SIr Henry Compton was sued for Clothes of his Wife, bought without Husband
shall pay for his Wives Clothes, though bought without his privity.
his command or privity: and the whole Court were of opinion, that if the Wife
should buy Merchandises, and thereof make Clothes, and wear those Clothes,
although the Husband know nothing of them, yet he shall pay for them.

PAsch. 10. Jac. The Court was moved, to know whether the Wife A man's Wife or
Infant cannot be examined.
of a Bankrupt can be examined by the Commissioners upon the Statute of
Bankrupt; and they were of opinion, she could not be examined. For the Wife is
not bound in case of high Treason to discover her Husbands Treason, although
the Son be bound to reveal it: therefore by the Common Law she shall not be
examined. An Infant shall not be examined.

If an Administration be granted to one, during the minority of two Infants,
and one of them dies, the Administration continues still.

Actions of Debt.
LOvelace versus Cocket, Mich. 6. Jac. rotulo 1001. Action of Debt One Bond
cannot overthrow the other.
brought upon an Obligation for the Payment of Money at a certain Day specified
in the Condition. The Defendant pleads, that the Plaintiff at the Day of
Payment accepts of another Bond for the Payment of the said Money, in
satisfaction of the said 52. l. 11. s. and upon a Demurrer held to be a naughty
Plea, for one Bond cannot overthrow another.

LEa versus Pain, Hill. 14. Jacobi rotulo 953. An Action of Debt Exceptions to
an Award, pretending the Arbitrators had exceeded their Authority, but adjudged
good.
brought upon an Obligation with a Condition to perform an Award, the Defendant
pleads, that the Arbitrators made no Award. The Plaintiff by way of Replication
sets forth an Award, that the Arbitrators did arbitrate of all matters, until
the Date of the Award, which was a Month longer then the Submission, and so
pretends they exceeded their Authority. The words were for all causes before
the Date of the Award. Another Exception was, because the Arbitrators awarded
that the Defendant should pay the Plaintiff such a Day of April, and does not
say, what year, or next following: and the Court held that good enough, because
the second Day of Payment was made to be such a Day, and such a year: and it
was held good enough, for if any new matters did arise between the Submission
and Award, or, etc. the Defendant ought to show it. Another Exception was, that
it was not said, that the Award was made between the Parties, but it shall be
intended to be made between the Parties, because the Award was made de and
super praemissis, and therefore it shall be implied, that it was made but of
such things as they had power to deal in. The Court was of opinion, that the
Award being de and super praemissis, the Court shall not say, but that this was
a cause submitted; and except it had been discovered by pleading, that there
was a new cause since the Date of the Award, which was made known to the
Wardsmen, the Court is not to take notice thereof.

SCot Executor versus Herbert. The Plaintiff in his Declaration says the
Testator in his lifetime was possessed of Land for a Judgment for the
Defendant, for insufficiency in the Count.
term of years; and so possessed grants part of his term to an Estranger,
reserving Rent, and he grants his Estate to the Defendant. And that the
Testator died possessed of the Reversion of the term, and because the Rent was
behind, the Executor brings his Action of Debt for the Rent, and the
Declaration was held naught, for that it did not appear that he that made the
first Demise was seized in Fee, or in any other Estate by which he could make a
Lease.

NOrris and Trussell Wardens of the Society of Weavers in the Judgement' for
the Defendant, upon a by-law.
Town of Newbury in the County of Berks, versus J. Scapes, Pasch. 14. Jac.
rotulo 907. An Action of Debt brought, and the Plaintiffs declare that Queen
Elizabeth had incorporated them by such a name, and given them Power to make
bylaws, for the better governing their Corporation, etc. and further show that
they made an Order which was confirmed by the Justices of Assise according to
the Statute of 19 H. 7. and for the Breach of such Order brought their Action:
the Defendant pleaded that he owed them nothing, and tried, and a Verdict for
the Plaintiffs, and Hutton Sergeant moved in Arrest of Judgment, and took
three Exceptions: the first, because the Constitution was against Law, to
restrain one to exercise a lawful Trade. The second, the Constitution was,
that the Offender should forfeit such a sum, and it did not appear to whom
this Forfeiture should go. Thirdly, the Plaintiff shows in his Count, that the
Queen by her Letters Patents had appointed A. B. C. to be Wardens for one year,
and shows not which those that brought the Action were elected, which ought to
be, to entitle them to that Action. It was against sense to bar all their own
Apprentices, it does not appear how many Wardens should be, and they do not
entitle them to the Action by the Corporation, the Law is altered; and
Judgment was given for the Defendant.

BRet versus Averder, Mich. 29. and 30. Eliz. Debt brought upon The Defendant
at his peril ought to make Payment.
an Obligation, to perform an Arbitrament: the Defendant confesses the
Arbitrament, but pleads in Bar, that the Plaintiff did not require him to make
Payment, and to that Plea the Plaintiff demurrs; and it was adjudged no Plea;
for the Defendant at his peril ought to make Payment, and the Plaiutiff ought
not to make a Request.

HAles versus Bell, Trin. 39. Eliz. rotulo 1974. The Plaintiff If part of a
Condition be to be performed within the Realm, and part without, ought to be
triable here.
brought an Action of Debt upon an Obligation, with a Condition for the Payment
of 40. l. within fourteen Days next after the return of one Russell into
England, from the City of Venice, and then the Obligation should be void; the
Defendant pleads in Bar, that the said Russell was not at Venice, upon which
Plea the Plaintiff demurrs; and adjudged a naughty Plea; for where part is to
be done within the Realm, and part out of the Realm, the Plea ought to be
triable within the Realm.

GArret versus Harrison Executor, Trin. 40. Eliz. rotulo 1651. To Defendant
pleaded six Judgments in Bar, and two found to be by fraud, and Judgment for
the Plaintiff.
an Action of Debt upon a Bond brought against him as Executor; the Defendant
pleads six Judgments in Bar; the Plaintiff replies, that they were by fraud
and covin; and the Jury found for the Plaintiff, that two of the six were by
covin; and Williams moved in Arrest of Judgment, because the Jury ought to
have found all; but Glanvile said, that if any part of the Plea be
insufficient, defective, or false, the Issue shall be found against you, for
your Plea is one entire thing; and he said, that the Plaintiff should have
taken Issue upon one only, as in an Obligation, with diverse things in the
Condition. Walmsley held, that by the Plea the Defendant had confessed
implicatively, that you have sufficient to satisfy those six Judgments, and
no more. So that if any part be found against you, this is Assets; and
Judgment was given accordingly for the Plaintiff.

GReen versus Wilcox Executor. To an Action upon an Obligation brought against
the Defendant as Executor, he pleads that the Testator was obliged to A. in 20.
l. which remained due to him at his Death; and that the said A. recorded
against him in the Common Pleas, and averres that it was a true Debt, and the
persons and matters to be the same, and that he had no Assetts beyond that; and
the Plaintiff replies, that the said Recovery was had by fraud and covin
between them, to defraud him of his Debt; to which Plea the Defendant demurrs,
specially because he had in his Plea averred, it was a true and just Debt, so
that it could not be by covin.

Trin. 44. Eliz. It was adjudged for Law by the whole Court, that The Sheriff
cannot break open the outward Door to do Execution, but that being open he may
break open any other.
if a Fieri facias be directed and delivered to the Sheriff, he may not break
the outer Door of the House, and enter, and do Execution; but if the outer Door
be open, then he may enter by that, and then he may and ought to break the Door
of an Entry or Chamber which is locked, and break open any Chest which is
locked, and take the Goods in that in Execution; and if he does it not, an
Action of Case will lie against him.

In Debt, if it be demanded by Original, the Process is Summons, Attachment,
and Distress; and for Default of sufficiency upon a Nichil, returned Process to
the Outlary, if the Summons or Attachment be returned, an Essoyn lies. And
Wager of Law lies if the Count be upon a simple Contract. And if the Parties be
living which made the Contract or Debt against an Heir, the Writ shall be
brought in the Debet; but when it is brought against an Executor, or
Administrator, or of Chattels, it shall be in the Detinet tantum. The Judgment
in Debt where the Demand is in the Debet and detinet, is to recover the Debt,
Damages, and Costs of Suit; and the Defendant in misericordia: but if the
Defendant denies his Deed, then a Capias for his Fine issues out. And if the
Original be in the Detinet for Chattels, then the Judgment is to recover the
thing in Demand, or the value thereof, and Costs, and Damages; and the Process
of Execution is a Distress to deliver the Chattels, or the value, and Damages.
And if the cause of Action be against Executors or Administrators, the
Judgment is to recover the Debt and Damages of the Testators Goods, if the
Executor has so much in his hands, and if he has not, then the Damages of the
Executors or Administrators proper Goods. And if the Sheriff upon a Scire
facias return a Devastavit, then a Fieri facias, or Elegit, may be sued out to
levy the Debt and Damages of the Executors or Administrators proper Goods. And
if the Executor plead, that he never was Executor, and it is found against him
that he has administered but one Penny, the Judgment shall be to recover the
Debt and Damages of the Executors own Goods. Debt brought upon a Record, the
Execution shall be brought where the Record remains.

MIch. 9. Jac. rotulo 2304. Throckmorton Administrator, versus Hobby. The
Aministrator releases, and afterward the Administration is revoked, and
declared by Sentence to be void and null, and then the Release is void.

TRin. 9. Jac. rotulo 917. Brookesby and Vaux versus M. Tresham Exception taken
to the Defendants Plea.
Executor of the Testament of T. T. and Exception was taken to the Defendants
pleading, because the Defendant pleads diverse Statutes to diverse persons; and
the Plaintiff shows that some were by fraud, and that others were for
performance of Covenants, that were not broken, and for other Statutes that
they were satisfied, and the Nota.
Defendant in pleading a Statute by three, says, two of them did not pay, and
does not say, that the three nor any of them have not paid. In pleading of a
Statute it must be generally pleaded, that it is a true Debt. And my Lord Cook
held, that a man without a Defeasance may plead, that the Statute was
acknowledged for Payment of a lesser sum; and it was held, that if the Count
be good, and the Plea naught, and Replication naught, if it appears that the
Plaintiff had good cause of Action, the Plaintiff shall have Judgment. And
Warburton said, that one may plead generally, that the Statute was acknowledged
by fraud, without showing the special matter.

SPeak versus Richards. The Plaintiff brought an Action of Debt Debt lies for
Money levied by the Sheriff, upon a Levari.
for Money levied by the Sheriff upon a Levari facias, and not paid to the
Plaintiff upon the Sheriffs Return upon the Levari issued out of the Chancery,
and that it would well lie. But note, the Plaintiff had concluded his Demurrer
ill, for he demurring to the Defendants Plea, which was grounded upon a Release
should have demanded Judgment, if the Defendant should be admitted to plead a
Release, which was made after the Sheriff had made his Return.

TRin. 15. Jac. rotulo 1630. Parson versus Middleton. Action of Nota.
Debt brought to be tried in Durham, and the Record sent to the Chancellor of
Durham, because the Bishops Sea was empty, and before the Day given by the
Judges, a Bishop was elected, and he sent the Record, and not the Chancellor.

MIch. 15. Jac. rotulo 2118. Maddock versus Young. The Plantiff Nota.
brought an Action of Debt for an Escape against the Sheriff upon a Capias
utlegat, after Judgment; the Defendant pleads that there was no such Record of
the Recovery of the Debt and Damages; to which Plea the Plaintiff demurrs,
pretending he had not directly and plainly answered the Declaration, but
Judgment was given for the Defendant. Where a Capias is not the Process, a
Capias ad satisfaciendum is not the Execution; and no Capias lies against a
Countess or Baroness; and at Common Law no Capias ad satisfaciendum would lie,
but only where the Action was Vi and armis, but only a Levari facias.

MIch. 14. Jac. rotulo 3140. Bawkey versus Isted. An Action of Exception taken,
because the Venire facias was of the Town, and not of the Parish, but ruled
good.
Debt brought upon the Statute of E. 6. for not setting forth of Tithes of Land
lying within the Parish of Horsted parva, the Defendant pleads Nil debet per
patriam, and after Trial and a Verdict, Exception was taken to the Venire
facias, because the Venire facias was of Horsted parva, and not of the Parish
of Horsted parva, but the Court were of opinion, that it might be either of the
Town or Parish of Horsted parva, and Judgment was given for the Plaintiff,
because both the Town and Parish were named in the Record.

An Action of Debt brought against an Administrator, who pleads, Creditor
administered, and is sued, ought to plead fully administered generally.
that the Intestate was indebted to him, and that he had fully administered, and
that he had no Goods or Chattels which were the Intestates, beyond Goods and
Chattels to the value of 10. l. which the Administrator retains toward
satisfaction of the said Debt to him due, the Court were of opinion that the
Administrator ought to plead generally, fully administered, else the Debtor
should be prejudiced in taking Issue upon that Plea, the Case was between Fox
and Andrew.

PAsch. 6. Jac. rotulo 751. Sharpley versus Hurrell. Action of Debt Debt
brought for 60. l. tr be paid at the Return of a Ship from Newfound-land to
Dartmouth, only 50. l. lent is not Usury.
brought upon an Obligation, and the Defendant pleads the Statute of Usury, and
sets forth, that one Ship went a fishing to Newfound-land, which Voyage might
be performed within eight Months, the Plaintiff delivered fifty pounds to the
Defendant, to pay sixty pounds upon the Return of the Ship to Dartmouth from
fishing, and if the Ship should not come to New Foundland, by reason of
Leakage or Tempest should return to Dartmouth, then the Defendant should pay
the principal Debt, and if the Ship should never return he should pay nothing;
and it was held by the Court that it was not Usury, for if the Ship stayed at
the New Foundland two years he should pay but 60. l.

An Action of Debt brought against an Executor, who pleads, that Plea made good
by Verdict. Nota.
he had nothing in his hands at the time of the Writ purchased, and says not,
nor any time after the Plea, is not good; but if the Plaintiff had took Issue,
that he had Assets at the Day of the Writ purchased, and it had been found for
the Plaintiff, now the Plea is made good.

If an Action of Debt be brought against two Executors, and one of them only
appear, and confess the Action, the Judgment shall be against both of them, of
the Goods of the Testators in the hands of all the Executors, and the Damages
of him that appeared only.

TRin. 16. Jac. rotulo 988. Houldsworth versus Barker. An Action Judgment
against both of the Testators Goods, and Damages of him that appeared only.
of Debt brought upon a Bill, the Defendant pleads the Bill was delivered to
the Plaintiff, upon a Condition not performed, and it was held a naughty Plea
by the whole Court.

HIll. 13. Jacobi rotulo 842. Harrison and al. at the Suit of Fleet. An Action
of Debt brought for 32. l. and the Plaintiff counts upon an Emisset; Harrison
pleads, that he and the other do not detain Nota.
from the Plaintiff the said 32. l. nor any Penny thereof; and the other pleads
to Issue, and a special Entry made, that the Issue should remain, until the
said Harrison had perfected his Law, or made Default, Nota.
and he at the Day did wage his Law, and Judgment was, that the Plaintiff
should take nothing by his Writ.

PAsch. 16. Jac. rotulo 1200. Rayson versus Winder. An Action of If no time of
Payment in an Award due upon Demand.
Debt brought upon an Obligation, with a Condition to perform an Award, which
was good in part, and void in part, and the Breach assigned upon the good part,
and the Award was to pay Money, but no time of Payment, and afterward it was
demanded, and the Award is good.

GAsington versus Burcher Knight, Turner, Jones, and Bowden, for Though two
appear by one Supersedeas, yet they may vary in Plea.
1800. l. Burcher was outlawed, Turner and Jones appeared by Supersedeas, and
Bawden appeared by another Attorney, and the Plaintiff declared against them
three that appeared upon an Account; Turner offered to wage his Law, and the
others plead Nil debent per patriam; and the Court was moved pretending that
Turner shall not be admitted to wage his Law, because the Defendants should not
sever in Plea, but the Court upon sight of diverse Presidents were of another
opinion, although it was urged that Turner and Jones joined in a Supersedeas,
and therefore pretend that Turner should not sever in Plea from Jones, that
pleaded Nil debet per patriam, but that Exception was disallowed, for although
two appear by Supersedeas, yet they may vary in Plea.

MIch. 16. Jac. rotulo 581. and the Imparlance entered, 16. Jac. rotulo The
Imparlance amended after Trial, upon the Attorneys Oath.
1727. An Action of Debt brought by Lee versus Arrowsmith upon an Emisset, for
diverse Parcels, and upon an Account, and the Parcels, and Account amounted to
the sum of 300. l. but in the Imparlance Roll, the Parcels and sum accounted
for, did not amount to 300. l. by 6. l. And this variance was moved in Arrest
of Judgment after a Verdict, but the Court were of opinion, that it was
amendable, because Ball the Attorney made Oath, that he commanded his Clerk to
sum the Account for 6. l. to maintain his Writ, and therefore the Roll was
amended.

HIll. 36. Eliz. rotulo 1908. Action of Debt brought by Gage versus Nota. Been
case.
Gilbert, upon an Obligation for 500. l. bearing Date, first of February, Anno
25. Eliz. The Defendant pleads a general Release made to him by the Plaintiff,
bearing Date after the making of the Bond, of all Dues and Demands whatsoever,
except an Award made between the Plaintiff and one G. W. why R. R. then dead,
and one Obligation of 500. l. for performance of the said Award, bearing Date
29. April, 25. Eliz. and whether these words (bearing Date 29. April) shall
have reference to the Arbitrament, or Bond, was the Question, upon a Demurrer
upon the Replication, in which the Plaintiff showed the special matter that the
Award was made the 29. April, and that the Bond was made the said first of
February, and it was adjudged that these words, bearing Date, should have
reference to the Award, and not to the Bond.

And if the Heir pleads Ciens per descent, besides one Acre, if the Plaintiff
please he may have Execution of that Acre; or if the Plaintiff plead that he
has Assets beyond that Acre, and it be found that he has ten Acres more, the
Plaintiff shall have Execution of the Land only, and not of his person: as it
is where the Heir pleads, that he has nothing by Descent generally, and it is
found against him, that Land, and all other his Land which he has, and his
Body are liable to the Judgment, by a Capias ad satisfaciend. Fieri facias, or
Elegit.

If a man be retained in London, to serve beyond Sea, he may have his A Servant
hired to serve beyond Sea may have his Action in England.
Action for his Wages in England, in any County. And the like of an Obligation
bearing Date at Roan in France, it may be sued in England, alleging the place
to be in such a County, where he brings his Action.

And note, that Debt may be brought in the Common Pleas, without Nota.
Original, against any Officer or Minister of the said Court, by Bill exhibited
to the Court, but no Process of Outlary lies upon that; and the Judgment upon
that, is, that the Plaintiff shall recover his Debt, and Costs, and shall have
an Attachment, ad satisfaciendum, but no Exigont; for because it is not by
Original; and all the Process by Bill shall be returnable at a Day certain: but
no Bill lies against a Sergeant at Law. And note, that the Judges, Sergeants,
and Officers, Clerks, Attorneys, and Ministers of the Court may have an
Attachment of Privilege out of the said Court, without an Original to arrest
any to them indebted, or for any personal cause to proceed upon it, as if it
were by Original, but no Process of Outlary lies thereupon, and such Process of
Attachment shall be returnable at a Day certain, and not at the common Return,
and they may be returned from Day to Day.

If a man be bound to perform an Award of Arbitrators, and they Nota.
make an Award accordingly, that one shall pay Money, he may have his Action of
Debt for the Money, and declare upon the Award: and afterward may have another
Action upon the Obligation, for not performing the Award, by the opinion of the
whole Court, Mich. 5. Caroli.

An Action of Debt brought by an Executor; the Defendant pleads Outlary in the
Executor, no Pled.
an Outlary in the person of the Executor, and demands Judgment, if he ought
to answer his Writ; the Plaintiff demurrs in Law to that Plea; and Judgment
was given, that the Defendant should answer over.

WOlly versus B. and his Wife, Trin. 37. Eliz. rotulo 1306. An Outlary in the
Testator in Bar, adjudged naught.
Action of Debt brought by Husband and Wife as Executrix: the Defendant pleads
in Bar an Outlary in the Testator by an Estranger, which is in its force; and
upon a Demurr and solemn Debate, adjudged a naughty Bar. Trin. 40. Eliz.
rotulo 507. The like Plea pleaded to an Executor that brought an Action of
Debt, and adjudged no Plea. And Dixon Administrator of Collins, exhibited a
Bill against Fawden an Attorney of the Common Pleas, and he pleads in Bar an
Outlary against the Administrator, and adjudged no Plea.

MIch. 4. Ed. 4. rotulo 144. An Action of Debt was brought against A wrong man
of the same name offers to wage his Law.
J. R. de W. in Com. L. Chapman, the Defendant appeared by his Attorney, and
offered to wage his Law, and essoyned; and at that Day the Plaintiff appeared,
and the Defendant being solemnly required, one J. R. came to answer the
Plaintiff as Defendant in that Action, in his proper person, and offered to
wage his Law; the Plaintiff said, that J. R. now appearing to wage his Law,
ought not to be admitted, because the said J. R. is not that person which the
Plaintiff prosecutes, because this I. R. appearing, is I. R. de W. in Com. L.
Jun. Chapman, and he who the Plaintiff prosecutes is I. R. de W. in Com. L.
Sen. Chapman, both of them at the purchasing the Plaintiffs Writ, living at W.
and that he agreed with the Defendant so to do, therefore because I. R. de,
etc. has not appeared to wage his Law, prays Judgment: the Defendant
confesses such matter, and says, that he beleiving that the Writ was
prosecuted against him, appeared by his Attorney, and offered to wage his Law;
and prays to be discharged of the Debt: and the other I. R. being exacted,
appeared not: and the Court would advise, but no Judgment for the Plaintiff.

HIll. 26. Eliz. rotulo 420. The Lessor makes a Lease by Indenture Lessor and
Lessee for years, one Assigns his term, and the other grants his Reversion,
Grantee of the Reversion shall have Action of Debt against the Assignee. Nota.
for years, and the Lessee grants over his whole Term; and the Lessor grants
over the Reversion, and it was adjudged that the Grantee of the Reversion
should have an Action of Debt for the Arrears of Rent, against the Assignee of
the term, and not against the first Lessee.

HIll. 43. Eliz. Pasch. 41. Eliz. rotulo 425. An Action of Debt brought against
an Executor in the Debet and detinet, for Rent due in the time of the Executor,
upon a Lease made to the Testator, upon a Judgment given in the upper Bench,
and that Judgment was reversed in the Exchequer, because it was not in the
Detinet alone; but afterward in the upper Bench. Int. dominum Rich. and Frank
Administrator for Arrears due, after the Death of the Intestate, it was
adjudged good in the Debet and detinet, and also in the Common Pleas, Trin. 11.
Jac. rotulo 2013.

MIch. 30. and 31. Eliz. rotulo 907. An Action of Debt brought, Nota.
to which the Defendant pleads an Outlary against the Plaintiff in its force,
the Plaintiff replies the general Pardon granted by Parliament; the Defendant
demurrs, and Judgment, that he should answer over.

MIch. 40. and 41. Eliz. Ralph Rogers brought an Action of Debt Default of the
Clerk amended, and afterward upon advice made as it was at first.
upon an Obligation of 400. l. and Judgment was entered by the Clerk upon a
Nichil dic. that the said Roger should recover, etc. and for that Default the
Defendant brought his Writ of Error to reverse the Judgment given for Ralph;
and when the Record was certified, the Judges of the then Kings Bench would not
proceed. And afterward the Judges of the Common Pleas upon a motion, and
before another Writ of Error brought, amended the Mistake of the Clerk. And
Justice Walmsley would have committed Keale the Clerk to the Fleet, for his
carelessness, but afterward the Amendment was withdrawn by the Court, and upon
further advice, the Roll made as it was before.

An Action of Debt was brought upon a single Bill for Payment of A Bill to pay
Money upon Demand, must lay a special Demand.
Money upon Demand, and the Plaintiff declares generally, that he often had
requested, etc. and Sergeant Harris demurres to the Declaration; and the
opinion of the Court was, that he ought to plead: yet if the Defendant had
demanded Oyer of the Bill, and upon that have demurred, it had been a good
Demurrer, because one special Demand was in the Bill, and no special Demand
alleged in the Count.

MIch. 3. Iac. Burnell versus Bows. Action of Debt brought upon Amendment of
Issue Roll by the Imparlance Roll.
a Bond, and the Plaintiff in the Imparlance Roll had counted upon a Bond made
the tenth of March, and an Imparlance thereupon until the next Term, and in
the next Term he declared, as of a Bond made the tenth of May, and the
Defendant pleaded per Dures, and it was entered of Record, and the next Term
after Entry thereof the Plaintiff moved that that Mistake might be amended, and
at first it was denied to be amended, because the Defendant had pleaded to it,
and by that Amendment his Plea should be altered, as if he had pleaded, that it
was not his Deed; and the cause of his pleading that Plea was the the Mistake,
and if that Mistake should be amended, he would be trised and overthrown; and
upon the first motion it was denied to be amended, but afterward granted to be
amended by the whole Court, for the Imparlance was entered, Hillar. first of
James, and the Issue was Pasch. second of James, but the Defendant was admitted
to plead a new at his pleasure.

MIch. 3. Jac. rotulo 2575. Fitch versus Bissie. An Action of Debt Estoppell.
brought upon an Obligation, with a Condition to pay Money yearly, according to
the form and effect of the Indenture made between the Plaintiff and Defendant;
the Defendant pleads that there was not any such Indenture made between the
Plaintiff and Defendant, as is in the Condition supposed: and the Plaintiff
demurrs upon that Plea, for that the Defendant is estopped to plead that Plea.

KIng and his Wife Executrix of J. Wright, Plaintiffs, brought a Scire facias
after the said Executrix came to full Age, against Death and his Wife,
Administratrix of W. D. to have Execution of a Judgment had by J. D. and H. E.
Administrators, during the minority of the Executrix, upon a Bond entered into,
to the Testator, and whether a Scire facias lay by the Executrix or no, was the
Question; and by the better opinion of the Court it did not lie.

MAyor and Burgesses of Linn Regis, in Norfolk, Mich. 10. Jac. rotulo 2413.
brought an Action of Debt upon a Bond against one Pain, and it was (Ad
respondendum Majori and Burgensibus de Linn Regis in Comitatu Norfolciae,) Pain
pleads, that it was not his Deed; and a special Verdict was found, that the
Mayor and Burgesses were incorporated by the name of Majores and Burgenses
Burgi de Linn, and non per aliud. And whether the omission of this word (Burgi)
should bar the Plaintiffs, was the Question: and Judgment was given by Cook,
Warburton, and Nichols, for the Plaintiff; for Cook said, that if the essential
part of the Corporation was named, it was sufficient: and in this case the
Mayor and Burgesses was one essential part, and Linn Regis is another essential
part, and those two were duly expressed, and sufficient to maintain the Action;
and Cook said, that those words (Et non per aliud) shall be intended to be Non
per aliud sensum and non literae; and of the same opinion were the other Judges
there.

NIchols versus Grimwin, Mich. 12. Jacobi, rotulo 1609. or Hill. in the same
year, rotulo 3027. The Plaintiff brought his Action upon a Bond, the Condition
whereof was performance of an Award, for and concerning all matters, Causes,
Suits, and Demands whatsoever, had, moved, or depending, etc. so as the said
Award be made, etc. The Defendant pleads no such Award made, the Plaintiff by
Reply sets forth the Award, it was made De praemissis, to wit, that the said I.
should clearly depart with, and avoid out of her House, in which she then
lived, and that the said I. should carry away all the Hay, etc. The Defendant
re-joynes, and says, no such Award; and a Verdict for the Plaintiff; the
Defendant moved in Arrest of Judgment; for that the Award was made but of one
part, and so void; but Judgment was given for the Plaintiff; for though the
Award be made but of one part, yet if the Defendant may plead it in Bar of the
other Action brought against him for the same cause, in all such cases the
Award is good. But my Lord Hubbart and Nichols took this Difference upon these
words (so that) for then the Arbitrators must make their Award of all such
things which are in Controversy, and in such manner as the Condition
prescribes; but if the Parties put themselves by Parroll, if the Arbitrament be
made of one part it is good. And Hubbart said, that in all Arbitrements,
whether by Bond, or Parroll, they ought to be reciprocal, and to be made in
such manner, that it may make an end of all Controversies between the Parties.
For if a man be bound in a single Bill, and put it to Arbitrament, and the
Arbitrators order that the Obligor pay to the Obligee a sum, and do not award
that the Obligee shall seal a Release, or that the Money paid shall be in
Discharge of the said Bill, the Award is void. But in Barpools case the
Submission was by Parroll, for Money due before the Submission; and the Award
was, that he should pay such a sum for the same Debt, and good; for the Award
shall inure to a Dischage. See Paschals case, 8. Rep.

STutfield Plaintiff, Grony Defendant; in Trinity Term, 13 Jacobi, rotulo 859.
The Defendant pleads to a Bond taken by the Sheriff for his Appearance in the
Kings Bench, Die Sabbati proximum post Oct. Martini, that he appeared at the
Day; and the Court of Common Pleas gave him a Day to bring in the Record of his
Appearance by Mittimus issuing out of the Chancery, the Record was certified,
Videlicet, that he appeared Lunae post xv: am Martini, which was after the Day,
yet it was adjudged good; for if the Appearance was the same Term, it is good,
though it be not the same Day.

SErle against Harris, Trinity Term, 9. Jacobi, rotulo 1321. Judgment is
there entered by Non sum inform. against Harris, Harris brings a Writ of Error
upon that Judgment, and assigns for Error, that the Record was Fr. Harris de
Brownton. and the Original filed to warrant that Judgment was Fr. Harris de
Browton, and there reversed for that Variance.

HAmond versus Jethrell, Mich. 8. Iacobi, rotulo 2354. Hamond brought his
Action of Debt upon a Bill obligatory, for the Payment of Money, and no Day
limited in the Bill for the Payment thereof: but after the words (In witness
whereof, etc.) these words were written, Nevertheless it is agreed, that the
said Jethrell shall not be hereby compelled or required to pay the said 30. l.
until the said Jethrell have recovered against B. Hudson the sum of 30. l. or
more, upon a Bond of 40. l. wherein the said Hamond, etc. The Defendant demands
Oyer of the Bill, and has it, Memorandum that J. W. J. etc. and demurrs in
Law, and shows that the Plaintiff had not alleged any Day of Payment, nor
when it was requested; and the Declaration adjudged good notwithstanding: and
my Lord Cook held, that whatsoever comes after these words, In witness, etc. is
no part of the Bill, but words after, In witness, etc. may be a Condition, and
must be pleaded, and not demurred upon: and 21 Henry the sixth, direct in this
point, and so the third Report. An Action of Covenant brought upon words of
Covenant in Indenture after In witness, etc. and above the Seal, and held good
and maintainable.

SAaint-John versus Cracknell, Mich. 12. Jacobi, rotulo 1153. An Action of Debt
was brought upon the Statute of the 24. of Henry the sixth for 40. l. for
Election of Burgesses in Parliament, and it was tried, and a Verdict for the
Plaintiff. And Sergeant Moor moved the matter ensuing in Arrest of Judgment.
First, the Statute directs the Sheriff to issue out his Warrant to the Mayor,
if there be one, and if no Mayor, then to the Bailiff: and it appeared by the
Court that the Sheriff made his Warrant to the Bailiff, and do not show that
there was no Mayor there: and the Exception disallowed; for if there was a
Mayor, the Defendant ought to show it by Plea. Secondly, that the Plaintiff
does not allege that the Warrant made to the Bailiff was under the Sheriffs
Seal, as the Statute directs: and the Court held the Count good
notwithstanding, because the Declaration was, that the Sheriff by virtue of a
Writ to him directed, made his Warrant to the Bailiff: and if it was by virtue
of the Writ, it shall be intended to be under his Seal.

HOpe versus Holman, Mich. 10. Jacobi, rotulo 3612. Debt upon an Obligation,
the Defendant pleads a foreign Attachment in London, and the Plaintiff
demurrs, and the Exceptions were; first, that the Defendant had attached the
Moneys in his own hands by way of Retainer, and so the Custom unwarrantable.
Secondly, it appeared that Judgment was given in the Mayors Court, by the
Default of him in whose hands the Money was attached: and it appeared, that the
Defendant which brought the Action in London, and he in whose hands the
Attachment was made, and that made Default, was the same person; and it is a
contrariety, that the same person should appear and not appear, and a
Prescription for that is naught; and the Custom is in London, that the
Recoveror in London ought to find Sureties, that if the Debt be discharged
within a Year and a Day, then to pay the Money, and did not appear by the
Record, that he found Sureties, which was an incurable Fault, and so adjudged
by the Court.

POtter versus Tompson, Hill. 14. Jacobi, rotulo 3449. To one Obligation with
Condition to make Assurance of Lands to such Uses therein expressed; the
Defendant pleads, that he made a Feofment of the same Lands to other Uses,
which the Plaintiff accepted; the Plaintiff demurrs, and it was adjudged a
naughty Plea; for he ought not to vary from the Condition.

HIggenbotham versus Armot, Hill. 8. Jac. rotulo 906. Action of Debt brought
upon a Retainer, in the Office of an Husbandman for one year, and so from year
to year; the Defendant wages his Law, and at the Day to wage his Law, the Court
refused to accept it, for that he ought not to wage his Law for Wages; yet if
the Retainer were not for a year at least, the Court seemed to be of opinion
that he might wage his Law.

VErnon versus Onslow, Pasch. 12. Jac. rotulo 1047. Upon an Action brought upon
a Bill for 80. l. the Defendant demands Oyer of the Bill, was Pro octogesimis
libris, and to that the Defendant demurrs, and Judgment for the Plaintiff.
Hutton cited the Case in Cooks 10. Rep. Rowlands Case. And another in Mich. 44.
and 45. Eliz. rotulo 131. Proseptingentis libris, and the Bond was
Proseptungentis libris. And another, Mich. 11. Jac. upon a Bill for seventeen
pounds, and adjudged a good Bill.

YOung versus Melton, Trin. 10. Jacobi, rotulo 3434. An Action brought upon a
Bond for performance of Covenants; the Defendant pleads Conditions performed.
The Assigns, the Breach for non-payment of Rent, and pleads in this manner,
that in December he demised to the Defendant one Wine-Cellar, etc. for one
year; and if the Defendant would hold the Wine-Cellar for three years paying
40. l. yearly during the said term; and alleadges non-payment of the Rent of
on Quarter in the first Year: and the Defendant demurrs; and the Court were of
opinion, that the reservation had reference as well to the first year, as to
the two years following: and in that case Cook said, that if a man demise, etc.
reserving Rent to himself, the Heir shall not have the Rent, but if the Rent be
reserved generally, the Heir shall have it.

WHickstead versus Bradshaw, Pasch. 14. Jac. rotulo 2175. There was Judgment
entered against the said B. and after the Bail of Bradshaw, brought a Habeas
Corpus to the Marshalsey, Bradshaw being a Prisoner there, to have his Body
before the Judges of the Common Pleas to be committed in Execution, in
Discharge of the Bail, but before the Return of the Habeas Corpus, the said
Bradshaw had brought a Writ of Error returnable the Day following; and when he
came to be committed, the Court doubted, that their hands were tied by a Writ
of Error, by reason he could not be committed upon the Judgment, and yet they
would have discharged the Bail, if they knew which way, therefore Quaere.

GErrard and al. versus Dannet, Hill. 9. Jac. rotulo 2015. Judgment was had
upon a Bond by Non sum inform, and a Writ of Error brought for that the
Christian name of the Defendant, Attorney was left out in the Imparlance Roll;
but it was in the Roll, whereupon the Judgment was entered, and a Warrant of
Attorney entered accordingly: and the Court was moved, that it might be put into
the Imparlance Roll, which was granted upon sight of the Judgment Roll, and
Warrant of Attorney entered.

If a man be bound by Award to pay one 20. s. And I at the Day offer it, and he
refuses it, or comes not to receive it; I must plead that I was ready to pay;
and shall not plead an Uncore prist. because it is upon a collateral matter.

An Obligation was made to pay 10. l. 8. s. and eight (not saying Pence, or any
thing else) An Action of Debt lies for the 10. l. 8. s.

Wild versus Vinor, Trin. 7. Jac. rotulo 1629, or 2629. Debt upon an
Obligation to perform an Award. The Defendant pleads, that the Arbitrators made
no Award; the Plaintiff replies, that the Defendant by Writing did revoke, and
null the Authority of the Arbitrators. Foster held the Bond was forfeited,
although he might revoke, the Plea was that he did discharge the Arbitrators
against the form of the Condition. My Lord Cook held, that the Power was
countermandable, if the Submission be by Writing, the Countermand must be by
Writing, if by word I may countermand by word. If two bind themselves, one
cannot countermand alone. If Obligor or Obligee disable by their own Act to
make the Condition void; the Bond is single, 14 H. 7. If I am bound to infeoff
A. and I marry her before the Day, the Bond is forfeited, 18 E. 4. 18. 20. the
great doubt was, because no express notice, but notice was implied. And the
Bond forfeited, because he did not stand to it. Judgment for the Plaintiff.

PArker versus Rennaday, Trin. 6. Jac. Action brought upon a Bond for 60. l.
the Bond was in Italian in these words, In cessanta libris, and held a good
Bond for 60. l.

O. K. ux. ejus Admin. versus Needham, who was bound to the Intestate in a
Bond, and pleads, that Administration of the Intestates Goods was committed to
him by the Archbishop, the Intestate having Bona not Abilia, before it was
committed to the Plaintiffs Wife. The Plaintiff replies, that the
Administration committed to the Defendant was revoked and made void; to which
the Defendant demurrs, pretending his Administration to be a Release in Law,
but it was otherwise adjudged. But if the Debtor were made Executor, then the
Debt is released: like unto an Administrator during the minority, he may do all
for the good of the Infants, but nothing to their prejudice, if an Executor
marry the Debtor, it is no Release in Law: Judgment for the Plaintiff by the
whole Court.

LAwrance and Althams case; if I have no means to gain my Right but by Action
if I release my Action, I release the thing it self, because I release my
means to come to my Right. If I release all Actions I may have Jus prosequendi.
A Release made by the Testator shall be no Bar to the Executor to bring a Writ
of Detinue, because it continues a wrong still to the Executor. A Bond to pay
Money at Michaelmas, may be released because it is a Debt, otherwise it is of a
Rent reserved by Lease: the like it is of a single Bill to pay Money at four
Days, if the first Day be broken no Action, until all the Days be past; but
in case of a Lease, after the first Day, Debt does lie; in the first it is a
Debt, but not in the other. Quarrels, Controversies, and Debates are all one,
that is all Causes of Quarrels, Controversies, and Debates, are more large then
Actions: and Suits are more then q. c. and d. and by Release of Suits,
Executions are gone, Release of Duties Executions are gone: neither Fraud nor
Might can take a Title without Right. Demand is most large, and by it Rents are
gone, Executions gone, Incidents gone, as Releif, Warranties gone, all Causes
of Demand gone, Actions and a man's Right gone.

When a condition is to arbitrate of all matters between, etc. there if the
matters be not made known to the Arbitrators, they are not bound to arbitrate
more then they know for, if it appear to the Court that all matters committed
to the arbitrators be not arbitrated, the Award is void; but if the submission
be of all matters between, etc. so that now all must be arbitrated, or else it
is void: and in every award there must be satisfaction of that which was
awarded.

POwel versus Crowther trin. 9. Jacob. rotulo 313. det port e un. three
executors which appeared at several terms, and plead severally, ne unques
execut. the plaintiff proceeds to trial against one of them, and was nonsuit.
And then one of the other defendants take the record down by proviso, and the
plaintiff was again nonsuit, and both the defendants desire costs, before the
third issue was tried: but costs was only given to the first, and denied to
the second, for his trial was erroneous, because by the first trial the
original was determined.

If a defendant wage his law, no excuse of sickness, or water, can save his
default; but in real actions he may excuse himself by such accidents.

If the condition of a Bond be to discharge a message of all encumbrances,
there one may plead generally that he did discharge it of all encumbrances; but
if it be to discharge it of such a Lease, there he must show how.

NOrton versus Sims Pasch. 11. Jacob. rotulo 346. debt upon a Bond entered into
by an under Sheriff to his high Sheriff, that the under Sheriff shall not
meddle with the execution of executions, and shall discharge the Sheriff from
all escapes, and the plaintiff shows a breach in the under Sheriff for an
escape; by reason whereof, the Sheriff paid the debt and damages: question was,
whether this covenant be good, or not Judgment for the plaintiff. A high
Sheriff may make an under Sheriff to be at will. An under Sheriff has the same
authority an high Sheriff has: it is a void condition to save a man harmless
from all men, but good, if it be special: if the condition be to discharge and
acquit, I must show how: An under Sheriff was before the Conquest. A Bond made
to the Sheriff by the under Sheriff, to discharge of all escapes, this is good
and lawful. If any part of the condition of a Bond be against a Statute Law, it
is void in all: but otherwise, if part be against the common law. See Boswels
case 10. Rep. when a man is under Sheriff he may do all ministerial things the
Sheriff may do, but not judicial. If the under Sheriff will covenant, that he
will not meddle with executions above 20. l. this covenant of his own accord is
good: if a Sheriff bind his under Sheriff, that he shall not return Venire
Facias, nor intermeddle with executions, until he be acquainted, it is against
Law, and naught by all the Court. A Bond to perform diverse Covenants, some
against Law, and others lawful, it is good for lawful things, and void for
the rest.

The Death of one of the Parties in an Original Writ does abate the Writ, it is
otherwise in a Judgment. If Husband and Wife sue a Scire facias, and the
Husband dies, the Scire facias shall abate; for it is no more a judicial Writ,
but as it were an Original to revive a Judgment.

The Court were of opinion in the case of Sir H. Dowckray, that where he had
delivered Money to his Servant to provide Victuals; and the Servant buys the
Victuals in his Masters name, and pays not for them; and afterward an Action
is brought against the Master for the Money, and he offers to wage his Law; and
the Court held, he could not safely wage his Law, because the Victuals came to
his own use, and therefore he is chargeable, and must have his Remedy against
his Servant. But if the Master did forbid the Tradesman to deliver any Wares,
except his Man paid for them; in that case if the Tradesman deliver Wares, the
Master may safely wage his Law, as it was adjudged in Sir H. Comptons case.

MAntell versus Gibbs, Trin. 7. Jacobi, rotulo 1254. An Action of Repleader
awarded.
Debt brought upon an Obligation; to which the Defendant pleads, that an
Estranger was imprisoned by another stranger, and kept in Prison, until the
Defendant, as Surety of the stranger, made the Bond; and it was held a naughty
Plea, and a Repleader awarded.

ALston versus Walker, Mich. 6. Jacobi, rotulo 1342. Land was Mortgaged, Money
due upon a Mortgage payable to the Heir, and not to the Executor.
and a Promise, that if the Mortgager at such a time and place should pay the
Money to the Mortgagee, his Heirs, or Assigns, that then the Mortgage should
be void; the Mortgagee died, and the Money was paid to his Executors; and it
was adjudged to be no performance of the Condition, for the Executor was not
named, and the Money ought to be paid to the Heir, who should have the Land, if
the Money were unpaid, and not the Executor. STurges versus Dean, Trin. 7.
Jacobi, rotulo 2915. An Action of Money to be paid fifteen Days after return,
etc. he proving his being there, Court divided which proof shall be, precedent
or subsequent.
Debt brought upon a Bill for Money to be paid within fifteen Days after his
Return from Jerusalem, he proving his being there; the Defendant pleads, that
he did not prove-his being there; to which the Plaintiff demurrs, he making
proof, that is, if it be true. Sir Edward Cook and Daniel held, that the proof
should be made upon the Trial, and the proof should be subsequent. But
Warburton and Foster held, that the proof shall be precedent, because it was
restrained to a certain time: but it had been otherwise if no time had been
appointed.

NOrton versus Goldsmith, Trin. 7. Iac. rotulo 3100. An Action of Condition
that an Undersheriff shall not intermeddle with Executions of such a value,
held void.
Debt brought upon an Obligation, with a Condition that Chamberlain, his
Undersheriff, should not meddle with Executions beyond such a sum, and
alleadges a Breach for intermeddling with Executions, contrary to the
Condition; and the opinion of the whole Court was, that the Bond was void.

PAin versus Nichols, Trin. 8. Iac. rotulo 134. An Action of Debt Judgment
arrested, because the whole matter laid was found, and part was not actionable.
brought upon the Statute of Ed. 6. for not setting forth of Tithes, and the
Plaiutiff declared as well for Prediall Tithes, for he might well bring his
Action, and for other Tithes, as of Lamb and Wool, for which no Action would
lie, and upon a Trial the Jury found for all, as well for those that would, as
would not bear an Action; and after a Verdict, this Exception was taken, and
Judgment arrested.

BOoth versus Davenant, Trin. 8. Iacobi, rotulo 805. A Bail taken in Bail
discharged upon the principals rendering his Body in another Term after a case
returned. Quaere.
the then Kings Bench, and an Action of Debt brought upon that Recognisance,
which was, that if it happened the Defendant in that Action to be convicted,
then the Manucaptors granted, and every of them granted, that as well the Debt
as Damages, and Costs, which should in that Action be adjudged the Plaintiff,
should be levied upon their Lands and Chattels. And in Easter Term 7 Iacobi,
the Defendant upon a Capias ad satisfaciendum, awarded against him, did not
render his Body, but afterward Mich. 7. Jacobi, he did render his Body, and
the Court accepted of it, and discharged the Bail: and whether the Bail should
be discharged, or not, was the Question; and the Court held, the Bail should be
discharged; and Judgment was given for the Defendant. An Award good in part,
and naught for part, and Breach assigned in the good part, and held good.


RAyson versus Winder, Pasch. 16. Jac. rotulo 1200. An Action of Debt brought
upon an Obligation, for performance of an Award, which was void in part, and
good in part; and the Breach alleged for that part which was good, and the
Award was to pay Money, but no time of Payment alleged in the Award, and
afterward it was demanded, and such Demand was held good.

KIng versus Law, Trin. 16. Jac. rotulo 507. An Action of Debt If the Plaintiff
be nonsuit, yet no Cost upon the Statute of Perjury.
brought upon the Statute of Perjury, in which the Plaintiff was nonsuit; and
the Defendant moved to have Costs upon the Statute of 23 H. 8. upon these
words, or upon any Statute for any Offense or Wrong personally, immediately
supposed to be done to the Plaintiff or Plaintiffs; and the Plaintiff after
Appearance, etc. be nonsuited, etc. but the whole Court held, that he should
not recover Costs upon that Statute, because the Statute of 5 Eliz. was made
long after the Statute of 23 H. 8. and upon the Statute of 7 Jacobi, the
Defendant shall not recover Costs; for if the Plaintiff had recovered, he
should have recovered no Costs, and so no Cost was given to the Defendant in
that Action.

PAnnell versus Metcalfe, Trin. 17. Eliz. rotulo 2722. Action of Nota.
Debt brought against the Defendant as Administrator, and he pleads a Recovery
had against him in the City of Norwich, and alleadges a special Custom, that
time out of mind, that they had Cognizance of Pleas; and in pleading the
Custom, he omitted this word Cur, and held naught.

FEtherston versus Tapsall, Mich. 13. Jacobi, rotulo 3409. The Imparlance
Amendment of the Imparlance demed, after Error brought.
was entered, and Hill. 13. Jacobi, rotulo 715. The Issue was entered. An Action
of Debt was brought upon a Bond, and in the Imparlance the Bond was alleged
to be made at Newcastle, and in the Issue Roll it was alleged to be made at
York, and tried; and afterward a Writ of Error was brought, and the Record was
certified, and upon a Scire facias that Error was assigned; and the Court of
Common Pleas was moved, that the Imparlance Roll might be amended, but the
Court would not grant it.

GAtes versus Smith, Mich. 16. Jac. rotulo 945. An Action of Debt A thing out
of the Submission awarded, and void.
brought upon an Obligation to perform an Award; the Defendant pleads, that the
Arbitrators made no Award; the Plaintiff by way of Replication sets forth the
Award, and that the Arbitrators had awarded the Defendant to pay such a sum,
and that he should be bound with another in such a sum, and shows that the
Defendant did not become bound with the other; and the Defendant demurred, for
because it was out of the Submission, and it was not in the Defendants power to
perform it.

JAckson versus Comin, Trin. 16. Jac. rotulo. An Action of Debt Nota.
brought upon an Obligation to perform an Award, so that the Award be signed,
sealed, and delivered: and in pleading of an Award, upon the Defendants saying,
there was no Award made; the Plaintiff omitted in his Plea to set forth, that
the Award was signed, and it was tried, and a Verdict for the Plaintiff; and
this was moved in Arrest of Judgment, and stayed by the Court.

CLempson versus Bate, Trin. 17. Iacobi, rotulo. An Action of Debt Defendant
wage his Law upon a Recovery in a Court Baron.
brought upon a Recovery in a Court Baron, and declares, that every Court was
held before the Steward only, and not before the Suitors, and a Declaration
there for Rent reserved upon a Lease for years behind, and the Court held the
Declaration void, and that these words, according to the Custom of the Manor
time out of mind, would not help the Declaration; and the Defendant was
admitted to wage his Law presently, if he would.

COventry versus Windall, Hill. 13. Iac. rotulo 2588. An Action of A man cannot
send his Apprentice beyond Sea, except he go with him.
Debt brought upon a Writing, thereby showing that whereas one T. before the
sealing of that Writing had become bound to the Defendant, to stay with him,
and serve him as his Apprentice for the term of eight years, and Woodall
covenants with the Plaintiff, that he before such a Day would receive and take
the said Apprentice for the residue of the said term of eight years then to
come, and would teach, keep, and employ the said Apprentice in his House and
Service in the Art and Mystery of Surgery, which the said Woodall then used,
and professed, if the said I. should so long live, and binds himself in 20. l.
the Plaintiff alleadges that the Defendant did receive the said Apprentice in
his Service at London, etc. and further says, that the Defendant within the
time, to wit, such a Day and Year, sent the said Apprentice in a certain
Voyage, in a Ship called the Dragon, from the House of the Defendant, unto the
East Indies, there to stay; and that the Apprentice did there arrive, and does
yet there remain, for which he brings his Action. The Defendant pleads, that he
for the better instruction of the Apprentice sent the Apprentice to the Indies,
to use and exercise his Art; and to this the Plaintiff demurrs; and Judgment
for the Plaintiff, that the Defendant could not send the Apprentice out of
England, except himself went with him, although it be in his own House, and own
proper Service, but clearly he might send the Apprentice to Chester, or any
other part of England.

GArrard and al. versus Dennet, Hill. 9. Iacobi, rotulo 516. The Defendant
after a Judgment entered, brought a Writ of Error, and assigned for Error, that
the Christian name of the Attorney for the Defendant was left out in the
Imparlance Roll, but it was in the Judgment Roll, and also in the Roll with the
Clerk of the Warrants was perfect, to wit, Henry Snag; and therefore the
Imparlance was made perfect, and Henry put into the Imparlance Roll, after
assignement of Error by the Court.

COwchman versus Hawtry, Hill. 14. Iac. rotulo 2167. Action of Upon a null.
tiel. Record, though some Variances, yet the Debt and Damages agreeing,
Judgment for the Plaintiff.
Debt brought against a Bailiff of a Liberty, upon a Recovery in a Court of
Record. The Defendant pleads no such Record. The Plaintiff brings the Record
into the Court: and there were diverse Variances between the Record upon which
the Plaintiff declares, and the Record certified, Videlicet, in the name of the
Bailiff and Continuances; for in the Record certified there were diverse
Continuances which were not in the Record in Court, and diverse other
Differences; but the Judgment and Recovery of the Debt and Damages agreed, and
the other Variances were not material, and Judgment was given for the
Plaintiff notwithstanding*

DOminus Rex Iacobus versus Castle. An Action of Debt brought upon an
Obligation taken in the Kings name in the Court of Request, Bond taken to
appear in the Court of Request, void.
with a Condition to appear before the Master, etc. and the Declaration is
general, that the Defendant such a Day and Year by his Obligation did
acknowledge himself to be bound to the King in the said 60. l. to be paid, etc.
and it was adjudged naught, for it did not appear to be taken in a Court of
Record.

Child versus Peisley, Hill. 14. Jac. rotulo 2184. Habeas Corpora returned
Return of the Habeas Corpus amended.
by the Sheriff, and these words omitted, Videlicet, Quilibet Iur. per se
seperatim Attach. est per Pleg. I. D. and R. R. exitus eor. cujuslibet x. s. R.
W. and M. L. Vic. and it was amended by the Court.

ANdrews versus Delahay an Attorney of the Common Pleas, Debt upon two Bills,
and one not due, and tried for the Plaintiff, and moved in Arrest, the
Plaintiff released his Damages, and had Judgment upon the Bill due.
Hill. 14. Jac. rotulo 3057. A Bill filed against the Defendant as an Attorney,
upon two Bills obligatory for payment of Money, and one of the Bills was not
payable, and due at the time of exhibiting the Bill: and the Defendant pleads
to Issue, and the Cause received a Trial, and a Verdict for the Plaintiff; and
afterward the Defendant in Arrest of Judgment moved, that one of the Bills
were not payable at the time of exhibiting the Bill against him, and thereupon
the Plaintiff remitted his Damages, and had Judgment for the Bill that was due.

HArris versus Cotton. As long as the Vicar occupies his Gleab-land Lessee of
the Vicars Gleab-land shall pay Tithes. Nota.
in his own hands, he shall pay no Tithes; but if he demise it to another, the
Lessee shall pay Tithes to the Parson that is impropriate. If the Vicar sow the
Land, and die, and his Executor takes away the Corn, and does not set forth his
Tithe; and the Parson brought an Action of Debt upon the Statute of 2 Ed. 6.
and the Court seemed to incline that it would lie.

DArrell versus Andrew, Mich. 14. Iaeobi, rotulo 2327. An Action of Venire
facias de D. or within the Parish of D. or de Parochia, good.
Debt was brought in London for Rent reserved, upon a Demise of Lands in Cawson
in the Parish of D. in the County of War. and of one capital Message. The
Defendant pleads Extinguishment of Rent, because the Plaintiff had entered into
one House called the Woollhouse, and into one Buttry at the upper end of the
Hall of the said House, and in one House called the C. parcel of the Premises
before demised, upon the Defendants motion, and had expelled the Defendant out
of the Possession thereof, and the Venire facias was of Cawson, within the
Parish of Dale, and Exception taken, because it was Infra Parocham: but my Lord
Hubbard said, that where Land is laid in Dale, in the Parish of Dale, that the
Venire facias may be made of Dale, or within the Parish, or of the Parish, and
both good.

HAll versus Winkfield. An Action of Debt brought in London for a Scire facias
upon a Recognisance may issue out into any County.
100. l. and the Plaintiff declared upon a Recognisance taken at Sergeants Inn
in Fleetstreet, London, before the Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, and
afterward enrolled in the Common Pleas at Westminster, in Middlesex. And the
Defendant demurred to the Declaration, and the Question was, whether the Action
should be brought in London or Mid. And note the Recognisance as soon as it is
acknowledged is a Record, and shall relate to the time of the taking to bind.
Sergeant Hutton said, that a Scire facias may issue upon a Recognisance taken
out of Court into any County, and none is bound to sue Scire facias where the
Recognisance is taken: but after it is enrolled in the Court, an Action of Debt
shall be brought in the County of Middlesex. At the Common Law the Execution
was by Levari facias, and after the Year an Action of Debt; it is not a
Recognisance consummate, until it be enrolled in the Court, yet it takes its
life by the first acknowledgement: for if you have an Action of Debt or
Trespass in a foreign Shire, when you have recovered Debt or Trespass, your
Debt or Trespass is now altered and made new. My Lord Hubbard held, that if I
bring Debt in Norfolk, and I have Judgment, and bring an Action of Debt upon
that Judgment, it must be brought in Middlesex, and so in Trespass. The
Inrolment of the Recognisance is but a fortification of the Recognisance.

MOrtimer versus Freeman, Hill. 9. Iacobi, rotulo 2001. An Action Deprivation
of a Minister may be given in evidence.
of Debt brought, for not setting out of Tithes, to which the Defendant pleads,
Nil debet per patriam, and to prove that the Plaintiff was not Parson, he
showed a Deprivation of the Plaintiff for Drunkenness by the high
Commissioners: and the Court held, for such a common Fault, after Admonition,
the high Commissioners might deprive a Minister; but because this Crime of
Drunkenness was committed before the general Pardon, and that the Sentence was
given after the Pardon, the Sentence was void. For Wool or Lamb no Action
lies upon the Statute, for they are not predial Tithes: nor for small Tithes.

If an Action of Debt be brought upon two Contracts, and both Best to have
Damages severed upon two Contracts.
found for the Plaintiff, in that Case the Jury may tax Damages entire, but the
safer and better way is to sever the Damages; for it may come to pass, that an
Action will not lie for one of the two, and if it will not lie, then your
labor and charge is lost.

An Action of Debt brought for 300. l. upon an Obligation. The Defendant after
a general Imparlance demands Oyer of the Bond, and pleads specially, that it
was but for 30. l. and it was not allowed after a general Imparlance. And the
Defendant pleaded, that it was not his Deed, which was the proper Plea in that
Case.

PReston versus Dawson, Pasch. 11. Jacobi, rotulo 2310. An Action Breach for
not acknowledging a Fine.
of Debt brought upon a Bond, for performance of Covenants in an Indenture, in
which Indenture was this Covenant following, that the Vendor should make
further Assurance at the cost and charges in the Law of the Purchasor; and for
Breach it was alleged, that a Note of Nota.
a Fine was devised and engrossed in Parchment, and delivered to the Vendee to
acknowledge the Fine at the Assizes, which he refused to do, and the Plaintiffs
Breach was demurred upon, because he did not offer Costs to the Vendee, and the
Court held it to be idle.

GLyver versus Lease, Trin. 11. Jac. rotulo 734. An Action of Debt Feossment of
Land in satisfaction of Debt upon a single Bill, held naught.
brought upon a single Bill. The Defendant pleads, that he did infeoff the
Plaintiff of Lands, in satisfaction of that Debt, and the Plaintiff demurred
upon it: and upon reading the Record, ruled to be a naughty Plea to a single
Bill, otherwise it had been upon a Bond, with a Condition to pay Money.

WIlliamson versus Barnsley, Trin. 12. Jac. rotulo 1291. An Action A Steward of
a Leet within the Statute of E. 6. against buying of Offices.
of Debt brought upon an Obligation, with a Condition to perform Articles, that
he before Easter Term next following, at the Request of the Plaintiff, should
surrender, and yield up to the Plaintiff, his Letters Patents of the
Stewardship of Bromsgrove, to the intent that he might renew the said Letters
Patents in his own name; and it was objected at Bar, that the Office of a
Steward of a Court Leet, or Court Baron, was within the Statute of 5 E. 6. made
against buying of Offices that were for Ministration: and so Winch held the
Stewardship of a Leet to be within the Statute, and so was adjudged in Grays
Case; but the Question was, whether the agreement to surrender, be within the
Statute or no, the words of the Statute are, to have and enjoy; and Winch said,
it was within the Statute; and so the Office of a Cursitor was within that
Statute.

Exception was taken to an Action of Debt brought upon the Statute of E. 6. for
not setting out of Tithes, because the certainty of Loads of Corn were not
expressed, but it was held good notwithstanding.

HAwes versus Birch, Hill. 12. Jacobi, rotulo 1843. An Action of One thing in
Action cannot be a satisfaction for another thing in Action.
Debt brought upon a Bond of 6. l. for the payment of 3. l. upon the 16. of
April. The Defendant pleads, that an Estranger at the Defendants request, the
said 16. of April, made an Obligation to the Plaintiff in lieu of the first
Debt, and adjudged naught by the whole Court, for one thing in Action cannot be
a satisfaction for another thing in Action; but this being done by a stranger,
is good by no means.

Pasch. 12. Jacobi. The Court was of opinion, that if Money be Upon a Request
and none ready to receive, and after a Request Damages shall be paid from the
Request.
tendered, and none ready to receive it, and afterward he to whom the Money is
payable, demands the Money, and the other refuse to pay, and afterward an
Action is brought, and a Tender pleaded, the Court held, that the Defendant
should pay Damages from the time that the Money was demanded.

FLeet versus Harrison, Hill. 13. Jac. rotulo 841. An Action of Debt Nota.
brought against two Defendants, one of them pleads Nil debet per patriam, and
the other lets a Judgment go by Default, and he that waged his Law, at the Day
appointed performed it; and Judgment that the Plaintiff should take nothing by
his Writ, for a Respectuatur of the Judgment was entered, until the other had
done his Law.

WIlliamson versus Spark, Mich. 13. Jac. rotulo 3511. Upon a cire facias
brought against the Bail upon an Attachment of Nota.
Privilege. The Defendant pleads a Release made after the Verdict, and before
Judgment, which was before the Recognisance was forfeited: and if the
Recognisee may release before the Damages are ascertained, or no, was the
Question, and it seemed he might.

An Action of Debt brought against a Baker, for a Fine imposed on him in a
Court Leet, and an Exception was taken, because it was not alleged that he
sold Bread against the Assise of Bread made to sell; for a man may make and
bake Bread for his own use, under the Assise limited.

BAcon versus Pain, Trin. 14. Jac. An Action of Debt brought, and Nota.
declare, that such a Day and Year the Defendant was a Brewer, and for one Year
then next following, and that the Defendant the said Day at K. bought of the
Plaintiff the fourth part of the Grains that the Plaintiff that Year next
following should make in brewing, for 3. l. to be paid upon Request. The
Defendant pleads, that he ought him nothing, and after a Trial, an Exception
was taken to the Declaration, because the Plaintiff did not aver that he made
Grains in that Year.

LOrd versus Huxly. An Action of Debt brought on a Judgment thereupon, and the
Defendant taken in Execution upon that An Almoner would have acknowledged
satisfaction, and doubted.
Judgment, and afterward the Plaintiff became Felo dese, by which the Almoner
seized of all his Goods, and afterward the Almoner would have acknowledged
satisfaction of the Debt and Damages in that Judgment, and doubted that he
could not.

SAwyer versus Crompton, Hill. 14. Jac. rotulo. The Plaintiff brought an Action
of Debt for Costs given before the Judges of the Marshalsey, Judgment against
the Plaintiff, for incertainty of his Count.
newly erected, 9 Jac. by Letters Patents of the same King within the Virge.
And the Plaintiff declared, that whereas at the Court of the said King, for the
Household held at S. in S. within the Virge of the Household then at Whitehall,
such a Day and Year before T. B. Knight Marshall, etc. and F. B. etc. Judges of
the said Court, to hear and determine all Pleas personal within the Virge,
between Persons not being of the Household, arising, by virtue of Letters
Patents, bearing Date such a Day and Year, in due manner made, came, etc. and
the Court held a repugnancy in the Count, and the whole Court against the
Plaintiff. If it had been brought upon the ancient Court, it must be between
two of the Household, and they held that cost lay: and the Exception was,
because the Plaintiff had not showed the Grant to hold the Court.

If a Bond be made to one, and he does not say in the Bond, that it Nota.
shall be paid to the Obligee, in this case the Plaintiff must show that it is
to be paid to him, though not expressed in the Bond.

HOnne Executor of R. Hutton, and E. May, Pasch. 40. Eliz. rotulo Judgment for
the Plaintiff.
433. An Action of Debt brought upon an Obligation, with a Condition that the
above bound T. G. or his Heirs do or shall at any time before the Purification
of the blessed Virgin, which shall be in the year 1596. according to the
Custom of the Manor, etc. Surrender into the hands of the Lord of the same
Manor for the time being, all those, etc. to the use of the said R. Hutton,
his Heirs, and Assigns for ever, in such wise as the said R. Hutton his Heirs,
and Assigns, shall, or lawfully may by the custom of the Manor be admitted,
etc. or if after such Admittance the Premises shall be recovered against the
said Rich. his Heirs or Assigns by one W. K. within four years, then if he
shall pay upon notice, etc. The Defendant pleads, that the Plaintiff ought not
to have his Action, because the said R. Hutton after the making of the Bond,
and before the said Feast of the Purification, which was in the year 1696. to
wit, the sixth of October 38 Eliz. at B. died. The Plaintiff demurs, and
Judgment for the Plaintiff.

If one be indebted to one, and he dies intestate, and after his Nota.
Death Administration is committed to the Debtor, this is no Release of the
Debt. If he marry the Executrix of the Debtee, and the Executrix dies, the
Husband shall be charged with the Debt after her Death.

VAughan versus Chambers, Trin. 20. Eliz. rotulo 145. An Action Because the
first Contract was not usurious, the latter shall not.
of Debt brought upon a Bond; the Defendant pleads the Statute of Usury, and
shows a corrupt Agreement for Money lent in the year 32. to be paid in 33. and
afterward in 35. a new Bond given for part of the first sum, and it was
pretended that this Bond was void; but it was adjudged, because the first Bond
was no Corruption, the later should not be.

LEech Attorney versus Phillips Executor of Phillips, rotulo 3415. No Action of
Debt for Soliciting Fees.
An Action of Debt brought for soliciting a Cause in the upper Bench, and it
was adjudged by the whole Court, that an Action of Debt for Solicitors Fees
would not lie, but ought to bring an Action of the Case, and afterward the
Court held an Action of the Case would not lie.

PAsch. 12. Jac. Grove versus Jourdain. An Action of Debt brought Defendant
pleads, the Plaintiff was indebted to him, and he took Administration, and
retained his own Debt in his hands.
against an Administrator, who pleads, that the intestate was indebted to him
by Obligation, and that he retained the Money in his hands to satisfy the
Debt. The Plaintiff replies, that the Money was not due and payable to him at
the time of the Intestates Death; and that he took Administration after the Day
of Payment; and if the Administrator had pleased he might have took
Administration before the Day of Payment: and the Court held the Defendants
Plea good, but he shall not have the Forfeiture.

CArrell versus Paske, Trin. 13. Jac. rotulo 1018. Debt brought Bailiff of a
College claims the Liberty of the University, but denied to him.
upon an Obligation made at C. in the County of Surry. The Defendant pleads the
Privilege of Cambridge, granted to them by the Queen Eliz. for Scholars,
Bachelours, Masters, and their Servants, upon Contract made within the
University, and shows the Bond was made in Cambridge, and that he was a Servant
of the Scholars, to wit, Bailiff of Kings College in that University, and
inhabiting within the Town of Cambridge, and Precincts of that University, and
therefore a privileged Person of the same: and upon reading the Record it
seemed, that the Defendant being a Bailiff of the College is not capable of
the said Privilege.

Priest versus Cee, Trin. 12. Jacobi, rotulo 2197. An Action of Debt Special
Verdict.
brought upon a Bill, bearing Date 17 Novomber, 1604. by which Bill the
Defendant did acknowledge himself to owe the Plaintiff 10. l. to be paid to the
Plaintiff at two Payments, to wit, 5. l. to be paid upon the 19. of November
then next following, and other 5. l. to be paid upon the 10. Day of December
then next following. The Defendant pleads, it was not his Deed. The Jury find
it specially, that the Defendant the 17. of November, 1604. sealed and
delivered to the Plaintiff one Bill obligatory, showed to the Jury, bearing
Date the Day and Year above, and find the Bill, in haec verba, Be it known,
etc. to be paid at two Payments, that is to say, 5. l. to be paid the 19. of
November, which is the present of this Month, and the other 5. l. on the 10.
of December. The Question was, whether the Bill maintain the Count for the
first Payment, and adjudged it did.

RAwdon versus Turton, Trin. 13. Jac. 1011. An Action of Debt Nota, well.
brought upon a Bond for Payment of Money such a Day. The Defendant pleads,
that he the same Day made an Obligation for the Payment of the said Money
another Day, which the Plaintiff accepted for the Money; and Issue taken
thereupon, and tried for the Defendant; and after the Verdict, the Plaintiff
moved the Court to have Judgment, though the Verdict passed against him,
because the Plea was insufficient, and that he confessed the Debt, but the
Court would not grant it. The like Mich. 6. Jac. rotulo 1061. And the like
Hill. 12. Jac.

CArter versus Freeman, Mich. 13. Jac. An Action of Debt brought Appearance,
though at another Day the same Term saves the Bond.
upon a Bond, with a Condition that the Defendant should appear before the King
at a certain Day, Videlicet, Die Jovis post Octobras Martini, and upon a Null.
tiel Record pleaded, the Defendant brought his Record of Appearance, Lunae post
xvam. Martini; and this was held by the whole Court an Appearance at the Day in
the Condition by the whole Court.

GRubham versus Thornborough, Hill. 12. Jac. rotulo 1773. An Demand necessary
for a Nomine penae.
Action of Debt brought for Rent, and for a Nomine penae the Rent due 14
November, Anno 9. and no name alleged for the Nomine penae, therefore the
Action would not lie for the Nomine penae, but it would for Rent.

PAsch. 44. Eliz. Elliot versus Golding. An Action of Debt brought, Costs
omitted in the Roll, and Error brought, and demed to be amended.
and Judgment given for the Plaintiff, and a space was left in the Roll for
the Costs of the Judgment; and after the Year and a Day, a Scire facias was
brought to revive the Judgment, and in the Scire facias the Costs are put in,
and so Judgment by Default; and afterward a Writ of Error brought, and the
Error was assigned, because there were no Costs put into the principal Roll;
and afterward the Record was removed, the Count was moved, that Costs might be
put into the Roll, but it was denied upon the first motion, and afterward
Pasch. 13. Jac. it was denied by the whole Court.

BOnd versus Green Administrator. An Action of Debt brought against Nota.
him as Administrator; he pleads diverse Judgments, amounting to 670. l. and
the Assignement of 100. l. Debt to the King by Deed enrolled; and he pleaded,
that he retained his Debt in his hands, and he might have given this in
Evidence, or pleaded it at the Liberty of the Defendant.

COoper versus Bacon. Action of Debt brought upon the Statute of The Venire
facias mis-awarded.
E. 6. for Tithes, and the Plaintiff declares that one was seized of the
Rectory of Elveley, alias, Kirkley, in Kingston upon Hull in his Demesne as of
Fee; and being so seized such a Day, and such a Day, at Elveley, alias,
Kirkley, did demise to the Plaintiff the said Rectory, with the Appurtenances,
to have, and to hold, etc. for years, and that by virtue thereof he has been,
and is thereof possessed; and that the Defendant such a Day, and before, and
always afterward hitherto had held and occupied 30. Acres of Land, in
Swandland, in Kingston, in a place called T. and that the Tithes did belong to
him. The Defendant pleads, Nil debet per patriam, and after a Verdict it was
alleged in Arrest of Judgment, that the Issue was mis-tried, because the
Venire facias was of Elveley, alias, Kirkley, and it should have been of
Swandland, where the Tithes grew.

CHapman versus Pescod, Trin. 11. Jac. rotulo 2106. An Action of The Defendant
pleads, that be was ready to grant, and naught.
Debt brought upon an Obligation, with a Condition to give and grant to him,
his Heirs, and Assigns. The Defendant pleads, that he has been ready to give
and grant; and adjudged naught, for he must plead that he did it, otherwise it
had been, if the words had been as Council should devise.

MAncester versus Draper, Hill. 10. Jac. rotulo 2613. An Action of Debt brought
upon a Bond, with a Condition to pay Money, if C. R. shall be then living, and
shall before the same 20. Day of O. by due form and course in Law perfect,
levy, and knowledge a Fine, and a Recovery before his Majesty's Justices of his
Highness Court of Common Pleas, of and in certain Houses and Tenements, with
the Appurtenances which the said Draper lately had and purchased of the said C.
R. the Defendant pleads that C. R. was living, and did not levy, etc. and a
Demurrer, and the Question was, whether Draper or To. should levy the Fine, and
held, that Draper should levy the Fine.

BAker versus Pain, Hill. 10. Jac. rotulo 3139. An Action of Debt No Demand
necessary.
brought upon a Bond to pay Rent, and perform all the Covenants, Grants,
Payments, and Conditions contained in a pair of Indentures: and the Defendant
pleads the Indenture and performance thereof. The Plaintiff assigns the
Breach, that the Defendant had not paid the Money. The Defendant replies, that
the Plaintiff had entered into part of the Premises the Day before the Day of
Payment, and so at Issue upon that; and Exception was taken, because the
Plaintiff had alleged no Demand to be made, and the Court held, that was
implied by the Issue, and that it was not necessary.

Friar Administrator of Mary Costiden, of the Goods not administered by Mary
Friar Executrix of the said M. C. versus Jacobum Note this diligently.
Gildiich Executor of N. Pope, Hill. 11. Jac. rotulo 1990. The case was this,
two were bound to one, and the Obligee makes the Wife of one of the Obligers
his Executrix, and one of the Obligers makes the same Woman Executrix, and she
dies, and the Plaintiff takes Administration of the Goods of the Woman not
administered; and Judgment was given for the Defendant by the whole Court. If
an Executor has a Lease, and purchases the Fee-simple, the Lease is gone, but
it shall be Assets in the Executors hands, if a persnal thing be once gone, it
is extinct for ever. If the Husband had survived the Wife, he should be charged.

HArcock Executor of Harcock, versus Wrenham Administrator of Fully
administered, no good Plea by an Administrator to a Scire sacias to revive a
Judgment had against the Intestate.
Wrenham, Hill. 11. Jac. rotulo 1963. A Scire facias brought to revive a
Judgment had against the Intestate, and the Defendant pleads, Plene
administravit, which was held a naughty Plea by the whole Court, for he cannot
pay so much as Funerals, before he pay the Judgment, and therefore that
general fully administered is naught. The Jury found that the Intestate in trust
conveyed one Lease to Fisher, and that Fisher promised upon the Payment of 300.
l. to re-assure the Interest to Wrenham, and after his Death the Administrator
the Defendant preferred a Bill in the Chancery as Administrator against Fisher,
and that the Chancery ordered that Fisher should pay the Defendant for his
Interest in the Lease more then the sum received, the sum of 1060. l. which
was paid the Defendant accordingly; and whether that should be Assets was the
Question, and it was held to be Assets. If an Executor make gain of the
Testators Money, that gain shall be Assets: the Doubt in this case was, because
this was but in Use; and now whether the Court shall take notice of this Use,
they shall being found by the Jury, Judgments shall be paid before Statutes or
Recognances: and Judgment was given for the Plaintiff: and although in this
case the Bar of generally administered be naught, yet an Issue taken thereupon
and tried, shall not arrest the Judgment for the Plaintiff.

PEase and Stilman Executors, Hanchet against E. Meade, Mich. An Executor an
Assignee in Law.
11. Jac. rotulo 945. An Action of Debt brought upon an Obligation, with a
Condition, if Meade his Executors, Administrators, or Assigns, or any of them
shall pay 20. l. within the Porch of the Parish Church of R. unto such person
or persons as the said Hanchet shall by her last Will and Testament in writing
limit, nominate or appoint, the same to be made in manner, etc. The Defendant
pleads that the said Hanchet by her last Will and Testament in writing has not
nominated, limited, or appointed, to what person or persons the said 20. l.
should be paid. The Plaintiff replies, and sues, that the Testator made him
Executor, and died, and that he took upon him the burden of the Will, and that
the Defendant did not pay the Executor the Money: and a Demurrer thereupon. And
if it had been to pay to her Assignee, that she should name the Executor should
have it: such things as go by way of Executorship shall be to the Executor,
without nomination or appointment.

STannard versus Baxster, Trin. 9. Jac. rotulo 1123. An Action of Nota.
Debt brought for Damages, recovered in an Assise of Nuzans, for stopping the
way, before special Commissioners. The Defendant pleads no such Record, and the
Record was delivered into the Court by the special Commissioners.

TRin. 8. Jac. rotulo. An Action of Debt brought upon a Bond, Nota.
with a Condition, for performance of Covenants of an Indenture. The Defendant
confesses the Bond, and that after the making the Bond, and before the
purchasing the Plaintiffs Writ, the Indenture by the consent and assent of
Plaintiff and Defendant was cancelled: and the said Plaintiff cancelled the
said Indenture: and it was held a naughty Plea by the said Court; for it did
appear but that the Bond might be forfeited. For he ought to have pleaded
performance of Covenants until such a Day, which Day the Indenture was
cancelled.

BRook versus Smith, Hill. 9. Jacobi, rotulo 829. Two Tenements in Common make
a Lease, and reserve a Rent and Covenant that neither Nota.
should release, and one of them releaseth his part, this is a Breach, for that
in Debt they both should join, and now by the Release the Action is gone.

LAny versus Aldred, and another Executor, Trin. 10. Jac. vel An Executor by
wrong shall not by his Plea prejudice a rightful Executor.
Pasch. 9. Jac. rotulo 504. An Action of Debt brought against them as
Executors, one pleads that he was Administrator, and that the Administration
was committed to him by the Bishop, and pleads a Recovery against him as
Administrator, and that he had fully administered, and had no Assets to satisfy
the Judgment, and the other Executor acknowledged the Action; and the Plea was
held a good Plea: but it was said, the Defendant might have defeated the Action
which was brought against him as Executor, and therefore they would infer, that
it was no good Plea, but it was a good Plea; and it was held by the chief
Justice, that if an Executor of his own wrong be sued with a rightful Executor
in one Writ, the Executor of his own wrong shall not by his Plea prejudice the
rightful Executor.

MArsh versus Curtis, Hill. 38. Eliz. rotulo 132. An Action of Debt brought
upon an Obligation for performance of Covenants Condition of non-payment of
Rent to re-enter, the Rent was behind, but before re-entry accepted the Estate
is confirmed by the Acceptance.
in a Lease, upon which Rent is reserved, and the Condition was that if the
Rent should be behind, then lawful to re-enter, and the Rent was behind and
before re-entry the Rent was accepted. The Question was, whether he may enter
for the Condition broken after the acceptance of the Rent. Sir Edward Cook was
of opinion, that by the acceptance of the Rent he did confirm the Estate, but
if a Bond be entered into to perform Covenants in a Lease, whereupon Rent is
reserved, and a Fine to be paid, with a Condition of re-entry for not paying
the Rent or Fine, and if the Rent be received, and the Fine not paid, the
acceptance of the Rent does not take away the Condition for not paying the Fine.

R. Milton versus R. Pearsey, Trin. 10. Iacobi, rotulo 445. An The Defendants
name mis-taken in the Venire, and a new Trial awarded.
Action of Debt brought, and in the Venire facias the Defendants name was
mistaken, for the Venire was to impannell a Jury between R. Milton Plaintiff,
and I. Pearsey Defendant in a Plea of Debt, and the Court held the Venire as
none, and a new Trial awarded, and the like Judgment was given, Trin. 7.
Iacobi, rotulo 787. in the upper Bench.

BRownsworth versus Trench, Trin. 10. Iacobi, rotulo 3628. An Action of Debt
brought upon an Escape against a Bailiff of a Liberty, and after a Trial
Exception was taken to the Declaration, because it was not alleged therein,
that the Sheriff made a Warrant to the Bailiff upon the Execution, but it was
only alleged that at A. aforesaid, by virtue of the Warrant aforesaid, he
took the Prisoner, and says not, within his Liberty aforesaid, and the
Exception was held void.

Trin. 10. Iacobi. An Action of Debt brought by Executors, and No costs against
an Executor.
the Defendant pleads that the Plaintiffs were not Executors, and tried, and
found for the Defendant; and the Defendant upon the Statute for Costs desired
Costs, because the Jury found against the Plaintiff that he was not Executor;
and if a Verdict pass against one that is not an Executor, he shall pay Costs,
but Costs were denied by the whole Court, for the Jury might find an untruth.

BAlder versus Blackborn, Trin. 16. Iacobi, rotulo 465. An Action Devise of the
profits of the Land it self.
of Debt brought for Rent reserved upon a Lease for years, the Case: this Land
was devised to a Woman in this manner, that she should have the profits of the
Land until the Daughter of the Devisor should be eighteen years old; and the
Woman made the Lease in question reserving Rent, and afterward married, and
then died; and if the Husband after her Death should have the Land until the
Daughter of the Devisor came to eighteen years old, was the question, and
adjudged he should hold the Land for the Devise of the profits is the Devise of
the Land, and is not like a Lease made by a Guardian in Socage, which ends by
the De^ of the Guardian; the Declaration was for one Mesuage demised the fourth
of May 15. Jac. for one year, and so from year to year, as long as both parties
should agree, paying twenty four pounds by the year, and Nil debet per patriam,
was pleaded; and the Jury found it specially that one I. W. was seized of the
Tenement, and held it in Socage, and made it his last Will in writing, and by
that did devise to A. his Daughter the said Tenement, and her Heirs for ever,
at the full Age of eighteen years; the words of the Will were: Item, I will
that my Wife and Executrix shall have the Education of my Daughter, with the
portion of Money and profits of my Land to her own use without account, until
my Daughters Age aforesaid; provided she shall pay the out-rents, and keep her
Daughter at School, and by that Will made his Wife Executrix, and the said W.
died, and his Wife survived, and took upon her the Executorship and married
with one P. the Woman performed the Condition, and afterward died, and
Judgment was given for the Plaintiff, that it was a term, and that the
Husband should have it.

An Action of Debt was brought against an Executor, and the Case was thus,
Administration was committed to one during the minority Debt brought against an
Excutor after full age for Goods wasted by the Administrator during his
minority.
of the Executor who wasted the Goods of the Testator, and after the Executor
attained the Age of seventeen years an Action of Debt was brought against the
Executor, and the opinion of the Court was prayed whether he might plead
generally ne unques Executor, or excuse himself by pleading the special matter,
and the Court doubled, but most safe to plead the special matter.

An Action of Debt was brought for Rent reserved by Indenture payable at two
Feasts, or within twenty days then next following, and the Plaintiff declared
upon a Lease for the Rent, and because ten pound at the Feast of the
Anunciation, 10. Jacobi, was behind and unpaid, the Action was brought, the
Defendant pleads, Non demisit, and a Verdict for the Plaintiff, and after a
Trial exception was taken to the Declaration because it was not alleged that
the Rent was arrere at that Feast and twenty days after, but it was not
allowed after a Verdict, because he should have taken advantage thereof before.

RAtliff versus Executors, Pasch. 15. Jacobi. An Action of Debt brought upon an
Obligation to perform Covenants in an Indenture. The Defendant pleads
performance of the Covenants, the Plaintiff alleadges a breach upon this
Covenant that the Lessee should enjoy the Land without any lawful interruption
or disturbance of the Lessor or his Executors, and shows that the Executors
entered upon him in the Land, and outed him, and shows not any interruption for
any just cause, and adjudged good in the upper Bench.

WHitton versus Bye, Trin. 16. Jacobi, It was adjudged in the upper Release of
all Demands, a good Bar in Rent not then due.
Bench in an Action of Debt brought by a Lessor against a Lessee for years for
Rent reserved during the Term being behind and unpaid, that a Release pleaded
to be made by the Lessor to the Lessee six years before the Rent was arrere, of
all Demands, was a good Bar: One cannot reserve a Rent to a stranger it must
be reserved according to the privity.

WAinford Administrator Kirby versus Warner Trin. 13. Jacobi rotulo 1906. An
Action of Debt brought upon a Bond, to which the Defendant pleads that the
intestate was indebted to him in such a sum, and that he retained, etc. in his
hands to satisfy himself of the Debt due to him. And that he had not assets
over to satisfy the Plaintiff, to which Plea the Plaintiff demurrs, because he
did not plead generally fully administered, but an Exception was taken, because
he showed not that the Condition of the Bond was for payment of Money.

STone versus Goddard, Trin. 14. Jacobi, rotulo 2258. An Action of Judgment
arrested for improper words without an Anglice.
Debt brought upon diverse Emissets of diverse Wares, Videlicet, unum ahenum for
five shillings, unum scabum for six shillings, and so diverse other words which
the Court could not understand what they signified, in regard no Anglice was
put to them: and the Defendant pleaded Nil debet per patriam, and the Jury gave
a Verdict for the Plaintiff, and Damages given for the whole Debt, and moved in
Arrest of Judgment, and Judgment that the Plaintiff should have no Judgment
for the insufficiency of his Declaration.

WEeks versus Wright, unum Clericorum R. B. The Plaintiff exhibited The want of
a Bill not helped by the Statute of Jeofayles.
a Bill against the Defendant for Money due upon an Obligation, and Issue was
joined, and the Cause tried, and a Verdict for the Plaintiff; and after Trial
the Defendant moved in Arrest of Judgment, that the Bill was not filed, and
that it was not helped by the Statute of Jeofayles, nor within that Statute,
for it is an Original, but afterward the Court granted that a new Bill should
be filed, so that the matter might be put to arbitrament, and if the
Arbitrators could not determine the matter the Court would. And note, the Court
seemed to be of an opinion that the want of a Bill is not helped by the Statute.

WItchoct and Linesey versus Nine, Trin. 9. Jacobi, rotulo 726. To forbid no
Breach.
An Action of Debt brought upon an Obligation, to perform the Covenants
contained in an Indenture, the Covenant was for quiet enjoying without let,
trouble, interruption, etc. The Plaintiff assigned his Breach that he forbad
his Tenant to pay his Rent; this was held by the Court to be no Breach, unless
there were some other Act; and the Defendant pleaded, that after the time the
Plaintiff said, that he forbad the Tenant to pay the Rent, the Tenant did pay
the Rent to the Plaintiff.

LEvel versus Hall, Pasch. 9. Jac. rotulo 805. An Action of Debt The Defendant
pleads a Plea by which he pretends the Plaintiff to be barred in another Suit,
but no Bar.
brought upon an Obligation, to which the Defendant pleads, that the Plaintiff
brought another Action upon the same Bond in London, to which the Defendant
there had pleaded Non est factum, and it was there found that it was not the
Defendants Deed, and in London the Entry is upon such a Verdict, that the
Defendant shall recover Damages against the Plaintiff, and that the Defendant
should be without day, etc. but no Judgment, that the Plaintiff should take
nothing by his Writ, and therefore no Judgment to be barred in another Suit,
but bar the Plaintiff, for it is only a trial, and no Judgment, and the
Plea was adjudged naught by the whole Court.

MIch. 15. Jac. Rotulo 2215. One made another his Executor, and One by his own
Election, cannot be Executor for part, and not for part.
that Executor died, and made another his Executor, and the last Executor
refused to own his first Will, as to his goods, and this matter was pleaded in
his Action of Debt, brought by an Administrator of the Goods of the first
Executor, pretending the Administration was void, although the Executor refused
to be Executor, as to the Goods, and the Court held the Administration void,
for the Executor cannot be Executor, for part at his own Election, and not for
part, and the Defendant pleaded that the Executor should not bring his Action
as Administrator, but as Executor.

WHerwood versus Shaw, Mich. 44. and 45 Eliz. Shaw Executor Tenants in common.
of A. brought an Action of Debt against Wherwood Administrator of Field, upon
a Bill made by Field to A. by which Field does acknowledge himself to have
received of one P. forty l. to be equally divided between the said A. and B. to
their use, and upon a Judgment given in the Common Pleas, Wherwood brings a
Writ of Error and the Judgment was affirmed, the matters moved were, i.
because the forty pounds was given to be equally divided between A, and B.
therefore they were Tenants in common of it, and Shaw should have joined B. in
the Action with himself, as Tenants in common are to join in personal action,
but overruled, that in this case there were several Debts, to wit twenty
pound to one, and twenty Several Debts.
pounds to the other, as in case of ten pounds rent reserved upon a Lease, to
wit five pounds at the Feast of Michaelmas, and five pounds at the Feast of the
Annunciation, yet it is but one Rent, and this case is not to be resembled to
the Cases of Interest, as in the 20 Eliz. where Land or Lease be given to two
equally to be divided, for there they are Tenants in common. The second thing
moved was, whether Debt or account did ly, and adjudged that although no
contract was between the parties, yet when either money or goods are delivered
Debt lies by him to whose use money is delivered.
upon consideration to the use of A. A. may have an Action of Debt, and of that
opinion was Mountain, 28 H. 8. in Core and Woods Case, and also there is a
President of such Actions of Debt in the Book of Entries. Debt upon a Statute
of Perjury, at a Commission issuing out of Chancery not ly.


BRoad versus Owen, Mich. 44 and 45 Eliz. The Plaintiff brought an Action of
Debt upon the Statute of 5 Eliz, for Perjury against the Defendant; the case
was thus, one Low was Plaintiff against Broad in the high Court of Chancery,
and upon Bill and Answer such matter appeared to the Lord Keeper, that he
ordered that one Labourer should become party to the Bill against Broad, and
afterward one Commission issued out of Chancery between Labourer and Broad, to
examine Witnesses, by which Commission Owen the now Defendant was examined on
the behalf of Labourer, and did depose directly for Labourer against Broad, by
reason whereof one Order and Decree was made in the Chancery against Broad, and
for that cause Broad brought his Action of Debt against Owen, upon the Statute
of Perjury, 5 Eliz. for one party grieved by the Oath and Deposition of
another, and Owen demurrs in Law; and by the opinion of Gaudy and Yelverton
Justices, the Action would not lie, for the words of the Statute are where a
man is grieved: and damnified by a Deposition in one Suit between party and
party, and in this Case it appeared that Labourer was no party to the Suit, but
came in by an Order, and no Bill depending either against him, or brought by
him, and so out of the Statute, for it is penal and to be taken strictly: and
quaere if he in the Reversion join in aid, and is grieved and prejudiced by an
Oath and Deposition may maintain an Action of Debt upon this Statute, for he
may undoubtedly by the Common Law have an Attaint.

GReen versus Gascoin, Pasch. 1. Jacobi. An Action of Debt brought Outlary
pleaded in Bar, and Null. tiel record pleaded, and in the mean time the Outlary
reversed Judgment that the Defendant should answer over.
upon an Obligation for an hundred pounds, to which the Defendant pleads in
Bar to the Action an Outlary against the Plaintiff, and shows it uncertain,
the Plaintiff replies Null. tiel, record; and the Defendant had Day till the
next Term to bring in the Record, and in the mean time the Plaintiff reverses
the Outlary, by which it is become in Law no Record, according to the 4 H. 7.
12. And Yelverton moved the Court for the Defendant, that although in Law there
was a Failer of the Record, yet the Defendant ought not to be condemned, but
shall answer over according to the 6. of Eliz. Dier fol. 228. where it is
adjudged that Failer of the Record is not peremptory, and so adjudged, for it
was no Default in the* Defendant, his Plea being true at such time as it was
pleaded with mark.

WEaver versus Clifford. Action of Debt brought for an Escape, No Escape lies
against a Sherif upon a Capias upon a Recognisance out of the Chancery.
the Case was thus upon the Nichils returned against a Conusor in Chancery a
Capias was awarded out of the Chancery against him, by virtue of which he was
taken by the Sheriff, and suffered to escape, and adjudged that no Action would
lie against the Sheriff in this Case, for a Capias lies not upon a
Recognisance, but only a Scire facias, and therefore when a man is taken upon
the Capias he is not a Prisoner by the course of Law, for the Law has not
ordained any means to arrest him, and is therefore in Custody without Warrant,
and no Escape, and it is an illegal Commitment, and so is the ^ratu^e of
Westminster, the 2. to b^ const^ued which g^ Action against the the Gaolor, to
wit, where the party is in Execution by course of Law, and although the
Chancery does award a Capias upon a Recognisance, and that there are diverse
Pre^^lents of it; et it is b^t the use of that Court only, which may not step
the ^udges mouths, but that they ought to judge according to Law, and this was
the opinion of Popham, Yelverton. Gaudy, but Fennor doubted, for he thought the
awarding of the Capias one^y erroneous, and not void; and Sergeant Tanfield and
the Attorney General showed a precise Judgment in the Case, 21 Eliz. in the
Exchequer Cl^ment Pastons Case, against whom an Action of Debt was brought for
suffering one to escape who was taken by virtue of a Capias upon a
Recognisance, and the three Judges held strongly their opinion.

PVdsey versus Newsam, Mich. 1. Jacobi. An Action of Debt brought upon an
Obligation for five hundred pounds, with a Condition, that if the Defendant
before Mich. do make knowledge, and suffer, etc. all and every such reasonable
Act and things whatsoever they be for the good and lawful assuring and sure
making of the Manor Request to make Assurance generally and good.
of D. to J. S. and his Heirs, that then, etc. The Defendant pleads that before
Mich. the Plaintiff had not reasonably required the Defendant to make any
reasonable Act or Acts which should be for the good and lawful assuring of the
Manor of D. The Plaintiff replies, that such a Day before Mich. he requested
the Defendant that he would convey and assure the Manor of D. to J. S.
according to the tenor of the Condition, and upon this they were at Issue, and
found for the Plaintiff, and it was moved in Arrest of Judgment, that no
sufficient Breach was assigned, for the Plaintiff ought to have required one
Assurance in certain which he would have had made, but the Exception was
overruled, and adjudged that the Issue was well joined, and the Condition
broken; for by the Condition the Defendant is to make all and every Act
whatsoever for the Assurance of the Manor of D. in so much that if the
Plaintiff should request one Fine, Feoffment, or Recovery, or Bargain and Sale,
the Defendant ought to make all, but they held he was not bound to make an
Obligation or Recognisance for the enjoying the Manor, for that is but
collateral Security, and is no Assurance. And when the Plaintiff requires the
Defendant to convey the Manor generally, the Defend. at his peril ought to do
it by any kind of Assurance; and if upon such Request the Defendant should
make a Feoffment of the Manor, yet if the Plaintiff afterward request one
Fine, the Defendant ought to acknowledge one Fine also, and so upon several
Requests he ought to make several Assurances, and so in making the Request
general, he had well pursued the Condition, and the Defendant ought at his
peril^ake every Assurance by the opinion of the whole Court.

ELlis versus Warnes, Trin. 2. Jacobi. An Action of Debt brought upon a Bond
for a hundred and twenty pounds, and the Case upon the pleading was, that
Warnes was indebted to one Ader a hundred pounds upon an usurious Contract, and
that Ader was indebted to Ellis in a hundred pounds, for which Warnes and Ader
were obliged to the Plaintiff, and Debt being brought upon that Obligation,
Warnes pleads the Usury between him and Ader to avoid the Bond; Ellis the
Plaintiff replies, that Ader before the making the Bond was indebted to him in
a hundred pounds, a just and true Debt, for Payment whereof VVarnes and Ader
were bound to him in the Bond in Suit, and that he was not in any wise knowing
of the Usury between Warner and Ader, and Warnes demurrs to this Plea; and
adjudged by Gaudy, Yelverton, and W. for the Plaintiff, for it is not Usury in
the Plaintiff, but only between Warnes and Ader, to which the Plaintiff being
not privy shall not be prejudiced, for although the Statute of Usury is to be
taken most strongly for the suppressing of Usury, yet it must be between such
parties as use Corruption, and not to punish the innocent, as the Plaintiff,
but if no Debt had been due to the Plaintiff before, then it had been clearly
Usury, for there had been no lawful Cause to make the Bond to him, but only
to countenance the Corruption between VVarnes and Ader; and Yelverton said,
that if the Defendants Plea be good, then every man may be defrauded of his
just Debt; for if the Bar shall be good by Corruption between the Debtor and
Surety, to which the Creditor is a mere stranger, a man may loose his Debt,
which is mischievous: but Popham and Fennor doubted of the Plaintiffs
Replication, that he ought to have took a Traverse upon the Defendants Bar,
which ought not to be; for how should he traverse a thing which could be within
his knowledge, and to which he was no party.

HArgrave versus Rogers, Mich. 2. Jacobi. Action of Debt brought, and Bail
given, that A. upon eight Days warning shall appear to an Action to be brought
by B. for the same Debt; and if A. shall be condemned in the Suit, and not pay
it, then the Bail would answer B. the Condemnation; and B. brought his Action
against A. in which A. was condemned, and did not pay, by reason whereof B.
brought an Action of Debt against the Bail upon the Recognisance, and set forth
the Suit against A. and the Condemnation, and that he had not satisfied it, but
showed not that it had eight Days warning to appear to the Action; and Fennor
and Yelverton held, that he need not show it, for the Condition of the
Recognisance depends upon two Clauses, one the Appearance at 8. Days warning,
the other is the satisfaction by the Bail, if P. should not pay the
Condemnation comprehended in these words (And) and in this Case the Action was
brought upon the second Clause, to wit, the Default of P. because he had not
answered the Condemnation, and therefore needless to meddle with that part of
the Condition. But if the Action had been brought, if the first Clause then B.
ought to have showed in certain the Warning to have been given by 8. Days; but
Popham, Gandy, and W. were of a contrary opinion, and that the Plaintiff of
necessity ought to show the Warning to have been given 8. Days, because that
part of the condition is not to be performed between parties, but an Estranger,
for A. is an Estranger, and the Bail is bound as well to answer such
Condemnation in such Action as shall be brought upon the eight Days Warning
given, for that is the ground of all; and it is no reason that A. by his
voluntary Appearance without eight Days Warning should Appearance upon
warning, and for default adjudged naught.
prejudice his Bail; but otherwise it had been if the Condition had been
between A. and B. for then if A. would appear without such Warning, it is his
folly, and no injury is done to one that is willing: and according to this
opinion the Plaintiff discontinued his Suit, and the Defendants were ordered to
put in new Bail with mark.

SIr Rich. Campion verse- Hill, Pasch. 3. Jac. An Action of Debt brought Action
of Debt upon the Statute of E. 6. for Tithes.
upon the Stat. of E. 6. for not setting forth of Tithes, and the Plaintiff
shows that the Rector of M. had 2. parts of the Tithes in 3. parts to be
divided, and that the Vicar of the same place had the third part of the Tithes,
and lays this by Prescription, as to the manner of the taking the Tithes, and
shows further, how the Parson and Vicar by several Leases had demised the
Tithes to him, and so he being Proprietor of the Tithes, the Defend. sowed 10.
Acres within the Parish, to wit, Wheat, Rye, etc. and carried it away without
setting forth the Tithe to his Damage, etc. And upon a Nil debet per patriam,
pleaded, it was found for the Plaintiff, and moved in Arrest of Judgment, that
the Plaintiff had in that Action comprised several Actions upon the Statute,
and that it appeared by his own showing, for the Plaintiff claimed not the
Tithes under one Title, but under the several Tithes of Parson and Vicar; and
Fennor Justice held they could not join, and no more could the Plaintiff who
claimed severally under them, and it seemed to him that the Parson could not
have this Action against several Tenants, for not setting forth their several
Tithes, because he could not comprehend two Actions in one; but the whole Court
besides held the contrary; for although the Parson and Vicar could not join in
this Case, because they claim their Tithes severally by divided Rights, yet
when both their Tithes are conjoined in one person; as it is in the Plaintiff,
then the the Interest of their Title is conjoined also in one, Sufficient to
say the Plaintiff is Proprietor without showing the Title.
and it suffices generally to show the Plaintiff is a Farmer or proprietor of
the Tithes, without saying of what Title, for it is but a personal action,
grounded merely upon a contempt against the Statute for not setting forth
Tithes, and also Tithes are not demanded by this Action, although the Title may
come in debate, yet it was agreed by all the Judges, that the Plaintiff should
recover his Tithes in damages, and shall not demand them again by any suit,
after a recovery in this Action, which Mark.

BErket versus Manning, Pasch. 3 Jacobi. Action of Debt brought Misprision of
the Clerk amended after Trial
against the Defendant, as Administrator of J. S. The Defendant pleads fully
administered, the Plaintiff replies that himself had assets and it should have
been that the Defendant had assets, and this was moved in arrest of Judgment,
but amended by the Court, being the Clerks misprision, only as where it is
entered, and predict. Defend. similiter, and it should have been, and predict.
quer. similiter, and this has been often amended by the Court.

PAler versus Hardman Pasch. Jacobi, Hardman and his wife Executrix, Judgment
reversed by Writ of error being in the disiunctive.
J. H. brought an Action of Debt in the common Pleas against Paler, and as that
they should restore a tun of Iron, to the value of twelve l. and declare upon a
Bill for the delivery of the said tun of Iron within such a time, and that the
Defendant had not delivered it to the Plaintiffes damage, of, etc. and upon
non est fact. pleaded it was found for the Plaintiff, and Judgment was given
that the Plaintiff should recover the Tun of Iron, or the value of the same,
and if he should render the tun then by the oath, etc. should inquire what the
tun of Iron was worth, and before any return of the writ to inquire of the
damages, the Plaintiff in the common Pleas takes out a Capias upon the
Judgment, and on Exigent upon that, and the Defendant brings a writ of Error,
and it was adjudged erroneous, for two causes, first because the Judgment was
in the disjunctive, that the Plaintiff should recover the tun of Iron, and if
not the value thereof, so in detinue, as it appears by the Judgment in this
Case, that the Plaintiff may choose whether he will have the Iron or the value
thereof, which he cannot do, for if the iron be to be delivered he shall
recover that only, but if it be not to be delivered, then the value, and not
as before. Secondly, for that the Judgment is not perfect until the writ to
inquire be returned, with issues to the Sheriff to distrain the Defendant to
render the Iron, and also to inquire of the value, and before the return
thereof, nothing in certain appears. One which to ground any writ of Execution
for the Judgment comprehends no certainty, but is to be made certain by the
return of the writ, to inquire with the whole Court granted.

CArpenter versus Collins, Mich. 3 Jacobi, An Action of Debt brought by the
Plaintiff for rent arere, and declares upon a Lease The Plaintiff had no
Interest but (...) rendering of the Land.
made to the Defendant at Will to be held from Mich. as long as both parties
should agree, yielding and paying three pounds yearly, and shows that Collins
entered and occupied from the Feast, etc. unto the Feast of Mich. and upon nil
debet before, the Jury foundthat J. Norrington had issue a Son and a daughter,
and Devises, that his Son shall have his Land, at the age of twenty four years,
and gives forty pounds to his Daughter, to be paid her at the age of two and
twenty years, an further wills that the Plaintiff should be his Executor, and
should repair to his houses, and have the oversight and doing of all his Lands
and moveable Goods, until the several ages aforesaid, and after dies and
Carpenter the Executor makes the Lease before mentioned, and the Jury further
find that the Son died, but find not at what age he was at his death, but that
the Daughter at the Sons death was nineteen and no more, and find the Lease
made by the Plaintiff, and that the Lessee by force thereof entered and
continued possession from Michaelmas for one year and more, and find that
within that year, the Daughter entered, and that the Defendant atturned to the
Daughter, and refused to continue Tenant to the Plaintiff, and by Fennor,
Yelverton and W. Judgment was given against the Plaintiff, for the Plaintiff
took no interest in the Land by the Will, for the oversight and doing of his
Lands shall be intended but in Right of the Heir, and to his use, because the
Testator though not his Son of discretion and government, until the age of
twenty four years, and in the mean time appointed his Executor to oversee and
order the Land to the profits of the He^^e that wanted discretion, 28 H. 8. D.
26. where it is declared that J. S. shall have as well the governing of, etc.
as the disposing, setting, letting, and ordering of his Lands, and by the Court
held that J. S. had them only to husband, for the profit of his children and
no otherwise, but he was of opinion that the Plaintiff had an estate in the Land
upon a limitation determinable at the Sons age of four and twenty years, and it
appears not at what age he died, being not found by the verdict, therefore it
is uncertain, and the Entry of the Daughter lawful, for the limitation looks
but to the age of the Son, and not to the age of the Daughter, for the age of
the Daughter shall be intended to be set down for the receipt of her legacy of
forty pounds, and for no other purpose, and the Defendant within the time in
which the Rent demanded, is supposed to be due, had not determined his Will, as
appears by the Verdict: but Fennor and W. said that by the Verdict that the
Defendant entered by force of the lease, and occupied the land at the time
comprised in the Declaration and more, and that the Tenant at will cannot
determine his will, within a little time before the year end, for that would
prove very mischeivous to the lessor, that his Tenant at will should determine
his will within the year, and refuse to occupy the land, twenty days before
the year end, and in 21 H. 7. Crooks Reports, it appears that a Lessee at will
cannot determine his will within the year to the prejudice of the Lessor, but
that he shall answer the whole Rent to the Lessor, but note it appeared, that
the Lessee at will was expulsed by the Plaintiff that was Lessor, and no other
Lessee at Will cannot determine his will within the year but must answer the
whole Rent.
thing, although done by his agreement can determine the Lease against the
Lessor, for it is Covin if the Lessee be not privy, and acquainted with it,
which was granted by the whole Court, and all of them agreed in the Title
against the Plaintiff, but as the Reporter affirmed, Popham was absent, and
hearing the Case, was of opinion that the Plaintiff had an interest by the words
of the will.

JEffry versus Guy Mich. 3. Jacobi, An Action of Debt brought upon The
Plaintiff not bound to allege a special breach, when the Defendants Plea
continues special matter.
an Obligation, with Condition, that if Jeffry the Defendant perform all
Covenants in such an Indenture, that then, etc. and one Covenant was, that he
should permit Guy the Plaintiff from time to time to come and see if the House
Leased by Guy. and K. his Wife were in repair, the Case was thus, J. Bill. and
K. his Wife were Tenants in Tail of a house, and had Issue, J. B. dies, K.
marries Guy the Plaintiff, and they two make a Lease by Indenture to Jeffry,
for twenty years, yielding and paying to them and their Heirs three pounds Rent
by the year, with the Covenant as aforesaid. Jeffry pleads in Bar the former
intail, and the death of R. and that VV. the Issue in Tail such a day entered,
before which Entry the Condition was not broken, Guy replies that William came
with him upon the Land, to see if reparations, etc. and traverses the Entry of
William in manner and form, prout, etc. and Issue joined upon the traverse, and
found for the Plaintiff, and Judgment given in the common Pleas, upon which
Judgment Jeffry brought Writ of Error in the Kings Bench, and Judgment
affirmed there, but it was assigned for Error, the Jury had not assigned any
breach of Covenant in Jeffry, and so had showed no cause of action, but the
Court held he need not in this Case, for by the special Issue tendered by
Jeffry, the Plaintiff was enforced, one special replication to that point
tendered, and the Plaintiff could not proceed error, and it is not like the
Case of an arbitrament, wherein Debt upon an Obligation to perform the award,
the Defendant pleads nullum fecer arbitrium, then the Defen^ in his replication
ought to set forth the award, and assign his breach, because the Defendants
Plea is general, but if in such Case the Defendant should plead a release of
all demands: after the Arbi-Arbitrement, by which he offers a special point in
Issue, there it suffices, if the Plaintiff answers to the Release, or other
special matter alleged by the Defendant, without assigning any Breach; so in
this Case the special Plea of the Defendant had disabled the Plaintiff, that he
could not assign any Breach of Covenants, but of necessity ought to answer to
the special matter alleged.

RAstell versus Draper, Mich. 3. Jacobi. An Action of Debt brought for nine and
thirty pounds, the Plaintiff declares that the first of Debt for Flemish Money,
but demanded by the name of 39. l. English.
May, primo Iacobi, sold to the Defendant twenty Northern Clothes for sixty
pounds Flemish Money, to be paid upon Request, which sixty pounds Flemish Money
amount to nine and thirty pounds English Money; and that the Defendant, though
often requested, had not paid the nine and thirty pounds, to his Damages of,
etc. The Defendant pleads Nil debet per patriam, and found for the Plaintiff,
and moved in Arrest of Judgment, that the Plaintiff should have demanded the
sum according to the Contract, which was for sixty pounds Flemish, and to have
showed, that it amounts to nine and thirty pounds English, but the whole Court
against it; for the Debt ought to be demanded by a name known, and the Judges
are not skilled in Flemish Money: and also when the Plaintiff has his
Judgment, he could not have his Execution by that name; for the Sheriff cannot
tell how to levy the Money in Flemish; and also it is made good by the Verdict,
for the Jury have found the Debt demanded, to wit, nine and thirty pounds. But
if the Contract had been for so many Ounces of Flemish Money, or a Bar of
Silver and Gold, now it cannot be demanded by the name of twenty pounds, or
such a sum, which is not Coin, nor used in Trade or Merchandise, but in such
Case must have a Writ of Detinue, and in that recover the thing, or the value;
and so in the Book of Entries, fol. 157. is the President, where Debt was
brought upon two several Obligations, and demands eight and twenty pounds, and
declares severally, that by one Obligation he owed eight and twenty pounds of
Flemish Money, and 34 H. 6. 12. and 9 E. 4. 46. But note in that Case, the
Plaintiff if he would might have declared in the Detinet, and it had been good.

Rolls versus Osborn, Mich. 3. Jac. The Plaintiff brought an Action of Debt
against the Defendant upon a Bond of a thousand If the Obligor marry the
Obligee, the Bond gone.
pounds, and Sergeant Nichols moved the Court for the Defendant, and showed
that the Plaintiff and Defendant were obliged each to other in a thousand
pounds a piece, that they should intermarry before such a Day, and both their
Obligations were forfeited, and each of them sued the other; and the Defendant
prayed that common Bail might be accepted of her, and she would accept of
common Bail of the Plaintiff; and the Court held it reasonable, but said, if
they would marry, both their Bonds might be saved.

BArneshurst versus Yelverton, Hill. 3. Jacobi. The Plaintiff as Administrator
Judgment obtained by an Administrator, and after Administration revoked, and
party took in Execution, and delivered, because erroneous.
of I. S. brought an Action of Debt against the Defendant, upon a Bond, and
obtained a Judgment, and afterward the Administration is revoked, yet
notwithstanding the Plaintiff proceeded, and took the Defendant in Execution;
and upon a Motion in the Court, the Court held the Execution void, and that the
Defendant ought to be discharged, because it issued out erroneously; for the
Letters of Administration being revoked, the power of the Plaintiff is gone,
and determined, for he prosecuted the Suit in another Right, and is but a
Minister of the Ordinary; and then when the Ground of the Suit is over-thrown,
to wit, his Commission, he has no Authority to proceed further, and the
Execution issued without Warrant. And the like Law upon a Judgment had upon an
Administrator, the second Administrator shall not have Execution by it, for he
has no privity to the Record; which mark.

ANdrews versus Robbins, Trin. 4. Jacobi. The Plaintiff brought To plead an
Appearance, and not say, Prout patet per Recordum, na^g^
Debt upon an Obligation made to him as Sheriff, with a Condition, that the
Defendant should appear; and Crook said that the Defendant had pleaded his
Appearance, and had omitted to say, as it appears by the Court, and it was held
a gross Fault, but the Record being perused, it appeared to be otherwise; for
the Case was, that the Defendant was obliged to make an Obligation to appear in
the Kings Bench at a day prefixed in the Writ and that the Defendant pleaded
there was no day prefixed in the writ for his Appearance; and Crook moved that
it was no Plea, for the Defendant was estopped, to which the Court agreed, that
he was estopped, and Williams said, that if a man be bound to pay a hundred
pounds, that I. S. owes to him, he cannot plead that I. S. does not owe him a
hundred pounds; and Tanfield said, if it were to pay all sums that I. S. owed
him, he isconcluded: and so it is held, 3 Eliz. Dyer. And the Court commanded
Judgment to be entered for the Plaintiff, if no cause showed tothe contrary such
a day.

JAckson versus Kirton, Trin. 4. Jacobi. In Common Pleas an Action of Debt
brought upon an Obligation, the Condition was, that if Nota.
A. would render himself to an Arrest in such a place, etc. The Defendant
pleads, that by Privilege of Parliament, those of the Parliament, and their
necessary Servants ought not to be arrested by the space of forty Days before
the Parliament, nor sitting the Parliament, nor forty Days after; and sets
forth that A. was a Servant to such a man of the Parliament at such a time, so
that he could not render himself to be arrested; to which the Plaintiff
demurrs; and the opinion of the Court was for the Plaintiff; for A. might
render himself, and let it be at their peril, if they will arrest him.

MArkham versus Jerux, Hill. 4. Jac. Action of Debt brought upon a Bond, with a
Condition to stand to the Award, Arbitrament, Award void for the incertainty,
for being the Judgment of one it ought to have plainness and certainty.
etc. of Master Porley of Grays Inn, about the Title of one Copyhold Tenement,
M. P. awarded, etc. that the Defendant should pay to the Plaintiff six pounds
upon the 21 May, 3 Jac. at such a place, to wit, in the Church Porch of C. and
further awards that the Plaintiff by his Deed should release to the Defendant
his whole Right, etc. upon the said (...) Day of May at the same place upon the
payment of the Money: and in another Clause of the Award he awarded that the
Plaintiff should make further Assurance to the Defendant for the extinguishing
of his Title, as should be advised, etc. And Yelverton moved that this
Arbitrament was void, and is in a manner no Award, for it is repugnant and
insensible; for although it be certain at what Day the Defendant should pay the
six pounds, yet it does not appear when, nor upon what Day the Plaintiff should
release to the Defendant, for there is no such first Day of May in the whole
Award, and it is not bound or tied to any year of the King, so that it is
altogether uncertain; and although it may be collected that the Arbitrator did
intend the 21. Day of May, because it is appointed to be made upon the payment
of the six pounds, which was the 21. May, yet it is not expressed but only by
way of inference and implication: and it was objected, that admit the Award to
be void in that part, yet it is good in the residue, which is to be performed
by the Plaintiff, to wit, the making of better assurance; to which Yelverton
answered, that all the Clauses in one Award are material, and the Clause of
further assurance depends upon the repugnant Clause of the Release to be made;
for the Award appoints that the Release is to be made upon the said first Day
of May, whereas no such Day in the whole Award, shall be the first assurance;
and the assurances which were to be made by the following Clause were in the
intention of the Arbitrator, to be for the strengthening of the first Release,
which was granted; and the Court said, there was much difference between Wills
and Deeds, and between Arbitrements; for Deeds, etc. shall be construed
according to the intent of the parties, and upon the words to be collected out
of the Deeds; but an Award, is of the nature of a Judgment, and Sentence in
which ought to be plainness, and no collection of the intent and meaning of
the Arbitrators; for how it ought to be his Judgment, and not the Judgment of
another upon the words of the Arbitrator; and Tanfeild said, it had been
adjudged, that where the Arbitrator did award, that one of the parties should
become bound to the other in the sum of, and no sum in certain, but a space
left for the sum, that it was void: and if an Arbitrament be void in one
Clause, although it be good in all Clauses, yet it is in Law no Award; for a
Judgment ought to be plain, certain, and perfect in all things: but if the
Arbitrators award, that one of the parties, and J. S. an Estranger shall do
such a thing, that is good; as to the party who is within the Submission, and
void only to I. S. the Estranger, 19 E. 4.

ATkins versus Gardener, Pasch. 5. Jac. The Plaintiff being President Judgment
obtained by President of the College of Phisicians, his Successor after his
Death, and not his Executor shall have Execution.
of the College of Phisicians in London, brought an Action of Debt against the
Defendant, for practicing Physic upon the Charter made to them by H. 8. that
none should practice Physic in London, nor within seven Miles thereof, except
such as were authorized by them, and gives them Authority to impose Fines upon
such as shall practice Physic, which Charter was confirmed by Act of
Parliament in 14 H. 8. and he obtained Judgment upon the Statute, to recover a
sum for himself, and the College, and before Execution the President died,
and whether the Successor should have Execution, and 8 E. 1. was cited, and
diverse other Books to that purpose.

STamford versus Cooks, Pasch. 5. Jacobi. An Action of Debt brought Assurance.
upon an Obligation, with a Condition, that the Defendant should seal such
Assurances as should be devised by the Plaintiff, and that the Assurance should
be of Copyhold Land; and the Plaintiff devised that the Defendant should seal
a Letter of Attorney made to one to surrender the Copyhold for him, and also
seal one Bond for the enjoying thereof; and the Plaintiff offered these
Writings to the Defendant to seal, and he refused, and upon such Refusal the
Plaintiff brought his Action, and a Verdict was given for the Plaintiff; and
Sergeant Yelverton moved in Arrest of Judgment, that the Plaintiff ought not
to have Judgment; for he said, that the Defendant was not bound and
compellable to seal that Obligation, because it was not in Law any Assurance,
but a collateral thing; and the whole Court agreed that; and therefore being
the Action was brought for refusing to seal the Obligation and Letter of
Attorney, and the Judgment according it ought to be arrested: but Cock said,
that Judgment ought not to be arrested, for the Premises of the Delaration, it
appeared that he refused to seal the Letter of Attorney, and thereupon
concluded, that it should not be arrested: and Fennor said, that the Letter of
Attorney was not any such Assurance, as the Law required in such Case; for when
he had made the Surrender, it should be accounted the Surrender of him that
made the Assurance, and he said, he should make a present Assurance of it: but
Tanfeild was of another opinion, and said, that when the Surrender was made, it
shall be said to be the immediate Surrender of him that made the Letter of
Attorney, and such an assurance as the Law required, and Yelverton, Justice,
said, the Letter of Attorney was lame for this cause, the Letter of Attorney
was made to one, for the surrendering of such a Copyhold, and did not say in
the Letter of Attorney for him, and in his name, for otherwise, the Copyhold
might be the Copyhold of him that surrendered by virtue of the Letter of
Attorney, and then he should surrender his own Copyhold; but Tanfeild was of
another opinion, because he said in the Letter of Attorney, that he did
constitute and appoint, and in his stead and place put such a one, which words
in his stead and place, are as full, as if he should have said, in his name.

HOllingworth versus Huntley, Pasch. 5 Jacobi, An Action of Debt brought upon
an Obligation, the Condition, amongst many other things, contained that the
Husband and Wife being Lessees for life of certain Lands, that if the said
Husband and Wife should levy a Fine to an estranger, at the Costs and Charges
of an estranger, and also that they should levy a Fine of other Lands, that
they also held for their lives to an estranger, and at their Charge, then, etc.
the Obliger says that the Husband and Wife did offer to levy the Fine, if the
estranger, to whom the Fine was to be delivered would bear their Charges, the
Obligee demurres, and it was adjudged for the Plaintiff, because the levying
the second Fine had not any reference to the other, because they are two
distinct sentences, and these words, and also make them so.

Man versus Somerton, Pasch. 5. Jacobi, The Plaintiff being Parson Tithe shall
be paid of Wood above twenty years growth, if it be not Timber.
of Henley, brought an action of Debt for six hundred pounds upon the Statute
of (...). 6. for not setting forth Tithe of Wood, and the Plaintiff shows that
the Defendant had cut down two hundred loads of Wood, to the value of two
hundred pounds, and says, the tenth part of that did amount to two hundred
pounds, and so he brought his action for six hundred pounds upon the Statute,
and the Plaintiff was nonsuit, for one fault in his Declaration, for whereas
he names the price of the Wood to be two hundred pounds, it was mistaken, for
it should have been two thousand pounds, for he demanded more for the tenth
part, then the principal is, by his own showing, and Tanfeild Justice held
that Beech by the common Law is not Timber, and so it was adjudged in Carry and
Pagets Case, and it was held, that Tithes shall not be paid for Beech above the
growth of twenty years in a common Country for Wood, as in Buckingham-shire,
for there it is reputed Timber, but in a plentiful Country, of Wood, it is
otherwise, for there it is not Timber and Tithes shall be paid for such wood,
Silva cedua, for which Tithes shall be paid, is under the growth of twenty
years, but Tithes shall be paid for such wood which is not Timber, which is
above the growth of twenty years.

PErcher versus Vaughan Trin. 5. Jac. An action of Debt brought Variance
between the Obligation and count shall not be showed after imparlance
upon an Obligation for six pounds thirteen shillings eight pence. The
Defendant demands Oyer of the Obligation, and imparles, and after an imparlance
the Defendant comes and says there was variance between the Plaintiffes writ,
and the Obligation, for it appeared by the Obligation that the Defendant was
obliged in viginti nobilis, and so his action ought to be brought according to
the Obligation, and demands Judgment, if the Plaintiff ought to have his
action, the Plaintiff demurres, and it was argued by the Plaintiffes counsel,
first, that it was no variance, for it was said that twenty nobles, and six
pounds thirteen shillings eight pence, were all one in substance, if a man be
bound to pay a hundred nobles, and brings his action for fifty marks, it is not
variance, 34 H. 8. 12. and 4 E. 3. Fitzherbert, Title varians, 102. agrees to
that, but if a man be obliged to pay certain money in Flemish money, he ought
to show the performance of that strictly, 9 Ed. 4. 49. and the Plaintiffes
counsel said that it was variance, it could not be showed after an Imparlance
in Marks Case, Co. 5. 74. and said the conclusion of the Defendants Plea to
demand Judgment of the Plaintiff, ought to have his action, was not good, for
this Plea was not in bar of the action, but in abatement of the Writ, and
Yelverton, Justice, agreed to that, and he said when the Obligation was in
viginti nobilis, it shall be intended twenty nobles, and good. Tanfeild said,
that when there is no good and apt Latin words, for a thing, and no unapt
Latin word is put in the Bond for that thing, the Bond is void, as when a man
is bound in quinque libris, it it was adjudged in Mich. Term, 5 Jac. that the
Obligation was void, because there was a fit Latin word, and that was quinque,
and so it was adjudged in the Lord Danvers Case, where the Indictment for one
blow super capud, and it was held void, because it was an unapt word, and there
was a fit and apt word, to wit Caput, and Williams agreed to this, for he said
it was adjudged in the common Pleas, between Pencrosse and Tout, a man was
bound in a Bond in viginti literis, when it should have been viginti libris,
and adjudged void for the same cause, but after in Hillary Term the Plaintiff
had Judgment, because in one Dictionary nobilis was a Latin word for six
shillings eight pence.

VEntris versus Farmer, Trin. 5. Jacobi. A Lease was made for Demand of Rent
must be at the place of Payment.
years, rendering Rent payable at a place of the Land: and the Court was moved,
whether a Demand of the Rent may not be made upon the Land, but denied by the
whole Court; for they said, that the Demand must be made at the place of
payment, although it be of the Land.

FIeld versus Hunt, Mich. 5. Jacobi. Hunt in Worcester Court obtained
Judgment reversed in an inferior Court for want of this word Dicit.
a Judgment after a Verdict in Debt upon a Contract, for twenty Sheep, and
after it was removed by a Writ of Error into the Kings Bench, and general
Errors assigned: but upon opening the Errors, it was showed the Court that
there was no Declaration in Worcester Court; for the Declaration was thus,
Raphael Hunt complains against H. Field of a Plea, that he render to him twenty
pounds which he owes unto him, and unjustly detains, and whereof the same
Plaintift by M. his Attorney, whereas the said Defendant, etc. and by Fennor,
VVillams, and Cook, it is no Declaration for Default of this word Dicit, and
the sense is imperfect: and although Yelverton objected, that a Declaration is
sufficient, if it be good, to a common intent; and Quer. being writ short, it
may be Queritur, and then it is, and whereof the same complains; but the Court
held that would not help, for it is not certain to whom the word Idem should
refer, whether to the Plaintiff or Defendant, and of the two it should rather
refer to the Defendant which is the next Antecedent; and the Court held it
matter of substance which is wanting, and therefore naught; but if it had been
4. and whereof the same Raphael quer. being writ short, it had been good; for
because the party Plaintiff is certainly named, and then Quer. could have no
other sense then Queritur, and Judgment reversed, which mark.

HArrison versus Fulstow, Mich. 5. Jacobi. The Plaintiff brought Action of Debt
for fourscore and six pounds, in the Common Want of an Original after a Verdict
no Error, but a vicious Original is Error.
Pleas, against T. Harrison, and the Capias was continued accordingly against
T. Harrison, but the Plur. capias was against William Harrison, which was the
very name of the Defendant, and that was but for fourscore and five pounds,
which varied from the first Entry; and William Harrison appeared upon the
Exigent, and the Plaintiff declares against William, and he pleads, and they
are at Issue by the name of William, and a Verdict for the Plaintiff, and
Judgment accordingly against William, and upon a Writ of Error it was assigned
for Error, that the Original did not maintain the Proceedings, for the Original
is against Tho. and the Proceedings against William: and the Plaintiffs Counsel
would have excused it, because the Judgment being against William, and the
Original against Tho. as it is certified, it cannot be the Original against
William, and so the Judgment against William being without Original it is
aided by the Statute after a Verdict: but the Court held it to be Error; for
there is great Difference between no Original and a naughty Original; for the
want of an Original is helped, but not a vicious Original, and Judgment was
reversed; for upon Diminution alleged, that this Original was certified as
the Original in that Suit, or else there was no Obtulit at all.

LOthbury versus Humfrey, Mich. 5. Jacobi. Lothbury and his Wife Administratrix
of VV. R. brought an Action of Debt as Administrator Plea naught for want of a
Traverse.
upon an Obligation of forty Marks, dated 4. April, 38 Eliz. made by the
Defendant to the Intestate, 1. the Defendant pleades that Ridge the Intestate.
October, the first Jacobi. made his Will, and made the Defendant his Executor,
and devised the Obligation, and the Money therein contained to one H. Son of
the Defendant, and died, after whose Death the Defendant takes upon him the
burden of the Executorship, and administers diverse Goods of Ridges, and that
he is ready to aver this: to which Plea the Plaintiff demurrs generally, and
adjudged for the Plaintiff; for the Defendants Plea is not good without a
Traverse, that Ridge died intestate. For the Action is brought as
Administrator, and they count upon a dying intestate, and that being the ground
of the Action ought to be traversed, as it is 9 H. 6. 7. Debt brought against
one as Administrator of J. and counts that J. died intestate; the Defendant
pleads that J. made his Will, and made him Executor, and held no Plea without a
Traverse; and the same Law, 7 H. 6. 13. Debt brought against one R. Executor of
R the Defendant pleads that R. died intestate at such a place, and held no
Plea; for if the Plaintiff maintain that R. made the Defendant Executor, and
the other say, that R. died intestate at such a place, this makes no Issue, and
therefore the Defendant ought to traverse that R. died intestate without that,
that he made him Executor, and 4 H. 7. 13. the very Case in question is
adjudged, that such a Plea in Bar is not good, without a Traverse, to wit, to
say without that, that R. died intestate, according to the 3 H 7. 14. and this
was agreed by the whole Court without Argument.

CHeyney versus Sell, Mich. 5. Jac. Cheyney as Executor of Cheyny, Nota.
brought an Action of Debt upon an Obligation against Sell, and the case was,
that the Testator had put himself as an Apprentice to Sell for seven years, and
Sell bound himself to pay to his Apprentice, his Executors, or Assigns 10 l.
at the time of the end or determination of his Apprentiship, the Apprentice
serves six years, and then dies, and it was moved by Towse that the Money was
due at the time of his Death, because then his Apprentiship ended, for he said,
if a man make a Lease for one and twenty years to another, and oblige himself
to pay to the Lessee ten pounds at the end and expiration of his Term, and
within those years the Lessor infeoffes the Lessee, so the term expires, and
the ten pounds should be paid instantly; but Cook denied that Case, because the
Lessee hastened the end of his term; but he said, that if a man lease Land to
another for seven years, if the Lessee should so long live, and the Lessor
oblige himself to pay ten pounds at the end of his term, and he die within
seven years, there he was of opinion, the Money was presently due upon his
Death, but in the principal case, the whole Court held, the chief Justice being
absent, that the Obligation was discharged, and that the Money should notbe
paid.

WIllot versus Spencer, Mich. 9. Jacobi. The Plaintiff brought an Action of
Debt for Tithes of Wood upon the Statute of Plaintiff in Debt for Tithes need
not be named Rector in the Plaint in the upper Bench.
2 E. 6. and Forster argued, that Judgment ought not to be given for the
Plaintiff, because the Plaintiff did not show in his Plaint that he was Parson;
for he ought to bring his Action according to that name that he claimed the
Tithes by, and this ought to be expressed in the Queritur, and therefore if a
man bring his Action to recover any thing, as Heir, Executor, or Sheriff, he
ought to name himself so in the Queritur, 30 H. 6. and 9 H. 4. but Towse said,
the same Exception was taken between Merrick and Peter's, and disallowed.
Fleming Justice said, that if it had been by Writ he must have showed it, but
need not, it being by Plaint, if the truth appear in that, and if a man bring
his Action as Assignee, he need not show it in his Plaint, if the truth appear
in the Declaration, but it is otherwise in an Original, and a Plaintiff in
Kings Bench, as an original, but not in all things, and if the Plaint be
uncertain, the Defendant in that Court shall plead in Abatement of the Plaint,
as to an Original in the Common Pleas; and at last two Presidents were shown,
one between Champion and Hill, and the other between Merrick and Wright, that
were allowed without naming of the Plaintiff Rector in the Queritur, and
Judgment was given for the Plaintiff by the whole Court.

Note, it was agreed by all the Court of Kings Bench, Mich. 5. Jac. Tithes
cannot be leased without Deed,
and has many times been ruled, that if a man sell his Tithes for years by
word, it is good; but if the Parson agree that one shall have his Tithes for
seven years by word, it is not good, by the opinion of Fleming Chief Justice,
because it amounts to a Lease; and he held strongly, that Tithes cannot be
leased for years without a Deed.

COb versus Hunt, Hill. 5. Jac. Cob sued a Prohibition in the Common Judgment
reversec^ for Error in the Judgment.
Pleas against Hunt Parson of D. in Kent, and suggests a Modus demandi, as to
part of the Tithes demanded against him in the Spiritual Court, and as to the
residue suggests a Contract, executed and performed between him and the Parson,
in satisfaction of the residue, and because he proved not his Suggestion within
six Months, Hunt the Parson had a Consultation, and Costs assessed by the
Court to fifty shillings, and Damages fifty shillings by the Statute of the 2
E. 6. they shall be doubled, but in truth no Judgment was given to recover
them, because these words, Videlicet, Ideo considerat. fuit quoth. recuperet, was
omitted: yet Hunt thinking that all was certain and perfect, brought an Action
of Debt in the Common Pleas for the Costs, etc. and declared of all the matter
above, and that the Damages were assessed, upon which it was adjudged, that he
should recover, etc. and that the Costs were not paid, Per quod Actio, etc. And
had a Judgment against Cob, by Non sum informat. and thereupon Cob brought his
Writ of Error, as well in the Record and Process, etc. of the Prohibition, as
of the Record and Process in the Action If a Suggestion in part need proof,
and part does not, no Costs.
of Debt for the Costs, and assign the general Error: but Yelverton assigns
two Errors in special; first, that there was no Judgment in the Prohibition
for Recovery of the Costs, but only an Assessement of Costs without any more,
which is not sufficient; for the Assessement of Costs only is but matter of
Office in Court, but no Judgment of Court to bind, which was confessed by the
whole Court. The second Error was that no Costs ought to be assessed or
adjudged in the Cause above, because the Prohibition is grounded solely upon
the Modus decimandi, which needs proof, and upon the Contract between the
parties, which requires no proof; and the Suggestion being entire, and part of
it needing no proof, they could not give any Costs, for that is only where the
whole matter in the Suggestion needs proof; and therefore the mixing the
Contract with the manner of Tithing privileges the whole, as to the matter of
Costs: but they might grant a Consultation, as to that part of the Suggestion
which concerned the manner of Tithing, but not for the rest, which was granted
by the whole Court, and so both the Judgments were reversed, which mark.

MArkham versus Mollineux, Hill. 1. Jac. Mollineux sued out Judgment reversed
for Error in changing the Defendants Additions.
an Original in the Common Pleas in an Action of Debt upon a Bond against
Markham, by the name of John Markham, Alderman de D. and all the mean Process
are continued against him by the name of Alderman Markham he appeared, and the
Plaintiff declared against him by the name of Markham of D. Esquire, and
afterward the parties were at Issue, and it was found for the Plaintiff, and
Judgment entered; and it was reversed by Writ of Error, because it did not
appear that, that Markham was the same Markham, against whom the Original was
prosecuted, and the Process continued, but it seemed rather that he was
another person by reason of his several Additions of Alderman and Esquire,
which mark.

OLiver versus Collins, Pasch. 6. Jacobi. The Plaintiff brought an Action upon
the Statute for Tithes, the Statute mistaken, yet it being according to diverse
Presidents ruled good.
Action of Debt upon the Statute, for not setting forth of Tithes, and shows
that he is Parson of the Parish Church of Little Lavar, in Com. Essex, and that
the Defendant had so many Acres within the Parish of Little Lavor, sowed with
Wheat, whereof the tenth severed from the ninth part came to eight and twenty
pounds, and shows that the Defendant at Little Lavor aforesaid took and carried
away the Wheat without setting forth the Tithes, contrary to the Statute, by
reason whereof he forfeited threescore Pounds, and upon Nil debet pleaded it
was found for the Plaintiff, and moved in Arrest of Judgment; first, that the
Statute was mis-recited, for whereas the the Plaintiff declared, that the 4.
November. 2 E. 6. it was inacted, it was said, that there was no such Statute;
for the Parliament commenced 1 E. 6. and continued by prorogation until the 4.
November. 2 E. 6. and therefore the Plaintiff was mistaken in that, but that
Exception was not allowed, for there were an hundred Presidents against it; and
in respect of the continual use in that form, as the Plaintiff had declared,
the Court said, that they would not alter it, for that was to disturb all the
Judgments that were ever given in that Court. And secondly, it was objected,
that the matter was mis-tried, and there ought to be a new Trial, because the
Venire facias was of Parva Lavar, whereas by their pretense it ought to have
been of the Parish of Little Lavar, to which Yelverton made Answer, that the
Trial was well enough, for by that Action no Tithe is demanded nor recovered,
but the Defendant is only punished for his Contempt against the Statute, in
not setting forth his Tithe, and the wrong done to the Plaintiff complained of,
is laid only in the Village of Little Lavor, and not in the Parish; for all
the places in the Declaration where the Parish is named, are only matter of
Conveyance and inducement to the Action, and not of the substance, for the
substance is only that where the wrong and grievance is done to the Plaintiff,
and that arises only in Parua Lavor, which was granted by the whole Court upon
a grand Debate, at several Days, and Judgment was given for the Plaintiff:
and the like Judgment was given between Barnard and Costerdam in an Action
upon the same Statute, upon the last point for the Venn; and this has been
twice adjudged; but in Costerdams Case which concerned the Earl of Clanrickard,
with whom Yelverton was of Council, it was resolved, that if the Issue be upon
the custom of Tithing, and that it be found against the Defendant, he shall
pay the value expressed by the Plaintiff in his Declaration; for because by the
collateral matter pleaded in Bar, the Declaration is in whole confessed.

SMith versus Smith Trin. 6 Jacobi one Bisse made K. his Wife, and Bill abated
for not naming an Infant Executor in the Action, although Administration was
granted during his minority.
John his Son, being one year old Executors and K. solely proved the Will,
and afterward married the Plaintiff, and they two brought an Action of Debt as
Executors against the Defendant, and the Defendant pleads in abatement of the
Bill, that John was made Executor with K. and is yet in life, and not named,
the Plaintiffes reply, that John was but of the age of one year, and that K.
proved the Will, and had Administration committed to her during the minority,
and that John is, and was at the time of the Writ purchased within the age of
seventeen years, and upon that Yelverton demurred, and adjudged for the
Defendant that the Bill should abate, for both of them in truth were Executors,
and ought to be named in the Action, and although by the Administration granted
during the minority, K. had the full power, yet the Infant ought to be named,
he being Executor.

GOmersall versus Ask, Trin. 6. Iacobi, The Defendant brought an Action of Debt
against the Defendant as Administrator of her Husband, upon two former
Judgments given in two Actions of Debt against the intestate, and shows the
recoveries, the Defendant pleads that the intestate entered into a recognisance
35 El. in Chancery to Sir Henry Bechel, and shows, that after the Judgments
had by the Plaintiff, Sir H. obtained a Judgment against the intestate, upon
the Recognisance, and that she has not assets to satisfy the Plaintiff of the
intestates Goods, beyond Goods that are chargeable and liable to the Judgment
upon the Recognisance, to which Plea the Plaintiff demurres, and by Fennor and
Williams justifies the Plea in Bar was good; for although the Plaintiffes
Judgments mentioned in his Actions are before Sir H. Judgment, yet because
the Plaintiff by his Action does not demand Execution of the Judgments, but
only his Debt recovered, for this Action brought it as an original, and in
the same Court, as if he did demand the Debt upon the first Obligation, and
therefore because the Plaintiff had not sued out a Scire facias, to execute the
first Judgments, but had prosecuted, a new original the Plea is good and
allowable, as it had been upon the said Obligation, but Yeluerton and Fleming
were of a contrary opinion, for the Plea had not been good against the
intestate himself, and the Executor or Administrator represents his person, and
therefore the Plea is not good, but only in excuse of a Devastavit, and they
were of opinion, that the Action brought by the Plaintiff, was in nature of a
Scire facias, for he demanded the Debt in another course, then it was at first,
for that Debt which was but matter of escript, is now become by the Judgment
to be Debt upon Record, and of so high a nature, that the Judgment being in
Force, he can never have an Action upon the Obligation which is adjuged in
Higgins Case, Co. 6 Rep. but Cook doubted, and the Plaintiff dying, the Court
did not resolve.

APleton versus Baily Mich. 6. Jacobi. Apleton as Executor of Apleton Action
upon the Statute 32 H. 8. of Arrerages of Rents.
brought an Action of Debt against Baily for the Arrerages of diverse Rents as
well Copyhold Rents, as Freehold Rents pertaining to a Manor, whereof the
Testator was seized and thereof died seized, and the Rents were not paid to him
in his life time, by reason whereof they belonged to the Plaintiff as Executor:
And the Defendant though he was requested had not paid against the form of the
Statute of the 32 H. 8. And the Court, that the Action, did not ly for the
Arrerages of Copyhold Land, for the Statute of the 32 H. 8. does not extend to
them, but only to Rents out of Free Land. Secondly, It lies not for the Rent of
free Land, because the Plaintiff has not showed in his Declaration that the
Defendant had attorned to the Testator in his life. And although in pleading it
is good to allege a Feoffment of a Manor, without pleading any Livery, or of
any Attornment of Tenements, but when the Rent of any Freehold Land comes in
Debate it behooves both the Owner of the Manor and and his Executor that
demands it, to convey the privity between the Tenant and the Lord which ought
to be by attornment; for Rents and Services rest not without Attornment, which,
mark.

PEirson versus Ponuteis Mich. 6. Jacobi The Plaintiff as Executor Action lies
not upon that Statute for Arrerages of Copyhold Rents.
of Peirson brought an Action of Debt against Jo. Ponuties of London Merchant,
that he should render to him three and thirty pounds twelve shillings, in that
the Defendant 5. Oct. 1598. at London, etc. By his Bill obligatory has
acknowledged himself to owe to the Testator, 1518. Florens, Polish, which then
amounted to thirty three pounds twelve shillings to be paid to the Testator, Ad
solucionem festi purificat, etc. Called Candlemas day next ensuing, and to that
payment had obliged himself by the same Bill. And the Plaintiff avers that,
Predicti soluciones dicti festi purificat, etc. Next after the making the Bill
were according to the use of Merchants the twentieth of February 1598. Yet the
Defendant had not paid the 1518. Florence, Polish, or the thirty three pounds
twelve s. to the Testator nor to the Plaintiff. The Defendant pleads, Non est
factum, and found against him, and moved in arrest of Judgment; that the
Declaration was not good, because first the payment of Candlemas is not known
in our Law, but that was not allowed for that which is unknown in ordinary
intendment is made manifest, and helped by the Averment in the declaration,
because that payment among Merchants is known to be upon the twentieth of
February, and the Judges ought to take notice of those things that are used
amongst Merchants for the maintenance of traffic, and the rather, because the
Defendant does not deny it, but pleads non factum, by which he confesses the
Declaration to be true in that averment. Secondly it was objected, that as the
Case is, the use of Merchants is not material, because the Testator by any
thing that appears, was not a Merchant, but it was not allowed, because the
defendant that bound himself to pay, was a Merchant, and the Testator ought to
take the Bill, as the defendant would make it, and he chose to make the payment
according to the use of Merchants and not according to the Ordinary intercourse
between party and party, which mark this by the whole Court.

TAlbot versus Godbold, Mich. 6. Jac. Godbold 28 Eliz. sealed a Bill to the
Plaintiff made in this manner, memorandum, that I have received Action of Debt
brought upon a Bill, for money received to another use.
of Edw. Talbot, who was the Plaintiffes Testator, to the use of my Master, Mr.
Sergeant Gaudy the sum of forty pounds to be paid at Mich. following, the
Plaintiff brought an Action of Debt upon this Bill, and declared verbatim as
the Bill was, and demanded the four pound, to which Declaration the Defendant
demurred, and his pretense was as he supposed, because he had received the
money but as a servant to another use, and so he ought not to be charged as a
principal Debtor, for the Bill is but a Testimony of the Receipt, as is the 1
H. 6. and 2 H. 6. in account, for there an Indenture testifying the Receipt
which under Seal did not alter the nature of the first account, but it was
adjudged for the Plaintiff, for although the first part of the Bill witness
the Receipt to be to another use, yet in the last clause of the Bill, for the
payment of the money, he does not say to be repaid by his Master, for then it
would not charge him, but the clause is general to be repaid, which of
necessity ought to bind him that sealed, for otherwise the party shall loose
his Debt, because he had no remedy against Sergeant Gaudy, and because the Debt
appears to be due, it shall be intended to go only in satisfaction of a due
Debt which mark.

ALexander, versus Lamb, Mich. 6 Jacobi, the Plaintiff brought an Action of
Debt upon an Obligation of forty pounds against An Executor of his own wrong
cannot retain Goods in his hand to pay himself.
Lamb, as Executor, P. the Defendant pleads that P. in his life time was
indebted to him in forty pounds due Debt, and that the goods of the Testator to
the value of ten pounds came to the Defendants hands, which he retained toward
satisfaction of his Debt, and averred that no more goods beyond the goods to
the value of ten pounds came to his hands to be administered, the Plaintiff
replied and showed that the Defendant is Executor in his own wrong to P. and
that he has many other goods of P. to be administered at S. in the County of
Norfolk, and concludes, and hoc paratum est verificare, etc. the Defendant
rejoyns, and demands judgment, if the Plaintiff shall be admitted to say that
the Defendant is Executor of his own wrong, seeing by his Declaration he had
affirmed him to be Executor of the Testament, the Plaintiff demurres in Law to
this Plea, and as to the matter in Law, all the Court was for the Plaintiff,
for he may well reply that the Defendant is Executor of his own wrong,
notwithstanding the Declaration, for there is no other form of declaring as is
adjudged in Coults Case, 5 Rep. fol 30. but the whole Court held the whole Plea
to be discontinued, for the Defendant having pleaded as to the Goods to the
value of ten pounds, which he retained in his hands for a Debt due to him, and
that he had no other Goods, and concludes, hoc paratum est definire, which is
not good, for he ought to have said, and hoc petit quod inquiratur per patriam,
for there being a surplusage of the Goods denied by the Defendant, and urged by
the Plaintiff, it ought to come in issue, but could not by reason of the ill
conclusion, but in the same Term between West the Plaintiff, and Lane
Defendant, West demanded four pounds Debt against Lane, as Executor, as above,
and all the rest of the Plea, is as above, and Judgment was given for the
Plaintiff, because the Defendant had confessed Goods to the value of ten pounds
in his hands, which was more then the Defendant demanded, and therefore
although by Judgment of Law, an Executor of his own wrong cannot retain Goods
to pay himself, and although the other proceedings in the Plea are naught, yet
Judgment shall only be given upon the confession of the Defendant, and so it
was entered with Mark.

GReen versus Eden, Mich. 6 Jacobi, The Plaintiff brought an Action Primo
deliberat. shall not be pleaded without a Traverse.
of Debt upon an Obligation for a hundred pounds, dated September the third, 1
Jac. the Condition was, that if the Defendant the fourth of September, anno 20
Jacobi, pay a hundred pounds to I. S. at such a place, and also save the
Plaintiff harmless from any suit which should be brought against the
Plaintiff, by reason of the Bond, in which he was bound to J. S. as Surety for
the Defendant, then, etc. the Defendant pleaded, that true it was, that he by
his Obligation bearing Date September the third 1 Jac. did become bound to the
Plaintiff in two hundred pounds, but further said that the said Obligation was
not delivered as the Defendants deed until the seventeenth of September, in
the second year of King James, and then it was first delivered, and further
says that he had found the Plaintiff harmless, etc. to which plea, the
Plaintiff demurres, and adjudged for the plaintiff, for the Bond mentioned in
the Declaration is not answered, for the plaintiff indeed, shows that the
Defendant was obliged to him by his Obligation, bearing date the same Day, etc.
which is laid to be a perfect Bond, the same day as the Plaintiff counts, and
then for the Defendant to come and say that it was first delivered the
seventeenth of September 20 Jacobi, which is a year after, is no good Argument,
but naught without taking a traverse, without that it was made the third of
September 10 Jacobi. Secondly, as the Defendant has pleaded, he has made part
of the Condition idle, and vain, for by the Condition it appears, that there is
a Condition for the payment of a hundred pounds at a Day to come, to wit the
fourth of September, in the second year, and now the Defendant by his Plea has
made the Day of payment, passed before he supposes the Bond to be delivered,
within a manner takes away the effect of the Plaintiffs suit, and if the
Condition had not stood upon two Branches, but upon one only, and the
Defendant will plead the Delivery after the Condition becomes impossible to be
performed, then is the Obligation become single for the whole two hundred
pounds, which mark, by the whole Court.

BArret versus Fletcher, Pasch. 7 Jacobi, The Plaintiff brought an If the
Plaintiff assign no breach he shall never have a Judgment, though he has a
Verdict.
Action of Debt upon an Obligation of five hundred pounds, with a Condition to
stand to the Award of J. S. and J. D. so that, etc. the Defendant pleads if the
Arbitrator made no Award, the Plaintiff replies, and shows the Award made
verbatim, and concludes that they had made an Award, and does not assign any
breach. The Defendant rejoyns, that the Award pleaded, is not the Deed of the
Arbitrators, and Issue being joined upon that, there was a Verdict for the
Plaintiff, and Yelverton moved in arrest of Judgment, because the Plaintiff in
his replication had not assigned any breach of the Award, and so had showed no
cause of Action, for the replication is not for any Debt, but is guided by the
Condition, and is for the performance of a collateral thing, to wit of an
Award and although the Defendant had not answered any thing to the breach, if
it had been assigned, yet the Court ought to be satisfied that the Plaintiff
had good cause of Action to recover, otherwise they should not give Judgment,
and although a Verdict is given for the Plaintiff, yet this imperfection in the
Replication, is matter of substance, and is not helped by the Statute, by the
opinion of the whole Court, except Justice Williams.

BArwick versus Foster, Mich. 7 Jacobi. Action of Debt brought for Rent
reserved at Michaelmas or within ten days after, due at Michaelmas.
Rent, the cause was thus, the Plaintiff leased certain Lands to the Defendant,
at Mich. 1 Jacobi for five years, yielding and paying Rent at our Lady Day, and
Mich. yearly, or within ten days after, and for rent behind at the last Mich.
the Plaintiff declares, as for Rent due at the Feast of Saint Michael, and
prima facie, it seemed to the whole Court, but Crook that the Action would not
ly, but that the Rent for the last quarter was gone, for it was not due at
Michaelmas, as the Plaintiff had declared, for his own, showing it is payable,
and reserved at Michaelmas, or within ten days after, and although the Lessee
might pay it at Michaelmas Day, yet it is not any Debt which lies in demand by
any Action, until the ten days be passed, and the reservation being the
Lessors Act, it shall be taken most strongly against himself, and although the
end of the Term is at Michaelmas, before the ten days, until which time the
Rent is not due, and because at that time the Term is ended, the Lessor shall
loose his Rent; as if a Lessor die before Michaelmas Day, the Executor shall
not have the Rent, but the Heir by descent, as incident to the Reversion, and
if the Lessee should pay the Rent to the Lessor at Michaelmas day, and the
Lessor should dye before the tenth Day, his Heir, being a Ward to the King, the
King shall have it again, for of Right it ought not to be paid until the tenth
day, according to the 44 E. 3. but this Case being moved again in Hillary Term,
Fleming, Fennor and Yelverton, changed their opinion, and held that the Lessor
should have the Rent, for it was reserved yearly, and the ten days shall be
expounded to give liberty to the Lessee within the Term, for his ease to
protract the payment, but because the ten days after the last Michaelmas are
out of the Term, rather then the Lessor shall loose his Rent yearly, the Law
rejects the last ten days.

MOlineux versus Molineux, Hill. 7 Jacobi. An Action of Debt A Judgment
reversed by Writ of error, notwithstanding a Verdict, and the Statute of 18
Eliz.
brought against Mo. upon an Obligation, as Heir to his father, the Defendant
pleads, that he has nothing by descent, but twenty Acres in D. in such a
County, the Plaintiff replies, that the Defendant had more Land by descent in
S. to wit, so many Acres, and upon this they are at Issue, and found for the
Defendant, that he had nothing by descent in S. by reason of which the
Plaintiff could recover, and had his Judgment to have Execution of the twenty
Acres in D. upon which Judgment in the Common Pleas, the Defendant brought his
Writ of Error, and assigned for Error a discontinuance in the Record of the
Plea, from Easter Term, to Michaelmas Term after, and whether this were helped
by the Statute of 18 Eliz. because it was after a Verdict was the question, and
adjudged to be out of the Statute, and that it was Error, for the Judgment was
not grounded upon the Verdict, but only upon the confession of the Defendant
of Assetts, and the Verdict was nothing to the purpose, but to make the
Defendants confession more strong, and therefore the Statute of the 18 of Eliz.
is to be intended, when the trial by Verdict is the means and cause of the
Judgment, which mark; and therefore the Judgment was reversed, the Law seems
to be the same, if the Plainiiff brings an Action of Debt for forty pounds, and
declares for twenty pounds upon a Bill, and twenty pounds upon a non tenet, and
the Defendant confesses the Action, as to the money borrowed, and they are at
issue, as to the money demanded by the Bill, which Passes also for the
Plaintiff, by reason whereof he has Judgment to recover the forty pounds
demanded, and the Damages assessed by the Jurors, and Costs entire, in which
Case if there be a discontinuance upon the Roll, it seems that all shall be
reversed, notwithstanding the verdict, for the verdict is not the only cause
of the Judgment, but the Confession also, and the Costs assessed entirely for
both, but yet inquire of this.

It was adjudged by the whole Court, that in those Cases, where Executor shall
not pay Costs upon the statute of 4 Jacobi cap. 3.
an Executor is Plaintiff, touching things concerning the Testament, and is
nonsuited, or the verdict passes against him, that he shall not pay Costs upon
the new Statute of 4 Jac. for the Statute ought to have a reasonable
intendment, and it cannot be presumed to be any fault in the Executor, who
complains, because he cannot have perfect notice of what his Testator did, and
so it was resolved also by all the Judges of the Common Pleas.

GOodier versus Jounce, Trin. 8 Jacobi. Jounce recovered in the common Pleas a
hundred and thirty pounds against Goodier, in Crastino Animar. 6 Jacobi, and
the eight and twentieth of November the same Term, being the last Day of the
Term, the Plaintiff proved an Elegit against Goodier, to the Sheriffs of
London, where the Action was laid, and to the County Palatine of Lancaster,
returnable, Crastino Purificationis, after; which was granted by the Court, and
by the Elegit, to the County Palatine, it appeared, that it was grounded upon a
Testat. returned by the Sheriffs of London, that Goodier had nothing in London,
where in truth they never made such a Return, and upon that Elegit by a Jury
impannelled before the Sheriff of Lancaster; a Lease of Tithes was extended for
fifty nine years then to come, at the value of a hundred pounds, which the
Sheriff delivered to J. the Plaintiff, as a Chattell of Goodiers, for a hundred
pounds, and returned it, and that Goodier had no more Goods, etc. and thereupon
Goodier brought a Writ of Error in the upper Bench, and assigned for Error,
that no Return was made by the Shetiffs of London, nor filed in the common
Pleas, as was supposed in the Elegit, and it was adjudged Error, for although
the Plaintiff might have an Elegit, as he desired in the common Pleas,
immediately both into London and Lancashire, but seeing he waived the benefit
thereof, and grounded his Execution upon a Testatum, which was false, it was
Error in the Execution, for as it appears, 18 H. 6. 27. and 2 H. 6. 9. that a
Testatum is grounded upon a former Return filed, that the party had nothing in
the County where the Action was brought, and because it appeared upon Record,
that the prayer of the Elegits was made the eight and twentieth of November,
the last day of the Term, and by the Testatum it is supposed that the Sheriffs
of London had returned quindena Martini which is before the eight and twentieth
of November, that the Defendant had nothing in London, which seemed to be
contrary to the Record, yet that is not material, but makes the matter more
vicious, for it may well be, that since the Judgment was Crastino animarum, a
Testatum might not issue out returnable Quindena Martini, and it shall be the
Plaintiffes fault that he did not file it, and it shall be presumed to be such
a Writ, as the Plaintiffs own Process does recite, and note that the whole
Court did adjudge in this Case, that Goodier should be restored to the Term
again, and although it was valued by the Jury, but at a hundred pounds, and
delivered to Jounce the Plaintiff to hold as his own Goods and Chattells, yet
Goodier shall have it again from Jounce, for he being the party himself, it is
in Law but a bare delivery in specie, and therefore ought to be restored in
specie again, and does not absolutely alter the property, but attends upon the
Execution to be good or naught, as the Execution is, and so it was adjudged
before, in Robothams Case, and also in Worrells Case, as Mr. Noy said to
Yelverton, but it had been otherwise, if the suit had been to an estranger, by
the Sheriff of the Term, for a hundred pounds according to the opinion of 28
Eliz. Die. for it is the parties folly, that he does not pay the Judgment, and
if such sales should be made void none would buy Goods of the Sheriff, by
reason whereof, many Ex-, ecutions would remain undone, and this by the opinion
of the whole Court.

SMith versus Newsam and his Wife, Mich. 6 Jacobi. The Plaintiff, as Son and
Heir of Geo. S. his father, brought an Action of Debt against the Defendant
for twenty Marks, and declares that his father, April the twenty seventh, 25
Eliz. leased to the Defendant one house, etc. in B. in the County of Bedford,
from Michaelmas next following, for one and twenty years, yielding and paying
during the Term, if the Father should so long live, thirty pounds at our Lady
day, and Michaelmas, by equal portions, and yielding and paying to the Heirs
and Assigns of the Father after his death twenty Marks, at the Terms
aforesaid, by virtue whereof the Defendant entered, and occupied from Michaelmas
35 Eliz. etc. the Father dyed the fourth of May 7 Jur. at B. and because twenty
Marks for a half years Rent were behind, the Action was brought, the Defendant
demurred to the Declaration, and adjudged against the Plaintiff, How a
reservation for Rent shall be construed.
for the clause by which the Court is reserved to the Heirs, gives but twenty
Marks for the whole year, and not twenty Marks every a year, and therefore the
Plaintiff had mistaken his demand in suing for twenty Marks, for one half year,
(for these words ad Terminos praedictos) are only the time of payment of the
twenty Marks which were to be paid as the thirty pounds were, and although in
the clause that reserved the Rent to the Heirs, the words (by equal portions)
were omitted, yet the Law will supply them, as it is in the 13 H. 9. Avowry 2.
40. Rent granted to be taken at two Terms of the year, and they named it shall
be intended by equal portions, although the Deed makes mention of that, for
the reservation being the Act of the Lessor, shall be taken most strongly
against him and his Heirs, and therefore shall have but twenty Marks for all
the whole year, and no more, as in Perkins 22, two tenements in common make a
Lease, rendering ten shillings, it shall be five shillings to each of them March
171. according to it the second cause of the Judgment was because the
Plaintiff brought this Action as Heir to his Father, and does not show in his
Declaration, that the Reversion descends to him, and the Rent demanded, is
incident to the Reversion descended, and so the Plaintiff does not make any
Title to have the Rent, which mark, and Judgment was given, that the Plaintiff
should take nothing by his Bill.

NEale versus Sheffeild Trin. 8. Jacobi rotulo. 782. The Plaintiff One must not
plead in discharge of the Obligation, but of the Condition contained in the
Obligation.
brought an Action of Debt upon an obligation for fourteen pounds, the
condition was that if the Defendant should pay seven pounds to the Plaintiff
upon the birthday of the Child of John living which God shall send after the
Date of the Bond then, etc. The Defendant pleads, that the Plaintiff after the
making of the Obligation and before the birth of any Infant of the said J.
living to wit the 1. September 7. Jacobi was indebted to the Defendant in one
load of Lime to be delivered upon request, and the same day it was agreed
between them at L. that if the Defendant would discharge the Plaintiff of the
said load of Lime, that then in consideration thereof, the Plaintiff would
discharge the Defendant of the said Obligation, and would accept the said load
of Lime, which the Plaintiff accepted in discharge of the Obligation, and did
then acquit the Defendant of the said Obligation, and demands Judgment, to
which Plea, the Plaintiff demurres, and adjudged for the Plaintiff for two
causes, first because the Defendant had pleaded his Bar in discharge of the
Obligation, whereas he should have pleaded it in discharge of the same
contained in the Condition of the Obligation, for it is not a Debt simply by
the Obligation, but the performance or breach of the Condition makes it to be a
Debt, for the Obligation is proved by the Condition, so that if the Condition
be not discharged the Obligation remains in his force and the matter in the
Bar is not pleaded in discharge of the Condition, but of the Obligation, and
therefore it is A contingent Debt cannot be discharged.
not good, which mark. Secondly, it appears that the Condition it self cannot
be discharged; for the seven pounds is not due nor payable until the Birth of
the Child of John living, which is a mere Contingency, and remote possibility,
whether he shall ever have a Child or no; and therefore it resting in
Contingency, whether it will ever be a Debt or no, it cannot be discharged; for
a possibility cannot be released, as it has been adjudged in Carters Case, and
it is not to be resembled to the Case where the Condition is to pay Money at a
Day to come, for that may be discharged presently, for it is presently a Duty,
although it be not demandable until the Day; and therefore because it cannot
be known whether the Day will ever come wherein John will have a Child; and
because it is no Debt nor Duty, therefore it cannot be discharged, by the
opinion of the whole Court.

DOdson versus Keys, Mich. 8. Jacobi. The Plaintiff brought an False Latin
shall not overthrow an Obligation.
Action of Debt upon an Obligation for ten pounds, and declares that the
Defendant 23. October. 1608. at M. became bound to the Plaintiff in ten pounds to
be paid upon request; the Defendant demands Oyer of the Obligation, which was
entered in haec verba, Noverint universi per praesentes me Thomam Keys tenerie
and firmiter obligarie Edw. Dodson, etc. Anno Regni Reginae Dom. nostri Jacobi,
etc. Rege Defensor suis de Scotia sexto and Angliae quadragesimo secundo, 1608.
And upon this the Defendant demurred, and adjudged for the Plaintiff; for there
are two principal things to be contained in one Obligation; first, the parties
to whom: secondly, the sum in which one party is bound, and they are both here
expressed sufficiently to the view of the Judges, for both the Obligor, and
Obligee, are well named, and also the sum is well expressed to be ten pounds,
but those words, by which it may be gathered, that the party intends to bind
himself, are found in false Latin, Videlicet, (tenerie and obligarie) in which
words there is only an e. too much; and it is true, false Latin, as it is, 10
H. 7. shall abate a Writ, because the party may purchase a new Writ, but it
shall not overthrow an Obligation; for the party cannot be again bound when he
will: and although there is no such year of the Reign of the King, as of
Scotland, the sixth, etc. it is not material, for it is good, though it have a
false Date, as 13 H. 7. Kelly, and the party may surmise a Date in his
Declaration, and it is good, and the Defendant must answer to the Bond, and not
to the Date, and the Law is the same, if it have an impossible Date, as the 30.
of February, whereas there is but eight and twenty Days in February, yet it is
good: but in the principal Case it is helped by the Year of our Lord which is
certain, and sufficient, and the Declaration good, which had omitted the year
of the King, and put in the year of our Lord, and Judgment was given by the
opinion of the whole Court.

HAwes versus Leader, Hill. 8 Jacobi. Hawes brought an Action A Deed of gift
good against him that makes it, notwithstanding 13 Eliz. and against his
Executors, and Administrators.
of Debt against Leader Administrator of Cookson, the Case was Thomas Cookson,
the nineteenth of February, 20 Jacobi, for twenty pounds paid into the
Defendants hands by the Plaintiff, grants all his Goods mentioned in a Scedule
annexed to the Deed, and gives possession of the goods by a Platter, and the
goods remained in his house, as they were before, to be carried away upon
demand by the Plaintiff, and covenants that the intestate, his Administrators,
etc. should safely keep them, and quietly deliver them, and to perform that
covenant, the intestate binds himself in forty pounds to the Plaintiff, and
afterward Cookson died, and the Plaintiff, the sixteenth of March, the sixth
of King James, demanded the goods of the Defendant, being Administrator, and he
would not deliver them, by reason whereof the Plaintiff brought his Action, and
in his Declaration shows, in specie, what goods were contained in the Scedule,
the Defendant pleads the Statute of the 13 Eliz. of fraudulent Deeds and gifts,
etc. and further says that Cookson the intestate, the twelfth of February, 2
Jacobi, was indebted unto diverse persons, and names them in several sums,
amounting to a hundred pounds, and being so indebted the nineteenth of
February, 2 Jacobi, made the Deed of gift, as is above declared, being then of
those and other goods possessed amounting to fourscore pounds and no more, and
that it was made by fraud, and covin, between Cookson and the Plaintiff, to the
intent to deceive his Creditors named, and shows how that Cookson,
notwithstanding the Deed of gift, occupied, and used the Goods all his life,
and died, and that Administration was committed to the Defendant, the Plaintiff
replies, that the Defendant had assets in his hands, to satisfy the Debts
demanded, and further says that the Deed of gift was made upon good
considerations, upon which they were at issue and at trial at Huntington
Assizes, Cook rejected the Trial, because the Issue was not well joined, and a
Replender ordered, upon which the Defendant pleaded as is above, and the
Plaintiff demurred, and adjudged for the Plaintiff, first because the
Defendant had not averred in his Bar, that the Debts due, yet certain, unpaid
to the Creditors named, for there was four years time between the Deed of gift
made, and the death of the intestate, in which time the Debts might well be
presumed to be satisfied. Secondly, the Defendant did not show that the Debts
due to the supposed Creditors were by specialty, and then the matter of his
Plea is not good, for the Defendant cannot plead such a Plea, but to excuse
himself of a Devastavit, and that could not be as this Case is, for he being
Administrator is not chargeable with the Debts, if they be not upon Specialty.
Thirdly, the Defendant supposed that it would be a Devastavit in him, if he
should deliver the Goods to the Plaintiff which were contained in the Deed of
Gift, but that cannot be, for those Goods in the hands of the Plaintiff are
liable to the Creditors, as an Executor of his (...) wrong, if the Deed of Gift
be fraudulent. And fourthly, it may be the Creditors will never sue for their
Debts, and by that means the Defendant will justify the Detainer of the Goods
for ever, which would be very inconvenient. But if the Defendant had pleaded a
Recovery by any of the Creditors; and that such Goods to the value, etc. had
been taken in Execution this had been a good Plea. Fifthly, the Defendant is
not such a person as is enabled by the Statute of 13 Eliz. to plead the Plea
aforesaid, for the Statute makes the Deed void, as against the Creditors, but
not against the party himself, his Executors, or Administrators, for against
them it remains a good Deed of Gift, and this by the opinion of the whole
Court.

SAllows versus Girling, Pasch. 9. Jacobi. The Plaintiff brought an Action of
Debt upon a Bond, and the Condition to stand to the Action brought upon an
Obligation to stand to the Award of four, or two of them, Award made by two
good.
Award of A. B. C. and D. of all Actions, Quarrels and Demands, etc. so that
the said Arbitrament were made in writing, before such a Day by the said A. B.
C. and D. or by any two of them under their hands, etc. The Defendant pleads
that the said A. B. C. and D. nor any two of them made no Award: the Plaintiff
replies, that A. and B. two of the Arbitrators, before the Day, by writing
under their hands, etc. made an Award, and set forth the Award, and assigned a
Breach in the Defendant for not paying of three pounds at a Day past limited by
the Award, to which the Defendant demurrs, and it was adjudged the Plaintiff;
and the Question was, whether the Award made by A. and B. alone were good or
no, because the Submission was to four named, and in the Premises of the
Condition the Defendant is bound to stand to the Award of four also, yet it was
adjudged by the Court upon consideration had upon every part of the Condition
that the Award made-by two alone is good; for the Arbitrators are made Judges
by the assent and election of the Parties, and it appears that the parties put
their trust not in the four jointly, but jointly and severally, and the Ita
quod, etc. is an explanation of all the Condition that they four or any two of
them might arbitrate all matters between them, and so much appears, 2 R. 3. 18.
where two of one part, and one of another part put themselves to the Award of
I. S. now by this Submission I. S. may arbitrate as well any matters between
the two parties of one part, as between them, and the third because in the
intent of the parties the end of their Submission was to have peace and
quietness: and 4 H. 4. 40. the Condition of a Recognisance was, that if A. A.
shall stand and abide the Award of four, named three, or two of them, of all
matters, etc. which is a division of their power; and observe in the principal
Case, that until the Ita quod, comes the Condition is not perfect, for all the
Condi^ is but one Sentence.

BRisco versus King, Trin. 9. Jacobi. The Plaintiff brought an Action Debt.
of Debt upon a Bond for three hundred pounds, with a Condition, that the
Defendant should perform all Covenants, Clauses, Payments, and Agreements,
contained in one Deed poll of the same Date, made by the Defendant to the
Plaintiff, the Defendant by way of Plea sets forth the Deed poll, in haec
verba, in which Deed was contained one Grant and Bargain, and sale of certain
Lands made by the Plaintiff to the Defendant for one hundred pounds paid, and
two hundred pounds to be paid, in which Deed there was one Proviso, that if the
Defendant should not pay for the Plaintiff to one J. S. forty pounds, to J. D.
forty pounds, etc. at such a Day, that then the Bargain and Sale should be
void: and the Defendant pleads that he had performed all the Covenants, etc.
comprised in the Deed: the Plaintiff assigned a Breach for the not paying of
forty pounds at the Day, according to the Proviso; and the Defendant demurrs,
and adjudged for the Defendant by the whole Court; for the Condition binds the
Defendant to perform other Payments then such as the Defendant is bound by the
Deed to perform, for the Obligation was made but for the strengthening of the
Deed, and the Deed requires not any compulsory Payments to be made, but leaves
it to the will of the Defendant, or to make the payments specified in the
Proviso, or in Default thereof to forfeit the Land to the Plaintiff, and
therefore it appears that it was not the intent and meaning of the parties to
make an Obligation with a Condition repugnant to it, and contrary to the Deed
poll of Bargain of Sale, and by this means the Payment of forty pounds to J. S.
which is made voluntary by the Deed poll, shall be made compulsory by the
Obligation: but the word (Payments) in the Condition of the Obligation shall
have relation only to such payments contained in the Deed poll which are
compulsory to the Defendant, and not otherwise; and because the neglect of the
payment of forty pounds to J. S. assigned for the Breach is denied to be
voluntary for the Defendant to pay or not, to which the Condition of the
Obligation cannot in any reasonable construction extend, therefore it was
adjudged against the Plaintiff.

WOolby versus Perlby, Mich. 9. Jacobi. An Action of Debt brought upon a Lease
for years, the Plaintiff derives his Title Judgment arrested for Nil showing
in what Court the Deed was enrolled.
by the grant of the Reversion, by way of bargain and Sale in Fee from the
first Lessor, and declares that by an Indenture of such a Date, one grants
bargains, and sells for money the Reversion to him in Fee, which Indenture was
enrolled such a day, according to the form of the Statute, and because he
showed not in his Declaration in what Court it was enrolled, and the Statute of
27 H. 8. Parles, of many several Courts, and that it is no reason to put the
Lessee to such an infinite labor to search in all Courts, as well at
Westminster, as in the Country with the Clerk of the Peace, and for this cause
after a verdict, a nil capiat per Billam entered by the whole Court.

SIR George Savill, versus Candish Hill. 9 Jac. The old Countess of
Shrewsbury, had a Verdict against Savel, and upon a challenge Judgment
reversed for want of these words, in a Tales at Assizes, nomina Jurat. etc.
of the Sheriff on the Plaintiffs part of the County of Derby, the Tenure was
directed to the Coroners, who returned all the Writs, and at the Assizes, a
Tales was awarded, and the name of one of them of the Tales was Gregory
Grigson, etc. and by postea returned by the Clerks of the Assise in the Common
Pleas, the Tales was returned to be by the Sheriff, but in the entering up the
Judgment it was made by the Coroners, and the name of the man of the Tales, by
the Clerk of the Assise, was restored according to his right name Gregory, but
entered in the Roll, by the name of George, and upon that Judgment Savill
brought a Writ of Error, which depended ten years and more, and the first
Plaintiff, who was the Countess of Shrewsbury died, this matter being
indiscussed, and Candish as Executor to the Countess, revived all by Scire
facias why he should not have Execution, and after many debates, the Judgment
was reversed for three causes: first because upon the Pannell of the Jurors
names, after the twenty four Jurors were named, at the foot of the Pannell, two
names were added to the Jurors, which in truth were the men of the Tales, but
no mention was made that they were the names of the Jurors, impannelled, de
novo, according to the form of the Statute, which ought to be, for at the
Common Law the Justices of assise cannot grant any Tales, to supply the default
of the first Jurors, but it is given only by the Statute of the 35. H. 8. which
ordains that their names shall be added to the first Pannell, and this cannot
be discerned to be done accordingly, if such a style and Title be not made over
their names viz. nomina Jurator. de noto apposit. secundum formam Statuti, to
distinguish what is done by the Common Law, and what by the aid of the Statute,
and also the Coroners names ought to be added to the Tales, at the bottom of
the Pannell, and in this Case, their names were only indorsed, which was upon
the Return of the first Pannell, and although diverse Presidents were shown to
the Court, wherein the names of the Jurors de novo appoposit. etc. were united
upon the Pannell, yet the Court did not regard them, because it seemed that
they passed in silence without debate had upon them, the second cause was
because it appeared by the Return of the postea, that the Tales were returned
by the Sheriff, which is error in the first Process to the Coroners, and
although in the Entry in the Common Pleas of the Judgment, it is made to be by
the Coroners, yet it is not helped in this Case, for the warrant of the Roll is
the Clerk of the Assizes Certificate, and thus is that, the Tales was returned
by the Sheriff, and the Court cannot intend it to be otherwise then is
certified, and thirdly the name of the Juror in the Tales, which is, Gregory is
made in the Entry of the Judgment to be George, and although the will shall be
amended in this point according to the Certificate of the postea, then in the
other point of the Return of the Tales by the Sheriff, it is not amendable, and
so it is error every way, and the Judgment was reversed by the whole Court.

BRidges, versus Enion Hillar. 9 Jac. The Plaintiff declares, how By a Release
of all demands money to be paid at a day to come, may be released before the
day.
that he and the Defendant, February tenth Anno 7. submitted themselves to the
Award of S. R. Bodenham, who awarded they should be friends, and that the
Defendant should pay the Plaintiff ten pounds at Miasummer following, at such a
place, and the ten pounds being unpaid, the Plaintiff brought his Action, the
Defendant pleads in Bar a release made by the Plaintiff to him, of all demands
which was made, the tenth of April, before Midsummer, when the Debt was to be
paid, and the release was of all demands, from the beginning of the world,
until the tenth of April, and shows the Release to the Court, to which the
Plaintiff demurres and adjudged against the Plaintiff, for although the sum of
Money awarded is not grounded upon any precedent Debt or contract between the
parties, yet by the opinion of the Court it lies in demand presently, and the
Plaintiff might assign it by his will, and the Executor should have it, and by
the spiritual Law, Administration may be granted of it, before the day of
payment, if the Plaintiff dye before, yet it is not recoverable before
Midsummer, nor will any Action ly for it, but it is a duty presently by the
Award, and as the award is perfect presently as soon as it is pronounced, so
are all the things contained in the Award, if they be not made payable upon a
condition precedent on the part of one of the Parties, as if an award be made,
that if the Plaintiff shall give to the Defendant at Midsummer one load of Hay,
that then upon the Delivery of the Hay, the Defendant should pay the Plaintiff
ten pounds, in this case the ten pounds cannot be released before the Day, for
it rests merely in a possibility and contingency, for it becomes a Duty upon
the Delivery of the Hay only, and not before; and therefore it is like the
Case, 5 E. 4. 42. of a Nomine pene waiting upon the Rent, which cannot be
released until the Rent be behind, for the not paying the Rent makes the
Nomine pene a Duty; and the Case in question is like the Case, Littleton 117.
where a man is bound to pay Money at a Day to come, for a Release of Actions
before the Day cuts off the Duty, because by 7 H. 7. 6. it is a Duty presently,
and the Case is stronger here, because the Release is of all Demands; which
observe.

MOrgan versus Sock, Pasch. 10. Jacobi. Sock brought an Action If the Defendant
confess he has Assets, the Sheriff may return a Devastavit.
of Debt upon an Obligation of fourteen pounds entered into by Ar. Morgan, Anno
1. Jac. against Tho. Morgan his Administrator; the Defendant pleads that after
the Death of Arth. and after Administration was to him committed, to wit, the
16, of September, Ann. 6. the Plaintiff brought his Original against him, of
which he had no notice nntill the 24. of February Ann. 6. before which Day the
Defendant was upon the Exig. for not appearing, which Exig. was returnable Tres
Pasch. after, and that the 17. of Febr. which was before the notice, his
Letters of Administration were revoked by the Archbishop, and granted to Rich.
M. the Brother of Arth. which Rich. is now Administrator, and that he at the
time of revoking the Administration had diverse Goods of the Intestates in his
hands, and shows them what they were, to the value of two hundred pounds, and
that he after the Administration revoked, and before notice of the Suit, had
delivered them over to Rich. to wit, the 22. of February, 6. Jacobi, and that
he at the time of the Administration revoked, had fully administered all the
Goods of the Intestates, besides the Goods delivered to Rich. etc. The
Plaintiff replied, that the Administration was revoked by Covin between the
Defendant and Rich. and upon that they are at Issue, and the Jury found it to
be Covin, by reason whereof the Plaintiff had a Judgment to recover the Debt
and Damages of the Goods and Chattels of the said Arth. at the time of his
Death, being in his hands, to be levied, and upon that Judgment he brought a
Writ of Error, and assigned for Error, that the Judgment ought to be
conditional, to wit, to recover the Debt of the Goods of the Intestate, if so
much remain in his hands, and not absolutely. But the Judgment was affirmed by
the whole Court; for where the Judgment may be final and certain, there it
shall never be conditional. And because it appears by the Defendants Plea, that
he had two hundred pounds in his hands of the Intestates Goods, it would be in
vain to give Judgment against him, if he had so much in his hands, seeing he
himself has confessed by his Plea, that (...) more in his hands then would
satisfy that Debt; and if (...) could not levy the Debt in the Defendants
hands, he may upon the Defendants (...) Damage return a Devastavit, and this by
the opinion of the whole Court, and then there was showed to the Court a
President in the Common Pleas to that purpose.

DOnghty versus Fawn, Mich. 11. Jacobi. The Plaintiff declares upon an
Obligation of an hundred and twenty pounds, dated 2. November. 43. Eliz. And the
Condition was, that one Edw. Astle by his last Will in writing of such a Date,
had disposed the Wardship of the Defendant, whereof the Defendant was
possessed, etc. if therefore the Defendant do save and keep harmless the
Plaintiff, etc. from all Charges, and Troubles, etc. which may happen to the
Plaintiff, etc. for or by reason of the last Will of the said Ed. A. or from
any thing mentioned in that, touching or concerning one M. Fawn, or any Legacy
or Bequest to her given or bequeathed, or otherwise from Ed. A. to her due,
then the Obligation, etc. The Defendant pleads that the Plaintiff was not
damnified. The Plaintiff replies, that after the Obligation made, one M. Smith
in the behalf of Jo. and Ed. A. Sons of the said Ed. A. named in the Condition,
did exhibit a Bill against the Plaintiff, as Administrator of A. in the
Chancery, for the payment of the Portions of the said Sons, to which Bill the
Plaintiff by way of Answer pleaded fully administered, and for the making good
thereof, sets forth diverse payments by him made, and amongst other payments
shows that he had paid to M. Fawn, named in the Condition, sixty pounds for a
Legacy due by the Will of the said Ed. A. the payment of which sixty pounds was
disallowed by that Court, and by the Order of the Chancery, sixty five pounds
paid, for not allowing the first sixty pounds to Ed. A. the Son, which sixty
and five pounds the Defendant had not repaid, though thereunto requested, and
so he was damnified; to which Replication the Defendant demurrs; and the
opinion of the whole Court after a great Debate, was against the Plaintiff, for
the Plaintiff in his Replication had alleged two Causes to enforce his
Damage; the first was, that the Plaintiff in his Answer in the Chancery had
alleged the payment of sixty pounds to M. F. for a Legacy due to her by the
Will, and that such Allegation was rejected by the Court, of Chancery, and
neither of those matters are certainly alleged, but by way of Implication,
and not expressly; for he ought to have shown that a Legacy of sixty pounds was
given to M. F. by the Will of E. A. for although the Will of E. A. is recited
in the Condition in the Date, against which Recital the Defendant may not be
admitted to say, that he made no such Will, yet the Legacy given to M. F. is
not recited in the Condition, if not in the General, against which the
Defendant may take a Traverse, that Eaw. A. did not bequeath such a Legacy of
sixty pounds, and upon that a good Issue may be taken. And secondly, the
Plaintiff says, that the payment of the said sixty pounds was disallowed by
the Court of Chancery, and does not appear in the Replication where the
Chancery was at that time, to wit, whether at Westminster, or at any other
place, and it is issuable and triable by a Jury, whether any such Order of
Chancery were made or not, for the Orders there are but in Paper, and are not
upon Record to be tried by Record, but by a Jury: and the Plaintiff perceiving
the opinion of the Court against him, prayed that he might discontinue his
Suit, which was granted by the whole Court; but Quaere of this, it being after
a Demurrer.

WEaver versus Clifford, Pasch. 44. Eliz. rotulo 453. The Plaintiff brought an
Action of Debt upon an Escape against Clifford, Action of Debt brought against
the Sheriff upon an Escape, for one taken upon a Capias upon a Recognisance,
and adjudged that it would not lie.
and declares that one A. was bound to the Plaintiff in one Recognisance of a
hundred pounds to be paid at a Day, at which Day A. made Default of Payment,
and the Plaintiff sued out two Scire fac. and upon the second Scire fac. a
Nihil was returned, and the Plaintiff had Judgment to recover; and afterward
he sued out a Levari fac. and a Nihil being returned, the Plaintiff prosecuted
a Capias ad satisfaciend. by virtue of which Writ the Defendant being then
Sheriff took the said A. and afterward at D. in the County of S. permitted him
to go at large; to which the Declaration the Defendant demurred. Damport for
the Defendant, and he showed the cause of the Demurrer to be because a Capias
upon the Recognisance did not lie; and he divided the Case into two parts,
first whether a Capias would lie in the Case; and secondly, whether the Sheriff
would take the Advantage of such a naughty Process; and as to the first it
seemed to him that a Capias would not lie, because it appeared by Herberts 5.
Repub. fol. 12. And Garnons Case 5. Rep. fol. 88. that the Body of the
Defendant was not liable to Execution for Debt, by the Common Law, but only in
Trespass, where a Fine was due to the King, or that he was accountant to the
King: and the Plaintiff could have no other Process but a Fieri facias within
the year, and if the year were passed, then he might have a new Original in
Debt. But now by the Statute of Marlbrig, cap. 23. And Westminster. 2. cap. 11. a
Capias is given in Account, and by the 25 E. 3. c. 17. Capias is given in Debt
and Detinue, and by the 19 H. 7. c. 9. the like Process is given in Case, as
in Debt and Trespass, and the 23 H. 8. c. 14. a Capias is given in a Writ of
Annuity and Covenant, but Statute gives a Capias in this Case, and therefore it
remains as it was at Common, and by that it would not lie, which is also
apparent by the Recognisance, for that is, that if the Debt shall be levied of
the Goods and Chattels, Lands and Tenements, etc. and does not meddle with the
Body, and by an express Authority, 13 and 14 Eliz. Dier, 306. Puttenhams Case
it is held that the Chancery has no Authority to commit the Defendant to the
Fleet, upon a Recovery in a Scire facias, upon a Recognisance, because the Body
is not liable. And for the second point, it seemed to him, that the Sheriff
should take Advantage of this, which should be as void and as null, whereof a
stranger may take benefit, and to prove this he took this Difference, when a
Process will not lie, and where it is disorderly awarded, as if an Exigent be
sued out before a Capias, or an Execution before Judgment; for if that
Process be originally supposed, there the Process is but erroneous, in
Druries Case, 8. Rep. 142. 34 H. 6. 2. b. But if the Action it self will not
maintain the Process as a Capias in Formedon, there that Process is as void
and null: and he took another Diversity, when the Capias is taken by the Award
of the Court, when Judgment is given that he shall recover; for in that Case
it shall remain good, until it be reversed, because it is the Act of the
Court; and so is Druries Case to be intended: but if the party himself take it,
it is at his own peril, as here it is; for the Plaintiff has only pleaded,
that he prosecuted, etc. which is as void to the party who sued it out, and he
shall have no benefit of it; but the Sheriff shall not be punished for false
Imprisonment, because he is not to examine the illegality or validity of the
Process; for the 11 H. 4. 36. If a Capias issue out without any Original: and
the party be taken, the Sheriff shall not be punished; and for these Reasons he
prayed Judgment for the Defendant: Noy was for the Plaintiff, and he agreed,
that at the Common Law no Action did lie in this Case, as it has been said;
but he was of opinion, that this Case is within 25 E. 3. cap. 17. for the
intention and drift of the Statute was to give speedy remedy to recover Debts,
and the Action is all one in the eye of the Law, as if it had been done by
Original, which in the equity of the Statute. And a Capias lies upon a
Recognisance against a Surety for the Peace, and upon a Scire facias against
the Bail in the Upper Bench. As to Puttenhams Case, the Reason, because he was
not in Execution before. And for the second Objection, although the Capias did
not lie, yet it is but Error; for if the Court had Jurisdiction to hold plea of
the Cause, although the Process be naughtily awarded, it is but Error, of which
the Sheriff shall not take benefit; and therefore if a Woman have recovered in
Dower, and has Damages in the Common Pleas, and thereupon the party takes a
Capias for the Damages, and the party be taken, and suffered to go at large, it
is an Escape, 10 Hen. 7. 23. and if a Capias be awarded in the Common Pleas,
after the Record removed, it is but Error, and so ruled, 13 E. 3. Title Bar,
253. But if the Court has no Jurisdiction in the cause, as a Formedon brought
in the upper Bench, as it is 1 R. 3. 4. or an Appeal in the Common Pleas, or
where a Writ is awarded out of the Chancery, returnable in Chester, these are
void, and coram non Judice, and there ought not to be any arrest upon such a
Writ, and he cited a Case, Trin. 31. and 37. Eliz. in the Exchequer, Woodhouse
and Ognells Case, ruled accordingy, and as concerning the difference taken,
there is no other form of pleading, but only, quod prosecutus fuit quoddam,
etc. without saying, that it was by the award of the Court, and the Court at
that time did strongly incline, that it was but Error at the most, but Mich. 11
Ja. It was adjudged by the whole Court, that the Capias could not ly, and that
it was only Error, of which the Sheriff shall not take the benefit.

KKetleys Case, Pasch. 11 Jac. An Action of Debt brought for arrearages of
Rent, brought against R. upon a Lease for years, the Debt brought upon a Lease
made to an Infant.
Defend. pleads in Bar, that the time of the Lease made, he was within age, to
which the Plaintiff demurres, and upon the first reading of the Record, the
question was whether a Lease made to an Infant be void, and it was said it
should be void, otherwise, it might be very prejudicial to Infants, whom the
Law intends not to be of sufficient discretion, for the mannaging of Land, and
also the Rent may be greater then the value of the Land, to the great
impoverishing of the Infant, and took this difference, where it is for the
apparent benefit of the Infant, a sa Lease made by an Infant rendering Rent, and
the like, and when it is but an implied benefit, as here, for the Law intends
that every Lease is made for the benefit of the Lessee, although prima facie,
it seems to be but tail and trouble, but the Court held it only voidable, as
Election, for if it be to the Infants benefit, be that benefit apparent or
implied, it shall be void in no Case, prima facie, as 21 H. 6. 31. b. but the
Infant may at his Election make it void, for he shall before the Rent day come,
refuse, and waive the Land, an Action of Debt will not ly against him, for
otherwise, such a Lease shall be more strong then any Fine or Record, and great
mischief would ensue, and as to the prejudice, it well be answered, for if more
Rent be reserved, then the value of the Land, he ought to have set it forth,
that it might have appeared to the Court, which is not done, for then clearly
he should not have been bound, for there had been no profit to the Infant, as
Russells Case is, 5 Rep. 27. for if an Infant release, it is not good, except
he has received the money, and it also appears by 21 H. 6. that if he did not
enter and manure the Land, that an Action of Debt would not ly against him, but
the principal Case was without color, for the Rent, and taking the profits
were Land, as one day of the Reservation, and secondly it was not showed, that
the Rent was of greater value, and thirdly, the Defendant was of full age,
before the Rent day came.

HIggins Case, Pasch. 11 Jac. Action of Debt brought by Higgins One may take
his Execution either against the principal or Bail at Election.
against Yelverton, was of an opinion at the Bar, that if one be arrested,
upon a Process in that Court, and he puts in Bail, and afterward the
Plaintiff recovers, that he might, at his Election take out his Execution
either against the principal, or Bail, but if he took the Bail, or arrested
him, or had him in Execution for the Debt, although he had not full
satisfaction, he could not meddle with the Plaintiff, but if two be Bail,
although one be in Execution yet he may take the other also, and Coderidge,
Justice, was of the same opinion, and Man the secondary, said it was the daily
practice there, and so if the principal be in Execution, he cannot take the
Bail.

HAukinson versus Sandilands, 11 Jacobi. The Plaintiff brought An Action of
Debt brought upon a Bond, which was, Obligamus nos, vel quemlibet nostrum,
adjudged to be joint and several at the Plaintiffs Election.
an Action of Debt upon an Obligation for forty pounds against the Defendant,
who demanded Oyer of the Condition, and afterward pleads that the Obligation
was made and delivered by him, and one M. who is still living at D, and demands
Judgment of the Writ, to which the Plaintiff demnrres the words of the
Obligation, were Noverint universi, etc. adquam solucionem been and fideliter
faciend. Obligamus nos vel quemlibet nostrum. And whether this was, should be
accounted a Writ, Obligation, or Several, at the Election of the Plaintiff,
was the question, and Ger. Cook was of opinion, that it should be brought
against both, and his only reason was, that at most the Plaintiff had but an
Election, for the word (vel) could not be taken for (et) as it is 11 H. 7. 13.
a Grant made to J. S. at J. D. is void, and 20 H. 6. grant to two, to them, or
to the Heirs of one of them, is not good, and then if he had only an Election,
he has made that already, for the Defendant has pleaded and averred, that is,
was made by two, jointly by the appearance, whereof he has agreed to take it
accordingly, but Yelverton argued in this manner, that although the words in an
Obligation be not proper and apt, yet if they be substantial, it is enough,
and therefore 28 H. 8. 19. utrumque nostrum is adjudged good, and the 21 R. 2.
939. ad quam quidem solucionem obligamus nos, and singulos nostrum, is adjudged
several and joint and for a direct authority he cited 7 H. 4. 66. where an
Obligation was, nos, vel alterum nostrum, and the Plaintiff brought several
Precipes, and adjudged good, that he might make it several or joint, and all
the Judges were clearly of an opinion, that the Action was well brought, for as
it has been said, the Plaintiff had his Election, and that Election would be
said to be executed by the joint Delivery, for there was no cause to make
Election until the Bond was perfected, and therefore though one delivers it at
one time, and the other at another, yet the Plaintiff may have a caput Precipe,
if he will, for the Election is in bringing the Action, and the words, (vel)
and (and) are but Synonimaes, and Champions Case, Plowden 286. (and) is taken
for (vel) and the 21 E. 3. 29. in Mallories Case, (u) is taken for (and)
therefore they gave Judgment that the Defendant should answer over.

FReeman versus Shield, Trin. 11 Jacobi, and adjudged Pasch. 12 Action of Debt
upon an Obligation to perform an award, and the breach assigned for exhibiting
a chancery Bill, and adjudged no Breach.
Jacobi. Freeman brought an Action of Debt upon an Obligation against Shield,
and proved Oyer of the Condition, which was that, if the Defendant should stand
to the Award, and Arbitrament of J. S. that then, etc. the Defendant pleads
that the Arbitrators, awarded, that whereas there was no suit in the Chancery,
depending against the Plaintiff for diverse matters, that the Plaintiff should
be acquitted of that suit, and of all the matters contained in the same Bill,
and the Defendant further alleges, that he did not make any prosecution of the
said Bill, but that the Plaintiff stands acquitted thereof, the Plaintiff
replies that the Defendant after the said Award such a year and day, did
exhibit a new Bill which did contain the same matter which the first Bill had,
and set forth at large, both the Bills, by which it appeared to the Court that
it was so, to which Plea the Defendant Demurres, and the cause of the Demurrer
only was, because the Plaintiff had pleaded, that the Defendant had exhibited
a new Bill, but had not alleged any Process taken forth upon the same Bill,
and if this be a breach of the award is the question, Govin was for the
Plaintiff, and he was of opinion, that it was a breach for the words were quod
staret acquietatus, and to be acquitted is not only to be intended of an
actual disturbance or molestation, but if the party be put in fright, or is
liable to any Process, it is a breach, 8 Ed. 4. 27. a Condition to save one
harmless, if a Capias be awarded against him, although it be not executed, yet
it is a forfeiture of the Bond, nay, though it was never delivered to the
Sheriff, for otherwise the Plaintiff should be in continual care and trouble,
for fear lest the Defendant should do it, and so the Defendant may dally with
him a long time, which shall be mischievous, and therefore it may be resembled
to 9 H. 7. where if a man sell a thing with warranty to pay for it at a day to
come, if the thing sold be corrupt, the party may have his Action of deceit,
before the day of payment, because it is in the others power to bring his
Action, and so it is in the Defendants power to serve the Plaintiff with
Process when he pleases, and therefore it is a breach, Coventry for the
Defendant; first because it is no such Process as can prejudice, for neither
goods nor Body shall be taken, and therefore is not like the Cases before
cited. And secondly, it is not such a process as our law respects or regards,
for a Bill is but as a Petition: Haughton Justice was of the same opinion with
the rest of the Judges, but adjourned until Hill. 11. Jac. and an Exception
taken, because the Defendant had not answered the Declaration, for the
Condition is that he should be acquitted, and the Defendant pleaded that he
has been acquitted; and Cook was of opinion that it was good, and Pasch. 12.
Jac. Judgment was given for the Defendant by the whole Court.

KIpping versus Swain, Trin. 11. Jacobi. The Plaintiff brought an Action of
Debt for Tithes, the Defendants time ended before the Co^n carried, yet held
good for the Plaintiff.
Action of Debt against Swain, upon the Statute of 2 E. 6. for not setting
forth of Tithes, and declares, whereas the Plaintiff being Proprietor of the
Rectory of B. in the County of, etc. for the term of seven years, and that the
Defendant was Occupier of Lands within the same Parish for six months by a
Devise made the tenth of March, Anno decimo Jacobi. And that the Defendant 27.
Aug. the year aforesaid did cut his Corn there growing; and that the tenth of
September then next following the Defendant being (Subdit. dicti Domini Regis)
carried away the said Corn, not setting out the Tenth according to the Statute;
and upon a Nil debet pleaded it was found for the Plaintiff, and it was moved
in Arrest of Judgment, first, because of the Plaintiffs own showing he had no
cause of Action against the Defendant, for the interest of the Defendant in the
Land was determined, before the Tithes were carried away; but the Court were of
opinion, that it was no Exception, for although his interest in the Land was
gone, yet he remained Owner of the Corn; for if An Action will lie against a
stranger, that shall carry away the Corn before the Severance.
Corn is cut, although a stranger take them away before severance, yet an
Action will lie against him upon this Statute, for otherwise the intent of the
Statute may easily be defeated. Another Exception was taken, because the
Plaintiff said, he was (Subdit. dicti Domini Regis) which is a Fault incurable;
for the Statute referrs Subdit. to his politic capacity, but Dicti goes to his
natural and sole capacity; and so the force of the Statute shall be determined
by his Death; and for this cause an Indictment upon the 8 H. 6. Contra pacem
dicti Domini, had been several times reversed; and of this opinion were three
Judges, but Haughton doubted of it, and so it was adjourned.

PEnniworth versus Blawe, Trin. 11. Jacobi. The Plaintiff brought an Action of
Debt upon an Obligation, and prayed Oyer of the Condition, which was, that he
should stand to the Arbitrament of J. S. of all Suites, Quarrels,
Controversies, and Debates, from the beginning of the World until the making
the Obligation, so that the Award be made in writing, under the hand and seal
of N. S. and should be delivered to the parties before such a Day, etc. and
observe that the Sealing and Delivery of the Obligation was at twelve a clock
the first of May: the Defendant pleads in Bar, that the Arbitrators made an
Award, and did deliver that to the parties abovesaid, but said further, that
in the morning, and before twelve a clock the first of May aforesaid, one
Debate and Controversy did arise between the parties, concerning a Trespass
committed by the Plaintiff the same morning, of which the Defendant gave notice
to the Arbitrator, before twelve a clock of the said first of May, concerning
which Trespass the Arbitrator made no Award, and therefore pretends the Award
to be void, and demands Judgment; to which the Plaintiff demurrs; and
Yelverton being for the Plaintiff, that the Plea was not any Answer to the
Plaintiff, and therefore Judgment ought to be given; for the Plaintiffs Action
is grounded upon an Obligation, as single, and the thing which helps the
Defendant is the Condition indorsed, to stand to the Award of S. the which is
restrained, so that it be delivered under the hand and seal: and if the
Defendant will plead the Condition against the Plaintiff, he must plead it to
be performed and executed according to the Submission by the Arbitrator, for
else the Bond remains as single: and so in this Case the Defendant pleads,
that the Arbitrator made an Award, and that it was delivered by the Arbitrator;
but whether it was delivered in writing or under his hand according to the
Submission is not pleaded, and therefore it is no Answer to the Plaintiff, for
he has not pleaded an Award made according to the Condition, and therefore the
Bond is single. Yea Cook argued for the Defendant, and said, that the Plaintiff
by the Demurrer had confessed that the Arbitrator had made no Award, as the
Defendant had pleaded, and then he shall never have Judgment: for if it may
judicially appear to the Court, that the Plaintiff had no Cause of Action he
shall never have Judgment; and that the Plaintiff ought to have averred, and
joined with a Traverse of that the Defendant pleaded, to wit, that the
Arbitrator had made an Award, and delivered it in writing under his hand and
seal without that, etc. and as to the other matter of the Trespass the same
Day, and so he might have demanded Judgment, for his Plea does but amount to
the general Issue, that the Arbitrators made no Award: but Yelverton answered,
that it could not be pleaded in any other manner then he had pleaded it,
because he could not traverse it, because the Defendant himself had pleaded,
that he made an Award: and although the Demurrer confess all matters in Deed,
yet they are such only as are well pleaded, as Burtons Case, 5. Rep. 69. And
also although the Award pleaded cannot be intended the same Award specified in
the Condition, yet the Plaintiff had good cause of Action; and all the Court,
Fleming being absent, were of opinion, that the Plaintiff ought to recover for
the Reasons before alleged, but as for that point whether the Controversy
that grew in the morning should be arbitrated, because there cannot be a
fraction of Days, it was not argued, nor any opinion of the Court delivered,
only Cook cited 5 E. 4. 208. that the Arbitrator ought to arbitrate of that,
because the Condition was of all matters, until the making the Obligation.

WHeeler versus Hayden, Trin. 11. Jacobi. W. Parson of the Church of A. brought
an Action of Debt against the Defendant for Arrerages of Rent, and declared
upon a Lease made to the Defendant for four years, if the Plaintiff did so long
live, and continue Parson, etc. and upon a Non demisit pleaded, the Jury found
an especial Verdict, to wit, that the Plaintiff had leased it to the Defendant
for four years, if the Plaintiff shall so long live only; and whether this
Verdict was found for the Plaintiff or Defendant was the Question; and Cook
Serj. seemed that it was found for the Plaintiff; for the main matter was, that
he should lease it, if he so long lived; and the subsequent words are of no
effect, because they contained no more then by the Law was before spoke of; for
the Law says, that if he be non-resident, or if he resign, or be deprived,
that the Lease shall be determined, like to the 30. Ass. 8. A Lease to two, and
the longest Liver of them, and the 17 E. 3. 7. A. A Lease to one of Land and a
House for years, and that the Lessee may make good profit of it, this last
Clause in both is idle; and Dallidge was of the same opinion; but Yelverton
against them, for the Plaintiff had entitled himself to the Action by such a
Cause; and if he fail in that it is his folly, and shall not recover; for the
Lease upon which he declared had two Determinations, the first by Death, the
second by removing; and the Jury had found the Lease only upon the first
Determination, and therefore various in substance; and therefore the Jury have
found against the Plaintiff, as if a Lease be made by Baron and Feme, if they
shall so long live and continue married, both of them ought to be found.
Haughton to the same purpose, for when a Parson makes a Lease, if he shall so
long live, he does take upon himself, that he will do no Act by which the Lease
shall be determined, but only by his Death, for otherwise an Action of
Covenant will lie against him; but if the other Clause be added, to wit, and
shall so long continue Parson, then he may resign, or be non-resident without
danger, and so there is great difference between the Verdict and Declaration,
and it was adjourned the Court, being divided in opinion.

Dower.
MIch. 6. Jacobi. Dower may be brought as well against the Dower may be brought
against the Heir or Committee of the Ward.
Heir himself, as against the Committee of the Ward: but if an Infant be in
Ward to a Lord in Chivalry, the Dower shall be brought against the Guardian in
Chivalry. If Dower be brought against one who is not Tenant of the Freehold,
the Tenant before Judgment shall be received, and upon Default of the Tenant,
and after Judgment he may falsify.

MIch. 9. Jac. Dower demanded of the third part of Tithes of Wool and Lamb in
three several Towns, and it was demanded Nota.
of the Court, how the Sheriff should deliver Seisin, and the Court held it the
best way for the Sheriff to deliver the third part of the tenth part, and the
third tenth Lamb, Videlicet, the thirtieth Lamb.

In Dower against the Lord Morley, the Tenant at the Day of taking He in
Reversion received after Default made by Tenant for Life.
of the Inquest after the Jury had appeared, and before the Jury were sworn
made Default, and a Pety Cape was awarded, and the Tenant at the Day in Banck
informed the Court, that the Tenant is but Tenant for Tenant for Life, and that
the Reversion is in one P. who at the Return in Banck ought to be received to
save his Title, and the Court appointed him at the Return of the Pety Cape to
plead his Plea.

HIH. 13. Jacobi. Allen and his Wife Demandants versus Walter in Dower of a
Freehold in Munden Magna, Munden Parva and B. Return of the Sheriff adjudged
insufficient being too general.
the Sheriff returned Pleg. de prosequend, J. D. R. R. And the Names of the
Summoners J. D. and R. F. And after the Summons made, and by the space of
fourteen Days and more, before the Return of the said Writ, at the most usual
Church Door of Munden Magna, where part of the Tenements lay upon the 27. of
October, being the Lords Day, immediately after Sermon ended in that Church, he
publicly proclaimed all and singular things contained in that Writ to be
proclaimed according to the Form of the Statute in that behalf made and
provided, L. P. Ar. Vic. And Exception was taken to the Return, because
Proclamation was not made at the Doors of the Churches where the Lands lay, and
the Court held it not necessary; but it was sufficient to make Proclamation at
any of the Churches; but the Return was insufficient, because he said, that he
had caused to be proclaimed all and singular in that Writ contained, and says
not what; and the Demandant released his Default upon the grand Cape.

CLefold versus Carr. The Tenant in Dower before the value inquired No Writ of
Error lies until the value be inquired upon.
of, and Damages found, brought a Writ of Error, and by the opinion of the
whole Court a Writ of Error would not lie, for the Judgment is not perfect
until the value be inquired upon. The Demand in Dower was of the third part of
two Messuages in three parts to be divided, and the Judgment was to recover
Seisin of the third part of the Tenements aforesaid, with the Appurtenances, to
hold to him in severally by Meets and Bounds, and adjudged naught; because they
are Tenants in common, and the Judgment ought to be, to hold to him together,
and in common; but if it had been in three parts divided, it had been good.

Actions in Ejectment.
ALlen versus Nash, Hill. 5. Jacobi, rotulo 719. The Plaintiff Implication not
good in a Surrender, though it be in a Will.
brought an Ejectione firm, and a special Verdict upon a Surrender of
Copyhold Land, which was to the use of the second Son for Life, after the
Death of the Tenant and his Heirs, and it was adjudged not to be good in a
Surrender; for though it be good in a Will, yet Implication is not good in a
Surrender; and in Copyhold Cases a Surrender to the use, etc. this no use but
an Explanation how the Land shall go; if the Lord grant the Land in other
manner then I appoint, it is void, if there be found Joynt-tenants, and one
Surrender to the use of his Will, it was a Breach of the Joinder, and the Will
good.

EYer versus Bannaster, Trin. 16. Jacobi, rotulo 719. The Plaintiff Challenge
because the Sheriff married the Daughter of the Lessors Wife, and held no cause.
brought an Ejectione firm, and declared upon a Lease made by Ed. Kynaston; to
which the Defendant pleads not guilty, and the Plaintiff alleadges a Challenge,
that the Wife of the Sheriff is Cousin to the Plaintiff, and desires a Venire
facias, to the Coroners, and the Defendant denied it, and so a Venire was made
to the Sheriff; and at the Assizes the Defendant challenges the Array, because
the Pannell was arrayed by the Sheriff, who married the Daughter of the Wife of
the Lessor; and note, the first Challenge was made after the Issue joined, and
at the Assizes the Defendant challenged as above, and a demurrer to it, and
Hutton held, that a Challenge could not be after a challenge, except it were
for some cause that did arise after the challenge made, and that the party
ought to rely upon one cause of challenge, though he had many causes, and
observe the Defendant could not challenge the Array until the Assizes, but
Husband held that a Challenge might be upon a Challenge, but this challenge was
adjudged naught by all the Judges.

HIll versus Scale, Trin. 16 Jacobi rotulo 5. 18. the Plaintiff brought an
Ejectione firmae, and declares upon a Demise made to the Plaintiff by J. C.
bearing date, the first of January, anno 15. and sealed and delivered the
twelfth of January following, to hold from Christmasse, then last past, for two
years, the Jury found a special Verdict, and found the Lease, and a Letter of
Attorney to execute the Lease, in this manner, that the Lessor was seized of
the Land in Fee, and being so seized, he made, signed, and sealed an Indenture
of a Demise of the said Tenements, and found it in haec verba, this Indenture,
etc. and they further found that the Lessor, the said fifth Nota.
day of January, did not deliver the said Indenture of Demise to the Plaintiff
as his Deed, but that the Lessor the said fifth day of January, by his writing,
bearing Date the same Day, gave full power and authority to one C. to enter
into all the premises and to take possession thereof in the name of the Lessor,
and after possession so taken, to deliver the said Indenture of Demise to the
Plaintiff, upon any part of the premises in the name of the Lessor, and find
the Letter of Attorney in haec verba, To all etc. whereas, I the said J. C. by
my Indenture of Lease, bearing date with these Presents, have demised, granted,
and to Farm let, etc. for and during the Term of two years, etc. and they
further find, that the said C. such a day, as Attorney to the Lessor, by virtue
of that writing did enter into the Tenements aforesaid, and took possession
thereof to the use of the Lessor, and immediately after possession so taken,
the said C. did deliver the said Indenture of Demise upon the Tenements, as the
Lessors Deed to the Plaintiff, to have, etc. and the doubt was because the
Lessor in the Letter of Attorney, and said that whereas he had demised, and if
it were a Demise, then the Letter of Attorney was idle, but notwithstanding the
Court gave Judgment for the Plaintiff.

WEeks versus Mesey, An Ejectione firmae brought against two, and one of them
was an estranger, and was in the house, and the principal would not appear,
and the other appeared, and pleaded non informat. and the Court was acquainted
with the proceedings, and the Plaintiff prayed an habere facias possessionem,
and the Court told the Plaintiff, that by that Writ and recovery, he could not
remove him that had Right, when a Lease is made to bring an Ejectment of Land
in diverse men's hands, then they must enter into one of the parcells and leave
one in that place, and then must he go unto another How to execute a Lease to
try a Title, the Land being in many men's hands.
and leave one there, and so of the rest, and then after he has made the last
Entry there, he seals, and delivers the Lease, and then those men that were
left there, must come out of the Land, and this is a good executing of the
Lease, and Pasch, the ninth of James, the Court held that an Ejectment would
not ly of Common pasture, or of Sheep-gate.

BEamont versus Cook, Trin. 13 Jacobi. An exception taken in Ejectment,
Original against four, and count against 3. without a Simulcum, and held
naught.
because the Original was test the very same day that the Ejectment was made
and adjudged good by the whole Court, and one Goodhall brought an original in
Ejectment against Hill, and three others, and the Plaintiff counts against
three of the Defendants, and no simulcum against the fourth, and this matter
was moved in arrest of Judgment. And the Judgment was stayed by the whole
Court.

COronder, versus Clerk, Hill. 10 Jacobi rotulo, 3315. Action upon The intent
of a will must be certain, and agreeable to Law
an Ejectment brought, the Jury found it specially upon a Devise, the words of
the Will were to my right Heirs Males and posterity of my name, part and part
like, the question was, who should have the Land, and the Court held, the Land
must go to the Heir, at the Common Law, and not according to the words of the
Will, because they cannot consist with the grounds of Law, a Will must be
construed in all parts, the brother cannot have it by the Devise, because he is
not Heir, and the Daughters cannot, for they are not Heirs and posterity, and
therefore, neither of them could have it, because they are not Heirs and
posterity, because they that take it must be Heir and posterity, for the intent
of a Will must be certain and agreeable to Law, and there must not an intent
out of the words of the will, be sought out, and the whole Court held, that the
Plaintiff was barred.

YOung, versus Radford, Pasch. 10 Jacobi Rotulo 1515. Action upon an Ejectment
brought, and the Jury found a special Nota.
Verdict, and the Case was, that Elizabeth Rudford, was possessed of a house
full thirty years, and she took a Husband, the Husband and Wife morgage the
Term, the Wife dies, and the Husband redeems the Land, and marries another
wife, and then dies, and makes his Wife Executrix, and she mary's the Lessor.
The Defendant takes Administration of the Goods of the first Woman, and it was
held void, and Judgment for the Plaintiff.

PEttison, versus Reel, Pasch. 12* Jacobi, Rotulo, 2350. An ejectment brought,
and Trial, and Verdict for the Plaintiff, and exception taken in arrest of
Judgment to the Venire Facias, because this word Juratum was omitted, for the
Writ was posuerunt se in illam, and omitted the word Juratum, and this was
amended by the Court. When a Title is to be tried upon an Ejectment, and a
Lease to be executed by Letter of Attorney, the course is this, that the Lessor
do seal the Lease only, and the Letter of Attorney, and deliver How to execute
a Lease by Letter of Attorney
the Letter of Attorney, but not the Lease, for the Attorney must deliver that
upon the Land: and upon an Ejectruent brought of Lands in two villages, of a
house and forty Acres of Land in, A. and B. and a special Entry in the Land,
adjoining to the house to wit, the putting in of a Horse, which was drove out
of the Land by the Defendant, and this was adjudged a good Entry for the Land
in both the Villages, by the opinion of the whole Court.

ARden versus Mich. 12 Jacobi. The Plaintiff delivers, that whereas such a day
and year at Curdworth in the said County did demise A Venire facias of the
Parish adjudged good.
to the Plaintiff two Acres of Land, with the Appurtenances in the Parish of C.
and the Venire facias was of the Parish of C. and after a verdict, exception
was taken because it was not of Curdworth, but it was adjudged good by the
Court, and to prove the Lease made Lanheston an Attorney swear, that the Lessor
sealed the Lease, and subscribed it, but did not deliver it, and by word gave
authority to one W. to enter into the Land, and to deliver the Lease upon the
Land to the Plaintiff as his Deed, and by that authority he entered, and
delivered the Lease as his Deed to the Plaintiff, and it was adjudged good.

MArsh versus Sparry, Hill. 14 Jacobi Rotulo, 1859. An Ejectment brought ex
dimissione G. W. and the Original was A mistake of the Cursitor in the
Original amended after Trial.
made ex divisione, and after a Trial, Sergeant Hitchaw moved the Court, that
the Original might be amended, and make ex dimissione, and the Court granted
it, and the Cursitor was ordered to amend it, and also in the end of the
Original, it was written Barnabiam, and it should have been Barnabas, and that
also was ordered to be amended by the Court.

CRadock versus Jones, Trin. 14 Jacobi. Rotulo 2284. An Ejectment brought upon
a Demise, made by Cotton Knight, the Defendant pleads not guilty, and a
Challenge to the Sheriff, and prays a Venire facias to the Coroners, because
the Sheriff is cozen to the Plaintiff, Nota.
and shows how, and because the Defendant did not deny it, a Venire facias was
awarded to the Coroners, and after a verdict, it was alleged in arrest of
Judgment, because it was not a principal Challenge, and a Venire facias de
novo, awarded to the Sheriff.

PArkin versus Parkin, 13 Hill Jacobi Rotulo 979. And Ejectment Though the
Defendants Plea be naught, yet the Plaintiff shall not recover, because he
showed not any Title by his replication.
brought and verdict, and after a Trial, Exception taken to pleading, of a
Deed enrolled, the Action was brought in the County of York, and pleaded thus,
ut infra, sex menses tunc proximos sequent. coram milite uno Justic. etc. in
West Riding, Com. Eborum, ad pacem, etc. conservand. Assign. and W. C. Clerico
pacis ibidem debito, modo de Recor. irrotulat. and Exception was, because the
inrollment was not made according to the Form of the Statute, because it did
not appear, that the Justice before whom the Deed was enrolled, was a Justice
of the Peace, of the County of York, but of the West Riding, and it was not
alleged, that the Land did ly in the West Riding, and note that the Defendants
Plea in Bar, was insufficient, because the Defendant did not confess, nor
avoid the Count, and the Plaintiff by his Replication does not show any Title to
the Land, because it did not pass by the inrollment, and so he has lost his
Suit, and although the Bar be insufficient, yet notwitstanding, the Plaintiff
shall not recover.

GReenely versus Passy, Hill 5 Iacobi Rotulo, 808. An Ejectment The question is
upon the Statute of 32 H. 8 upon Feoffements made by Husbands during the
coverture.
brought, the Defendant pleads not guilty, and the Jury found it Specially,
that one Woodhouse was seized of Land in Fee, and did infeof the Husband and
Wife, to have and to hold to the said Husband and Wife, and the Heirs of their
bodies between them to be begotten, by virtue of which Feofment, the Husband
and Wife were seized of the whole Land in Fee Tail, to wit, etc. the Husband
infeofs the youngest Son of the land in Fee, and afterward the Husband dies
and the woman survives, and afterward she dies before any Entry by her made
into the Land, and further find the lessor to be the eldest son, of their
bodies, and that the younger Son infeoffed the Defendant; and afterward the
eldest Son entered into the Land, and made the lease in the Declaration, and
whether the Entry of the eldest Son was lawful, or no, was the question upon
the Statute of 32 H. 8. that Fines or Feoffements made by the Husband, etc.
during coverture be or make any discontinuance, etc. or be hurtful to the said
wife, or her Heirs, and Sir Edward Cook held, that the Heir is not barred of
his Entry by the Statute.

PAcy versus Knollis, Trin. 6. Iacobi Rotulo 291. An Ejectment brought, the
Defendant pleaded not guilty, and the Jury found A verbal averment shall not
overthrow a will.
it Specially, and the question is upon the words of the Will, to wit, And I
give to Katharine my Wife, all the Profits of my Houses and Lands lying and
being in the Parish of Billing, and L. at The mistaking of the Town not
hurtful in a Will.
a certain street there called Broke-street, and the Jury found that there was
not any Village or Hamlet in the said County called Billing, and that the Land
supposed to be devised lies in Byrling-street; no man's verbal Averment shall
be taken, or admitted, to be contrary to the Will, which is expressly set out in
the Will. If I have two Thomas to my Sons, and I give it to Thomas, it shall
be intended my youngest Son, because my eldest Son should have it by Descent,
the Will was held by all the Court to be good.

HEllam versus Ley, Trin. 7. Jacobi, rotulo 2718. A special Verdict Property of
Goods cannot be in obayance.
in an Ejectione firm, the Question was upon the words of the Will, which
were, that her Husband had given all to her, and nothing from her, and whether
these words imply a consent, and so an Agreement to the Devise of the Husband
or no. And Foster, Warburton, and Walmsley, that it was an Assent; but Sir
Edward Cook was of a contrary opinion: and note she was made sole Executrix,
and she proved the Will, and Justice Foster held it to be an Assent in Law. The
property of Goods cannot be in obayance, they must be in the Executor,
Administrator, or Ordinary; and Warburton held, that the words made an Assent,
and said, that when the Bond is delivered to one to the use of another, until
he dis-assent, it is his Deed, but when he dis-assenteth, then it is not his
Deed, Ab initio: if a Lease be given by Will to diverse, and made one of them
his Executor, in this Case the Executor must make his special Claim, else he
must have it as Executor: and Sir Edward Cook held, that the general Entry, and
proof of the Will is no Assent, she must first have it as an Executor, before
she can have it as a Legatee, a Legacy is waiveable; but if the Law work it in
me whether I will or no, then I cannot waive it, and therefore he held she
should enter specially.

Rolls versus Mason, Hill. 6. Jacobi, rotulo 2613. An Ejectment Difference
between Prescription and Custom.
brought, and the Question grew upon two Customs, one was that the Copyholder
for Life may name to the Lord of the Manor who should be his Successor in the
Copyhold: and the other that the Copyholder for Life may cut down all the
Trees of wrong upon the customary Land: and the third Question was, whether the
second Lessee of the Manor may take advantage of the pretended Forfeiture for
cutting down the Trees, by the Law a Copyholder shall have, house-boot,
free-boot, and hedge-boot, and common of Turbary to burn in his house, but he
cannot sell them. A Copyholder by Custom may name his Successor, and if the
Lord refuse to admit him, the Homage may set* a reasonable Fine, and so he
shall be admitted. The Lessee of the Manor may take advantage of the
Forfeiture, but in this Case it is no Forfeiture, and the Copyholder may cut
down Trees, for he has a greater Estate then a sole Tenant for Life, because
he shall name his Successor: APrescription goes to one man, and a Custom to
many; and Judgment for the Defendant.

MAson versus Strecher and alios, Pasch. 7. Jacobi, rotulo 606. An Ejectment
brought for the Manor of P. it was held by the Court, that the consent of a
Servant in the absence of him who is possessed of the Term shall not out his
Master of the Possession, because the Servant has no interest in the Land.

CRamporne versus Freshwater Pach 8 Jacobi rotulo 2742. An action Copihold Land
cannot be demised for three years without license or custom.
of Debt brought upon an Ejectment, the Plaintiff was nonsuit upon his own
Evidence because he declared upon a Devise made for three years, and it was
confessed by the Plaintiff that the Lands were Copyhold Land, and that the
Plaintiff had not license to demise them for three years neither could he
prove; that by any custom he could demise them for three years without a
license, and so the Lessor was taken for a Disseisor by the opinion of the
Court.

CAffe versus Randall Trin. 9. Jac. rotulo 3299. An Ejectment Record of Nisi
prius amended by the Roll.
brought against Randall and his Wife, the Ejectment made by the Wife and not
guilty, pleaded and tried; and it was moved in Arrest of Judgment, because the
Issue was pleaded in this manner, Et dicunt quod ipsi in nullo sunt culpabiles,
etc. And the Ejectment was made by the woman alone, and ought to have been that
she was not guilty, and upon examination of the Plea Roll and Record of Nisi
prius it appeared to the Court that the Plea Roll was right but the Record of
Nisi prius mistaken, but Sergeant Barker said that at the time when the Record
of Nisi prius was tried, the Plea roll agreed with the Record, and was
afterward amended. and Waller the prothonotary confessed that he amended the
plea roll, as upon his private examination of the roll but without notice that
there was a Record sent down to try that Issue, and therefore the Court ordered
that the Record of Nisi prius should be amended according to the Plea roll
which was done accordingly.

PAts versus Chitty Trin. 9. Iac. rotulo 2151. vel 2151. An Action of Concord
with satisfaction a good Plea in Eiectment.
ejectment brought, the Defendant pleads a concord with satisfaction in Bar,
the Plaintiff demurs, and it was held by Winch and Foster a good Plea because
the Action is not only in the realty for he recovers damages and possession
which are mere Chattells. Secondly, Because the Defendant pleads the
satisfaction as in discharge of that Action and all others and ten shillings
for rests, Warburton of the same opinion, and he vouched the like case
satisfaction is good. Plea in a Quare impedit wherein a man recovers the
presentation: And Cook said, that in all Actions wherein money or Damages are
recoverable as well wherein the Defendant might wage his Law as wherein he
might not, it is a good Plea Pasc. 3. Jacobi rotulo 1033. Eden and Blake, but
in matters where one Freehold or Inheritance is recoverable, concord is no
Bar and in dower recompense in other Lands or Rent is no Bar. But by petition
in Chancery, but Rent Issuing out of the same Land demanded is a good Bar; and
in all Actions Quare vi and armis wherein process of Outlary lies by the common
Law, concord or an Award is a good Bar, 38 H. 6. title Bar satisfaction in
trespass by an Estranger is a good Bar although it be without notice of the
trespassor by the opinion of the whole Court.

CRaddock versus Jones Trin. Iacobi rotulo 2284. An Ejectment brought, and
declares upon a Lease made by W. Cotton Knight, Misconveyance of process, what
it is, and helped by the Statute.
the Defendant pleads not guilty, and makes a challenge and prays a venire
facias to the Coroners because the Sheriff is Cozen to the Lessors Wife which
is not a principle challenge but by favor, and after a Trial and Verdict it
was amended in arrest of the Judgment because it was mistried and Barker
vouched a case in the Exchequer Chamber, in 43 El. upon a Writ of Error,
between Higgins, and Spicer, upon a Venire facias, awarded in the like manner,
and it was adjudged to be mistryed, and it was then agreed that misconveyance
of process is, where one Writ is awarded in place of another to an Officer
which of right ought to execute that process, and he returns it, this is helped
after a Verdict by the Statute. But if a writ be awarded to an Officer who
ought not to execute that process, and he returns it, this is a mistriall and
not helped by the Statute and Warburton said that Dyer folio 367. To the
contrary is not Law, two Tenements in Common join in a Lease for years to
bring an Ejectment and declare that whereas they did demise the Tenements and
it was held naught for it is a several Lease of moities and if they had
declared, that one of them had demised one moity and the other another moity it
had been good.

WIlson versus Rich, Pasch. 44. Eliz. The Husband and Wife join in a Lease by
Indenture to A. rendering Rent, and this is A feme covert cannot make a Letter
of Attorney to deliver a Lease upon the Land.
for years, and make a Letter of Attorney to seal and deliver the Lease upon
the Land, which is done accordingly; A. brings an Ejectmentand declares upon a
Demise made by the Husband and Wife, and upon Evidence to the Jury ruled by
Popham, Fenner, and Yelverton, that the Lease did not maintain the Declaration,
for a Woman covert could not make a Letter of Attorney, to deliver a Lease upon
the Land, although Rent was reserved by the Lease, and so the Warrant of
Attorney is merely void, and the Lease is only the Lease of the Husband, which
is not made good by the Declaration, by the opinion of the Court.

STretton versus Cush, Pasch. 1. Jacobi. J. L. leased a House for fourscore
years, in which Lease there is one Condition, that the Lessee his Executors and
Assigns should keep and maintain the House in reparation, and if upon lawful
warning given by the Lessor, his Heirs and Assigns, etc. to enter; the Lessee
for fourscore years leases the House to A. for thirty years; and A. leases it
to Wilmore for fifteen years; the Assignee of the Reversion came to the House,
and seeing it in decay gave warning to Wilmore then possessed of that House to
repair it, which was not done within six Months, by reason whereof the
Assignee entered for the Condition broken, and upon a Not guilty pleaded, the
matter before recited was found by a special Verdict, and adjudged against Sir
William Wade the Assignee of the Reversion, for the warning given to Wilmore to
repair, who was but an under tenant, was not good, for he was not Assignee of
the term, nor had but a pety interest under the grand Lease, upon whom no
Attorney could be made for the Rent, nor any Action of Waste brought against
him, for there wanted the immediate privity: and in this Case there is a
difference to be taken between a rent and a Condition for reparations, for the
Condition is merely collateral to the Land, and merely personal, and therefore
warning is not of necessity to be given at the House, but notice of Reparations
ought to be given to the person of the Lessee, who had the grand interest. And
a Difference is to be taken between a time certain in which a thing is to be
done, and a time uncertain; for in the Case of Rent reserved at a Day certain,
Demand thereof must be made upon the Land only, because the Land is the
Debtor; for Popham said, that if the Lessor should come and demand his Rent,
and there should meet with J. S. a stranger, and should say to J. S. Pay me my
Rent, this is no good Demand of the Rent, having mistaken the person who is
chargeable with it: but in this Case one general Demand of Rent, without
reference to any person who is not chargeable, is good. And he was of opinion,
that if a man lease Land, rendering Rent for a year, whenever the Lessor
should demand it, in this Case the Lessor come and demand it before the end of
the year, his Demand upon the Land is not good, except When a demand shall be
made to the person, and when upon the Land*
the Lessee be there also; for the time being uncertain, when the Lessor will
demand it, he ought to give notice to the Lessee of it. And if the Lessor come
to the Lessee in person, and demands the Rent, yet it is not sufficient; for
although notice is to be given the Lessee in person, yet the Land is the
Debtor, and therefore the Law ties the Lessee to the Land, as to the place in
which he shall be paid; but if the Lessor stay nntill the eud of the year, then
the Lessee at his peril ought to attend upon the Land to pay it, for the end of
the year is time of payment prescribed by the Law which was granted, and
Judgment was given for the Plaintiff.

CLerk versus Sydenham, Pasch. 4. Jacobi. An Ejectment brought by A Lease made
to three for their lives, with a Covenant that the Land should remain to the
survivor of them for ninety years, a good interest in the survivor.
the Plaintiff of a Lease made of Land by P. and B. and Not guilty pleaded: and
the Evidence of the Defendants part was by reason of a Lease of the Land in
Question, made by the Abbot of Cleeve, before the Dissolution to W. D. and Jo.
his Wife, and F. their Daughter for their Lives by Indenture; and by the same
Indenture the Abbot covenants, grants, and confirms to the three Lessees, that
the land should remain to the Assignee of the Survivor of them for ninety
years; Fr. survived, and took to Husband one Hill, who the 20 Eliz. grant their
Estate for life to J. S. and all their interest in the Remainder, and all their
power for all the term, and this by mean Assignements came to the Defendant:
and whether any interest passed in Remaindor by the Lease of the Abbot was the
Question; and by all the five Judges it was held to be a good interest in
possibility, and to be reduced into a certainty in the person of the Survivor;
as where Land is given to three and the right Heirs of the Survivor, this is a
good limitation of the Inheritance presently, but it is in expectancy until
the Survivor be known, for then the Fee is executed in him. And Popham vouched
a Case in his experience, 17 Eliz. in which Sergeant Baker was of Counsel, and
it was a Lease was made to Husband and Wife for life, and for forty years to
the Survivor of them, the Husband and Wife join in Grant of this Interest: and
although it be certain, one of them shall survive, yet the Grant is void,
because at the time of the Grant there was not any interest, but only a
possibility in either of them: and although in the Case in Question the
Remainder is not limited to any of the three Lessees, but to the Assignee of
the survivor; yet the Court was of opinion, that this was not a bare nomination
in the survivor to appoint what person he pleased, but a term and an interest;
and Popham took this difference, if a Lease be made to J. S. for life, and
after his death to the Executors and Assigns of J. S. this is an interest in
J. S. to dispose of it, but if it had been limited to J. S. for life, and
afterward to the Executors and Assigns of J. D. here this is a bare power in
J. D. and his Executors, because they are not parties or privies to the first
interest which was agreed, and it was also agreed, that whether it was an
interest or a word of nomination, it was all saved to the party by the Statute
of 31 H. 8. of Monasteries, which gives the Houses dissolved to the King, but
in the same degree and quality as the Abbot had them. And the Abbot was
charged with the power given by himself, and so was the King. Which mark.

VVAnto versus Willingsby, Pasch. 5. Jacobi. The Bishop of Exceter in the time
of H. 8. by his Deed gives Land, etc. to Nicho: Turner, and by Bill his Cousin
in consideration of service done by Turner, and for other considerations him
moving to them, and the Heirs of their bodies, and dies. They have Issue Jo.
and William, N. T. dies, and Sybill marries Clap. and they alien the Land to
John in Fee; Sybill and John leavie a Fine to Walther in Fee of the Land. And
afterward Sybill infeoffes William her younger Son, who infeoffes Willinghby,
Io: enters, and leaseth to Walther and Willingby for the trial of his title,
seals a Lease to ward, who declares of so many Acres in Sutton Cofeild. And the
Jury upon a not guilty pleaded foundby the Verdict that the Bishop gave the
Tenements aforesaid by his Deed, the tenor of which Deed follows, etc. And by
the Deed it appeared that the Lands did lie in Little Sutton within the
Lordship of Sutton Cofeild. And notwithstanding the Plaintiff shall recover.
For first it was held not to be any Jointure within the Statute of 11 H. 7. for
it is not any such gift as is intended by the Statute, for the Bishop was not
any Ancestor of the Husband, and the Husband took nothing by that, but it was a
voluntary recompense given by the Bishop in reward of the service passed. And
the Statute intended a valuable confideration. And also the Bishop might well
intend it for the Advancement of the woman, who appeared to be Cozen to the
Bishop. And Tanfeild held if the woman were a Done^ within the Statute of 11 H.
7 she could be but for a moyetie, for the gift was before the marriage, and
then they took by moyeties. And the Baron dying, first the woman came not to
any part by the husband, but by the course of Law as survivour. But quaere of
this conceit, for the other Judges did not allow it. And secondly, they held
that the Fine of Io. the elder Son of Sybill levied to Walther destroyed A
precise Verdict makes the Declaration good, which otherwise is naught.
the entry of Io. and of Walther. For although in truth the Fine passed nothing
but by conclusion, yet Io. the Son, and Walther his Conusee shall be estopped
to claim any thing by way of forfeiture against that Fine on the woman's part,
then any title accruing after the Fine. For they shall not have any new right,
but Io: the Son upon whom the Land was intayled is barred by the Fine. Thirdly,
although upon view of the Deed made by the Bishop the Land which by the
Declaration is laid to be in Sutton Cofeild, by the Deed appears to be in
Little Sutton, yet this is helped by the Verdict, by which it is found expressly
that the Bishop gave the Lands within written, and therefore being so precisely
found the Deed is not material. Which mark.

KNap versus Peir Iewelch Pasc. 5. Jacobi. An Ejectment brought for A demand of
Rent to avoid a Lease upon a condition ought to be in the most open place.
Lands in Wiccombe, which were the Deans and Chapters of Chichester, And in
this case it was agreed by the whole Court, that if it be a Corporation by
prescription, it is sufficient to name them by that name they are called. And
the Court held, that if a man demands Rent upon the Land to avoid a Lease upon
a condition, the Demand ought to be made in the most open place upon the Land;
The Dean and Chapter of Chichester made a Lease to one Raunce, the Lessee of
the Defendant of Lands in Wiccombe, rendering Rent payable at the Cathedral
Church of Chichester, upon such a condition, it was agreed by the whole Court,
that the Demand ought to be made in the Cathedral Church of Chichester,
although it was of the Land Leased. And the Demand ought to be made at the
setting of the Sun the last instant of that day, and when he made his Demand,
he ought to stand still, and not walk up and down, for the Law did not allow of
walking Demands. As Pipham said, and he ought to make a formal demand. And
because those whom the Dean and Chapter did send to make the demand of Rent
said, bear witness, we are come hither to demand and receive such Rent, it was
held by the Court, that such a demand was not good. And they held the demand
ought to be made at that part of the Church where the greatest and most common
going in is. And in this case it was said by Popham, that if a man make a Lease
to one for years to commence at a day to come, and then he lease to another for
years rendering Rent upon a condition to commence presently. And he enter. And
the first Lease commence, and he enter the Rent, and Condition reserved upon
the second Lease is suspended. A man leases for years rendering Rent, and after
he leaseth to another to commence at a day to come, and the first Lessee
attorns, the second shall not have the Rent reserved upon the first Lease by
Popham; but he doubted of it. And Popham and Tanfeild held, none contradicting,
that the Letter of Attorney made by the Dean and Chapter to demand their Rent
was not good, because the Letter of Attorney was to make a general demand on
any part of the Land, which the Dean and Chapter had leased. And that ought to
have been special only for that Land. And secondly, it was to demand Rent of
any person to whom they had made a Lease. And the Letter of Attorney ought to
be particular, and not general of any person.

TOmpson versus Collier, Mich. 5. Jacobi. The Plaintiff declares upon a Lease
of Ejectment made by Robinson and Stone of one Message, and forty Acres of
Land, in the Parish of Stone in the County After an Imparlance cannot plead in
abatement.
of Stafford. The Defendant imparled trial another Term, and then pleads that
within the Parish of Stone there were three Villages, A. B. and C. And because
the Plaintiff has not showed in which of the Villages the Land he demanded
Judgment of the Bill, etc. And the Plaintiff demurred upon this Plea; And
adjudged for the Plaintiff. For first, after an Imparlance the Defendant
cannot plead in abatement of the Bill, for he has admitted of it to be good by
his entering into defense, and by his Imparlance. And secondly, the matter of
his Plea is not good, because the Defendant has not 22 H. 6. 6. Foxlies Case.
5 Rep. 111.
showed in which of the Villages the House and forty Acres of Land did lie;
And that he ought to have done. For where a man pleads in abatement, he always
ought to give to the Plaintiff a letter writ with mark. And the whole Court
held that this Plea was not in bar, but that he should answer over. And
Williams Justice took this difference, that when a man demurrs upon a Plea in
abatement; And when he goes to issue upon it, for if they descend to issue upon
such a Plea, and it be found against the Defendant, it is peremptory, and he
shall loose the Land: but upon demurrer it is not peremptory, but only to
answer over. Which mark.

VVOrkley versus Granger, Mic. 5. Jacobi. An Ejectment brought for two Houses,
and certain Lands, etc. And upon a special Verdict, The case was one He^: Wels
and his wife nere seized of a parcel of Land to them, and the Heirs of their
bodies begotten, as for the jointure of the wife, the remainder to the Heirs of
the Husband in Fee, the Husband bargains, and sels the Land to Stamp and his
Heirs in Fee. And afterward the Husband and one Winter leavie a Fine of that
Land to another who grants that Land back again to Winter for one month, the
remainder to the husband and wife, and the heir of their bodies to be
begotten, the remainder to the husband and his heirs. The Husband dies, the
Wife survives, and makes a Lease to the Defendant for ninety nine years, if she
should so long live; the woman dies, and the Plaintiff claims under the
bargainee: and in this Case two points were debated. First, what Estate passed
to the bargainee, and Digges of Lincolnes Inn, who argued for the Plaintiff,
that the bargainee had a Fee simple determinable which issued out of both the
Estates as it was held by Periam in Alton Woods Case. And he said that the
Proclamations upon the Fine are but a repetition of the Fine, as it is held in
Bendlones Rep: put in the Case of Fines in Cooks 3. Rep. And see Pinslees Case,
for then for the same cause the Issue in tail is bound, although the Fine be
levied by the Husband alone by the Statute of the 4. H. 7. and 32 H. 8. because
he cannot claim but as Heir to the Father, as well as to the Mother, and
therefore his Conveyance is bound: and see 16. E* Did. 332. Husband and Wife
Tenants in special tail. The husband is attainted of Treason, and executed
having Issue, the woman dies, the Issue shall never have the Land. And if
husband and wife Tenants in special tail; And the Husband levies a Fine to his
own use, and devises the Land to his wife for life which remainded over
rendering Rent; the husband dies, the woman enters, pays the Rent, and dies, the
Issue is barred for two causes: first by the Fine which had barred his
Conveyance of the intayl: secondly, by the Remitter waived by the Mother. 18
Eli: Dyer 531. See 5 H. 7. Assise Thorp and Tirrels Case. Secondly, the Lease
made by the woman was determined by her death, and it was said that the woman
had not any quality of an Estate tail, but only she might take the profits
during her life within the Statute of 11 H. 7. And when she dies the Estate is
denised. See Austens Case. Doctor Wyat Tenant in tail leased for years, And
dyed without Issue, the Lease was determined. See first of Eliz: title
Executors. And 31 H. 8. Dyer. Where a Bishop made a Lease for years, and
afterward makes another Lease to one of the Lessees, etc. And Fleming held
that if the woman survived as under Tenant in special tail, and made a Lease
for 21. years, it is out of the Statute of 32 H. 8. and so it was adjudged in
Wattes and Kings Case.

LAne versus Alexander Hill, 5. Jaco. The Plaintiff declares in Ejectment upon
a Lease made to him by Mary Planten for three The day of a Copihold of Court
roll traversed, and adjudged naught.
years, the Defendant says, etc. that the Land is Copihold Land of the Manor
of H. in Norff. whereof the Queen Eliz: was seized in Fee, and long time before
the Lessor had any thing there in Court such a day, that J. S. her Steward at
the Court, etc. granted the Land to the Defendant by Copy in Fee, according to
the custom, and so justifies his entry upon the Plaintiff. The Plaintiff
replies and says, that long time before the Copy granted to the Defendant, to
wit, at a Court of the Manor held such a day, the 43. Eliz: the Queen by Copy,
etc. granted the Land to the Lessor for life according to, the custom, by
force whereof he entered, and made a Lease to the Plaintiff. The Defendant by
way of rejoinder maintained his bar, and traverses: with that the Queen at the
Court of the Manor by J. S. her Steward, such a day, etc. granted the Land to
the Lessor and upon this the Plaintiff demurred in Law generally. And
Yelverton moved that the traverse was good in this Case upon the day, and
Steward: and the difference is where the act done may indifferently be supposed
to be done on the one day or the other, there the day is not traversable as in
the Case of a Deed made such a day; there the day of the Deed is not
traversable, for it passes by the livery, and not by the Deed. And the livery
is the substance, and the day but a bundance. 10 E. 4. And the Law is the same
if the day in trespass wherein the day is not traversable. For although it be
done upon another day it is not material. But when a man makes his title by an
especial kind of Conveyance, as in this case, the Plaintiff makes his title
by one Copy, there all that is concerned in the Copy is material, and the
party cannot depart from it, for he claims not the Land by any other Copy but
by that which is pleaded, as is in the 18 H. 6. 14. where an Action is brought
for taking his Servant, and counts that he by Deed retained with him his
Servant the Monday in one week, in such a case it is a good plea for the
Defendant to say, that the Servant was retained by him such a day, after
without that that the Plaintiff did retain him the Monday. And the Law seems
to be concerning Letters Patents, wherein the day and place are traversable,
being the special conveyance of the party from which he cannot depart. And
also it seems that although the day in the principal case be traversed, yet
the Statute of 18 Eliz: of Demurrers aids it, it being but a general Demurrer,
and the day being only matter of form. But the whole Court were of opinion,
that the day was not traversable in this case. For the Queen granting an
ancienter Copy to the Plaintiffs Lessor then to the Defendant, and the traverse
should have been without this, that the Queen did grant in manner and form,
etc. to the Plaintiffs Lessor, and the Case is the same in the Letters Patents,
for there the traverse should be without this, that the Queen granted in manner
and form, etc. And the day and place shall not come into the traverse. But
Justice Fennor was of a contrary opinion, for the Reason delivered by Yelverton
before, and he also, and the Lord chief Justice held it to be helped by the
Statute of 18 Eliz: for it is but matter of form. For if the Jury find a prior
grant of the Queen to the Plaintiffs Lessor, although it be at another Court it
is sufficient; and so by consequence the day is not material in substance,
which mark. But Williams Justice, and the rest held the traverse to be naught,
for by that the Jury should be bound to find the Copy such a day by such a
Steward which ought not to be, and that it was matter of substance not helped
by the Statute of 18 Eliz.

DArby versus Bois Hill. 5. Jacobi. An Ejectment brought for an Houses in
London pass by the delivery of a bargain and sale without inrolment.
House in London, and upon not guilty pleaded, The Jury found a special
Verdict; And the case was Tenant in tail of diverse Messuages in London, 7
January, 44 Eliz: bargains and sels the said Houses to J. S. and delivers the
Deed from off the Land the 8. of January the same year. Indentures of Covenants
were made, to the intent to have a perfect recovery suffered of those houses;
and the ninth of January after a Writ of right is sued in London for those
Messuages returnable at a day to come. And the tenth of January the same year
the Tenant in tail makes livery and seisin to J. S. of one of those Houses in
the name of all. And the other Messuages were in Lease for years, and the
Lessees did not atturn. And the question was if the Messuages passed by the
bargain and sale, or by the livery. And it was adjudged that they passed by the
bargain and sale. And Yelverton took a difference between several Conveyances
both of them Executory, and where one of them is executed presently, as in Sir
Rowland Heywoods Case, where diverse Lands were given, granted, leased,
bargained, and sold to diverse for years; the Lessees were at election whether
they would take by the bargain and sale upon the Statute of 27 H 8. or by the
demise at the Common Law. But otherwise it is if one be executed at first, for
then the other comes too late, as it is in this Case; for by the very delivery
of the bargains and sale, the Land by the custom of London passes without
inrollment, for London is excepted, and this custom was found by the Verdict.
And therefore it being executed, and the Conveyance being made perfect by the
delivery of the Deed without any other circumstances, the livery of sesin comes
too late, for it is made to him that had the Inheritance of the Message at
that time. And the possession executed hinders the possession executory, for if
a bargain and sale be made of Land, and before inrollment the bargain takes a
deed of the said Land, this hinders the inrollment, because the taking of the
livery did destroy the use which passed by the bargain and sale which was
granted by the Court. And another reason was given, because it appeared that
the intent of the parties was to have the Land pass by the bargain and sale;
because it was to make a perfect Tenant to the Precipe, as appears by the
subsequent acts, as the Indentures Covenant, and the bringing the Writ of Right
etc. All which will be made frustrate, if the livery of seisin shall be
effectual: and when an Act is indifferent, it shall be taken most near to the
parties intents that may be if a man has a Manor, to which an advowson is
appendant, and makes a Deed of the Manor with the appurtenances; And delivers
the Deed, but does not make livery of seisin, yet now although the Deed in it
self was sufficient to pass the Advowson, yet because the party did not intend
to pass it in Posse, but as appurtenant if the Manor will not pass, no more
shall the Advowson pass alone, as it was agreed, 14 Eliz: in Andrews Case.
Which mark. And the whole Court gave Judgment accordingly, that the Defendant
who claimed under the bargain and sale, should enjoy the Land.

CHalloner versus Thomas, Mich. 6. Jacobi. A Writ of Error was brought upon a
Judgment given in Ejectment in the Cour^ of An Ejectment will not lie de aquae
cursu.
Carmarthen, and Yelverton assigned the Error, because the Ejectment was
brought de aquae cursu, called Lothar in L. and declares upon a Lease made by
D. de quidam rivulo and aquae cursu: And by the opinion of the whole Court the
Judgment was reversed, for rivulut se^ aque cursus lie not in demand, nor does
a precipe lie of it: nor can livery and seisin be made of it, for it cannot be
given in possession, but as it appears by 12 H. 7. 4. the Action ought to be of
so many Acres of Land covered with water, but an Ejectment will well lie by, if
a stang for a precipe lies of them, and a woman shall be endowed of the third
part of them, as it is 11. E. 3. But if the Land under the water or River do
not pertain to the Plaintiff, but the River only, then upon a disturbance his
remedy is only by Action upon the Case, upon any diversion of it, and not
otherwise. Which observe.

Wilson versus Woddell, Mich. 6. Jacobi. The Grandfather of A Servant is a
sufficient Ejector, if he dwell with the pretended owner.
the Plaintiff in an Ejectment being a Copy holder in fee, made a surrender
thereof to L: Woddell in fee, who surrendered it to the use of Margery I. for
life, who is admitted, etc. But L: Woddell himself never was admitted. The
Grandfather and Father dye, the Son who is Plaintiff was admitted, and enters
upon the Land: Margery being then in possession, and the Defendant then living
with her as a servant in those Tenements, and this was the special verdict,
And Judgment was given for the Plaintiff. And the Court was of an opinion,
that the Defendant was found to be a sufficient Trespassor, and Ejector, though
he be but a Servant to the pretended owner of the Land, because the Verdict
found that the Defendant did there dwell with Margery. And in such case he had
the true title and had made his entry, might well bring his Action against
Master or Servant at his election. And perhaps the Master might withdraw
himself that he could not be arrested. And secondly, it was adjudged, that the
surrender of J. S. of a Copyhold is not of any effect, until J. S. be
admitted Tenant. And if I. S. before admittance He that is a Purchaser of
Copihold has nothing in it, nor can he surrender to another before admittance.
surrender to a stranger who is admitted, that that admittance is nothing worth
to the estranger. For J. S. had nothing himself, and so he would pass nothing,
and the Admittance of his grantee shall not by implication be taken to be the
admittance of himself; for the admittance ought to be of a Tenant certainly
known to the Steward, and entered in a Roll by him; and it was held, that the
right and possession remained still in him that made the surrender, and that is
descended to his Heir, who was the Plaintiff. And they took a difference
between an Heir, to whom the Copy descended, for he may surrender before
admittance, and it shall be good; because he is by course of the Law, foe the
custom that makes him Heir to the estate casts the possession of his Ancestors
upon him: but a stranger to whom a Copy hold is surrendered, has nothing before
admittance because he is a purchasor. And a Copy made to him, upon which he is
admitted, is his Evidence by the custom, and before that he is not a customary
Tenant, and so he could not transfer any thing to another, and adjudged so
according to 24 Eliz: Alderman Dixies Case.

BEdell versus Lull, Pasch. 7. Jacobi. The Plaintiff declares in Ejectment How
an Abatement shall be traversed.
upon a Lease made by Eliz: James of certain Lands. The Defendant pleads that
before Eliz: had any thing, one Martin James was seized in fee of it, and had
issue Henry James, and dyed seized, by reason whereof it descended to H. J. as
Son, and Heir; and that Eliz: entered, and was seized by abatement, and made the
Lease to the Plaintiff: and that afterward the Defendant as servant to H:
James, and by his command, etc. The Plaintiff by way of replication confesses
the seisen of M. James, And that he being so seized by his last Will in
writing, devised the said Land to Eliz: in fee, and afterward dyed seized by
reason whereof she entered by force of the devise, and made the Lease to the
Plaintiff, and traverse without, that Eliz: was seized by abatement in manner
and form, etc. And 1 E. 4. acr. 1 E. 4. 9. acr.
the Defendant demurrs upon this replication, and showed for cause that the
traverse was not good, and adjudged for the Defendant: for the Plaintiff by
his replication need not both confess, and avoid, and traverse the abatement
too, for the Plaintiff made a title to his Lease by the Will of his Ancestor,
and that proved that he entered legally, and not by abatement, as the Defendant
had supposed. And then to take a traverse over makes the replication vicious.
For a traverse shall not be taken, but where the thing traversed is issuable.
And here the devise is only the title issuable. And it was also held that the
traverse was not good as to the manner of it, for he should not have traversed
without that, that he was seized by abatement, but it ought to have been
without that, that he did abate; and also if the Plaintiff had minded to have
fully answered the Defendant, he ought to have took his traverse in the very
same words the Defendant had pleaded it against him, to wit, without that, that
he did enter, and was seized by abatement, which observe. The Case concerned
Sir H. James to whom the Defendant was Tenant.

SAunders versus Cottington, Mich. 7. Jac. An Ejectment brought of two Houses,
but the Bill was only for one, and it was filed. And The Bill amended after a
Writ of Error brought and before the Record was removed.
the Defendant by his paper book pleaded to both Messuages; And the Roll in
Court, and the Record of Nisi prius were two Houses. And there was a verdict
for the Plaintiff, and Judgment entered accordingly. And a Writ of Error was
brought by the Defendant, and before the Record was removed, the Plaintiff
moved the Court that the Bill upon the file might be amended, and made two
Messuages. And because the Defendant had pleaded to Messuages in his Answer in
paper, and that the Roll and Record were according, it was resolved by the
whole Court, that the Bill upon the File should be amended, and made two
Messuages; for that Bill which made mention only of one House could not be the
ground of all the proceedings afterward; but it was as if no Bill had been
filed, and therefore it should be supplied, and so had been several times
before the Record was renewed. Which observe.

THe Plaintiff declared in Ejectment upon a Lease of an House, Where the
Prenomen destroyesthe quantity inthe declation.
10 Acres of Land, 20 Acres of Meadow, 20 Acres of Pasture, by the name of one
Message, and ten Acres of Meadow be it more or less, and upon not guilty
pleaded the Plaintiff had a Verdict, but moved in Arrest of Judgment, and
Judgment was stayed. For by the Plaintiffs own showing in his Declaration, he
could not have Execution of the number of Acres found by the Verdict; for in
the Lease there is but ten Acres demised. And these words more or less could
not in judgment of Law be extended to thirty or forty Acres; for it is
impossible by common intendment, and the rather because the Land demanded by
the Declaration is of another nature then that which is mentioned in the per
nomen, etc. For that is only of Meadow, and the Declaration is of arrable and
Pasture.

MOore versus Hawkins, Mich. 8. Jacobi. In Ejectment after issue Joined upon a
not guilty pleaded, the cause came to be tried before Brook and Yelverton,
Judges of Assize in the County of Oxford, the Plaintiff had declared of diverse
Messuages, and diverse Acres of Land lying in three Villages in the said County.
And at the trial before the Jury was sworn, Walter the Defendants Counsel put
in a Plea, that after the last continuance, to wit, such a day in Trinity Term
before the day of Assize, to wit, the 20. of July, the Assizes being held at
Oxford, the 21 of July the Plaintiff had entered into such a Close by name
containing eight Acres, parcel of the premises specified in the Declaration,
etc. and this Plea was received by the Judges of Assize. And afterward in Mich.
Term Yelverton and Walter being of Counsel with the Defendant, desired that
they might amend their Plea, to wit, to put in the very Village where the Land
did lie, into which the entry of the Plaintiff was, because it was but matter
of form, and not of substance: and they were of opinion, that the trial of
that new lssue ought to be of all the three Villages named in the Declaration.
And Yelverton Justice having asked the opinions of all the Judges in Sergeants
Inn Fleetstreet, related their opinions in the Court, the Record of Nisi prius
was returned into the Exchequer, to wit, that it was in the discretion of the
Justices of Assize to accept such a Plea as is before, and that it might be
well allowed, as the 10 H. 7. is, and it shall stay the Verdict. But otherwise
it is of a protection, for although they allow a protection, yet the Judges may
take the Verdict, de been esse; yet he said that in the 7. E* 3. in a Precipe
quod reddat, a Release was pleaded at the trial, and the Jury found the
Verdict, but that was the indiscretion of the Judges to allow it, when it
should not have been allowed. And all the said Judges held as he related, that
the Plaintiff could not have a replication to that Plea at the trial; for the
Justices have no power either to accept a Replication upon that Plea, or to try
it, but only to return it as parcel of the Record of Nisi prius. And they
held also that the Plea being put in the Country, could not be amended in
adding the Town in certain in which the Close did lie; for it was matter of
substance. And that the Court of Exchequer where the Record was, would not
award the Venire Facias of all the three Villages named in the Record, if it
did not appear judicially to them that the Close did extend in all the
Villages; and it does not appear for parcel, if the premises does not
necessarily extend to all the Villages, but may well be, and so presumed in one
Village only, and therefore it is matter of substance. And the Judges had not
power after their Commission determined to amend the Plea.

DAvis versus Pardy, Mich. 8. Jacobi. The Plaintiff declared of a Where words
in a Declaration shall be void, rather then the Declaration shall be void.
Lease made by one Cristmas the sixth of May, Anno 7. of one Message, etc. In
D. by reason whereof the Plaintiff entered, and was possessed, until the
Defendant afterward, to wit, 18. of the same month, Anno sexto supradicto, did
eject him. And not guilty being pleaded, a verdict was found against the
Plaintiff. And Yelverton moved in Arrest of Judgment to save Costs, that the
Declaration was insufficient. For that Action was grounded upon two things:
first, upon the Lease: secondly, upon the Ejectment, and both those ought to
concur one after the other. And in this case the Ejectment is supposed to be
one year before the Lease made, for the Lease is made Anno 7. and the Ejectment
supposed to be done Anno 7. 6. And therefore the Declaration naught. And
Yelverton vouched the case between Power and Hawkins, Anno septimo, Termino
Pasch. Where the Plaintiff declared upon the Lease of Edw. Ewer, 27. April,
Anno sexto, and laid the Ejectment to be 26. April, Anno 6. And the Court held
then, that the Declaration was naught, yet in the case in question, the
Declaration was adjudged good. And the word sexto to be void, for the day of
the Ejectment being the 18. of the same month of May, it cannot be intended but
to be the same year, in which the Lease is supposed to be made, by the opinion
of the whole Court.

AYlet versus Chippin, Mich. 8. Jacobi. The Plaintiff declares upon a Lease
made by John Aylet, for one year, of certain Land in C. in the County of E. by
virtue whereof he entered, and was possessed, until the Defendant did eject
him. The Defendant pleads that the Copihold Land is parcel of the Manor of D.
etc. of which one Jo: Aylet the Lessors Father was seized in Fee, according to
the Custom, and that he made a surrendor thereof to the use of his Will, and
by his will devised the Land in question to John the lessor, and H. Aylet his
sons, and to their Heirs Males of their Bodies, and willed that they should not
enter until their several ages of 21 years. And further willed that W. B. and
H. B. his Executors should have the Lands to perform his Will, until his said
Sons Jo: and H. came to their several Ages, of one and twenty years, etc. To
which Plea the Plaintiff replies, and confesses the Will, but shows further
how that such a day and year before the Lease, Jo: his Lessor attained to his
full Age of one and twenty years, and entered, and made a Lease thereof to him,
etc. To which Plea the Defendant demurred, and adjudged for the Plaintiff. For
although the Estate to Jo: and H. precede in words, and the devise to the
Executors insues in construction, yet the estate to Io: Executors, precedes in
possession. And is as if he should have demised the Land, until his Sons Io:
and H. should attain to their several Ages of one and twenty years. And
afterward to them and their Heirs Males, etc. to be enjoyed in possession at
there several Ages, so that the Executors have only a limited estate,
determinable in time, when either Son severally should attain to his full age,
for his part. For so it appears, the Devisors intent was that either Son might
enter, when he attained to the age of one and twenty years. And although it was
objected by Justice Williams, that the two Brothers are joyntenants by the
Will, and if one should enter when he comes to his full Age, the other Brother
being under age, that would destroy the intent of the devise, for then they
should not take jointly, but the Court as to that said, that the entry of him
that attained to his full age, does not destroy the juncture, but that they are
joyntenants notwithstanding. For that entry in the intent of the Devisor, was
only as to the taking of the the profits, and the possession, and not as to the
estate in joyntenancy, and this is proved by 30 H. 6. Devise 12. where a devise
was to four in Fee, and that one of them should have all during his life, and
this was adjudged good, and it was as to the taking of the profits only, which
observe by the whole Court but Williams.

RIce versus Haruiston Pasch. 10. Jacobi. The Plaintiff declares of a Lease
made by Jo. Bull, etc. The Defendant pleads that the Land is Copihold Land,
parcel of the Manor of, etc. Whereof the King was seized, and is seized, and
that the King by his Steward such a day granted the Land in question to him in
Fee, to hold at will according to the custom of the Manor, by virtue whereof
he was admitted, and entered, and was seized until the lessor entered upon him,
and outed him, and made a Lease to the Plaintiff, and then he entered, and did
eject him, etc. The Plaintiff replies, that long before the King had any thing
in the Manor, Queen Eliz. was thereof seized in Fee in right of her Crown, and
before the Ejectment supposed by the Defendant, by her Steward at such a Court
did grant the Land in question, by Copy to him in Fee, to hold at Will
according to the custom of the Manor, who was admitted, and entered, and
further showed the descent of the Manor to the King, and how the Lesser
entered, and made a Lease to the Plaintiff, who entered, and was thereof
possessed, until the Defendant did eject him. Upon which Plea the Defendant
did demurr, because he supposed that the Plaintiff ought to traverse the grant
alleged by the copy of the Defendant in his Bar. But the Court held the
replication good; for the Plaintiff had confessed, and avoided the Defendant
by a former Copy granted by Queen Eliz: under whom the King that now is
claimed, and so the Plaintiff need not traverse the grant to the Defendant,
but such a traverse would make the Plea vicious, for which see Hilliais Case,
6. Rep. And 14 H. 8. Dotknis Case, 2 E. 6. Dyer. And Brooks title confess, and
avoid, for as no man can have a Lease for years without assignment, no more can
a man have a Copy without grant made in Court. Which observe.

SHecomb versus Hawkins, Pasc. 10 Jacobi. The case was in an especial verdict
in Ejectment, that one Mrs. Luttrel Tenant in fee of the Manor of L. leavied a
Fine to the use of her self for life, and after death to the use of her eldest
Son in tail, etc. With power to her self at any time, to make Leases for one
and twenty years, and before the Lease in being expired, she made another Lease
to B. for one and twenty years to commence after the determination of the first
Lease. And as to the third part of the Land she made a Lease of that for one
and twenty years after the death of one Carn, who in truth never had any estate
in the Land, and afterward she dies, the first Lease expires, And I: the Son
enters, and makes a Lease to the Plaintiff, And the Defendant claims under B.
the Lessee, And adjudged for the Plaintiff, for by such a power she could not
make a Lease to comence at a day to come, but it ought to be a Lease in
possession, and not in interest to comence in future nor in reversion, after
another estate ended, but the Law will judge upon the general power to make
Leases without saying such ought to be Leases in Possession, for if upon such
power she might make Lease upon Lease she might by infinite Leases detain those
in Reversion or Remainder out of the Possession for ever, which is against the
intent of the parties, and against reason, and adjudged accordingly: Trin. 30
Eliz. Earl of Sussex case, 6 Rep. 33. And Justice Williams said, that when he
was a Sergeant, it was so adjudged in the Common Pleas in the Earl of Essex
Case, and Judgment by the the whole Court.

BRasier versus Beal, Trin. 10, Jacobi. Upon an especial Verdict in Ejectment,
the Case was, that a Copyholder in Fee of the Manor of B. in the County of
Oxford, by license of the Lord lease the Land in question for sixty years to M.
if he should live so long, rendering Rent with a Condition of re-entry, the Copy
holder surrenders to the Lessor of the Plaintiff in Fee, who demands the Rent
upon the Land, which being not paid he entered, and made a Lease to the
Plaintiff, and without any Argument the Court seemed to be of opinion that the
Entry of the Lessor was not congeable, for Copyhold land is not within the
Statute of 32 H. 8. of Conditions, nor the Lessor such an Assignee that the
Statute intends, for at the Common Law a Copyholders Estate is but an Estate
at will, and custom has only fixed his Estate to continue, which Custom
goes not to such collateral things, as Entries upon Condition, for such an
Assignee of a Copyholder being only in by Custom is not privy to the Lease
made by the first Copyholder, nor only by him, but may plead his Estate
immediately under the Lord, by the opinion of the whole Court.

ODingsall versus Jackson, Mich. 10. Jac. In Ejectment the Declaration was,
that the Defendants intraverunt, and that he did eject, expulse, and amove in
the singular number, and after a Verdict for the Plaintiff upon Not guilty
pleaded, the Defendant showed this matter to the Court in Arrest of Judgment,
for the Declaration is uncertain in that point, because it cannot be known
which of the Defendants did eject the Plaintiff; for by his own showing it
appears that the Ejectment was but against one, and upon that Declaration the
Jury could not find all the Defendants guilty, for by the Plaintiffs supposal
one only did eject him, but the Court gave Judgment for the Plaintiff, that
the Declaration should be amended in that point, for it was but the Clerks
fault, and so it was, and upon an Evidence in an Ejectment by the Lessees of
Cresset and Smith: Yelverton said, that if a man comes into a Copyhold
tertiously, and is admitted by the Lord, and afterward he makes a Lease for
three Lives, which is a Forfeiture of his Estate, yet if he that has the pure
Right to the Copyhold release to the wrong-doer, that it is good; for until
the Lord enter he is Tenant in fait, and if the rever as Copyholder, 4 Rep.
15. But Walter seemed of another opinion, and therefore quaere what benefit he
shall have by the Release.

In an Ejectment the Plaintiff declared of an Ejectment of december acris pisar.
and upon the general Issue it was found for the Plaintiff, and it was moved in
Arrest of Judgment, because the Plaintiff had declared de december acris pisar.
which is not good, for Pease are not known by the Acre, and therefore he should
have declared de december acris tene pisis seminaris, as if a man will demand Land
covered with water, he must say, december acras terrae aqua co opertas, but the
whole Court held it good, for in a common acceptance ten Acres of Pease, or ten
Acres sowed with Pease is all one, and so is the opinion of Catesby, 11 E. 4.
1. And the man the Secondary said, that so it had been adjudged in the
Exchequer Chamber upon a Writ of Error.

MEerton versus Orib, Trin. 11. Jacobi, Orib brought an Ejectment Nonage shall
be tried where it is alleged, and not where the Landlyes.
against Meerton in the Common Pleas, 6 Jacobi, of a Colemine in Durham in the
County Palatine there; the Defendant pleaded not guilty, and it was found for
the Plaintiff before the Justices Itinerantes there, upon which Judgment the
Defendant brought a Writ of Error, and assigned for Error, that the Plaintiff
appeared by an Attorney, whereas it ought to have been by Guardian, being
under age: And upon an Issue that he was of full age was tried at Durham, and
found that he was within age; but the Plaintiff had license to discontinue his
Writ of Error, and brought a new Writ of Error, Quod coram nobis residat: And
declared that M. was inhabiting at Westminster in the County of Middlesex; and
being within age, appeared by an Attorney; the Defendant in the Writ of Error
confessed that he was inhabiting at Westminster, but that he was at full age at
the time: And upon the trial in Middlesex, it was found that M. was under age:
And it was alleged in Arrest of Judgment, and it depended a long time that
it was a mistryall; and the doubt and question was only, whether the trial at
Westminster in this Case was good: And Davenport, and Yelverton were of opinion
that it was not good, for the Error assigned was done at Durham, and because
they there have the best notice of it, it ought to have been there tried: As if
Error be in a Record, it shall be tried where the Record is, 19 H. 6. 79.

Secondly, This is a real Action, in which the Land shall be recovered, and
therefore though the Issue be upon a collateral matter, yet it shall be tried
where the Land lies, because it concerns the realty, but if it had concerned
the person only, it had been otherwise; and this difference is taken by
Montham, 19 H. 6. 10. And therefore if a Feoffment be made upon payment, etc.
If upon an Assise brought, the Defendant plead payment in another place, yet it
shall be tried where the Land lies: And so likewise if the Issue should be,
which is the eldest Son, although they allege their births in several
Counties, yet it shall be tried where the Land lies; and so in that Case a
Release of all his right was pleaded against him, and he pleaded that he was
within age, and borne in another County, yet it shall be tried where the Land
lies, and so adjudged, 7 H. 4. 8. and 17 E. 3. 36. b. 19 H. 6. 15. Nay though
the Espousals be alleged to be in another County, yet it shall be tried where
the Land lies, and adjudged, 7 H. 4. 8. And Davenport inferrs from 36 H. 6. 9.
A grand Cape against one, he comes and pleads that he was within age at the
time of the first Cape, which shall be tried where the Land lies: And another
exception was taken, because the Venire facias was not well awarded, for it was
directed to the Sheriff of Middlesex, that he should cause to come twelve,
Coram nobis apud westmonasterium, which is not good, for that Court follows the
King, and may be removed to any place, and therefore it ought to have been
Vbicunque fuerimus in Anglia, but all the Judges, Fleming being absent, after
mature deliberation held the trial at Middlesex good, for they took this
difference in their answer to the rule laid down, that what concerns the
realty, it shall be tried where the Land lies, for when nonage or the birth are
alleged to entitle one to the Land demanded, as if in an Assise the Tenant
pleads a discontinuance, the Demandant says he was within age at the time; or
to debarr another of Land, that he was borne before marriage in these Cases,
because the Inheritance of the Land depends upon it, although they be alleged
in another place, yet they shall be tried where the Land lies, 19 H. 6. And so
it is 39 H. 6. 49. b. to be intended, but if nonage or birth be pleaded as
matter dehors, and not to the disabling of the title to the Land, but to
another purpose, as here it is to the person, because he could not appear by
Attorney, in this Case it shall be tried where the Infancy is alleged: As if
in a Formedon in the Remainder, the Tenant pleads nonage in the Plaintiff, and
prays that the Plea may stay until his full age, if Issue be taken upon it,
it shall be tried in the place where it is alleged.

And as to the Exception to the Venire facias the Roll is right, which warrants
the Writ, and therefore they held it was but the Writers fault, and should be
amended: and Doddridge and Cook held the Trial good: if Infancy be alleged,
the Trial shall be by inspection during his Nonage, as it is 17 E. 3. Account,
121. and 11 H. 4. 115. 25. Ass. 2. and 48 E. 3. 11. and the 11. Rep. f. 30. but
if his Age upon inspection remains doubtful, then the Judges may swear the
party and examine Witnesses. And 25 E. 3. 44. and 50 E. 3. 5. but if the Infant
come to full Age, it shall be tried by the Country, 33 H. 8. and they took
this Difference in what place it should be tried, for if the Action be real,
it shall be tried where the Land lies, as it is 21 E. 3. 28. 28 E. 3. 17. 44
Assis. 10. 46 E. 3. 7. 13 H. 4. 3. and if both places be in one County, then
the venire facias shall be of both, 22 E. 3. 11. H. 4. 75. but if nonage be
alleged in a personal Action, the Trial shall be where the writ is brought,
43. H. 6. 40. in Debt the Defendant pleaded infancy, and that he was born in
such a place, yet the Venire facias was awarded of that place where the Action
was brought, and 43 H. 6. 40. Prisot was of the same opinion, and the Law is
the same, when it concerns the person as in misnomer, or that he is not the
same person, and so in the Case in question, although the Action be brought in
one place, and the nonage pleaded in another County, yet it shall be tried
where the Action was brought, and therefore the Action being brought in Midd.
the trial of Midd. is good, for a writ of Error, is of the nature of an
Original which is personal, and they held the Venire facias should be
amended, being but a matter of Form, and that it was no mistriall, it being
awarded at a right place, and likewise the will is right which warrants it, and
therefore it is but a misprision, and no mistriall, and the Venire facias shall
be amended according to the will, and Judgment was given for the Plaintiff in
the writ of Error.

Formedon.
BRigham versus Godwin, The Formedon did abate, by the death of one of the
Demandants, and upon a new writ brought by Journes Essoin lies in a writ
brought by Journes account, although he was essoined upon the first Writ.
accounts, the Tenant was Essoined, and it was moved by the demanded, that the
Essoin should be quashed, because the Tenant was Essoined upon the first writ,
but the Essoin was allowed by the Court, but it was held by the Court, that if
the Tenant had the view upon the first Writ, he should never have the view
again, at the Common Law we might have had a new Essoin upon view, as often as
he brings a new writ, and Husband held, that if by the Common Law it is to be
granted, the Statute does not abridge it, two views do not ly upon one writ at
the common Law, and if this shall be accounted but one Writ, the view lies
not, but in this case the Tenant did relinquish the view, because he had day to
plead.

NEvill versus Nevil, Mich. 15 Jac. rotulo 77. Formedon in le Discender, the
writ was general, and the Count was upon a Feofment made after the Statute of
uses, and a special verdict, whether the Deed warrant the Count, the verdict,
is whether upon the whole matter the said A. N. gave the moity of the third
part of the Manor, etc. for default of Issue of the Bodies of either the said
G. and D. to the use of either of them surviving, and of the Heirs males of
his Body to be begotten or no, the Jury are wholly ignorant, the writ was to
the use of G. and D. and of the Heirs males of the Bodies of the said G. and D.
lawfully to be begotten, and for default of such issue male of the Body of
either of them, then to the use of either of them, having issue male of his
Body lawfully begotten, and for default of such issue male of both the Bodies
of the said G. and D. or either of them lawfully to be begotten, then to the
use, etc. By Deed an implication By Deed an implicationbe intended.
cannot be intended, if there be not apt words, otherwise, it is in a Will, for
this is but a gift to a man and his Issue, for this gift is but to both of them
for life, and several inheritances.

Bishop and al. versus Cossen, Trin. 16 Jac. rotulo 62. In Formedon, the Tenant
pleaded a warranty, and pretends that it was collateral warrantry, where in
truth it was a lineall warranty, and it was held naught, because the warranty
was in Law a lineall warranty; the Case was, that Land was givenby Feoffment
made to the use of the Feoffer, for life, remainder in Tail, Tenant for life
dies, Tenant in Tail had Issue a Son and two Daughters, and the Father and Son
join in a Feoffment with warranty, and after the Father and Son die without
issue, and the Daughters bring a Formedon, and this is a lineall warranty.

PIt versus Staple, Trin 14 Jac. rotulo 112. Formedon in le discender against
three which plead non-Tenure, and issue thereupon joined, and found specially,
that two of them were Lessees for life, the remainder to the third person, and
whether the three were Tenants as is supposed by the writ, was the question,
and the better opinion was, that it was found for the Demandant, for the
Tenants should have pleaded several Tenancy, and then the Demandant might
maintain his writ, but by this general non-Tenure, if any be Tenant it is
sufficient, but in some Cases, the Precipe may be brought against one who is
not Tenant, as a morgagor or morgagee.

COmes Leicester versus Commit. Clanriccard. In Formedon upon a Judgment given
in part for the Demandant, and part for the Tenant, the Tenant brought a writ
of Error, and had a Supersedeas upon it, and afterward the Demandant
prosecuted a writ of Seisin, and delivered it to the Sheriff, and he executed
the writ, and immediately afterward, the Tenant delivered the Supersedeas to
the Sheriff, and the Tenant moved the Court, and prayed a writ of restitution,
and it was granted him, because the Tenant had done his endeavor, and had not
delayed the prosecuting the writ of Error.

COmes Clanriccard and Francisca uxor. Ejus Demandants, versus R. S. milit.
vicecomit. Lyple for three messuages, etc. which R. late Earl of Essex, and
Frances late wife of the said Earl, by Fine in the Court of the Lady Elizabeth,
late Queen of England, before her then Justices at Westminster, levied and gave
to William Gerrard Esquire, and F. Mills Gentleman, and the Heirs of the said
W. for ever, to the use of Elizabeth Sydney, Daughter and Heir of P. S. Milir.
and the Heirs of the Body of the said E. coming, and for Nota.
default of such issue, to the use of the said F. then wife of the said Earl,
and the heirs of the said Fr. and which after the death of the said Eliz. ought
to revert to the said Fr. by form of the gift aforesaid, and by force of the
Statute in such case provided, because the said Eliz. died without Heir of her
Body. The Tenant pleaded in abatement of the writ, because the writ ought to
revert to the woman alone, and it should have been to the Husband and wife, and
upon a demurrer, Judgment was, that he should answer over, the writ may be
either to revert to the Husband and wife, or to the wife alone, and herein the
Tenant vouch two vouches, and one is Essoined, and an idem dies given to the
other, and Sergeant Harris demanded of the Court if he should Fourcher by
Essoin, because the Statute of Westminster, the first is, that Tenants,
Parceners, or Joint Tenants, shall not fourcher in Essoin, therefore they two
should not fourcher by Essoin, but the Court held, that before appearance it
could not appear to the Court, whether they were Tenants or not, and therefore
before appearance they shall have several Essoins, and Westminster, the first
is expounded by Gloucester the tenth, which is, that two Tenants shall not
fourcher after appearance* and at the day of the adjournment of the last
Essoin, the Tenant was Essoined, and such Essoin was allowed and adjudged by
the whole Court, and the reason hereof seemed to some to be, because the Tenant
might be informed of the Vouchee, that he vouched was the same person or no,
for he might be onother person, for if he should be an estranger, and demand
the place, and the Demandant could not hold him to the warranty, the Demandant
should loose his Land, and they held that upon several Process, to wit upon
the view and upon the summons to warranty, which are diverse Processes, the
Tenant ought to be Essoined, and the Court held that this Essoin was at the
Common Law, if the Tenant and the vouchee at the day given to the Tenant, and
the vouchee make default, Judgment shall be given against the Tenant, to wit a
petty Cape, and nothing against the vouchee.

SHotwell versus Corderoy, In Formedon the Tenant prays in aid, and the prayee
in aid and Tenant vouch, and the Vouchee was essoined and adjourned, and at
that Day the Attorney of the Tenant, without the Prayer in aid cast an Essoin;
and an Idem dies given the Prayee in aid, and it was quashed; for they shall
not have several Essoines but joint Essoines.

A Formedon brought of Lands in A. B. and C. The Tenant pleads a By the Name of
a Manor the Land in all the Villiages will pass.
Fine of all by the name of the Manor and Tenements in A. and B. And it was
objected that he said nothing to the Land in C. but the Courtheld that by the
name of the Manor the Land in all the Villages would pass: and the Demandant
may if he will plead as to the Land in C. that it was not comprised in the Fine.

Hill. 7. Jacobi, rotulo 76. vel 69. Formedon in the Discender the Nota.
Writ was general that J. L. gave to T. L. and the Heirs Males of his Body,
upon the Body of D. V. Widow lawfully to be begotten, which D. the said T.
afterward took to Wife, and which after the Death of the said T. etc. Son and
Heir Male of the Body of the said T. upon the Body of the said D. lawfully
begotten to the said J. L. younger Son and Heir of the said J. L. Son of the
said T. ought to descend by form of the Gift aforesaid, etc. and whereof he
says, that the said T. was seized, etc. and 2 Eliz. of the said Tenements did
infeoff the Plaintiff in Fee to the use of the said T. L. and his Heirs, etc.
and note, in the Count no mention made of the Marriage.

If a Gift be made in tail to D. and his Heirs Males: the Remainder to A. in
tail, D. discontinues in the Life of A. and D. dies without Issue, and the Heir
of A. brought his Writ, as the immediate Gift to A. his Ancestor, who never was
seized in his Life, and for that cause the Writ was naught; but if A. had been
seized of the Land, then it had not been necessary to have showed the first
Gift to D. by the opinion of the whole Court.

Actions upon the Statute of Hue and Cry.
NEedham versus Inhabitant. Hundredi de Stoak, Trin. 8. Jac. Action brought by
the Servant in his own name, part of the Goods being his Masters.
rotulo 534. Action brought upon the Statute of Hue and Cry by the Servant who
was robbed in his own name, and part of the Goods were his Masters, and part
his own proper Goods, and found guilty as to his own Goods, and a special
Verdict, as to the Goods of his Master; and Judgment for the Plaintiff.

COnstable versus Inhabitant* in dimid. Hundred. de VValsham in Nota.
Comitat. Essex, Trin. 15. Jacobi, rotulo. 2244. The Action wabrought for a
Robbery, the Defendant is found guilty, and it was alleged in Arrest of
Judgment, that the Action would not lie, because it was not brought against
the whole Hundred: and it was answered on the Plaintiffs behalf, that the half
Hundred is a Hundred by it self; and the Court held, the Writ should have been
brought against them in this manner, Inhabitants in Hundredo de W. called the
half Hundred of Waltham; but the Writ was held good; for the Writis, and so
shall be intended to be brought against the men inhabiting in the half hundred
of W. and Judgment for the Plaintiff; and in a special verdict, the Jury found
that the robbery was done upon the Sunday, and it was held in the Kings Bench,
that the Hundred was liable.

NOrris versus Inhabitants in Hundredo de G. Hill. 14. Jacobi, rotulo 431. And
the Plaintiff declares upon a Robbery done the Nota.
ninth day of October, An. 13 Jacobi. And the Original bears Test the ninth
of October 14 Jacobi, and after a Verdict, Sergeant Harvey moved to stay the
Judgment, because the Writ was not brought within one year after the Robbery
done, according to the form of the Statute of 27 Eliz. And the Court held it a
good Exception.

CAmblyn versus Hundredum de Tendering, Trin. 15. Jacobi, rotulo The Record of
Nisi prius amended upon motion.
1952. The Plaintiff in his Declaration had mistaken to allege the very Day
of the Robbery, for he showed the Robbery to be committed in October, where in
truth it was committed in September; and the Court was moved, that the Record
which was taken out for Trial, but never put in, might be amended, for the
notice given to the Hundred, as the Record is, would appear to be before the
Robbery, and they granted that it should be amended.

Actions in Partition.
THe Process in Partition are Summons, Attachment, and Distress, and the
Process are returnable from fifteen Days to The Process in Partition.
fifteen Days; and if the Writ be brought against two or more, several
Essoines will lie, but no View, and the Sheriff upon the Distress is
compellable to return the value of the Land from the test of the Original
until the Return thereof: and if the Writ be against two or more De^e^^iants,
and only one appears, the Plaintiff cannot declare against him, until the
residue of the Defendants appear: and Partition lies by the Statute of 31 H. 8.
cap. 32. between Jointtenants, Tenants in Common, Tenants for Life or for
years, but at the Common Law Partition was only between Coparceners, his
Petit. is no Plea in Partition, and in this Action there are two Judgments,
the first is, that Partition shall be made, and if the Plaintiff die after the
first Jugement, and before the second Judgment, the Writ shall not abate, but
his Heir shall have a Scire facias against the Defendants, to show cause why
Partition should be made, and a Writ of Partition will not lie of the View of
Frank Pledges; and the Death of one of the Defendants abates the Writ. And
note, the Plaintiff may have a general Writ, but a special Count: and if the
Defendant confess part, and plead Quod non tenet insimul and pro indiviso, for
the residue the Plaintiff may have Judgment upon the Confession, and a Writ to
make Partition upon the Confession before the Trial, and afterward try the
Issue for the residue, or else he may respit his Judgment upon the Confession
until the Issue be tried, but this is dangerous; for if the Plaintiff be
nonsuit at the Assise, then the whole Writ will abate: and if the Sheriff
return the Tenant summoned, when in truth he was not, an Action of Deceit lies
not, but an Action upon the Case, because the Plaintiff shall not recover the
Land by default, and you shall never have a Writ of Partition against one,
where he cannot have one against the other; thirteen men join in a purchase of
a Manor, the Conveyance was of the moity to one of them in Fee, and the other
moity to the other twelve men in Fee, the twelve make a Feoffment to one, of
twelve several Tenements, and Land, and that Feoffee makes twelve several
Feoffments to those twelve men, now the thirteenth man which had the other
moity brings one Writ of Partition against them all, pretending that they
held insimul and pro indiviso, and by the opinion of the whole Court it would
not lie, but he ought to have brought several Writs, and Mich. 6. Jacobi. in
Partition, because both of them are in Possession, he that is not prohibited
may cut down all the Trees and no Estrepment will lie.

COcks versus Combstoks. The Plaintiff declares that one A. was Error in
Partition upon the first Judgment.
seized in Fee, and demised for years to J. and L. and to the Plaintiff for
term of Life: and one of them demised to one of the Defendants for years; the
Defendant as to part pleads, that he did not demise; and the other pleads Non
est informat. and a Demurrer to the Plea of Non demisit, because it is but
argumentative, Quod non tenet insimul, and it was adjudged a naughty Plea, a
Writ of Error lies in Partition upon the first Judgment, before the Writ be
returned.

MIll versus Glemham. The Defendant pleads, that he before the Defendant pleads
he had brought a Writ for the same land, and adjudged no plea.
purchasing of this Writ, had brought a Writ of partition for the same Land
against the Plaintiff, which yet depends, and demands Judgment if the
Plaintiffs Writ were brought. And the Court held, that the Writ last brought is
well brought; for if the first Plaintiff will not proceed upon his Writ, and
the Defendant shall confess the Action, yet the Defendant cannot sue a Writ to
make partition upon that Plaintiffs Writ, and therefore it is reasonable that
the Defendant in the first Action may sue out a Writ to make partition, and
that the Defendants plea is naught, and the last Writ is well prosecuted.

Actions upon Quare Impedit.
THe Process in this Action, are Summons, Attachment, and Distress, Process in
a Quare Impedit.
peremptory by the Statute of Marlborough, cap. 13. the Sheriff must summon the
Defendant by good summoners, and return their names upon the original Writ, and
not return common summoners, as John Do, and Richard Roo; for a Writ of deceit
lies in this Writ, if the summons were not made indeed; The Writs hereupon are
returned from 15. days to 15. days. The summons upon the first Writ may either
be made at the Church door to the person of the Defendant. And although a nihil
be returned upon the first summons, Attachment, and Distress; yet if the
Defendant make default upon the Distress, a Writ shall go to the Bishop upon
the title made by the Plaintiff: but at the common Law a Distress infinite did
lie, and no Writ to the Bishop before the appearance of the Defendant; but now
this is taken away by the Statute of Marlborough, cap. 13. A Writ of Journes
accounts lies upon the death of the Testator, and summons and severance if one
of the Plaintiffs will not sue.

The Judgment in a Quare impedit, is to recover the presentment, and the value
of the Church for half a year, if the Plaintiff remove the Clerk: And if he do
not remove the Clerk, then the value of the Church by two years, and the value
shall be levied by fifa or elegit, and not by capias ad satisfaciend. for that
no capias lay before the appearance upon the Original. Four things are to be
enquired on in a Quare Impedit; the first is, whether the Church be full or no;
the second is, if it be full, of whose presentment; thirdly, whether the six
months be past from the time it became void; fourthly, the value of the Church
by the year.

If a Quare Impedit be brought against diverse, they shall have several
essoins before appearance; if the first man be essoined, it must be adjourned
for 15. days, idem dies shall be given to the rest. And at that day another of
the Defendants may be essoined for 15. days more, and an Idem dies given to the
rest, and so of all the rest of the Defendants. And if the Defendant take not
his essoin upon the summons, he may take his essoin upon the Attachment. And if
the Plaintiff do not adjourn the essoin, he shall be nonsuit: And note, that
the Defendants are not bound to appear after they have had their essoins until
the return of the Distress; for an essoin is no appearance, because it may be
cast by a stranger: And note, if the Quare Impedit be not brought against the
Incumbent that is presented and admitted into the Church, at the time of
purchasing the first original Writ, that Clerk shall never be removed by the
Plaintiff, although he has judgment to remove his presentation: but if a
stranger be presented, hanging the Writ; if the Plaintiff recove, he shall
remove him: And therefore the surer way is to bring the Writ against the Bishop,
Patron, and Incumbent, and then the Bishop shall not present by Cupps: and if
the Patron be omitted in the original, the Writ is abateable.

If the Original writ be brought against three, one May appear before his
companions, and Process shall be continued until Distress be against the
rest, and the Plaintiff in the mean time declare against him that appears in
the Simulcum, and if he that appears pleads non impedivit, the writ shall be
awarded to the Bishop, but there shall be acesset Executio, until the Plea
between the Plaintiff, and the other Defendants be determined, and if the
Bishop appear and claim nothing but as Ordinary, a writ shall issue to the same
Bishop upon that Judgment, but if the Bishop makes a Title to present, and
Judgment is given for the Plaintiff, then the writ shall issue to the
Metropolitan of Canterbury, if the Church be within his Province, and so to the
Metropolitan of York, if it be within his, and upon a Judgment by non sum
informat. or nihil dicit, the writ, shall go to the Archbishop, and not the
Ordinary, if the writ be against him. The death of one of the Defendants,
hanging the writdoth not abate the writ, nor of one of the Plaintiffs
Parcenors. If the Incumbent recover, he shall recover damages, for he cannot
have a Writ to the Bishop, and if a man recover in a Quare impedit, and die,
his Heir shall not have Execution, for it is not a real Action, and the
Plaintiff ought always in his Declaration to make mention of the last
Incumbent, or otherwise his Writ shall abate.

The Husband alone, but in the Right of his wife, may without his wife bring a
Quare impedit, but not an Assise, de Durraigne presentment, for he shall
recover nothing but his presentation and damages, and if the wife dye hanging
the writ, it shall not abate, and a writ did abate because it was that he
should permit him to nominate a fit person, where it should be to present, for
an Advowson in Wales, the writ shall be brought in the next English County,
and Judgment shall be given in his Action for the Plaintiff, at the Assizes,
and deceit lies as upon a Judgment had in this Action upon default upon every
Issue issued, joined by Jury, the Jury shall inquire of the points of the writ,
and note, admission, plenarty, institution, and ability shall be tried by the
Ordinaries Certificate, but if the Issue be whether the Church be empty by
resignation, or whether the Patron have presented his Clerk, it shall be tried
by the Couutrey, and in this writ the Defeudant shall neither have his age, nor
a protection, nor an Essoin, as in the Kings service to avoid the Cupps.

If the King was Plaintiff and that the defendant was not summoned by the
Sheriff, nor attached, nor distrained, and the King had Judgment by default,
no writ of deceit lies in an Assise of Durraign, Presentment of the writ be
brought in Midd. at the Return of the writ, the Assise shall be there arraigned
by the Sergeants at the Bar in French, and the Tenant shall be demanded, and
if the Tenant do not appear, when he is demanded, a resummons shall be awarded,
and if upon the resummons, the Tenant shall not appear, the Assise shall be
taken against him by default, and if the Tenant appear, he may demand Oyer of
the writ and the Return, and the writ shall be read to him, in haec verba, and
the Return thereof, and the Jury shall have the view, and the Tenant may take
exception, either to the writ, or to the Return thereof, if there be cause, and
if there be no cause, then he may pray a day to plead, and if the Court give a
day, then the Jurors that appeared, shall be discharged of their attendance,
and ought to appear upon a new Process to be awarded against them, the
Judgment in this Assise is to recover the Presentation, damages, and the
value for half a year, and if six months be past, the value of the Church for
two years, by the Statute of Westminster, Ed. 2. and six of the Jury ought to
have the view of the Church, to the intent that they may put the Plaintiff into
possession if he recover, and in this writ the Plaintiff shall not recover the
Advowson, but the Presentation, the Process in this writ is summons, resummons
against the Tenant, and summons, habeas corpus, and distress against the Jury,
and the Process shall be returned from fifteen days, to fieteen days, and no
Essoin nor voucher lies after a resummons.

If the King present his Clerk, one may have an Assise against his Clerk only,
and not against the King, and at Common Law none can have an Assise, but only
the Tenant of the Freehold, but by the Statute, Tenant by Statute, Merchant, or
Elegit may have an Assise, if the Incumbent hanging the writ die, and the
disturber present again, that writ lies by Journes account upon the first
disturbance, and always in a Declaration in a Quare impedit, you must lay a
Presentation in him from whom you first derive your Title, or under some from
whom he claims, otherwise it is not good. The Bishop cannot grant a
Sequestration in no Case, but where the Church is void, but if the Clerk be
instituted, and inducted, no Sequestration lies.

CVppel versus Tansie, Trin. 16 Jac. rot. 3210. Quare impedit brought for the
Church of Bleby, the Issue was, that there was no such Exception taken to the
Venire, and overruled.
Church, and the Venire was, de visu de Bleby, and the Exception was, because
it was not of the Body of the County, but the Exception was salved, because in
the Declaration it was alleged, that one died at Bleby aforesaid, and it was
held, that every place alleged, shall be intended to be a Town, and by the
user of the writ, it is presumed in Law to be a Parish, and then if there be a
Parish, and a Town, if the Venire facias be either of the Parish or Town, it is
good, and it is a good Writ to demand Manerium de D. with the appurtenances.

Several Quare impedits may be brought against several Defendants, as one
against the Bishop, and another against the Patron and Several Quare impedits,
may be brought against several men.
Incumbent, but if J. S. brings a Quare impedit against A. B. that A. B. cannot
have a writ against the said J. S. if a Quare impedit, abates, within the six
months the Plaintiff may bring another writ, but if the Plaintiff be nonsuit
within the six months, he cannot have a new writ, because the Defendant upon
Title made, has a writ to the Bishop, and for that cause, a new writ will not
lie.

COmber versus Episcopum Cicester, and al. Trin. 6 Jacobi. rotulo 1629. The
issue in a Quare impedit was, if S. Rose by covin Admittance of a Resignation
by fraud, takes not away the Kings Title.
between him and Comber and Rivers, did resign into the hands of the said
Bishop, if the King has Title of lapse, and a resignation be made by fraud,
and one admitted, this shall not take away the Kings Title, for if the Kings
Title appear upon Record, then shall go out a writ for the King, but otherwise
it is upon matter of Evidence, the King shall loose his presentation, as well
by resignation, as by Death, where he has Title to present by lapse, and does
not, except the resignation be by fraud, and where an avoidance is by Statute,
there needs not notice to be given to the Bishop.

LOrd Say versus Episcopum de Peterborrow, Mich. 30 Jacobi rotulo The state is
determined by the death of Tenant in Tail.
2601. The Imparlance and the demurrer entered, Hill. 7. Jacobi, rotulo 3458.
The Case was Tenant in Tail grants the Advowson to others, to the use of
himself and his wife, and the Heirs males of the Husband, and the Husband dies,
and the wife survives, and the Lord Say marries the woman, and brought the
Quare impedit, the estate is determined by the death of Tenant in Tail, and
Judgment was given for the Bishop upon a Demurrer, in a Quare impedit, if any
of the Defendants do bar the Plaintiff, the Action is gone.

WAllop versus Murrey, Trin. 8. Jacobi, rotulo 3905. The Church became void by
resignation and a presentation upon the proviso in the Statute of 21 H. 8. for
the Kings Chaplains. The Kings Chaplains might have three Benefices with
license, nay he may give to them as many as he will, being of his own gift,
Judgment for the Plaintiff, if the Incumbents Plea be found for him, he shall
never be removed, although other Pleas be found for the Plaintiff by the whole
Court, Pasch. 9. Jacobi. If the writ abate for Form, you shall never have a
writ to the Bishop, nor where it appears that you have one Title.

DOminus Rex versus Emerson. Trin. 8. Jac. rot. 1811. The question was, where
the King had Title to present to a Church by reason A presentment by words,
good.
of ward-ship, and after livery: and before the King does present under the
Seal of the Court of Wards, the King does present by his Letters patents under
the great Seal of England, and the Clerk is admitted, instituted, and inducted,
whether the Clerk shall be removed or no, and the Court held that he should
not: and Judgment that the Plaintiff, nihil capias per breve, he that gets
it first by the Court of Wards or great Seal shall have it, there needs no
recital in the grant. A common person by his letter or his word may make a
presentation to a Benefice to the Bishop; the King may present by word if the
Ordinary be present; for a presentment is but a commandment; if the King under
any Seal present, it is good: It is best to plead the King presented generally,
and not to plead it by Letters Patents, for it is the worst way, and judgment
was given for the Defendant: and Mich. 10. Jacobi, it was held by the whole
Court, that a presentment under the great Seal, to a Church parcel of the
Duchy of Lancaster is good, and needs not to be under the Duchy Seal.

CRanwell versus Lister. The Defendant had been Parson for three years, and
pleaded plenarty generally by six months of the presentation of one Styles, a
stranger to the Writ: And the Court held Nota.
the Plea to be naught, because the Defendant showed no Title in Styles.

NEedler versus Winton and Needham, Hill. 12. Jacoci, rotulo, 1845. In a Quare
Impedit, the Case was, Husband and Wife, bargain and sell Land to the King;
this is as good as a Fine being found, if it was delivered to the King, but not
entered of Record; if it was made and delivered, it was good: but if the King
should before it be delivered, grant it out, it had been void, being not
enrolled of record; for the King in consideration of the bargain and sale of
the Husband and Wife before the Deed enrolled, did grant to them the Parsonage
of Horsham: in this case the Wife is bound as strong as by Fine, and the King
made the grant between the date of the deed, and before inrolment. If the Kings
Clerk be once inducted, the K. cannot remove his Clerk at the common Law,
before the Statute of 34. H. 8. If a Quare Impedit were brought against the
Patron and Clerk, the Patron might confess the Action, and so prejudice the
Clerk; therefore by the Statute the Clerk being inducted, he may plead that he
is Parson impersoned, and so defend himself.

GLaswick versus Williams, Hill. 9. Jacobi, rotulo, 854. A Quare A subsequent
debt to the Qu. related to award an assurance made upon good consideration.
Impedit brought of the Rectory of I. Stoneley, one of the Tellers in the
Exchequer, was indebted to Queen Eliz. And it was found that he was seized of a
Manor, ad quod, etc. in fee, and sold it to the Plaintiff, who brought a writ
to remove the Clerk, who was admitted by the presentation of Stoneleys wife, to
whom a jointure was made by her Husband before he was indebted to the Queen:
and it was pretended that the jointure was void by the Statute of (...) and so
was the opinion of the Court.

If one usurp upon the King, where the King has Title, the Clerk cannot be
removed, but by a Quare Impedit: but where the King is to present by laps, and
one does present the King during the life of the The King has lost his
presentation by the Clerks death.
Clerk, shall remove him: but if he dye, the King has lost his presentation;
but if the Clerk resign, then is it no prejudice to the King.

COmes Bed. versus Episcopum Exo. Trin. 14 Jacobi, rotulo, 2235. A Defendant
pleads another writ depending against the said Bishop, and good.
Quare Impedit brought, the Bishop and Incumbent join; and plead that there is
another writ depending against the same Bishop only, and pleads it: and that
the disturbance in this Declaration, and the disturbance in the former
Declaration, are one and the same disturbance. The Plaintiff replies, that the
first writ was brought for another disturbance, and traverses without that,
that they are one and the same impediment, and the Defendant demurs upon that
plea, and Judgment given for the Defendant, that it was a good plea in
abatement; for although the presentation and the disturbance are both of them
in question, yet the presentation is the main, and the presentation but as
accessory.

BIrkhead versus Archiepiscopum Eborum and al. Pasch. 14. Jacobi The
Bishopsplea shall not prejudice the Incumbent.
rotulo 953. A Quare Impedit brought for the Vicaridg of Leeds in Yorkshire.
The Archbishop claims nothing but as Ordinary, and pleads further, that the
Church became void the first of January, An. 12. Jacobi, and that six months
had elapsed; by reason whereof he collated the 23. December. and Cook the
Incumbent pleaded the same plea; the Plaintiff replied, and confessed the
Avoidance the first of January: but he further said, that within the six
months, to wit, the 20. of May, etc. he presented his Clerk, and the
Archbishop refused to admit him: And afterward, to wit, the 30. of May, the
Bishop collated, and the Defendant demurred for the doubleness of the plea. If
the Incumbent plead good matter for his presentation, although the Bishop plead
insufficiently, that shall not prejudice the Clerk: And the Defendant took
exception to the Plaintiffs writ, because it bore-date the 9. of May, the
presentment was 29. of May, and the refusal of the Bishop was the said 29. of
May, and he collated the 30. of May: and so the writ was brought before the
refusal made by the Archbishop.

DOminus nuper Rex Jacobus versus Episcopum Roffen. and al. Hill. 13. Jacobi
rotulo, 2330. A Quare Impedit brought for the Church of Milton near Gravesend
in Kent, and the issue was, that Queen Eliz. was seized of the advowson of the
said Church, etc. and upon trial of the issue, the Jury found it specially; by
which it appeared, that the Queen had Title but at two turns, and the Bishop
had one turn: and because it appeared to the Court, that the Queen had Title to
that turn, therefore a writ was awarded to the Bishop for the King.

WInchcomb versus Episcopum recutor. and al. Pasch. 14. Jacobi rotulo, 1026.
The case was, that a Clerk in Salisbury, when the Church was full, contracted
with the Patron, to give him 98. l. when the Church should become void, the
then Incumbent being a very old and sickly man, and did conclude, that the
Patron should grant the next avoidance to a Friend of his who presented him.
And this was held to be a Simonaicall contract. The Clerk was admitted and
continued in all his life, and died, and now the King presented.

The qustion was, whether the King, not taking advantage thereof during his
life, shall have now the presentment, if he had resigned or made cession, and
then another had been presented, and then the first Nota.
Clerk had died, the King then had lost his turn. Hubbard and Winch held that
the King had not lost his presentation, for he never was Parson, and that the
King after his death shall have his turn: and Winchcomb cannot have it, because
the Church was void when the lease of the Manor was made. And Calverts case in
the Exchequer was remembered; for the Church being void, P. contracts
simoniacally with the Patron to have the presentation, and upon this corrupt
agreement he presents R. who was ignorant of this corrupt agreement, and yet he
was removed; for he shall be punished for the offense of his Patron: the
admiission upon such corrupt agreement makes the institution and induction
void.

Austen versus Episcopum London, and al. Pasch. 12. Jac. rotulo, 2255. A Quare
Impedit brought for the Church of B. he claimed by grant of the next avoidance
from Sir Edward Pynchion. The Defendant pleads a Usurpation by Queen Mary upon
a deprivation and plenarty of her Clerk by six months. The Plaintiff pleads a
recovery by a Quare Impedit upon a non sum informat. by the Patron against the
Queens Clerk. If the King upon usurpation present, and his Clerk be in by six
months; if the Patron bring a quare Impedit against the Kings Clerk, and
recover by non sum informat, this shall remit the Patron to his ancient right:
otherwise it is, if the King do present by Title in the case of deprivation,
the Patron must have six months after notice. And Judgment was given for the
Plaintiff.

WIvel versus Episcopum Cestrie and al. Pasch. 12. Iacobi rotulo, 626. Tenant
in tail and his son, grant an advowson, and the Father dies, the grant is
void, and Judgment for the Plaintiff.

WIndham versus Episcopum Norwic. and al. Mich. 13. Jac. rotulo, 2042. A Quare
imped. brought that the Bishop should permit the Plaintiff to present, etc. to
the Church of A. etc. and declares, that whereas E. W. Knight, was seized of
the Manor of M. with the appurtenances, to which the advowson of the said
Church, to wit, to present to the said Church every first turn, etc. and that
the Duke of Norfolk was seized of the advowson of the said Church, to wit, to
present to the same every second turn. And that one T. G. was seized of the
advowson of the said Church, to wit, to present to the same every third turn,
etc. And an exception was taken to the Declaration, because by the writ the
Plaintiff claimed the entire advowson, and by his count he claimed but the
third turn: and also he did not alledg that he ought to have the first turn;
but the exceptions were overruled by the Court; for when the Church is void,
and it appertains to him to present; he has the entire advowson, but otherwise
it is, when there are two advowsons in one Church, for there the Court must be
to the moity of the Church, or the third part.

THe late King James against Matthew, Trin. 4. Jacobi. The King was Plaintiff
in a Writ of Error against Matthew, upon a Judgment given in a Quare impedit,
against the King in the Common Pleas, of the Church of A. and the Question was,
whether a double usurpation upon the King does so put him out of Possession,
that he shall be forced to his Writ of Right, and it was adjudged in the Common
Pleas against the opinion of Anderson, that he was put to his Writ of Right;
but a Writ of Error being brought upon that Judgment in the Common Pleas, the
Judgment was reversed by the opinion of Popham, Yelverton, Williams, and
Tamfeild; Fennor, being of a contrary opinion, and they alleged two Reasons;
first, because the Right of Patronage, and the Advowson it self being an
Inheritance in the Crown; upon Record the Law will so protect it, that no force
or wrong done by a Subject, it shall be divested out of the King, for there is
a Record to entitle him, but there is no matter of Record against him, for a
Presentationby a Subject is but matter in fait, the which Act although it be
mixed with the judicial Act of the Bishop, to wit, Institution, yet it shall
not prejudice the King, being only grounded upon the wrong of a Subject: and
the second Reason was, because no man can show when the Usurpation upon the
King should commence and begin; for it is not to be doubted, but that the King
after six Months passed, if the Incumbent cy might have presented, for
plenarty is no plea against him, and Nullnm tempus occurrit Regi; and after
that Usurpation upon the King, the Court doubted not but that the Patronage was
still in the King; and Popham said, that a Confirmation being made by the King
to such a Presentee, is good, to establish his Possession against a Recovery in
a Quare impedit by the King afterward, but that it should not inure to any
purpose, to amend the Estate of the Usurper, for he gains no Posaession by the
Presentation against the King, but the Release to him made by the King is void,
as to so much as is in posaession, and during the life of the first Presentee,
the whole Court did not doubt but that the King might present, and then the
Death of the Incumbent could not make that to be an Usurpation, which was not
an Usurpation in his life, for his Death is a Determination of the first wrong,
which will rather help then injure the King: and Tanfeild said, that so it had
been resolved in the Common Pleas, 23 and 24 Eliz. in one Yardleys Case, for in
that Case there was not any Induction, for which reason Judgment was not
entered, but they were all of the same opinion, as the Court then was; and only
43 E. 3. 14. 14 E. 3. and 18 E. 3. are against it; and Popham said, that a
Quare impedit was by the Common Law, but it was only upon a Presentment, to
wit, Induction; but if the Incumbent was to be inducted, then at the Common Law
a Writ of Right of Advowson only lies.

DIgby versus Fitzch, Trin. 14. Jacobi, rotulo. It was said, in this Case by
Justice VVarburton, that the Presentment is the Posaession in a Quare impedit,
as in Rent, the receiving, and in common, the taking of the profits: and in a
Quare impedit one ought to show in his Title a Presentation either by himself,
or one of those, under whom the Plaintiff claims as in a Writ of Right of an
Advowson, one must show a Presentation in himself, or in his Ancestors, whose
Heir he is plenarty in a Quare impedit, shall be tried by the Bishop, for the
Church is full by Institution only in common persons Cases, but in the Kings
Case the Church is not full until the Clerk be inducted, but whether a Church
be void or not, shall be tried by the Country, for of Voidency the Country
may take notice.

Actions upon Replevins.
IF the Cattle be distrained, the party that owes them may have a Replevin,
either by Plaint, or Writ, at his pleasure, and if it be by plaint in the
country, and the Bailiff return to the Sheriff that he cannot have the view of
the Beasts to make deliverance, then the Sheriff ought to inquire of that by
Inquest of office, and if it be found, that the Beast be not to be had, then he
ought to award a Withernam, and if the Sheriff will not do it, then an
Attachment shall issue against the Sheriff to the Coroners, and after that a
Distress, and if a Withernam be granted, and a nihil returned upon the
Withernam, he shall have an alias and plures, and so infinitely; and a second
deliverance lies after a Withernam; and note, that sometimes a Withernam lies
after a Withernam, as when the Plaintiff is nonsuit, and after a Return
habend. and that the Beasts are not to be found, and that the Beasts of the
Plaintiff are taken in Withernam, and the Plaintiff appears, and alleadges that
the Defendant, had the cattle first taken, and prays Delivery.

And if the Defendant, when the Sheriff comes to make replevin of the cattle,
claims property, then at the return of that writ, another writ, de proprietate
probanda shall issue to the Sheriff, by which writ the Sheriff is commanded;
that taking with him custodibus placitorum, etc. he shall enquire of the
property. And if it be found that the property was to the Plaintiff, then a
redeliverance shall be made the Plaintiff, and an Attachment against the
Defendant, to answer for the contempt in taking, and unjustly deteyning, the
cattle of the Defendant appear upon the plures withernam, he shall gage
deliverance presently. And if the Defendant in Court claims the property, and
it be found against him, the Plaintiff shall recover the value of the cattle
and his damages. And if the Defendant plead in abatement of the writ, that the
property is in the Plaintiff and one other, etc. and the Plaintiff confess it,
by which the writ shall abate by an award upon the Role, and a return habend.
be awarded to the Defendant, yet the Plaintiff shall have a new replevin, and
the return shall not be irreplegiable; for the Statute of Westminster. the second,
does not help a false writ, or abatement of a writ: but the Plaintiff may have a
new writ from time to time, but it helps non-suits in replevin; for if he be
nonsuit, he shall not have a new replevin, but a writ of second deliverance.
And if the Defendant upon the return habend. adjudged for him, cannot have the
return of the Beasts, and the Sheriff returns upon the return habend. that the
cattle first taken are dead, he may have a Scire facias against the pledges:
and upon a nihil return upon that, he may have a Scire facias against the
Sheriff, for insufficient pledges are no pledges; and the party may relinquish
his withernam, and fall upon the pledges or the Sheriff. And if cattle be put
into a Castle or Fortress, the Sheriff may take the power of the County to
make a replevin upon the plures replevin: a replevin will not lie of deeds or
charters concerning Land, and no return habend. lies upon a justistification:
and if a discontinuance be after a second deliverance, the return habend. shall
be irreplegiable. And if the Defendant after an advowry will not gage
deliverance, he shall be imprisoned for the contempt: no disclaimer lies upon a
justification, but upon an advowry.

And if the replevin was sued by writ, and the Sheriff return thereupon, that
the cattle are not to be found, then a withernam shall be awarded against the
Defendant: and if a nihil be returned, then a capias alias and plur. withernam,
and thereupon an Exigent: and if he do at the return of the exigent find
pledges to make deliverance, and be admitted to his Fine, then the Plaintiff
shall declare upon an uncore detent. and go to trial upon the right of the
cause of distress: and if it be found for the Plaintiff, he shall recover his
costs and damages: And if for the Defendant he shall have a return habend. But
if upon the return of the Plures repleg. the Defendant appear, then no
withernam lies, but he must gage deliverance, or be committed: and the
Plaintiff shall count against him upon an uncore detent. and so proceed to the
rightful taking of the distress. And if it be found for the Plaintiff if the
Cattle be not delivered, he shall recover the value of the goods, and costs
and damages, if for the Defendant, costs and damages, and a return habend.

WIlkins versus Danre Trin. 6. Jacobi, rotulo, 930. The Defendant avowed a rent
charge, granted to his Father in fee, with a clause of Distress: the Plaintiff
demands Oyer of the deed, which was a grant of the rent to one and his heirs,
to hold to him his Heirs, Executors, and Assigns to the use of the said H. and
his Assigns during the life of a stranger: And whether it was in fee, or for
life, was the question, and whether the habendum be contrary to the premises,
or do stand with the estate: If the habendum had been to him and his Heirs
during his own life, this had been void; but it was held otherwise for a
strangers life, and no occupancy can be of a rent.

Chapel versus Whitlock, Mich. 6. Jac. rotulo, 1316. The question was upon a
liberty in the deed to make Leases, provided Liberty to make Leases.
they shall not exceed the number of three lives, or twenty and one years, and
the lease was made for 80. years, if two live so long; if he make a Lease
absolute, it must not be above twenty and one years, but in this case it is
uncertain.

MAnning versus Camb, Pasch. 7. Jacobi rotulo, 341. in Replevin, the Defendant
avows damage fesant by reason of a devise A devise for years in confidence, the
condition must go to the estate, and not to the use.
made to the Advowant by will for one and twenty years, by one Lockyer, who was
seized of the Land in fee: The Plaintiff says, that true it is, that Lockyer
was seized in fee of the Land in question, and by the said Will devised the
Land to the said D. for the said years, in confidence only to the use of it, if
she should remain unmarried, and afterward, and before the taking, dyed
thereof, seized J. L. being then Son and Heir of the said Lockyer, after
whose death the Land descended to the said J. as Son and Heir, etc. after whose
death the Legatees entered into the Land, and were thereof possessed to the use
and confidence above said, the reversion belonging to the said J. L. And the
woman took Manning to her Husband; by reason whereof, the said term devised by
the said L. to the said A. and J. to the use and confidence abovesaid, ended
the said being under the age of 14. years, to wit, of the age of two years, by
reason whereof the custody of the Heir did belong to the Husband and Wife, by
reason whereof they seized the Heir, and entered into the Land, and maintained
their count; the Defendant confessed the Will, and the devise for years, in
confidence: and further, that after the term he devised the Land to his son
in fee, and a demurrer. The condition must go to the estate, and not to the use.

COuper versus Fisher, Trin. 6. Iac. rotulo 513. The Defendant as Administrator
of Foster, advows for rent reserved upon a Feofment made in fee of the Manor,
reserving rent in fee to the Feoffer, in the name of a Fee-farm-rent, with a
clause of Distress for the not The scisin of rent reserved upon a Feosment
within the time of limitation not to be traversed.
paying of it, and that the rent did desend to the issue of the Feoffer. And
for the rent due to the Heir, the Feoffer in his life advows the Plaintiff in
his bar to the Advowry, says; that neither the intestate nor his Ancestors,
nor any other whose estate the said T. has in the rent were ever seized of the
same rent within forty years then last past before the taking, etc. And a
demurrer pretending that he ought to alledg seisen in the Advoury with forty
years: And it was held by the whole Court that the seisin is not to be alleged
being it was by deed made within the time of prescription; neither is the
seisin but where the seisin is traversable, there it must be alleged, and in
no other case, and the Judgment was given for the Advowant.

Mich. 8. Jacobi. An Advowry was made for an amerciament in a Nota.
Court leet, and shows that he was seized of the Manor in Fee, and that he and
all, etc. have had a Court leet, and the Plaintiff traverses that he was seized
of the Manor in Fee: and the Court held. If the Defendant had a reputed
Manor, it would maintain the Avowry, though he had indeed no Manor in truth.

REynolds versus Oakley. The Defendant avows for rent reserved The beast of a
stranger shall not be distreined for rent except they have been upon the land
some time.
upon a lease for life, and the Plaintiff shows that the place in which etc.
did adjoyn to the close of the Plaintiff, and that the Cattle against the
Plaintiffs will did escape into the other close, and that he did presently
follow the Cattle; and before he could drive them out of the close, the
Defendant did distrain the Plaintiff's Beasts: And whether the Distress were
lawful or not, was the question. And the Court held in this case, because the
Beasts were always in the Plaintif's possession, and in his view, the Plaintiff
would not distrein the Cattle of a stranger; but if he had permitted the
Beasts to have remained there by any space of time, though they had not been
levant and couchant, the Lessor might have distreyned the Beast of a stranger.

BLown versus Air, Hill. 40. Eliz. rotulo, 1610. In a Replevin the question
was upon these words, to wit, the said Abbot and Covent granted to the said R.
that he and his Assigns, Fierboot, Cartboot, and Plowboot, sufficient by the
appointment, etc. without making wast under the penalty of forfeiting the
devise, whether those words make a condition or no, and by the whole Court held
to be a condition, but Judgment was given for the Plaintiff for doubleness in
the plea.

BRown versus Dunri, Hill. 15. Iac. rotulo, 1819. The Defendant made cognizance
etc. as Bailiff, M. Walker, Widow, Administrator, etc. R. W. for one rent
charge of 6 l. granted by one Warner Demand not necessary in a Replevin for
rent.
to the said R. and M. his wife for life of the Wife. And the said R. by the
said writing granted, etc. That if it should happen the said yearly Rent to be
behind, and not paid in part, or in all by the space of ten days next after
any Feast, etc. being lawfully demanded, that then, etc. the said Warner, etc.
ten shillings, nomine paene, for every default, and that then it should be
lawful to the said W. and M. and their Assigns, to enter into the premises,
and distrain as well for the rent as for the nomine paene, and shows that the
rent was behind in the life of the Husband, and that he dyed intestate, and
that administration was committed to the woman, and made cognizance for the
rent due at such a Feast in the life of the Husband, and being then behind, and
the issue was, that the Grantor was not seized: and after a trial diverse
exceptions were taken; one was for that a demand was not alleged; another was,
that the cognizance was made as Bailifle to the Administrator, when as the
woman by the survivorship should have the rent. Another was, that it is not
alleged that the rent was behind by ten days next after the Feast, and the
exceptions upon debate at diverse days were overruled. First, the demand is
not necessary, for the Distress is a sufficient demand, as it was adjudged in
Iaces case: The second was, because the cognizance as Administrator are void,
idle, and superfluous: and for the ten days it was good, because that predicto
tempore quo, etc. It was behind, and adjudged by the whole Court for the
Advowant.

SLoper versus Alen, Trin. 15. Jac. rotulo, 3002. Replevin upon the taking of
40. Sheep; the issue was, that the Sheep were not levant and couchant, and
found by a special verdit that twenty Sheep were levant and couchant, and that
twenty Sheep were not levant Nota.
and couchant: and it was held upon the reading of the Record, that the
Plaintiff should have his Judgment.

BVrton versus Cony, Hill. 16. Iac. rotulo, 2044. The Defendant Exct^tion to
the advowry too late after judgment entered.
avows for a rent charge granted to him for life by his Father, issuing out of
all his Lands in such a Town, to have and to hold, to levy, and yearly to take
the said annuity or annual rent of etc. during the natural life of the said
P. at two Feasts in the year, to wit, etc. by equal portions: the first
payment to be made at the first and next Feast of the said Feasts, which should
next happen after the term of 8. years ended and determined, specified and
declared in the said will. And if it should happen, etc. And averres in the
avowry, that there is not any term of years specified and declared in the said
Testament before recited. And note, that in the premises of the Deed it is
recited thus in fulfilling the Will or Testament of me the said T. bearing date
such a date I have given, etc. And the Court held that the grant was present if
no term was contained in the will, and Judgment was given for the Advowant. But
after Judgment was entered upon Record, an exception was taken, because it was
not averred that the Grantor was dead: and it was allowed for a good exception,
but it came to late judgment being entered.

HEyden versus Godsulm. Judgment for the Defendant who avowed Replevin not
within the statute of 3. Iac.
for rent reserved upon a Lease for years: and it was moved that the Plaintiff
who brought the writ of Error upon that Judgment ought to find bail upon the
writ of Error by the Statute of 3. Iacobi, and it was held by the greater
number of the Judges that the Plaintiff should not find bail for Replevins
are not within the Statute.

TVrny versus Darnes, Trin. 17. Iac. rotulo, 2887. Demurrer in a replevin upon
a traverse of Lands, when as the parties have not agreed of the quantity of
Land. The Avowry was that C. was seized of one Message, two Barns, one Mill,
etc. and 100. acres of Land, with the appurtenances in W. and held them of etc.
by fealty and rent, etc. and suit of Court, etc. And the Plaintiff prayed in
aid, and he joined, and alleges that he was seized of 70. acres of Land with
the appurtenances in his demesne as of Fee, and held them of G. by fealty and
rent, etc. and suit of Court, and traverses that he held the Tenements of the
said G. as if his Manor of W. in manner and form as etc. and a special
demurrer: and one cause was, because he denies not the seisin of the said
services, but only denies and traverses the tenure, and therefore they
pretended that the plea contained double matter, and was a negative pregnant,
and secondly, whether the Seisin or Tenure be traversable, and the Plea was
held good by Hubberd and Warburton.

RIchards versus Young, Trin. 16 Jacobi rotulo 104. vel 1700. Judgment
arrested, for that the plea was naught.
A Replevin brought for taking of Cattle at Aller, in a certain place called
Land Mead, the Defendant avows as Bailiff of Sir John Davies the Kings
Sergeant, containing four Acres for damage fesant, the Plaintiff pleads in
Bar, that Henry Tearl of Hunt. was seized of the Manor of Aller, whereof one
Message, etc. was parcel, and customary Land, and devisable by Copy of Court
Roll, and that within the said Manor there was a Custom that every customary
Tenant of the said Message has been used to have Common of Pasture in the
said place called Land Mead, the Issue was without that, that within the said
Manor, with the appurtenances whereof, etc. is, and time out of mind, was a
custom that every customary Tenant of the laid Message etc. had Common of
pasture in manner and form, etc. and Sergeant Harris moved in Arrest of
Judgment, that there was no custom alleged, because it did not appear in the
pleading, that the place where the taking was supposed to be was within the
said Manor, and no custom of the Manor, could extend forth of the Manor,
but he ought to prescribe in the Manor, and note he ought to have pleaded,
that the place in which, etc. was parcel of the Manor, and then the Plea had
been good.

In a Replevin upon an Avowry for Rent, the Plaintiff for part Nota.
pleads, payment, for the other part an Accord, the one Issue is found for
the Paintiff, and the other for the Defendant, the Plaintiff shallrecover his
costs and damages, and the Defend. shall have Judgment of Return habend. and
no costs and damages, I think otherwise it is, if the Avowries be several,
then on both sides they shall recover costs, and damages.

LEe versus Edwards, Trin. 19 Jacobi rotulo, 470. The Case was Nota.
in Replevin, a Copyholder claims Common in another man's Land, and the Lord
infeofleth the Copyholder of his Copyhold Land, whether he has now lost his
Common, and held that he had, but if a Copyholder has Common in the Lords
waste, and the Lord inseofeth him, of the Copy hold with all Commons, the
Common is not gone.

Oabel versus Perrot, Hill. 9 Jacobi rotulo 2734. Tenant in Tail The Plea
naught for want of amendment.
has power to make a Lease for 89 years, if three persons live so long, and
reserving the old Rent due, and payable yearly, and he makes a grant in
Reversion for years, and whether that be good or no was the Question, there
being a Lease for life in possession, the second Lease was for 89 years, if
three live so long, for the matter in Law, the Court held the Lease good, but
for want of an averment of the life of, etc. the Plea was not good.

ROberts versus Young, Hill. 9 Jacobi routlo 1835. the Defendant Amends made to
the Bailiff not good.
in a Replevin pleads that he offered amends, and does not show that he offered
it before the impounding of the Cattle, and adjudged an ill Plea, and the offer
of amends cannot be made to him that makes cognizance.

BAcon versus Palmer. Trin. 12 Jacobi rotulo 3947. A Copyholder If one enclose
part, it is an Extinguishment of Common for cause of vicinage.
in Replevin prescribes to have Common of pasture appurte nant to the
Copyhold, the other party, pleads an Extinguishment of Common, because the
Lord had enclosed Land, lying in another field in which field, and in the other
field, the Lord had Common by cause of vicinage, and note that in Common for
cause of vicinage, if one enclose part, it is an extinguishment of all the
Common.

SHarp versus Emerson, Mich. 12. Jacobi. The Defendant makes avowry for Homage,
Fealty and Rent, the Plaintiff prays in aid, Avowry amended after Entry by
consent.
and has a Summmons in aid, and at the return of the Summons, the Prayee in
aid was Essoined, and after the Ession, the Defendant moved the Court, that the
Homage might be put out of the Avowry, which was entered with by consent of
parties, was raised out of the Will.

ARundell versus Blanchard and Jackson, Pasch. 13 Jacobi rotulo One of the
Juro^s names mistaken in the Pannell of the Return, and amended upon the
Sheriffs Oath, that he was the same man.
2037. The taking in Replevin was supposed to be at Southwark, and one of the
Defendant pleads non cepit, and the other Bailiff of the Governors of the
possessions, revenues, and good of the Free-Grammar-School of etc. for the
Parishoners for the Parish of Saint Olaves, in Southwark, in the County of
Surrey, and the Advowry was made for damage fesant, the Plaintiff prescribed
for a way belonging to his house, in the Parish of Saint Olaves in Southwark,
and the Venire facias was of Southwark, in the Parish of Saint Olaves in
Southwark, and exception taken to that, and held good, because one Defendant
had pleaded non cepit, and another exception was, because he had not showed
when the Corporation begun, and held an idle exception, for one need not show
when they were incorporated, another exception was, because the name of one of
the Jury was mistaken, because in the Return of the Venire it was to Lisney of
Croydon, and in the Pannell of the Habeas Corpus, it was written to John Lisney
of Croydon, and because in sound it is all one, and the Sheriff made oath, that
he was the man, that was returned, in the Venire facias the Return was amended
in Court, and Judgment given by the whole Court for the Plaintiff.

PAin versus Mascall. Hill. 12 Jacobi. rotulo 3400. The Lord avows If two men
distrain one Mare, and both have Judgment, no Return.
the taking of one Mare, as for Rent behind, so for the fourth part of a
Releif, and does not express the same due for the releif, and for the Rent,
the Plaintiff pleads tender, and demurres for the Releif, because he had not
expressed the same, and because he had distrained one thing for the Rent, and
Releif, pretending that if one cause pass against him, and another for the
Avowant, that he could not have a Return habend. but the Court were of a
contrary opinion, but if two men shall distrain one and the same Mare for two
several causes, and one has Judgment for himself, and the other for
himself. In this case no return habend. can be made of the Mare,

BRown versus Goldsmith, Trin. 13. Jacobi rotulo, 607. A Court of Court Baron
in order to the Manor.
Pipowders is incident to a Fine, and a Court Baron to a Manor: And a Court
Baron cannot be separated from a Manor; for it is a wealth to a Manor: the
like of a Court of Pipowder to a Fair by the grant of a Manor with cum
pertinencijs the Court passes; for it is an incident inseparable to the Manor,
and a man cannot grant his Court but he may grant the profits of his Court.

MAgistri and socij Collegij Emanuel is in Cambridg. The writ was adjudged
naught in replevin, because they had distrayned in their proper names for a
Corporation: as Mayor and Comonalty cannot distrain in their own persons but by
their Bailiff. The Court held Nota.
that the Sheriff could not take a Bond in replevin, but must take pledges
according to the old custom.

JVid versus Bungory, Trin. 8. Jac. rotulo, 3059. The Defendant shows that one
was seized of Land in fee, and held it by Knights service of a Manor, and for
the rent of two Cocks and two Hens: and the Lord grants the third part of the
Manor to another, who avows Nota.
for the service, and the Cocks and Hens, and held he could not alone avow for
that joint service, but the other should join with him.

WEnden versus Snigg, Trin. 11. Jac. rotulo, 1137. In replevin A lease for life
to three to hold successively, naught.
the question was upon a Lease for life made to three, to have and to hold to
them the said A. B. and C. and every of them for the term of their lives, and
the longest liver of them successively one after another as they are writ in
order. And the question was, whether this was a remainder or no, and it was
held to be a remainder upon the reading of the Record: but if the grant had
been only successively, not saying as they are named in the writing, it had
been naught because he could not tell who should begin.

THorold versus Hadden. Trin. 11. Jac rotulc, 451. In replevin a The pannell of
the Habeas Corpus amended upon Oath.
Juror was returned by the name of Payly, and in the distress the name was T.
P. and in the Pannell he was written Baily, and tried by that name of Baily,
and moved in arrest of Judgment for the mistaking of the name. And the Court
held, that if the right name was sworn, yet notwithstanding the mistake it was
good; for if the name in venire was not mistaken, all was good, and the Sheriff
ought to amend his misprision: and the Court demanded if any one could swear
that Paly was sworn; and one then present in Court made oath that Paly was
sworn: and the Court ordered that it should be amended, and Judgment was given
for the Plaintiff; every Leet was derived out of the Sherifs turn.

PAul versus Barwicke, Hill. 11. Jac. rotulo, 2147. A stranger in replevin
pleaded non est factum, where he should have pleaded non concessit, and good
after a verdict, though it is not formal pleading.

REad versus How. In replevin the place was omitted in the Declaration, and the
Defendant demurred and held a good cause; for the Plaintiff is bound to take
notice where the Cattle are distrained; a man cannot distrain for a rent
charge but in the day time, because I may take notice where it is, because the
Law presumes that I or my servants are all the day upon the ground. A second
deliverance must not vary in the place; a disclaimer goes to the locus in quo,
etc.

HYnd versus Wainman, and al. Pasch. 8. Jacobi rotulo, 758. Wainman pleaded non
cepit, and the other made cognizance as Bailiff to Wainman. The Plaintiff
pleads, that the parties to the Fine had nothing, Nota.
etc. and it was tried Mich. and Jacobi, and it was moved by the Council of
the Defendant, that the Plaintiff should prove an actual taking: but the Court
held the contrary. And the Judges said, that if one takes Cattle as Bayliffe
to another, and by his command, this shall be adjudged to be the taking of the
Master as of a Bailiff in trespass.

FRancis versus Forest, Trin. 9. Jacobi rotulo, 2033. In replevin for the
taking of Cattle at A. in a certain place called R. the Defendant avows
damage fesant; the Plaintiff in his Bar says, that he was seized of one
Message, etc. in C. in the Parish of A. and prescribes for common: And after a
trial it was moved in Arrest of Judgment, that the venire facias was ill
awarded because it was of A. only: and so it was adjudged by the Court. And
Cook said, that at C. or in C. imply a Village, and therefore he said, the
venire facias ought to have been of C. and A. or at least of the Parish of A.
and Brownlow chief Prothonotary agreed to this.

RIchardson versus Sterer, Trin. 13. Jacobi rotulo 786. In Replevin the
Defendant avows for Damage fesant. The Plantiffe replies that long before the
time of taking the Cattle, H. late Earl of L. was seized of one Message. etc.
and so prescribes for Common of Pasture for ten Beasts, and so justifies the
putting in of one Cow of the two Cowsusing his Common. And the Plaintiff
further says that the said W. R. long before, etc. lent to the said T. P. the
other Cow to manure the Land of the said T. P. as long as the said W. pleased;
And so prescribes for the putting in of that Cow being thereof possessed by
reason of the lending of it, and so demands Judgment. And Hutton Sar^eant
moved that the Bar was naught, because the Plaintiff had falfified his
Replication, because the Replication is by two, and by the pleading another
time of the taking the property was in P. only* and the special property by
verture of the lending was also in P. And so Replevin ought to have been
brought in the name of P. only, and the Defendant demurred the Replication,
and the Plaintiff was non suit.

POpe versus Shurm Hill. 7 Jacobi rotulo 336. The Defendant avows Damage
fesant. The Plaintiff claims Common by reason of a Demise made to him by one
H. W. who was seized in Fee of one Message and Common for him, his Tenants and
Farmers, etc. And alleges one Lease made the thirtieth of March 11. to have,
and to hold, etc. from the Feast, etc. then last past for one year, and so from
year to year, etc. The Defendant traverses the Demise, and the Jury find that
the said H. W. before the said time of the taking, to wit, the 25 of March,
Anno 11. did demise to have for one year then next following, and so from year
to year, and this found specially. And Judgment was given for the Plaintiff,
because the matter in question was whether he had right of Common, or not, and
not the title of the Lease, and it appears by the Jury that he had just right
of Common. And Warburton put this difference, if a Tenant brings an Action of
Trespass wherefore by force of Arms, etc. against his Lord; And the Lord
pleads that the Defendant holds by such services, and Issue be taken upon it;
And the Jury find that he holds by other services, the Verdict is sufficiently
found for the Lord, because the Plaintiff could not maintain an Action against
his Lord.

Johnson versus Thorowgood Trin. 12 Iacobi rotulo 1734. In Replevin the
Plaintiff allows damage fesant, the Plaintiff claims Common by prescription
to, when the Fields called F. and C lie fallow all the time of the year. And
when the Fields are sowed after the Corn, etc. After the Feast of Pentecost.
they used, etc. And the Jury found that he had Common to wit, when the Feilds
lie fallow every year, all the time of the year. And when the Fields were
sown, they used to have Common, etc. And it was held by Nicholls that for
Common Appendant it is not necessary to prescribe, but to say he is seized of
one Message, etc. in Fee; and that he has Common of Pasture in the said
place, as belonging and appertaining to the Tenement. And says further, that
Judgment ought to be given for the Plaintiff, because it appeared by the
Record, that the Defendant took the Cattle at such time as the Plaintiff ought
to have Common. And therefore Nicholls said, that if a man have Common for
great Cattle and Sheep, and the Sheep be taken, and he prescribes that he has
Common for Sheep only; and the Jury said Common for Sheep and great Cattle, the
Common is found for the Plaintiff. And the like if one claim Common all the
time of the year, when the Land lies fallow, and when it is sown, from such a
day unto, etc. And his Cattle are taken in the year when it is sown as lies
fallow, it is sufficient for the Plaintiff to prescribe for Common, either in
the year when it is sown, or when it lies fallow. And if the Jury find all the
Common, it is sufficiently found for the Plaintiff. The like if a man has
Common from such a day to such day, and the Cattle are taken, and a day
between the days, and he prescribes that he has Common in the said time, quo,
etc And the Jury find he had Common before that time the same day, and after
the Verdict is found for the Plaintiff, and Warburton and Winch of the same
opinion.

PIts versus James, Mich. 12. Jacobi rotulo 2155. Upon a special Verdict for
the Misnomer of a Corporation. The first question was, whether the foundation
of poor men to pray for Souls departed is within the Statute of Chaunterys:
and secondly, for the Misnomer: And Winch: held that the Plaintiff should not
be barred for the Misnomer; and for the second he held that his house was
within the Statute of Chaunterys, and so the interest in the King, H. 6. And so
the Lease made by the Master of the Hospital void. Dyer 246. 287. And
Warburton held the Plaintiff should be barred upon both points.

SWynerton versus Mills, Hill. 14 Jacobi rotulo 2049. In a Replevin the
Defendant a vows for a rent charge reserved by a Copiholder who Atturnment not
necessary for a Copyholder.
is seized in Fee, and made a Lease by the license of the Lord, reserving Rent
at four Feasts, or within one and twenty days, being lawfully demanded, and
afterward the Copiholder surrendered one moity in Fee to a stranger, and
afterward surrendered the reversion of the other moity to another, to which the
Termer atturned, and so avowed for Rent. The Plaintiff pleaded in Bar^ that he
was seized of a Close adjoining to the place, in which, etc. and put therein
his Cattle, and that they escaped by fault of enclosure, and issue taken upon
that. And after a Verdict by default those exceptions were taken to the Avowry
in Arrest of Judgment. First, because it appeared by the Advowry that the
Copiholder had surrendered a Reversion, which could not be, because a Copiholder
is a Tenant at will, and so could not have a reversion; for he cannot make a
Lease for years without the license of the Lord, but this exception was
overruled by the Count. Secondly, because there was no Atturnment alleged in
the first surrender. And it was held no exception, because the Rent for which
he avowed was reserved by the Copiholder by the second surrender, to which the
Termer had atturned. And also the Court said, that an Atturnment is not
necessary for a Copiholder, because there is no time when the Term should
atturn. For before the surrender he cannot atturn; and after the surrender and
admittance it is too late. And the Copihold estate is like an estate raised by
uses or devise, in which an Atturnment is not necessary. As also in an estate
raised by Fine, and the like, an Atturnment is not necessary, for if the
Termer will not atturn, he is compellable by Law, as by a Quid juris clamat:
but a Copiholder has no means to make the Termer atturn if he refuse. And
thirdly in the conclusion of the Advowry, he does not say that the Rent was
behind such a day, and one and twenty days after at least; and this exception
was disallowed, because the distress is a sufficient demand of the Rent; and
it appears that the day of the taking of the distress was one and twenty
days after the Feast, at which the Rent was due, and Judgment was given for
the Advowant: and note, that a Covenant to distrain is idle, for a man may
distrain of common right.

HOwell versus Sambay, Mich. 13 Jacobi rotulo 2009. In Replevin, the Demand
necessary for a Nomine pene.
Defendant a vows for a Rent charge, and a Nomine pene granted by Tenant in
tail general, and one Fine levied afterward, and the use expressed: the
Plaintiff replies, and says that the Grantor had only an interest for life,
and so makes inducement, and traverses the use of the Fine. The Defendant
demurrs; And held by the Court that the Grantee was not seized in tail, nor to
the use of the Fine. And it was said, that in this case, that it was necessary
for the Advowant to plead the Fine with the estate tail; for if the Tenant in
tail grant a Rent charge, and dye, no Fine being levied, and the estate tail
discends, the issue in tail is not chargable with the Rent. And note, the
Advowry was as well for the Rent as for the Nomine pene, and no special demand
was alleged in pleading the Rent: and it was adjudged by the Court a naughty
advowry as to the Nomine pene, but good for the Rent, as it has been adjudged
in one Mildmaies Case.

COtterell versus Harrington, Pasch. 6. Jacobi rotulo 545. In a Replevin the
Defendant avows for an Annuity for 20 d. granted for years payable upon demand,
and alleges a demand; the Plaintiff demands either of the Deed, and by the
Deed it appeared that for a hundred and ten pound one Rent of twenty pound was
granted for eight years, and another for 20 l. for two years, if E. R. and T.
should so long live: the Plaintiff pleads the Statute of Usury, and sets forth
the Statute, and a special usurious Contract. If it had been laid to be upon
a loan of Money, then it was Usury; but if it be a bargain an Annuity it is no
usury. But this was alleged to be upon a lending

VVOod versus Moreton Hill, 6 Jacobi, rotulo 1802. In Replevin the Defendant
advows to have Common Appendant out to his house and Land, the Plaintiff
says, that he had Common Appendant to his House and Land. And the Defendant to
avoid the Common says, that the Commoner sold to the Plaintiff, five Acres of
the Land, to which the Common is appendant, pretending that he should not have
Common for that Land, being but parcel of the Land to which the Common was
appendant, Common Appurtenant cannot be to a House alone, purchasing of part of
Common Appendant, does not extinguish the Common, otherwise it is of Common
Appurtenant. And it was pretended to be Common Appurtenant, because it is to a
House and Land, whether by severance his Common is gone, and held to be common
Appendant, and Judgment given for the Plaintiff.

MOrse versus Well. Replevin for Common of Pasture, the casewas that the Father
was seized of two yard Land with Appurtenances, Common Appurtenant and purchase
part, the Common is gone, but not if Appendant.
and had Common of Pasture, for four rother Beasts, three Horses, and sixty
Sheep, and he demised part of the said two yard Lands in being. And whether the
Common should be apportioned, and if it should be apportioned whether the
Prescription failed, because the issue was taken, that he and all those, etc.
had Common in the said two yard Land, A Release of Common in one Acre, is a
Release of all. If I have Common Appurtenant, and purchase part, the Common is
gone, but otherwise it is of Common Appendant. And note: this Common was Common
Appendant, and the purchasing of Common Appendant, does not extinguish the
Common, and Judgment was given for the Commoner by the whole Court.

HVghes versus Crowther, Trin. 6 Jacobi. rotulo 2220. In a Replevin a Lease for
years made to Charles H. and the said A. T. to have Nota.
and to hold from, etc. for sixty years if they live so long, Charles dyed, in
this case Judgment was given, that the Lease was ended by the death of Charles,
but otherwise it had been if it had been for life.

BIcknall versus Tucker, Trin. 9 Jacobi rotulo 3648. in a Replevin the case
was, whether a Fine with five years will bind the Copyholder Nota.
in remainder, there was a Copyhold granted to three for lives, to have and to
hold successively, the first had the Free hold granted to him, by the Lord of
the Manor. And then he leavied a Fine and five years pass, whether he in the
Remainder be Barred or no, those whose estates are turned to rights, either
present or future, are meant by the Statute, to be barred of a Copyhold for
years, be put out of possession, and a Fine Leavied and no entry by him, he is
barred by the Statute, by the Bargain and Sale, he in the Remainder is not put
out of possession, if a man make a Lease to begin at Easter next, and before
Easter a Fine is leavied: and five years pass, this Fine will not bar,
because at the Leavying of the Fine he could not enter, for then his right was
future, if the Lease had been in possession, and the Lessee had never entered
he had been barred. A Lease for years, Remainder for years, if the first man
takes for life, the first estate is not so determined but that the Remainder
stands, if a Copyhold surrender for life, there passes no more from him
then so much as makes the estate and no more, and the rest remains in him.

CRantley versus Kingswel, Pacsb. 15 Jacobi rotulo 710. The Defendant makes
cognizance as Bailiff of Kingswell his Father for Rent, service Demand of Rent
service upon the Land sufficient.
due to his Father at such a Feast. And shows that Cramley holds of him by
fealty, and rent paiable at such a Feast, and for Rent due at such a Feast made
Cognizance, the Plaintiff in Bar says, that he at the said Feast offered the
Rent upon the Land, and that no body was there to receive it. And the
Plaintiff says, that afterward he demanded the Rent upon the Land, and the
Plaintffe made a Replevin, pretending the Lord should make a personal demand,
but the whole Court was against him. And Warburton took acception against the
pleading the Tender, because he says that he offered the Rent to pay, when as
he was not present. And the question was, whether the Lord for a Rent service,
did not demand it at that day whether he can distrain without a demand of the
person, and held he might, for the Tenant is yet bound to tender, and the Land
is debtor, and the Lord may resort thither, when he pleases to demand the Rent
upon the Land, but if he tender his Homage, and the Lord refuses it, he cannot
distrain without a demand of the Person, and Judgment for the Defendant.

STokes versus Winter, Trin. 15. Jacobi rotulo 2242. In Replevin, the Defendant
makes cognizance as Bailiff to Tenant for life, to whom the Annuity was granted
for life, to begin by will, after the death of the devisor; And alleges the
death of the devisor, but not the day of the death: after whose death the said
H. was seized of the yearly rent aforesaid in his demesne, as of his Freehold
for term of his life, by virtue of the devise aforesaid. And because seven
pounds of the Rent aforesaid, for one year, ended at the Feast, etc. and by the
space of 14. days then next following were behind to the said T. the said
time, with, etc. the said T. as Bayliffe of the said H. does make cognizance of
the taking of the cattle aforesaid in the said place, in which, etc. for the
said 7 li. for the yearly Rent aforesaid being so behind, etc. and issue was
taken whether the said I. at the time of his death was seized of the said six
Acres of Land in his demesne as of Fee, as, etc. And after trial exception was
taken to the Advowry, because it was not alleged that the annuity at such a
Feast, after the death of the devisor was behind, but it was overruled,
because there is so much expressed, and Judgment given for the Defendant.

HVmfrey versus Powell, Trin. 12. Jacobi rotulo 2791. Replevin, wherein the
Defendant avows for one Annuity granted to the Defendant, to whom the office of
Catorship of the Church of Roffen in Kent was granted by the D^an and Chapter
of that Church for life, with an Annuity of 6. pounds for the exercising of
that Office, with a clause of distress, by virtue of which grant he was
possessed, and avowes for the Annuity, and avers that it was an ancient Office
pertaining to the Dean and Chapter of Roffen: and does not aver that the
Annuity was an ancient Annuity. The Defendant pleads the Statute of the 13
Eliz: that all Devises, Donations, Grants, etc. made by any Master, and Fellows
of any College, Dean and Chapter, etc. other then for the term of twenty and
one years, or three lives from the time of this Devise, etc. should be totally
void. And shows that the old Dean died, and another was elected; And a Demurrer
thereupon; And Judgment that the Grant was void.

HYen versus Gerrard, Mich. 13. Jacobi rotulo 752. The Defendant in Replevin
avows, that one being seized in Fee made a Lease to him, and avows for Damage
feasant. The Plaintiff in Bar pleads, and maintains his Declaration, and
traverses the Lease upon the Avowant, demurrs, and adjudged a goodtraverse.

IEnyx versus Applefourth, Trin. 17. Eliz: rotulo 543. The Defendant avows for
a Rent charge, the Plaintiff in Bar pleads that the Defendant had presented a
Writ of Annuity, And that he had an Imparlance thereunto; And demands
Judgment, if the Defendant did well make cognizance to the taking of the
cattle in the said place, in which, etc. in name of a distress for the rent
aforesaid, by virtue of the said writing, as Bayliffe of the said R. the said
Writ of Annuity being prosecuted, etc. upon the said writing, in form
aforesaid, etc. And a Demurrer thereupon, and Judgment by the whole Court for
the Plaintiff; it is not needful to lay a prescription to distrain for an
Amerciament in a Court Leet, but it is otherwise for an Amerciament in a Court
Baron, by the whole Court.

DArcy versus Langton. The Defendant avows for a Rent charge, and for a Nomine
penae, and no mention made in the Avowry of the Rent charge, and the Plaintiff
was nonsuit, and afterward in Arrest of Judgment this matter was alleged,
and at first held to be a good exception; but afterward Judgment was entered,
an Advowry is in the nature of a Declaration, if that be vicious no Judgment
can be given for the Advowant.

TRin. 9. Jacobi Regis, rotulo 2033. Replevin for the taking of Cattle at
Andover, in a certain place there called R* The Defendant makes cognizance for
damage feasant: the Plaintiff says, that he was seized of the Message, etc.
in C. in the Parish of A to which he claimed Common of Pasture. And issue taken
upon the prescription, and a Venire Facias of A. and exception taken, because
it was not tried of C. and A. or of the Parish of A. but it was adjudged to be
good.

TRinbone versus Smith, Trin. 12. Jacobi rotulo 626. In Replevin, four Nota.
and twenty were returned upon the Venire facias, and upon the Habeas Corpus,
only twenty and three were returned, and the Jury did not appear full, and a
Tales was awarded, and tried for the Plaintiff, and good, because the Venire
Facias was returned full.

PIgott versus Pigott, Mich 20 Jacobi. In Replevin, Avowry that Ellen Enderby
was seized in Fee, of three Acres in Dale, and took to Husband S. Pigott, and
had Issue Tho: Ellen dyed, and the husband was in by the Courtesy, the Husband
and Tho: the Heir, granted a Rent of 10. (...). issuing out of the three Acres
to the Avowant, and avows for so much behind, the Plaintiff in barrsayes, that
before Ellen had any estate, one Fisher was seized in Fee, and gave it to John
E. in tail, Jo: had issue Ellen, who after the death of her Father, entered and
was seized in tail, and took a Husband, as is before declared. And had Issue
Tho: and that Tho. Tenant by the Courtesy living, grants the Rent as above
without this, that Ellen was seized in Fee of three Acres, and issue was joined
thereupon, and found for the Avowant. And in arrest of Judgment it was
objected, that in effect there was no issue joined. For the traverse of the
sesin of Ellen E. was idle, for no title of the Rent is derived from her, but
they ought to have traversed the seisin of Thomas the grantor, and then the
Issue had been of such a nature, that it had made an end of the matter in
question, which was not in this case, no more then if the Tenant in Formulen
should plead not guilty, but the Court held that though an apter issue might
have been taken, and that the traverse is not good, yet it was helped by the
statute of Jeofailes. For the estate of Ellen H. was in a sort by circumstance
material. For if she were seized in tail, and that estate tail, descended to
Thomas the grantor, then by his death the Rent is determined after the Fee
descended to Tho: from Ellen, there the estate was of that nature, that he
might grant a sufficient rent charge. And although it might well be presumed,
that Thomas after the Fee descended to him from Ellen had altered such estate
tail, yet by Popham the Courts shall not now intend that, because the parties
doubted nothing, but whether Ellen was seized in Fee or not when he dyed, And
that doubt is resolved by the Verdict, as if a Defendant should plead a D^ed,
of J. S, to A. and B. and that it dyed, and B. survived and infeoffed the
Defendant, if the Plaintiff should say that J. S. did not infeoffe A. and that
they should be at issue upon that, and should be found against him, although
this be no apt issue yet it is helped by the statute, because the parties
doubted of nothing, but of the manner of the feoffment of J. S. whether it was
made to A: or not, and of the same opinion was Fennor, Yelverton, and Williams.
but not Gandy.

CRate versus Moore, Mich. 3. Jacobi. In Replevin of Cattle taken in D. the
Defendant avowes as Bayliffe of H. Finch, And the case was thus, the Lady Finch
Mother of H. Finch, granted a Rent charge to H. issuing out of her Manor of N.
and out of all her Lands in D. E. and is in the County of Kent, belonging or
appeartaining to the said Manor* And the Plaintiff to bar, the Defendant
pleads an abatement in H. Finch into the Lands in D. And upon the Defendant
demurrs for the Lands in D. were not belonging or appertaining to the Manor of
N. and adjudged for the Defendant. For no Land can be charged by that grant, if
it be not belonging to the Manor. And that for two Reasons, the first is
because by the word (aut alibi) it appears that it is all but one sentence, and
the (Aut) conjoynes the words proceeding to wit, all the Lands in D. S. and to
put in the County of Kent in these words following, to wit (alibi) in the said
County to the said Manor appertaining, and the sentence is not perfect until
you come to the last words, (to the said. Manor appertaining) for if the Rent
be issuing out of the Land in D. etc. which is not appertaining to the Manor,
then the sentence must be perfect, and these words (County of Kent, and these
(aut alibi) must begin a new sentence: which was never seen, that they should
make the beginning of a sentence. And therefore this case is not like the case
between Bacon and Baker, second of King James, in the prohibition, where Queen
Eliz. grants all her ^ith Hay, etc. within the liberty and precincts of St.
Edmonds Bury, belonging and appertaining to the said Monastery, and which were
lately collected by the Almoner of the said Monastery; for there the latter
sentence is perfect and complete: And these words (in the County of Suffolk)
and the nec non that ensues are a new sentence: And therefore the last clause
(And which by the Almoner, etc. go only to the Tiths following the (nec non)
and not to the Tiths contained in the first clause: but it had been otherwise
if the (nec non) had been (unacum) as in truth the patent was, but it was
mispleaded; for then the (unacum) would have reinjoyned all, and made it but
one sentence. The second reason was, in respect of the nature of the thing
granted, which was but a rent. And therefore, if rent be granted out of a
Manor, to be perceived, and taken out of one acre, this shall be good: and
nothing shall be charged but that one acre only, 17. Ass. but otherwise it is
of Land for a Feofment of a Manor. To have etc. one acre it is a void habend.
For here it appears, that the intent of the Lady Finch was only to charge the
Manor, and such Land only which were appertaining to the Manor: But Popham
held the contrary, for he conceived that D. S. and W. in the County of Kent
were particularly named and bounded in by the name of the place and County, and
therefore they should be charged, although they were not appertaining to the
Manor. As if a man grants all his Lands in D. R. and V. in the County of M.
and in Darn in the same County which he has by descent, it should only extend
to Darn, but denied by the Court, but he was strongly of that opinion. And he
held that by the first of the charge out of the Manor; all the Lands parcel
or appertaining to the Manor are charged, and therefore the subsequent words
if they should be limited, as is abovesaid, would be idle and frivolous. And
Yelverton said, that the words before belonging or appertaining, shall be taken
to extend to the Land occupied in the Manor, although it is not parcel of it,
and Fenwood and Willams granted, and Judgment was given that the Defendant
should have a return habend.

TOtt versus Ingram, Trin. 4. Jac. In a replevin brought by T. against I. who
makes conisance as Bailiff of Sir Ed. Br. for a common Fine which was assessed
upon the Plaintiff who was resident within the Leet of his Master: The
Plaintiff replies, that Sir Edw. by his deed had released to him all rents,
services, exactions, and demands out of his Manor except suit of Court; the
Defendant demurred: And Nichols; that suit of Court for which this common Fine
was set is excepted, and therefore the common Fine is not released by that, but
is excepted: also a common Fine is assessed, when the Jurors in the Leet do
conceal that which they ought to find, and with which they are charged, and
therefore the release being for exactions out of the Land: And this is not for
any thing by reason of the Land, but because he does misbehave himself; and by
the opinion of the whole Court, a release of all demands does not discharge a
man of his suite to a Leet by reason of his residency; because a Leet is the
Kings Court, to which every leige-Subject is to come and perform his allegiance
to him. And also because suit of Court is inseparably inoident to a Court* leet
which cannot be released.

PAllets Case, Pasch. 5. Jacob. In a replevin in which Pallet was Plaintiff,
the case was such, where a man made a Lease of Lands, of which Land he was
seized by a good Title, and of Land of which he was seized of a defeasible
Title for years, rendering rent: and in the replevin, the Lessor avows for the
whole rent: The Plaintiff in the replevin says; that after the lease made, the
Disseisee had entered upon part of the Land, and a demurrer. Sergeant Hicham
moved for the Advowant that he ought to have a return; for he agreed that the
rent should have been apportioned; but he said, that if a man avows for many
things, and he has right but to one, he shall have a returh habend. 5. H. 7.
and 9. H. 7. And 4. Ass. Pl. 6. where a man brings an assise for rent, and has
right but to part, yet he shall recover for that part, and cited the opinion of
Popham put in Walkers Cafe in the third Rep. 24. when rent reserved upon a
Lease for years should be apportioned. If a man in an action of debt demands
more then he ought, yet upon a nil debet pleaded, the Lessor shall recover so
much as shall be apportioned and assessed by the Jury, and shall be barred as
to the residue. But Yelverton was of another opinion; for he said, as this case
is, the Avowant shall not have a return habend. But if the apporciament had
been made by the Jury, he should have had a return habend. but in this case the
apporciament must be made by the Judges, to whom the quantity of the Land
cannot appear, and therefore they cannot make apportiament; for they all agreed
that the apportiament ought to be accotding to the value of the Land, and not
according to the quantity: And to prove this, he cited Hubberd and Hammonds
Case, 43. Eliz. co. lib. 427. As where the Fines of Copyholders upon admittance
are uncertain, the Lord cannot exact excessive Fines: and if the Copyholder
deny to pay it, it shall be determined by the opinion of the Judges before whom
the matter depends: and upon a demurrer to the evidence to a Jury upon the
confession or proof of the annual value of land; the annual value ought to
appear to the Judges; but in this case the value does not appear to them, and
therefore they cannot make any apportiament, and therefore the Avowant shall
not have a return habend. But T^anfield held the Avowant should have a return
habend. for the whole rent; for the Judges could not apportion this, because
the value did not appear: and the eviction is matter of privity, which ought to
be discovered by the Lessee, and he should give notice to the Lessor, and he
ought to show the value of the Land from which he is enriched to the Judges.
And Popham is of the same opinion; for he said the value of the Land ought to
be showed by the Lessee, for every one ought to plead that which is in his
knowledge, and that was in the Lessee's knowledge, and not the Lessor: and Fenner
of the same opinion, but Yelverton and Williams against it; for Yelverton said,
that it appeared that part of the Land was evicted, and therefore it ought to
be apportioned; but because the value did not appear to the Judges, it could
not be apportioned. Williams said, that if the Lessee surrender part, the
Lessor need not show the value: and Popham agreed to that, because the
acceptions of the Lessor had made him privy to it.

KEnrick versus Pargiter, Trin. 6. Jacobi. The Defendant justifies A Commoner
may take the cattle of the Lord damage fesant.
the taking of the Cattle damage fesant upon a surmise of a custom; that the
Plaintiff being Lord, has the place in which etc. wholly to himself until
Lammas day: and after that day it is common for the Tenants, and the Plaintiff
is not to put in but only three horses, etc. And because the Plaintiff after
Lammas put in more cattle then three horses, the Defendant took them damage
fesant, as it was lawful for him to do: And issue was joined upon the custom,
and found against the Plaintiff; and Yelverton showed in arrest of Judgment
that the Defendant could not take the Cattle damage fesant, for it appears
that the Defendant is only a Commoner: and it also appears, that the place in
which etc. is the soil of the Plaintiff, and the Cattle cannot be taken
damage fesant upon his ground, no more then the Tenant can have an Action of
Trespass against his Lord guare vi and armis, etc. in regard of his Seigniory,
as it is in Littleton, and 5. H. 7. But the Court said, that the matter of
taking the Cattle did not come into question; for nothing was in issue but the
custom, which is found against the Plaintiff; for if the Plaintiff would have
taken advantage of that, he ought to have demurred. And although by that he had
confessed the custom, yet whether such Commoner could have taken, the Lords
Cattle would then properly have come into debate. And by Fenner, Williams, and
Cook, the taking the Lords Cattle damage fesant was good; for by the custom the
Lord is to be excluded but only for his stint: and the Lord may well be
stinted, and the whole vestive and benefit of the soil is the Commoners, and
they have no other remedy to preserve the benefit they have in feeding their
Cattle, but by taking the Cattle of the Lord if he offends. And the Custom
has made the Lord as mere a stranger as any other: and without doubt the
Commoner might take the Cattle of a stranger, 15. H. 7. The chief Justice and
Yelverton doubted of it: And although the Commoners by the custom had gained
the sole feeding in the land of the Lord: Yet they ought to have showed the
custom, and also the usage to have distrayned the Cattle of the Lord damage
fesant, and observe his.

BRaxall versus Thorold. Trin. 8. Jac. In Replevin for the taking of 4 Oxen at
Coringham in the County of Lincoln, in a place called Judgment arrested for not
showing in what place the Message did lie to which the Common did belong.
Dowgate leys, Sept. 6. Jac. The Defendant says, the place contained four acres
in Coringham magna, which was his Freehold and justifies the taking damage
fesant. The Plaintiff in his bar to the Avowry, that the place where etc. lies,
in a place called Harrerart quarter, parcel of a great Common Field called E.
in Coringham aforesaid: and that the Plaintiff the said time, and long before
was seized of one Message, and of 14. acres of Land, Meadow, and Pasture, with
the appurtenances to the said Message belonging, and that the Plaintiff and
all they whose estate the Plaintiff had in the Tenements, ought to have common,
and so prescribed to have common for him, his Farmers, and Tenants, etc. for
all comunable cattle levant and couchant upon the Tenements, etc. And upon
issue taken upon the Common, it was found for the Plaintiff, and alleged in
arrest of Judgment, that it did not appear by the Bar to the Avowry in what
place the Message and Land to which the Common did appertain did lie, to wit,
whether it did lie in Coringham, or in any other place or County, and thisof
necessity ought to have been showed in certain, because the tenure ought to be
both of the place where the House and Land did lie, and of the place where the
Land did lie in which the Common was claimed, and therefore of necessity ought
to have been showed uncertain, and shall not of necessity be intended to be in
Coringham where the Common is; For a Common may be appendant or appurtenant to
Land in another County. And the trvall shall be of both Counties, and Judgment
was arrested by the whole Court

TRuelock versus Riggsby Mich. 8. Jacobi. In Replevin, for the Common, when the
field and acres unsown the sowing of parcel shall not debar him of his common
in the residue.
taking of six Kine in a place called Brisley hill, in Radley, in the County of
Berks, the Defendant as Bailiff of one Read, makes Conisance that the place,
where, etc. contains fifty acres, and is parcel of the Manor of Barton,
whereof the place, where, etc. is parcel, and shows that E. 6. was seized of
the Manor of Barton, whereof the place where is parcel, and granted it by
Letters Patents to R. Leigh, and diverse other Lands. by the name of the
Coxleyes, etc. and amongst other particulars in the Patent, the King granted
Brisley hill in Barton, and deduces the Freehold of the Manor, of which the
place, In which, etc. is parcel to Read, and he as Bailiff to him, took the
Kine damage Fesant: the Plaintiff replies, and shows that one Hide was seized
of a Message, and diverse Acres of Land in Radley, and that he and those, whose
estate he has for himself, his Farmers and Tenants used to have Common in the
said place called Brisley hill in Radley, when the said Field, called Brisley
hill in Radley, was fresh and not sowed, all that year with their Cattle
Levant and Couchant, and when the Field was sown with Corn, and when the
Corn was carried away, until it was referred, and so justify the putting in
of six Kine using his Common, because the Field was not sown with Corn at the
time, to which the Defendant pleads, and says, that part of the Field, called
Brisley Hill in the Avowry named, was at that time sown with Corn, etc. and the
Plaintiff demurres, and adjudged for the Plaintiff for two reasons. The first
was, because the Defendant in his Avowry referres the taking of the Cattle to
another place, then that set forth in the Avowry, which is not in question, and
in which the Plaintiff claims no Common, for the Plaintiff may claim Common in
Brisley hill in Radley, and the place named in the Defendants Avowry, to which
he referres his Plea is Brisley hill in Barton, for Brisley hill in Radley is
not named in the Avowry by any special name, but only by implication, by this
name the place in which, etc. and for that reason the rejoinder does not answer
the matter in the replication. The second cause was, because the Plaintiff
claims Common, when Brisley hill in Radley was unsown with Corn, and the
Defendant to that, although his Plea should refer to the same Brisley, yet
has he given no full answer, for he says that parcel of the said Field was
sowed with Corn, and the Court held that sowing of parcel of the Field shall
not hinder the Plaintiff from using his Common in the residue, for that may be
done by covin to deceive the Plaintiff of his Common, for the Plaintiff claiming
his Common, when the Field, that is, the whole Field is sown, shall be barred
of his common by sowing of parcel of it, notwithstanding that parcel be
sowed, the Plaintiff shall have his common by the opinion of the whole court.

GOdfrey versus Bullein. Mich. 8 Jacobi. Bullein brought a Reple vin against
Godfrey, for the taking of six Beasts, in such a place in Bale, in the County
of Norfolk.* the Defendant as Bailif of R. Godfrey makes conisance, because
before the time, and at the time, in which etc. the said R. Geffrey was seized
of a Court Leet in Bail of all the inhabitants, and r^^dent within the
Precinct of the Manor of Bail, to be holden within the Precinct of the
Manor, as appertaining to his Manor, and shows, how that he had used to have
a Fine of ten shillings, called a Leet Fine of all the chief pledges of his
Leet, and if they failed to pay, the Steward had used to amerce them that made
default in payment, and showed, how that at a Court holden within the Manor,
such a day it was presented, that the Plaintiff in the Replevin being an
inhabitant in B. and resident within the Precinct of the Manor, made default
in payment of the said Fine of ten shillings, being then one of the chief
pledges of the Court, by reason whereof he was amerced at five pounds, which
being not paid, the Defendant took the Beasts, and the Issue was, whether
Bullein at that court was a chief Pledge or no, and the Venire to try his Issue
was only of the Manor, and found for the Plaintiff, and damages, and costs to
thirty pounds given against Geffrey, upon which he brought a Writ of Error, in
the late Kings Bench, and adjudged Error and the Judgment reversed, for the
Venire facias should have been both of Bail which was the Village, as of the
Manor, for although the Court be held within the Manor, yet the Leet it self
is within the village of Bail, and the Plaintiff was an inhabitant, and
resident within the village, which village is within the Precinct of the
Manor, and though Fleming chief Justice held, that nothing was in question but
whether the Plaintiff was chief pledge at the Court held within the Manor or
no, and so nothing within the village is in question, or could come in Issue,
yet it was resolved by the whole Court, but him, that those of the village of
Bail might well know whether the Plaintiff being an inhabitant within the
village in which the Leet was, were a chief Pledge at the Court or no, for to
have chief pledges, does properly belong to a Leet, which Leet is within the
village, and therefore they of the Manor cannot have so good knowledge of the
matter, as they of the Manor and village together, and therefore they all
ought to have been of both, as in the Case of Common, or a way from one
village, to a house in another village, this ought to be tried of both
villages, and so also of the Tenure of Land in D. held of the Manor of Sale,
the trial must be as well of the village, where the Land lies, as of the
Manor of which the Land is holden, as it was adjudged Hill. 45. El. in the
then Queens Bench, in the Case between Lovlace and and Judgment was reversed,
and see 6 H. 7. and Arundels case, in my Lord Cooks Reports.

BVrglacy versus Ellington. Burglacy brought a Replevin against When a Deed is
perfected and delivered as a Deed, one agreement after pleaded in defeasance
thereof, and when the agreement is parcel of the Original contract, it may be
pleaded.
Ellington, for the taking of his cattle, etc. the Avowant pleads that one W.
B. was seized of the place in which, etc. in his Demesne, as of Fee, and being
so seized died, by reason whereof the Land descended to one Crist. his Daughter
and Heir, who took to Husband the Avowant, the Plaintiff in his Bar to the
Avowry, confesses that W. B. was seized, and that it descended to C. who took
to Husband, the Avowant, but he further said that the 16 of April, primo Jac.
the Husband and Wife by their Deed indented, and enrolled, did bargain and sell
the same Land unto one Missenden, and a Fine levied by them, and that M. the 30
of James, bargained and sold it to F. M. in Fee, and he being so seized,
licensed the Plaintiff to put in his cattle, the Avowant replies, if in the
said Bargain and Sale made by the Husband and Wife, a Proviso was contained,
that if the said Ellington should pay one hundred pounds a year after, then,
etc. and pleaded the Statute of 13 Eliz. of usury with an averment that the
profits of the Land were of the value of twelve pounds by the year, the
Plaintiff rejoyned that true it is, there is such a clause in the Indenture but
he further said, that before the sealing of the Indenture, it was agreed by
word, that the said Ellington should have and receive the profits, and not the
Plaintiff, and thereupon the Avowant demurres, and the Case was thus, Ellington
bargains his Land to M for the payment of one hundred pounds a year after to
be paid, and that the Bargainee should have the profits, the bargainor enters
as upon a void Sale, because of the statute of usury, for by the Proviso ^he is
to have the hundred pounds, and ten pounds for the forbearance, and by the Law,
he is to have the profits, and the which did amount above ten pounds by the
hundred, the bargainee to avoid the usury pleaded an agreement by word, before
the sealing of the Bargain and Sale, and the question arising upon this was, if
the Bargainee might plead this verbal agreement, for the avoiding of the Deed
which did suppose the contrary, and Moore of Lincolns ^nne counsel, was of
opinion that he could not put that maxim that every thing must be dissolved by
that, by which it is bound, and his whole argument depended upon that, and he
cited diverse Cases, as 1 H. 7. 28. 28 H. 8. 25. 1 Eliz. Dier 16. 9. Rutlands
Case 5 Rep. and Cheyney 6 Case there, but the whole Court without any argument
were of opinion, that he might plead the verbal agreement, and avoid the
usury, and first they all agreed, that when a Deed is perfected and delivered
as his Deed, that then no verbal agreement afterward may be pleaded in
destruction thereof, as it is in the Cases put, but when the agreement is
parcel of the Original contract, as here it is, it may be pleaded and
secondly otherwise it would bring a great mischief, being the custom so to do
by word, but if it had been expressed within the Deed, that the Bargainee
should have the profits, and that it was delivered accordingly that no
agreement or assignment of the profits could now avoid it, for it is an
usurious contract, and therefore the whole court gave Judgment for the
Plaintiff that he might well plead the agreement.

Actions of Trespass and Battery.
JOhnson versus Turner, Trin. 44 Eliz. Trespass brought for breaking the
Plaintifs house, and the taking and carrying away his goods, The Defendant in
his Demurrer ^nswers not the whole Declaration, and Judgment reversed.
the Defendant justifies all the Trespass, the Plaintiff, as to the breaking of
the House, and taking the goods, and the matter therein contained demurres upon
the Defendants Bar, the Defendant joins in demurrer in this form, to wit,
because the Plaintiff aforesaid, as to the breaking of the House, and taking the
goods is sufficient, demands Judgment, and Judgment given in the Common Pleas
for the Plaintiff, and a Writ to inquire of Damages, upon which Damages are
assessed for the breaking of the House, and taking the goods, and whether the
subsequent words, to wit, and the matter therein contained go to the whole
matter in the Bar, to wit, to the carrying of the Goods away also, for when
the Defendant joined in Demurrer with the Plaintiff he joined, specially to
wit, to the breaking of the House, and taking the Goods, but nothing of the
carrying them away, and so as to the carrying of them away, nothing is put into
Judgment of the court, yet the Writ to inquire is for the whole, and the
Judgment also, and the carrying of the Goods away being parcel of the matter,
and for which greater Damages, are adjudged, and that being not put into the
Judgment of the Court by the Demurrer, therefore the Judgment is erroneous,
for there is a discontinuance, as to the carrying of the Goods away, which is
part of the matter, and this business concerned Mr. Darcy of the privy
chamber, concerning his patent for Cards.

PVrrell versus Bradley. Pasch. 1 Jacobi. The Plaintiff declares in Trespass,
wherefore by force and Arms, such a day the Defendant did assault him, and one
Mare, price six pounds, from the person of the Plaintiff, then and there did
take, and Yelverton moved for the Defendant in arrest of Judgment, and the
Declaration was not good, for the Plaintiff did not show any property in the
Mare, for he ought to have, that it was his Mare, or the Mare of the Plaintiff,
for as it is laid in the Declaration, the words may have two intendments, that
the property of the Mare was to the Defendant, and then the taking was lawful,
or that the property was in the Plaintiff, and then the taking was wrongful,
and it being indifferent, to whether it shall be taken most strongly against
the Plaintiff, for his is not a fault in form, which is helped by the Statute,
but it is a defect in matter, and then the Jury having assessed entire Damages
for both the Trespasses, and that no cause of Action is supposed form, the
verdict was not good which the Court granted.

FReshwater, verse. Reus, Mic. 2 Jac. tenant in tail, convenanted to stand
seized in consideration of a marriage, to be had by his Son, with the Daughter
of J. S. to the use of himself and his heirs, until the marriage be had, and
afterward to the use of himself for life, and afterward to his Son and his
wife, the daughter of J. S. and the heirs of their bodies, and suffers a
recovery with a single voucher to that purpose, they die without Issue, and
adjudged that the Entry of him in the Remaindant depending upon the estate.
Tail was lawful, for first there is no consideration, to raise an use for the
consideration, is only the marriage of his Son with a stranger, the which as
to the changing ofthe possession is not any benefit to the Father, for he is as
a stranger to that personal and particular consideration, but if the
consideration had been for the establishing of the Land in his name and blood,
it had been good, for that only concerned the Father, and the whole Court
agreed, that although it were an alteration of the Estate, as to himself, but
not to strangers, for if he had after such Covenant to stand seisedtook a Wife,
she should have had Dower.

In Trespass the Process is Attachment and Distress infinite, but if nihil be
returned, Process of Outlary lies; and if the Defendant be returned attached by
such Goods and Chattels, if the Defendant omit to cast an Essoine at the
return of the Writ of Attachment, he shall forfeit the Goods by which he was
attached, but if he cast an Essoine, he shall have a special Writ, reciting
the matter to the Sheriff, to deliver to him his Goods or Cattle, although he
do not appear at the day of the adjournment of the Essoine: And if the
Defendant at the return of the Attachment will appear without an Essoine he
may, and then he shall not forfeit the Goods: And note, the Essoine shall not
be adjourned by, from fifteen days to fifteen days: And if the original Writ
be against many, they shall have but one Essoine in personal Actions: And if a
Lord of the Parliament appear not, he shall forfeit an hundred pounds, and
upon issue joined in this Action, the Process against the Jury, is the Venire
facias, Habeas corpus, and Distress: And if a Baron of the Parliament be a
Defendant, then if a Knight be not returned upon the Pannell, the Defendant may
at the Assizes quash the Pannell; and if at the Assizes the Jury do not
appear full, to wit, twelve men, this may be supplied by the Justices at the
request of the Plaintiff; and the Sheriff ought to return two Hundreds at the
least in this Action, and so in every personal Action; but four in real
Actions, for if a challenge be made, Pro defectu hundredo, if two be not
returned, the Jury shall remain; and a Distringas, with a December tales shall be
awarded, returnable in Court, but no circumstances shall be awarded in Court,
for if the Jury in Court do not appear full, or are challenged, for that the
Jurors have no freehold, and it be tried, a new Habeas corpus shall issue out
with a December tales, if it be desired: And if the Jury appear full in the
Court, and the Array be challenged, either for that it was of the Plaintiffs
denomination, or that the Sheriff or under Sheriff who returned the Jury, are
of the Kindred of the Plaintiff, or any other principal cause of challenge,
and this is confessed or tried by two of the Jurors who have appeared, being
assigned and sworn by the Court to be tryers of the challenge, who shall give
their Verdict that the challenge is true, then the Array shall be quashed; and
if he that arrayed the Pannell remain Sheriff, the Venirefacias de novo, shall
be awarded to the Coroners, if there be no cause of exception against them or
any of them by reason of Kindred, or any other principal cause: And if there
be cause of challenge to any of them, the Venire facias shall issue to the
rest, and his companion shall not intermeddle with the execution of it; and if
there be good cause against all, then a Venire facias shall issue to Estizors
to be appointed by the Court to return the Writ, but if the Sheriff who
returned the first Pannell be removed, then a new Venire facias shall issue to
the Sheriff who shall be then in Office: And note, no challenge shall be made
to the Array returned by the Estizors but by the Poll; and if the Jury appear
full, and no challenge be made until twelve be sworn, the Jury shall proceed
to hear their Evidence, and give their Verdict; and if the Jury find for the
Plaintiff, then they shall give costs and damages, but if they find for the
Defendant, they shall find neither costs nor damages: And the Judgment for
the Plaintiff is, that the Plaintiff shall recover his damages found by the
Jury and costs of suit, but if the Jury find for the Defendant, the Judgment
is, that the Plaintiff shall, int. capiat per breve, but if Judgment in this
case had lain, a Nil dicit confession. or Non sum informat. then the Court
shall award to the Sheriff a Writ to inquire of damages, and no challenge lies
to the Jury upon a Writ to inquire: And if the Sheriff return but twenty and
one upon the Jury, and twelve of them appear, and try the Issue and give a
Verdict, it is a good Verdict, but if only ten or eleven of them appear, and
the Jury be made up at the Assizes, De circumstantibus, and the Issue be tried
and a Verdict given, it is naught, and not helped by the Statute: And if the
Issue be joined, and the Sheriff be cozen to the Defendant, the Plaintiff shall
not have a Venire facias upon the challenge of Kindred of the Sheriff to the
Defendant, but it ought to stay until that Sheriff be removed and another
Sheriff made: And if the Defendant be Lord of the Hundred, within which Hundred
the ten does arise, the Plaintiff may show that, and have a Venire facias to
the next Hundred; or if the Array be quashed for that cause, he may have a
Venire facias to the Coroners of the next Villiage in the next Hundred next
adjoining: And note, The Venire facias shall not issue to the Coroner but upon
the principal challenge, and if a challenge be to the Tales, and that be found
true, the Tales only shall be quashed, and the principal Pannell shall stand:
And if an Issue be joined between the Mayor and Commonalty of a City, and
another concerning a Trespass done within that City; the Plaintiff surmising
that the Sheriff and Coroners are Citizens of that City, may pray a Venire
facias to the next County of the body of the County, or of the next Villiages
in the next County: And if the challenge of Kindred be not rightly alleged in
the challenge, it matters not if it be Kindred; and if a Venire facias be
quashed, because it was returned by the Under Sheriff who was Kin to him, or
other good cause, it shall be quashed, and the Venire facias shall be returned
by the high Sheriff, with words in it, that the Under Sheriff shall not
intermeddle with it: And if the Array be challenged and affirmed, the Defendant
may after challenge the Poll, and must show his cause of challenge presently:
And if the Land in question lie in four Hundreds, if four of any Hundred
appear, it is good; and note, That the challenge of the Array shall be drawn
in Paper, and delivered presently after the Jury appears; and the Defendant is
not bound to make good his challenge with these words, Et hoc parat. est ver
iscare, etc. And those that try the principal challenge may also try the
challenge upon the Tales, if the King had been party alone no challenge was to
be allowed, but if the suit had been in the name of another, who sued as well
for the late King as for himself, in a Writ to inquire of waste after a
distress, no challenge to the Poll lies.

It is good cause to challenge a Juror because he was attainted in a conspiracy
or attaint, or if any Juror was put into the Pannell at the desire of the
party, it is good cause of challenge to the Array: And if a Jury of two
Counties, and both Arrayes are challenged, two of one County shall try the
Array of that County, and two of the other County shall try the Array of the
other County, and they shall not join until they be sworn of the Principal,
and two of one Hundred and two of the other Hundred do suffice, if in Trespass
the Defendant justify as a Servant to the Lord and by his commandment. It is
good cause of challenge to the Juror that he is a Tenant to the Lord, although
the Lord be no party to the Record; and if Process by challenge is awarded to
the Coroners, the Process afterward shall not go to the Sheriff, although
there be another Sheriff, but after Judgment execution shall issue to the new
Sheriff: And where a man challenges the Polls of the principal Pannell, he
afterward shall not challenge the Array of the Tales, and if the Array be
quashed, it is entered upon Record, but if it be affirmed then it is not entered.

If Trespass be done in diverse Towns in one Shire, they may all be joined in
one Writ, to wit, why by force and arms the Closes and Houses of the Plaintiff
at A. B. and C. have broken; and, etc.

WOlsey versus Sheppard, Constable, The Constable being Defendant The mistake
of the day of an Act by way of Bar, not prejudicial.
justifies the Imprisonment, by reason that the Plaintiff kept one Alehouse
against the form of a Statute of Queen Elizabeth, and therefore by the warrant
of two Justices he was committed to Prison, and Issue was, that he did not keep
an Alehouse against the form of the Statute aforesaid; and indeed the Statute
was made in Edw. 6. time, and the Jury found that he did keep an Alehouse
against the Statute in Edw. 6. time: And the Court held the mistaking of the
day of the Act is not prejudicial by way of bar, but by way of count it must
be laid truly.

GLasbrook versus Einsey, Pasch. 16. Jacobi, in Assault and Battery, the
Defendant pleaded not guilty, and the next term after A confession after an
issue joined, refused.
the Writ of Venire facias was awarded, the Defendants Attorney would have
confessed the Action by Relicta verificatione, which the Plaintiff did deny to
receive, having took out his Venire, and that those Errors which had escaped in
the proceedings by that confession were not helped as they are after trial;
and it was much controverted by the Court, whether the Defendant without the
consent of the Plaintiff might confess the Action; and the Court was in
several opinions, but because the Plaintiff always prays for the confession,
it seemed he might refuse the confession; and afterward it was adjudged the
confession should not be received, because it appeared to the Court to be but a
practice to lessen the Plaintiffs Damages.

COok versus Jenman, Trin. 12. Jacobi, rotulo 329. An Action of Trespass and
Battery was brought the last day of October, 10 Jacobi: The Defendant as to the
force and arms says nothing, but pleads generally that he and one, in the
said last day of October did jointly enter into the Plaintiffs at S. and did
then and there assault the Plaintiff; and that afterward, to wit, such a day
and year, the said Plaintiff* did by his Writing, etc. release, etc. the said
R. of all Actions, etc. And avers it to be the same Trespass whereof the
Plaintiff complained, and the Plaintiff traverses without this, that the
Trespass, etc. was jointly done, and demurrer upon this Plea, pretending the
Trespass is several and not joint, and so no satisfaction, but it was held a
good Plea, for the Battery was joint or several at the Plaintiffs election, to
have his Action against one or other: And a satisfaction by one is a
satisfaction for all, and the Plaintiff cannot have several damages, but one
damage against them all, and he has his choice, as in Heydens Case, to have
the best damages.

COok versus Darston, Mich. 15. Jacobi, An Action of Trespass brought by the
Committee of a Lunatique being a Copyholder to whom the Lord had committed the
Lunatique, and a stranger sowed the Land, and the question was, whether the
Committee or the Lunatique should have the Action, and the Court held, the
Action should be brought in the name of the Lunatique.

Young versus Bartram, Battery brought by the Plaintiff against Husband and
Wife and two others, the Woman and one of the others, without the Husband plead
not guilty, and the Husband and and the other plead, Son assault demesne, and
tried, and alleged in arrest of Judgment, because the Wife pleaded without
her Husband, and Judgment stayed and a Repleader by the whole Court.

CRogate versus Morris. If a stranger come over a Common, the Lord may have an
action, but not the Commoner; for the petty Trespass, multiplicity of actions
will not take away my action: and except it be a damage whereby I lose my
Common, I can have no action. If a stranger come and eat up my Common, a
Freeholder may bring an Assize of common, for it is a Disseisin; for a
Disseisin of Common; is the taking away the profits of the Common: And an
action of case will lie against the Lord for cutting down the body of the tree,
when the Tenant should have the loppings; if the Commoner may have his Common,
although another take away part of my Common, yet no action lies. As if one
beat my servant lightly, except the Master lose his service, no action lies.
And if my friend come and lie in my house, and set my neighbors house on fire,
the action lies against me, and Judgment for the Plaintiff.

HAtton versus Hun, Trin. 13. Jacobi, rotulo, 3314. In Trespass and
Imprisonment, the Defendant justifies by virtue of a Capias, and the Plaintiff
did afterward escape, and he being Sheriff, did follow him by virtue of the
said Warrant taken upon the Capias, the Plaintiff replies that he escaped by
license of the Sheriff, and traverses the latter taking by virtue of the
Warrant: and the Court held the traverse idle, because the Plaintiff had
sufficiently confessed, and avoided: and if he escaped by the Sheriffs License,
that ought to be the thing put into issue, and not the traverse.

PAtry, versus Wilsh, Trin. 9. Jacobi. rotulo, 1055. An action of Trespass
brought, wherefore by Force and Arms he broke the Plaintiffs Close, and eat
his Grass, etc. The Defendant justifies for common of pasture, and says, that
he was seized in Fee of one Message, with the appurtenances in G. and used to
have common for all his Cattle, levant and couchant upon the said Message.
And it was moved after a verdict in arrest of Judgment by Sergeant Nichols,
that the plea was insufficient, because the certainty of the Cattle was not
expressed, as for 200. or the like: but the Court held the contrary that levant
and couchant is a certainty sufficient, and all the Books prescribe for a
Common by reason of a Message.

RInghall versus Wolsey, Mich. 11. Jacobi rotulo, 820. An action of Trespass
brought; wherefore by force and Arms the servant A Constable cannot detain
one, but for Felony.
of the Plaintifs out of the service of the said Plaintiff, has taken and laid
to be at H. The Defendant justifies that one was possessed of Corn at S. And
that the said servant by the command of his Master, had carried away the Corn:
and that the Owner came to the defendant, being Constable, and prayed him to
detain the servant until he could procure a Warrant of a Justice of Peace,
and traverses that he is guilty at H. The Plaintiff demurres, that it was held
by the Court a naughty plea: First, because the Constable could not detain any
man but for Felony: And secondly, the traverse is naught, because the Trespass
is in the same County, and so he might have justified as well in H. as in S.

DArney versus Hardington, Pasch. 9. Jacobi rotulo, 1857. An action of Trespass
brought, to which the Defendant pleads a justification for an Amerciament set
in the Sheriffs turn; to which Justification exceptions were taken. First,
because the Defendant justified by virtue of a precept to him lawfully granted,
and says not at what place. Secondly, he prescribes for the turn to be held,
and does not any, or what estate, etc. And Hutton said, that a prescription for
a turn, or one hundred Court by what estate, is naught, because a hundred is
not manurable, but lies in grant; but he ought to have said, that the King and
all they that were seized of the said Hundred have had, and from the time, etc.
And my Lord Cook said, that a prescription by what estate for a thing incident
to a Manor is good, for an Hundred that lies in grant, it is naught: And he
and Warburton held that except it was showed before whom the turn was held, it
was naught; because where any thing is taken by common right as the Sheriffs
turn, it ought to be holden before the Sheriff, as in the prescription it ought
to be showed, before whom the turn was held, or else it would be naught.

ROberts versus Thacher, and al. Hill. 11. Jac. rotulo, 1928. An action of
Trespass brought; wherefore by Force and Arms the Close and House of the
Plaintiff at A. did break, and a certain Cow, price, etc. took. The Defendant
says, that the Plaintiff ought not to have his Action against him, because he
says that the Close and House is one Message, etc. in A. aforesaid: and that
before the time in which, etc. such a one was possessed of the said Cow, as of
his own proper Cow, to wit, at A. aforesaid; and being thereof so possessed,
certain Malefactors unknown to the said, etc. before the said time, in which,
etc. the said Cow out of the possession of the said B. did feloniously steal,
take, and lead away, whereupon he made Hue and Cry; and thereupon he had
intelligence, came, and was in the possession and custody of the Plaintiff, and
B. upon notice thereof, did request the Defendant to ask the Cow of the
Plaintiff, and to bring her, etc. By reason whereof, the Defendant the said
time, in which came to the said Message by the usual way, by and through the
said Close, etc. to demand, etc. And the Defendants then and there finding the
aforesaid Cow in a walled parcel of the Message, they took the Cow from
thence, and brought her to the said B. and to him delivered her, as etc. which
is the same Trespass, to which plea the Plaintiff demurres, and it was adjudged
a naughty Justification for these reasons. First, because it does not appear
but that the Plaintiff had good right to the Cow. Secondly, because the
Defendant took the Cow without demand. And thirdly, it is not pleaded that the
Defendants were servants to the said B. R. and that he did it by his command,
and therefore Judgment given for the Plaintiff.

HAll versus Stanley, and al. Pasch. 9. Jacobi. rotulo, 2289. An action
Marshalsey has no authority to hold plea in debt, except both are of the
Household.
of false imprisonment: The Defendant as to the whole Trespass except the
Battery and Imprisonment, and keeping in prison not guilty: And as to that
pleads that the Marshals Court is an ancient Court, etc. and so justifies,
because the Plaintiff was the pledge of T. C. to the Defendant in an action of
trespass upon the case in an indebilat. assumpsit general, and thereupon a
Judgment against C. and a Capias awarded, and a non est invent. returned, and
thereupon a capias awarded against Hall the pledge according to the custom, by
virtue whereof the said Hall was taken and detained, and traverses that he was
guilty, etc. of any imprisoning the Plaintiff before such a day, and averres
that they are the same persons: And the Plaintiff replies, that neither R. C.
nor T. T. at the time of exhibiting the Bill were of the household, etc. The
Defendant demurs, and Judgment for the Plaintiff: and the whole Court agreed,
that the Marshalls Court could not hold Plea, Covenants, and Contracts, except
both of them were of the household of the King; and all the matters of which
they could hold plea, were Trespass, Covenants, and Contracts of the household,
and within the verge, to wit, within twelve miles of the Court, and Doddridge
said that before the Statute of 28 l. as it appears by Fleta and Brian, the
authority of the Marshall was absolute in civil and criminal causes at the
Common Law, and that Statute restrains them for Debts, but not for Trespass of
what nature soever, and therefore see the Statute of 30 l. 1. 5 E. 3. chapter 2.
and 10 E. 3. chapter 2.

Swaffe versus Solley, Trin. 14 Jacobi. rotulo 689. An Action of Trespass
brought, wherefore he took his Close, the Defendant justifies for a way, the
Plaintiff replies that he did the Trespass of his own wrong without any cause
alleged, and so an Issue joined, and after a Verdict, for it was moved in
arrest of Judgment, that the Issue was not well reined, and prayed a new
Trial, because the Issue ought to be special, but that exception was
disallowed, and adjudged that it was helped by the Statute of Jeofails, by the
opinion of the whole Court.

PLaint versus Thirley, Hill. 6 Jacobi rotulo 161. An Action of Trespass
brought, wherefore by force and Arms, the Goods and chattells of the plaintiff
did take and impound, the Defendant pleaded the common Bar, and the plaintiff
assigns the place, and are at issue upon that, and after a verdict it was moved
in arrest of Judgment that there was no Issue joined, because the Lands are
not in question, and so no assignment necessary, and Judgment was stayed, but
afterward upon a motion Judgment was given for the plaintiff, because the
Issue was helped by the Statute of Jeofails, and there was the like case upon a
Demurrer, in the court of common pleas, Trin. 4 Jacobi, rotulo 1131.

CHild versus Heely, 13 Jacobi, rotulo 3381. vel 381. An Action of Trespass
brought, wherefore by force and Arms, the Close, Hedges, and Gates, of the
Plaintiff at W. did break, and his grass with walking over it did destroy, and
other his Grass with Cattle did eat and consume, the plaintiff assigned one
Close of pasture called Drew, and another close called Sutton, one other close
called L. and the Defendant as to the Trespass, except the breaking of the
close called G. and P. and the treading, etc. with his feet, and eating with
his cattle in the said close called P. and E. not guilty, and as to the
breaking of the close, etc. says the plaintiff ought not to have his Action,
because he says that E. 6. was seized of the Manor of W. of which one
Message etc. was copyhold and shows the custom for a way, and another
custom for a Common, and conveys the Copyhold to himself, and justifies, as
to the pedibus ambulandi, and as to the Trespass with the Cattle justifies
for Common, the Plaintiff replies as to the Trespass pedibus ambulandi, that it
was of his own wrong without any cause alleged, and traverses the way, and as
to Trespass with the Cattle demurres, and the cause of the Demurrer was, as it
appeared by motion, because in the justification of the Cattle the Defendant
had not alleged any custom for Common, and so the Plaintiff could not take any
Issue of that custom, but had alleged a custom for the way, as for the
common, and the court were of opinion that it was well pleaded; and Judgment
upon the Demurrer for the Defendant.

FAirchild versus Gair Pasch. 3 Jac. An Action of Trespass brought for the
tiths of the Church of B. and therein a special verdict was as follows, the
Defendant was collated to this Church of B. being a Donative by A. and B. the
Patrons, and that the Church was exempt from the Jurisdiction of any Ordinary,
the Defendant resigned to A. and C. who was a stranger, and to other persons
who had no Interest, his Church of B. with all Rights, etc. and afterward the
persons pass their Rights to D. who collates and interests the Plaintiff in
the Church, by reason whereof he seized the Tithes in question, and the
Defendant took them, and concludes that upon the matter, etc. and if the
Resignation be good, then they find for the Plaintiff, otherwise, for the
Defendant, and by the opinion of the whole Court, Judgment was given for the
Plaintiff, for the Resignation was good, both in respect of the thing
resigned, and of the person to whom it was made, for it being a Donative, and
exempt from ordinary Jurisdiction, the Resignation must be into his hands, and
the Incumbent shall not be constrained to keep the Church, whether he will or
no, if the Patron will not accept it, and because there is no person, to whom
the Resignation can be made, but only into the hands of the Patron, it is
good, and although the Resignation be to one Patron, and to a stranger, it is
good to both the Patrons, and void as to the stranger, and the more strong it
is, because of the following words, (to wit, to all persons whatsoever, which
words involve all, that have any manner of interest, and then seeing it is
found, that D. who collated the Plaintiff, and the Estate of both the Patrons,
although no agreement be found of the Patrons, it is not material, and the
resting of the Plaintiff in the Church is good to give him power to take the
profits by reason of the primer possession, and although the Defendant did
resign but the Church only, yet it is good to all that appertains to the
Church, and that which the Defendant may have as Rector there, 6 E. 3. is, that
if the Patron grant Ecclesiam, that will pass the Avowson, but Herlethen said,
that was in ancient time and therefore not so then, to which the court seemed
to agree, and the court waived the Dispute of any other thing, but only the
Resignation, for of that only the Jury doubted, and was only referred to the
court, but Popham chief Justice said, that if the Patron would not collate any
man to such a Donative, there was no way to compel him, but he is left to his
own conscience, and he might in time of the vacancy take the profits, and sue
for the Tithes in the spiritual court, for such Donatives at first grow by
consent of all persons, who have any manner of Right or Interest, to wit the
Ordinary, and Parishioners, but Gaudy, Fenner, Yelverton, and Williams, against
him, that the Ordinary might compel him to collate any clerk, for the Rectory
is only exempted from the power of the Ordinary, and not the Patron, and that
is only as to charges to be taxed upon the church, for the ordinary attendance
in a Visitation, and such like, and Popham said, that although the Church in
execution of the charge is spiritual, yet the patron may collate, and a mere
lay man, as the King may make a temporal man a Dean, which has often
happened, but all the other Judges were against him in case of the person,
which is merely spritual, but as to the Deanery, they did agree it, for the
function is temporal, but yet Williams said, that lay men who have Deaneries,
ought to have, and at all times used to have a Dispensation from the
Archbishop, and if the Incumbent in this Case should preach Heresy, as the
Attorney and Popham said, the Ordinary might correct him, for the parson is not
exempted out of his Jurisdiction, but his Parsonage only, but by Gaudy and the
rest, the Ordinary could not meddle with him, for the Parson is privileged in
respect of the place, but the Patron may commission and examine the matter, and
thereupon out and deprive him, and so it happened in Coverts Case, as Gaudy and
Williams said, wherein the Bishop of Winchester was the Donor of such a
Donative, 13 E. 4.

LEe versus Lacon, 3. Jac. In trespass, the action was Land in the County of
Salop, and not guilty pleaded, and the venire facias was made with a space for
Salop, but Salop was not named there: And by virtue of that Writ the Sheriff
of Salop impannelled the Jury, and found for the Plaintiff, and the matter
above specified was moved in Arrest of Judgment, to wit, that the venire facias
was vicious, and so a mistriall; but by Fenner and Williams it was to be
accounted his, if no venire facias had been awarded: And so indeed by the
Statute of Jeofailes; for the County, to wit, Salop, is omitted, and left out,
and so the Sheriff of Salop had no power nor authority to summon the Jury,
because the Writ which is his Warrant is general (to the Sheriff) and not
naming of any County: but the Court held it to be the best way to amend it, and
they put this difference: For when the action is laid in Salop, and upon a
special pleading, the issue is drawn into a foreign County, there the entry
and award of the venire upon the Will is special, to wit, to the Sheriff of
that County, where the issue arises to be tried: and in such case a venire
facias with a blan^k shall not be good, because it cannot be judged to which of
the Sheriffs the venire was to be awarded, and upon that incertainty it shall
be naught: but when the general issue is taken, or the matter is triable in
the same County where the action is laid, there the venire facias is awarded
generally, and must of necessity be intended to be the Sheriff of that County
where the action is laid, and cannot be otherwise intended: and for this reason
it was but the default of the Clerk which is amendable, and so it was amended.

BAylie versus Moon, Trin. 3. Jacobi. An action of Battery brought Judgment
before a wrong Officer erroneous.
in Plymouth Court before the Major and Bailiffs there, and not guilty pleaded:
but afterward the issue was waived, and Judgment was given for the Plaintiff,
and a Writ to enquire of damage was awarded to the Sergeant of the Mace, that
by the oath of twelve, etc. he should inquire: and the Writ was made returnable
at the next Court before the Mayor and Baylifs. And upon a Writ of Error
brought, it appeared by the Record certified, that the Writ to inquire of
damages was taken before the Mayor of Plymouth, who was also Judge of the Court,
and for that cause reversed; for the Writ warrants the inquiry to be before the
Sergeant of the Mace, who by the writ for that purpose is made a distinct
Officer, and so an inquiry before the Mayor is not warranted by any writ: And
so by consequence a Judgment to recover those damages taxed before a wrong
Officer to whom the Writ was not directed, is erroneous, which was granted by
the whole Court.

LAxworth versus West, Mich. 3. Jacobi. Trespass brought for the taking of Hay
severed from the ninth part of Elthorp in the County of Warwick, the Defendant
to part pleads not guilty, and to the residue pleads a devise of the Parsonage
made by Lepworth to the Defendant at Wapenbury in the same County, and to
enable the devise for tithes in L. alleges L. to be a Hamlet in Wapenbury, to
the intent that the whole Tithes may pass: and upon a non devisavit, the venn
was of Wapenbury, and found for the Plaintiff, that T. L. did not devise it, and
the other issue of not guilty found for the Defendant, and moved in Arrest of
Judgment that the venu was mistaken, because it was of Wapenbury only, and not
of Elthorp, and they of W. could not try a matter in E. And although it was
answered, that the Defendant himself by his plea had confessed that E. was but
an Hamlet, yet the Court held the venu mistaken; for when the Plaintiff declares
of a Trespass in E. This by general intendment is presumed to be a Village: of
which Village the matter which is there in question ought to be tried: and
although the Defendant had alleged Elthorp to be but an Hamlet; yet it was but
to enable the devise, and does not extend to the issue before joined upon the
not guilty for part; for in that issue both parties agree that Elthorp is a
Village, and it is a perfect issue taken, which has not any coherence with the
other issue of non devisavit: but if the Defendant had to the whole issue
pleaded the devise as his excuse, and had alleged E. to be an Hamlet of W. and
that only been in issue there, the venu awarded had been good of W. only; but
in this case it was adjudged that the venire was mis-awarded, and that the
Plaintiff should have a venire facias de novo.

DElves versus Wire, Mich. 3. Jacobi. The Plaintiff brought an action of
Trespass for breaking his Close, and for cropping The Court could not mitigate
damages in trespass which was local.
200. Pear Trees, and 100. Apple Trees, and damage found to 40. l. And the
Court was moved by Richardson, for that the damages might be mitigated, because
he produced an Affidavit, whereby it appeared that the party himself before the
Action brought, would have took 5 l. but denied; for the Court said, that they
could not diminish the damages in Trespass which was local, and therefore
could not appear to them, and the damages might well amount to 40 l. for
cropping of an Orchard, and so Judgment entered.

WOody's case, Mich. 3. Jacobi. Woody brought an action of false imprisonment
and Battery against two, who justify and The Defendant justifies the
imprisonment by the command of the Mayor of London, and naught.
set forth that London is an ancient City, and that the Mayor of London is a
Justice of Peace, and that the Defendants were Sergeants of the Mace according
to the custom of the City, and that the Lord Mayor, to wit, one Lee, commanded
them to arrest the Plaintiff for causes to them unknown, but to him known, and
to imprison him, etc. Walter moved that this Justification was insufficient,
because they only showed that they were Sergeants at Mace duly elected
according to the custom of the City; but do not show the Custom and Authority
that they have to make Sergeants, and to arrest, as it is 4. H. 4. 36. in
trespass the Defendant justifies, that the Tower of London is within the City
of London, and time out of mind, etc. one Court was there used, etc. and that
the Plaintiff was sued there by J. S. and that he was summoned: and upon a
nihill returned, a capias issued according to the Custom, etc. And that he
being an Officer there, did arrest: and the Court ruled him to plead the
Custom particularly for holding the Court, and to prescribe, etc. And here it
is shown that the Mayor is a Justice of Peace: And it does not appear whether
he did it as a Justice of Peace, or Mayor, as 14. H. 7, 8. A Justice of Peace
cannot command his servant to arrest one without a Warrant in Just. of Peace
cannot command his servant to arrest in his absence without warrant in writing.
writing in his absence. And Popham, chief Justice, said, That although the
Judges knew the Authority of the Mayor, by which they arrested men; yet because
it did not appear to them judicially as Judges, it must be pleaded: And a
Justice of Peace cannot command his servant to arrest one if not in his
presence, which was granted. And Fennor, Justice, said, that the servant is not
an Officer to the Mayor as he is a Justice of Peace, but the Constable: and
Walker also added, that the Plea was, that the Mayor commanded to imprison him
presently without showing any cause, which was held naught; for the mayor ought
to temper his Authority according to Law. For the Judges cannot imprison
without showing cause; but them and the Mayor both may command an Officer to
arrest a man without showing the cause, for else before he shall be examined he
may invent and frame an excuse, and the accessories will fly away: And
Williams, Justice, finds that it was uncertain for the Plaintiff, by what
authority he commanded it, whether as Mayor or Justice of Peace: and his power
as a Justice of Peace the Judges knew by common Law; but his power as a Mayor
they knew not, if it be not showed by pleading and Judgment.

HVggins versus Butcher, Trin. 4. Jac. The Plaintiff declared that If a servant
be beaten, and dye, the Mr. shall not have an action for the loss of his
service.
the Defendant such a day did assault and beat his Wife, of which she dyed such
a day following to his damage 100 l. And Sergeant Foster moved that the
Declaration was not good, because it was brought by the Plaintiff for a Battery
done upon his Wife: And this being a personal wrong done unto the woman, is
gone by her death: And if the woman had been in life, he could not have
brought it alone, but the woman must have joined in the Action; for the damages
must be given for the wrong offered to the body of the woman, which was agreed.
And Tanfield said, that if one beat the servant of J. S. so that he die of that
beating, the Master shall not have an Action against the other for the battery
and loss of service, because the servant dying of the extremity of the
beating, it is now become an offense against the Crown, and turned into Felony,
and this has drowned the particular offense, and prevails over the wrong done
to the Mr. before: And his action by that is gone, which Fennor and Yelverton
agreed to.

BRown versus Crowley, Pasch. 5. Jac. Action of Trespass brought against
Croyley for wounding the Plaintiff upon the hinder part of Declaration shall not
abate for false Latin.
the left leg, being rendered in Latin, super posteriorem partem levis libaei,
and the Jury found for the Plaintiff: And Harris moved in Arrest of Judgment;
for he said that these words (levis libaei) made the Declaration vicious for
the incertainty; for he said that levis signified light, and it was an improper
word for left; and that judgment ought to be respited for the incertainty. And
Yelverton argued that judgment ought to be given for the Plaintiff; for he
said, the Declaration was not vicious; for if the Plaintiff had declared
generally that he had wounded, broken, or evil entreated him, and had omitted
those other words, it had been sufficient, and then the adding of those words
which were not material, but for damages did not make the Declaration vicious:
and he said, that levus leva levum was Latin for left: And whereas he has
said, that he struck him, super posteriorem partem levis libaei, where it
should have been (levis libaei) it was but false Latin, and the Declaration
shall not be made naught for false Latin. And Popham said, that he showing
upon which part of the body the wound was, were laid only to incense damages;
for the Declaration had been sufficient, though they had been omitted: And
Justice Fennor agreed to Popham, and he said, it had been judged, that where a
man brought an Action against another for calling him strong Theife: and the
Jury only found that he called him Theife, but not strong Theif, yet the
Plaintiff recovered; for this word strong was to no other purpose then to
increase damages, and Judgment was given for the Plaintiff.

VIccars versus Wharton, Pasch. 5. Jac. Viccars brought an action of false
imprisonment against Wharton and others, and shows that he was imprisoned two
days and two nights without meat or drink. The Defendants come and show that
King Edward the 1. by his Letters Patents did incorporate one Village in
Nottingham-shire with Bailiffs and Burgesses, and that the King did ordain and
make those Burgesses Justices of the Peace there; and that the Defendant was
Baili^^, and a Justice of Peace there; and that the Plaintiff did speak A man
cannot prescribe to be a Justice of the Peace.
diverse opprobrious and contumelious words of the Defendant, by reason whereof
they imprisoned him: And shows further, that the Bailiffs have used from the
time of the making their Patent to imprison the disturbers of the Peace, and it
was held a naughty plea, for a custom could not be shown in such a manner: And
Tanfield held in this case, that a man could not prescribe to be a Justice of
peace; but Justice Williams held he might prescribe to be a conservator of the
Peace. And Tanfield held that the King might grant that all the Burgesses and
their Heirs should be Burgesses, which Justice Williams denied.

HAll versus White, Pasch. 5. Jac. An action of Trespass brought If a Book that
ought not be given in evidence, the Court above cannot remedy it, except it be
returned with the Postea.
against the Defendant for impounding the Plaintiffs Cattle, the Defendant
justifies for Common: And upon that they were at issue in Derby-shire, and the
Jurors being sworn, the Bailiff found one Bagshaw one of the Jurors, rending of
a Letter concerning the said cause, and showed it to the Judge, and a verdict
given by the Jury: And this matter moved in the then Kings Bench to quash the
verdict, but denied by the whole Court, because the Letter and the Cause was
not certified by the Postea, and made parcel of it; for otherwise the
examination of that at the Bar after the verdict, shall never quash it. And
so it was adjudged between Vicary and Farthing, 39. Eliz. where a Church Book
was given in Evidence, of which you shall never have remedy except it be entered
and made parcel of the Record.

BVtler versus Duckmonton, Trin. 5 Jacobi. In Trespass upon a special
Verdict, the Case was, that no demised Land to a woman, A release to Tenant at
sufferance, void.
if she should live sole and unmarried, the remainder to John D. bastard in
Tail, the Remainder to the Defendant To. Duckmonton in Fee, the woman married
with To. D. the Defendant the Term expired, Jo. D. Tenant in Tail, in remainder
releases to the Husband, and whether this should alter the estate of the
Husband, he being Tenant at sufferance was the question, and adjudged by the
whole Court, that the Release was void, and it was chiefly void, because the
Release was made to him in the Remainder to take effect, as upon the Remainder,
and there was no privity, and he had but a bare possession, and no Freehold,
and 10 Eliz. Dier, Lessee for years, surrenders, and afterward the Lessor
releases to him, and held a void Release for the reason aforesaid, and 31 and
32 Eliz. it has been adjudged between Allen and Hill, where a Devise was made
to the woman for life, if she would inhabit and continue in the house, and he
went and inhabited in Surrey, and the Heir released to her, and it was held
void, because she was but Tenant at sufferance, and so no privity, but
Yelverton and Tanfield, that such estate for life was not determined without
Entry, and Yelverton Justice demanded, that when the Husband continued in
possession after the Lease determined whether he should be in the Right of his
Wife, and so remain Tenant at sufferance, whether he should be in his own
Right, or be as an intruder, Disseisor, and then the release made to him was
good, but no answer was given to him, but Judgment was given that the release
was void, and Fennor put this Case, Tenant for life, remainder in Tail,
remainder in Fee, he in the remainder in Fee released to Tenant for life, a
void release, because of the mean remainder in Tail, and cited 30 E. 3. and no
answer was given to it, and Yelverton said, that if Tenant for life release to
him in the remainder in Fee, it is void, because it shall be void, as a
surrender, and this word release, shall not recite as a surrender.

HOldesden versus Gresill Mich. 5 Jacobi. An Action of Trespass brought for
breaking the Plaintiffs Close called B. at L. and for Commoner cannot chase the
Lords Cattle, if the surcharge be Common.
taking of two Conies, the Defendant to the whole Trespass, but the entering in
the Close pleads not guilty, and as to the Close justifies, because he Common
in the Close called B. for five Cowes, and because very many Conies were there
feeding, and spoiling the Common, the Defendant in preservation of his Common
entered to chase and kill the conies, to which the Plaintiff demurred in Law,
and Judgment was given that the justification was naught, for a Commoner
cannot enter to chase or kill the Conies, for although the owner of the Soil
has no property in the Conies, yet as long as they are in his Land he had the
possession, which is good against the commoner, for if the Lord surcharge the
common with Beasts, the commoner cannot chase them out, but the owner may
distrain the Beasts of an estranger or damage feasant, or chase them out of
the common, for the stranger hat no color to have his Beasts there, and also
conies are a matter of profit to the owner of the Soil for Housekeeping, and
therefore because it appears that the cause of Entry was to chase, and also to
kill, which are not lawful, as against the Lord, who is Plaintiff, therefore
the matter of the justification is not good, for if the Lord surcharge the Soil
with conies, the commoner may have an Action of case against him for that
particular damage, which is a sufficient remedy against the Plaintiff, upon a
full and deliberate consideraof all the Judges.

JEnnings versus Haithwait, Mich. 5 Jacobi. An Action of Trespass brought, to
which the Defendant pleaded not guilty, the Jury found The Statute of 13 Eliz.
for non-residence a general law.
the Defendant Vicar of D. and that he such a day leased his vicaridg to J. S.
for three years rendering rent, which J. S. assigned one Acre parcel thereof to
the Plaintiff, and the Defendant was absent several quarters in one year, to
wit sixty days in every quarter, but they did not find the Statute of 13 Eliz.
and adjudged for the Defendant, for the Statute of the 13 Eliz. is a general
Law, for although it extends but to those which have cure of Souls, yet in
respect of the multiplicity of Parsonages and vicaridges in England, the Judges
must take notice of it as a general Law, and adjudge according to the said
Statute, and so is the Statute of the 21 H. 8. for non-residence.

DRewry versus Dennys, Mich. 5. Jacobi, An Action of Trespass brought against a
man and his Wife, and the Plaintiff declares, that they did beat one Mare of the
Plaintifs, and committed diverse Where Husband and Wife shall be joined, and
where severed in Action.
other Trespasses, and upon not guilty pleaded, the Jury found that the Woman
beat the Mare, and for the residue they found for the Defendant, and the
Verdict adjudged naught by the Court, for it is altogether imperfect, for they
have found the Woman guilty of the beating the Mare, and have given no Verdict
concerning that for the Husband, either by way of acquittall or condemnation;
and the finding the Defendant not guilty, as to the residue, does only extend
to the other Trespasses contained in the Declaration, and not to the beating of
the Mare: And Williams and Cook Justices said, that where a Battery is brought
against Husband and Wife, supposing that they both beat the Plaintiff or the
Mare of the Plaintiff, and upon not guilty pleaded, it is found that the Woman
only made the Battery and not the Husband, this Verdict is against the
Plaintiff, for it now appears that the Plaintifs Action was false, for the
Husband in this case shall not be joined for conformity only, and there is a
special Writ in the Register for this purpose, and is not like a Battery
charged upon I. D. and I. S. for there one may be acquitted and another found
guilty, and good, because they are in Law several Trespasses.

SAnds and others, versus Scullard and others, Mich. 5. Jacobi. The The Venire
facias vicious, no damages in Partition.
Plaintiffs brought an Action of Trespass against the Defendants for entering
their Close; and Judgment was entered against Dawby one of the Defendants, by
nil dicit, Scullard pleaded not guilty, whereupon a Venire facias was awarded
upon the Roll between the parties, as well to try the Issue, as to inquire of
the damages: And the Plaintiffs took their Venire facias to try the Issue
between the two-Defendants, and the two Plaintiffs. And according to that was
the Habeas Corpus, and Distringas, but the Plaintiffs knowing Dawby to be dead,
took their Record of Nisi prius against Scullard only; and he was found
guilty: And Yelverton moved in Arrest of Judgment, and showed the Venire
facias, and that there was no Issue joined between the Plaintiffs and Dawby,
for Judgment was given against him by Nil dicit; and the Writ ought to have
made mention only of the Issue between the Plaintiffs and Scullard: And their
ought to have been an inquiry of damages between the Plaintiffs and Dawby,
according to the Award upon the Roll, which is the warrant for the Venire
facias; and it was showed that the Jury knew nothing of the matter for which
they were warned, for they ought to have only given their Verdict against
Scullard and not against Dawby; and it was likened where two matters are in
Issue, and they give a Verdict for one and nothing for the other, it is naught
for all: And this was the opinion of the whole Court except Justice Williams,
who relied upon 9. Eliz. Dyer, Sir Anthony Cook, and Wottons Case in partition
against two, one confessed the Action, and the other pleaded to Issue, and the
Venire facias was to try the Issue between the Plaintifs and the two
Defendants, and it was amended by the opinion of the Court: But mark the
difference, for no damages are to be recovered in partition, but it is
otherwise in Trespass; and therefore in Cooks Case it was found by the Court,
that it was as if a mere stranger to the Record had been named in the Venire
facias.

WInckworth against Man, Mich. 5. Jacobi. The Plaintiff declares If the Jury
find a man guilty in Trespass for a foot, where it is laid in an Acre, good
enough, and so in all Actions where damages only are to be recovered.
for a Trespass in one Acre of Land in D. and abuts that, East, West, North,
and South; and upon not guilty pleaded, the Jury found the Defendant guilty in
half an Acre within written; and moved in Arrest of Judgment, because upon the
matter no Trespass had been found, for there is no such moity bounded as the
Plaintiff had declared, for the whole Acre is only bounded by the Plaintiff,
containing his Trespass within those bounds, and the Defendant ought to be
found a Trespassor within those bounds, for otherwise it is not good; and it is
impossible for the moity of one Acre to be within those bounds: But the whole
Court except Fenner, were of opinion that the Plaintiff should have his
Judgment; for if the Plaintiff lays his Action for a Trespass committed in
one Acre, and the Jury find that only to be in one foot of it, it is good; and
here they have found the Trespass in the moity of the Acre bounded, which is
sufficient in this Action, where damages only are to be recovered, but if it
had been in Ejectment, the Verdict had been naught, for it is incertaine in
what part he should have his Writ of Habere facias possessionem.

BVckwood against Beale, Mich. 5. Jacobi, In an action of Trespass it was said
by the Court, That if a Sheriff execute a Capias, and there is no Original to
warrant it, he is excused it, for he is not to Nota.
examine whether the Original be sued out or no: and for this Trewyrmards
Case, 38 H. 8. And so if a Bailiff execute a Process made to him by the Steward
for damages recovered in the Manor in a thing in which they had no authority
to hold Plea: The Bailiff is excused, and shall not be punished, because he is
not to examine the jurisdiction of the Court, 7 H. 4. 27. 22 Ed. 3. and 22.
Ass. But if Process come to the Sheriff to arrest J. S. and he arrest J. N. or
to make execution of the Goods of J. S. and he make execution of the Goods of
I. N. he is a Trespassor; for in this Case he must take notice at his peril of
the Person and the Goods, for when he arrests I. N. or does execution upon his
Goods, he does it without warrant: And so if I. S. sue a Replevin to the
Sheriff to replevin his Cattle, and I. S. comes to the Sheriff, and shows him
the Cattle of I. N. and says they are his Cattle, and he makes replevin of
the Cattle, he is a Trespassor to I. N. and the Sherif may have an Action of
Trespass against I. S. for his false information, for the Sherif must at his
own peril take notice whose Cattle they be, 3 H. 7. 14 H. 4. but if there be
any fraud in the matter he may averr that.

MOnrey versus Johnson, An Action of Trespass brought for entering into a man's
House, The Defendant pleads that he was a Constable, etc. And it was held by
the whole Court that a Constable may justify his entry into the House of any
man for Felony or Treason.

STrickland against Thorpe, Pasch. 6. Jacobi. Thorpe brought an Error assigned
because in trespass nothing was entered of the Fine, etc. where it was a
continued trespass, and part of it was laid to be after the Pardon.
Action of Trespass against Strickland, wherefore he broke his close the 20. of
June 3 Jacobi, with a continuance thereof until the sixth of November after;
and upon a not guilty pleaded, it was found for the Plaintiff and Judgment
entered, but it was entered nothing of the Fine because it is pardoned: And upon
a Writ of Error brought he assigned for Error that the Judgment should have
been entered with a Capiatur, because the King and Parliament pardoned all
offenses before the 25. of September, and therefore the Trespass being
alleged to have been continued until the sixth of November following, only
part of the Trespass was pardoned; and therefore, as to that it should have
been a Capiatur; but the whole Court were of opinion that the Judgment was well
entered for the first Trespass, which was by force and Arms being pardoned, all
that depends on that was pardoned, and the continuance of the Trespass being
only as to the entering and consuming the Grass is for increase of damages
only, but not for the Kings Fine, for the first entry being only with force
and Arms makes the Trespass.

REpps against Bonham, Trin. 6. Jacobi, The Case in Trespass was that a
Feofment was made of three Acres to R. Repps and Mary his Wife for their lives,
and afterward to the first, second, and third Son of the body of the said
Mary; and after to the heirs of the body of the said Mary by the said Richard
to be begotten, and they had no Son but one Daughter: Richard levies a Fine of
the Land, and Mary dies, the Plaintiff enters, and the Defendant pleads Richards
Fine, and adjudged that the Plaintiff is not barred by the Fine, for Richard had
only an Estate for life, and the Estate tail was in the woman only by the
opinion of the five Justices; for they said that the Husband is only named to
declare what heir of the body of the woman should inherit: and not any Heir,
but such an Heir as Richard her present Husband should beget. And if the
limitation had been to the Heirs of the body of the woman by her Husband, and
by I. S. to be begotten, the Inheritance had been only in the woman, but by the
last words; for if she had no Heirs by her Husband, and afterward marries I.
S. the Heirs that she should have by I. S. should inherit: And they were all
of opinion, that the Inheritance was only in the woman, because the word Heir
which makes the estate of inheritance, is annexed only to the body of the
woman: but if it had been to the Heirs which the Husband should have got of the
body of the woman, there the intaile had been in both, 19. H. 6. 75. And the
like Law, if it had been to the Heirs which the Husband should beget of the
body of the woman, Little. 82. 6.

HOrn against Widlake, Mich. 6. Jac. An action of Trespass brought wherefore he
broke his Close, and spoiled his Grass in D. The Defendant pleads, that in the
Close wherein the Plaintiff supposes the Trespass to be done time out of mind,
there has been a foot-way for all people passing in, by, and through the said
Close until such a day, Nota.
and that such a day the Plaintiff plowed up the said Foot-way, and sowed it
with Corn, and laid thorns on the sides of it: And further pleads, that in the
said Close, near the said ancient Foot-way, the Plaintiff, before the Trespass
supposed to be committed, left, and set out another Foot-way for all people who
would use that new way; which way, since it was laid forth, has been used by
all Foot-passengers; by reason whereof, the Defendant the time in which, etc.
went in the way so laid forth unto such a place, etc. which is the same
trespass* etc. and demands judgment, etc. and the Plaintiff demurs, and
adjudged against the Plaintiff, because the Plaintiff made the first wrong in
stopping up the ancient way, and had assigned a new way for passengers: And
therefore the Defendants plea is good by way of excuse as to the Plaintiff; for
it is not fit he should punish the Defendant against his own agreement. As if
there were a Foot-way through the Close of I. S. over an hedge, and I should
remove the hedge into a new place, if passengers in using their way go over the
hedge where it is newly placed and fixed, they shall not be punished for that;
for it arises of the Act and wrong of the Plaintiff himself: and volenti non
fit injuria: As if water run by the Land of M. and M. stop the watercourse, so
that it surround my ground; if now abate this, he shall not have an action
against me for entering into his Close, because the stoppage was his own Act,
and the same law in the principal case. And although the Defendant has
pleaded generally, that the Plaintiff has set out a way, and shows not where
it is, is not material; for that which is common to all cannot be assigned to
any particular person, which was the opinion of the whole Court, except Justice
Yelverton.

MEtham versus Barker, Mich. 6. Jacobi. An action of Trespass brought, for that
the Defendant the first of August, in the fifth year, the Plaintifs Close at
L. in the County of Suffolk, has broken, and entered, and spoiled his Grass
with his Cattle, etc. The Defendant pleads, that in the time when the Trespass,
etc. the freehold Nota.
of the Land where, etc. was in Sir Jo. T. And that the Defendant as servant,
and by his commandment, has entered, and put in his Cattle. The Plaintiff
replied, that true it was, that the Freehold was in Sir John T. But said, that
a long time before the Trespass, etc. Sir John leased the Close to the
Plaintiff at will, by reason whereof he entered, and was possessed until the
Defendant did the Trespass, and traverses without that, that the Defendant by
the command of Sir Io. entered, and put in his Cattle; and the Defendant
demurred, and adjudged against the Plaintiff, for the plea in Bar is good,
and in no wise avoided by the Replication; for the Replication must be good
only by way of Title: And the Plaintiff does not entitle himself to any good
Lease at will; for he does not alledg indeed any Seisin in Sir John, or any
possession in him, out of which a Lease at will may be derived. And although a
Declaration may be good to a common intent, and in debt upon a Lease, as 21. H.
7. is, the Plaintiff may declare that he devised. And need not alledg a seisin
in himself, when he made the Lease, etc. Yet when a title is made by Bar or
Replication, as 2 E. 4. 9. is, that ought to be certain to all intents, because
it is traversable, and because the Defendant had made a good Justification in
Law, that ought to be answered by the Plaintiff with a good title, to wit, that
Sir I. T. was seized, and made a Lease to him at will, which is not so done;
but it is all one, as if he should have replied, that Robin-Hood in Barnwood
stood, without that by the command of Sir John, etc. which observe. And this by
the opinion of Fennor, Williams, and Cook, being only then in Court, and
Judgment was given accordingly.

GOodman against Ayling, Mich. 6. Jac. An action of Trespass If the verdict
find the tenure in substance, though not in manner and form, it is good
intrespasse.
brought, that the Defendant the 8. of February, 4. Iacobi. broke the
Plaintiffs house, and took and carried away one Brass Chafer of the
Plaintiffs, price, 20 s. The Defendant pleads that the house is parcel of
half a yard Land in P. and that it was holden of H. Earl of North, as of his
Manor of W. by homage, fealty, escuage, uncertain suit of Court, enclosure of
the Park-pale, and rent one pound of Common, and for the Rent behind for three
years, and the homage and fealty of Th. P. Tenant thereof; the Defendant as
servant of the Earl, and by his command, justified the Entry, and taking, etc.
The Paintiff replies, that the house was held of R. Stanley, as of his Manor
of Lee, without that, that it was held of the Earl in manner and form, and upon
this they were at issue, and the Jury found it was held of the Earl, as of his
Manner of P. by homage fealty, enclosure of the pale rent of a pound of Common,
and no otherwise. And if it seemed to the Court that it was not held in manner
and form, they found for the Plaintiff, etc. And adjudged for the Defendant,
for although the verdict did not agree with the plea in manner and form of the
tenure, yet it agreed in substance in the point, for which the taking was, to
wit, that the Land was holden of the Earl, and that suffices; for there is
difference between a Replevin and Trespass: For in Replevin, because Difference
between Replevin and Trespass.
the Avowant is to have return, it behooves the Avowant to make a good Title in
all things, but otherwise it is in Trespass; for there the Defendant is bound
only to excuse the Trespass, and therefore if there be any tenure it suffices;
for if the Lord or Bayliffe in his right distrains for that which is not due,
yet he shall not be punished in Trespass, as Littleton, 114. for the manner and
form: And 9. H. 7. which mark by the whole Court: and Fleming, Justice vouched
the 33, H. 8. Dyer 48. B. where the issue was, whether a Villain regardant,
etc. or free: And the Jury found a Villain in gross, yet it was held good for
the substance of the Villianage, and of the issue were found, H. 5. Jac.
rotulo, 834.

GOodwin against Welsh and Over, Pasch. 7. Jacobi. The Plaintiff brought an
Action of Trespass for several things against the two In a writ to enquire of
damages, the Plaintiff is not bound to prove the property of goods, but the
value only.
Defendants, and declares to his damage, etc. The Attorney for the Defendants,
pleads non sum informat, and thereupon Judgment was given severally for the
Plaintiff, and Writs to inquire of the damages issued out, and were returned:
and it was moved, that the Writs should not be filed, because the Plaintiff at
the time of the inquiry did not prove that the goods did appertain to him, but
only proved the value of the goods; for Sergeant Nichols took a difference
between an Action confessed, and non sum informat; for in the first case the
property of the goods is also confessed to be in the Plaintiff, but it is not
so in the other case: for here Judgment passes without the privity of the
Defendant, and only for want of pleading, as in the case of a nil dicit, but by
the whole Court it was all one. And the Plaintiff is not bound to prove the
property in any of the Cases: and the reason is, because the Writ commands only
the value to be inquired of, and no more, and that only is the charge of the
Jury: And the whole Court were of opinion, that they themselves as Judges, if
they would in such Case might assesse Damages without any Writ, if they would
trouble themselves, for the Writ goes only, because it is known what Damages
are, but it is otherwise, when not guilty is pleaded, for then the Trespass is
denied, which must be proved and tried by the Jury, and there both the value
and property come in proof; and observe, the Judgment is, that he should
recover, and if upon a Writ of inquiry he should be bound to prove the
property, and fail thereof, it would be in destruction of the first Judgment
which cannot b. observe this.

TAilor against Markham, Trin. 7 Jacobi. An Action of Trespass Where of his own
wrong without such cause shall be a good issue and where not.
and Battery brought for, etc. The Defendant pleads, that he at the time of,
etc. was seized of the Rectory of, etc. where the Battery was supposed in Fee,
and that at the time in which, etc. Corn was severed from the nine parts at the
place aforesaid, and because the Plaintiff came to carry away his corn, and the
Defendant stood there in defense of his corn, and keeping the Plaintiff from
taking it away, and the hurt that the Plaintiff had, was of his own wrong, etc.
the Plaintiff replies, that it was of his own wrong with the such cause
allege, etc. and the Defendant demurred in Law, and adjudged for the
Plaintiff, for that general replication is good, and does not behove the
Plaintiff to answer the Defendants Title, because the Plaintiff by his Action
does not claim any thing in the Soil or corn, but only damage for the Battery,
which is altogether collateral to the Title, but when the Plaintiff makes a
Title by his Declaration to any thing, and the Defendant shall plead another
thing in destruction thereof, or if the cause of Action in such Cases, the
Plaintiff must reply specially, and not say without such cause, as it is in 14
H. 4. Trespass brought for taking a servant, the Defendant shows that the
Father of him that the Plaintiff supposes to be the servant, held of him in
Knights Service, etc. and died seized his Heir, the Servant being within age,
by reason whereof he seized as his Ward, as it was lawful for him to do, and
there the Plaintiff replied that he did it of his own wrong, and without such
cause, and disallowed by the Court, because he did not answer to the Seigniory,
to wit, that he did that of his own wrong, without it, that the Father of him,
that is, supposed to be the Servant, held of him in Chivalry, and the reason
was, because the plaintiff by his Action made Title to the Servant, according
to 16 E. 4. and Judgment given accordingly.

ALlbon against Dremsall, Mich. 7 Jacobi. The plaintiff declares The Defendant
prescribed for a passage over Land, and naught, it should have been for a way.
in an Action of Trespass, that the Defendint the twentieth day of February, 5
Jac. did break the plaintiffs Close, at etc. called Sandy Heath, and entered
it, and spoiled his grass, and kiiled took and carried away a hundred Conies,
and also that the Defendant the same day the free Warren of the plaintiff at
Sandy aforesaid did enter, and chase without license, and killed fifty Conies,
and took and carried them away to his damage of, etc. the Defendant to the
whole Trespass, except the entering and breaking of the Close called Sandy
Heath, not guilty, and in Issue joined upon that, and as to the breaking the
Close the plaintiff ought not to have his Action, for he said, that William
Lord Russell, and Elizabeth his Wife, were, and yet are seized in Fee, in the
Right of his Wife, in a certain piece of Heath, containing ten acres in Sandy
close adjoining, and on every side separated from the place called Sandy Heath
and that they, and all those whose Estate they have in part, in that piece of
Heath, have used to have for themselves and Farmers of the said piece of Heath,
and for their Servants a passage unto the said piece of Heath, and from the
said piece, in, by, and through the said Close called Sandy Heath, in which,
etc. the whole year at their pleasure to take and receive the profits of the
said piece of Heath, and the Defendant further says, that long before the
Trespass supposed to be committed, very many Conies were wandering in the said
piece of Heath, and diverse Cony holes were there made, in which the said Conies
did delight to live in, and at the time in which, etc. they were in the said
piece of Heath, eating the grass growing there, and the Defendant, as Servant
to the Lord Russell, and by his command, the time in which, etc. in, by, and
through, the said Close, in which, etc. toward, and unto the said piece of
Heath, did walk over to hunt, and take the said Conies, in the said piece of
Heath, then being and feeding, as it was lawful for him to do, which walking
in, by, and through the said Close, in which, etc. for the cause aforesaid, is
the same breaking the Close, and entering thereof, whereof the Plaintiff
complains, and averres that the place by which the Defendant walked for the
cause aforesaid to Sandy Heath, in which, etc. was the next passage, by which
he could go to the said piece of Heath; to which the Plaintiff demurres; and
adjudged for the Plaintiff, for a passage, is properly a passage over the
water, and not over Land, and the Defendant ought to have prescribed for the
way, and not for the passage, for he ought to have observed the usual words,
and such as are known in the Law for a prescription, and usage is for a way,
and not for a passage, and see 32 Assis. 58. and 11 H. 4. 82. b. Secondly, the
prescription is not good, because he does not show from what place, nor to what
place the passage or way is, for although a way be in gross, yet it ought to
be bounded, and circumscribed to some certain place, especially when it appears
to ly in usuage, time out of mind, for that ought to be in a place certain, and
not in one place to day, and another to morrow, but constant and perpetual in
one place. Thirdly, the Plea in Bar is not good, because he does not show what
manner of passage it was, whether a Foot-way, or Horse-way, or Cart-way, and
therefore it is altogether uncertain, and Judgment given accordingly.

TRoughton against Gouge, Mich. 7 Jacobi. An Action of Trespass brought, for
entering into the Plaintiffs Close, called Wild Marsh, and for mowing and
cutting five Loads of hay, to his damage of, etc. the Defendant says, that the
Close aforesaid did contain twelve Acres, whereof a long time before the
Trespass done, and at the time the Mayor of, etc. of Lincoln were seized in
Fee, and being so seized, Nota.
Leased it to the Defendant for years before the Trespass committed, by reason
whereof he entered and was posaessed until the Plaintiff claimed by Deed of the
Mayor, etc. for life, whereas nothing passed and entered, and the Defendant the
time aforesaid re-entred as it was Lawful for him to do, the Plaintiff replied,
that the Close in which the Trespass is supposed to be done, contained one
Acre, and three Roods, and abutts it East, West, North, and South, and one of
the abutnals were upon the twelve Acres mentioned in the plea in Bar, and
concludes it is another Close, the Close mentioned in the Plea in Bar,
containing twelve Acres, whereupon the Defendant demurres, and the Court were
of opinion at the first opening the matter, that the replication was not good,
because it answers not to the matter supposed in the Bar, for when the
Plaintiff in his Declaration gives the place a certain name as he has, and the
Defendant by his Plea in Bar agrees, the place as here he does, to wit that
the Close aforesaid, to wit, Wild Marsh, is the inheritance of the Mayor, etc.
and he as Lessee to them for years makes a Title to himself, the plaintiff
ought to answer to the Title, or avoid it, which he does not by his
replication, for the plaintiff by that endeavors to assign a new place, which
he cannot do when they are agreed of a place before, and therefore he ought to
have pleaded, that there were two Closes called Wild Marsh, the one containing
twelve Acres, as the Defendant had alleged, and the other containing one Acre,
and three roods, whereof the Plaintiff was seized, and that the Close where the
Plaintiff supposed the Trespass to be committed, and the close called Wild
Marsh, contained one Acre, and three roods, which mark: and see 21 E. 4.

LEe against Atkinson and Brooks, Hill. 7. Jacobi. An Action of Ba^tery brought
against the Defendants at London for assaulting the Plaintiff, to wit, in such
a Parish and Ward, and beat, wounded, and evil entreated him, to his damage
of an hundred pounds; the Defendant as to the force pleads not guilty, and as
to the residue, that Atkinson the time in which, etc. at Gravesend in the
County of Kent was possessed of a Gelding, and being so thereof possessed, the
Plaintiff the time in which, etc. at Gravesend, etc. came to the Defendant to
hire the Gelding for four shillings for two days, in which the Plaintiff
would ride from Gravesend aforesaid to Nettlebed in the same County, and from
thence to Gravesend within the said two days, by reason whereof the Defendant
for the consideration aforesaid, the time in which, etc. lent the Gelding to
the Plaintiff, who had it, and in a direct line rode for the space of a mile to
Nettlebed aforesaid upon the Gelding, until the Plaintiff, the time when, etc.
intending to deceive the Defendant of his said Gelding, went forth of his way
to N. and rode toward London, by reason whereof, Atkinson in his own right,
and Brook as his servant, came to the Plaintiff, and at the same time in which,
etc. required the Plaintiff then riding upon the said Gelding toward London, to
deliver the Gelding, which he refused to do, by reason whereof Atkinson in his
own right, and Brook as his servant, and by his command the time in which,
etc. to repossess himself of the said Gelding, laid hands upon the Plaintiff
and took him from the Horse back, and would have taken the Gelding from the
Plaintiff, by reason whereof the Plaintiff did by force and Arms assault the
Defendant, and by strong hand kept the Gelding, by reason whereof the Defendant
did defend the possession of the Horse against the Plaintiff, as it was lawful
for him to do: And further say, that if any damage happened to the Plaintiff, it
was of his own assault, and in defense of the possession of the Gelding, and
Traverses that he was not guilty in London, or any where else out of Kent, etc.
and the Plaintiff demurs, and adjudged for the Plaintiff, for the Battery is
confessed and did arise from the evil behavior of the Defendant, for it
appeared by their own Plea in bar, that the Plaintiff had hired the Gelding
for two days, and that they within these two days disturb the Plaintiff of
his possession of the Horse, and thrust him off his back, which was not
lawful, for the Plaintiff had a good special property for the two days
against all the World; and although the Defendant pretends that the Plaintiff
had misbehaved himself in riding to another place then was intended, yet that
was to be punished by an Action of the Case, but not to seize the Horse: Which
observe.

KNieveton against Roylie, Mich. 8. Jacobi. An Action of Trespass brought for
breaking the Plaintifs Close called G. in Woodthorpe in the County of Derby, to
the damage of, etc. The Defendant pleads that the Close was known as well by
the name of G. as by the name of D. And that it was and had been, time out of
mind, parcel of the Wigenworth, and pleads his freehold in the Manor: The
Plaintiff maintains his Declaration, and traverses that the place where, etc.
was not parcel of the Manor, and upon this they are at Issue, and a Venire
facias awarded of Woodthorpe only, and moved in Arrest of Judgment by the
Defendant, the Verdict being for the Plaintiff, and urged that it was a
mistryall, for the Venire facias ought to have been as well of the Manor as of
Woodthorpe, for although the parties be agreed, that the place where the
Trespass was committed lies in Woodthorpe, yet that being supposed indeed to be
parcel of the Manor of Wigenworth, the Venu of the Manor by intendment have
a more perfect and better knowledge of it then the Villiage of Woodthorpe
only, which was granted by the whole Court, and a new Venire awarded to try
the Issue anew.

Douglas against Kendall, Mich. 8. Jacobi. The Plaintiff declared, that the
Defendant the 21. of January, 6. Jac. by force and Arms thirty Loads of Thorns
of the Plaintifs ready to be carried, in a place called the Common wast at
Chipping-warden in the County of Norfolk, did take and carry away, to the
Plaintifs damage of ten pounds, the Defendant pleaded not guilty to all but to
ten Loads; and as to them that the place where, etc. contained one Acre of
pasture, and that one William Palmer was seized in fee of a Message and three
quarters of a yard Land in C. aforesaid, and that he and those whose estate he
had in the said Message, etc. time out of mind, were used to have for their
farmers, etc. all the Thorns growing upon the said Acre of pasture to their
use to be employed and spent upon the said Message, etc. as appurtenant
thereunto; and the said ten Loads were growing and unjustly cast down by the
Plaintiff upon the said Acre of wast, and being ready for them to carry, the
Defendant as servant to Palmer, and by his command, took them and carried them
away and employed them upon the House, as it was lawful for him to do; the
Plaintiff by protestation that Palmer and such, etc. time out of mind, had not
the Thorns growing upon the said Acre of pasture parcel of the wast, and that
Sir Richard Saltonstall was seized of the Manor of Chipping-warden, whereof
the common wast was parcel in fee; and that he the 21. of January, the sixth
year of K. James, granted license to the Plaintiff to cut and carry away thirty
Loads of Thorns mentioned in the Plea in bar growing upon the Wast, by reason
whereof they cut those ten Loads of Thorns, growing upon the wastes, and they
were ready to be carried, by reason whereof they were possessed thereof until
the Defendants took them away; and upon this Replication the Defendants
demurred; and adjudged against the Plaintiff, and there was a differance taken
by the Court, where a man claims reasonable Estovers in another Soil, and
where a man claims all the Thorns in another Soil, for in the first case if
the Owner of the Soil shall cut down the Thorn^s first, he that has title to
the Estovers cannot take them, for the property and interest of all the Thorns
continues If the Lord cut the Wood in which the Commoner has Estovers, he
shall have an Action of the Case, but not an Assise.
in the Owner of the Soil, and the other has only Common there, and if the
Owner of the Soil cut them down all, he that should have the Estovers shall
have an Action upon the Case only, and not an Assise, for when all the Wood is
destroyed it cannot be put in seisin, as the Abridgement of the Assise is, fol.
21. And so it appears by Sir Thomas Palmers Case, Co. lib. 5. fol. 25. And if
one grant an hundred Cords of Wood to be taken at the election of the Grantee,
and the Grantor or an Estranger cut down the Wood, the Grantee cannot take the
Wood but must supply his Grant out of the residue, for the Grantee has but an
especial interest in part of the Wood and not in all, but now in this Case the
Defendant in right of Palmer claims all the Thorns, in the name of all the
Thorns growing upon the said Acre of pasture, and if he has all, Sir Richard
S. cannot have any, and so by consequence cannot license the Plaintiff to cut
any; and so the whole interest is in Palmer, and it is not in the nature of
Estovers, for Estovers is but parcel of the Wood, and that to be taken to a
special purpose; and in this case it was agreed, that although the Defendant
had alleged an employment of the Estovers, yet since the Defendant had claimed
all the Thorns and Trees, the employment is not traversable, for he that has
the general interest and property in Trees by custom or prescription, cannot
be restrained but may use them at his pleasure; And see 10 E. 4. 2. and
adjudged accordingly.

MAssam against Hunt, Mich. 6. Jacobi. A Copi-holder of a Message and two
Acres in fee. The Lord grants and confirms the Message and Lands with the
appurtenances to the Copyholder in fee: and whether he to whom the
confirmation was made shall have by the usage as a Copyholder common in the
wastes of the Lord, was the question, and adjudged he should not; for the
Copyholder Nota.
by that confirmation is extinct and infranchiz'd, for the words, with the
appurtenances will not create a common; for at first the Common was gained by
custom, and annexed to the customary estate, and is lost and perished with
that; for Common of its own proper nature is incident to a Copyhold Estate.

FArmer against Hunt. Hilar. 8. Jacobi. An Action of Trespass brought for
chasing the Plaintiffs Cattle in such a Close; the Defendant justifies taking
damage fesant in his Freehold: The Plaintiff replies, and shows one grant of
Common in the place where, etc. by the Defendant to the Plaintiff, and that
afterward the Defendant had erected a reek of Corn, and the Plaintiff put in
his Beasts to use his Common, and the Defendant chased them: But note, that
Nota.
the Plaintiff in his replication in pleading the grant of the Common by
Indenture, did omit the bringing it into Court. And by all the Judges the
chasing of the Cattle by the Defendant is not lawful, for by such means he
may defeat his own grant; for by the grant of common in such a place, the
Grantee may use the whole Common: And then when the Grantor erects a Reek of
Hay upon part of the Common he had granted, he will diminish the Common, and
tend to the enfeebling of his Grant, which ought not to be; for the Beast ought
to range over the whole place, and eat the Hay without doing any wrong; for
the wrong did first begin in the Grantor, who is the Defendant, of which he
shall never take advantage. And whereas he has erected one Reek of Corn, he
may erect twenty, and so the Beasts shall have no liberty of pasture there; but
because the Plaintiff did not show to the Court the Indenture of the Grant,
which is the ground of his title; for that very cause judgment was given
against the Plaintiff.

DVrant against Child, Hillar. 9. Jaco. An Action of Trespass brought for
chasing the Cattle of the Plaintiff, and shows what Cattle, and that the
Trespass was done at B. to his damage of, etc. The Defendant justifies the
chasing in one Close called M. in B. which is his Freehold, and that the
Cattle were there damage fesant. The Plaintiff replies and shows, that one B.
is seized of one Close called Catley in D. in fee, and made a Lease thereof to
the Plaintiff Nota.
for years: and that the Defendant is seized of one Close called Fursey in Fee,
which lies next adjoining to the Close called Catley; and that the Defendant,
and all those whose Estate he has in Fursey Close, have used time out of mind
to repair the Fence and Hedges between Catley Close and Fursey Close, which
Fursey Close does next adjoyn to the Close called M. where the Cattle were
chased, and shows that the Plaintiff put his Cattle in Catley Close to feed
the Grass there, which by default of enclosure escaped into Fursey Close as
above; but he said that between Catley Close and Fursey Close, there is a
little Brook; which Brook at the side of Catley close had a banck next
adjoining to it; which banck the Lessor of the Plaintiff, and those whose
Estate they have, etc. have used time out of mind, etc. to repair. And that the
Brook at the side of Fursey Close had another Brook next adjoining, which the
Defendant used to repair, and shows because the Plaintiff had not repaired the
banck; on the side of Catley Close the Cattle did escape into Fursey Close,
and stayed in the Close called M. By reason whereof the Defendant chased them,
as it was lawful for him to do; whereupon the Plaintiff demurres, and
adjudged for the Plaintiff; for the Defendant had pleaded a good Bar, and the
Plaintiff had replied a good replication, and had removed the fault from
himself, and laid it upon the Defendant by his negligent enclosure between
Catley and Fursey: and the rejoinder does not confess and avoid the
replication, but perplexes the matter by adding one point of prescription on
the Plaintiffs part, that he ought to repair one banck between Catley and
Fursey, upon which an issue could not be taken, for then two prescriptions
should be an issue together, which cannot be, no more then two affirmatives, as
the 5. H. 7. 12. And also the matter contained in the Records does not answer
the matter contained in the Replication, but by way of Argument only: And
whether that be true, is no matter in evidence against the Plaintiff, who is
bound to prove his Replication true. For the Plaintiff says, that Catley and
Fursey do lie together, that is, without any space between them. And the
Defendant in his Rejoinder says, there is a banck between Catley and Fursey,
which if it be so they do not lie together: but the Defendant ought to have
traversed the prescription alleged by the Plaintiff, which had made an end of
all the matter, which observe was by the opinion of the whole Court.

SVtcliffe against Constable, Trin. 10. Jac. Chapter Constable 32. Eliz. was seized
in fee of the Manor of East-hatfield in the County of An action will not lie
for the counter-part of an Indenture without a special grant.
York: and by his Indenture infeoffes H. Remingham, paying for certain Lands
parcel of the Manor, 60 l. at two Feasts, with a clause of Distress, if it
be behind by the space of 14. days. Chapter 43. Elizab. by Indenture bargains and
sells the 60 l. Rent to the Plaintiff, which was enrolled, by reason whereof he
was seized of the Rent for the life of Chapter and being so seized, loses that part
of the Identure sealed by Remingham; which the said day, to wit, the 24.
November, 44. Eliz. came to the hands of the Defendant, who by Force and Arms
teared the seal of the Indenture against the Peace, etc. to his damage of 400
l. The Defendant pleads that Chapter has not granted the Manor of E. to
Remingham, paying the rent, etc. in manner and form, and the Plaintiff demurres
upon this Plea: And it was argued that the Bar was good, which is a direct
traverse to the title of the Plaintiff, to destroy the ground of the Plaintiffs
action; for if no rent were granted, then the Indenture concerning which the
Plaintiff complains, did not belong to the Plaintiff; for it passes not to the
Plaintiff, but as an incident to the second Grant, of necessity to make good
his title: As the Lord Buckhursts Case, Co. 1. and 7. E. 4. 30. in assize of
rent, the Plaintiff made his title by deed of a rent charge, it was a good plea
to say that nothing passed by the grant, because the issue is taken upon the
special matter, and not the general; but in an Assize brought of an Office,
it is no plea to say there is no such Office, for that amounts to no more but
that he has not disseised him, 45. E. 3. In trespass for taking away of
writing, it is no plea to say that he never had such a writing, but must plead
not guilty: So in an Action of Trespass for Goods, it is no Plea to say, that
the property of them was to an Estranger, and not to the Plaintiff, because by
that plea he denies not but that the Plaintiff was in posaession, which is
sufficient to maintain the Action, 20. H. 8. 28. which books prove that the
Plea in Bar is not good, for the Defendant destroys the Plaintifs Action, but
by way of Argument: And the rent by such Action is not demanded, but damages
for tearing the Indenture, and so the Title of Rent is not in question, and
exceptions were taken to the Declaration. First, the Action was brought for
tearing the Counter-part, by which the Rent was not created: And the Indenture
is not expressly granted to the Plaintiff, but the rent of 60 l. only is
bargained and sold; and by that the counter-part that pertains to Remingham,
does not pass to the Plaintiff as an incident; for it is not the Original Deed
by which at first the rent was reserved, which was granted by all but the
Chief Justice, for he said that the counter-part waited upon the interest, and
was good evidence for that: Secondly, the Plaintiff had not averred that Chapter for
whose life the Rent was granted, was alive at the time of tearing the
Indenture; and if C. was dead, the Indenture pertained to the Defendant of
right, as Heir of Chapter for so much appeared by the Plaintifs own showing, which
was granted. And thirdly, the Plaintiff showed not that ever he was posaessed
of the Deed but by way of Argument, to wit, that he casually lost it, which is
not sufficient; for none shall have trespass but he who is in actual
posaession, which was also granted by the Court. Fourhly, the counter-part
whereof the Plaintiff complains, by the Plaintifs own showing, contained as well
a warranty as the rent reserved: And therefore without a special gift made of
that Deed by Chapter to the Plaintiff, that Deed does not pass by Law to the
Plaintiff, as it is adjudged in Lord Buckhursts Case. Fifthly, if Chapter the
Father be dead, then the writing has lost his force, as to the rent; for by
his death the rent is determined, and therefore of necessity the Plaintiff
ought to aver the life of Chapter For no Action lies for a Deed that is
determined, and for these reasons the Plaintiff did discontinue his Action.

An Action of Trespass was brought for entering into a man's House, and
continuing there diverse days, etc. And after a Trial and verdict for the
Plaintiff, Yelverton moved in Arrest of Judgment, and showed for cause that the
Plaintiff had declared with a continuando for breaking his house, which he
could not do; for the entering is one act Nota.
done and ended at the going out again: And therefore if he re-enter, it is a
new Trespass, and the continuando is only alleged for the aggravation of
damages, 2 R. 3. 15. 10. E. 3. 10. 16. E. 3. 24. That a continuando cannot be
for breaking the House: but Doddridge and Haughton Justices, the rest being
silent, were of opinion that it might be alleged, that a continuando; for
although it might be that if he went forth, and re-entred, it should be a new
Trespass: but if upon his first Entry he continued diverse days, it might be
alleged with a continuando: And see for that Mich. 38. El. in the Common
Pleas, fol. 118. If a Disseisee re-enter he shall have an Action of Trespass
against the Disseisor with a continuando: And so is Fitzherberts Nabrevium 91.
L. that a continuando may be laid as well for breaking a House as eating the
Grass, and so is 10. E. 3. 10. and 20. H. 7. 30. by the opinion of Gapley.

GEush against Mynne, Pach. 11. Jacobi. An Action of Trespass brought,
wherefore by Force and Arms, the Close of the Plaintiff did break, etc. The
Defendant justified, by reason there was a report A man cannot Justify the
digging of a man's ground in hunting a Badger.
that a Vermin called a Badger was found there to the great damage of the
Inhabitants; by reason whereof he uncoupled his Beagles in the place where,
etc. and hunted there, and found the Badger, and pursued him until he Earthed
in the place where, etc. by reason whereof he dug the ground, and took the
Badger, and killed him, and afterward he stopped up the Earth again, which is
the same Trespass, and demands Judgment; whereupon the Plaintiff demurs: And
upon reading the Record, Scamber of the Inner Temple was for the Demurrer, and
that the Defendant could not justify as this case was. And first, he was of
opinion that the Common Law warrants hunting such noisome Beasts, although it
be in the Lands of another, because it is good and profitable to the
Commonwealth that such hurtful Beasts should be extirpated, according to the
8. E. 4. 15. And Fishermen may justify their Nets upon another Land, 13. H.
8. 16. 22. H. 6. 49. A man may justify entering into a house to serve a
Subpaena, 3. H. 6. 336. A man may justify the entering into another Land with
the Sheriff to help him to distrain, but otherwise it is for things of
pleasure, as 38. E. 3. 10. B. You cannot justify the Entry when your Hawk has
killed a Pheasant in another Land: and so for hunting of Hares or Conies in
the Freehold of another: but although the Law allows and permits such Entries
as aforesaid, yet the Law requires, that such things shall be done in an
ordinary and usual manner, as 12. H. 8. 2. A Commoner cannot dig the Land to
make Trenches, although it be for the benefit of another; and this is confirmed
and explained by the Statute of 8. Eliz. cap. 15. For although that Statute
gives reward for the killing of Vermins; yet the Statute further says, that it
must be with consent, and with reasonable Engines and Devices, 2. R. 2. Bar.
237. Grant of Fish in the Pond; one cannot dig the Land and make a Sluice, but
must take with them Nets: And so, if a man grant to me all his Trees in such a
place, I I cannot grub up the roots out of the earth, if there be any other way
to take them, but if there be no other way, then it is otherwise, as 9 Ed. 4.
35. a. A grant to put a Pipe in my Land, and afterward it is stopped, I may dig
to mend it by the opinion of the Court, and therefore there being an Ordinary
course, to wit, hunting, to kill the Badger, the digging for that is unlawful,
and the Action will well ly Mich. 36. and 37 Eliz. 60. Nicholas Case expressly
for a Fox, and Fenner held it was not lawful to break a Hedge in the pursuit.

MIles against Jones, Pasch. 11 Jac. Miles brought an Action of Trespass
against Jones, wherefore by force and Arms his goods, Nota.
etc. The Defendant pleads that the Plaintiff, 5 Jacobi. acknowledged a
Recognisance of 100. l. at Mich. at which day he did not pay it, and that two
years after the Recognisance was extended upon his goods, because the moneys
were not satisfied at the day, nor at any time after, the Plaintiff replies,
that they were paid in the sixth year of James, and desires this, that it may
be inquired only by the Country, and the Defendant likewise, and upon the
Trial, it was found for the Plaintiff, and it was new moved in arrest of
Judgment, by Goldsmith, that there was no Issue joined, for an Issue ought to
be joined upon a thing alleged by the party, DOyly against White and Webb,
Trin. 11 Jacobi. Doyly brought an Action of Assault, Battery, and imprisonment,
of his wife, against White and Webb. The Defendant pleads a special
Justification, to wit, that in November, 2 Jacobi, an Action of Trespass was
brought in the Common pleas, by one A. against Julian Goddard, and upon the
general Issue it was found for J. G. and Judgment given for her, and
afterward, and before Execution, J. G. takes to Husband the now plaintiff, and
afterward brings a Writ of Error in the Kings Bench, and upon a Scire Facias
against the said Julian, the Judgment in the Common pleas was reversed, and
costs given to A. the plaintiff in the Writ of Error, and aftewards a Capias ad
satisfaciend. was directed to the now Defendants to take the said I. G. by
Force of which, the said Defendants took the woman of the now plaintiff, with an
averment that the said I. G. and the Wife of the now Plaintiff, were one and the
same person, and the plaintiff demurres upon this plea, and Yelverton moved,
that this justification was not good for diverse causes; first, when the Sherif
is to execute a process, he is to do it duly, and upon the right person at his
peril, and for that see 11 H. 4. 90. b. If the Sherif take the goods of
another in Execution, Nota.
he is a trespassor, 5 E. 4. 50. a. If a Capias be to take I. S. and there be
two of the same name, he ought to look to take the right man at his peril, and
as he ought to take notice, so he must pursue his authority, and for this see
10. E. 4. 12. b. if a Capias issue out against I. S. the Son of A. and he take
I. S. the Son of B. false imprisonment lies against him, and in a Case when his
Warrant is against I. G. there is no such J. G. for by her marriage with the
Plaintiff she had another name, and he is therefore a Trespassor for the taking
of J. Doyly, and his averment cannot help him, because it agrees not with his
Warrant, and so cannot be intended to be the same person, but if the variance
was in the name of Baptism only, it would be otherwise, and secondly,
although the party had admitted her to have the same name, yet the Sherff in
pleading had taken express Conusance of the contrary, and had made it appear
to the Court, that it was not according to his authority, and therefore he
shall be punished, but the whole Court was of a contrary opinion, for first,
the Scire facias was according to the Judgment in the Common Pleas, and well
then might all the subsequent Process be according in course of Law, but if
the Husband had come upon the Scire facias, and showed how that she was covert,
then the Action ought to be against both of them; and secondly, the parties
themselves in all the proceedings throughout, have all admitted that she is the
same person, and that she had the same name, and therefore this differs from
the 10 E. 4. 15. and therefore they shall be concluded from saying the
contrary, and although the Sheriff had showed the marriage, that was but a bare
allegation, and suggestion of the Sheriff, and it appears not judicially
whether it were so or no; and thirdly, it would be dangerous for the Sherif to
return a Non est inventus, for because the parties have admitted her name to be
so in all the proceedings, the Sheriff shall be estopped also, as the 3 H. 7.
10. and then an Action of the Case would ly upon the false Return, or if the
Woman should be in the company of the Sheriff, and the party show her to the
Sheriff, she might escape.

CArrill against Baker, Trin. 11 Jacobi. The Plaintiff brough an Action
wherefore by force and Arms, he entered into his Warren, and dug his Land,
and chased his Conies, and took them, the Defendant pleads to all, except to
the entering the Warren, chasing the Conies, and digging the Land, not guilty,
and as to the entering of the Warren, chasing of the Conies, and digging the
Land, he pleads an especial Justification, to wit, that he had Common there
time out of mind, and because the Plaintiff stored the Borrows there with
Conies, and made new holes, by reason whereof the Defendants sheep feeding
there, fell into them to their great damage, the Defendant did with a Ferret
chase the Conies, and stopped up the holes with the earth dug out, etc. and
upon that Plea, the Plaintiff demurred, and George Crook was of opinion that it
was not a good justification, and the Question was single, whether a Commoner
might drive out Conies which surcharged the Land, and he conceived he could
not, for the Freehold and possession of the Land is in the Terr-Tenant only,
and the Commoners cannot intermeddle with it, for a Commoner has only the
grass of the Land, and not absolutely neither, to do with it what he pleases,
but only to take it with the mouths of his Cattle, and for this see 12 H. 8.
2. a. and 27 H. 6. 10. and 13 H. 8. 16. the espleas in a Quod permittat is
alleged in taking the grass with the mouths of his Beasts, and for that see
22 Assis. 48. 10. E. 4. 4. and 46 Ed. 3. 23. if a stranger put in his Cattle,
the Commoner cannot have an Action of Trespass, and 13 H. 8. 15. ruled, that if
a Commoner dig the Land to make a trench, he is a trespassor, but he may drive
out or distrain for doing damage, and 15 H. 7. 12. 13 H. 7. 13. and 12. H. 8.
2. a. because after a manner he has interest in the grass, which is spoiled
and consumed by the Cattle of the stranger, but although he may drive out and
distrain the Cattle of an estranger, yet he cannot meddle with the Lords
Cattle, or the Terr-Tenants, although there be more then reasonable, as in
Fitzherberts Na. brev. 125. D. and 8 E. 3. 30. if the Lord surcharge the
Common, The Commoner may have an Assise against the Lord, and if he be a
copyholder, he shall have an Action of the case, 9 Rep. 112. but the Lord may
distrain H. 9. Ja. Kings Bench, a prescription for a Commoner to kill Conies of
the Lords is not good, and he cited Pasch. 43 Eliz. Kings Bench rotulo. 234.
Belly and Laughorns Case, the Lord may use the Sale as he pleases, but as his
Case is the Commoner although Tenant of the Land, cannot kill the Conies with
his Ferret, For a free Warren in such a precinct, is a charge upon the Land, in
what hands soever it comes, but if he has a Warren adjoining, and the Conies
come into the Lands of another, out of the Precinct, then he may kill the
Conies, and he cited Boslers and Hardies Case in the Common Pleas, and for an
express authority he cited Old and Conies case, Hill. 29 Eliz. and Sir Robert
Fitcham he was against it, and he agreed he could not kill the Conies, but as
to the digging he took this difference, if a Commoner makes any thing de novo
in the Land, he is a Trespassor as it is adjudged in the Case of a trench
before, and the like; but if a commoner amends and reforms a thing abused, it
is no Trespass, and therefore, if the Land were full of Mole hills, he may dig
them down, 13 H. 8. and 42 Assis. if the Lord make a Hedge the commoner may
pluck it down, 23 E. 3. 6. a. See if the Lord make a Pond in the Land, the
commoners may dig and let the Water out, and therefore holes that were made
long, in a hurt and Damage to the Land, the commoner may put the earth dug
out, again into its place. Secondly, the Defendant has showed that the Cony
holes were made by the Plaintiff himself, and he shall never take advantage of
his own wrong: and Thirdly, the Law will allow every man to preserve his
inheritance, and it cannot be preserved any other way, for if he should bring
his Assise, yet he in that shall recover but Seisin, and no Reformation of the
Trespass, and wrong done, and the opinion of the Court seemed to incline for
the Plaintiff, and Doddridge Justice said, that a Lord or his Feoffee may make
new conie-Borrows lawfully, for they are necessary for the preservation of the
conies, but one fault found by Justice Haughton, in the pleading nothing was
done, for the Plaintiff declared for entering into his Warren, the Defendant
pleads to all, but the Warren digging, and chasing not guilty, and as to the
digging and chasing, he justifies for common here, but answers nothing as to
the Warren, neither by confession or traverse, and therefore all was
discontinued, as Herlackendons Case is, Co. 4. Rep. and to this the whole
court, Fleming being absent agreed.

WAldron against Moore, Trin. 11. Ja. The Plaintiff brought an Action of
trespass against Moore, wherefore his Close called Gerleford at Rentesbury in
the County of Devon, by force and Arms has broken and entered, etc. The
Defendant pleads that a long time before the Trespass was supposed to be done,
one John W. was seized of three hundred Acres of Land in R. aforesaid, of which
the place in question called G. is parcel, and that 30 H. 6. the said John
Whithing, reciting that whereas N. de la moore, 31 E. 1. the Plaintiffs
Ancestor, Son and heir of H. de la Moore, grants to William de la Moore,
Corsum aque, which runs from W. through the middle of the Land of the said M.
And shows further, that by mean discents it discends to the Defendant, etc,
and so justifies: The Plaintiff replies if W. S. was seized of the place where,
etc. and made a Lease thereof to him for years; and traverses that the three
hundred Acres of Land were parcel, and Issue joined upon that, and found for
the Plaintiff; and it was moved in Arrest of Judgment, that the Defendant had
not made any answer to the Plaintiff, and so no Issue joined; for the Plaintiff
lays the Trespass in G. in L. the Defendant says he was seized of three
hundred Acres, of which the place, etc. was parcel, but he conveys no title to
himself, but by a course of water through the middle of the Land of M. but
whose Land that was it does not appear, and is another thing; and therefore an
Issue upon that which the Defendant does not claim is void, and although Issue
be joined yet it is not helped by the Statute of Jeofailes of 18 Eliz. or 32 H.
8. for it is as no Issue when it is of a thing not in question, but if the
Issue had been of a matter in question, although ill joined, yet it is aided as
Nichols Case is, 5 Rep. 43. upon payment pleaded without Deed: And Doddridge
and Crook, Justices agreed to that, but Haughton seemed to incline that it was
an Issue, and so helped by the Statute.

FVller against Pettesworth Knight, Mich. 11. Iacobi. Fuller brought One Venu
out of two places in the same County.
an Action of Trespass against Pettesworth and his Servant, for breaking his
Close, and taking one Cow in D. in the County of B. One of the Defendants plead
not guilty, the Servant pleads that the Plaintiff holds of Sir Peter P. as of,
etc. in the County aforesaid; and for services behind, by the command of his
Master, he seized the Cow, etc. The Plaintiff traverses, etc. and one Venire
facias was awarded out of both the Villiages, and being found for the
Plaintiff, it was new moved in Arrest of Judgment by Finch of Grays Inn, that
two Venire facias ought to have been awarded, because the Issue is of things in
several places, for if there be several Issues in one place, one Jury shall
be only Impannelled, but if in several places for several things local,
several Juries shall be, but the whole Court held that one Jury only should
be impannelled, and one Venu only should be awarded out of both the places;
and it is all one as if it had been in one place, but it had been otherwise if
in several Counties, as 41 Eliz.

DAme Petts Case, Mich. 11. Iacobi. In an Action of Trespass brought by the
Lady Petts, upon not guilty pleaded, the Jury being at Bar, the matters
following came in question upon the evidence by Haughton and the other
Justices: If A. be seized of a great Close, where, etc. and a Stranger enter
and occupy part of the Close, yet notwithstanding A. continues the posaession
of the residue, whether this shall preserve his possession in the residue; and
he shall be judged to be in possession of that, because it is an entire thing,
5 E. 4. 2. and 8 E. 3. 13. Seisin of part of the services is the seisin of the
whole, and so is Bettisworths Case, 2. Rep. The possession of the House is the
possession of the Land, for the Lessee against his Lessor of that which passes
by one demise: But if a stranger enter and sever part by metes and bounds,
nothing is wrought by the possession of the residue: Another question was this,
A Lessee for years of ten Acres, paying twenty shillings Rent, the Lessee is
outed of parcel, yet he paid all the Rent to him in Reversion; the Lessor
having notice of the enter whether this protects the Reversion, so that nothing
is gained by the entry but the interest of the Lessee, and shall be no
disseisin: And Yelverton at the Bar was of opinion, that it should be no
Disseisin, Rithen, Sect. 590. says, That so long as the particular Tenant
continues his possession, so long is the reversion in the Lessor; for in such
case as to the Lessor the Lessee shall be always deemed in possession by force
of the Lease; and the reason why the Lessee shall be adjudged in posaession of
all as to the Lessor, is, because the Lessor cannot have notice of the
alteration of the posaession; for when the Lessee by his own Act or sufferance
does a thing in alteration of the posaession, of which by common intendment the
Lessor cannot have or take notice, there the Law will not prejudice the Lessor:
And see for that, Farmers Case, in the third Rep. 79. If Tenant for life levy a
Fine having Land in the same Villiage, this shall not bind the Lessor, if five
years pass before he take notice of what Land the Fine is levied: And the same
Law if Tenant for life make a Feofment to one who has land within the same
Village levies a Fine, and in this cafe if the Lessee has continually paid all
his Rent, the Lessor cannot intend or suspect, but that the Lessee is absolute
Tenant of the whole: and in Farmers Case it is said, That if the Lessor levy a
Fine, the Disseisee is barred without claim, for it is impossible but he to
whom the wrong is done shall presently know it. But if he that has the
particular estate by Grant or trust reposed in him, shall secretly practice,
although he pay the Rent and continue posaession, yet it is otherwise: But the
Reporters opinion was, that if in the principal case no Rent had been
reserved, then the Reversion had been divested by the entry, for there had been
no act done to mislead or hinder the knowledge thereof; and also although rent
be reserved and all paid, yet if he had express notice thereof, the reversion
had been divested, And secondly, if it should be a Disseisin a great mischief
would follow, for if a descent should be, it would take away the Lessors entry
and yet no fault in them, because in common presumption the Lessee always
continued Tenant; but Cook of a contrary opinion, for he said, it could not be
denied but that the Lessee is out of the posaession, and then it follows of
necessity that the Lessor must be out of his reversion: And as to notice to
make his claim, he must take notice at his peril, 4 M. Dyer, 143. b. But
note, that this is when the Law intends that he may take notice, which it will
not intend in this Case: Haughton was of opinion that it was a Disseisin, and
Doddridge said, It would be mischeivous if it should.

Hill. 6. Iac. In the Common Pleas, that if in the Common Bar, in Trespass
the place in the Common Bar is alleged to be Blackacre, the Plaintiff may
plead that it is his Freehold: and then it was held by the whole Court, that
an abuttall of one side is sufficient without alleging it of every side.

Swain against Becket. An Action of Trespass brought for cutting Whether a
Copyholder may lop the trees growing upon his Copyhold, and held he might.
down of Trees: And upon a special verdict the question was, that whereas
there is a Manor wherein are Copi-holders for life, which have used to lopp
Trees growing upon the Copy-holds for their necessary fire, and repairing of
their customary Tenements; the Lord of the Manor makes a Lease of the Manor
for years, excepting the Trees: the Lessee of the Manor grants a copy for
life, the Copyholder loppeth the Trees growing on his Copyhold, whether by
law he might do it or no was the doubt of the Jury. And it was held by all the
Court that the Copyholder might lopp the Trees, because he is in by the
custom, which is above the Lords Estate after he is admitted, and that the
copyhold does not depend upon the Lords interest: And that the Trees excepted,
and the Soil remained parcel of the Manor, because the Lease was but for
years: but if the Lease had The Copyholder is in by custom, which is above
the Lords estate.
been for life, it had been otherwise, because it had been severed from the
Manor. And whereas it was objected, that the Tenant should not be in a better
condition then his Author, it was answered that a Lord of a Manor at will, may
grant a copy for life, or in fee, and it is good. If the Lord cut down all the
Trees, so that the Copyholder can have no lopping, he may have his Action upon
the Case against the Lord, as it was adjudged in Gosnolds case. If the Lord
sell The Copyholder shall have trespass upon the Case against the Lord for
cutting down of trees.
away his waste, and the Copyholder dye, and the Lord grant a new copy, he
shall have his Common. If the Lord sell away the Trees, so that the Copyholder
cannot have Estovers because the Bargainee felleth down the Trees, the
Copyholder shall have his Action against the Bargainee: Common and lopping are
incident to the copyhold, Judgment for the Defendant.

HArris against Ap-John. An Action of Trespass brought; the Defendant pleads
not guilty, and verdict found for the Plaintiff. And in Arrest of Judgment it
was alleged that the venire facias was de placito debiti: and so also was the
habeas corpus, and it should have been de placito transgressionis: And it was
amended by the whole Court.

MYnwinnock against Bligh. Trin. 16. Jacob. rotulo, 1697. An action of
Trespass brought for breaking the Plaintiffs Close, done September. in the 13.
year of King James: The Defendant pleads as to part of the Trespass in award,
and that the Defendant submits himself to the award the 15. year: and that the
Arbitrators in the 13. year, which was before the submission made the Award,
and traverses that he was guilty of the Trespass after the award made: And the
Plaintiff replies, that the Arbitrators the said day in the 13. year, made not
any award, etc. And after Trial exception was taken, that the issue was ill
joined, being of a thing that was void, yet notwithstanding Judgment was given
for the Plaintiff, and they resembled to a payment upon a single Bond, and
conditions performed at a Feast, not contained in an Obligation.

Trin. 15. Jac. rotulo, 3044. An Action of Trespass brought, wherefore by force
and arms his Goods and Chattels, to wit, a thousand posts, and forty railes
took and carried away, and damages given entire, and after a verdict exception
taken, because Rales was pretended to be no Latin word, nor to have any
exception, but Judgment was given for the Plaintiff.

DVncomb against Randoll, Hill. 9. Jac. rotulo, 2267. Three issues in Trespass:
One issue was upon a prescription, to wit, that they had accustomed to have for
himself his Farm and Tenants of the same Manor, common of pasture in the
said, etc. for all his Sheep which are levant and couchant in and upon the
Demesne Lands of W. which lie, and are in A. aforesaid every year: And
exception was taken for the uncertainty, because it did not appear that those
were demesne Lands which lie in A. for it was ill pleaded, and ought to be
averred; but notwithstanding it was held good after a trial, and Judgment was
given for the Plaintiff, and in this case an exception was taken to the venire
facias, because it was of A. and of the Manor of C. and because it was made in
this manner, to wit, de visu de A. and de visu manerij de C. but it was
disallowed, because against the form used in the Common Pleas.

Downs against Skrymsher, Trin. 9. Iac. rotulo, 334. An Action of Assault and
Battery brought, and there was a Demurrer upon the Evidence: And the case was,
that the Defendant the day specified in the Declaration said, that the
Plaintiff assaulted the Defenant, and in defense of himself justifies the
beating; the Plaintiff replies that he did it of his own wrong, without any
such cause: and in the Evidence the Defendant maintained that the Plaintiff
beat him the day mentioned in the Declaration, and in the same place. And the
Plaintiff perceiving that, gave in evidence that the Battery was made another
day and place, to wit, etc. which was the cause of the special verdict; for if
there be two Batteries made between the Plaintiff and Defendant at diverse
times, the Plaintiff is bound to prove the Battery made the same day in his
Declaration, and shall not be admitted to give another day in evidence, by the
opinion of the whole Court.

HEydon against Mich. 8. Jac. rotulo, 839. An Action of Battery brought against
three, two of them pleaded not guilty, and Judgment by non sum informat.
against the third, and the two were found guilty for all: And the Jury gave
damages severally, against one a 100 l. and against the other a 100 s. and what
Judgment should be given was the question: and at first the Court was of
opinion that the Plaintiff should not have Judgment at all; for where the Nota.
Defendants are found guilty of all the Trespass, in this case, the damages
shall be entire; but if one shall be found guilty of part, or at another time
in this case, the damages shall be several, otherwise not. And they thought a
Venire de novo ought to issue out, because the Jury had mis-behaved themselves
in severing the damages; but afterward, it was resolved that the damages that
were given by the first Jury, to wit, one 100 l. should be recovered against
all the Defendants in that Writ named: and that in Trespass the first Jury
taxes the damages for the whole Trespass, and that shall bind all the
Defendants, and therefore execution was given against all the Defendants for
the hundred pounds, Trin. 9. Jam. rotulo. 1835.

BAnks against Barker, Hill. 12. Jac. rotulo, 1979. In an Action of Trespass,
the venire facias was well awarded upon the case of the venu in Westown, and of
the Manor of D. and the Writ of Venire was mistaken, to wit, of the venu of
Westown: and exception being taken after trial, the Court was moved for the
amending of the venire facias by the roll; and it was denied, because the Jury
Nota.
did come of another venu then they ought by the Law of the Land to come, and
therefore could not be amended: but afterward the Court seemed to be of an
opinion, that the awarding of the venu in the roll was mistaken, because it was
of the venu of the Villiage and Manor: and it should have been of the Manor
only, being to try a custom of the Manor.

Forest against Headle, Hill. 13. Jac rot. 1123. An Action of Trespass
brought, and a continuando of the Trespass unto the day of the showing forth
the Plaintifs Original, to wit, the 20. day of November, which day was after
the showing forth of the Original: and because the Jury gave damages for the
whole time, which ought not to be, it was proved that the Judgment upon the
verdict might stay, Nota.
but by the whole Court the videlicet was held idle, and Judgment given for the
Plaintiff.

COcks against Barnsley, Hill. 10. Iac. rotulo, 2541. An Action of Trespass
brought, and a special verdict found, and the question was, whether Land held
in ancient Demesne was extendable for debt, and an action of Trespass brought
for that cause. And Justice Nichols held it was extendable; for otherwise, if
it should not be extendable, there would be a fayler of Justice; for if a
Judgment should be had against a man, that had no other Land but what was in
ancient Demesne, Nota.
and that it could not be extendable, there would be a fayler of Justice, which
the Law does not allow of: but an Assize, or a re-disseisin does not lie of
Land in ancient Demesne, because of the Seisin that must be given by the Common
Law, and it would be prejudicial to the Lord, which the Law allows not: and
Wynch and Hubbard were of the same opinion. For ancient demesne is a good plea,
where the Freehold is to be recovered, or brought in question, but in an
action of Trespass it is no plea. And note, that by this execution, neither the
Freehold nor Possession is removed, but only the Sheriff enters to make
execution upon a Judgment had in the Common bench in debt, which is a proper
Action to be brought there.

WRight and his Wife against Mouncton, Hill. 12. Iac. rotulo, 43. An Action of
Trespass brought, to which the Defend. pleaded not guilty: And the Husband only
made a challenge, that he was servant to one of the Sheriffs, and prays a
process to the Coroners; and the Defendant denies the challenge: and therefore
notwithstanding the challenge, the Venire issued to the Sheriffs; and after a
trial, Nota.
exception was taken, because the woman did not join in the challenge: and it
was held that the Husband and Wife should join in the challenge, although the
cause of challenge proceeded from the Husband only; but after trial, it was
helped by the Statute of Ieofailes, and judgment given for the Plaintiff.

BIde against Snelling, Hill. 16. Iac. rotulo, 1819. An Action of Ejectment
brought, and also a Battery in one, and the Writ: and after a verdict it was
moved in Arrest of Judgment, because the Battery was joined with the Ejectment.
The damages were found severally, and the Plaintiff had released the damages
for the Battery, and prayed Judgment for the Ejectment: Winch held the Writ
naught, but Judgment was given for the Plaintiff notwithstanding.

STeward and his Wife against Sulbury. An Action of Trespass brought, wherefore
by Force and Arms the Close of the Wife while she was sole at D. has broken:
and the wood of the said D. to the value of 1005. there lately growing, has
cut down and carried Nota.
away, and in his Count shows that he has cut down two acres of wood: and
exception was taken because he declared of so many acres of wood, and not of so
many loads of wood, to wit, twenty, etc. loads, and held by the Court to be a
good exception.

BLackeford against Althin, Trin. 14. Jac. rotulo, 3376. An action of Trespass
brought, wherefore by Force and Arms a certain Horse of the said Plaintiffs
took away, etc. The Defendant conveys to himself a certain annuity, granted to
him by one John Hott. The Plaintiff shows, that one William Hott, Father of the
said John Hott, the Grantor was seized of Land in Fee, which Land was
Gavel-kind Land, and devised it to his Wife for life, the remainder to John
Hott the Elder, and John Hott the Younger his Son, and the Heirs of their
bodies: And afterward William dyed, and the Woman entered, and was seized for
life; and the two sons entered, and were seized in tail, and being so seized,
John Hott the younger had issue, John Hott, etc. and traverses without this,
that John Hott the Father, at the time of granting the annuity was seized of
the Tenements aforesaid, with the appurtenances in his Demesne, as of fee, as,
etc. And the Defendant as before, says, that the said J. H. the Father at the
time of the granting the annuity aforesaid was seized, and after the trial it
was moved in Arrest of Judgment, supposing it was mistried; because the issue
was, that the said J. H. the Father, at the time of the grant, etc. And it does
not appear that the said J. H. was nominated Father, neither could it appear
that the said J. H. was the Father, and so the word Father was idle, and the
Court were of opinion, that it was helped by the Statute of Ieofailes: and the
word Father was idle, and judgment was given for the Plaintiff.

A. brought an Action of Battery against the Husband and Wife, and two others;
the Wife and one of the others without the Husband pleads not guilty, and the
Husband and the other pleaded, seu assault demesne, and tried and alleged in
arrest of Judgment, because the Woman pleaded without her Husband: and Judgment
was stayed, and a Repleader alleged, and this case was confirmed by a case
which was between Yonges and Bartram.

HArvy against Blacklole, Trin. 8. Jacobi. rotulo, 1749. An Action of Trespass
brought, wherefore by force and Arms his Mare so strictly to a Gelding did
fetter, that by that fettring the Mare aforesaid did dye. If a stranger take a
Horse that comes and strayeth into a Manor, the Lord may have his action of
Trespass. If my stray does stray out of my Manor, and goes into another
Manor the day before the year be ended, I cannot enter into the other Manor
to fetch out the stray: If I take an Horse as a stray, and onother takes him
from me, the Action lies not by the Owner against the second taker, because
the first taker has divested the property out of the Owner. The Defendant in
this justified the taking of the Mare as a stray, and did not alledg that he
came as an estray, and the Plea was held insufficient, and the Court held they
could not tie them together: And the Defendant said, that the Hayward took the
Mare and delivered her to the Defendant; this was but not guilty, and Judgment
for the Plaintiff.

LVttrell against Wood and other Defendants, Pasch. 40. Eliz. An Action of
Trespass brought, wherefore by Force and Arms he broke the Plaintiffs Close,
and cut down his Trees. The Defendant in Bar to the new assignment, alleges
that he is a Copyholder for life of the Manor of Mynehead in the County of
Somerset: and that in that Manor there was a Custom that every Copyholder
for life had used at his pleasure, to cut down all the Elmes growing upon his
customary Lands, and to convert them to his own use, when, and as often as he
would, and so justifies, and a Demurrer upon the Bar: And the question was,
whether the Custom was good and reasonable; and the later opinion was, that it
was a good and reasonable Custom, but now it is otherwise held.

Actions of Waste.
IN Waste the Writ shall be brought where the Waste was committed: And the
Process in this Action is Summons, Attachment, and Distress, peremptory by
the Statute of Westminst. 2. But at the Common Law the Distress was infinite.
And if the Defendant does not appear upon the Distress, although a Nihil be
returned, yet the Plaintiff shall have Judgment, and a Writ to inquire of
damages of the Waste, and an Essoine lies, as in a Quare Impedit, and the
Process shall be executed as in a Quare Impedit, and returned from 15 days to
15 days, and the Plaintiff in this Action shall not recover costs, but the
value of the Waste found by the Jury shall be trebled by the Court; for costs
shall not be recovered in such Actions as are given by the Statute, as in this
Action a Decies tantum, and Quare impedit: And so Judgment is to recover the
place wasted, and severance lies in this Action, Mich. 9. H. 4. rot. 104.

And note, in the trial of the issue in Waste, if the Defendant by his Plea
does not confess the Waste, six of the Jury which are impannelled to try the
Waste must have the view of the place wasted, to the intent that the Plaintiff
may be put in possession of the place wasted by the view of the Jury: And if
the Defendant confess the Waste, the Jury ought only to inquire of the value
of the Waste, but not who committed the Waste: But upon a default upon the
grand Distress, the Sheriff in his proper person shall repair to the place
wasted, and there inquire what waste and spoil is done. And if he does not
return that he was there in his proper person, it is naught: But upon a
Judgment by non sum informat. nil dicit, or in a Plea by which the Defendant
confesses the waste, the Sheriff shall inquire only of the damages: And he is
not bound to return upon that Writ, that he in proper person went to the place
wasted: And when the Judgment is by default, the challenge lies against the
Sheriff, and if it be denied it is Error: And if the Plaintiff do not take
jungment upon the first distress, being returned, executed, but takes another
distress, it is Error.

And no receipt lies by the Wife upon the default upon the Distress at the
return of the Writ to inquire of the wast, Trin. 6. H. 6. rotulo, 133. For if
the Woman at the Assize before verdict, does not pray to be received, she
shall never be received afterward in the Court, at the return of the Nisi
prius. And note, that the Jury may give several values, and one joint value of
the place wasted, but several values is the better way.

If a Lessee for years makes a Lease of one moity to one man, and of the other
moity to another man, and one of them commit Waste, the Action shall be brought
against the two, for the Waste of one is the Waste of the other, if a Lease be
made by three to one for life, and afterward two release to the third, and the
Lessee commits wast, he alone shall have a Writ of Waste, supposing that he
demised only.

If Waste be committed in two Villiages, and the Sheriff has executed his
Office naughtily in one Villiage and well in another, all shall be inquired of,
De novo, because the whole in Inquisition was but one Inquest at one time; but
if the Plaintiff assign the Waste in the Houses and Woods, and it does not
appear by the Count, that the Houses were demised; and upon a Nihil dicit, a
Writ to inquire of the damages issues out, and the Jury find, etc. the
Plaintiff shall have his of the Houses.

BEdell against Bedell, Trin. 8. Jacobi, rotulo 3052. An Action of Waste
brought; the Case was, There is a devise to two for one and twenty years, the
Father and Son, and made the Son Executor, and he refuses to prove the Will,
and take the term, and so no Waste committed. And if Lessee for life and his
Lessor join in a Lease for years by Indenture, and the Lessee for life dye,
and waste is committed, the surviving Lessor shall have the Action of Waste,
and shall count that he did demise it alone: If a Lease be made to Husband and
Wife for life, and for twenty years after their deaths, and the Wife dye, and
Waste is committed, the Wife shall not be named in the Wri^, nor the term
after her death.

If Husband and Wife during the Coverture make a Lease, and Waste is committed,
they both shall join in the Action of Waste: And if a Lease be made but for
one year or for half a year only, yet the Writ shall be for a term of
years, but the Count shall be special; if a Lessee for years or life grants
Rent out of the Land he had for years, and afterward commits Waste, if the
Lessor recover the place wasted, the Land shall be charged: If a Lessee for a
hundred years grants part of his term to another, and be commits Waste, the
Action shall be brought against the first Lessee. If Tenant for life commits
waste, and afterward grants his estate to another, waste shall be brought
against him in the Tenet; and after Judgment, a Scire facias shall issue to
the Grantee, to show cause wherefore the Plaintiff shall not have Execution of
the place wasted; and the like if Lessee for years commit waste, and grants
over his Estate, Waste shall be brought against him in the Tenet.

And if a Lease be made for life, upon condition that if the Lessee shall do
such an Act, his Estate shall cease; and he does commit such an Act, the Writ
shall be brought against the Lessee in the Tenet, although his Estate be ended:
And the like if a Lease be granted to a Woman so long as she shall live sole,
or shall behave her self well, if she commit Waste, the Writ shall be brought
in the Tenet ad terminum vite, and the Count shall be special: If Tenant in
Dower grants over his Estate to a Stranger and commits Waste, yet the Action
lies against the Tenant in Dower, but otherwise it is if the Heir grants over
his Estate: And the like for Tenant by the Courtesy.

If Waste be brought against two, and one appear upon the Distringas, and the
other make default, the Plaintiff shall have a Writ to inquire of the Waste,
but shall declare against him that appears, for a man shall not recover by
moities in Waste, as one shall recover in a Precipe quod reddat against two,
for in waste the Land shall not be lost by default, by an Action tried, and if
a waste be committed between the Judgment and Execution, a writ shall be
awarded to inquire of the waste, but Quaere thereof: If a woman while she is
sole commits waste, and marries, the writ shall be, that the woman while she
was sole committed waste, and if Tenant in Tail in remainder brings an Action
of waste against Tenant for life, the writ may be, which he holds of the Tenant
in Tail, although they hold of him in the Reversion in Fee, and so it was
adjudged, Pasch. first James, that the writ was good. An Action of waste lies
against Executors for waste, for waste committed by the Testator, and if a man
have Land in the Right of his Wife, and waste is committed, and the woman dies,
now no Action of waste lies against the Husband, after the death of the wife.

In waste, if the Term be ended, and nothing be recovered but damages, there a
concord with satisfaction is a good plea, and if the Lease for years
determines, pending the writ, the Plaintiff shall recover nothing but damages,
and not the place wasted. The Defendant may disclaim in his Action, if he that
has the fee, pleads no waste done, this is a forfeiture of his Estate; the
Defendant may plead no waste done, and give in Evidence that the Tenements at
the time of the Demise were ruinous, ancient Demesne is no Plea in Waste.

If a Guardian in Socage, in the Right of his wife commits waste, the writ
shall be brought against the Husband only, Mich. 27. Ed. 1. rotulo 329.

If an Action of waste be brought against the Husband and wife, and the Husband
appear upon the Distringas, and the wife makes default, this shall be the
default of both of them, Mich. 20. H. 4. rotulo 393. the Plaintiff may abridge
the waste assigned in part, so that he aabridges not the whole, as if writ be
of waste in houses and wood, he may abridge part of the assignment in the
houses and woods, but not the whole, and if Issue be joined for part, and
demurrer for another part, the Issue may be tried before the Demurrer adjudged.

If an Indenture to raise uses upon good consideration be made, and he that
has the Estate for life commits waste, he to whom the reversion is limited, by
the same Indenture may have a general writ of waste, by saying generally, that
he has demised, it or a special writ at his pleasure, and Mich. 27 H. 7. it
was held by all the Judges, that it is an ill return, for the Sheriff to return
upon a writ to inquire that he has commanded his Bailiff, because the Sheriff
is both Officer and Judge, which power cannot be committed to the Bailif of the
Liberty, and the writ is a Non omittas in it self, but Quaere, for there are
diverse Presidents against it, the Lessee may cut down Trees for the repairing
of houses, when the Lessor is bound by covenant to repair, and does not; and it
is no good Plea, for the Lessee in waste brought against him by his Lessor, to
say generally that he has nothing in the Reversion, but he must show how the
Reversion is not of him, but upon a grant of the Reversion, and waste be
brought by the Grantee, nothing in Reversion is a good Plea. Upon no waste
pleaded the Defendant cannot give in Evidence that the Tenements were
sufficiently repaired before the writ brought. If an Issue arises i^ a foreign
County, the Jury shall not be examined of the view, and if the Jurors be not
examined of the View when they should be examined, it is Error.

If my Father leases Land for term of life, the writ of Waste shall be of
houses, etc. which the said A. Father to him demised, and so in a Writ of
waste, of a Lease made by my Predecessor, but if the Abot, or the Son himself
bring the writ, it shall be of Houses, which he holds for a Term, etc. if waste
be made (sparsim) in a Close or wood, the Plaintiff shall recover the whole
Close or wood, and the treble value shall be levied by Fieri facias, or Elegit,
and not by Capias, because a Capias lies not upon the Original, the Sheriff
may take a Posse Comitatus to stay the Tenant from doing of waste upon an
estrepment. Two Tenants in Common, one of them makes a Lease for years to the
other.

An Action was brought against Tenant for years, by him in the Reversion: the
Case was, that the Lessorafter the Lease made, granted another Lease in
Reversion for years, and this matter pleaded in abatement, pretending that the
Lease in Reversion, was an impediment against the Plaintiff, inbringing his
Action, but otherwise adjudged, for if a Lease be made for life, the Remainder
for years, and waste be committedby Tenant for life, notwithstandingthe Lease
for years in remainder, waste lies.

SKeate against Oxenbridge and his wife, Trin. 12 Jac. rotulo 849. waste
brought of Lands and Gardens, in L. of which E. K. was seized in his Demesne,
as of Fee, and being so thereof seized, after the fourth of February, 27 H. 8.
thereof infeoffed E. S. and others to the use of the said E. S. dead, and of
the said E. for Term of their lives, and the longest liver of them, and after
the decease of the said E. S. and the said E. then to the use of the Heirs of
the body of the said E. S. to be begotten upon the body of the said E. of which
said E. S. dead, the now Plaintiff is Son and Heir begotten on the body of E.
committed waste, and in the Declaration he showed the Feoffment made to the
Feoffees, and the habend. to them and their Heirs, and because the word Heirs
was omitted in the writ, exception was taken, but because it was in the
Declaration, it was adjudged good; and note, in this Case the woman was
received upon the default of the Husband, and pleaded to Issue. If the Feoffees
have but an Estate for life then they cannot convey an Estate in Fee simple
over.

SAunders against Marwood H. 41. El. rot. 747. An Action of waste Waste in the
Tenuit for digging of Sea coals.
brought in the Tenuit against the assignee of the Term, by the assignee of the
Reversion for wast committed in digging of Sea Coals: the Defendant pleads in
Bar, that the first Lessee, opened the ground, and granted to him all his
Interest in the Land, with all profits, except and always reserved to him his
Heirs and Assigns, all the Title of the Coal-Mines in the said parcel of Land,
and all Timber Trees, and averres that the Mine in the Land, at the time of the
Grant made, was, and yet is open, and adjudged no Bar, for he had no power to
intermeddle with the digging for coals, and to except with which he had no
power to meddle, is void exception, and the Defendant was punishable for the
waste by the whole Court.

LAshbroke against Saunders, Pasch. 41. El. rotulo 1532. or 2592. in waste, the
Case was in the Lease, there was this Proviso, to wit, povided that the Lessee
shall not fell the wood, the Defendant pleads the Proviso, and says, he has
not demised it, and the Question was, whether these words, provided and agreed,
are an exception, or no, and adjudged that the word provided is no exception,
and the wood was demised.

The End of the Book.
An exact Table, Alphabetically pointing out the most necessary and pertinent
matters of this Treatise contained, for the ^ase of the Reader.
A.
AVerrment, where necessary, 1. 13. Attorney called Champertor, where it is
actionable, 15. Account, what process in it, 24. Account against a Bailiff
local, 25. Account where the Writ abateth by death, 25. Account lies not
before a Sherif, 25. nor against Executor, nor an Infant, ibid. Account, what
is a Bar, 26. Account, where it lies not, but detinue, 26. Account, Judgment
upon special verdict, 26. Accountant shall not wage his law, where, 26.
Auditors, their Certificate, 25. Allowance to a Bailiff, where, 25. Action to
be revived by Scire Facias, 25. Assize for the Office of Clock-keeper, 28.
Assize in Costs upon nonsuit 29. Audita querela, 29. Audita querela,
supersedeas denied, where, ibid. Administration dur. minor. 31. Attornment not
necessary for acts in Law, 33. Assets, a difference, 34. Action upon penal
Statutes, not upon the Statute of Jeofails, 36. Audita querela, bail put in,
in the Chancery, and good, 38. Audita querela for a Purchasor, 39. Assumpsit
upon marriage, 40. Alyen borne, no plea in a Writ of Error, 42. Admiralty, its
Jurisdiction, 42. Amendment after trial, 43. Ancient Demesne tryable by
Doomsday Book, 43. Attorney put out of the Roll, 44. Attorney scandalized, 1,
2. Arrest for Felony good, where words importing a Felony actionable, 2.
Attorney called bribing Knave, 6. Attornment of an Infant 47 Administration
revoked, 92, 51. Action in England for service beyound Seas, 54. Attachment ad
satisfaciendum, 54. Amendment after imparlance, 57. Action for nonperformance
of an Award, 58. Action upon the 24. H. 6. for Election of Burgesses, 59
Attachment foreign, pleaded, 60 Arbitrium nullum pleaded, 62 and 90. Award,
where void, 63 Apprentice, when to be sent beyond the Seas, 65 Amendment of
Imparlance denied after Error, 69 Award of a thing not in the submission, void
69 Appearance on another day saves the Bond, where 75 Assets, what shall be, 77
Acceptance does confirm an Estate, where, 79 Appearance pleaded de novo, when
naught, 92 Award void for incertainty, 93 Assurance devised to be made by the
Plaintiff, 94 Abatement for not naming an Infant Executor, 102 Action, sur le
Stat. 32. H. 8. pur. Rent arrear, 103 Action, sur le Stat. 32. H. 8. where it
lies not, 103 Action lies, though a stranger does carry away the Corn before
severance, 124 Amendment of Original after trial, 130 Award where good
notwithstanding all do not award, 112 Abatement how traversed, 144 Amendment in
a writ of Error before the Record removed, 144 Avowry in a Rent charge, 169
Avowry for an Amerciament in a Court Leet, 170 Avowry amended after entry by
consent, 174 Amends made by a Bailiff not good, 173 Avowry, exception too late
after Judgment entered, 171 Avowry for damage feasant, 177 Attornment, where it
is of necessity, where not, 179 Annuity granted by Will, 182 Apportiament,
where, 187 Agreement verbal where to be averred, where not, 191 Advowson will
pass per concessionem Ecclesiae, 102 Ancient Demesne, whether extendible, 234
Annuity, 235
B.
BArretor, where actionable, 11 Bankrupt Knave, where it is not actionable, 16
Breach assigned, 20, 81 Bar, where naught, 22 Breach, that one entered, and does
not show by what title not good, 23 Breach by non-payment, 24 Bailement upon
Habeas Corpus, where no cause is expressed, 44 Bastard, where it is actionable,
41 Baron chargeable for femes, clothes 47 Bond pleaded in satisfaction, 47 Bona
notabilia, 62 Bond by the under Sheriff to the high Sheriff, where good, 63,
64 Breach assigned in Covenant, 73 Breach, what, 79 Bar, another action of
the same nature pleaded, 82 Breach, when not specially to be alleged, 90 Bond
joint or several at the Plaintiffs Election, 122 Breach upon award not good,
where, 123 Breach not assigned, the Plaintiff shall never have Judgment though
he have a verdict, 105. Bishops Plea shall not prejudice the Incumbent, 164
Beasts of a stranger where they are distrainable 170. Battery 134. 195, 196.
Bar where good, 222. Badger may be hunted but not dug for in another man's
ground, 224
C.
COunt uncertain 13. Court where it may discharge one arrested, 15. Clerks
misprision helped 16. Common appurtenant cannot be divided, 17. Covenant
against an Administrator, 19 Covenant and Debt where they differ, 19. Covenant
against the first Lessee, after Assignment, 20. Covenant upon a void Lease,
where it is good, 21. Covenant in Law how extendible, 22 Covenant against an
Executor, 24. Covenant against two, to levy a Fine, various acknowledgement, 29
Covenant against more then did acknowledge the Fine amended, 29. Commander in
trespass liable to Action, 31. Copyhold extendible upon the Statute of
Banckerupt, 34. Charter of privilege pleaded, 36. Commission high de
authority. 45 Conversion what makes it, 5. Collateral Consideration where good
to maintain Action, 3. Count uncertain, 6. Consideration not valuable, 6.
Conspiracy where it will not ly, 7. Costs where to be given, 46. Count
insufficient 48. Creditor administering 52. Costs, none upon the Statute of
perjury, 69. Custom special pleaded, 69. Contract usurious what not, 74.
Costs omitted in the Roll, Error, 76 Costs, none against an Executor, 80 Costs
to be considered multi fariam, 100. Challenge insufficient 128. Copyholder
must act according to Custom, 133. Concord with satisfaction, good Plea in
ejectment, 133. Court Roll of a Copyhold traversed, adjudged naught, 140. 141.
Copyhold purchaser cannot surrender without admittance, 134 Chaplains
privileged, 162. Court Baron incident to a Manor, 175. Common appendent need
to be prescribed, 178. Common, when its well found by a Jury, 178. Challenge
denied, 234. Copyholders their Privileges within the Manor, 231.
Copyholders custom is above the Lords Estate, 231. Copyholder what Action he
shall have, ibid. Capiatur upon a Judgment assigned for Error where, 211.
Common appendant apportionable, aliter appurtenant. 180. Copyholder barred by
a Fine, if not claiming within five years, 181. Cognizance as Bailiff. 181.
Commoner may take the Cattle of the Lord damage feasant, where 187 Common in a
field, and Acres unsown, sowing of parcel shall not destroy the Common, 189.
Consideration to raise an use, 193. Challenge where it lies, 194. 195. 196.
Challenge, none against the Jurors returned by the Eslizors, 194. Commoner,
what Actions he shall have and how, 227. Commoner may have an Assise against
the Lord, 227. Common is incident to a Copyhold Estate, 220. Commoner cannot
chase the Lords Cattle, if they surcharge the Common, 208. Confession after
Issue joined refused, 196. Commoner cannot bring an Action, but the Lord may,
197. Constable cannot detain one but for Felony, 198. Continuando, where
proper, 223 224. 234. Cursus aque granted, 229.
D.
DOuble prosecution for one thing actionable, where, 12. Demand and denial
makes a good conversion, 17. Denis age pleaded to a Bond 30. Distress where
good, ratione concessionis, non posaessionis, 32. Devastavit may be by paying
of money upon an usurious contract, 33. Distress in a Court Baron by
prescription, 36. Devise Executory, where good, 41. Devise of Land in Tail
conditionally, 45. Demand not necessary, 10. Debt, how, and where it lies, 50
Devastavit returned, where 50. Debt lies for money levied, 51. Debt against a
Sheriff for an Escape, 51. Debt in Debet and detinet where, 56. Default of the
clerk amended, 56. Demand alledgable, ibid. Debt for performance of covenants,
61. Debt upon Obligation in Italian, 62. Debt for non performance of award. 65.
Damages from request. 70. Deprivation given in Evidence, 73 Damages where to
be severed, 73 Debt lies not for fees of a Solicitor, 74. Debtee take
Administration, 74. Demand necessary in nomine penae 76. Devise of the profits,
good of the Land it self, 80. Debt against an Executor after full age for
Devast. of an Admistrator, duravit minor aetate 81. Debt lies for him, for use
money is delivered, 83. Debt upon the Statute of perjury, 83. 84. Debt against
the Bailiff, 86. 87. Debt upon the Statute of Edw. 6, for Tithes. 87 Debt for
Rent Arrear 89. Debt for Flemish money but demanded by English value, 91 Demand
of Rent, where to be 97 Debt for Tithes, Plaintiff need not to be named Rector,
99 Debt for Tithes, the statute mistaken is not good, 101 Debt by a Bill for
money received to anothres use, 104 Debt for nonperformance of Covenants, 114
Devastavit, when it ought to be retained, 117 Debt upon a Lease made to an
Infant, 121 Debt for Tithes after the toarm ended, 124 Demurrer to an action
for nonperformance of an Award, 125 Dower against the Heir or Committee, 127
Dower of Tithes, how, 172. Demand, when to the Parson, when to the Land, 135
Debt contingent cannot be discharged, where, 110 Deed of gift good against him
who makes it non obstante, 13. Eliz. and against his Executors and
Administrators, 111 Demand of Rent to avoid a Lease, where to be made. 138.
Discontinuances, 155. Darraign Presentment, where, 159 160. Demurrer for
doubleness of Plea, 164. Devise for years in confidence, 196. Demand not
necessary in Replevin for Rent. 171. Distress of a thing entire by two, no
return in Replevin adjudged, 171. Distress for Common Right, 177 Distress,
where it is good for the Rent, but not for the nomine penae without demand, 179
Demand of Rent-service, how, 181. Demurrer to part of the declaration what it
effects, 92 Disseisin of a Common, what, 197. Damages for Trespass local
cannot be mitigated by the court, 204. Declaration shall not abate for false
Latin, 206. Damages, none in partition, 209. Damage where it shall be entire,
233 Damage released for part 235.
E.
ELegit, how executed, 38. Elegit from the Test binds Goods and Chattells, 38.
Extent upon Extent, 39. Estovers, 44. Entry, Writ filed after the death of the
Tenant 44. Error as to Costs, where, 3. Exception to a Declaration 8. Executor
at what age, 46. Exceptions to an Award, 48. Exceptions to a Plea 51. Exception
to a Venire facias 52. Estoppell 57. Error assigned, 65, 66. 59 Executor an
Assign in Law, 78 Executor, de seu tort. shall not prejudice the rightful 79
Escape against a Bailiffe of a liberty, 80 Executor, his election for part is
not good, 83 Escape lies not against the Sheriff, where, 85. 119, 120
Executor, de seu tort. cannot retain money to pay himself, 104, 105 Election
of Execution either against Principal or Bail, 122 Error lies not before
(...) value (...) inquired of (...) Executor shall not pa^ 4. Jac. cap. 3. 107
Elegit to a foreign Sheriff upon a testatum in London, 107, 108 Ejectment
does not lie De aequae cursu, 142 Ejectment sufficient by a servant in present
Relation, 143 Ejectoris in traverunt and after he did expulse in number.
singulari, 149 Essoine lies by Writ of Journeys accounts, though allowed in the
first Writ, 152 Essoine, where it lies, 154 Extinguishment of Common by
enclosure, where, 174 Exceptions to an Avowry, 179 Evidence what shall be
given, 207 Enquiry of Damages, the Plaintiff not bound to prove the property of
his goods taken, but the value only, 214 Estovers, if the Owner cut all the
wood down, what remedy, 220 Exception taken for incertainty, 232 Estray how to
be used, and the nature of it, 236
F.
FRench Pox actionable, 11 Filching fellow not actionable, 13 Forsworn Knave,
where it is actionable, 13 Forging Knave, where actionable, 16 Feme, where not
bound to perform the Covenant of her Husband, 31 Fraud not ^^nended, 45 Feme
Covert cannot convert, 3 Feoffment to uses, 60 Feme Covert cannot make a letter
of Attorney, 134 Formidon in descender. 152, 153 Felony committed, is good
cause for to arrest one suspected, but not to defame one, 2 Feme cannot plead
without her Husband, 197 Free Warren, what, 228
G.
GRant by the King, where good, 27 Grant not enlarged by a bare recital, 32
Guardian in socage, who, 40 Gift by Deed void, quoad chose, and Action, 40
Goods not saleable upon execution out of a Court Baron without Custom, 41
Guardian of the spiritualties, who, 43 General release pleaded, 54 Grantee of
a Reversion, what action he shall have, 56
H.
HAbeas Corpus to the Marshalsey, 61 Hue and Cry, 155 Hundred charged in
Robbery, 156 Hundred not chargeable after the year and day, 156 Hundredors in
a Jury, how many necessary, 193 Husband and Wife, where they shall be joined,
and where severed in an action, 209
I.
INcertainty in the Declaration, 10 Justification disallowed, 11 Indebilatque
assumpsit, where good, 14 Justification by the Sheriff, 17 Judgment arrested
for default in the Declaration, 21. 23 Judges of the fact, who, 36
Inquisitions, where naught, 38 Juror appearing cannot be discharged, 41 Issue
cannot be bastarded after death of Parent, 42 Imparlance, what plea after, 42
Judgment Arrested, 2 Judgment reversed, because the Sheriff was not named in
the Venire facias, 3 Judgment arrested, 5 Justification not good, where, 5
Justification amounting to a not guilty, naught, 5 Innuendo will not help the
action, 7 and 9 Imparlance Roll supplied by the issue, 9 Juror committed, 44
Judgment upon a By-law, 48, 49 Judgment pleaded in Bar by Executor, 49 Judgment
against Executors, 53 Imparlance amended, 53 Judgment arrested for improper
words, Sans (Anglice) 82 Jeofaile, the statute not helping, where, 82 Judgment
reversed by Error in the disjunctive, 88 Intendment upon a Will, 89 Judgment
reversed in an inferior Court, why, 97 Judgment reversed for Error in the
judgment 99 Judgment reversed for changing the Defendants addition, 100
Judgment priority considerable, 102 Judgment reversed for not showing in what
Court a deed was enrolled, 115 Judgment reversed for want of words in the
Tales, 115, 116 Implication not allowed of in a surrender, where, 128 Judgment
in an Eject. firmae, 129 Interest, what, 136 Judgment reversed by Writ of
Error, non obstante, a verdict, and the Statute of 18. Eliz. 106 Imparlance,
what is pleadable after 138 Jointure, what, 139 Interest in possession, and in
future, the difference, 148 Implication not intended, where, 153 Judgment
arrested, for that the plea was naught, 172 Jurors name mistaken, was amended
upon constat de persona. Judgment arrested for not showing in what place the
Message did lie, to which Common did belong, 188 Jury challenge, 194 Judgment,
it is nature, as to the Plaintiff and Defendant, 194 Issue helped by the Statute
of Jeofailes, where, 200 Judgment reversed, because the writ of Enquiry was
before a wrong Officer, 203 Imprisonment justified by the commandment of the
Mayor of London, naught, where, 204 Justice of Peace cannot command his
servants to arrest in his absence without Warrant, 205. Justification in
Trespass for a way, 212. Justification not good, where, 218. Justification
special pleaded in Battery, 226. Issue of things in several places, 229.
K.
KIngs Title not lost, 164 Knight ought to be returned in the Pannell, where,
193.
L.
LAw Gager lies not if the except be per manus proprias, 25 Lease to two,
determined upon the death of one, where, 30. Lease of a Reversion sans
Attornament, where good, 30. Legacy of Land not suable for in Court Christian,
32. Legacy of a Chattell suable for in Court Christian, 34. Locallity not to be
made transitory, 35. Limitation is taken strictly, grant aliter 39. Lessee at
will cannot grant over his Estate, 43. Law mistaken, where it is hurtful, 41.
Letters of Administration ought to be showed, 9. Law waged, where, 53. Law
wager by a false party, 55. Letter of an attorney where naught 94. 95. Law Gager
lies not in debt for sallery. 60. Law Gager where, 70. 65 Lessee at will, if he
determine his Will, Devis. au. yet shall pay the entire Rent, 90. Lease to try
a Title of Lands in the hands of many, 129. Lease to be executed by Letter of
an Attorney, how, 129. Lease made to three for their lives, with a Covenant
that the Land should remain to the survivor for 90 years, is a good Interest in
the Survivor, 136. London, how houses pass without inrollment, 141. 142.
Liberty to make Leases, 169. Lease for life to three, where it was naught, 175.
Lord of Parliament not appearing shall forfeit 100 l. 193. Lunatic where an
Action ought to brought in his name, 197. Levant and Couchant is certainly
fufficient, 198.
M.
MIstryall, the Ven. fac. mistaken, 17 Mistake of the Jury, 18 Misprision of
the Clerk amended, 26 Monasteries dissolved, only those Regular, 39 Mistake by
the Court no prejudice, 42. Mistriall, 7. Missworn fellow Actionable, 9.
Medietas Linguae, where, 45. Master chargeable where, 64 Misprision of the
Clerk amended after trial, 88. Manor by that name, what will pass, 155.
Mistake of a day, of an Act by way of Bar not prejudicial, 196. Marshalsey has
no authority to hold plea of Debt, except one party be of the household, 199
Marshalsey no Jurisdiction, 199. 200. Master cannot have an Action for the loss
of Service if the Servant die of the beating, 205.
N.
NOtice not necessary, 10 Non est inventus where the party did escape, 12
Nuisance where it lies. 4. Non damnificatus pleaded, 7 Noverint for non
assumpsit. 8. Notice where needful, 46. Null tiel Record pleaded to a Plea of
Outlawry, 84. Non damnificatus pleaded, 118. Nisi prius, amended by the Roll,
133 Nonage tried where it is alleged, not where the Land lies, 150. 151.
Non-tenure pleaded, 153. Nisi prius the Record amended upon motion 156 Nullum
tempus occurrit Regi, 166. Negativum praegnans, 172. Non residency the Statute,
13 El. a general Law, 208. New Asignment where not good, 217. Bar to it, 236.
Nihil dicit, 237. 238. Non omittas, 240.
O
ORdinary cannot make a division, 32. Ordinary his power, 45. Outlawry no Plea,
where 55. Outlawry in the Testator, 55. Original want of it, after verdict no
Error, 97. Obligation discharged why, 98. 99. Original against four, and count
against three without a Simulcum adjudged naught, 130 Ordinary and Patron their
several Rights, 202.
P.
PArdon general de effect, 10. Promise by an Infant, not good, 11 Papist to a
Bishop actionable 12. Proviso implicit, where good, 14. Perjured knave
actionable 15. Proviso, 18, 19. Pyracy no excuse in an Action of Covenant, 21.
Plea in abatement, 27 in Assise, 28. Praemunire in a Parson, 30. Pleas several
cannot be in a joint debt or contract, 30. Proof, how far extendible 33 Where
required and where not, 34. Pardon, crimen legitur, non tollitur, 34.
Privilege from Arrest, where not to be allowed, 84 Prender and Render, the
difference, 34. 35. Prescription, where good, 35 Property not altered upon a
Scire facias, 41. Punishment corporal not to be imposed for the default of a
deputy, where 45. Proviso Executory and executed, the difference, 8. Privilege
respective, 47 Payment where peremptory, 49 Plea made good by verdict, 52
Payment when upon demand, 52 Pardon general pleaded, 56. Plea to a Bond taken
by the Sheriff, 58. Payment to the Heir, and not to the exceutor where good,
64. Privilege of an University, where not to be allowed, 75. Plene adm
nistravit no Plea, where 77, 78. Proprietor sufficient, 88. Privilege of Parl.
pleaded, 92 Plea naught for want of traverse, 98. Primo deliberat. shall not be
pleadded, sans traverse, 105. Propriety of goods cannot be in abeyance, 132.
Prescription and custom do differ, how, 132. Process misawarded, where helped
by the Statute, 134. Plea where it shall be in discharge, but not in Bar of an
obligation, 109. Partition Process in it 156. For whom it lies, 157 Partition
error in the first Judgment, 157. Partition in another Writ was pleaded.
Presentment of a Clerk by words, good 162. Patrons 6 months, 165. Proprietate
probanda, 167. Plea naught, 173. Pannell of hab. corp. amended upon oath, 175.
Parts ad finem nihil, etc. pleaded 179 Prescription for Common of pasture,
177. Prescription to distrain for amendment in a Court Baron must be not in a
Court Leet, 183. Prescription in a good estate good for a thing incident,
though it be in grant, 198. Prescription to be a Justice of peace where good,
how naught, 206. 207 Prescription good matter, and various, 215. 216 Possession
how it enters, 230, 231. Posse Comitatus, where it may be raised. 240.
Q.
QVeen cannot be an Officer to the King, 28 Quantity in a Declaration may be
destroyed by a per nomen, 145. Quare impedit, Process in it, 158 Quare impedit
the Judgment in it, 158 Quare impedit, essoyn in it, how and for whom, 159.
Quare impedit, Judgment in it, where execution shall be by the Metropolitan,
159. Quare impedit several against several men 161. Quod permittat. 227.
R.
REquest, where it is necessary, 13 Release of Baron where it is no Bar 15 Rent
arrear no plea in an action of Covenant, 19 Release where not to be given in
Evidence, 24 Request upon a bond what is sufficient, 30 Rent reserved, where
gone, 32 Rent proportioned, 33 Return of a Sheriff insufficient, 37 Return of
21 Jurors, naught, 41 Rogue not actionable, 9 Rieus per deceit, 54 Release, how
and where good, 62. and 63 Repleader awarded, 64 Release, where good, in
respect of time, 70 Release of all demands, its force, 81 116. Request to make
assurance generally good, 85 Release in Law, 91 Reversioner received for
default of Tenant for life, 127 Return insufficient, why, 127 Replication not
good, 131 Rent received at Michaelmas, or within ten days after, 105
Reservation of Rent how to be construed, 108, 109 Record removed unto the
Exchequer, 145, 146 Resignation by fraud takes not away the Kings Title, 161
Replevin, where, and how, 168 Replevin not within the Statute, 3 Jac. 172
Returno habendo, 173 Replevin place omitted, not good, 176 Resignation of a
Benefice, 201 Release to Tenant at sufferance, void, 201 Recognizance sued, 225
S.
SVit in Chancery is no disturbance, 23 Sheriff amerced for the false Rereturn
of another, 36 Summons and severance, where, 37 Statute preferred before a
judgment, where, 37, 38 Supersedeas granted, where, 40 Subboth, where
punishable, 44 Scandal for keeping a false Debt-booke, actionable, 4 Suing in
a wrong Court, where actionable, 4 Scandal for false measures, actionable, 4
Scandal for invocation of Spirits, 8 Sheriff, his authority in executions 50
Scire facias, for whom, 57 Satisfaction, what is not, 70. where it is held
naught, 73 Steward of a Leet within the Stat. of Edward 6. 73 Successor not
Executor, when he shall take benefit, 94 Supersedeas upon a Writ of Error, 153
Servant brought an Action, nomine proprio, part of the goods being his Masters,
155 Seisin of Rent within the time of limitation, not traversable, 170
Surrender of a Copyholder, how it works, 181 Sheriff, where his performance
is good, where naught, 210, 211 Scire Facias, where it is proper, 226 Seisin of
a part of service, is seisin of the whole, 230 Submission to Arbitrators, 232
Seu Assault Demesne pleaded in Battery, 233
T.
TRover, where, 12 Trover against an Administrator good, where, 16 Tenant at
the time of Writ purchased, where good, 27 Tenant at will and at sufferance do
differ, 30 Tithes discharged, where, 31 Tithes, where not suable for by the
statute, 31 Tithes in kind renewed, where, 32 Trees devised to pay Debts, 32
Tithes, where not of boughs, 33 Tithes not set forth, where action. 34 Tales
prayed denied, where, 35 Term whole, adjudged as one day, 37 Trees in the
highway, whose, 42 Trial, where, 49 Tenants in Common, 83 Tithe of what trees
to be paid, 95 Tithes cannot be leased without Deed, 99 Trial upon Ejectment,
good matter, vide. 147, 148 Tenant in tail, his death, where it determines
Estates by him granted, 161 Tenant in tail grants a rent charge, 179 Tales
awarded, 183 Trespass, what process, 193 Trespass is joint or several at the
Plaintiffs election, 196 Trespass laid in an Acre, and the Jury found in a
Rood, yet it is good, 210 Trespass* difference 'twixt it and Rep'evin, 214
Tort* Demesne, where good in issue, where not. 215
V.
VAriance betwixt Count and the writ of Inquiry, 15 Ven mis-awarded, 23 View,
to be there where an Office is performed, 27 Villianage within the statute of
limitation, 38 Use, upon what, 40 Venire Facias mendable, where, 43 Usury what,
where not, 52 Uncore Prist, where pleadable, 61 Verdict special, 75 Venire
Facias mis-awarded, 76 Uncore Prist for to grant, where naught, 76 Venire
Facias, the Defendants name mistaken, 79 Usurious contract pleaded, 86 Variance
betwixt the specialty and Count, 96 Verdict special upon non demisit, 126
Venire Facias of the Parish adjudged good, 130 Venire Facias to the Coroners,
ib. Verdict special in Ejectment, 131 Verdict precise sometimes makes the
Declaration good, which otherwise would be naught, 137 Venire Facias, exception
taken and overruled, 161 Usurpation upon the King, 163 Venire Facias, whence,
176 Usury, the statute pleaded, 180 Venire Facias de novo, 194. 204. 219 Venire
Facias vicious, why, 209 Verdict finding substance, though not circumstances,
yet good, 213, 214. Venire, one out of two places in the same County, 228
W.
WHere arrant not actionable, 16 Words employed not actionable, 16 Will, good by
notes, 44 Words actionable, 2, 3. Witch, not actionable, 2. 14 Warrant of
Attorney, 46 Words after the Clause of his testatus, of what force they are, 59
Writ original, where abated by death. 64 Will must be certain, and according
to Law, 130 Will not to be avoided by averment, 131 Will, mistakes in many
cases tolerable, 132 Words void, rather then the Declaration, where, 146
Warranty Collateral pleaded in a Formedon, 153 Writ, another depending
pleaded, 163 Withernam awarded, 167, 168 Words of double intendment how to be
construed, 192, 193 Wast, where it lies, for what judgment in it, 237, 238
Waste, inquiry of it, ibid. Waste, who shall join in the action, 238 Waste,
against whom it lies, 239, 240 Waste, sparsim, ibid.
The times when these several Officers of the Court of Common Pleas were
admitted to their several Offices.
Thomas Spencer, Ar. Pasch. 33. Eliz. Custodes Brev.
Henery Compton, Miles balnei. Circa An. 5. Car. Jo. Glyn, serviens ad Legem.
5. Febr. 19. Car. Johannes Foorde. 27. Jan. 27. Eliz. Capital. Prothon.
Gulielmus Nelson. 15. Novem. 25. Eliz. Richardus Brownelow. 9. Oct. 32. Eliz.
Thomas Cory. 9. Oct. 14. Car. Zacharias Scot. 9. Oct. 27. Eliz. Sedi' Prothon.
Thomas Crompton. 10. May 7. Jac. Johannes Goldesborough. 7. May 11. Jac.
Johannes Gulston. 15. Oct. 16. Jac. Richardus Barnard. 9. Febr. 19. Car.
Johannes Pynsent. Ult. May 20. Car. Laurentius Rardford. 30. Oct. 23.
Elizabeth. Try' Prothon.
Hugo Browker. 28. November. 31. Eliz. Thomas Waller. 23. Jan. 5. Jac. Robertus
Moyle. 7. May 3. Car. Geo. Farmer. 16. Oct. 14. Car. Gulielmus Anderson. 12. 1.
May 1. Jac. Cliri' War.
Geo. Reading. 10. Oct. 6. Jac. Milo Hobert. 25. Dec. 13. Jac. Gulielmus Rolfe.
11. May 1. Car. Jo. Gulston. 23. Jan. 10. Jac. Cliri. argenti Regi.
Henery Ewer. 2. Oct. 16. Jac. Antonius Wright. 6. Dec. 18. Jac. Cliri. Error.

FINIS.
REPORTS: (A Second Part.) OF Diverse Famous CASES in LAW, as they were Argued,
as well upon the Bench, by the Reverend and Learned JUDGES, Coke, Flemming,
Hobard, Haughton, Warburton, Winch, Nicholls, Foster, Walmesley, Yelverton,
Montague, Dodridge, and diverse others, in their respective Places; as also at
the Bar, by the then Judicious Sergeants and Barristers of special Note.

Collected by RICHARD BROWNLOW Esquire Prothonotary of the Court of COMMON PLEAS.

Very beneficial for all such who are Studious to know LAW, in its Power, Act,
and Limitation: Directive, and Useful for all Clerks, Attorneys, etc. In their
Inter-Agendum's, or several Ministerial Functions. WITH A PERFECT TABLE
SHOWING THE Remarkable matters Argued and Concluded in this Book.

Protag. de Leg. lib. 5. (...).

LONDON, Printed by Tho: Roycroft, for Matthew Walbancke, at Grays-Inne Gate,
and Henry Twyford, in Vine Court Middle Temple, 1652.

TO THE READER.
UPON the strict survey of Natures Products, there is nothing to be found,
whether in the bosom of its Causes, or in its Singularities, within the
Convexity of the Universe, which being contemplated at an intellectual
distance, beyond the Magnetic Effluvium of our Senses, does not felicitate
with more certainty, Nedum, probability, as more obsequious to the Prototype of
its projection, then MAN: the very Cronologie of whose Errors does compute his
Existency, an ungrateful return for the dignity of his Essence, which
unmolested and freed from the Procacity of his Junior and Inferior faculties,
would have fixed him in the harmonious Orb of his motion, and have secured him,
as well against the scandal of a Planetique, as the Eclipse of his native
glory: But alas! the doom is past, Ex Athaeniis in Barathrum, he is now
benighted with Ignorance, Phainomena's, and Verities; an Ignis fatuus, and a
Linck-boy, are Eodem calculo; which condition imposes upon him something more
then Metaphorically, the semblance of a Moth-flye, which is in nothing so
solicitous, as in its own ruin: Nevertheless had Privation in his Judgment
been the only loss, he could then have undergone; but his Po^o di matto, but
his will, and too too cereous Potestatives, have Stigmatized him in all his
habitudes, undiqueversum, with a more reproachful Sobriquet of Vellacazo teso,
in which shameful state, forgetting his Constitutive Nature, and rudely
breaking through his Divisive difference, he seems now to be lost, if perchance
he is not found in the confused Thickets and Forests of his Genus; where
measuring his actions (rather Ausa furosa) by the Cubit of his strength, he
giddyes himself into a Maze of Inquietudes, shuffling the Malefactor and Judge
into one Chair, to make up the Riddle of all Injustice, because all things are
Just; Hence was the no less opportune, then needful Venu of Cicero's Vir
magnus quidem and sapiens, Cic. lib. 1. de Invent. Rhet.
etc. Hence the blissful emergency of all Laws, the limitting Repagula's of
his Insolenoy, and the Just Monuments of his Depravity: But Hinc polydacrya, he
is yet so unwilling to forgo his bainefull Appetite (Reasons too potent
Competitor) that he is still persuaded he may safely act without controlment;
though like a Partridge in a Net, he finds no other Guerdon for his Bussle,
then a more hopeless Irretition: And as if he were damned to be a ^ury to
himself, he will not admit that wholesome and thriving Council, That
Obedience to Laws is a much more thriving piece of Prudence then Sacrifice; and
as much differenced as innocence, and guilt ignorant of its expiation. Whence I
conceive by a just title, to keep the World from Combats, and the reward of
virtue from Violation, the wisest in all Ages have had the privilege, not
only of prescribing, but of coacting the orders of Regiment amongst others,
who by necessary Complot have engaged for observance; which something seems to
repair the loss; yet so, as by our Dianoeticks, we have opportunity enough to
see, and like the Satyr in the Fable, to fear, our Idaeated Humanity,
although in a more sublime contemplation, it may fall out otherwise, in respect
that the Law of Essences are more certain, and of a far more facile direction,
then those of existency; which is so necessarily entitled to infinite
Incertainty, from Approximation of Accidents, that it would now be an equal
madness for the Governor to think he can, or the governed to fancy he
should, constitute Laws, Adaequate to humane Velleity, since the wills of no
two Sons of Adam did ever Mathematically concenter, nor were ever two humane
Actions shaped with parallel circumstances; which, as it seems necessarily to
import the deficiency of the Rule, so also to imply the evident reason of
Debating and Reporting of Cases in our Law: And the denoting of Limitations in
that of the Empire; which first, properly are, or (a notatione) at least should
be, no other then Exceptions to the Rules general, from a due consideration of
individuating circumstances. For the Expediment of which knowledge, this
Gentleman, the painful Collector of these ensuing Relations, for his own
benefit, whilst yet living, and for the good of others, who by natures Decree
should see his Pyre, did think it Tanti to make his Observations Legible: There
now remains nothing, but thy Boni consule, in which thou will oblige the
Publisher to continue thy Friend in all like Opportunities.

R. M. Bar:

A Table of the several Cases Argued and Adjudged.
A.
Admiral Court fol. 16, 27 Agars Case 36 Andrews against Ledsam 49 Airs Case
280
B.
Butler against Thayre 29 Baxter against Hopes 30 Bushes Case 36 Blackdens Case
ibid. Beareblock against Read 39 Burdet against Pix 50 Bone against Stretton
51 Bedell against Bedell 58 Bearblock against Read 81 Burnham against Bayne 96
Barney against Hardingham 120 Brandons Case 122 Baynall against Tucker 134
Bishop of Ely 137 Brook against Cob 150 Bicknell against Tucker 153 Browning
against Stel'ey 165 Bard against Stubbing 167 Bartons Case 215 Barwick and
Fosters Case 220 Buckner against Sawyer 274 Bailey against Sir Henry Clare 275
Borough of Yarmouth 292
C.
Cradocks Case 37 Cartwright against Gilbert 48 Canning against Doctor Newman
54 Crogat against Morris 55, 146 Crane against Colepit 84 Cross against
Westwood 108 Charnock against Currey 118 Crew against Vernon 152 Charnock
against Corey 153 Case of Cinque Ports 191 College of Physicians Case 255
Chamberlain against Goldsmith 280 Cholke against Peter 289, 322 Chapman
against Pend'eton 293 Caesar against Bull 328
D.
Daringtons Case 3 Dorwood against Brickenden 26 Doctor Conways Case 37 Doctor
Husseys Case 59, 91 Doctor Mannings Case in the Starrchamber 151 Downs against
Shrimsh^w 182 Denis against More. 299 Dunmole against Glyles. 308
E.
Enby versus Walcot 28 Earl of Cumberland and Hilton 108 Ear^e of Rutland
against the Earl of Shrewsbury 229 Estcourt and Harrington 272 Earl of
Rutlands Case 330
F.
Forde versus Pomroy 9 Fetherstones Case 168 Flemming and Jales 280 Freeman
against Baspoule 309 Foster against Jackson 311
G.
Glover and Wendham 10 Gaudey against Newman 38 Gargrave against Gargrave 52
Gravesend Case 177 Goodyer and Ince 208 Gittins against Cowper 217 Grimes
against Peacock 222 Godsalls Case 270
H.
Hurrey against Boyer 8 Huntley against Cage 14 Hurrey against Bowyer 20 Hamond
against Jethro 97 Hamond Strangis Case 102 Hill against Vpchurch 121 Hall
against Stanley 124 Holcraft against French 137 Higgins against Piddle 149 Hare
and Savill 273 Heyden against Smith 328
I.
Jones against Boyer 27 Jennings against Audley 30 James versus Read 47 Jacob
against Sowgate 12^ Ireland against Smith 166
K.
Kenrick against Pargiter and Phillips. 60 Kemp and Phillip his Wife, James and
Blanch his Wife, against Lawrere and Trallop, and the Wife of Gunter 144
L.
Linch against Porter 1 Legates Case 41 Lampit against Margeret Starkey 17^
Lawry against Aldred and Edmonds 183
M.
Master, Brothers, and Governors of Trinity house againsi Boreman 13 Mallet
against Mallet 133 Marstons Case 167 Manley against Jennings 176 Marsam against
Hunter 209 Miller and Francis. 277 Michelborn against Michelborn 296 Mors
against Web 297
P.
Parkers Case 7 Penns Case ibid. Priddle against Napper 25 Powis against Bowen
29 Parkers Case 37 Petty against Evans 40 Pyat against the Lady Saint-John 56
Portington against Rogers 65 Pits against Dowse 74 Petoes Case 75 Patrick
against Lowre 101 Prowse against Worthing 103 Peto against Checy and Sherman,
and their Wives. 128 Peacock against S George Reynel 151 Proctor against
Johnson 212 Pain and Mutton 276
R.
Robotham and Trevor 11 Reyner against Powell 42, 76 Rowles against Mason 85,
192 Robinsons Case 271 Rivit against Down 279 Read against Fisher 297 Rutlage
against Clarke 308
S.
Symonds against Green 16 Sir William Chanceyes Case. 18 Sir John Watts 29 Sir
Edward Ashfeild 48 Styles against Baxter. 49 Sturgis against Deane 57 Sir
Richard Bulkley against Owen Wood 100 Sir Ed. Puncheon against Legate 137 Sir
Henry Rowles against Sir Robert Osborne and Margeret his Wife 169 Strobridge
against Fortescue and Barret 190 Sammer and Force 208 Styles Case 216 Stydson
against Glass 223 Simson and Waters 272 Smallman against Powes 291
T.
Tey against Cox 35 Tresham against Lamb 46 Trobervill against Brent 97 Tyrer
against Littleton 187 The Lord Rich against Frank 202 Trinity College Case.
243 The Town of Barwick 270 The Duke of Lenox Case 301
V.
Vivion against Wild 290
W.
Wagginer and Wood 9 Westons Case 11 Wallop against the Bishop of Exeter, and
Murrey Clark 45 Wickenden against Thomas 58 Weeks against Bathurst 102 Water
against the Deane and Chapter of Norwich 158 Warbrook and Griffin 254 Waggoner
against Fish 278 Waggoner against Fish Chamberlain of London 284
Y.
Yates and Rowles 207
THE SECOND PART OF BROWNLOWE'S REPORTS Containing diverse excellent Cases and
Resolutions in Law.
Lynche against Porter.
THE Plaintiff in Prohibition suggests that he Prohibition upon the statute
of 23. H. 8. Chap. 9.
inhabited in London, within the Diocese of the Bishop of London, and was
cyted to appear in the Court of the Arches, and was out of the Diocese of
London, without license of the Bishop of London, against the Statute of 23.
Henry 8. And upon the first motion, the Court gave rule to the Defendant to
show cause why the Prohibition should not be granted; and to hear the
Civilians, and to confer with them concerning the practice and expounding of
the Statute of 23. H. 8. Chap. 9. And at the day appointed, three several
Civilians came into the Court, and were heard according to the former Order:
and they say, that they use to cite any Inhabitant that inhabits in London to
appear, and to make answer in the Arches originally; for the mischief that the
Statute of 23. H. 8. intends to prevent, was, that those which inhabit in
Dioces remote from London, should not be sued here without license from the
Ordinary; but this mischief was not in this case. And Doctor Martin says,
that so it was used by the space of 427. years before the making of the
Statute, and then was complaint made thereof to the Pope, and he was answered,
that it was the use that any man might be cyted to the Arches out of any
Diocese in England: and also that the Archbishop may hold his Consistory in
any Diocese within his Jurisdiction and Province: And also that the
Archbishop has concurrent Jurisdiction in the Diocese of every Bishop as well
as the Archdeacon. And then, if the suit be first begun in the Court of the
Archbishop, or the Bishop, or Archdeacon, it ought to be there determined
where it had its beginning, and shall not be inhibited: And then it was
objected by Cook, chief Justice, that the Statute of 23. H. 8. was affirmed by
Canon 94. And this shows the agreement of the Civilians with the said
Statute. And to this Doctor Martin answered, that the said Canon was made in
the vacancy of the Church of Canterbury, for the Sea of the Archbishopric was
then void: and also he said, that the Archbishop of Canterbury prescribes to
hold plea of all things, and of all persons in England: And the Pope has no
power to make Canons against the Law, nor against any Custom or Prescription;
and for this it shall be void, and that shall not bind the Archbishop which is
against the said prescription; and also it seems to the Civilians, that the
exposition of the said Statute being the Ecclesiastical Statute appointed to
them: And also it was said by them, that this detracts from the Archbishops
Jurisdiction against the custom of the Realm, and every Subject has interest
in that: And also that the Bishop takes notice, that they hold plea of the said
cause, and took no exception, and that made a sufficient assent, and amounted
to a license in Law, and so concluded that a prohibition ought not to be
granted in this Case. Coke, chief Justice says, that the Mischeife which the
Statute of 23. H. 8. was not only to prevent the mischeife that those which
inhabited in places remote from London, should not be cyted to come to the
Court of the Archbishop, but also to give to them other privileges, which by
the Law they ought to have, that is, the Appeal that they loose by the
beginning of the Suit in the Arches; for they may appeal from the Ordinary
after the suit begun here to the Archbishop; which benefit is lost if the suit
be begun before the Archbishop originally: and for that the Inhabitants in
London are as well within the Mischeife as the body of the Act of 23. H. 8. And
also that at the making of the said Canon, the Archbishop of Canterbury which
late was, had the Jurisdiction of the same then committed unto him, he then
being Bishop of London: So that upon the matter he was Archbishop of
Canterbury, so that the unity of the Sea of Canterbury shall not be avoidance
of the said Canon; and he agreed that a Canon against Statute Law, or Common
Law, or any Custom, shall not bind the Subject; and agreed, that so it had
been adjudged in this Court. But he denied that the exposition of any Statute
belonged to the Ecclesiastical Court; for the Statute is mere temporal,
though it concern spiritual things, and it shall be expounded according to the
Rules of the common Law, see 5. Edw. 4. Keasors Case: And so concludes that
this suit was against the Statute of 23. H. 8. For it ought to have its
beginning in the Court of the Bishop of London. And this exposition of the
Statute is made for the Defendant, 94. Canon, which was ex presly made against
the Court of Arches, and inflicts suspension (by the space of three months
upon the Judges which offend against it) from their Office, and awarded that
Prohibition shall be granted, and with that agreed Warburton and Foster,
Justices: but Walmsley Justice was of contrary opinion, that is, that no
Prohibition shall be granted by the Court of Common Pleas, but in case where
the Suit is there hanging. And this was objected also by the Civilians, And the
opinion of the Judges of the Kings Bench cited to prove it, but prohibition was
granted that notwithstanding. And to the objection that the Archbishop of
Canterbury may have a consistory in the diocese of every Bishop, this was
denied but only where he was the Popes Legate, and thenas Legate heshall have
Jurisdiction of all the Diocese of England, and it was agreed that there were
three sorts of Legates. First, Legates, a Latere, and these were Cardinals,
which were sent, A Latere from the Pope. The second, A Legate born, and these
were the Archbishops of Canterbury, York, and Ments, etc. And these said
Legates may cite any man out of any Diocese within their Provincial; then
there is a Legate given, and these have Authority by special commission from
the Pope.

Daringtons Case.
DAringtons Case, was cited before the high Commissioners Prohibition to the
High Commissioners*
of the King, for maintenance of the opinion of Brownisme, and for slandering
of one Mr. Eland a Minister, and also of the Judges of the Common Law, and was
sentenced, that for the first he should make his submission before the said
Commissioners, and also for the second that he should make submission to Mr.
Eland, and confess his offense to him, and pray that he will forgive him; and
so for the third also, that he should make submission, and that he shall be
committed to prison until he perform the said sentence, and put in security
that he will not here after make a Relaps in any of the said offenses; and
after he made submission for the first offense according to the sentence, and
upon complaint to this Court, Habeas Corpus was awarded to the Keeper of the
Prison, in which he was to bring in his Body, with the cause of his taking and
detaining, and he certified the causes aforesaid, but not the Submission; and
these were the causes of the taking and detaining of the said Darington, and it
was prayed by Sergeant Nicholls, that he might be delivered, and Coke chief
Justice said, that the Ordinary by the common Law, nor by the Statute, De
circumspecte aegatis, cannot imprison for any offense, though it be for
Heresy, Schism, or other erroneous crime whatsoever, and then by the Statute
of 5. R. 2. chapter 5. 2. Statute. It was awarded that Commissions should be
directed to the Sheriffs and others, to apprehend such which should be
certified by the Prelates to be Preachers of the Heresy; and the Favorers,
Maintainers, and abettors, to keep them in strong Prison, until they will
justify themselves by the Law of the holy Church: But this was repealed; by, 5
Ed. 6. 12. And 1 Eliz. 1. And also by the Statute of, 2 H. 4. 15. It was
ordained that none shall preach or write any book contrary to the Catholic
faith, or determination of holy Church, nor shall make any conventicles of such
Sects and wicked Doctrines, nor shall favor such preachers: Every Ordinary may
convent before him any person suspect of Heresy. An obstinate Heretic shall
be burned in an open place before the People, and this Statute was also
repealed by, 25 H. 8. And 1 Eliz. 1. By express words, and then by the Statute
of, 1. H. 7. 4. Power is given to all Archbishops, Bishops, and other
Ordinaries having Ecclesiastical Jurisdictions, to commit Clarks, Priests,
etc. To Ward and Prison for Adultery, Fornication, Incest, or any other fleshly
Incontinency, there to abide for such time as shall be thought to their
discretions convenient for the quality and quantity of their Trespass, and these
were all the Statutes, which give Authority to the Ordinary to imprison any
man. And when the Statute of 1 Eliz. 1. Repealed the first two Statutes of 5 R.
2. 5. and 2 H. 4. 15. It was not the intent that these offenses should be
unpunished, but the Queen would not leave and trust the Bishop, which was but a
man, and when he is made Bishop cannot be removed with such general and
uncontrollable Power, and Authority, and for that this power and Authority was
transferred by the said Statute of 1 Eliz. 1. To high Commissioners, which the
Queen might countermand at her pleasure, and appoint new, and so it was
transferred from one to many, and this Stature did not intend to give other
Authority to high Commissioners to imprison any man, which the Ordinary
himself had not before the making of the Statute of 1 El. 1. And it was not
the intent of the makers of the said Statute and Act of 1 Eliz. To alter any
Laws, but to transfer the power of one to others, and it was resolved that for
working upon holy days, the party shall not be punished before the high
Commissioners, in Reimores Case, and it was also resolved in Symsones Case by
the Lord Anderson chief Justice of the Common place, and Glanvile, they then
being Justices of Assise in the same place, that a Pursivant came with a
Warrant of the high Commissioners to attach one by his Body for Adultery, in a
lay man's house, and was s^ain, with great deliberation and conference had with
the other Judges, that that was no Murder, but Manslaughter, for they could
not attach the Body of any man, but ought to proceed by citation, and
excommunication: But it was agreed that they might imprison for Brownisme, for
that was Herezie, besides he maintaind that if the King do not govern his
subjects as he ought, that his Subjects may and ought to depose him, and other
such abominable opinions, and further that he might fine for that, and he said
that one Elyas Brown was hanged for that in the time of the last Queen, and for
that, that it does not appear by the return that Darington has himself
conformed, they could not deliver him, for they ought to give credit to the
return, according to 9 H. 6. 46. be it true or not, and if it be not true, the
party may have his action against the officer which does it, and it was
adjudged in Fullers Case in the Kings Bench that the high Commissioners may
imprison and impose a fine for Heresy and Schism, and it was also resolved
that Poligamy before the Statute of the 3. of King James, was punishable before
the high Commissioners, for this was an heinous crime, otherwise the Statute
would not have made it Felony, and he said that it was agreed in the time of
the last Queen Elizabeth, that the high Commissioners should not meddle with
any thing but only those five, that is, Heresy, Schism, Poligamy, Incest, and
Recusancy, and with no others, and it was moved that a Writ, De causione
admittenda, lies, for that they would not allow of the submissions. And the
Justices would consider of that, and the Prisoner was remanded, and it was
adjourned.

And at an other day it was moved by Nicholls Sergeant, that the high
Commissioners supposed, for that that the Statute of 5. El. gives authority to
the Queen, and to her heirs and successors, to grant Commission to Visit,
Reform, Redress, Order, Correct, and amend, all Errors, Heresies, Schisms,
Abuses, Offenses, Contempts, and Enormities whatsoever; and that the
Commissioners may execute all the premises according to the Tenure and effect
of the said Letters Patents, that by that they might fine and imprison at their
pleasure. But Coke chief Justice said, that it appears by the preamble of the
said Statute, that after the Statute was in the ^5. year of the Reign of King
Henry the 8. by which the ancient Jurisdictions, Authorities superiorities, and
Prehemenences, were united or restored to the Crown, and by means of the said
Statute, his Subjects were continually kept in good order, and were
d^sburthened of diverse great and intolerable charges and exactions, before
that time unlawfully taken and exacted, until such time as the said Statute of
25. H. 8. was repealed by the Statute of 1. and 2. of Phillip and Mary, which
said Statute of 1. and 2, of Phillip and Mary, should be repealed and void, by
which it appears, that the Kings Subjects, were greviously burdened with
grevious and intolerable charges and exactions, and yet in this time of
usurped power of the Pope, does not challenge that he might Commit, or
Imprison, or Fine in any case, but in the cases especially mentioned in the
last Case aforesaid, and for that all the usurped power was annexed to the
Imperial Crown, the which he called the clause of annexing, the second was the
clause of deputation, and this was the clause of the Statute, by which the
Queen has power to grant Commission to such persons being natural borne
Subjects, as her Majesty, her Heirs, or Successors, shall think fit, to
Exercise, Use, and Execute, under her Majesty, all manner of Jurisdictons,
Privelidges, and Preheminences, in any wise touching or concerning any
spiritual Jurisdiction in all her Majesty's Dominions, and to Visit, Reform,
Redress, Order, Correct, and amend all such Errors, Heresies, Schisms,
Abuses, Offenses, Contemps, and Enormities whatsoever, which by any manner
spiritual or Ecclesiastical power, authority, or Jurisdictions, can or may be
lawful Reformed, Ordered, Redressed, Corrected, Restrained: or amended, and
the third he calls the clause of execution, by which power and authority is
given to the Commissioners to Exercise, Use, and execute all the premises
according to the Tenure and effect of the said Letters Patents. And it seems it
was not the intention of the Statute, to give any power to the Commissioners,
which was not given to the Queen by this Statute, for the clause of deputation
shall not be more ample then the clause of annextion, and then the clause of
execution refers to the first too clauses, as it appears by the words of that
(that is) to use and execute all the premises according to the said Letters
Patents, and the premises are expounded by the first clauses, that is, Errors,
Heresies, Schisms, etc. And the said Letters Patents, refer all Letters
Patents before mentioned, where the persons are appointed to be natural borne
Subjects, and the material manner of Jurisdictions, Privileges, and
Preheminences, Ecclesiastical, Siprituall, and to Visit, Reform, Order,
Redress, Correct, and Amend, all such Errors Heresies, etc. Which by any
manner of spiritual or Ecclesiastical, Power, Authority, or Jurisdiction, can
or may lawfully be Reformed, Redressed, Ordered, Corrected, Restrained or
Amended, etc. So that it cannot be intended that they may proceed in any other
form, but only according to the Ecclesiastical power and Jurisdiction and no
other, for otherwise they may Fine, Imprison, and ransom any man at their
pleasures, which was never intended by the makers of the said Statutes. But
only to transfer the Power and Authority, which at that time was in the
Bishops, which then were Papists to the high Comissioners; the which the King
may alter at his pleasure, and so he cannot the Bishops, for they are nor
displaceable after their consecration.

Michaelmas, 8. Jacobi, 1610. in the Common Place.
A Man was cited before the High Commissioners for Poligamy, High Commission.
which was agreed to be a cause examinable and punishable there: and upon
examination of the Cause, the Defendant was acquit, and yet he was censured to
pay costs, though that he was acquitted of the Crime: and this Court was moved
for a Prohibition, and it was denied; for they may hold plea of Principal, and
then Prohibition shall not be granted for the accessory: and the Lord Coke
said, that they have just cause of lawfulness of punishing the offense, though
they have not just cause of the Deed, and peradventure it was very suspicious
that he was guilty, and for that he has only God for his revenger.

Parkers Case.
THree were cyted to appear in the Court at Chester for Tenths, Prohibition.
and treble damages demanded: and also in the Libell it is suggested, that the
Land is barren, and very unfruitful, and Prohibition Joint prohibitions and
several Counts.
was awarded against those jointly; and yet it was agreed, that they ought to
count upon the Prohibition severally.

Penns Case.
PEnn Parson of Ryton in the County of Warwick, sued for Tithes Prohibition
upon the statute of Symony, upon the stat. of 31. Eliz.
in the Ecclesiastical Court before the Ordinary, and the Defendant here
pleads that the same Parson was presented upon a Symonicall contract, and for
that his Presentation, Admission, and Institution were void, by the Statute of
31. Eliz. And the Symony was for that, that it was agreed between the said
Parson and another man, that was Brother to the Bishop of Lichfield and
Coventry, who was Patron of the same Church; That if he should procure three
several grants of three several next avoydances, to them severally granted,
to surrender their said several grants, and procure the said Bishop to present
him when the Church became void (that being then full of an old Parson being
deadly sick) that he would make to him a lease of parcel of the Tithes of his
Rectory: And the brother of the said Bishop procured the said Grantees to
surrender their several grants accordingly (the Church being then full.) And
also after when the Church became void, he procured the said Bishop to present
him according to the first contract, and then the said Penn made a lease to him
of the Tenths, and after sued others of his neighbors in the spiritual Court
for tithes, who pleaded the said Symoniacall contract, and here Nicholls
Sergeant suggested, that the Judges Ecclesiastical would not allow of this
Plea there, but the Court would not give credit to this suggestion, but said,
that if the Ecclesiastical Court make exposition of the Statute of, 31 H. 8.
Against the intent of it, that then they would grant a Prohibition, or if they
should in verity deny to allow of this Plea, and for that advised him that his
Clyent might offer this Plea another time to them, and if they denied to grant
that, they would grant a Prohibition.

Hurrey against Boyer.
IN Prohibition awarded in the spiritual Court for stay of a Suit Prohibition
upon the Statute of, 32 H. 8. for the dissolution of the Hospital of Saint
John's of Jerusalem.
there for tithes of Lands which were the possessions of the Hospital of S.
John's of Jerusalem, upon suggestion that the Prior of the said dissolved house
of S. John's had this privilege from Rome which was by diverse Counsels and
Canons, that is, that the Lands of their Predecessors which by their own hands
and costs they did till, they were tied to pay no tithes, and then by the
Statute of 31 H. 8. chap. 18. Of dissolutions which was pleaded, but agreed
that this Hospital was not dissolved by this Act but by a special act made,
32. H. 8. chapter 24. By which their Corporation and Order was dissolved, and
their possessions given to the King, with all the Privileges and Immunities
belonging to that, and the King granted that to the Plaintiff in the
prohibition, and if he should hold them discharged of payment of Tithes, was
the question; it was urged by Harris Sergeant that this Immunity was annexed to
the corporation of the Prior and his Brethren of the said Hospital, and that
that was determined by the dissolution of the said Hospital, and does not come
to the King, and he says, that so it has been adjudged in the Kings Bench,
against the Book of 10. Eliz. Dyer 277. 60. 2. Coke the Bishop of Winchesters
Case 14. B. And the Archbishop of Canterburies Case, 47. B. And 18. Eliz. Dyer
349. 16. And he said, that it was not given to the King by the Statute of, 31
H. 8. of dissolutions, for that was given by act of parliament, and this was
not intended by the Statute of 31. H. 8. As it appears by the Archbishop of
Canterburies Case: Nicholls Sergeant argued to the contrary: And he cited a
Cannon made by the Council of Mag. and another made by Innocent the third, In
the year 1215. And diverse others, and also the Statute of, 2. Hen. 4. 4. And 7
Hen. 4. 6. And he said that the Pope had Authority amongst spiritual men, and
might grant to them freedoms of special things; and he says, that if Land be
discharged of payment of Tithes by prescription of not tithing, and this Land
came to the King, yet this privilege remains, and also he urged, that these
privileges are given to the King by the Statute of, 31 H. 8. Of dissolutions,
by which all Hospitalls, as well dissolved, lost, surrendered, granted, or, etc.
To the King, as those hospitalls which should be dissolved, lost, etc. And by
this the possessions, lands, etc. are given to the King in the same plite and
case, as they were in the hands of the hospitallers themselves; and he affirmed
the Book of 10. Eliz. Dyer 277. 60. To be good Law, and the Archbishops of
Canterburies case 2. Coke 47. b. and the Bishop of Winchesters case 44. b. and
18. Eliz. Dyer. 349. 16. and also the words of the Statute of 32. H. 8. 24.
gives to the King, not only the manors, houses, etc. but also all Liberties,
Franchises, and Privileges, of what natures, names, or qualities soever they
be, appertaining or belonging to the said Religion or the Professors thereof,
by which he intends that this freedom to be discharged of tithes, and so
concludes that the Prohibition shall stand, see the rest after, Easter 9.
Jacobi.

Forde versus pomroy.
UPon a Prohibition the case was this. An unmaried woman For not setting forth
Tithes.
being proprietor of a Parsonage, took to a Husband, a Parishoner within the
Parish, set forth and divided his tithes, and those immeadiatly took back,
and the Husband alone sued for the treble value, according to the Statute of
the 2. Ed. 6. And two points were moved. First, if that were a setting forth
within the Statute, and by the Court that it was not, and so has been adjudged
Husband sue only.
in 43. and 45. of Eliz. and 1. Jacobi, If the Husband may sue for the treble
value without naming his Wife, and to that the Court would be advised, for
though, that the Husband may sue alone where a thing is personal, for which he
sueth, as the books of 4. Ed. 4. 31. 7. Ed. 4. 6. 15. Ed. 4. 5. and 11. are;
yet where the Statute says, that the Proprietor shall have suit for the not
setting forth, etc. The Husband is not intended Proprietor as the Statute
intends, but the Wife, and for that the Wife ought to join, see more.

Wagginer and Wood, Pasche 8. Jacobi, in the Kings bench.
WAgginer sued Wood in the Court of Requests, for that, that Prohibition to the
Cort of Requests.
Wood had estopped his way, and in the Bill of complaint, there was no express
of the place, the County, nor to what place the way did lead, and for that it
was demurred to the Bill there. And notwithstanding they ordered the defendant
Wood to answer, and the Attorney came and moved the Court for a Prohibition,
and it was granted to him, for they could not determine the right of a way.

Glover and Wendham.
HEndyn of Grayes Inn, moved the Court for a Prohibition, Against Forreiner
for Ornaments for the Church and for Sextons wages.
and the case was this. A man dwelling in a Parish, that is, Dale, has land in
his occupation in the Parish of Sale, the Wardens of the Church of the Parish
of Sale, and other the Parishoners there make a Tax, for the reparation of the
Church, for Church ornaments, and for Sextons wages, amounting to the sum of 23
l. And the Tax of the Church being deducted, comes but to 3 l. only. And now
the forreigner which dwells in Dale, is sued in the Court Christian, by the
wardens of the Church of Sale, for his part of the Tax; and he prays
Prohibition: and Hendyn says he well agreed the case of Jefferies 5. Coke,
that he should be charged if this Tax had been for the reparation of the Church
only: for this is in nature real. But when that is joined with other things,
which are in nature personal; as ornaments of the Church, or Sextons wages,
with which as it seems he is not chargable, then Prohibition lies for all;
Flemming chief Justice: and Williams Justice, thought fit that he should not
have a Prohibition: for as well the reparations of the Church as the ornaments
of that, are merely spiritual, with which this Court has nothing to do, and:
Flemming said, that such Tax is not any charge issuing out of Land as a rent,
but every person is taxed according to the value of the land, but Yelverton and
Fenner to the contrary, that a Prohibition did lie; for the same diversity
which has been conceived at the Bar; and also they said that he which dwells
in another Parish does not intend to have benefit by the ornaments of the
Church, or for the Sextons wages, and for that it was agreed by all, by the
chief Justice; Williams, and the others, that if Tax be made for the reparation
of Seats of the Church, that a forrainer shall not be taxed for that, because
he has no benefit by them in particular, and the Court would advise.

Michaelmas, 8. Jacobi, in banco Regis.
HEnry Yelverton moved the Court for a Prohibition to the Admiralty Admiralty.
Court: and the case was, there was a bargain made between two Merchants in
France; and for not performance of this bargain, one libelled against the other
in the Admiralty Court. And upon the Libell it appeared that the bargain was
made in Marcellis in France, and so not upon the deep Sea; and by consequence
the Court of Admiralty had nothing to do with it, and Flemming chief Justice
would not grant Prohibition; for though the Admiralty Court has nothing to do
with this matter, yet insomuch as this Court cannot hold plea of that (the
contract being made in France) no Prohibition; but Yelverton and Williams,
Justices, to the contrary; for the bargain may be supposed to be made at
Marcellis in Kent, or Norfolk, or other County within England, and so tryable
before us: and it was said, that there were many presidents to that purpose,
and day Contract for retaining of Tithes.
given to search for them. Note, upon a motion for a Prohibition; that if a
Parson contract with me by word, for keeping back my own tithes for 3. or 4.
years, this is a good bargain by way of Retayner; and if he sue me for my
Tithes in the Ecclesiastical Court, I shall have a Prohibition upon this
Composition. But if he grant to me the Tithes of another, though it be but for
a year, this is not good, unless it be by Deed, see afterward.

Westons Case.
A Merchant has a Ship taken by a Spaniard, being Enemy, and a month after an
English Merchant with a Ship called little Richard, Admiralty.
retakes it from the Spanyard, and the owner of the Ship sueth for that in the
Admiralty Court. And Prohibition was granted, because the Ship was gained by
Battle of an Enemy, and neither the King nor the Admiral, nor the parties to
whom the property was before shall have that, according to 7 Ed. 4. 14. See 2.
and 3. Phillip and Mary, Dyer 128. b.

Michael. 8. Jacobi. 1610. in the Kings Bench.
A Man sues an Executor for a Legacy in the Spiritual Court, Prohibition.
where the Executor becomes bound by his deed obligatory to the party, to pay
that at a certain day, before which this suit was begun in the Spiritual
Court; and the Executor moved for a Prohibition, and it was granted, for the
Legacy is extinct: but by Williams, if the Bond had been made to a stranger,
the Legacy is not extinct, Fenner seemed that it was so.

Hillary, 1610. 8. Jacobi, in the Kings Bench. Robotham and Trevor.
THe Bishop of Landaff granted the Office of his Chancellor-ship At the Archess
discussed in right of Office.
to Doctor Trevor, and one Griffin, to be exercised by them, either jointly or
severally: and it was informed by Sergeant Nicols, that Dr. Trevor for 350. l.
released all his right in the said Office to Griffin, so that Griffin was the
sole Officer, and after died: and that after that the Bishop granted the same
Office to one Robotham, being a Practitioner in the Civil Law, for his life:
And that Doctor Trevor surmising that he himself was the sole Officer by
survivor-ship, made Doctor Lloyd his Substitute to execute the said Office for
him, and for that, that he was disturbed by Robotham, the said Doctor Trevor
being Substitute to the Judge of the-Arches, granted an Inhibition to inhibite
the said Robotham for the executing of the said Office, and the Libell
contains, That one Robotham hindered and disturbed Doctor Lloyd, so that he
could not execute the said Office. And against this proceeding in the Arches, a
Prohibition was prayed, and day was given to Doctor Trevor to show cause for
why it should not be granted: And they urged that the Office was spiritual,
and for that the discussing of the Right of that appertains to the
Ecclesiastical Courts: But all the Judges agreed, That though the Office was
Spiritual, to the exercising of that, yet to the Right it was Temporal, and
shall be tried at the Common Law, for the Party bath a Freehold in this, see
4. and 5. of Phil. and Mary, Dyer, 152. 9. Hunts Case, for the Office of the
Register in the Admiralty, and an Assize brought for that: and so the chief
Justice says, which was adjudged in the Kings Bench, for the Office of the
Register to the Bishop of Norwich, between Skinner and Mynga, which ought to be
tried at the Common Law. And so Blackleeches Case, as Warberton says, in this
Court for the Office of Chancellor to the Bishop of Gloucester, which was all
one with the Principal case. And they said that the Office of Chancellor is
within the statute of Edw. 6. for buying of Offices. And Warberton also cited
the case of 22. H. 6. where action upon the case was maintained, for not
maintaining of a Chaplain of the Chamber in the private Chapel of the
Plaintiff very well, though it was spiritual, for the Plaintiff has
inheritance in that. But if it had been a parochial Church, otherwise it shall
be for the infiniteness of the Suits, for then every Parishoner may have his
action. And so in manner of Tything, the prescription is temporal, and this is
the cause which shall be tried at the Common Law, and Prohibition was granted
according to the first Rule.

Hillary 8. Jacobi, in the Common Bench.
AN Attorney of the Kings Bench was sued in the Arches for a Legacy,
Prohibition.
being Executor, as it seems, and it was urged that he inhabited in the
Diocese of Peterborough: And for that, that he was here remaining in London in
the Term time, he was sued here, and upon that a Prohibition was prayed, and
it was granted accordingly; For as the Lord Coke said, Though that he were
remaining here, yet he was resident and dwelling within the Jurisdiction of the
Bishop of Peterborough, and he said that if one Lawyer comes and remains
during the Term in an Inn of Court, or one Attorney in an Inn of Chancery,
but dwells in the Country in another Diocese, he shall not be sued in the
Arches,

Master, Brothers, and Governors of Trinity House against Boreman.
THe Master, Brothers, and Governors of Trinity House sue in the Admiralty for
staying ships for Ballast.
Admiralty Court one Boreman, for that, that where Queen Elizabeth by her
Letters Patents under the great Seal of England, bearing date the 36. year of
her Reign, had granted to them the ballasting of all Ships within the Bridge of
London and the Sea, and that no Ship shall take any ballast of any other but of
them: And for that that the said Boreman has received Ballast of another
within the place aforesaid, he was sued in the Admiralty Court. And upon that
Prohibition was prayed; and day being given to hear both parties, the Master of
Trinity-house came into the Court, and the Judges demanded of him for what end
the said Suit was there begun, if it were to have the Defendant in Prison, or
to have recompense, or for other purpose. But he could not give any answer to
that: and upon that the Judges saying, that the place being alleged to be at
Ratcliffe, is within the body of the County without question, and for that* for
the place, shall be tried at the common Law. Secondly, the Great Seal and
Letters Patents of the King shall be expounded according to the course of the
common Law, and the Admiralty cannot punish by Imprisonment, pecuniary
punishment, nor otherwise. Thirdly, the Letters Patents are void, for, for that
one charge is raised upon the Subject for the private gain of this private
house; for they would not ballast any Ship under 2 d. for every tun of Ballast:
But if the Letters Patents have been made for public good, peradventure they
had been good, but a Prohibition was granted. Note that the said Boreman was a
Dutchman, and his two Ships were arrested and stayed by the Admiralls Warrant
out of the said Court, so that he was enforced to find sureties to answer to
the said suit, before he could have his Ships at liberty.

Huntley against Cage.
HEnry Huntly was Plaintiff in the high commission Court against High
Commissioners and their power in Ministering O^th and taking obligation.
Mary Clifford Widow Defendant, Huntley pretends that he was contracted to the
Defendant, and upon that complains to the high Court of Commissioners, and
that she would marry her self to Cage, and upon that the Archbishop then did
grant a Warrant to a Pursivant to attach Cage, and the said Mary Clifford, and
upon that they were arrested by force of the said Warrant, and upon that they
were committed to Prison, and being imprisoned, an obligation of 2000 l. was
taken by the said Commissioners of the said Mary Clifford, by which she was
bound to the King with condition, that she should not marry her self, nor
contract to any other, until the same suit was determined in the same Court,
and also to appear before the Judge of the Arches within nine days, after
notice of that given.

And then being dwelling in H^lborn, after that Sir William Armstrodder
obtained the said obligation of the King, pretending that that was forfeited;
for that, that the said Mary Clifford had married her self to Cage, before that
the said suite was ended and determined. And upon that the said Mary Clifford
was another time cited before the high Commissioners, and a suit was there
promoted against her (Ex officio) by Serle the Kings Proctor, also had the 4th
part of all fines and forfeitures which grew to the King by reason of the
Ecclesiastical Courts; and then was articled against her; first, that she was
married or contracted to Cage, and to that she refused to answer, for that,
that it was the direct question upon which the forfeiture of the Bond depended,
and then this Article was referred to some Doctors, who upon consideration
seemed that the Article ought to be reformed, and upon that the Article was
made that she lived single and unmarried in a house with the said Cage, which
was as much as the first, for she could not make any direct answer to that,
without discovering whether the Bond were forfeited or not, and upon all this
matter a Prohibition was prayed to the high commission Court, for the said Mary
Clifford. And all the Justices, that is, Coke chief Justice, Walmesley,
Warburton and Foster agreed that the Obligation was void, for that it was taken
by duresse of imprisonment, for they can not imprison any. Secondly that they
ought not to examine any man upon his oath, to make him to betray himself, and
to incur any penalty pecu^iary or corporal, and Foster cited a Judgment in the
Exchequer, in Ralph Bows Case, where an English Bill was exhibited against one
for bringing into England, Cards without license, and one which had a Monopoly
upon that exhibited the said Bill, and upon that the Defendant demurred in Law
upon that, and it was agreed that the Defendant shall not be compelled to
answer to that upon his Oath, for that, that he had then incurred the danger of
a penal Statute. Thirdly that they cannot take any obligation, by which a man
shall be bound to appear in another Court, but only in the Court where the
obligation is taken, no more then the Judges of this Court may take obligation
of any man to appear before the Council in the North: And Walmesley also
seemed, that these high Commissioners ought to meddle only with things of the
most high nature, and not of things which concern Matrimony, and the ordinary
Jurisdiction, and Coke said that the high Commissioners cannot meddle with any
civil causes betwixt party and party, as keeping back tithes, or not payment
of a Legacy, and lawfullnesse of Marriage, but the causes with which they
intermeddle ought to be criminal, for otherwise they dissolve all ordinary
Jurisdiction, and by their sentence every man shall be concluded, for he cannot
appeal nor have any other remedy, and also he said that in civil causes, the
high Commissioners, cannot send a Pursivant to arrest any man by his Body, for
that was adjudged in Humptons Case, 42. Eliz. By Anderson and his companion,
Judges in their circuit in the County of Northampton, with conference had with
all the Judges of England, where the case was, a Pursivant having a warrant to
arrest the body of one for Incontinency, and to have him before the high
Commissioners, and a Constable came in aid of the said Pursivant in Execution
of his warrant, and was slain, and was adjudged as before, that it was no
Murder, and the reason was, for that, that the high Commissioners cannot award
any warrant or process to arrest the Body of any man, but if the warrant had
been lawfully awarded, it was agreed that it should be murder, but as this case
was, it was resolved to be but Manslaughter, and also he said they cannot take
in civil causes, where they have no Jurisdiction, but in criminal causes
where they have Jurisdiction, it seems they may take obligation as the case
requires.

But he would not dispute that nor affirm nor disaffirm it, but as the
principal case was, the obligation was made by Duresse, and so it may be
avoided, and also he seemed that they could not examine any lay man upon his
Oath, But in causes Matrimonial and Testamentary, and he said that so was the
common Law before the making of that Statute of Articulis cleri. as it appears
by a Canon made by Ottamon which was a Legate A Latere from the Pope in the 22
H. 3. and Canonical, by which is recited, that where such were drawn in
length, because that lay men were examined upon their Oaths, and therefore it
was provided that lay men should be examined upon their Oaths, although it did
not concern causes Testamentary nor Matrimonial, the custom of England to the
contrary thereof notwithstanding, see Fitzherberts Natura brevium 41. a.
Cromptons Justice of Peace fol. 59. b. Register 36, b. and Hyndes Case 18.
Eliz. or the Margin in Scrogs case Dyer 175. b. So also Lamberts Justice of
Peace, that those things are to be given in Charge by the Justice of Assise,
and Coke says that the Writ in the Register was framed before the Statute of
Articuli cleri. And also he cited one Lees Case, who was committed for hearing
of a Mass, and refused to be examined upon that upon his Oath, and had a
prohibition, and so he agreed that a Prohibition should be granted, and upon
that it was awarded accordingly.

Note that a Prohibition was granted to the high commission Court, for that,
that they examined the lawfullnesse of a Marryage.

Symonds against Green.
NOte one suit was before the high Commissioners, and 16. were brought by
Pursivants before them, for that that they were High Commission Clandestine
marriage.
present at a Clandestine marraige, and it was urged, that this was not to be
punished, by any inferior Ordinary, in any of their consistories; for the
contract was made in the Diocese of the Bishop of Worcester, and the marriage
in the Diocese of Gloucester, and the Priest which married them, inhabited in
the Diocese of Oxford. And yet Prohibition was awarded, and the Justices were
of the opinion, that every of them, for which the Pursivant was sent, might
have an action of false imprisonment against him, for they cannot use any other
process but cytation only.

Admiral Court.
NOte that it was urged by Haugton, that the intent of the Admiralty Co^rt, if
a thing done beyond Sea shall be there tried.
Statute of 13, R. 2. chapter 5. Was not to Inhibite the Admiral Court, to
hold Plea of any thing made beyond Sea, but only of things made within the
Realm, which pertaines to the common Law, and is not in prejudice of the King
or common Law, if he hold plea over the Sea; and that this was the intent of
the Statute appears by the preamble. But to this Coke says, that the office
of the Admiral was an ancient office, though it has been otherwise conceived
by some, for he has seen Records and Libells and proceedings in the time of
King John, where he was called Marina Anglie, in the time of Ed. 3. And also he
said that the words of the Statute are in the negative. That is, that the
Admiral nor his Deputy, do not meddle from henceforth of any thing done
within the Realm, but only or things done upon the Sea; and he said that it
was adjudged in one Wrights case, that a thing made at Constanticople shall
notbe tried in the Admiralty, for itought to be made upon the deep Sea,
otherwise they shall hold no trial of that, see 48. or 50. of Ed. 3. 2 Ed. 2 F,
obligation, and if a man be slain or murdered beyond Sea, the offender shall
not be punished in the Admiralty: Walmesly and Warburton Justices, agree, that
if a thing be done beyond the Sea, and may be tried by the common law, there
the admiral Court shall have no Jurisdiction. But if an obligation bears date
beyond Sea, or be so local that it cannot be tried by the common law there, if
the Admiral hold Plea of that, Prohibition shall not be awarded, for it is not
to the prejudice of the King, nor of the common law. But if the party can have
his remedy by the common law, the common law shall be preferred. And if at the
common law one matter comes in question upon a conveyance, or other Instrument
made beyond Sea: according to the course of the civil law, or other law of the
Nations where it was made; the Judges ought to consult with the Civilians or
others which are expert in the same law; and according to their information,
give Judgment, though that it be made in such form, that the common law
cannot make any construction of it.

Michaelmas 8. Jacobi 1610. in the common Bench.
IF a Parson agree and contract withme, that I shall keep back my own Agreement
by word ^p back tithes.
tithes if that be made after that I have sown my Corn, and for the same year
only, this shall be good: and if the Parson sue in the spiritual Court for
tithes, I shall have a prohibition; but if it be for more years then one or
before the Corn be sowed, this shall not be good, by Coke and Foster against
Warburton, and Coke said it was adjudged in the Kings Bench in Parson Boothes
Case, that a contract made with a parishioner for keeping back of his tithes
for so many years as he shall be Parson, was not good, and so it was Wellowes
Case here also, but it was agreed by them all, that such a contract or
agreement for the tithes of any other was void, but only of the party himself,
which was party to agreement, and that ought to be made by way of keeping them
back. See before, Easter 8. of James, See 20 H. 6. and the 21. H. 7. 21. b.

Pasche 1611. 9. Jacobi in the Common Bench.
THE question was upon a motion to have a Prohibition to the Where a
Prohibition shall be granted without Action hanging.
President and Council of Wales, if that shall be granted without action
hanging. And Coke chief Justice said, that the Record of the book of 38. H.
6. agreed with the Report, and is witness, John Prisott, and 2. Ed. 4. Is
adjudged in the point; but yet he advised that there shall be information.
Walmesley Justice said that this is no action. But Coke, Foster, and Warburton
said, that it is an action fufficient, upon which a Prohibition shall be
granted, and Coke said, that if they hold Plea of a thing, out of their
Instructions; he would grant Prohibition without action hanging. But if they
proceed in erroneous manner, in a thing which is within their Instructions, he
would not grant Prohibition without action hanging, or Information.

Sir William Chanceys Case.
SIr William Chancey, was cited before the Ordinary of the Diocese of
Peterbrough, and sentenced to do Penance for Adultery; and this he commuted,
and after that he lived in Adultery High Commissioners Alimony, Adultery.
with one in his house, and had two Bastards by her, and continued in Adultery
with her for many years: and for that he was cited before the high
Commissioners, and for that, that he would not allow his wife competent
allimony; who had separated himself from her company, in respect that he lived
in Adultery, as aforesaid; and for that, that he refused to become bound to
perform the order and the sentence of the high Commissioners, he was committed
to the Fleet, and he prayed Habeas Corpus for his Enlargement, and also a
Prohibition to be directed to the high Commissioners; and it was moved by
Nicholls that fining is not Justifiable by the high Commissioners no more then
Imprisonment; he said that he was cited out of his Diocese against the Statute
of 23. H. 8. The which Statute is commanded to be put in execution by the Stat.
of 1 El. Secondly, the offense that is Adultry, is not an Enormious-crime, and
for that shall not be punished by the high Commissioners, as it appears By the
Statute of 1. El. But by the Ordinary. Thirdly, the high Commissioners by the
Stat. of 1 El. ought to observe the same course and order in their proceedings,
that the Ordinary used before the making of the Statute of 1. El. etc. That
they could not fine nor Imprison. But he agreed that the Statute 1 H. 7 gives
authority to the Ordinary to Imprison for Adultery, but then the person ought
to be Ecclesiastical, so that he agreed, if Sir William Chancey had been an
Ecclesiastical person, the Ordinary might Imprison him for Adultery, and for
Allimony they ought to give no remedy if the Husband would inhabit together
with his wife; as he said Sir William Chancey desired. But if the Husband
refuse to dwell together with his wife, or thrust her out of his house; and
will not suffer her to dwell with him, then the Ordinary may compel the
Husband to allow allimony for his wife; but the high Commissioners ought not to
proceed upon that, for this is no erroneous crime, for by that the party shall
loose his benefit of Appeal, which he has from the Ordinary, to the
Metrapolitan, for here the party cannot appeal to any, nor has any remedy. If
the Queen will grant Commission to reneue, and so he concluded that, for that
these matters appear upon the return of the Habeas Corpus to be the causes of
his commitment, he prayed that Sir William Chancey might be delivered out of
Prison: and prohibition of staying the proceedings of the high Commissioners.
Doderidge the Kings Sergeant for the case of Sir William Chancey argued that
the return consisted of two parts. That is, Adultery and Allimony, and to the
manner of the proceedings he would not speak; for he said that the Court had
ajudged, that the high Commissioners by the Statute of 1. Eliz. Ought not to
proceed upon any offenses, but those which are Enormious; but he intended that
the offense at the first was not Enormious, being but Adultery and Allimony,
yet when Sir William Chancey was sentenced for that before the Ordinary, and
then commuted his penance, and after that lived diverse years in Adultery with
two several women, and had two Bastards; and then he became Incorrigible, and
by consequence the offense is become Enormious, and is properly to be
determined before the high Commissioners, and so prayed he might be sent back,
and that no Prohibition should be granted; and at another day, Foster and
Warburton said, that the high Commissioners ought not to meddle with these
matters. Nor could not Fine nor Imprison for that: But Walmesley said that the
Statute of 1. Eliz. Has referred that to the discretion of the King, and the
King by his Commission, has given them power to medd^e with that; and also he
seemed that this was an Enormious crime for this is, against an express
commandment, that is. Thou shall not commit Adultery, and he intends there can
be no greater offense then that, and it seems to him that the word Enormious
ought not to be so expounded as it is expounded by the other Judges, that is,
an Exorbitant crime, but Enormious is where a thing is made without a rule or
against Law, for in every action ^f trespass the word is used (Et alia enormia
ei intulit) and yet these are not intended Exorbitant offenses, but other
trespasses of the nature of them, which are first expressed perticulerly, and
so the Statute has been expounded for many years, and to the Imprisonment he
said, that the high Commissioners have Imprisoned for the space of 20. years,
and though that the Statute does not give power to them to Imprison, yet this
is contained within the Letters Patents, and the statute has given power to
the King to give to them what authority he pleases by his Letters Patents, and
for that, that it has been used for so long a time he would not suddenly
alter that, but gave day till the beginning of the next Term for the argument
of that. Coke chief Justice said, that it was agreed by all that the
Imprisonment was unlawful: and if a Person be imprisoned which has the
Privilege of this Court, this Court may deliver him without Bail, for the
King is the supreme head by the Common Law, as to the coercive power, and that
the Letters Patents of the King cannot give power to imprison, where they
cannot imprison by the Common Law, and so it was adjudged in Sympsons Case, 42.
Eliz, Which was cited before the high Commissioners for adultery with Fists
Wife, and adjudged there that they cannot imprison for that; and he says that
an exposition with the time is the best, and for that see the ninth of Eliz.
Dyer, and the 18 of Eliz. And also it appears by the Statute of 5. Eliz. that
awards a (Capias excommunicatum) which could not be imprisoned before that, and
upon this Sir William Chancey was bayled; and after by meditation of the
Metrapolitan, he was reconciled to his wife, and this was the end of this
Business.

Pasch 9. Jacobi 1611. in the common Bench. As yet Urrey against Bowyer.
HVtton Sergeant argued for the Defendant, the question is, if lands which were
parcel of the Possessions of the Hospital of Saint John's of Jerusalem should
be discharged of tithes by the statute of 31. H. 8. or 32. H. 8. in the hands
of the Patentee, and he seemed that the privilege was personal and annexed to
persons of the said order; for it is confessed, that it came by reason of the
order of the Cestercians, as appears by the Canon: The words of which are;
that they should hold their lands, etc. Also it appears by the statute of 2.
H. 4. 4. That it is personal by which it was enacted, that the religious of
the order of Cestercians, that had purchased Bills to be discharged, to pay
tithes, should be in the state they were before; by which it appears that it
is annexed to their persons, and not to their lands, so that their Farmers
cannot take benefit of that, Secondly, the privilege was annexed to this order
by canon, which is a thing spiritual, and has no power to meddle with the
lands of any man, but the proceeding of that ought to be by inhibition, or
excommunication, see 11. H. 4. 47. 19. H. 6. 3. This privilege by the canon
which gives that, shall be taken strictly. And so is the opinion of their own
expositors, see Panormitan Canon 37. So that there is an apparent difference
between that and the lands, which came to the King by the statute of 31. H. 8.
For by that the King is discharged of payment of tithes, and so are his
Patentees. It seems to me, that the construction of the Cannon may be in
another course different from the rules of the common law as it was ajudged in
Buntings case; that a woman might sue a Divorce without naming her Husband very
well, and 11. H. 7. 9. The pleading of the sentence, or other act done in the
spiritual Court, differs from the pleading of a temporal act done in temporal
Courts, and 34 H. 6. 14. a, Administration was committed upon condition, that
if the first Administrator did not come into England, that he should have the
Administration, which is against the Common Law, for there one authority
countermands another: and 42 Ed. 3, 13. A Prior which has such privilege to
be discharged of Tithes, makes a Feoffment, and his Feoffee pays Tithes to the
Prior, and this was of Lands which were parcel of the possessions of Saint
John's of Jerusalem, and upon that he inferred that this privilege is
personal, and if it be so; it is determined by dissolution of the order as it
is determined in, 21 H 7. 4. That all Parsonages impropriate to them, by the
dissolutions are become prsentable and so of these which were annexed to the
Templers, for these shall not be transferred to Saint John's, though that the
Lands are 3 Ed. 1. 11. By Herle accordingly Fitz. Natura Brevium 33 K. and, 35.
H. 6. 56. Land given in Frankalmaine to Templers and after transferred to
Hospitallers of Saint John's, the privilege of the Tenure is paid, and so shall
it be in case of Tithes, being a personal privilege that shall not be
transferred to the King, and to the Statute of 32. H. 8. The general words of
that do not extend to discharge the Land of Tithes, though that the Statute
makes mention of Tithes, if there be not a special provision by the Statute
that the Lands shall be discharged, and this appears by the words of the
Statute of, 31, H. 8. where the general words are as general and beneficial
as the words of this Statute, and yet there is aspeciall provision for the
discharge of the payment of tithes, by which it appears that the general words
donot discharge that, and so the general words of 1 Ed. 6. are as larg and
beneficial as the general words of the Statute of 31 H. 8. And yet this shall
not discharge the Land of payment of Tithes, and this compared to the Case of
the Marquess of Winchester, of a writ of Error, that, that shall not be
transferred to the King by Attainder of Land in tail for treason by the
Statute of 26 H. 8. or 33 H. 8. And so of rights of action; and so it was
adjudged in the time of H. 8. that if the founder of an Abbey which has a
Corrody be attaint of Treason, the King shall not have the Corrody; and he
agreed that the Hospital of Saint John's of Jerusalem is a house of Religion
for this is agreed by Act of Parliament, and the word Religion mentioned in the
Statute more then seventeen times, and also it seems to him that the Statute of
31 H. 8 shall not extend to that, for this gives and establishes Lands which
come by grant, surrender, etc. And that shall not be intended those which come
by Act of Parliament, no more then the statute of 13 Eliz. extends to Bishops,
1. and 2. Phillip and Mary, Dyer, 109. 38. The statute of Westminster the 2.
chap. 41. Which gives (Contra formam collationis) to a common person, founder
of an Abbey, Priory, Hospital, or other house of religion, without speaking
expressly of a Bishop; and yet it seems that this extends to an alienation made
in Fee simple or Fee tail by the Bishop, 46 Ed. 3. Forfeiture 18. But it is
resolved in the Bishop of Canterburies Case, 2 Coke 46, that the statute of 31
H. 8. shall not extend to these lands which come to the K. by the statute of 1
Ed. 6. to make them exempt from paying of Tithes, and to the Case in 10. Eliz.
that is but an opinion conceived, and that the Prior has this privilege from
Rome, and that the Farmer shall pay Tithes, and the question was in the
Chancery; and upon consideration of the statute of, 31 H. 8. It seems that the
Patentee himself shall be discharged (as long as by his own hands he tills it)
and the statute of, 32. H. 8. Upon which the state of the question truly
consists, was not considered, and also it was not there judicially in question.
And to the case of Spurling against Graves in Prohibition, consultation was
granted, for that, that the statute was mistaken, and so the award was upon the
form of the pleading only, and not upon the matter, and so he concluded, and
prays consultation, Houghton Sergeant Houghton.
to the contrary, and he agreed that it is a personal privilege: and if the
Order of St. John's had been dissolved by death, that then the privilege shall
be determined, and this appears by the Stat. of 2. H. 4. 4. before cyted: and
also the case of 10. Eliz. Dyer, 277. 60. did doubt of that: but he relied upon
the manner and words of pleading; that is, that Hospitallers are not held to
pay Tithes, and it is as a real composition made betwixt the Lord and another
Spiritual person, of which the Tenants shall take advantage, as it is resolved
in the Bishop of Winchesters case. Also as if a man grant a Rent charge, if the
Grantee dye without Heir, the grant is determined: But if the Grantee grant
that over, and after dies without Heir, yet the Rent continues, 27. H. 8. Or if
Tenant in tail grant Rent in fee, and dies, the grant is void. But if he after
suffers a recovery, or makes a Feofment, the Rent continues good till the
Estate tail be recontinued, as it is resolved in Capels case. So here the
order of Templers has been determined by death, the privilege has been
determined, but insomuch that the Land was transferred by Parliament to the
King, this continues. Also the words of the Statute of 32. H. 8. are apt, not
only to transfer all the Interest which the Pryor had in his Lands, but also
his Privileges and Immunities to the King; and he agreed, it is not material
if the words Tithes are mentioned in the Statute or not. But the word upon
which he relyes, and which comprehends this case, is the word Privilege, which
takes away the Law; for where the Law binds them to pay Tithes, the privilege
discharges them: And the words of the Statute are taken in the most large
extent, that is, all Manors, etc. Privileges, Immunities, etc. of what
nature, etc. be they Ecclesiastical, or Temporal, which appertain and belong,
etc. by or in the right of their Religion; but the Privileges and Immunities
they have in the right of their Religion, and these the Statute of 32. H. 8.
gives to the King, and there is no cause that they should surmount, or that the
Statute should give to them more favor then the former Statute has given to
those religious houses which were dissolved by the Statute of 31. Eliz. For the
Hospitallers of S. John's were favorers and maintainers of the Popes
Jurisdictions as well as the others, as it appears by the Statute of 32. H. 8.
Also the words of 32. H. 8. has only the words of the King and his Successors,
and does not speak of his Assigns, which words are expressed in the Statute of
32. H. 8 But it is provided by 32. H. 8. that the King cannot use at his will
and pleasure, which amounts to so much. Also the Statute of 31. H. 8. extends
to all Religious houses by express words: and it shall not be intended, that
the intent of the makers of the statute was to omit that which were to be of
the Order of S. John's of Jerusalem, when the mischief was in equal degree. And
it has been agreed that they are religious persons, and that they were under
the obedience of the Pope, for so they are described in the statute of 17. R.
2. by which the possessions of the Templers was transferred to them, so that on
the matter they are religious, which shall not be intended so largely, as every
Christian may be said religious, but Secular, and Regular, which vow Obedience,
Chastity, and Poverty; and for the proof of this, he cyted a president. Also it
seems to him that the Statute of 30. H. 8. extends to those Lands which come to
the King by the statute of 32. H. 8. And it is not like to the Archbishop of
Canterburies case, 2 Coke, 47. upon the statute of 1. Ed. 6. For that Statute
gives the Lands to the King for other causes, and not for the same causes which
are contained in the Statute of 31. H. 8. But the Statute of 32. H. 8. is for
the same cause, and with the same respect to Religion. But if these Lands have
come to the King by Exchange, or by Attainder, then they shall not be intended
to be within the Statute of 31. H. 8. But if another Statute be made in 32. H.
8. by which all Religious houses have been given to the King, this shall be
intended within the Statute of 31. H. 8. And the Judges before whom the cause
depended judicially, ought not to be ignorant of that, and so he prayed that a
Prohibition might be. Shirley Sergeant for the Defendant, at another day in
Trinity Term 9. Jacobi, argued, that the question Shirley.
only depended upon the Statute of 32. H. 8. upon which the Prohibition is
founded with the Statute of 31. H. 8. by which the Lands of Monasteries are
given to the King, do not extend to those Lands which are given after by
Parliament. But he intented that the Constitution which discharges the Templers
of the payment of Tithes is spiritual, and extends only to spiritual persons
which may prescribe in not tything; see 38. Ed. 3. 6. 2 of Coke, the Bishop of
Winchesters Case, 44. Also he intended when an appropriation was made to the
Templers, that this is determined by dissolution of their Order. So upon the
Statute of H. 5. of Priors Aliens, which have Impropriations, or which have
Rent issuing out of them; and after the Impropriation is dissolved, the Rent is
gone, for the Impropriation is dissolved. Also he took exception to the
pleading, for that, that it is only a branch of the Statute of 32. H. 8. And
then by virtue of the premises he was seized, which is not good: and so he
concluded, that it was a good cause of demurrer upon the Prohibition, and
prayed consultation. Barker Sergeant for the Plaintiff seems the contrary, and
Barker.
yet he agreed, that he could not take benefit of the Statute of 31. H. 8. for
that, that these Lands came to the King by another Statute, but he relied upon
the words of the 32. H. 8. which was made only for the dissolution of the
Hospital of St. John's of Jerusalem, Tithes are as ancient as any thing that
the Church has, and before that any Law was written, for Abraham paid Tithes
to Melchisedeck, but it does not appear that he paid the tenth part; but
Tithes are due by the Judicial Law of God, and the King has power to appoint
what quantity shall be paid. But at the beginning there were Sacrifices,
Oblations, and Tithes And it was ordained by Edgar, King of this Realm, that
Tithes should be given to the Mother Church. Also Edmund, Ethelstone, William
the Conqueror, and the Council of Magans specially provided that Tithes
should be paid, but did not appoint when they should be paid. But the first Law
which appointed the quantity was made in the time of Edw. 1. and this ordained
when they ought to pay the Tenth with the fear of God. And it was resolved in
Fox and Cresbrooks case in the Commentaries, after severance they are
temporal, and Action lies against him which carries them away, as of Mortuary,
as it is resolved, 10. H. 4. 1. 6. And before the Council of Lateran, every
one might pay his Tithes to what person he would, and then were paid to
Monasteries as Oblations: But of Tithes which are due to any by prescription,
he which pays them has no such election, but ought to pay them to him which
claims them by prescription, 14. H. 4. 17. If a Parson of a Parish claim Tithes
in another Parish as portion of Tithes due by prescription to his Rectory, he
ought to show the place specially. So if Nunns prescribe to have a portion of
Tithes, they ought to show the place, for it is a question if they are
spiritual, or not; for their office is only to pray in their house, 24. Ed. 3.
So the book of Entries, if a man claim Tithes to his Pupil, he ought to show in
what place the Tithes lie, in the 17. Ed. 2. The order of the Templers was
dissolved, and their possessions annexed to St. John's of Jerusalem: and they
did not claim by any Bull of the Pope, nor other spiritual Canon but by
prescription, which is privilege and private Common law, and this appears by
the Statute of Westminster, 2 Chap. 47. That is, that they are conservators of
his privileges. Also he says, that the Statute of 2. H. 4. discharges Farmers
without speaking of Privileges. And the Statute of 7. H. 4. 6. uses the same
words which are contained in the Stat. of 32. H. 8. That is, that none shall
put in execution any Bulls, containing any privileges to be discharged of
payment of Tithes. And Mephams Canon in time of Ed. 1. says, Let the custom
be observed with the fear of God. And another Canon, That custom of not
Tything, or of the manner of Tything, if they paid less then the tenth part,
see Panormitan upon that; seek of the Case between Vesey and Weeks in the
Exchequer, upon the Statute of 27. H. 8. for the dissolution of small
Monasteries. Also the Lord Darcy in quo warranto, was discharged of purveyance
by Patent granted by the King Edward 6. of such privileges which such a one
had, and by the same reason the King shall be discharged of Tithes by the Act
of Parliament; also he remembered the Book of 10. Eliz. Dyer, 277. 60. to be
resolved in the point: and also 18. Eliz. Dyer, the Parson of Pekerks case,
399. 16. upon the Statute of 31. H. 8. and so concluded, and prayed judgment
for the Plaintiff, and that the Prohibition should stand, and it was adjourned.

Trinity 9. Jacobi, Priddle against Napper.
UPon a special verdict the cause was, The Prior of Mountague was seized of an
Advowson, and of diverse acres of Land, and the 20. of H. 8. the King licensed
him to appropriate that; and 21. H. 8. the Bishop which was Ordinary assented,
and after that, the Church became void, that the Prior might hold it
appropriate; and 27. H. 8. the Incumbent dyed, so that the Appropriation took
effect, and was united to the possession of the Rectory Appropriate, and also
of the Land out of which Tithes were due to the said Prior, in respect of the
said Rectory, and then the Priory is dissolved, and the Impropriation and the
Lands also given to the King, by the Statute of 31. H. 8. which granted the
Impropriation to one, and the Lands to another. And if the Patentee of the Land
shall hold it discharged of the payment of Tithes, in respect of that unity,
was the question: And Harris, Sergeant for the Defendant, in the Prohibition,
that the unity ought to be perpetual and lawful, as it was adjudged between
Knightley and Spencer, 2 Coke, 47. a. cyted in the Archbishop of Canterburies
case; and for that unity by, or by lease for years, or for two or three years,
as in the case at the Bar, shall not be sufficient to make discharge of the
payment of Tithes: and so it was adjudged, Pasche 40. Eliz. Rot. 454. between
Child and Knightley, that is, that the unity of the possession ought to be of
time, that the memory of man does not run to the contrary. And in the argument
of this Case it was said by Popham chief Justice, that if no Tithes were paid
after the Statute, that then it shall be intended, that no Tithes were paid
before the Statute, and so he concluded, and prayed Consulation, see 2 Coke 48.
a. The Archbishop of Canterbury for the reason by which unity of possession is
discharged of payment of Tithes, that is, for that, that some houses of
Religion were discharged by Bulls of the Pope, and many were founded before the
Council of Lateran: and for that it shall be infinite, and in a manner
impossible to find by any searches, the means by which they are discharged; the
unity is no discharge in respect of it self, for the reasons aforesaid, and
none may know if Tithes were paid or not before the union: And if Tithes be not
paid in time of memory by a house of Religion, and they lease of that for
years, and receive Tiths, then the lease expi^es two years before the
Dissolution of the same house, the King shall not be discharged of the payment
af Tithes by the Statute of 31. H. 8. by Coke and Walmesley, against Warburton
and Foster.

Dorwood against Brikinden.
UPon the Statute of 5 Ed. 3. a man libelled in the Spiritual Court for Wood
cut, and a Consultation was granted; Yet the Defendant in the Court Christian
might have a new Prohibition, if it appeared the first Consultation was not
duly granted: So if a man libell for Tithes for diverse years, and Prohibition
is granted for part of the years, and after that a Consultation is awarded, yet
the Plaintiff may have a new Prohibition for the residue of the time,
notwithstanding the Statute of 50 Ed. 3. and that it be upon one self same
libel.

Admiral Court.
NOte that the Admiral cannot imprison for any offense; but if the Court has
Jurisdiction of the Original cause, and sentence Court of Admiralty's
Jurisdiction.
is there given, this sentence may be executed upon the Land, 19. H. 6. But no
Ordinary may meddle out of his own Diocese, 8. H. 6. 3. 2. H. 4. The Parson of
Salt-ashes Case; That this Court took notice of Jurisdiction of all
Ecclesiastical Courts, and Ordinaries, for they write unto them for trial of
Bastardy and Matrimony. And there are 3. Legates, First a born Legate, as the
Archbishop of Canterbury and York, Remes, and Pylazam. Second, a Latere, as
all Cardinals. The third a Lagate given, as those which have their Authority,
by commission, and Lynwood Provinc. says, that the Archbishop of Canterbury,
as Archbishop, cannot meddle out of his Diocese of Canterbury and his
Peculiars, but as a Legate borne, which is in respect of his Office, he has
prerogative, and if a man inhabit in one Diocese, and ought to pay tithes to
another which inhabits in another Diocese, there the Ordinary ought to prefer
the suit to the Metrapolitan, but seek what Ordinary shall transfer it.

Trinity 9. Jacobi 1610. in the Common Bench. Jones against Boyer.
HEnry Jones Parson of Bishopton sued Bowen the Executor of Holland, the last
Incumbent in the Arches for Dilapidations, upon which a Prohibition was prayed
upon the statute of, 23. H. 8. for that, that it was sued out of his Diocese,
which was Saint David's, but it appears that the Vicar general of the same
Ordinary has made general request to the Metropolitan, to determine that
without showing any cause special, and if the inferior Ordinary may transmit
any cause, but only for the causes mentioned in the statute of, 23. H. 8. And
if the causes ought to be expressed in the Instrument, was the question: note
that the general words of the statute of, 23 H. 8. chap. 9. Rastall Citation
2. are afterward many particulars, or in case that any Bishop or any inferior
Judge, having under him Jurisdiction in his own right and title, or by
commission, make request or instance to the Archbishop, Bishop, or other
inferior Ordinary or Judge, to take, treat, examine, or determine the matter
before him or his substitute. And that to be done in case only where the Law
civil or Canon does affirm execution of such request or instance of
Jurisdiction, to be lawful or tolerable, and for the better discussing of
this question, the Judges had appointed to hear two Doctors of the Civil Law,
which at this day attended the Court; the first Doctor Martin said, that these
general words have reference to the Executor, and not to the maker of the
request, and this request may be made for all causes, but ought to be made to
him, which has concurrent or immediate Jurisdiction to which appeal may be
made, and that the Archbishop has ordinary Jurisdiction in all the diocese
of his Province; and this is the cause that he may visit, but this Jurisdiction
is bound and tied up to the Ordinary, and when he will leave that at large,
then the Archbishop may proceed, as he is Archbishop, and the cause of
request need not to be contained in the Instrument, for when the power which
was bound up is unbound and at large, then he may proceed: Doctor Talbot, that
the request is referred to three, to the Bishop, Dean, and Archdeacon. And the
persons to whom the request is to be made are three: The Archbishop, two
Bishops, three, or superior Judge, and the Bishop and his Commissary are all
one, and request made by the Commissary shall be as good, as request made by
the Bishop himself. Also that the President may transmit, and make request to
the Emperor, as it appears in the Book of Justinian of the Laws, 2. Book.
So Baldus in reference made of inferior Magistrates to Superior, does defend,
that the Archbishop is Judge of the whole Province, yet is bound. So Speculata
in his Title of Relations, of which relation shall be made: So in the Council
of Antioche, that the Metropolitan is mediate Judge in the first part of the
Canon, and for that relation shall be made to him. Passonilis de officio, etc.
disputes: If the Archbishop may have consistory in the Diocese of the
Ordinary. Hostiensis, that the Ordinary may transmit a cause, though the
parties be unwilling. Panormitan in capite pastoralis, 8. Question 6.
decretalls of the Canon Law. Philippus Francus upon the decretalls of the Canon
Law, That the Archbishop cannot meddle in the Diocese of any Ordinary without
his assent. Dominicans upon the same Decretall: And so he concludes; that when
the Ordinary makes a request to the Archbishop, he may meddle without the
assent of the parties, and the stranger, when the parties assent. And they
agreed, that generally the Archdeacon ought to transfer to the Bishop, and so
the Bishop to the Archbishop: But they agreed also that here in England it was
prescription and usage, that every Archdeacon has used to appeal immediately
to the Archbishop, and so ought the Request within this statute to be made
accordingly. Also they agreed, that if a man inhabit in one Diocese, he has
cause to sue for Tithes in the same Diocese in which he inhabits: and in
another Diocese, there he ought to sue in the Diocese where the Defendant did
inhabit, and not where the Tithes are payable, nor where the Plaintiff
inhabits, and the Principal case was ordered accordingly.

Michaelmas, 1611. 9. Jacobi, in the Common Bench. Enby, versus Walcott.
THe Defendant was sued before the Ordinary in the County of Lincoln for
defamation. And the Suit was begun before the last general pardon, ex officio,
and the Costs taxed after the time limited by the pardon: and Pr^hibition was
granted, in so much that all things promoted, ex officio, are discharged by the
pardon; and in so much as the principal was pardoned, the Costs being but as
accessory shall be also pardoned, notwithstanding that they were taxed after
the pardon.

Powis against Bowen.
UPon consideration had of Instructions given to the President and Council of
Wales, it was resolved by all the Justices of this Court, that the Council
there ought not to proceed upon English Bill, which conteins title. But the
form of that ought to be only, that the Plaintiff was in possession for three
years: and that the Defendants, which ought to be always more then one,
riotously, and with force have entered upon him, and so ought to be restored to
his possession. And in so much that the Bill contains Title in this case, and
that the Defendants have entered upon him, and disseised him in form of
Assise, and does not say riotously and with force, Prohibition was granted.

Butler against Thayer.
THe Lord Admiral granted a Commission under the Seal of the Admiral Court
to Thayer, for measuring of all the Corn which shall be transported from one
Town or place to another within the Creeks, which are within the first Bridges,
and to have so much for every bushel measuring, and granted, that if any
resisted, to arrest them, and commit them till they had found sureties to
appear in the Admiral Court. And at Milton, and Raineham in Kent, Thayer
endeavored to put his Commission in execution, and Butler resisted him, and was
for that arrested, and sued in the Admiral Court, and for stay of that prayed
Prohibition, and it was granted, in so much that the Admiral has not power to
meddle with the first Bridges for civil causes, but only for Maymes and death
of men: but for causes made upon the high Sea, where the Mariners have the
better knowledge in the Common Law, he cannot try that: See the time of Edw. 1.
Avowry, 192. 8. Ed. 2. 45. Ed. 3. Stamford, 51. 7. R. 2. Statham Trespass.

Sir John Watts.
CErtain goods of a Subjects of the King of Spains, were forfeited Admiralty.
upon the high Sea, and after were brought here into England, and there sold to
Sir John Wats: and the goods were attached in the hands of Sir John Watts by
Process out of the Admiralty, and there a libell was exhibited against the
goods remaining in the hands of Sir John Watts, and Sir John Watts was not made
party to the Suit. And Sir John Watts prayed a Prohibition* in so much
that-they bought them in open Market: And by this Suit in the Admiral Court,
the property will be drawn in question there, where the Suite was prosecuted in
the name of Awlenso de Valasco the Spanish Ambassador, Legier here. And
Prohibition was granted.

Michael. 1611. 9. Jacobi, in the Common Bench. Jennings against Audley.
PRohibition was prayed to the Admiral, and the Libell showed Prohibition.
to the Court, which contained the Contract, was made in the straits of
Mallico, within the Jurisdiction of the Admiralty, and does not say upon the
deep Sea. And it was agreed, that in all eases, where the Defendant admits the
Jurisdiction of the Admiral Court, by pleading there, Prohibition shall not be
granted, if it do not appear by the Lybell, that the act was made out of their
Jurisdiction; and that, though that Sentence was given, yet if that appears
within the Libell, Prohibition shall be granted.

Note that a man was sued before the Ordinary in the Diocese of Norwich, for
infamous words, and after sentence there given, he appealed to the Arches: and
the first sentence being there affirmed, he appealed to the Delegates; and
before that the proceedings were transmitted, Prohibition was granted by this
Court, in so much that the offense was pardoned by general pardon. But this
notwithstanding the Register transmitted the proceedings: And after for his
fees due for that, he exhibited a Bill in the Court of Requests, and
Prohibition was prayed in this Court for to stay his proceedings there. And it
was granted, in so much that the original ground of the Suit, that is, the
infamous words were pardoned by the general pardon; and for this all the
proceedings were erroneous, and their transmitting after. And afterward the
Prohibition received willingly; And for these causes Prohibition was granted to
the Court of Requests.

Thomas Baxter against Thomas Hopes.
IN Prohibition the Plaintiff Suggests, that within such a Town was such a
custom; that every Inhabitant which maintained a family, and dairy, for
manuring his land, and maintenance of his family, have used of time out of
memory, etc. to pay tithes of Corn, growing upon his Farm, in kind, and by
reason thereof have used to be discharged of after crop, of the said land. And
also that they have used to pay tithe milk, and tithe Calves in kind, and by
reason thereof have been discharged of tithe of young and barren Beasts, and
the Plaintiff suggested further, that he occupied a Farm and maintained a
family, and dairy, for the manurance of that, and maintenance of his family;
and has paid his tithe Corn, and milk, and Calves, in kind: And for that
ought to be discharged of tithes for the after crop, and for young and barren
Beasts, and for the tenthes of which, suit was begun in the Court Christian,
and upon demurrer joined upon Prohibition, the custom was debated whether it
were good or no, and it was moved first by Houghton Sergeant for the Defendant,
that the custom was not good, insomuch that by that the Plaintiff was not to
pay more, then by the Law he ought, for he ought to pay tithe Corn, and milk
and Calves, in kind: And this is no more then the Law compells him to do, and
this cannot be a consideration to discharge him of other things. For all things
which renew ought to pay tithes, of Common Right, as after pastute, and barren
Cattle, and Corn, and milk. And all other things which renew; if it be not
good custom to the contrary, which is grounded upon consideration; and then to
consider how much consideration shall be valuable in other Cases, and what not:
And to that it appears in 9. Ed. 4. 18. and 19; in Trespass upon the Statute
of 5. Rich. 2. The Defendant pleads accord, that the Plaintiff entered into his
land again, and agreed that that was not bar, insomuch as agreement without
satisfaction is not bar, and entry into lands, is no more then he might do
without the agreement, and for that it is not good for default of
consideration; so in 12. H. 7. 15. a. in trespass for goods taken; the
Defendant pleads arbitrament, that is; for that that the Defendant, has taken
the goods of the Plaintiff, and that he should deliver them to the Plaintiff,
in full satisfaction: And agreed that this is no good award, insomuch that this
cannot be satisfaction, for that that the goods were the proper goods of the
Plaintiff: And although, that he has his goods again; yet he is not satisfied
for the taking. But if the award had been, that the Defendant should redeliver
his goods, and carry them to such a place certain, at his own costs and
charges, then it had been good: See 45. Ed. 3. accordingly. So in an action
upon the Case, upon an Assumpsit made in consideration that the Plaintiff has
paid due debt, is not good, for this is no consideration, and so in the
principal Case the Prescription is not good, insomuch that he has not
suggested more or other consideration, which by the Law he ought to do: But he
agreed that if he had suggested, that the Plaintiff, had plowed and manured the
land, and disposed of the tithes of the Corn, for the benefit of the Parson, in
other manner then the Law compelled him; then the first prescription had been
good, and so he concluded, and prayed Judgment for the Defendant: Hutton
Sergeant for the Plaintiff, in the Prohibition seems the contrary, and that the
Suggestion, and Prescription, and Custom, Contained in that are good: And to
the Objection, that it is no consideration, that the Custom may be founded; he
intended, that this is a ground upon immunity subsequent to the Consideration,
as of things which are not tythable, as in the general Case of things, which
are for the maintenance of the family; for Plowing and Manuring of the land,
shall not pay tithes, as in a suit for tithes for herbage, suggestion that they
were depastured, by laboring Cattle, which Plowed and Manured the Land, of
which the Parson had tithes, or small Wood, which are cut or employed for the
fencing of a Farm, or fuel spent in the Farm, shall not pay tithes; insomuch
that without that, the Farm cannot be Manured nor the Famaly sustained. And so
by consequence the Parson shall not have any tithe Corn, insomuch that no Corn
will grow without manuring; and also the Parson by those has the more tyth
Corn, and so he has consideration in that, for the better that the Farm is
fenced and manured the more tithe the Parson shall have: So the Farmer may be
discharged of tithes, for Rakeings, insomuch that he Mowes and Cocks the tithes
for the Parson at his own costs, and this is sufficient consideration: And also
he insisted upon the Statute of 2. Ed. 6. Which provides that tithes shall be
paid in the same manner, as they were paid for 40. years before, and he cited
one Jessopps case to be adjudged in Prohibition; Pasche 36. Eliz. Upon suit in
Court Christian, for flocks, and locks of Wool: And the Custom was alleged,
that the owner had woond the tithe for the Parson, and in consideration of
that, ought to be discharged of tithes, of locks and flocks, if they be not
made by Covin, to defraud the Parson; and these were demanded by the name of
wool dispersed, and 18. Eliz; it was adjudged, that tithes shall, not be made
for Brick, and in Prohibition; the suggestion was grounded upon the general
immunity, and insomuch that it was made of land, for which no tithes are to be
paid; insomuch that it does not renew, that for this cause tithes ought not to
be paid, for the Brick which is made of that, and so of Mines, and so Loppings,
and Toppings, and bark of Trees shall pay no tithes: But are within the Statute
of 40. Eliz. 5. of wood to be fallen, as it is resolved in Soby and Molyns case
in the Commentaries: And he agreed that for herbage the tenth gate, or proffit
of that ought to be paid, if there be not a custom to the contrary; but in the
Principal case he intended that* that was paid in the Corn, and in that the
Parson has recompense and consideration as before, and so he concludes and
prays Judgment for the Plaintiff: Dodrigde Sergeant of the King argued that
the Custom is not good, as it is here suggested, for the consideration is of
some things which ought to pay tithes in kind, and so upon the matter is no
sideration at all, for he intended that tithes should be due by divine right,
as due by the Manuring and Tillage of the occupier, in whose soever hands that
the land comes; if it be not in the hands of the Parson himself, 30 H. 8.
43. Dyer. 20. And for that a Parson shall have tithes against his own
Feoffment, 43. Ed. 3 13 a. 1. Coke. Albanyes case, 111. a. 32 H. 8. B. Tithes
the 17 accordingly, and unity of possession shall not extinguish them: And also
he intended there are two manner of persons, which are discharged of payment of
tithes. One Spiritual, the other Temporal, the spiritual in respect of their
Order, and the temporal in respect of Custom and Prescription, and also by
grant, as it is agreed in the Archbishop of Canterburies Case, 2. Coke; but
this is in the case of a spiritual man before the Statute of, 32 H. 8. which
was capable of them in taking, and that he might prescribe in not Tithing, but
a lay man cannot be discharged but for satisfaction and consideration, for he
cannot prescribe in not Tithing, and for that in the case here the thing to be
considered is, if it be sufficient satisfaction and consideration, and to that
he intended that the payment of a duty, that is Tyth Corn and Tyth Hay, cannot
be satisfaction and consideration for another duty, and this was the Reason of
Piggot and Hernes Case, that the Lord of a Manor, in consideration of Modus
decimandi.
20. Nobles yearly paid to the Parson, prescribes to have the tithes of a
Hamlet, and in consideration of that, the Lord himself and his Tenants, were
discharged of payment of Tithes, but there the consideration and satisfaction
was the cause which made the custom good, see 2. Coke 45. a. And then he
proceeded and examined the manner of the satisfaction in the principal case,
which is, that the Plaintiff shall pay tyth Corn and Hay, and nothing for Milk
and Calves, but by reason thereof shall be discharged, as if he should say,
that because he pays tithe Corn, therefore he shall pay no tithe Milk, and
he intended that the nature of satisfaction is to give content to the party, as
if the prescription had been, that the Plaintiff should pay so much Money, and
in consideration of that, or that he shall make the tithe in Cocks, or rake it,
or mow it at his own charge, this is a good prescription, aed there are
diverse presidents of that, but no president is of this form, as the case here
is; for money shall be intended the greater value, and more beneficial for the
Parson, then his Tithes in kind, and Money is the value of every thing, and may
give contentment to the party which receives it, and he cited Books of, 9. Ed.
4. 19. and 12 H. 7. 15. and 2^ H* 5. 2. a. To the same intent which were cited
before by Haughton, that is, which agree in Arbitrament, and the Plaintiff
entered into his own Land, or that the Defendant delivered to the Plaintiff, his
own goods which the Defendant had taken from him, it is not good, for it cannot
give contentment to the party, otherwise it is, if it be that the Defendant
shall carry them to another place and there shall deliver them, for it cannot
be satisfaction and contentment to the party, and for that, that here the
Plaintiff has not made more then the Law compells him, and that it was his own
duty, and for that the prescription wants consideration, it shall not be good,
and also by reason thereof it can be no good discharge, for this cannot be
satisfaction, but he said, it was adjudged Pasch 20 Jacobi between Hall and
Aubery, that Money was a good consideration and satisfaction for tithes, and so
he concluded and prayed judgment for the Defendant; note that this cause was
adjudged Hillary 8. Jacobi upon solemn argument by all the Judges with one
voice, that the Prescription was good.

Haughton Sergeant moved for a Prohibition, for that the Suit was begun in the
Admiral Court upon Charter party made beyond Sea upon the Land, and
Prohibition was granted, though it be for a thing made in Paris, or in another
place beyond the sea, if it be not upon the Main Sea, but if the Defendant
there admitts the Jurisdiction of the Court and suffers sentence, then the
Court will not upon a bare surmise grant a Prohibition, after the admittance of
the party himself; if it be not in a thing which appears within the Libell,
that is, that the Act was not made within the Jurisdiction of the Sea, and to
this difference all the Court agreed.

If a Court Baron divide a Debt of thirty pound in several parcells
Prohibition to a Court Baron.
under forty shillings, and so proceeds in several Actions, Prohibition shall
be granted, see Fitzherberts Natura brevium, and 19 H. 6.

Hane was cited out of his Diocese into the Arches, and he pleaded to the
Libell, and sentence is given against him for costs, and after that Prohibition
was granted, and upon that consultation was prayed, for that, that the
Defendant was the party greeved, and ought to have pleaded the Statute,
insomuch that the Statute was made for his benefit, but if it appears by the
Libell that the Court of Arches need not to have Jurisdiction, then it seems
that the Prohibition was well granted, as in Sir Henry Vinors Case, he began a
suit in the high Commission Court, for the not serving of a Chapel, and the
Court understanding that they had no Jurisdiction, remitted the cause to the
Ordinary, and yet gave sentence against Sir Henry Vinor which was Plaintiff for
Costs, and for that he prayed a prohibition and it was granted to his Petition
notwithstanding that he himself was the party, who begun the suit there, as it
was remembered by Nicholls Sergeant.

A Woman sued in the spiritual Court for Defamation, and the words were, That
thou may be an honest woman but thou playest too much with a thing, etc. And
Prohibition was prayed, insomuch that these words were not Actionable; for in
Spellmans reports Prohibition was granted, for that they proceeded there for
calling a Minister Knave Priest, and also by these words, a white Cloak is
more fitter then a black cloak for him, for action upon the case does not lie
for these words by any Law, but the Prohibition was not granted.

Pasch. 11. Jacobi Prohibition. Tey against Cox.
PRohibition was prayed, for that, that one was cited out of his Diocese
before the Archbishop of Canterbury, as Keeper of the Spiritualties in time of
the vacation of the Bishopprick, and it was denied; but if he had been to
appear before him as Metrapolitan, otherwise it should have been, insomuch
that this is against the Statute of 23. H. 8. And also for his own Canon, but
in this case the Statute of, 23 H. 8. And also their own Canon; but in this
case the ArchBishop has done as he ought, and for that the Prohibition was
denied, see 17 Ed. 2. Fitz. Na. Bre. 822. and 41 Assis.

The case was this, there was a custom that a Park has paid two shillings a
year, and the sholder of every Dear which was killed for tithes, and in
consideration of that, had been time out of mind, etc. Discharged of Tithes,
and now the Park is dis-parked, and it was moved by Harris Sergeant, that this
dissolves the custom, for when part of the custom is dissolved by the party
himself, this determines the residue, for it is adjudged if the Land be
discharged of tithes by real Composition, then if he sue for tithes in the
spiritual Court, prohibition by the common Law was granted, without other
suggestion, but only that he sued there for Lay Fee, and it was said that it
was adjudged 5. Jacobi, that where it was a custom that so many of the bucks
shall be paid for tithes in such a park yearly, and after the park shall be
disparked, yet that remains discharged of Tithes, and the custom remains,
and Coke chief Justice seemed that tithes are due by divine right, but not what
part, for if the tenth part be due die divine right, then all Customs are void.

Trinity, 11. Jacobi, 1612. in the common Bench.
NOte by the Statute of 50. Edw. 3. If a Consultation be once duly granted, no
new Prohibition shall be afterward granted upon the said Libell. But if it be
apparent matter that the first was not duly granted, then a new Prohibition
may be granted by the whole Court, and with this agreed the book of Entries in
the Title of Prohibition: But this is to be intended to the Spiritual Judge;
and it seems that the Admiral is out of this Statute, see 22. H. 7.

Bushes Case.
NOte that it was agreed in this Case, that if a Parsonage be impropriate, and
the Vicaridge be endowed, and difference be between the Parson and the Vicar
concerning the endowment, that shall be tried by the Ordinary, for the persons
and the cause also are spiritual: And there the Vicar sues the Parson for
Tithes, and he suggests the manner of tything, and prays a Prohibition, and it
was granted, and after upon solemn argument, Consultation was granted, in so
much that the manner of tytheing did not come in question; but the Endowment of
the Vicaridg only, for that is the Elder Brother, as the Lord Coke said, and
this was cyted to be adjudged by Coke.

Prohibition. Agars Case.
AGar of Kingston upon the Thames was sued in the Ecclesiastical Court for
beating of his Wife, and for calling her Whore, and was sentenced by them to
pay to his Wife three shillings a week for her Alimony, and diverse Fynes were
imposed upon him for not performing of that, and also provided that he should
enter into a Recognizance for performance of that, and a Prohibition was
granted, and also a Habeas Corpus to deliver Agar out of Prison:

Michael. 8. Jacobi, Blackdens Case.
BLackden married one within age, and after disagreed, so that they might marry
elsewhere; and the first Wife had Issue by other Husbands, and dyed, and
Blackden was sued in the Ecclesiastical Court by an Informer, supposing he had
married a womon, living his other Wife. And Blackden proves there the
disagreement, by which he had sentence for him against the Informer, and yet
he was taxed to give to the Informer twenty marks for costs, which he
refused to pay, and moved to have a Prohibition, which was granted. For it was
injustice to allow Costs to one which had vexed him without cause, and when
they had given sentence against the Informer.

Parkers Case, Michael. 8. Jacobi
PArker being a Parson of a Church, was deprived by the High Commissioners for
Drunkenness, and moved for Prohibition, but it was not granted; and he was
directed to have action for the Tithe, and upon that the validity of the
Sentence shall be drawn in question.

Doctor Conways Case, Michael. 8. Jacobi.
COnway and his Wife were sued before the High Commissioners, that is to say,
the Wife for Adultery with Sir Michael Blunt, and the Husband for connivency to
that, as a Wittall, and they were sentenced there for that, and costs taxed in
July; and after the general pardon came, and pardoned all offenses before the
9. day of November before, and upon that the Doctor moved for Prohibition, and
had that, because the offenses were not enormious crimes, and the Statute, and
the Commission upon that is to give power to them to proceed upon enormious
crimes, and to Fine and Imprison for them. Also resolved that the general
pardon has discharged the Costs, though that the Costs were taxed before the
Pardon was in Print. And this by the relation that he had at the day before
the Costs were taxed.

Cradocks Case, Michael. 7. Jacobi.
CRadock bought diverse things upon the body of the County, which concerned the
furnishing of a Ship, as Cordage, Powder, and Shot, and the party of whom they
were bought sued Cradocke for the money in the Admiral Court, and Prohibition
was granted; for the Statute of Richard 2. is, that the Admiral shall not
meddle with things made within the Realm, but only of things made upon the Sea,
and that no Contract made upon the Land shall be held there. And here the
Contract was at St. Katherines stairs in the body of the County; for it was
said that St. Katherines is within London, and the Major of London has
jurisdiction upon the Thames as far as Wapping. And if a Murder be committed
upon the Thames, this shall not be tried by the Admiral: and here Terry and
Peacocks Case was cyted, which is related in Binghams case in the 2. Reports,
and also in Sir Henry Constables Case in the 5. Reports, and it was cyted to be
adjudged, that if a Contract be made at Roan in France, that shall not be tried
in the Admiral Court, for that it was made, upon the Land, and not upon the
high Sea.

Pasche 8. Jacobi Regis, Common Eench. Gaudyes case with Doctor Newman.
THe Parishioners of the Parish of Alphage in Canterbury, prescribed to have
the Nomination and election of their Parish Clark, and the Parson of the Parish
by force of a Canon, upon voidance of the place of the Parish Clark elected one
to the Office; the parishoners by force of their Custom elected Cundy, the
Parson supposing this election to be Irreguler, for that it was against the
Canon; sued Cundy before Doctor Newman Chancellor of Canterbury, and the said
Cundy was by Sentence deprived of the Clark-ship of the Parish, and the Clark
of the Parish admitted; Cundy moved for a Prohibition, and had it granted by
all the Court, for it was held that one Parish Clark is a mere lay man, and
ought to be deprived by them that put him in, and no others; and if the
Ecclesiastical Court meddle with deprivation of the Parish Clark they incura
Praemunire, and the Canon which wills that the Parson shall have election of
the Parish Clark, is merely void to take away the Custom that any Parish had
to elect him. See the Statute of 25 H. 8. That a Canon against Common Law
confounds the Royal Prerogative of the King, or Law of God, is void; and
Custom of the Realm cannot be taken away but by act of Parliament. See 21 Ed.
4. 44. the Abbot of Saint Albones has a Charter of the King, to be discharged
of Collection of tenthes granted by Parliament or Convocation: The Clergy
grants tithes in Convocation, there is a clause in the grant that no one of
them who shall be chosen to be collector, shall be discharged of collection by
color or force of any Letters Patents, and after they return the Abbot of St.
Albones Collector, who pleads his Letters Patents in discharge of Collector,
and resolved by the Court that the clause in the grant of tenthes does not take
away the exemption of discharge by the Letters Patents granted. And it was
resolved that if the Parish clark misdemene himself in his office, or in the
Church; he may be sentenced for that in the Ecclesiastical court to
Excommunication, but not to Deprivation: And after Prohibition was granted by
all the court, and held also that a Prohibition lies as well after sentence as
before.

Trinity 8. Jacobi, Common Bench.
ON was cited to appear in the Prerogative Court of Canterbury, which was out
of the Diocese of Canterbury, and upon that he prayed Prohibition upon the
Statute of 32. H. 8. Which wills that none shall be cited to appear out of
his Diocese, without assent of the Bishop, and Prohibition was granted: And
yet it was said that in the time of H. 8; and Reign of Mary, that the Arch
Bishops of Canterbury had used to cite any man dwelling out of his Diocese,
and within any Diocese within his Province, to appear before him in the
Prerogative Court, and this without the assent of the Ordinary of the Diocese:
But it was resolved by the Court, that this was by force of the power Legantine
of the Archbishop, that as Lynwood says, ought to be expressed in the
Prohibition, for the Archbishop of Canterbury, York, Pisa, and Reymes were
Legati nati, and others but Legates a Latere.

Hillary, 1610. 8. Jacobi, in the Common Bench. Beareblock against Read.
IN an Action of Debt brought by Beareblocke against Read, Administratrix to
her Husband, upon a Judgment given in this Court: The case was this, the
Plaintiff had Judgment against the Husband, and after sued him to an Vtlagary,
and upon that he brought a Writ of Errous, and removed the Record into the
Kings Bench, and reversed the Judgment for the Vtlagary. But the first
Judgment was affirmed; and then the Husband acknowledged a Statute, and dyed:
And the Wife took out Letters of Administration, and then the Statute is
extended against the Wife, and all the goods which she had of the Intestates
taken in execution. After which Beareblock in the Kings Bench sueth a
Scirefacias upon the said Judgment against the said Administratrix, to have
execution, and she pleads upon that, the said Statute in Bar, and the extent
of that, and that more then that, she has nothing to satisfy, and this was
adjudged a good plea. And then the Plaintiff being not satisfied, he hrought
an action of debt upon the said Judgment in this Court, and in Bar of that,
the Wife pleaded all this matter in Bar, as aforesaid, upon which the
Plaintiff demurred in Law, and the Judges seemed to incline that this was no
Bar; for though that the Wife has not any means to aid her self, or to
prevent the extent of the Statute, yet it seemed to them that this should not
prevent the execution upon the Judgment, and that the Wife might have Audita
quaerela against the Connusee of the Statute; and so to make the extent void.
It was not argued at this day, but the point only opened, see 3. Eliz. Dyer, 7.
H. 6. See Pasche 9. Jacobi, the Residue.

Petty against Evans.
IN an Ejectione firm brought by the Lessee of a Copyholder, it is sufficient
that the count be general without any mention of the License, and if the
Defendant plead not guilty, then the Plaintiff ought to show the Lycense in
Evidence: But if the Defendant plead specially, then the Plaintiff ought to
plead the License certainly in his replication, and the time and place when it
was made: and in this case the Plaintiff replied, that the copyholder by
License first then had of the Lord did demise, and did not show what estate the
Lord had, nor the place nor time when it was made, and all the Justices agreed
that it is not good: For the License is traversable, for if a copyholder
without License of the Lord make a Lease for years. The lessee which enters by
calour of that, is a Disseisor and a Disseisor cannot maintain an Ejectione
Firm, and the Defendant cannot plead that the Plaintiff by license did not
demise, for this is a pregnant negative, also it ought to appear what estate
the Lord had, for he cannot give license to make a lease of longer time in the
Tenancy then he has in the signiory: And for that if he be Lessee for life of
a Manor, and he licenses a copi-holder to make a Lease for 21. years of a
copyhold, and then the Lessee for life dies, the license is for that
determined, though that the copyholder be of Inheritance, for the Inheritance
of the Lord is bound by that. And for that the Plaintiff replies, that the
copyholder by license of the Lord first therefore had, made the Lease, that is
not good by Coke and Walmesley expressly, and though that the Defendant confess
the Replication, by Implication, by pleading. Yet this shall not aid the
Plaintiff, for that it is insufficiently pleaded, which note.

Hillary 8. Jacobi 1610. in the Common Bench.
IN action upon the case upon an Assumpsit, the Plaintiff counts that when he
such a day at the special instance and request of the Defendant, lent to the
Defendant the same day ten pound; And that the Defendant the same day in
consideration thereof assumed and promised to the Plaintiff to pay the same
sum of ten pound at an other day to come: And it was moved in arrest of
Judgment, that the consideration was too general, and for that the action not
maintainable, and all the Justices but Foster seemed the consideration was
good, but Foster it seems was in some doubt of that, but Judgment was entered
for the Plaintiff according to the verdict: And Coke chief Justice said, that
such a like action was maintained against Kercher his Chaplain, as Executor of
his Father, and it seems for good Law.

Legates Case.
ONe Legate was committed to Newgate Prison for Arrianisme for denying of the
Trinity, by the high Commissioners: and it was moved on the behalf of Legate
to have a habeas Corpus and it was granted, and it was said by Coke chief
Justice, that the Statute of 5. H. 4. Chapter 10. Inhibits Justices of peace to
commit any man to any private Prison. And it seems if any do against this
Statute, that an action of false Imprisonment lies: For every one ought to be
committed to the Common Goal, to the intent that he may be dilivered at the
next Goal delivery, and also if any be committed to any of the Counters in
London, unlessthat it be for debt, that an action of false Imprisonment lies
for that, for these are private Prisons, for the Sheriffs of London for Debt
only.

Note in Debt for ten pound the Defendant confesses five pound, and for the
other five pound pleades that he owes nothing by the Law, and at the day the
Plaintiff would have been nonsuited. And it was agreed by all, that if he be
nonsuited, that he shall loose all, as well the debt confessed as the other.

Note the year of the Reign of the King was mistaken in the Record of nisi
prius, but the Record which remains in the Court was very well, and it was
amended: For insomuch that it was a sufficent and certain Issue, this was
sufficent Authority to the Justices of nisi prius to proceed, but nothing being
mistaken but the year of the Reign, this shall be amended, for it is only the
misprision of the Clark, see Dyer 260. 24, 25. 9. Eliz. 11. H. 6.

Note also if Tenant in Dower be disseised, and the Disseisor makes a
Feoffment, the Tenant in dower shall recover a^l their damages against the
Feoffee, for she is not within the Statute of Gloucester chapter 1. By which
every one shall answer for their time.

Hillary 8. Jacobi 1611. in the Common Bench. Reyner against Poell; See Hillary
6. Jacobi fol:
IN second deliverance for copyhold in Brampton, in the County of Huntington;
the case was, copyhold Lands were surrendered to the use of a woman, and the
Heirs of her Body, and she took a Husband, the Husband and the Wife have Issue
2. Sons, and after Surrenders to themselves for their lives, the remainder to
the eldest Son and his Wife in fee, the Husband and the Wife dye, the eldest
Son dies, the youngest Son enters, and Surrenders to the use of a stranger: And
the sole question upon which they relied, if the Wife was Tenant in tail, or if
she had fee simple conditional; and it was argued by Nicholls, that the Wife
was Tenant in tail, and to prove that, he cited 2. cases in Littleton, where it
is expressly mentioned, who may be Tenant in tail, see Sect. 73. 79. And who may
have a Formedon, see in the discender, sect. 76. And he grounded that upon
reason, for that, that it cannot be denied: But that fee simple might be of
copyhold according to the custom, and as well as fee simple, as well it may
be an estate tail, for every greater contains his less, and he said that this
is grounded upon the reason of other cases, as if the King grant to one to hold
Plea in his Court of all actions of debt, and other actions, and then one
action of debt is given in case where it lies not at the common Law, yet the
Grantee may hold Plea of that: But if a new action be framed, which was not in
experience at the time of the grant, but is given after by Statute, the grant
shall not extend to that; and to the Objection, that copyhold is no Tenement
within the Statute, of gifts, etc. As to that he says, that that shall be very
well intended to be within the Statute as it is used, and 4. H. 7. 10. A man
makes a gift in tail by deed, the Donee has an estate tail in the deed as well
as in the Land, so Morgan and Maxells case, Commentaries 26. And so of Office,
Honor, Dignity, and copyhold also; and Dyer 2 and 3. Phil: And Mary 114. 61.
It is found by special verdict, that copyhold Lands have been devisable by
copy in tail, and so it is pleaded 2 and 3 Eliz. Dyer 192. b. And when a lesser
estate is extracted out of a greater, that shall be directed and ordered,
according to the course of the Common Law; and for that the Wife shall have
plaint in nature of a Cui in vita, and 15. H 8. b. Title Tenement by copy of
Court Roll, it was said for Law that tail may be of a copyhold, and that
Formedon may well ly of that in descender, by protestation to sue in nature of
a Formedon in descender at the Common Law, and good by all the Justices; for
though that Formedon in descender was not given but by Statute: Yet now this
Writ lies at the Common Law, and shall be intended that this has been a
custom, time out of mind, etc. And the Demandant shall recover by advise of
all the Justices, and the like matter in Essex M. 28. H. 8. And Fitz. affirms,
that in the chamber of the Duchy of Lancaster afterward; and also he says,
that when custom has created such Inheritances, and that the Land shall be
descendable, then the Law shall direct the descent, according to the Maxims
and Rules of the Common Law, as incident to every estate discendable, and for
that shall be possessio Fratris, of a copyhold estate, 4. Coke 22. a. Brownes
Case b. And there 28. a. Gravener and Tedd, the custom of the Manor of
Allesley in the County of Warwick was; that copyhold lands might be granted to
any one in fee simple: and it was adjudged that a grant to one and the Heirs
of his Body, is within the Custom, for be that Estate Tail, or Fee simple
conditional, that is within the Custom: So he may grant for life or for
years by the same Custom, for Estate in Fee simple includes all, and it is a
Maxim in Law, to him that may do the greater, it cannot be but the less is
lawful; and over he said, that in all cases where a man was put to his real
action at the Common Law, in all these cases a copyholder may have plaint with
protestation to prosecute in ^re of the same action; and to the objection, that
there cannot be an Estate tail of copyhold Land, for that, that the Tenant in
tail shall hold of him in revertion, and shall not be Tenant to the Lord, to
that he said that this Estate may be created as well by (Cepit extra manus
Domini,) as by Surrender, and then there is not any reversion or remainder, but
it is as if Rent be newly granted in tail; but he said there may be a reversion
upon an Estate tail, as well as upon an Estate for life, and he did not insist
upon the Custom, but upon this ground, that if the Custom warrant the greater
Estate, which is the Fee simple, the less shall be included in that. And he
did not argue, but intended that it would be admitted, that descent of
copyhold Land shall not take away entry nor Surrender of that, nor shall make
discontinuance, so prayed Judgment and ^rne. Harris the youngest Sergeant
argued for the Plaintiff, that it shall be a Fee simple conditional, and not
an Estate tail, and he said that the sole question was if the Statute of
Westminster 2. conevrted and changed Fee simple conditional of copyhold into
an Estate tail, for if it be not an Estate tail within this Statute, it shall
not be an Estate tail at all, for Littleton says, before the making of the
said Statute, these Estates were Fee simple conditional, and for that cannot
be by prescription; also he said that copyhold Estate was so base an Estate,
that at the Common Law a copy holder had no remedy but only in the Court of the
Lord: But as to Littleton who says, that he may have a Formedon in discender,
to that he says, that the Heir which has Fee simple conditional may have it
by the Common Law, for this was at the Common Law before the making of that
Statute of Westminster 2. As it appears by 4. Ed. 2. Formedon 50. 10. Ed. 2.
Formedon 55. And by Bendlowes in the Lord Barkleys case, in the Commentaries
239. b. by Benlose where it is said by him, that a Formedon in discender was
not at the Common Law, but in a special case; where an Assise of Mortdancester
would not serve the Issue; that is, if a man had Issue a Son, and his Wife
died, and after that he takes another Wife, and Land was given to him and to
his second Wife, and to the Heirs of their two Bodies begoten, and they have
another Son, and the Wife dies, and after the Father dies, and a stranger
abates, there he says that before the Statute, the youngest Soon could not
have an Assise of Mortdancester, and for that he shall have a Formedon in
discender, which was no other but a writ founded upon his Case, see 10 of Ed.
2. Formedon 55. And for that when Littleton speaks of an Estate tail of
copyhold, that ought to be understood of Fee tail, which may be Fee simple
conditional, and so Littleton may be reconciled, (...) will well agree with
himself; also it seems that Copyhold is ou^ ^f the intent and meaning of the
Statute of Westminster 2. For at the common Law in ancient times, this was base
Estate, and not more in reputation then villinage, and also if such an Estate
then might be created of that which shall be perpetual and no means to bar
it, for surrender of that does not make any discontinuance, and Recovery was
not known, till 12. Ed. 4. and he says, that in ancient time the name of
Copyholder was not well known, for in ancient time they were called Tenants in
Villinage; and Tenants by copy is but a new term, see Fitzherberts Natura
Brevium 12. b. and the old Tenures fol. 2. and Bracton lib. 2. charter 8. In
gifts made to servants calls them Villains and Sokemen, and in the old
Tenures it is said that the Lords may expel them, and upon this he inferred,
that if it be so base^ Tenure, though it be of Lands and Tenements, yet they
shall not be intended to be within the intent of the makers of the Statute of
Westminster 2. and also by a second reason, that is, that it was not the intent
of the makers of the Statute that this should extend to any Lands but only to
those which are free Lands, for the parties are called Donees and Feoffees, and
the will of the Giver should be observed according to the form in the Charter
of his gift manifestly expressed, by which it appears that it ought to be of
such Land of which a gift may be made, and also the Statute provides that if
the Donee levy a fine (that in right it should be nothing) by which also it
appears as to him it seemed, that it ought to be of such Land, of which a fine
may be levied. And also for a third reason, which was the great Inconvenience,
which would ensue upon it, for then the Donees have no means to dispose of
that, nor give that for the advancement of his Wife nor her Issues, and also
the Lord shall loose his signiory, for the Donee shall hold of him in Reversion
and not of the Lord, and it is resolved in Heydens Case, 3 Coke 8. a. That when
an act of Parliament, alters the service, Tenure, Interest of the Land, or
other thing in prejudice of the Lord or of the custom of the Manor, or in
prejudice of the Tenant, there the general words of such act shall not extend
to Copyholders, see the opinion of Manwaod chief Baron there, and he agreed,
that admitting it shall be an Estate tail, that then Surrender shall not make
discontinuance, and so he concluded and prayed Judgment for the Plaintiff his
Clyent, see Hill and Vpchars Case, which was adjudged in the Kings Bench, and
the principal case was adjourned until the first Saturday of the next Term,
See Hillari 7. Jacobi in this Book in Replevin the Plaintiff was nonsuited
between the same parties. See also Pasche 9. Jacobi 149.

Hillary 1610. 8. Jacobi in the Common Bench. Wallop against the Bishop of
Exeter and Murray Clark.
IN a Quare impedit, the case was, Doctor Playford being Chaplain of the King,
accepted a Benefice of presentation of a common person, and after he accepted
another of presentation of the King, without any dispension, both being above
the value of eight pound per annum, if the first Benefice was void by the
Statute of, 21 H. 8. chapter 13. or not, was the question, for if that were
void by the acceptance of the second Benefice without dispensation, then this
remains a long time void, so that the King was entitled to present by Laps,
and presented the Plaintiff, the Statute of 21 H. 8. provides, that he which is
Chaplain to an Earl, Bishop, etc. may purchase license or dispensation to
receive, have, and keep, two Benefices with cure, provided that it shall be
lawful to the Kings Chaplains to whom it shall please the King to give any
benefices or promotions spiritual, to what number soever it be, to accept and
receive the same without incurring the danger, penalty, and forfeiture, in this
Statute comprised, upon which the question was, if by this last Proviso,
Chaplain of the King having a Benefice with cure above the value of eight
pound per annum, of the presentation of a common person, might accept another
Benefice with cure over the value of eight pound also of the presentation of
the King without dispensation, the words of the Statute, by which the first
Church is made void are, and be it enacted that if any parson or parsons having
one Benefice withcure of Souls, being of the yearly value of eight pound or
above, accept and take any other with cure of Souls, and be instituted and
inducted in possession of the same, that then and immediately after such
possession had thereof, the first Benefice shall be adjudged in the law to be
void. See Hollands case 4. Cook 75. a. This case was not argued but the point
only opened by Dodridge Sergeant of the King for the Plaintiff, and day given
for the argument of that till the next term.

Hillary 8. Jacobi 1610. in the Common Bench. Tresham against Lamb.
Jews Tresham was Plaintiff in waste against John Lamb, the Plaintiff
supposed the Defendant had made waste in sowing and plowing ancient meadow, the
which he had let to the Defendant for years in Rushton in the county of
Northampton, and sowed it with Woade, and prayed Estrepement upon the Statute
of Gloucester, chapter 13. And upon examination it appears, that the Lands let
was pasture and Meadow, the Pasture was Ridge and furrow, but had been mowed
and used for meadow for diverse years, and that the Defendant plowed and sowed
that with Woade, but this which had been ancient meadow, he used that as
Meadow, and did not convert that to Arable Land, but the Judges would not grant
any Estrepement to the Pasture, for that it was Ridge and furrow, and it was no
ancient meadow, although that had been mowed time out of mind, etc. But to the
ancient Meadow they granted a writ of Esterpement, but Foster seemed to be of
another opinion, for that, that it was to sow Woade, for that that it is
against common Right, and the fume and smell of that is offensive and
infectious, but if it had been to sow Corn he agreed as above, and for the
executing the Writ of Estrepement, they all agreed that the Sheriff ought to
take, if need be, the power of the County against those which made the waste
(hanging the Action) and may commit them if they will not obey him, for the
words of the Statute are, that you shall cause to keep, which shall be intended
in safety. But if Lessee for years trench or draine, that is no Wast, as it was
now of late times adjudged, where if the Lessee takes any of the reasonable
Boots that the Law allows, that it shall be no Waste nor Estrepement shall be
granted, see Fitzherberts Natura Brevium, 59. m.

If a man devise Land to his Executors for years, this is assetts, but if he
devise that his Executors shall sell his Lands, or devise his Lands to his
Executors to be sold, this shall be no assets until the Lands are sold, and
the money for which the land shall be sold, shall be assetts.

A Record of Nisi prius, in an Action of Debt upon an obligation, with
condition to pay such a sum of Money at such a Feast next after the date of the
obligation, and the day of the date of the obligation was omitted in the Record
of the Nisi prius, so that it does not appear which shall be the next Feast at
which the money ought to be paid after the date, and by all the Justices, that
was no perfect Issue, and for that the Justices of Nisi prius have no power to
proceed upon it, and for that it shall not be amended, otherwise if it had been
a good Issue, though that another thing had been mistaken, see Dyer 9. Eliz.
260. 24. And see before the same Term here.

The King pardoned a man attaint, for giving a false verdict, yet he shall not
be at another time impannelled upon any Jury, for though that the punishment
were pardoned yet the Guilt remains.

Hillary 8. Jacobi 1610. In the Common Bench. James versus Read.
THE case was, the King was seized of a Manor, where there were diverse
Copyholders for life, and was also seized of eight Acres of Land in another
Manor, in which the Copyholders have used time out of mind, etc. To have
common, and after the King grants the Manor to one, and the eight Acres to
another, and a Copyholder puts in his beasts into the eight Acres of Land, and
in trespass brought against him by the Patentee of the eight Acres, he
prescribes that the Lord of a Manor, and all those whose estate he has in the
Manor have used time out of mind, etc. For themselves and their Copyholders
to have Common in the said eight Acres of Land; and further pleaded that he was
Copyholder for his life by grant, after the said unity of possession in the
King, and so demanded judgment if action, against which the said unity of
possession was pleaded, upon which the Defendant demurrs, and all the Justices
seemed that though that prescription was pleaded that the common was extinct,
but it seems also to them that by special pleading he might have been helped
and save his common, for this was common Appendant, see 4. Coke, Tirringhams
Case, 37. 6.

Hillary 8. Jacobi 1610. In the Common Bench. Cartwright against Gilbert.
IN Debt upon an obligation with condition to be and perform an Arbitrament to
be made, the Arbitrators award, that the Defendant should make Submission, and
should acknowledge himself sorry for all transgressions and words, at or before
the next Court to be held in the Manor of P. And for the not performance of
that Award, the Plaintiff brought this Suit, and the Defendant in Bar of this,
pleads that at the said next Court, he went to the Court to make his submission
and to acknowledge himself greived according to the Award, and was there ready
to have performed it, but further he says, that the Plaintiff was not there to
accept it, upon which the Plaintiff demurred; and it seems to Coke and Foster
that the Defendant has done as much as was to be done of his part; and for
that, that the Plaintiff was not there ready to accept, the Defendant was
discharged, for this submission is personal, and to the intent to make them
friends, and for that both the parties ought to be present. But Walmesley and
Warburton seemed, that it might have been very well made in the absence of the
Plaintiff, as well as a man may submit himself to an Arbitrament of a man which
is absent, for this is only to be made to the intent to show himself sorrowful
for the Trespasses and words, which he has made and spoken, and it was not
argued but adjourned till the next term, and the Justices moved the parties
to make an end of that, for that it was a trifling Suit.

Hillary 8. Jacobi 1610 In the Common Bench. Sir Edward Ashfeild.
SIR Edward Ashfeild was bound in an obligation by the name of Sir Edmund, and
subscribed that with the name of Edward, and in Debt brought upon that, he
pleads (it is not his Deed) and it seems to all the Justices that he might
well plead that, for it appears to them that he is not named Edmund, and the
original against him, was, Command Edward, otherwise Edmund, and this was not
good, for a man cannot have two Christian names, and if judgment were given
against him by the name of Edmund, and the Sheriff arrest him by Capias, that
false imprisonment lies against him* But if he have a name given to him, when
he was christened, and another when he was confirmed, he shall be called and
known by the name given unto him at the time of his confirmation, and not by
the first, see, 11. R. 2. Grants 9. Ed. 3. 4. 12. R. 2 Feoffments 58. See
Perkins fol. 8. b 9. a. Grants, 10. Eliz. Dyer, 279. 4.

Hillary 8. Jacobi 1610 In the Common Bench. Styles against Baxter.
STyles brought an Action upon the case against Baxter for calling him perjured
man, the Defendant justified that he was perjured in such a Court, in such a
deposition and so pleaded that certainly, and it was found for the Defendant at
the Nisi prius, and Judgment was given accordingly, and the Defendant
afterward* published the same words of the Plaintiff, upon which he brought a
new Action for the new publication, in which the Defendant pleaded in Bar the
first Judgment, upon which the Plaintiff demurred, and it was adjudged without
any Contradiction; that it was a good Bar.

Hillari 8. Jacobi 1610. In the common Bench. Andrewe against Ledsam in the
Star Chamber.
ANdrewe exhibited his bill in the Star Chamber against Ledsam, the matter,
Andrew being a rich Usurer, delivered to Ledsam being a Scri^ener, one thousand
pound to be employed for him* for Interest, that is, for ten pound for the use
of every hundred pound for every year, Ledsam being a Prodigal man, as it
seems, spent the Money, and delivered to Andrewe diverse several obligations,
every of them containing three several persons, well known to be sufficient,
being some of them Knights, others Gentlemen and Esquires of great Estates, and
the other good Citizens without exceptions, were bound to Andrewe in two
hundred pound for the payment of one hundred sixty pound to Andrew at a day to
come within six Months then next coming, as Andrew, had used before to lend
his Money, and delivered the Obligations with Seals unto them, and the names
of the parties mentioned to be bound by that subscribed, and his own name also
subscribed as witnessing the sealing and delivery of them, as a public
Notary, a^ the good and lawful obligations of the Parties which were mentioned
in them, where indeed the parties mentioned in them, had not any notice of any
of them. But Ledsam had forged and counterfeited them, as he has confessed
upon his Examination, upon Interrogatories administered by the Plaintiff in this
Court, and at the hearing of the Cause and sentence of that, it was moved if
Ledsam shall loose both his Ears or but one, for if it be but one forgery,
then by the Statute of 5. Eliz. Admitting that the Bill is grounded upon this
Statute, he shall loose an Ear and pay the double dammage^ and cost to the
party greeved: And also if Andrew, being but the Obligee, and not any of the
parties, in whose names the Obligations were forged, if he be such a party
greived, which shall have double costs and damages, and these doubts were
resolved by Coke chief Justice of the Common Bench, where they were moved, and
Flemming chief Justice of the Kings Bench, that Ledsam should loose but one
ear, for that shall be taken as one forgery, for that it was made at one time,
and also that Andrew was the party greived within the Statute, but Coke said
that the Bill was general, that is against the Laws and Statutes of the
Realm, and not precisely upon the Statute of 5. Eliz. For he said, that when a
Bill is founded upon an Act of Parliament, that this ought to contain all the
branches which are mentioned in the Act, the which wants in this Bill, but
insomuch, that it was adjudged in Parliament what punishment such offenders
shall have, they inflicted the same punishment which is appointed by the
Statute, and added to that, that he should be Imprisoned till he found good
Suerties for his good behavior, and also that he shall be brought to every
one of the Kings Courts at Westminster with great Papers in his hatt,
containing his offense in Capital letters, but the Lord Chancellor expounded
the double damages in such manner; that is, that they shall not be intended
double Interest, but only the Principal Debt.

Note, that if Execution be directed to a Sheriff, to Arrest any man, or to
make Execution within a Liberty: And the Sheriff direct his Warrant to a
Bayliffe of the Liberty, for to make Execution of the Process, which makes it,
and after is a Fugitive, and not able to answer for that, the Lord of the
Franchise shall answer for that, and shall be liable to answer for his
Bayliffe, by all the Justices.

Burdett against Pix.
IN Debt upon a single Bill by Burdett against John Pix, as administrator of
Freewen, the case was this; that is, Freewen was bound in an Obligation of
thirty four pound to Burdett the Plaintiff, and was also bound to one William
Pix in 80. l. Freewen dyed Intestate, and the Letters of Administration of his
Goods were Committed after his Death, to the said John Pix, the Defendant and
the said William Pix also made the said John Pix the Defendant his Executor and
died, and the Defendant in this Action pleads, that the said Freewen was
indebted to the said William Pix, and that he was his Executor, and that he had
Goods of the said Freewens, sufficient to satisfy the said debt, the which he
retained for the satisfaction of that, and that over that, he has not of his
to satisfy him, upon which the Plaintiff Dem^or that, that the Defendant does
not plead, that he has ^is election to retain the said goods, for the
satisfaction of ^own said Debt before the Action brought, and by all the
Justices, he ought to make his election before the bringing of the Action,
otherwise he shall be charged with the other Debt. See Woodward and Darcyes
Case, Commentaries 184. a. and 4. Cook 30. Coulters Case.

Hillary 8. Jacobi 1610. in the Common Bench. Bone against Stretton.
THe case was this, A man seized of two Acres of Land, makes a Lease for years
of one Acre to one, and another Lease for years of the other Acre to another,
and then he enters and makes a Feoffment, and several Liveryes upon the
several Acres, and one of the Lessees being present, does not assent to the
said Livery, and the use of the said Feoffment, was not the use of his last
Will, and then he declares his last Will; and by that recites the said
Feoffment, and then declares the use of that to be to the use of himself for
life, the remainder over to a stranger, and after the Tenant for years which
did not assent to the Livery, grants his Estate to the Feoffor, and the Feoffor
dies; and Nicholls Sergeant moved first: That this enures as a grant of a
reversion; and that the grant of the particular Tenant enures, first as an
Attornement, and then as a surrender of his Estate, as if it had been an
express surrender, and all the Justices agreed, that this does not enure to
make Attornement and surrender as express surrender will, for an express
surrender admits the reversion, to be in the Grantee to whom the surrender is
made: But in this case before Attornement the Grantee has nothing, and after
Attornement the particular Estate being granted, it shall be drowned in the
reversion, Harris Sergeant, the words of the devise are, that his Feoffees and
all other Persons which after his Death shall be seized, shall be seized to the
same uses before declared, and of one Acre he has not any Feoffees; for of
that the Feoffment was void, and yet it was agreed that the devise was good as
Lyngies Case was in 35. H. 8, cited by Anderson, in Welden and Elkintons Case,
Commentaries 523 b. And he argued, that though, that when a conveyance may
enure in several courses, yet it cannot enure for part in one course, and part
in another course, and for that this devise enures as a devise of Land for one
Acre, and declaration of the use of the Feoffment fo^her Acre; for it is agreed
in Sir Rowland Haywards Case, 2. (...). a. 6. Coke 18. a. Sir Edward Cleeres
Case, and also in this (...) the devisor has, made express declaration, that
the Land shall pass by the Feoffment, and that the Will shall be but a
declaration of the use of the Feoffment, and for that nothing shall pass by
the devise, with which the Justices seemed to accord, and cited a case to be
adjudged in the Kings Bench, 40. Eliz. where the Father gives and grants Lands
to his Son and his heirs with warranty, and makes a Letter of Attorney within
the deed to make Livery, and adjudged, that that shall not enure as a Covenant
to raise a use, for that, that it appears by the Letter of Attorney, that his
intent was, that that should enure as a Feoffment, and not as any other manner
of conveyance, see 14 Eliz. Dyer 311. 83. Master Cromwells Case, and so it was
adjudged accordingly.

Hillary 8. Jacobi 1610. in the Common Bench: Gargrave against Gargrave.
Katherine Gargrave, was Plaintiff in a Replevin against Sir Richard Replevin.
Gargrave Knight, and the case was this; The Father of Sir Richard Gargrave was
seized of diverse Tenements called Lyngell Hall in Lyngell Hall, and of a Moore
called Kingstey Moore in another Town, and the Tenants of the said Father of
Sir Richard, have used to have Common in the said Moore, and the said Father so
being of that seized, demised the said Tenements to the said Katherine Gargrave
for her Jointure, by these words, by the name of Hingell Hall, and certain
Land, Meadow, and Pasture in certainty; and with all ^ands, Tenements, and
Hereditaments to that belonging; or with that occupied and enjoyed, now or late
in the Tenure of one Nevill; and Nevill was Tenant of the said premises, and
had Common in Kingsley Moore, upon which the question was; if the said
Katherine by this demise shall have Common in the said Moore or not. And Hutton
Sergeant argued, that the said Katherine shall have Common in the said Moore,
for he said, that the said demise shall be expounded, according to the intent
of the party, (...) as it is agreed in Hill and Granges Case, Commentaries
270. b. Where a man makes a Lease for years of a house, and all the Lands to
that belonging, and though it is there agreed, that Land cannot be appurtenant
to a house, yet this word appurtenant, shall be taken in the effect and sense
of usually occupied with the Message or lying to the house, by which it
appears that the words are transferred from the proper signification to
another, to satisfy the intent of the parties, for it is the office of the
Judges, to take and expound the words which the common People use, to express
their intent according to their intent, and for that shall be taken not
according to the very definition, insomuch that it does not stand with the
matter, but in such manner as the party used them: And for that this grant
shall amount to a new grant of Common in the said Moor, for as it seems common
or feeding for Cattle may be granted, and pass by the name of Tenements and
Hereditaments, or at least shall be included and comprised within the words
Tenements and Hereditaments, and so shall be construed as a thing occupied and
enjoyed with the said Messuages, see Hen. Finches Case 39. Coke. And it was an
express endorsment upon the demise, that the said Katherine should not have
Common in the said Moore, but it was agreed by all, that this was vain and
idle, and nothing worth; but he urged that this shall have a favorable
construction, for that it was for Jointure, which shall have as favorable
construction as Dower. And so he prayed Judgment for the Plaintiff; and of the
other part Nicholls Sergeant argued, that this shall not amount to a new grant,
for he said that they are not apt words to receive such construction, for he
said that this is no Tenement or Hereditament, no Common, but only a Feeding
for the Cattle of the Lessee, in the wast of the Lessor, see 20. Edw. 2.
Fitzherbert, admeasurement, and it cannot pass as a thing used with the said
house, for that was not in Esse at the time of the grant, and there is not any
apt word to make a new grant, and he cited (...) Judgment in Action of wast,
between Arden and Darcy, where Ardon was seized of the Manor of Curball and
also of Parkhall, and makes a conveyance of the Manor of Curball to diverse
uses, and at this time parcel of the Manor of Curball, was occupied with
Parkhall as parcel of that, and after made another conveyance, of all his
Lands in England, except the Manor of Curball: And adjudged that the Park*
which is used with Parkhall shall not be within the exception* Coke says, that
it was only feeding, and not Hereditament, for the Inheritance of both was in
the Lessor; but if it be granted of feeding it shall be intended the same like
feeding, that the Tenant has; as if the King grant such Liberties as the City
of London has, and that shall be good, and so it was adjourned.

Hillary 8. Jacobi, 1610. In the Common Bench. Cannige against Doctor Newman.
IN an Information upon the Statute of 21 H. 8. chapter 13. Of non-residency,
it was found by special Verdict, that Doctor Newman was Incumbent, invested in
the Rectory of Staplehurst in the County of Kent, and that he was also seized
of a house in Staplehurst aforesaid; situate within twenty yards of the said
Rectory, and that the mansion house of the said Rectory was in good repair,
and that Doctor Newman held that in his hands and occupation with his one
proper goods, and did not let it to any other, and that he inhabited in the
said Message and not in the Parsonage, the Statute of 21 H. 8 chapter 13.
Provides, that every Parson promoted to any Parsonage, shall be personally
resident, and abiding in, at, and upon his said Benefice, and in case any such
spiritual Parson keep not residence at his Benefice, as aforesaid, but absent
himself wilfully by the space of a month together or two Months, to be
accounted at several times, in any one year, and makes his residence and
abiding in any other places by such time, that then he shall forfeit for every
such default ten pounds, the one half to the King, and the other half to the
Informer; and if the said Doctor Newman was not resident, and incurred the
penalty of this Statute was the question, and it was argued by Haughton, that
he had incurred the penalty of the Statute, and was non-resident within the
intent, and he argued that to some intent all the Parish may be said the
Benefice of the Parson, for that, that he has benefit out of it, and he is
called Parlon of such a Town or Parish, but this is not the Benefice that the
Statute intends, upon which he ought to be resident, as in the 29. Assise 55.
If a Corrody be granted out of an Abbey, it shall not be intended out of the
seat of the Abbey, out of the Book of 29. Assise 8. Where it is said, that if a
Rent be granted out of a Priory, that all the possessions of the Priory are
charged, as to that he says, it was but (it was said) and not Judgment, and
also the said Books may be well reconciled, for it is more proper that the
seat of the Abbey shall be charged with the Corrody, and the possessions of the
Priory with the Rent, and also he said, there were seven causes of making of
the said Statute, whereof but two are to our purpose, the first is Hospitality,
second releife of the Poor, and these are to be done in the Parsonage house,
for this is the free Alms of the Church, and so it was adjudged, 34 of Eliz.
in the Kings Bench, Broom and Hudson, and in this Court also, and in this
Court also in the 40 of Eliz. in the Kings Bench betwixt Butler and Goodall 6
Coke 21 b. that he ought to be resident upon the Parsonage house and not other
where, and he allowed and agreed, that imprisonment without deceit, and
sickness are good excuses, but so it shall not be a prejudice, for the
Parsonage house is in good repair: And so concluded that judgment shall be
given for the Plaintiff: And for the Defendant, Barker Sergeant argued, that it
appears by the special Verdict, that Doctor Newman held the Parsonage house in
his own hands and occupation, and did not let it, upon which he gathered that
his servants were resident upon it, and to the exposition of the Statute, he
says, that it appears by Heydons Case, 3 Coke 7. a. That the better means to
expound Statutes, is to consider the mischeife which was at the common Law
before the making of that, and when it is intended to be reformed by that, and
this appears by the Preamble of that Statute, also he says, that before the
Council of Lateran a man might pay his tithes to whom he would, but by the
same Council all the Parish is made the Benefice of the Parson, for he
receives benefit by that, and yet he said, that before the said Statute, every
spiritual man was bound and compellable by the Ecclesiastical Law to be
resident, yet if he were in the Kings Service or an Officer in the Chancery, he
should be excused, as it appears in the Register, fol. 58. b. Though that he
were Dean, the which Office merely requires his personal residence, as it is
there said, and also he says, that the Case between Butler and Goodall, was
that the Parson demised all the Parsonage house but only one Chamber, and was
not resident in that, but in a Copyhold within the Town, and so prayed
Judgment for the Defendant, this case was compounded by the Lord Coke, but he
intended this was no residence within the Statute, for this was not his
Benefice, but the Tenants part of that, as he said has been adjudged in the
Exchequer.

Hillary 8. Jacobi 1610 In Banco Communi. Crogat against Morris
THE Case was, A Commoner brought an Action upon the Case, against a stranger,
for that his Beasts came in and fed upon the Common, and by Coke, Walmesley,
and Warburton it lies very well, Foster to the contrary, for then every
Commoner may have the same Action, and then it would be infinite.

Hillary 8. Jacobi 1610. In Bonco Communi. (...) against the Lady Saint John,
Postea, 269.
SEE for the beginning of this in Michalemas term last, and that case was
argued again by Hutton. Sergeant for the Defendant, that the parcelling of
reversion destroyed the Covenant, it was agreed in Winters case in case of
condition, and he agreed, that that Covenant is within the Statute of 31. H. 8.
chapter. 34. as well as condition, and for that Grantee of part of the
Reversion shall not have an Action of Covenant, for then if there be twenty
Grantees, every one of them shall have several Action, and this was not the
intent of the Statute, and as to the Common Law before the Statute, a thing
which gives action cannot be divided, and he urged, that when the Reversion of
Fee simple was first granted, if he may by that have an action, then when the
Reversion of the term was granted, he may have another action, and so a man
may have two several actions for one thing, see, 29. Assise 23. Three
Coparceners were, and Rent of five pound was allotted to two of them equally to
be divided, that is, fifty shillings to one and fifty shillings to another, and
they two joined in an Action, and it is doubted, if the Writ shall abate or
not, and 44 Ed. 3. 34. b. The Abbot of Westminster^ Case, the Abbot made a
Lease of a Manor, except the Wood, and after by another Deed he let the Wood,
and the Lessee made Wast in the Manor and the Wood, and he brought one Action
of Wast and it is not good; and he agreed that one Formedon yeth upon two
discontinuances, for there was but one discontinuance, and that is the cause of
the Action, but a man cannot have a Writ of Warrantia Charte upon two Deeds, no
more in the^ principal case, for the Plaintiff has his Title by two Deeds*
and so concluded, and prayed Judgment for the Defendant. Harris Sergeant argued
of the other part for the Plaintiff, that an action of Covenant lies very
well, for the original Lease was but one entire Lease, and the Covenant was
also entire, and for that the Grantee of the Reversion shall have advantage of
that, and he agreed that in real actions, which always are grounded upon the
title, and for that if it be grounded upon two titles, he ought to have 2.
actions according to his title, but in personal actions where the action is
grounded upon the deed, and another matter which comes (Ex post facto) which is
the (wrong) which is the cause of the action, and for which damages I shall be
recovered as it is said in Blakes Case* 44. 6, Coke, and this is the reason
that a man may have an Action upon the Statute of Offenders in Parkes for
hunting in two Parkes, 13 H. 7^12. and 8 Ed. 4. (...) One Action of Trespass
for Trespasses* made at several times, and so one Action of Debt for diverse
Contracts, 11 H. 6. 24. by Martin, 3 H. 6. Trespass, 3 H. 4. But he argued that
in real or mixed Actions, as ravishment of Ward, for several Wards or one;
Quare impedit for several Churches, this shall not be good, Fitz. Ward 52. 3.
H. 6. 52. And also he said that the Statute of 32 H. 8. chapter 34. by express
words gives the same remedy to Grantees of Reversions, that the Grantors
themselves had, and the Grantor without question, may have an Action if he have
not granted the Reversion, and so he concluded, and prayed Judgment for the
Plaintiff, and it was adjourned.

Hillary 8. Jacobi 1610. In the Common Bench. Sturgis against Dean, see T. 65.
A Man was bound to pay to the Plaintiff ten pound within ten days after his
return from Jerusalem, the Plaintiff proving that he had been there, and the
Plaintiff after ten days brought his Action upon the Obligation, without
making of any proof that he had been there, and if that were good, or that he
ought to make proof of that before he brings his Action, this was the
question, and also he ought to make proof, then what manner of proof, and it
was moved by Haughton, that when a thing is true, and is not referred to any
certain and particular manner of proof, as before what shall be done, or how
the proof shall be made, the party may bring his Action, and the other party
may take his Issue, upon the doing of the thing which ought to be proved and
the trial of that shall be proof sufficient, and in his count he need not to
aver that he had been there, see 10 Ed. 4. 11. b. c. 15, Ed. 4. 25. 7 R. 2.
Bar 241. And here also the proof, if any should, it ought to be made within
ten days, the which cannot be made by Jury in so short a time, as it is said
by Choke in 10 Ed. 4. 11. b. though that he agreed, that when a man may speak
of proof generally, that shall be intended proof by Jury, for that, that this
is the most high proof, as it is said in Gregory's Case, 6 Coke 20. a. and 10
Ed. 4. 11. b. But of the other part it was said by Sherley Sergeant, that true
it is that proof ought to be made for the Defendant, as the Case is in 10 Ed.
4. 11. That then such proof should be sufficient, for the Plaintiff may bring
his Action before that the Defendant may by possibility bring his Action, but
where the Plaintiff ought to make the proof, there he ought to prove, that
before that he bring his Action, and it shall be accounted his Folly, that he
would bring his action before he had proved that, but all the Justices agreed,
that the Plaintiff need not to make any other proof, but only by the bringing
of his Action, but the Lord Coke took exception to the pleading, for that, that
the Plaintiff has not averred in his replication that he was at Jerusalem,
but generally that such a day he returned from thence; and he said, that a man
might return from a place, when he was not at the same place, as if he had
been near the place, or in the skirts of Jerusalem, and upon that it was
adjourned, see the beginning of that. Trinity 8. Jacobi 462. a. Mich. 13. 200.
and 204.

Hillary 8. Jacobi 1610. in the Common Bench. Wickenden against Thomas.
THe Case was this, 2. Executors were jointly made in a Will, 2. Executors one
refuses.
one of them releases a Debt due to the Testator, and after before the Ordinary
refuses to Administer, and it was agreed by all the Justices; that the release
was Administration, and for that he has made his Election, and then the
Refusal comes too late, and so is void.

Bedell against Bedell.
IN wast the case was this, A Man seized of Lands makes his Will, Waste. 2.
Executors, one refuses.
and of that makes two Executors, and devises his Lands to his Executors for
one and twenty years after his Death, upon trust, that they should permit A.
To enjoy that during, and to take all the profits all the Term, if he so long
lived, and if he ^ied within the Term, then that B. should take the profits,
and so with others remained in the same manner, with the remainder over to a
stranger in tail, one of the Executors refuses to prove the Will, or
Administer, and also to accept the Term, the other executor proves the Will,
and Administers the Goods, and enters into the Land according to the Lease, and
that assigns to A. according to the trust reposed in him, and after that he in
reversion in tail brings an Action of wast against the Executors which proved
the Will, and he proved all the matter aforesaid, and that before the
assignement, and that before that no wast was made, and it seems to all the
Judges, that this was a good Plea, for the waveing of one Executor is good, and
though that he might after Administer, as the book of 21. Ed. 4. Is for that,
the Interest of his Companion preserves his Authority, where are 2 or more. But
if there be but one Executor and he refuses, and the Ordinary grants
Administration to another, he cannot then Administer again; and Coke chief
Justice cited that one Rowles, made the Lord Chancellor which then was the
chief Justice of England, and the Master of the Rolls, his Executors and died,
and they writ their Letters to the Ordinary, witnessing that they were Employed
in great businesses, and could not intend the performance of the said Will, and
that for that, they desire to be free of that, and that the Ordinary would
committ the Administration, of the goods of the said Testator to the next of
blood, and this sufficient refusal. And upon that the Ordinary committed the
Administration accordingly: And to the pleading, that no wast was made before
the assignement, they all agreed that this was good, and so it was adjourned
for this time.

A man sold his Land upon a condition, and after took a Wife Bargain and sale
upon Cond^
and died, the Heir entered for the Condition broken, yet the Wife shall not be
endowed, so if the Condition had been broken before the Death of the Husband,
if he had not entered, for he had but title of entery.

Hillary 8. Jacobi 1610. in the Common Bench. As yet Doctor Husseys Case:
MOore against Doctor Hussy and his Wife and many others, Ravishment of Ward.
in Ravishement of Ward. The case was, the Ward of Moore was placed at the
University of Oxford to be instructed in the liberal Sciences, and was married
by the Wife of Doctor Hussy to the Daughter of the said Wife, which she had by
a former Husband. And for that Moore brought this Writ against Doctor Hussy
and his Wife, and the Minister which married them, and all others which were
present at the said marriage, or Actors in that. And upon Evidence it appeared,
that Doctor Hussy was not present nor Actor in it; and for that the Jury found
him not guilty, but they found all the other Defendants guilty of the said
Ravishment, for upon the Evidence it appears, that the Wife of Doctor Hussy
procured and provided the Minister which married them, and in the last
Michaelmas Term this was tried here at the Bar, and the Jury assessed
Damages to ten pound, and the value of the Ward to eighty pound, for so much
Moore proved that he could have sold him for, and also the Jury found, that the
Ward does appear married being of the Age of 16. years at the time of his
marriage, and exceptions were taken to that, for that it was not found of what
age the Ward was at the time of the verdict, and it was urged by Dodridge that
by the Statute of Westminster 2. chapt. 39. The precise age ought to be found
at the time of the verdict. Secondly it was found that the Ward did appear
married, and does not say without License of the Guardian, and the Guardian may
give his consent, where the Ward marries himself, and then there is no cause
of action. The third and other exception was taken in the behalf of the Wife
of Doctor Hussy, for that she being a married Wife was found guilty of
Ravishment of Ward, against the Statute of Westminster the 2. chap. 39. And it
was urged that it was not the intent of the Statute that provides, that he
which did Ravish; not having right in the marriage, though he should restore
the Boy naked and not married, or should satisfy for the marriage, he shall be
punished for the transgression, by Imprisonment for two years, and if he shall
not restore him, or shall marry the Heir, after the marrying years, and
cannot satisfy for the marriage, he shall abjure the Realm, or shall have
perpetual Imprisonment. And it was objected that a married woman, was not
intended to be within this Statute, for it is apparent, that a married woman
has not wherewith to make satisfaction, and it shall not be intended that she
shall have perpetual Imprisonment, or make abjuration, for this was to make
separation between the Husband and his Wife, and so it was adjourned. And the
Judges moved the parties to compound amongst themselves, see Michaelmas 8.
Jacobi. Trinity 9 Jacobi.

Pasch. 9. Jacobi 1611. in the Common Bench. Kenricke against Pargiter and
Phillipps. Mich. (...). Jacobi. Rot. 213.

RObert Pargiter Gentleman, and John Phillipps were summoned Common of Pasture.
to answer to Robert Kenricke Gentleman of a Plea, why they took the Beasts of
the said Robert Kenricke, and those unjustly detained against Suerties and
Pledges, etc. And thereupon the said Robert Kenricke by Thomas Pilkington his
Attorney does complain, that the said Robert and John the fourth day of August
the year of the Reign of our now King seventh, at Kings Sutton in a certain
place called Great Greenes took Beasts, that is to say, one Gelding, one Mare,
and one Colt of the said Robert Kenrickes, and do unjustly detain them against
Suerties and Pledges, until, etc. By which means he says he is the worse,
and has loss to the value of twenty pound, and therefore brings this suit,
etc. And the aforesaid Robert Pargiter and John Phillipps, by John Barton their
Attorney, do come and defend the force and Injury when, etc. And the said
Robert Pargiter in his own right does well avow, and the aforesaid John
Phillipps as Bailiff of the said Robert Pargiter, does well acknowledge the
taking of the said Beasts in the aforefaid place in which, etc. and justly,
etc. Because he says that the said place, in which it is supposed the taking
of the said Beasts to be made, did contain and at the aforesaid time in which
it is supposed the taking of the aforesaid Beasts to be made, did contain in
it four Acres of Meadow in Kings Sutton aforesaid, which the said Robert
Pargiter long before the aforesaid time in which, etc. and also at the same
time in which, etc. was and as yet appears seized of one Message and one
virge of land with the appurtenances in Kings Sutton, in his Demesne as of Fee,
and that the aforesaid Robert Kenrick the aforesaid time when, etc. and long
before was seized of a Message and four Virges of land with the appurtenances
in Kings Sutton aforesaid, whereof the aforesaid place in which, etc. Is, and
at the aforesaid time when, etc. and also at the time, to the contrary does not
appear in the memory of man, was parcel in his Demesne as of Fee. And the
said Robert Pargiter and John Phillipps further say, that the said Robert
Pargiter and all those whose Estate the said Robert Pargiter now has, and at
the aforesaid time when, etc. had in the aforesaid Message and one Virge of
Land with the Appurtenances of the said Robert Pargiter, from time the contrary
whereof does not appear in the memory of man, had and have used to have, and
were accustomed to have Common of Pasture in the aforesaid place, etc. For six
Horses, Geldings or Mares, two Colts, six young Beasts called Steeres, or young
Beasts called Heifers, and two Mares called breeders, in and upon the said
Message, and one Virge of Land with the Appurtenances, lying and rising in
manner and form following, that is to say, every year, in and from the first
day of August called Lammas day, until the feast of the purification of the
blessed Mary the Virgin, then next following, as to the said Message and one
Virge of Land with the Appurtenances, belonging, and the said Robert Pargiter
and John Phillipps further say, that the aforesaid Robert Kenricke of the
aforesaid Message and four Virges of Land with the Appurtenances whereof,
etc. In the form aforesaid, appearing seized, the said Robert and all those
whose Estate the said Robert Kenricke now has, and at the aforesaid time in
which, etc. had in the aforesaid Message and four Virges of Land with the
Appurtenances whereof, etc. time out of mind, had and were used and accustomed
to have the aforesaid place in which, etc. To their proper use in severalty
every year, in and from the feast of the purification of the blessed Virgin
Mary, until the first day of August called Lammas day then next coming, that
by reason, and in consideration thereof, he the aforesaid Robert Kenrick, and
all those whose Estate the said Robert Kenrick now has, and at the time in
which, etc. had in the aforesaid Message and four Virges of Land with the
Appurtnances whereof, etc. time out of mind, have had and were accustomed to
have every year from the aforesaid first day of August, called Lammas day, and
from thence until the aforesaid purification, then next following, Common of
pasture in the aforesaid place in which, etc. Only for three Mares or Geldings
and no more, and because the Beasts aforesaid in the narration aforesaid,
specified over and above the aforesaid other three Mares or Geldings, the
aforesaid time in which, etc. were in the aforesaid place in which, etc the
Grass then growing, there eating, and the Common of pasture of the said Robert
Pargiter, overcharging, and doing damage to the said Robert there, the said
Robert Pargiter in his own right does well avow, and the aforesaid John
Phillips as Bailiff of the aforesaid Pargiter do well acknowledge the taking
of the Beasts aforesaid in the aforesaid place in which, etc. and justly, etc.
they then doing damage there, etc.

And the aforesaid Robert Kenrick says, That neither the said Robert Pargiter
for the reason before alleged, the taking of the aforesaid Beasts in the
aforesaid place in which, etc. can justly avow, nor the aforesaid John Phillips
as Bailiff of the aforesaid Pargiter, for the same reason the taking of the
Beasts aforesaid, in the aforesaid place in which, etc. justly can acknowledge,
Because by protestation that he the said Robert Kenrick, and all those whose
estate the said Robert Kenrick now has, and at the aforesaid time of the
taking, etc. had in the said Message and four Virges of Land, with the
appurtenances, whereof, etc. time out of mind, had not, nor used to have, or
were accustomed, every year at the first day of August, called Lammas day, and
from thence to the next Feast of the Parification then next following, Common
of pasture in the aforesaid place in which, etc. only for three Horses, Mares,
or Geldings, and not more, in manner and form as the aforesaid Robert Pargiter
and John Phillips above have alleged; for Plea the said Robert Kenrick says,
That he long before the time of the taking of the Beasts aforesaid, and also at
the same time of the taking, etc. was seized of the Manor of Kings Sutton with
the appurtenances in Kings Sutton and Astrop in the County aforesaid, whereof
the aforesaid Message and four Virges of Land with the appurtenances, whereof,
etc. are and at the aforesaid time of the taking, etc. and also time out of
mind, etc. were parcel, in his Demesne, as of Fee; and the aforesaid House and
four Virges of Land, with the appurtenances thereof, etc. and of the taking,
and likewise time out of mind, were parcel of the Demesne Lands of the Manor
of Kings Sutton aforesaid: And the said Robert Kenrick so of the Manor
aforesaid, with the appurtenances in manner aforesaid appearing seized, the
said Robert, before the said time in which, etc. put his Beasts aforesaid,
which then were the proper Beasts of the said Robert Kenrick, upon the
aforesaid House and four Virges of Land with the appurtenances, lying and
rising in the aforesaid place in which, etc. to eat the Grafs there growing in
the said place, in which, etc. called Great Greens, parcel, etc. the Grass in
the same then growing, feeding, and the aforesaid Beasts were in the place
aforesaid, until the aforesaid Robert Pargiter and John Phillips, the
aforesaid fourth day of August, the seventh year aforesaid, at Kings Sutton
aforesaid, in the County aforesaid, at Great Green, parcel, etc. took the
said Beasts of the said Robert Kenrick, and those unjustly detained, against
Sureties and Pledges, until, etc. as he above against those complains, and
this he is ready to verify; whereof, and from which the aforesaid Robert
Pargiter and John Phillips, the taking of the aforesaid Beasts in the aforesaid
place, etc. further acknowledge, the said Robert Kenrick demands Judgment and
his damages (by reason of the taking and unjust detaining of those beasts) to
be adjudged unto him, etc.

And the aforesaid Robert Pargiter and John Phillips say, that the aforesaid
Plea of the said Robert Kenrick above in the Bar avowed pleaded, and matter
therein contained, is very insufficient in Law, justly to avoid the said Robert
Pargiter and the said John from just acknowledging the taking of the Beasts
aforesaid, to have and shut up, and that he to the said plea in manner and
form aforesaid pleaded, has no need, not by the Law of the Land shall be held
to answer, and this they are ready to averr, whereof for default of a
sufficient plea of the aforesaid Robert Kenrick in this part, the said Robert
and John, as before, demand Judgment, and Return of the Beasts aforesaid,
together with their Damages, etc. To them to be adjudged, etc. And the
aforesaid Robert Kenrick in respect he has sufficient matter in Law, justly to
avoid the said Robert Pargiter, and the aforesaid John from justly
acknowledging the taking of the said Beasts to be shut out as above alleged,
which he is reaoy to verify, which truly matter of the aforesaid Robert
Pargiter and John do not answer according to their verifying, they altogether
refuse to admit as before, and demand Judgment, and their Damages occasioned by
the taking and unjust detaining of the said Beasts, to be adjudged to them,
etc. And because, etc. Upon the pleadings the Case was thus, a Freeholder
prescribs to have common in parcel of the Demesnes of the Manor for six
Horses and other Cattle in certain Land from Lammas to Candlemas, and that the
Lord of the Manor has used to have the said Parcel of Land in several to
his own use, from Candlemas to Lammas, and in consideration of that, the said
Lord has used to have Common in the said parcel of Land for Horses only and
not more, and the Lord unjustly puts in other Beasts then the said three Horses
in the said parcel of Land, and surcharged the Common, and the Freeholder
distrayned them doing Damage, and the Lord brings a Replevin, and it was argued
that prescription was not good, for that that Freeholder claims that as
Common without number, in his several Soil, the Grantee cannot exclude the
owner of the Soil, 12 H. 8. Brook, so of him which has Common Fishing in the
several of another, he cannot exclude him which has the several, 18 H. 6.
16. And it is not like to the Case of the time of Edward the first,
prescription the 55. Where is Prescription that the Owner of the Soil shall be
excluded from his Common for part of the year, for there the other claims all
the Vesture of the Land, and so may well exclude the Lord, but not when he
claims it but as Common, but it was agreed that by Laws by the Commoners
consent they may order that their great Cattle shall be put in in such Field
only, until such a Feast, and after that for sheep and swine, and this is
good, as it appears by 46 Ed. 3. 25. And Coke chief Justice said, that such
prescription to have Common and to exclude the Owner of the Soil, is not good,
and he says that so it has been adjudged between White of Shirland, 31 Eliz.
And in Cletherwoods Case of the Middle Temple, but he said that Prescription to
have all the Vesture of the Land, is good for such a time, and at the first day
of the Argument of this Case, Foster Justice seemed that the prescription was
good, and might have reasonable beginning, that is by Grant, as if they have
Common together, and they agree that one shall have all for one part of the
year, and the other for another part of the year, and that shall be good, to
which Coke answered, that that cannot be by Prescription to have that as
Common, and at another day Coke, cited Shirland and Whites Case to be adjudged,
26 of Eliz. in the Kings Bench, to be prescription to have common in the Waste
of the Lord, and to exclude the Lord to have common in the place, and adjudged
to be void prescription, and also he cited a case between Chimery and Fist,
where prescription was to have common in the Soil of the Lord, and that the
Lord shall have feeding but for so many cattle, and adjudged that the
Prescription was not good to exclude the Lord, but a man may prescribe to have
the first Crop, or the first Vesture of another Land, and it is good, and with
that agrees the resolution in Kiddermisters Case in the Star Chamber; Warburton
justice said, that this prescription is not for the excluding of the Lord, but
for their good ordering of their Lands, according to the Book of 46 Ed. 3 25.
before cited, that the great Cattle should have the first feeding, and after
that the sheep: Coke said, that if it had appeared by the pleading, that all
the Demesnes of the Lord ought to be common, and in consideration, that the
Lord had enclosed part, and enjoyed that in several, the Freeholders and
Tenants of the Manor which have Common over all the Residue, and exclude the
Lord, and this shall be good by prescription, and it is adjourned, see 15 Ed.
2. Fitzherbert Prescription 51.

And afterward in Trinity Term 1612. 10. Jacobi, this case was moved again,
and all the Justices agreed as this Pleading is, Judgment shall be given for
the Plaintiff, and they moved the parties to replead.

Pasch. 9. Jacobi, in the Common Bench. Portington against Rogers. Trin. 8.
Jacobi, Rot. 3823.
MARY Portington brought a Trespass against Robert Rogers Trespass.
and others Defendants, for the breaking of her house and Close, upon not
guilty pleaded and special Verdict found, the Case was this, A man had Issue
three Daughters, and made his Will in writing, and by that devised certain Land
to the youngest Daughter in tail, the Remainder to the Eldest Daughter in
tail, the Remainder to the middlemost daughter in tail, with Proviso, that if
my said daughters or any of them, or any other Person or persons before enamed,
to whom any estate of Inheritance in possession or Remainder, of, in, or to the
said Lands, limited or appointed by this my last Will and Testament, or to the
Heirs before mentioned of them or any of them, shall jointly or severally by
themselves, or together with any other, willingly, apparently, and advisedly,
conclude and agree, to or for the doing or execution of any Act or Devise
whereby or wherewith the said Premises so to them intailed as aforesaid, or any
part or parcel thereof, or any estate or Remainder thereof, shall or may by
any way or means be discontinued, aliened or put away from such person or
persons and their Heirs, or any of them, contrary to mine intent and meaning
in this my Will, otherwise then for a Jointure, or shall willingly or advisedly
commit or do any act or thing, whereby the premises or any part thereof, shall
not or may not descend, remain, or come to such persons, and in such sort and
order, as I have before limited and appointed by this my last Will and
Testament, then I will limit, declare, and appoint, that then my said Daughter
or Daughters, or other the said person or persons before named, and every of
them, so concluding and agreeing, to or for the doing or execution of any such
act or Devise as is aforesaid, shall immediately from and after such concluding
and agreeing loose and forfeit, and be utterly barred and excluded of and from
all and every such Estate, Remainder, and benefit, as she or they, or any of
them should, might, or ought justly, to have, claim, Challenge, and demand,
of, in, or to so much thereof, as such conclusion or agreement shall extend
unto or concern, in such manner and form, as if she or they, or any of them,
had not been named nor mentioned in this my last Will and Testament, and that
the Estate of such person, etc. shall cease and determine, etc. And after that
the youngest Daughter took a Husband, and then she and her Husband concluded
and agreed to suffer a Recovery, and so to bar the Remainder, and upon that
the Plaintiff being the eldest Daughter entered, and upon the Entry brought this
Action: And Harris Sergeant argued for the Defendant, that this shall be a
condion and not a limitation, and he said that Mews and Scholiasticas Case is
not adjudged against him, see the Commentaries, 412. b. And it shall be taken
strictly, for that, that it comes in Defesans of the Estate, and then admitting
it is a condition it is not broken, for this conclusion and agreement is only
the agreement of the Husband, and though that the Wife be joined, yet be that
for her benefit or prejudice, that shall be intended only the Act of the
Husband, and he only shall be charged, as in the 48 Ed. 3, 18. Husband and Wife
join in Contract, and the Husband only brings Action upon that, and 45 Ed. 3.
11. Husband and Wife join in Covenant, and the Action was brought against them
both, and it was abated, for that shall charge the Husband only, 24 Ed. 3. 38
The Husband and the Wife join in an Action upon the Statute of Laborers, and
the Writ abated, and so in cases of Freehold, as 15 Ed. 4. 29. b. The Husband
and the Wife being Tenants for life, join in praying aid of a stranger, and
this shall be no forfeiture of the Estate of the Wife, and 48 Ed. 3. 12. a.
Statute Merchant was made to the husband and Wife and they joined in Defeasans,
that shall not be Defeasans of the Wife, and 28 H. 8. Dyer 6. The Husband of
the Wife Executrix, aliens the Term which was let to the Testator upon
condition, that he or his Executors should not alien, and by Baldwin by the
alienation of the Husband the Condition was not broken, for it was out of the
words, so here the agreement and conclusion being made by Husband and Wife
shall be intended the Act of the Husband only, and so out of the Words, and by
consequence, out of the intent of the Condition, and shall be taken strictly,
but he seemed that the Condition shall be void, for the Words (conclude and
agree) are words uncertain, for what shall be said conclusion and agreement
within the said Provision, and for that as it seems it is so uncertain as
going about, but admitting that it is good, yet it shall be good but to some
purpose, but not to restrain the Daughter which was Tenant in tail, to do
lawful Acts, as to suffer a Recovery, or to levy a Fine, as it is resolved in
Mildmayes case, 6 Coke 40. By which it appears that she has as well power to
dispose that by Recovery as of Fee simple, notwithstanding that the Reversion
remains in the Giver, as it appears by 12 Ed. 4. 3. For all lawful Acts made
by Tenant in tail shall bind the Issue, as 44 Ed. 3. Octavian Lumbards Case,
Grant of Rent for Release of right is good, and shall bind the Issue, for
there are four incidents to an Estate tail, First, That he shall not be
punished for Waste. Secondly, That his Wife shall be endowed. Thirdly, That the
Husband of the Wife Tenant in Tail, shall be Tenant by the Courtisie.
Fourthly, That Tenant in Tail may suffer common recovery. So that a Condition
which restraines him so that he cannot suffer a common Recovery is void, for it
is incident to his act, and it is a lawful Act, and for the benefit of the
Issue as it is intended, in respect of the intended recompense, and he said
that a Feoffment to a woman covert or infant, shall be conditional, that they
shall not make a Feoffment during their disability, is good, for that the Law
has then made them disable to make a Feoffment, so a Lease for life or years
upon condition that he shall not alien, is good, in respect of the confidence
that was reposed in them by the Lessor, and so concluded that the Condition in
this Case which restraines Tenant in Tail generally from alienation. First,
was uncertain in respect of the words (conclude and agree) Secondly for that it
was against Law and so void, and for that prayed Judgment for the Defendant.

Hutton Sergeant for the Plaintiff, he argued that the verbal agreement of the
Wife shall bind her, notwithstanding the Coverture, for that, that this is for
her benefit, for in performance of the said agreement, she suffers a recovery
to the use of her self and her Heirs, and so Dockes the remainder, and he
agreed the cases put by the other part which concern freehold, but he said in
cases of Limitation of Estates, as if Limitation be, if a Ring be tendered by a
woman that the Land shall remain to her, and she takes a Husband, and after
that she and the Husband tender the Ring, this shall be sufficient tender, and
it shall be intended the Act* of the wife, and 10. H 7. 20. a. A man devises
his Lands to a married woman to be sold, she may sell them to her Husband; And
though that it be not any agreement of the Husband only, yet here is an act
done, in a Precipe brought against the Wife, and she vouches over, for that is
not only an agreement, but an Act executed, upon which the Estate Limited to
the eldest Sister shall take effect, and the 2. Coke the 27. a. Beckwiths Case.
If the Husband and the Wife, join in a Fine of Land of the Wife, the Wife only
without the Husband may declare the use of that. And he intended it was a
Limitation and not a condition, and so it might be well at this day in case of
devise, and then the Act shall be, that the Estate is Limited to have
beginning, being made the Estate of the youngest Daughter which made the Act,
shall be destroyed and determined, for if it be a condition, then all the
Daughters shall take advantage of that, and this was not the intent of the
Devisor, for they are the parties which should be restrained by the devise from
Alienation. And also he cited Wenlocke and Hamonds Case cited in Bractons Case,
3. Coke 20. b. Where a Copyholder in fee of Lands devisable in Borough
English, having three Sons and a Daughter, devises his Lands to his eldest
Son, paying to his Daughter and to his other Sons forty shillings within two
years after his death, the Devisor makes surrender according to the use of
his Will and dies, the eldest Son admitted, and does not pay the money within
the two years, and adjudged that though the word payment makes a condition,
yet in this case of devise the Law construes that to a Limitation, and the
reason is there given to be, for that, that is, it shall be a condition, then
that shall descend upon the eldest Son, and then it stands at his pleasure, if
the Brothers or Sister shall be paid, or not, and 29. Assis. 17. cytes in
Nourse and Scholasticas Case, Commentaries 412. b. where a man seized of Lands
in Fee devisable, devises them to one for life, and that he should be
Chapleine and single for his Soul all his life, so that after his decease, the
said tenements should remain to the Commonalty of the same Town, to find a
Chapleine perpetual for the same Tenements, and dyed, and adjudged that this
shall not be a condition of which the heir shall take advantage, but limitation
upon which the remainder shall take effect; and also he cyted S. E. Cl^ers
Case, 6 Coke 18. a. b. and 11 H. 7. 17. and Pennants Case, 3 Coke 65. a. That
if a man makes a Lease for years, upon a condition to cease, that after the
condition is broken, grantee of reversion may take advantage of that; so he
said in the case at the Bar, when the first Estate is determined and destroyed
by the limitation, then he to whom the Remainder is limited shall take
advantage of that, and not the Heir, for as he intended an Estate of
Inheritance may as well cease by limitation of devise as term, as in 15 Ed.
4. Lands are given to one so long as he has heirs of his body, the remainder
over, and if he dye without heirs of his body, the remainder over shall vest
without entry, and the Freehold shall vest in him; and 2* and 3. Phil. and
Mary, Dyer 127. and 56. Fisher and Warrens Case.

If a man devise Lands to one for life, the remainder over upon condition that
if he do such an act that his estate shall cease, and he in remainder may
immediately enter, there he in remainder shall take advantage though he be a
stranger, for that that the Estate determines there without re-entry: And he
says, that the Case of Wellock and Hamond, cyted in Barastons Case, was a
stronger Case then this, for there the limitation was upon Fee-simple, and here
it is upon an Estate tail; and the Law has favorable respect to devises, as
in Barastones Case, is alteration of words for the better exposition of that,
for Shall is altered to Should; and also see 16 Eliz. Dyer 335. 29. for the
marshalling of absurd words in a Will for the expounding of that; and 18 Eliz.
Cheeks Case, he cyted to be adjudged, that if a man devise his Lands to his
Wife, and after her death to his Son, and the remainder to his said Wife in
Fee-simple, the Husband of the Wife having Issue, shall not be Tenant by the
Courtesy, for always the Judges have made such favorable construction of
Wills, that if Estates devised by Will might be created by act executed in the
life of the party, then it should be good by devise; and to the objection (that
conclusion and agreement is uncertain, and so for that shall be void; he says
that it is not so uncertain, as going about, or resolve and determine an
attempt or procure, as in Corbets Case, first of Coke 83. b. or as attempt or
endeavor, as in Germins and Arscotts Case there cyted, fol. 285. a. See 6 Coke
40. a. Mildmayes Case, and also the words subsequent are repugnant, that the
Estate tail shall cease, as if the Tenant in tail were dead, and not
otherwise, which is absurd and repugnant, for the Estate tail does not
determine by his death, if he do not dye without Issue: And also he said, that
it is more reasonable that the perpetuity in Scholasticas Case, for here the
limitation depends upon agreement, which is a thing certain, upon which the
Issue may be joined; and also the condition does stand with the nature of the
Estate tail, and for the preservation of it; and Recovery is against the
nature of it, for this destroys the Estate tail, and is only a consequent of
it, and not parcel of the nature of the Estate, and this is the reason that
Littleton says, That an Estate tail upon condition that he should not alien,
is good, for that preserves the Estate, and also preserves Formedon for him in
reversion, if there be a discontinuance; and with that agreed 13 H. 7. 23. 24.
and he said, that there was a Judgment in the point for his Clyent for another
part of the Land, and he cyted 31 Edw. 5. Fitz. Feoffment placito the last, and
Fitzherberts Natura brevium (Ex gravi querela) last Case; and so concluded and
prayed judgment for the Plaintiff; and this Case was argued again by Shirley
Sergeant for the Defendant, and he intended that the agreement is void to the
Wife, and shall be intended the agreement of the Husband only, for a married
Wife cannot countermand Livery, 21 Assis. 25. and if a Woman makes a Feoffment
upon condition to enfeoff upon request made by her, and she takes a Husband,
she cannot make request after coverture, 35 Assisarum: So that he intended that
this shall be intended the agreement of the Husband only, and not of the Wife,
and yet he argued that Declaration of a use by a married Wife, shall be good,
according to Beckwiths Case: But he said, That the reason of that is, for that
that she is party to the Recovery, which is a matter of Record, and as long as
the Record remains in force, so long the Declaration of the use shall be good;
and also he argued, that if the condition being, that if the Wife conclude or
agree to any act to make discontinuance, that then, etc. that that shall be
intended unlawful acts, and Recovery is no unlawful act, and for that shall
not be within the restraint of the Condition, as the Earl of Arundels Case, 17
Eliz. Dyer 343. and admitting that it is a limitation, yet it shall be of the
same nature as a condition, and as well as a condition, that Tenant in tail
shall not suffer Recovery, is void.

So also is such Limitation void, and so it was intended before the Statute of
Donis Conditionalibus and it appears by the pleading, that the parties did not
intend to take advantage of the agreement, for it is pleaded that at the time
of the Recovery suffered, the youngest Daughter was seized of an estate tail,
the which could not be if her estate were determined and destroyed by the
(agreement and conclusion) so that the last words make the Forfeyture; for the
first are not unlawful, and before the execution of the Recovery the estate
tail is determined, and so he concluded, and prayed Judgment for the
Defendant, Barker Sergeant argued for the Plaintiff; It shall be intended a
Limitation and not a condition, for a Will shall have favorable construction
according to the intent of the Devisor, for a Joyntenant may devise to his
Companion, 49. Ed. 3. and Fitz. Na. Bre. Ex gravi querela, last case. A man
devises Land to his Wife for life upon condition, that if he marry, that it
should remain over to his Son in tail, and the Wife marries, and the Son in
remainder sues (Ex Gravi querela) by which it appears that it was a Limitation
and not a condition, and 34, Ed. 3. devise was to one for life upon condition
that if his Son disturbed him, that then it should remain over in tail, upon
disturbance; he in Remainder in tail brings Formedon, by which it appears it
was a Limitation, and with that agrees all the Justices in 29 Assisarum 17. And
Wellock and Hamonds Case cited in Barastons Case before, and 18. Eliz. Dyer If
Land be limited to no third person by the Devise, then the Heir shall enter for
breaking the condition, and also he said, that it appears by Littleton, and 13
H. 7 23. and 24, and 20 H. 7. and 17 Eliz. 343. the Earl of Arundells, case
which conditioneth that Tenant in tail shall not alien, stands with his
Estate, but not with Fee simple, and so it is adjudged in Nowes and
Scholasticas Case, which is adjudged in the point, which as he says cannot be
answered, and the Words of the Condition are not that her Estate tail shall
cease as if she had been dead, but as if she had not been named, which is not
so repugnant or absurd as the other, and this compared to 34 Ed, 3. Where the
Estate was limited till it was disturbed.

And he also argued, that the agreement of the Wife shall be a forfeiture
notwithstanding the coverture, for when the Estate is granted upon such
condition, he which has the estate shall take it subject to the condition; as
if two Lessees are, and one Seals the Counterpart only, yet the other shall be
bound by the Covenants contained in it; and 33 H. 6. 31. a Woman disavows to be
Executor, notwithstanding that she was married, and if Precipe had been
brought against the Husband and Wife, the default of the Husband shall bind
the Wife, and so she shall be punished for waste made during the coverture, and
so concluded, and prayed judgment for the Plaintiff: Foster Justice, that an
Estate of Freehold shall not cease by agreement or conclusion without entry,
for it is a matter of Inheritance and Freehold, and it is not like to 33 H. 6.
31. which concerns Chattels and Goods; and Walmesley Justice accorded with him:
Warburton Justice, it has been adjudged in Scholasticas Case, that the
condition was good, and therefore he would not deliver his opinion without
argument; Coke chief Justice, that the agreement is void to a Woman married,
for then she was married to a Husband, whom in her life she could not
contradict, and a Devise upon Condition, that if she conclude or agree, as this
Case is, is void, for it is a bare communication, upon which the Inheritance
does not depend, and so he said, it has been twice adjudged, 6 in Corbets
Case, and Germins Case, and Arscots Case, and Richells Case in Littleton, it
was upon condition that he should not alien, and this was adjudged to be void;
but yet if the condition were if he alien, and not if go about or intend, or
conclude, or agree as in the case at the Bar, for there is no such case in all
our Books as this.

Secondly, For that, that the Words are, if they do any act, that then the
Estate shall cease, and this is repugnant, for when the Act is done, then the
Estate tail is Barred, and cannot cease, but if it had been but a Feoffment,
then the right had remained, and he said that such a condition had been void
before the Statute of Donis Conditionalibus, when it was but Fee simple
Conditional, be it a Condition or a Limitation, and he said that Scholasticas
Case is of Fine which is only discontinuance till the Proclamations are past,
and if dead before may be avoided by Remitter, in Germins and Arscotts Case,
the Condition was, that if he go about or endeavor, and this was adjudged to
be void, though that it be in devise in respect of the uncertainty, and he said
that the (agreement or conclusion) is so uncertain, and may be well compared to
that, for here the Estate shall cease by the agreement, as well as it may cease
by the going about, also he seemed that the Freehold cannot cease without
entry, for if use cannot cease without entry as he intends, much less a
Freehold cannot, though it be by Devise, and he seemed that it shall be no
limitation, but a Condition, and Judgment accordingly, if cause be not showed
the next Term, and in Trinity Term then next ensuing this Case was argued
again by Dodridge Sergeant of the King for the Plaintiff, and he said that
there are three questions to be disputed. First, If it be a good limitation.
Secondly, If the recovery be a breach of that. Thirdly, Admitting that it may
be broken, if the agreement of the Husband and the wife shall be said to break
it, and to the first he seemed that it is a limitation and not a condition, and
such a Limitation that well might be with the Law, and that it is a Limitation
it is agreed in Scholasticas Case, Commentaries, and the reason of the Judgment
there is, that if the intent of the Devisor appears, that another shall take
benefit of that and not the Heir, that then it shall be but a limitation and
not a Condition, and he in remainder shall take benefit of that, and for that
in the principal case Mary the Eldest Daughter, to whom the Remainder was
limited, shall take benefit of that, and with this agrees the case of Fitz. Na.
Bre. Ex gravi querela last case, that if a man devises Lands to his Wife for
life, upon condition that if she marry that the Land shall remain over, and
after she marryes, and he in Remainder sues by (Gravi querela) by which it
appears that it is a limitation and not a condition, and with this agrees 2.
and 3. P. and M. 127. Dyer, Jasper Warrens Case, where a man devises land to
his Wife for life, upon condition to bring up his Son, Remainder over, and
agreed to be a limitation and not a condition, and so he concluded this first
point, that it is a limitation and not a condition. Secondly, that it is a
lawful limitation, for there is not any repugnancy in that, as it is in
Corebts before cited, for there are no words of going about, for he agreed that
this is absolutely uncertain and void, and so is Germin and Arscots case, where
there is not only a going about, but repugnant going about for he ought to go
about and before discontinuance, and then his Estate shall be void from the
time of the going about and before discontinuance, but here it is upon
(conclude and agree) plainly and apparently, and conclude and agree is
issuable, and a Jury may try that, and it will not invegle any man, but the Law
will not suffer Issue upon such uncertainty as going about or purposing, but
Attornements and Surrenders are but agreements, and yet are Issuable: And so in
the principal case, and in Mildmayes Case 6 Coke it is agreed that a condition
that a Tenant in tail shall not suffer a Recovery is void, for Recovery is not
restrained by the Statute of Westminster 2. but here it is not so but in
general, that he shall not conclude or agree to alien or discontinue, but that
which cannot be a condition good in the particular, may be good in the
general, as Littletons Case, gift in tail upon condition that he should not
alien is good, otherwise of Fee simple, with which 10 H. 7. 11. and 13 H. 7.
23. 24. accordingly.

Thirdly, That it is a breach of the limitation, Condition, that alienation and
discontinuance be by Recovery, which is a lawful act, and it is a privilege
incident to the Estate tail, and though that the agreement was made by the
Husband and the Wife during the Coverture, and so should be if the Husband and
the Wife had levied a Fine, see 10 H. 7, 13. Condition, that if the condition
had been expressed that they should not levy a Fine had been void, and here
this verbal agreement betwixt the Husband and the Wife and the third person
shall be for Forfeiture of their Estates, for this is the agreement of the Wife
as well as of the Husband, as it appears by Becwithes Case 2. Coke before
cited, where the Husband and the Wife agree to levy a Fine, and that the Fine
shall be to the use of the Connusee, this is good declaration of the use,
though that it be of the Land of the Wife and during the Coverture, and cannot
be avoided by the Wife after the death of her Husband, for it was the agreement
of the Wife, though it be not by any Indenture to declare the use of the Fine,
so many acts in the Country made by the Husband and the Wife, shall be intended
the act of the Wife, as well as of the Husband, as in the 17 Ed. 3. 9. The
Abbot of Peterboroughs Case, the Husband and Wife granted Rent for equality of
partition, and this shall bind the Wife after the death of the Husband, for it
is her act as well as the act of the Husband, and shall be intended for her
benefit, and so here by the Recovery the Wife shall be Tenant in Fee simple,
which was Tenant in tail before, and 34 Ed. 3. 42. feoffment to a married Wife
upon condition to re-enfeoff, and she with her Husband makes the re-enfeoffment
it is good; so a Woman being Lessee for Life, and with her Husband attorn upon
a Grant of Reversion, is good, and shall bind the Wife after the Death of the
Husband, 3 Ed. 3. 42. 4 Ed. 3. Attornment 12. 15 Ed. 3. Attornment, also this
Estate was made to the Wife when she was sole, and for that it shall be
accounted her folly, that she would take such a Husband that would forfeit her
Estate, but with that agreed the reason of the Book of 20 H. 6. 28. Where a
woman Tenant was bound by the ceasing of her Husband, and so he concluded and
prayed Judgment for the Plaintiff, and so it was adjourned, see another
argument of this case in Michaelmas Term 9. Jacobi 1611. by Haughton and
Nicholls Sergeants.

Pasch. 9. Jacobi, 1611. In the Common Bench. Pitts against Dowse.
IN an Ejectione firm upon not guilty pleaded, The Case was this, Ejectione
firmae.
A man makes his Will, by these words, I bequeath all my Lands to my Son
Richard, except my Chauntery Lands. And I devise all my Chauntery Lands to be
divided amongst all my Children, men and women alike, except my Son Richard.
And if Richard die without Issue, the remainder to A. My second Son, the
remainder to B. My third Son, the remainder to C. My fourth Son, the remainder
to my next of blood, and so from Heir to Heir. And so likewise I would to be
done upon my Chauntery Lands and Tenements, in case all my aforesaid Children
die without Issue. Then I would the one half of my Chauntery Lands to remain
to the next of kin, and the other half to the Hospital of M. And the question
was, what estate the Heir of the eldest Son shall have in the Chauntery Lands,
and it was argued by Dodridge the Kings Sergeant, that the Heir of the eldest
Son shall have estate tail in the Chauntery Lands, the Devisor devises no
estate to Richard his eldest Son in the Chauntery Lands, nor limitts any estate
of that in certain, and for that he seemed that the youngest Sons and
Daughters shall be Tenants in Common for life, and by this manner of
Interpretation, every part of the Will shall be, for first he excludes Richard
himself, so that he shall have nothing in that, and then by the Limitation to
the younger Children to be equally divided between them, makes them Tenants in
Common, see 28. H. 8. 25. Dyer 155. And he cited Lewin and Coxes Case, to be
adjudged, Michaelmasse 41. and 42. of Eliz. Pasche 42. Eliz. Rot. 207. Where a
man devises Lands to his two Sons to be equally divided, and adjudged that they
are Tenants in Common; so devise to two part and part like, and equally
divided, and equally to be divided is all one, and for that there is no other
words to make an estate of Inheritance, it shall be an estate for life, and the
remainder shall be directed according to the estates limited of the other Land.
And he seemed that the words in the last sentence, all my aforesaid Children,
shall extend to Richard his eldest Son, as well as to the others, and so all
the Will shall stand in his force, which may be Objected that Richard the
eldest Son shall be excluded out of the Possession, and for that see 6. Eliz.
Dyer. 333. 29. Chapmans Case, and also he cited one case to be adjudged,
Trinity 37. Eliz. Rot. 632. between Bedford and Vernam, where a man devises
all his lands in Alworth, and afterward purchases other Lands in the same
Town, and afterward one comes to him to take a Lease of this Land newly
purchased, which the Testator refused to Let. And said, that these Lands newly
purchased should go as his other Lands. And upon his Death bed adds a Codycell
to his Will, but says nothing of his purchased Lands, and adjudged that the
purchased Lands shall pass, and so concluded and prayed Judgment: Harris
Sergeant, that it is a new Sentence, and Richard is excluded and it shall be a
good Estate tail to the youngest Children, and foresaid Children shall be
intended them to which the Chauntery Lands are limited, see Ratcliffes case 3.
of Coke adjudged, that they shall be Tenants in Common by the devise to he
equally divided, and thall not be surviving, but every youngest Children shall
have his part in tail, though that the first words do not contain words of
Inheritance, yet the last words, in case all my Children die without Issue,
declares his intent that they should have an estate tail, see the 16. of Eliz.
Dyer 339. 20. Claches Case, that when he has disposed of part devised to
Richard, then disposes of the residue, and the sentence begins with (And so
likewise) and that shall be intended in the same manner as he had disposed of
the Lands devised to Richard, for he has devised the remainder otherwise, that
is, to an Hospital, and so concludes and prays Judgment accordingly, Coke
chief Justice says, that it was adjudged between Coke and Petwiches 29. Eliz.
that if a man devise a house to his eldest Son in tail, and another house to
his second Son in tail, and the third house to the third Son in tail, and if
any of them die without Issue, the remainder to the other two equally, this
shall be but for life, for this enures to the quantity of the Land, and not to
the quality of the Estate: And he said that Richard is excepted without
question, for it is but a Will, and every of the youngest Sons therein shall
have the Chauntery Land one after another, and Richard shall have no part, and
the Chauntery shall have nothing till they all are dead, and he likened that to
Frenchams Case, where Lands were given to one and to his Heirs Males, and if
he died without Issue, the remainder over, the Issues Females shall not take,
though that it be if they die without Issue, for express it makes to cease
only, and so it was adjourned.

Petoes Case.
PEto suffers a common Recovery, to the use of himself for life, the remainder
to his eldest Son in tail, with diverse remainders Common Recovery.
over, to the intent that such Annuities should be paid as he by his last Will
or by grant declares, so that they did not exceed the sum of sixty pound, and
if any of the said Rents be behind, then to the use of him to whom the Rent
shall be behind, till the Rent be satisfied with clause of distress: Rent of
twenty pound was granted to his youngest Son for his life, the grantee
distraines for the Rent, and in Replevin avowes, the Plaintiff repl^es, that
by the non-paiment the use rises to the youngest Son, by which it was objected
that the Rent shall be suspended; Quere if without demand, or if the distress
shall be demanded, or that the use shall not rise till after the distress, and
to the distress well taken, and agreed by all that the Plaintiff shall take
nothing by his Writ, and that the eldest Brother has nothing in the Land.

Judgment was had against a Defendant in Debt, and Capias to Judgment in Debt.
satisfy awarded, and (Non est inventus) returned, and Scire facias awarded
against the Bayl, and upon the first Scire facias, the principal Defendant
yields his Body in execution, and it was very good, for before that the Bayl
had no day in Court, and in the Kings Bench if the Defendant yields his Body
upon the second Scire facias it shall be accepted; And if a man be Bayl upon a
Writ of Error, if the Judgment shall not be reversed, he shall be in execution
again: It was objected by Hutton Sergeant, that the Scire facias is against
the Bayl, to know why the execution shall not be awarded against the Bayl, and
that ought to be delivered to the Sheiriff, before the day of the return, or
otherwise it shall be Erroniously awarded, and then the party may yield his
Body to Prison at any time, and discharge his Bayl, and agreed that Bayl in
this Court may be released.

Account does not lie for any sum certain. Account.


Pasch. 9. Jacobi 1611, in the Common Bench. John Reyner against Powell. See
Hillary 8. Jacobi, 136.
HAughton Sergeant argued, that there shall be a good Estate tail of a
Copyhold, and that by the custom after the making of the Statute of
Westminster 2. And he agreed that at the Common Law, all estates were Fee
simple absolute or conditional, and that the estates tail were created by the
Statute of Westminster 2. And do not exclude customary estates, as it appears
by Littleton, who says, that Tenant at will by copy of Court Roll by custom
may be in Fee simple, and so of estate tail, and with this agrees many other
Authors, 15 H. 8. b. Tenant by Copyhold of Court Roll resolved in the point,
and that a Formedon in the discender lies for that, and as the Statute of
Westminster 2. divides estate tail and Fee simple, So may custom of a Manor
as well as custom make an estate at will, which is personal and determines by
the death of any of the parties to descend, and as well as the custom of
London (of not moving things fixed) is created by custom, as well may Formedon
be created by Custom, and also the Statute is, that gives Cui in vita, extends
to a Copyhold, so the Statute of Limitation, as it appears by Brook,
Limitation, 5 Ed. 6. And with this agrees also Heydons Case, and though that
the words are, Voluntas Donatoris in the Charter, etc. Yet the estate tail may
be created by devise. So that the Statute shall not have such literal
construction, and as well as a Lease for a hundred years may be within the
Statute of 11. H. 7. Which speaks only of discontinuances, as it appears by
Sir George Brownes Case, 3. Coke, So may a Copyhold estate which is but an
estate at will be within the Statute of Westminster 2. and it is confessed by the
other part, by pleading that he was seized in tail according to the custom of
the Manor, and it is not pleaded that he had Issue at the time of the
Alienation, and the other party claimed by the Alienation, the which was not
good, if he had no Issue at the time of that if he had but Fee simple
conditional, and so concluded and prayed Judgment, etc.

Dodridge Sergeant of the king says, that the reputation of the estate
consists upon two parts, first the name, secondly the nature of the estate
tail, and for both the makers of the Statute of Westminster 2. bad no intention
that this should extend to Copyhold, and first for the name, which gives the
being, he cited Fitz. Natura Brevium. 12. C. where it is said, that
Copy-Tenants, or Copyholders, or Tenants by copy, is but a new Term found,
for of ancient times they were called Tenants in Villenage or of base tenure,
as this also appears by the old Tenures, by which it appears that then they
were called and named Tenants, which held in Villenage or of base tenure, and
Bracton, book 2. chap. 8. in the end speaks of that, and calls them
Villains, Sokemaines, and that if such a Tenant will transfer his Tenement,
let it be delivered into the hand of the Lord or his Steward, and he wrote
immediately before the Statute of Westminster 2. and agreed with Fitz. Na. Bre.
And also Bracton, book 4. fol. 209. Says, that such Tenants have used to Plow
the Demesnes of the Lord, and calls and names them as before; and 4. Ed. 1. He
is called Customarius; So that Custom does not make the certainty of his
estate if he has any, and he said that 42. Ed. 3. 25. is the first in Law; in
which is any mention of these Lands, and there they are called Neists Lands,
and 14 H. 4. 323. a. they are called Sokemaines by base Tenure, and Lambert
calls it Folkland, by which and several names he says, that the baseness of
the Estate appears, And to the estate he says that originally it was but at
the will of the Lord, though that it be according to the Custom of the Manor,
So that the Lord cannot put him out if he perform the services. And the
Register does not respect him, for he has not framed any Original for him, to
give him remedy by the Common Law, but only in the Court of the Lord, though
that erroneous Judgment be given: Also he cannot prescribe but in the name of
the Lord, as it appears by 18. Ed. 3. Fitz. prescription, that such estates
which are incident to Fee simple, as Dower, not Tenants by the Curtisie cannot
be derived out of this without Custom, nor that warranted. So that his
reputation appears by his name and also by his nature: Also he intended that
the makers of the Statute of Westminster 2, did not intend that the Statute
should extend to this, for it is, Oppositum in Objecto, for Custom is without
time of memory. And the Statute of Westminster 2. was made 13. Ed. 1. the
beginning of which every one knows. Also the Statute of Westminster 2. does
not extend to any Lands, but those which the Tenant might have aliened before
the Statute. But the Copyholder had not any power to alien, for the Lord ought
to be his Instrument and hand, as Bracton says, to alien, transfer he cannot,
but by the hands of the Lord, and it must be restored to the Lord, the words of
the Statute are, The will of the giver in the Charter, etc. So that the Statute
intends such Lands which may pass by Deed and Fine, and devise his Deeds, and
the Deed extends to them, for a Fine is Chirograph, and devise to be made by
copy of Court Roll is not so, for that is only of Acts made in the Court of the
Lord, it cannot be within the Statute, for Copyhold ought to be held of the
Lord, and Tenant in tail shall hold of the giver, and so cannot a Copyholder,
which has so base an estate. And if this shall be so, these mischeifes will
ensue. That is, that this base estate should be of better security, then any
estate at the Common Law, for Fine shall not be a Bar of that, for it cannot
be levied of that, also Recovery cannot be suffered of that, for there cannot
be a Recovery in value neither of Lands at the Common Law, neither of Customary
Lands, for they cannot be transferred but by the hands of the Lord.

And to Littleton he agreed, and also, 4 Ed. 2. which agrees with this, where
it is said that at Steben^eath, a Surrender was of Copyhold Lands to one and
the Heirs of his Body, but he said, that that shall not be an Estate tail,
for then the Estate has such operation, that this setles a Reversion and
Tenure betwixt the Giver, and him to whom it is given, but this cannot be of
Copyhold Land, for this cannot be held of any, but only of the Lord, and to
the others, this Estate does not lie in Tenure, and yet he agreed that of some
things which did not lie in Tenure, Estate Tail may be, but Land may be
intailed, but Copyhold Estate is so base, that an Estate tail cannot be
derived out of it, so that though that custom may make an Estate to one and
the Heirs of his Body, yet this cannot be an Estate tail but Fee-simple
conditional, and also he agreed that they might have Formedon in Discender,
but it is the same Formedon, which was before the Statute, as if Tenant in
Fee-simple conditional before the Statute, would alien before issue, but it
was no Estate tail, with the privileges of an Estate tail before the
Statute, and to the other matter of Surrender, that is the admittance of the
parties which is an Estate tail, that does not conclude the Court, as it
appears by the Lord Barkleys Case in the Commentaries, where the Estate pleaded
severally by the parties is not traversed by any of them, and so concludes, and
prays Judgment, etc. And this case was argued again in Trinity Term next
ensuing by Montague the Kings Sergeant for the Defendant, and he said, that
there are three questions in the case.

First, If Copyhold land may be intailed. Secondly, Admitting that it may be
intailed, if Surrender makes discontinuance. Thirdly, If it shall be Remitter;
and to the first, he seemed that it might be intailed and that it shall be
within the Statute of Westminster 2. And first for the Antiquity of that, he
said that Littleton placed that amongst his Estates of Freehold, and has been
time out of mind, and is a primitive Estate, and not derived out of the Estate
of the Lord, and the Lord is not the Creator of that, but the means to convey
that after that it is cerated, and what is created then shall have all the
privileges and Benefits which are incident to it, and shall be nursed by the
custom, and is time out of mind, and the Law always takes notice of it, and
he cited, 24 H. 4. 323. by Hankf. Bracton, Fitz. Na. Bre. 12 C. and Brownes
Case 4. Coke, which is not simply an Estate at the will of the Lord, but at the
Will of the Lord according to the custom of the Manor, and when it has
gained the reputation of Freehold, then it shall be dircted according to the
rules of the Common Law, and 2. and 3. P. and Ma. Dier 114. 60. allow Copyhold
Estate to be intailed, and he says, That no Statute has more liberal
exposition then the Statute of Westminster 2. 45. Ed. 3. Encumbrance shall not
charge the Issue intaile, also a Copyholder shall have a Cui in vita, also a
Copyhold is within the Statute of Limitation; and so upon the Statute of
buying of pretenced rights: And it is always intended when a Statute speaks of
Lands and Tenements, that Copyhold Lands shall be within that: And he says,
That all the Objections which have been made of the contrary part are answered
in Heydons Case, but he relied upon that, that every real Inheritance is
within the Statute of Westminster 2. 4 Ed. 2. Formedon lies of Copyhold Land,
25 Ed. 3. 46. Estate tail is of a Corrody and office, which proves, that
Copyhold is a real Inheritance, and for that shall be within the Statute, 46
Ed. 3. 21. Gavelkinde Land may be intailed, 6 Rich. 2. Avowry 2. 8. Rich. 2.
26. Copyholder shall be charged with Fees of a Knight at Parliament, 22 and
23. Eliz. Dier 373. 13. Lands in ancient Demesne were intayled, and he said
that the reason is, that for that it is Inheritance and time has applied them
to an Estate, and so concluded, and prayed Judgment for the Defendant.

Hutton Sergeant argued for the Plaintiff, that Copyhold Lands cannot be
intailed, for that is but a customary Estate; and the Law does not take any
notice of it, but only according to Custom, for there were no Estates tail
before the Statute, for then all were Fee simple absolute or conditional; that
is, either employed, or by limitation, which cannot be of an Estate tail, which
is not within the Statute of Westminster 2. for no Actions are maintainable by
that, but those which are by the Custom, and a Writ of false Judgment: See
Fitzherberts Natura brevium, 12. 13 Ed. 3. F. Prescription 29. that it has no
Incidents, which are incident to Estates at the Common Law without Custom, as
Dower: See Revetts Case, and so is Tenancy by the Courtesy, and there shall be
no descent of that to take away Entry, and so of other derivatives: And he
seemed that it is not within the Statute for three reasons apparent within the
Statute.

First, That it is hard that Givers shall be barred of their reversions; but in
case of Copy-holds, the Giver has no remedy to compel the Lord to admit him
after the Estate tail spent, but only Subpena, and in this Case the Lord may
relieve himself for the loss of his services, for that the Statute provides
no remedy for him.

Secondly, That the Statute does not intend any Lands, but those of which there
is actual reversion or remainder, and those which pass by Deed; so that the
will of the Giver expressed in the Charter, may be observed, and of which there
may be a subdivision, as Lord, Mesne, and Tenant, for there shall be always a
reversion of the Estate tail, and the Donee shall hold of the Donor and not of
the Lord.

Also it seems that the Statute does not intend to provide for any, but those
for whom the Writ in the Formedon ordained by the Statute lies, and agreed
that for Offices and such like, Formedon lies, if the party will admit Estate
tail to be discontinued.

Also the Statute intends those things, of which a Fine may be levied, for the
Statute provides, that (the Fine in his own right should be nothing) but by
Copyholder Fine cannot be levied, and for that he shall not be within the
Statute, and if the Words do not extend to that, then the Equity of the Statute
shall not extend to that, and he said that Copyhold is not within any of the
Statutes, which are made in the same year, as the Statute which gives Elegit,
and such like, and to Littleton that an Estate by copy, is where Lands are
given in Fee-simple, Fee-taile, and that Formedon lies for that with which
agrees 10 Ed. 2. Formedon 55. It seems that the Estate tail here mentioned,
shall be intended Fee-simple conditional at the Common Law, and the Formedon
in Discender which was at the Common Law, for alienation before Issue: And so
Littleton shall be intended, For the Estate is within time of memory; see
Heydons case, that a Copyhold Estate is an Estate in being within the Statute
of 31 H. 8. And Manwood there said, that insomuch the Estate of that is created
by custom, and the Estate tail is created by Statute, yet it shall not be
within the Statute, and he said that the case of 15 H. 8. B. Copy of Court 24.
is repugnant in it self in the words of Formedon, for he says, though that
Formedon was given by Statute, and was no otherwise in Discender, yet now this
Writ lies at the Common Law, and it shall be intended, that this has been a
custom there, time out of mind, etc. And so he concluded, and prayed Judgment
for the Plaintiff.

Pasche 9. Jacobi 1611. in the Common Bench. Yet Bearblock and Read.
SEE the beginning before Hillary 8. Jacobi, this Case was argued See the
beginning. fol.
by Hutton Sergeant, that the Plaintiff in the Action of Debt ought to Recover,
for if Executor may pay Debt due by the Testator by Obligation, before Debt due
by Judgment, this shall be a (Devastavit) as it is resolved in Trewinyards
Case, 6. and 7. Edward 6. Dyer 80. 53. And he shall be charged for the
Judgment with his own goods. And so it was adjudged between Bond and Hales
31. Eliz. that Judgment at the Common Law shall be first satisfied before the
Statute, which is but a Pockett Record, and Medium redditer in invitum. Also it
was adjudged in Harrisons Case, 5. Coke 28. b. That Debt due upon an Obligation
shall be first paid before Statute with Defeasans for performing of Covenants,
the which Defeasens is not broken, and also it is adjudged between Pemberton
and Barkham here cited, that Judgment shall be satisfied before Statute
Merchant or Staple or Recognizance, though that the Statute be acknowledged
before the Judgment had by the Testator. See this Case in Harrisons Case, 5.
Coke 28. b. and in 4. Coke 60. a. Sadlers Case, upon which he infers, that if
an Executor first satisfy a Statute or a Recognisance before a Judgment, that
this shall be a Devastavit, as well as if he satisfies an Obligation, first as
in Trewynyards Case, and that when the Plaintiff which has Judgment, the
Executor may aid himself by Audit a querela by this matter subsequent: Quere
of Doctor Druryes Case, as in 7 H. 6. 42. in Detinue against Gamishe, and
Judgment had for the Plaintiff. If the Judgment be reversed, restitution shall
be made to every one which has loss. So here by Audita Querela, if the
Executrix has not more then was taken in execution by the Statute, and it
seems to him that the Judgment in the Scire Facias shall not be a Bar in
this Action, for the Judgment remains, Executrix and the Plaintiff may have
Action of Debt upon that. But of the contrary, if the Plaintiff had brought
Action of Debt upon the Judgment and had been barred, then shall be barred in
Scire Facias also; But the Plaintiff this notwithstanding, may have Scire
Facias upon surmise, that there are new assets, come to the hands of the
Executor, and so he concluded and prayed Judgment for the Plaintiff. Nicholls
Sergeant for the Defendant relies only upon the Judgment had upon the Scire
Facias, and that till that he Defeated, the Plaintiff cannot maintain Action
of Debt, for the Action of Debt is nothing but demanding of Execution, and for
that till the first Judgment be Defeated the Plaintiff has no remedy at the
Common Law. All things which bar the Execution of the Judgment in Scire
Facias, these shall be Bars in an Action of Debt, as in Baxters Case here last
adjudged, in an Action upon the Case for slanderous words, the Defendant pleads
that he had justified the speaking of these words, at another time in another
Action brought against him, and had a verdict and Judgment upon that, and so
demands Judgment, and adjudged a good Plea, till the first Judgment is
reversed, for Judgment is the saying of the Law, and 13. Eliz. Dyer 299. 34.
in Debt for Costs recovered in a Writ of entry, the Defendant pleads that the
Plaintiff has sued an Elegit, which was Executed, and a good Bar in an Action
of Debt, and so 1. and 2. P. and M. Dyer 107. 24. In Debt for Damages
recovered in Assise, the Defendant pleads in Bar, that after the verdict given
and before Judgment, the Plaintiff entered into the Land, and there no
Judgment is given. But it seems if the Plaintiff fayl of Course that the
Common Law prescribes, that then he shall not have Execution, (for of those
things which rightly are Acted let there be Executions) but if the Defendant in
the first Action had pleaded a release, and Judgment was given upon that
against him, he cannot plead that again, (for it runs into the thing Judged,)
34. Ed. 3. in Debt against an Executor, and part of the assetts found, the
Plaintiff cannot have new Scire Facias without Averrment that there are new
assetts, and 34. H. 6. Action with averment that there are assets, and
Judgment good both ways, and presidents showed of both Courts. And he
intended that the Executor could not have helped himself by Audita Querela,
unless he fears to be impleaded, but after Execution he cannot have
Restitution, and so concluded and prayed Judgment for the Defendant. Coke
chief Justice, that there cannot be a Devastavit in the Wife, unless that it
be voluntary payment by her, for the Statute of 23. H. 8. gives present
Execution of a Statute Staple without Scire Facias. So that the Wife had no
time to plead the Judgment, and for that this unvoluntary Act, shall not be a
Devastavit, for she is no agent, but only a sufferer. And at the Common Law if
the Plaintiff has Judgment in an Action of Debt after the year he has no
remedy, but new Original, and this mischeife was remedied by the Statute of
Magna Charta, which gives Scire Facias in place of new Action. But it seems to
him that the Bar in the Scire Facias shall remain good Bar, till it be
reversed, as in 2 Rich. 3. A man has election to have action of Detinue, or
action of Trespass, and he brings his action of Detinue, and the Plaintiff
wages his Law, and after brings an action of Trespass, and the first Nonsuit
pleaded in Bar, and adjudged a good Bar, 12 Edw. 4. accordingly: Foster,
Walmesley, and Warburton, agreed without any doubt, but they said, that if the
first execution had been had by Covin, then it should have been otherwise.

In Debt upon buying of diverse several things, the Defendant* Debt by
Executor.
confesses part, and for the residue the action being brought by an Executor
in the Detinet only, the Defendant pleads, he owes him nothing; and upon this
Trial was had, and Verdict for the Plaintiff, and after Verdict it was moved,
that this misjoyning of Issue was aided by the Statute of Jeofailes; but it was
resolved by all the Justices, that it was not aided, for it was no misjoyning
of the Issue, but no Issue at all; but if there had been Issue joined, though
that it were not upon the direct matter, yet this shall be aided, and at the
end the Plaintiff remitted the part that the Issue was joined, and prayed
Judgment for the residue, and this was granted, but if the Plaintiff had been
nonsuited that would go to all.

Administrators during the minority had Judgment in debt, and Administrators
during the minority of the Executor.
before execution sued, the Executor came to his age of seventeen years, and
how this execution shall be sued comes the question, for the power of the
Administrator was determined by the attaining of age of 17. years by the
Executor, and the Executor was not party to the Record, and for that he could
not sue execution; but it seems that the Executor may sue special Scire facias
upon the Record, and so sue execution in his own name: See 27 H. 8. 7. a.

Action upon the Case for these words (He has stolen forty Staure Action upon
the Case for words.
of Lead (meaning Lead in Stauce) from the Minster, and resolved by all, that
action does not lie, for it shall be intended that the Lead was parcel of the
Minster, and the (Innuendo) shall not help that.

Pasche 9. Jacobi 1611. In Common Bench Crane against Colepit.
THomas Crane Plaintiff in Replevin against Bartholemew Colepit, Replevin,
Attornement of Tenant, being under age of 21. years.
the only question was, if Tenant by descent of the age of twenty years and
more, ought under one and twenty years to attorn to a Grant of the signiory or
not, and it was adjudged that the Attornement is good for three reasons.

First, For that he gives no Interest, and for that it cannot be upon
condition; for it is but a bare assent.

Secondly, His Ancestors held the same Land by the payment of the Rent and
making of their Services, and it is reason that the Rent should be paid, and
the Services performed, and for that though that he shall have his age for the
Land, yet for the Rent he shall not have his age, and though that it is agreed
in 32 Ed. 3. That he shall have his age (In per que servitia) yet after his
full age the Grantee shall distraine for all the arrerages due from the first,
so that the Attornement is no prejudice for this Infant, and he is in the
number of those which shall be compellable to attorn, see 41 Ed. 3. age 23. 26
Ed 3. 32. 32 Ed. 3. and 31 Ed. 3. Per que servitia, 9 Ed. 3. 38. 32 Ed. 3.
Infant of the age of three years attorned, and good, and 3 Ed. 3. 42. Husband
attornes, and that shall bind the Wife, 12 Ed. 4. 4. 18 H. 6. Attornement of an
Infant is good to bind him, for that it is a lawful act.

Thirdly, The Attornement is a perfect thing, of which the Law requires the
finishing, that is, the grant of the signiory which is not perfect, till the
Tenant attorn, and Foster Justice said, that so it had been adjudged in this
Court in the time of the Reign of Elizabeth, in which Judgment all the
Justices agreed with one voice, without any contradiction, See 26. Ed. 3. 62.

Pasch. 9. Jacobi, 1611. In the Common Bench. As yet Rowles against Mason, see
the beginning, Michaelmas 8. Jacobi.
DOdridge Sergeant of the King argued for the Plaintiff, he says that there
are two Copies, first that a Copyholder for life under a 100. l. may nominate
his Successor. Secondly, That such Copyholder after such nomination may cut
down all the Trees growing upon his Copyhold and sell them, and he says that
it has been adjudged that the custom that Copyholder for life may sell the
Trees growing upon his Copyhold is void, between Popham and Hill, Hillary 45
Eliz. in this Court, so if the first custom does not make difference by the
nomination, the second is resolved to be void, and it seems to him that the
first custom does not make difference, and to the objection that the first
custom has been adjudged to be good between Bale and Crab, he says that the
custom adjudged, and this custom as it is found differs in many points.
First, It was found that every Copyholder for life solely seized without
Remainder, but here is sole Tenant in possession, and this may be where there
is a Remainder, so that uncertainty in this makes the custom void, as in 6 Ed.
3. custom that an Infant at the age of discretion may alien is void for
uncertainty, also in the case here it is found, that the Copyholder may name
who shall be next Tenant to the Lord, and does not say to whom the nomination
shall be made, but in the first case the custom is found to be, that the
nomination ought to be to the Lord* in the presence of two Copyholders, also
in the first it is found, that if they cannot agree of the Fine, that the
Homage shall assess it; but in this custom here found there is not any mention
of that he ought to seek to be admitted, and does not say at what court, the
which ought to be showed in certain, as it is resolved in Penimans Case, 5 Coke
84. Where custom that a Feoffment ought to be enrolled, is expressed, shall be
enrolled at the next court, also in the first case to be found that after the
Fine is paid or offered, he which is named shall be admitted, and here is not
any mention of that, so that he concluded that this is a new custom, and not
the same custom which was in question between Bail and Colepit, also it is
found that the trees were cut immediately after nomination of a new Tenant, and
before any admittance or Fine paid for him; so that insomuch that the Benefit
was not equal as well as to the Lord as to the Tenant, as in 2 Ed. 4. 28. and
22 Ed. 4. 80. For plowing and turning upon the Land of another, for that the
custom shall be void. And to the second custom also it seems, that that is
void and unreasonable. First, for that when any is alleged in the custom,
that is inconvenient, though that it be not mischeivous, yet the custom shall
be void, as in 4. Assisarum 27. in Assise brought against an Abbot, which
pleads custom, that all the houses of the South side of the street shall be
devisable, and he claims by force of a Devise made according to that custom
and adjudged that the custom is not good, for it is inconvenient that in one
self same ancient Town one house shall be devisable and another not, and upon
that the Plea was amended, so here, custom that a Copyholder may sell all the
Trees is inconvenient, for it does not appear that this Custom extended to
any other but to him: Secondly this Custom is against the Common Wealth, for
every Custom ought to have preservation and maintenance, and that shall not be
here, for when one Copyholder has sold all the Trees, the Successor shall not
have any Boots nor Fire, and so by the same reason he may pull down the house.
And so this tends to destruction, and rests in the will of a man if he will
distroy or not. And this is inconvenient that such power should be given to
one, which has but an estate for life, as in 14. Ed. 3. Bar 277. Copyholder
pleads Custom of a Manor, that that Copyholder which comes first after a
windfall fallen, shall have it, and resolved to be void Custom, for that it
rests in the will of a man if he will find that or not. So in 5. H. 7. 9.
Custom that if one find Beasts doing Damage that he may distraine them, and
have four pence for his Damages, and adjudged void Custom, for the Damages
are nncertaine, and for that it is no reason that the Fine shall be certain,
and 19. Eliz. Dyer 358. 46. Custom that all Devises and Leases, granted for
more then six years are merely void forthwith, is a void Custom, because
contrary to common reason, and the liberty of one which has Fee simple. So 2
Hen. 4. 24. Custom that the Tenants of the Manor shall not use their Common
till the Lord put in his Beasts, is void, for it should not depend on the Will
of the Lord; So in the principal case the Lord cannot grant Copyhold Estate
in reversion, for it depends upon the Nomination of his Tenant, and for that
the Custom shall be void.

Thirdly, The Copyholder has prescribed to do a thing which is contrary to
his Estate, and does not cohere with his Estate, that is, that Lessee for life
shall cut the Trees, for he has but a special property in that, and not the
^bsolute property, and it is like to a Case in 19 Ed 3. Feoffments 68. and 19
Assise 9. Where Commander of an Hospital prescribes, that he and his
Predecessors, which have had the same office, have used to make Leases for
lives, and in an Action brought by the Prior it was adjudged that the custom
is void, and so by consequence the Lease was void, for the Commander has no
Estate to make it, so in Fors^ and Hemlings Case, 4. Coke, and 3 Ed. 3. F. Dat.
Custom that a married Wife may make a Will is void, for it does not stand with
the quality of her person, so here it is not with the quality of the Estate,
but it may be objected that it is a greater Estate, then an Estate for life,
for it is perpetual Freehold; to that it may be answered in this case, it is
no greater Estate then for life, for the Copyholder has only made nomination,
but he which was nominated was not admitted, so that the Tenant has no greater
Estate, nor the Lord has granted greater Estate then for life, but admit that
he be Tenant for life, with a Remainder for life to him to whom the nomination
is made, yet he cannot do such an act, and for that the cutting down of the
Trees shall be a forfeiture of his Estate by custom, by which the Estate is
created, and copyhold Lands are not as other Lands, which if they were let for
Life at the common Law, the Tenant were dispunishable for wast, till the
Statute of Gloucester, for it was the Folly of the Lessor to make a Lease to
such a person, which would make wast, and for that, as the benefit and
Privilege of the copyholder remains, so the benefit of the Lord shall not be
abridged, and so he prayed Judgment for the Plaintiff.

Haughton Sergeant seems the contrary for the Defendant, and he agreed that
Customs ought to be reasonable, and if they be generally inconvenient, they
cannot be reasonable; and to the first exception, to prove that it is a new
Custom; that is, that it is found that he is only Tenant in possession,
without saying, Without Remainder, as it was in the first Case; to that he
thought if it were true, that the Copyholder has such privilege that he
might nominate his Successor, it is not material, and to the lessening of the
Fine, that is found very certain, for he that is nominated at the first
requires admittance, and if the Lord refuse that he shall be admitted, for such
a Fine that the Homage Assess, and so it is found, and that is very certain,
and the rather for that, that this is a special Verdict.

Also he agreed as before, That Custom ought to be reasonable, and if it be
generally inconvenient, though it be not mischeivous, yet it shall not be good;
and to the Case of 40 Assis. 37. Custom to devise the Tenements on the South
side of the Street, is not good, for that, that Custom cannot be in one
particular place certain; and also he agreed the Case of Windfall, for that
tended to charge the Lord, 3 Eliz. Dyer 299. 57. 58. Custom to have Herriot
the best Beast, and if that be put out of the way before seizure, then the Lord
may seize and take the Beast of any other man's there arising and lying down;
to his own proper use, and the custom held void and unreasonable: So the
custom in 20 H. 7. to have so much for every Pound-breach is void; but this
custom is merely between the Lord and Tenant, and the custom has made that
discendable Inheritance, and also may have reasonable beginning, and the Lord
has benefit for that; that is, his Fine for the admittance of him which is
nominated; and custom has created other Estates, as Grant to him and his, is
good by the custom, and so the Cases of 21 Ed. 4. and 22 Ed. 4. before cyted,
for the turning of Plough upon the Land of his Neighbor: So the custom if the
Lord feed the Beasts of his Tenant that he may Fold them; and so he concluded
that the first custom to make nomination is good; and to the second custom,
he agreed that bare Copyholder for life, could not Prescribe to cut and sell
all the Trees, no more then custom that Tenant for life may devise, as 35 H.
6. But here the Tenant has perpetuity in his Estate, and may nominate his
Successor, and as well as the Common Law allows Tenant after possibility of
Issue extinct, to make waste; so may custom allow Tenant for life with such
nomination, power to cut and sell the Trees: Also he intended, admitting the
custom not good, that yet the Copyholder has nor forfeited his Estate, for
the Trees and the Manor are granted by several Grants, and for that, though
that they are by one self same Deed, yet by that the Trees are severed from
the Manor, and the Trees are the cause of the forfeiture, and they are no
parcel of the Manor, as in 31 Edw. 3. Assis. 441. by sale of a Castle the
services are extinct.

So here the forfeiture cannot accrue to the Manor, when that comes by
reason of Trees, which are severed by reason of several Grants; and he thought
that the Grant shall be taken more strong, against him which made it; as if a
man in the Premises give Fee-simple, to have in tail, the Estate tail shall be
precedent, and the Fee-simple depending upon that; so if a man have the next
avoydance of a Church, and the Church becomes void. and after he purchase the
Advowson, yet the Presentation remains as it was before, for that is the best
thing, and so it is resolved in Herlackendens Case, 4 Coke 63. b. That if a man
makes a Lease for years of Land, except the Trees, and after grants the Trees
to the Lessee, that the Trees are not reunited to the Land, and so he concluded
that it shall be no forfeiture, and prayed Judgment for the Defendant; and this
Case was argued again, Michaelmas, 9 Jacobi, by Shirley for the Plaintiff,
Shirley.
that the first custom was void, insomuch that he claimed to do a greater
thing then his Estate would warrant, as in 35 H. 6. Custom that if one Pawn
the Goods of another, that he which has them Pawned may keep them whosoever
they were, is not good, as Custom that the Tenant in tail may devise, is
void, for his Estate will not warrant it, and it is prejudice to the Tenant in
reversion: So Custom that Copyholder shall have Common, and another Custom,
that none shall put in his Beasts till the Lord put in his, 2. H. 4. 24. Also
there is no Fine Limited to be tendered by the Tenant, or to be demanded by the
Lord: And if a Copyholder refuse to pay his Fine it is a Forfeyture, and if
the Custom do not provide for the Fine of the Lord as for the Copyholder, the
Custom shall be void: Also here cannot be admittance, for Littleton says,
that the sole means to transfer Copyhold is by Surrender. And here if the
Custom should be good, the copyhold should be transferred by Nomination only,
and so the Lord should be Defeated of his Fine, and it seems also that the
second Custom is void, for it is contrary to the Estate of a copyholder, to
sell all the Trees, but he agreed that he might have Estovers for houseboote
and hedgboote, as it was adjudged in Swayne and Becketts Case, and he cited the
19. assis. Where a Commoner made a Lease for life, and void, for that that the
Estate would not support it, 9. H. 6. 56. and 11. H. 6. 40. Prescription to
sell Estovers is void, for Estovers are appropriate to a house: And also it was
adjudged in this Court between Poltocke and Powell, that a copyholder for life
cannot prescribe to sell the Trees, for it is contrary to his Estate, as if a
Custom be, that if a Feoffor die his Heir within age, that he shall be in
Ward, as 8. H. 6. And he thought that the Nomination was no alteration, for he
to whom the Nomination is made, has only an Estate for life, when the
Nomination is made, and that does not warrant the sale of the Trees, and to the
third it seems that the Lord of the Manor bargain and sells the Trees, and
after lets the Manor to the bargainee for years, and then copyholder makes
wast, he thought that the Trees were not severed from the Manor, as in 33. H.
8. 48. Dyer 2. if a man bargain and sell a Manor, and after in the same Deed
makes a bargain and sale of an Advowson appendant, this remains appendant: So
if a man bargain and sell a Manor, and also the Trees do not pass till
Livery be made of the Manor, So if Lessee for years, gives and grants the
Land, and makes a Letter of Attorney to make Livery, the term passes without
Livery, and then it is a Forfeyture: And here the Lessee shall have the benefit
of Shade and Borough, and the Trees themselves during the Term, as parcel
of the Land, and then when the copyholder has done more then his Estate will
warrant, this is a forfeyture, and the Lessee shall take the advantage of it,
and so he prayed Judgment for the Plaintiff: Harris for the Defendant that the
Customs are good, but admitting that so, yet the Plaintiff shall not take
Harris.
advantage of it, and he argued that Custom ought to have two properties;
first reasonable, secondly ought to have time to make that perfect, and then
shall be good, as it appears by the examples of Littleton, f. 37. of Borough
English and Gavelkind, and custom may be against common right, but not against
common reason, which is the common Law, 8 Ed. 4. 18. 21 Ed. 3. 4. And he
intended here that the second custom is good, if the first be good, for then
it is perpetual Freehold, and Copyhold Estate of Inheritance is but an
Estate at will at the Common Law, and yet such Copyholder may dispose the
Trees, as well as custom may create the Estate, as well may it give such
privilege, as custom may warrant the taking of Toll for passing over the
soil of another, 22 Assise 58. And so custom to have the Foldage of the
Beasts which feeds upon his soil is good, but custom for paying the Goods of
another is not good, for there is not any recompense, but fishing in the Sea
and to dig the soil adjoining for landing of his Nets is good, for this is for
the public good, 8 Ed. 4. 23. So the custom for turning upon head-land of
another is good, and is for the preservation of Tilling, and also it is between
Lord an Tenant, and shall be intended to have a reasonable beginning for
consideration, etc. That this continues, for he has Fines and other Services,
and yet 3 Eliz. 199. Dyer. If the Lord claim Harriot of his Tenant, and if it
be Esloyned, allege custom, that he may take the Beasts that he found upon
the Land in Withernam; and this was adjudged unreasonable custom, so 20 H. 7.
13. Custom to have three shillings of a stranger for pound-breach is void, but
of a Tenant is otherwise, for it shall be intended to be a lawful beginning,
11 H. 7. 40. So here the beginning shall be intended to be lawful and for
valuable consideration, and for this it shall be good; and to the second
custom it follows by consequence to be a good custom, if the first should be
good, and then to the third he agreed that Copyholder cannot make wast, and if
he do it shall be a forefeiture of his Estate, as it is said by Hull, 9 H. 4,
Wast 59. but this ought to be such Wast that is prejudicial to the
Inheritance, as it is agreed in Herlackendens case, 4 Coke, Where it is agreed
that the Bargainee has several Interests in the Land and in the Trees, and by
the Writings, by the making of the Lease of the Manor they are not reunited
and annexed to the Freehold again, and then the cutting and selling is no
prejudice to him in reversion, and so no Wast to make forfeiture, and so he
concluded and prayed Judgment for the Defendant and is adjourned, see the
beginning, fol.

Trinity 9. Jacobi 1611. In the Common Bench. As yet Doctor Hu^freys Case, see
Hillary 8. Jacobi.
IN the Writ of Ravishment of Ward, between Francis Moore Esquire Plaintiff,
against Doctor Hussy and Katharine his Wife, Robert Wakeman Clark, and many
other Defendants, Dodridge the Kings Sergeant argued for the Defendant Doctor
Hussy, that a married Wife is not within the Statute of Westminster 2. chapter
35. By which the Writ of Ravishment of Ward is given, that which before the
Statute was only Trespass, is by the Statute altered in manner and form of
proceedings and in penalty of Judgment, and he thought that this Writ being
formed upon the Statute does not extend to a married Wife, for by the Statute
if the Defendant, cannot satisfy for the marriage he must abjure the Realm,
or shall have perpetual Imprisonment, which goes near to every man next unto
his Life, the love of his Country and liberty, and those the makers of the
Statute did not intend against a married Wife, and he grounded his argument
upon these words of the Statute, by which it appears that the makers of the
Statute; did not intend any person which had no property in any Goods nor power
to make satisfaction.

For first the Statute provides, that if he be able to make satisfaction, that
then he should satisfy, if not that then he shall abjure the Realm, by which
it appears that the Statute intends those that have property, and by
possibility may satisfy, but a woman cannot, for her marriage is a gift of all
her goods personal to her Husband, see for that Fox and Girtbrookes Case
Commentaries.

Secondly, The Statute provides new form of proceedings, for if the Ward or any
of the parties die hanging the Writ, the Writ shall not abate, but it shall be
revived by Resummons, by or against the Executors of him that is dead, by this
it appears that he which has no power to make Executors, shall not be intended
to be within the Statute, and a married Wife cannot make a Will, and by
consequence cannot make Executors, see Coke 6. a. Forse and Hemblins case, 3
Ed. 3. Devise 13. 4 H. 6. 6. and if the Executors have no assets, then the
statute gives remedy against the Heir.

Thirdly, The Statute intends to give action against him which may have
possession of the ward, the which a married Wife cannot have, for her
possession is to the use of the Husband, and by the words of the statute, he
against whom the Action is given ought to be made Fidei possessor, and to the
objection, that though that the Wife married cannot by any possibility have
sufficient to make satisfaction according to the intent of the statute, yet if
the Husband has sufficient, he shall answer for his Wife, as in 48 Ed. 3. 26.
and 17 H. 6. A married wife shall be attached by the Goods of the Husband, he
says that there the reason is, that the Wife is answerable by the Husband, but
this is only to make him to appear, but he against whom the action is given, by
this statute ought to have property, and in such cases a married Wife shall not
be punished, as in the same Parliament Westminster 2. chapter 25. Is provided,
that if a Disseisor fail of Record that he shall be imprisoned, in Assise, for
this is the speedy remedy, but if a married wife pleads a Record and fails of
that to the Jury; she shall not be imprisoned, though that the Assise was
brought against the Husband and the Wife or against the Husband, and the wife
is received, see 1. 3 Ass. 1 44 ass. 3. 17. as. 19. 11 H. 4.

Also the statute of Conjunctim Feoffatis, fol. 99. Which was made in the time
of the said King Ed. 3. in which time the statute of Westminster 2. was made,
and is contemporary with the same statute, by which it is provided, that if any
plead Joyntenancy, which is found against him in the Assise, that he shall be
imprisoned by the space of a year, and 16 Assise 8. Husband pleads Joyntenancy
with his wife, and maintains the Exception which is found against them, and
resolved that the Wife should not be imprisoned by this statute, 21 Assise 28.
31 Assise a. accordingly, and he said there was not any president nor Book of
Record, by which it appears that a Writ of Ravishment of Ward, was maintained
against a married Wife, for Ravishment after the Coverture, but for Ravishment
before the Coverture, see 6 and 8. Ed. 3. and to the Objection that the
Plaintiff has election if he will have the sufficiency come in question, may
but admit the Defendants to be sufficient, and then the imprisonment, nor the
abjuration shall not be inflicted, as it seems to be some opinion, 8 Ed. 3. 52.
and to that he says, that the admittance of the parties cannot alter the Law,
for if it were not the intent of the makers of the Statute that this should
extend to the Wife, the admittance of the parties will not make that extend
over the provision of that, also it seems to him that the Verdict is not
perfect, for that it is not fonnd by whom the Ward was married, but only that
he appeared married, and it ought to be without the consent of the Plaintiff,
and for that it might be that he was married by the Plaintiff, and then there
is no cause of action, nor to have the value of the marriage, and it appears by
22 R. 2. Damages 130, that they ought to inquire by whom he is married, and
also the value of the marriage, and if it does not appear whether he be married
or not, then the Verdict shall be conditional and the Judgment also, and all
the Presidents are, he appears married without the assent of the Plaintiff, and
so he concluded, and prayed that the Judgment might stand: Harris Sergeant for
the Plaintiff prays Judgment, and he supposed that it is in the choice of the
Plaintiff what Judgment he would Harris.
have, for he ought to have Damages and the value of the marriage, and it
remains in the discretion of the Plaintiff, what judgment he will have (that
is) upon the Statute, for to have the corporal punishment, or allow the
Defendants to be sufficient, and so to have judgment for the Damages, and the
value of the Marriage, without any Imprisonment or Abjuration; as in 29 Ed. 3.
24. and 8 Ed. 3. 52. where the question was demanded of the Plaintiff, and in
22 Rich. 2. Damages 130. Hankford demanded the question, if the Jury ought to
inquire if the Defendants were sufficient or not, and it was resolved that they
need not; and in 34 H. 8. Trinity, Rot. 347. there is a President accordingly,
where the Husband and the Wife were found guilty; and the Action was founded
upon the Statute, and Capias awarded against them both, and to the failing of
the Record, it is reason that the Wife should not be imprisoned, for the Pleas
are the Pleas of the Husband and his acts, and in the 11 H. 4 51. and 21 Assis.
4 in Assise the Wife was received, and voucheth a Record, and failed, and no
judgment upon that against the Husband, and the Wife was imprisoned; and so
upon Allegation of Joyntenancy, the Wife was imprisoned; and so he concluded,
and prayed judgment for the Plaintiff; and at another day the Case was argued
again by Montague the Kings Sergeant for the Defendant, Montague.
that a married Wife was not within the Statute of Westminster 2. Chap. 35. And
he said, that the true course for understanding the Statute, is to consider
three things:

First the Common Law before the making of that Statute:

Secondly the mischeife that the Statute intended to remedy:

Thirdly against what persons the Statute intended to remedy such mischeifes:
And to the first he intended that at the Common Law, before the making of the
Statute, the Remedy for Ravishment of Ward, was an Action of Trespass, as it
appears by Fitz. Na. Bre. And then it was questioned if the Plaintiff should
recover the Body without Damages, or Damages only without the Body. See 9.
Ed. 4. 48. Ed. 3. 20. 27. H. 6. And then there was no greater punishment, nor
other remedy for the taking of the Ward, then of other goods, and for the
remedy of that, the Statute of Westminster 2. chap. 35. was made, by which it
is provided, that if the Ravisher restore the Ward unmarried, then the
Plaintiff shall recover only Damages for the Ravishment, and not the value of
the Ward: But if the Ward be married, then the Guardian shall recover the value
of the marriage, and if he shall not satisfy, then he shall abjure the
Kiugdome, or have perpetual Imprisonment, and the punishments inflicted by the
Statute, being so penal: Then the persons which are within the Statute are
considerable, for in all penal Laws, the persons and the penallties are the
things to be considered, and to the persons this Statute says, that one for
another Fault is not to be punished, and he said, this is referred to
Damages, as well as to Imprisonment, and it is not a lost case, and the
Plaintiff without remedy, for Action of Trespass lies against the Husband at
the Common Law, for, for all Trespasses at the Common Law done by a married
Wife, the Husband shall be punished by payment of the Damages and costs which
are recovered: See 14. H. 8. and 9. Ed. 4. But to the Statutes which are penal
and inflict corporal punishment there otherwise, and as the Statute of 23.
Eliz. made against Recusants for not resorting to Church, should forfeit twenty
pounds for every month; and resolved that this shall extend to a married Wife,
and for that the Husband shall be liable to action: But by the third of Jacobi,
there is special provision, that the Woman shall not be subject to twenty
pounds a month, but other punishmrnt provided for her; and he supposed that
where a statute gives Imprisonment and Damages, and a married Wife offends the
statute, and shall be imprisoned, but the Husband shall not pay the Damages, as
in 8 H. 8. 18. Upon the statute of Westminster, a Woman was Imprisoned for
false appeal, for the death of her Husband, who was brought into the Court and
living; and in the 11 H. 4. 54. It is marvel that the statute of Westminster
2. gives the action to the Heir, insomuch that Interest appears to the
Executor: And for that Hill says, That the statute was not made by those which
were skilled in the Law, but he spoke ill, says the Reporter: Also the words
of the statute, If the Ravisher cannot satisfy, he shall abjure the Realm, or
have perpetual Imprisonment, and the Wife cannot, by any possibility; make
satisfaction, for she cannot have any Goods; so as this Case is, the statute
would make perpetual separation, either by abjuration or perpetual
Imprisonment, if this shall extend to a married Wife, as in 6 H. 7. was the
question, whether a married Wife shall be Attached for that, and she had no
Goods, as it is 48 Ed. 3. 2. the Sheriff returns (Nihil) against a Monk, for
that that he had no Goods, for all his Goods are the Goods of the Abbot, and it
is impossible that a married Wife should have any Goods, and the Law does not
compel to impossible things: See 3 Ed. 4. 4 H. 6. Also the Statute says, That
if the Ravisher dye, hanging the Writ, let the Law proceed against hi^
Executors by resummons, and a married Woman cannot make Executors; and to the
like cases, he thought that a married Wife was not within the Statute of
Offenders in Parks, and this gives the same punishment that the Statute gives,
as it is resolved, 13 Assis. So if a married Wife fail of a Record in Assise,
she shall not be imprisoned, and the Husband is joined only for conformity,
and for no other cause; and to the President of 34 H. 5. which has been cyted
here against the Husband and Wife, and Judgment by default against both, and
upon this, Capiatur is awarded against them both, but this is only for the
Imprisonment but not for the Damages; and also this Case differs from that, for
here the Husband is found Not guilty: Also it seems that the Book of Entrys,
366. 15. lies against Husband and Wife, and there they both plead, but if the
Wife only be condemned, the Husband shall not pay the Damages recovered
against her, 44 Ed. 3. 25. As a Lease is made to the Husband and Wife, the
Husband makes waste, and an Action of waste is brought against them both, and
the Husband dies, and the Writ abates, for the wrong dies with him, and the
Wife shall not be punished; and so prayed that the judgment might stay, and
Doctor Hussy not punished.

Hutton Sergeant for the Plaintiff prayed that the Judgment Hutton.
might be entered, and first ^ee considered the Common Law, and after that the
Statute, and at the Common Law he agreed that a Trespass lies against the
Husband and the Wife, for Ravishment made by the Wife, and in this he should
recover Damages against the Husband and the Wife, and the Husband shall be
charged with the Damages, though it be but for words proceeding from her
tongue, or any other Trespass, and if the Husband make default, his body shall
be imprisoned, so that it appears that there was remedy at the common Law by
action of trespass, and that the Husband was subject to that, then by
consequence it was intended, that all persons which were chargeable by the
common Law shall be chargeable by the Statute, and by the action which is
formed upon that, and by the common Law the Husband was chargeable, and by
consequence shall be chargeble by the Statute; and he intends that there would
be difference between actual wrongs, and others which are come by omission,
and if the Wife be the person which did the wrong, then she shall be punished
as well by Statute, as she was before by the common Law, also she shall be
outlawed, and it has been agreed that Ravishment of Ward shall be
maintainable against the Husband and the wife, if they both are Ravishers, and
also if the wife be Ravisher before marriage, and after takes a Husband, the
Husband shall be charged with the damages, and his Body shall be imprisoned,
and by consequence shall be abjured, also she may make an Executor by the
consent of her Husband, but admitting that she could not, then the remedy is
given against the Heir, and she shall be within this Statute as well as other
Statutes made in the time of the said King, as the Statute of Westminster 1.
37. And shall be a Disseisor with force, and shall be imprisoned, whether the
Husband join with her or not, as it is adjudged 16 Assise 7. for all Statutes
which provide for actual wrong, a married Wife shall be intended within them,
as it is 9 H. 4. 6. But the pleading of Joyntenancy, there the Plea is the act
of the Husband, and so failing of Record, upon the Statute of 34 Ed. 3. as it
is 16 Assise 8. for the Husband propounds the exception, but if the Wife
propounds the exception, then she shall be within the Statute and shall be
imprisoned, 21 Assise: So if a married Wife make actual disseisin with force
she shall be imprisoned, 9 H. 4. 7. b. 8 Ed. 3. 52. 22 Ed. 2 Damages 20. 27 H.
6. Ward 118. And so the President, Trinity 33 H. 8. Rot. 347. in a case between
Thomas Earl of Rutland against Lawrence Savage and his Wife in Ravishment of
Ward, at the Nisi prius the Defendants make default, and the Judgment was, that
the Husband and the Wife should be taken, and upon that he inferred, that the
Husband should be subject and charged with the damages, and so it is taken upon
the statute of 35. Eliz. That the Husband shall be charged with Debt for the
Recusancy of the Wife, and shall be imprisoned for the not payment of it, as
to the verdict it seems that this is good, and it shall be intended the Ward
was married by the Defendants, as in 33 Ed. 3. Verdict 48. It is found by
verdict, that Mulier enters, and resolved that this shall be intended in the
life of the Bastard, or otherwise it is nothing worth, and in Fulwoods case 4
Coke, the Jury found that the Defendant acknowledged himself to be bound, and
that shall be intended according to the statute of 23 H. 8. and so here though
that it be not found, that the Ward was married by these Defendants, yet it
shall be so intended, notwithstanding that nothing is found, but only that he
appeared married, and so he concluded and prayed Judgment for the Plaintiff.
This case was sollemnly argued this Term by all the Justices, that is, Coke
and Walmesley, Warberton and Foster, and upon their selemn arguments, Coke and
Walmesley were of opinion that a married wife is not within the statute, and
Warberton and Foster were of the contrary opinion, and so by reason of their
contrariety in opinion, the Judgment was staid.

Trinity 9. Jacobi 1611. in the Common Bench. Burnham against Bayne.
THE case was, A Man seized of diverse Lands, the half of them were extended by
Elegit, and before Judgment was had against him, a new Elegit Awarded, and if
all the half which remains, or but the half of that which was the fourth
part of all should be extended was the question: And it was agreed by all the
Justices, that but the half of that which remains, and not the half of all,
which he had at the time of the Judgment: But the half of that, which he had
at the time of the Elegit: And if all which remains be extended, the Extent
shall be void, by all the Justices, see 10. Ed. 2, Execution 137, 16. E. 2.
Execution 118. And here the principal case was, A man has a Rent of forty
pound, reserved upon a Lease for years, and two Judgments in Debt were had
against him at the Suit of Sir Thomas Cambell, and three Judgments at the Suit
of the Plaintiff, the half was first extended by Elegit, upon the first
Judgment had, at the Suit of Sir Thomas Cambell, and after upon the Judgment
had at his Suit, the half of the residue was extended and after upon the
Judgment at the Suit of the Plaintiff all the residue was extended, and all the
Justices agreed that the Extent was void, for they ought to extend but the
half of that which remains, and that was but the fourth part.

Trinity 9. Jacobi, 1611. In the Common Bench. Trobervill against Brent.
THE Case was, A man makes a Lease for years rendering Rent, Surrender after
Statute acknowledged.
and after grants the Reversion for life, to which Grant the Lessee for years
attornes, the Grantee acknowledges a statute, and after surrenders his Estate,
the Conusee extends the Statute and distraines for the Rent, and in Replevin
avowes for the cause aforesaid, and adjudged that the Avowry was good.

Agreed that Creditor may sue the Executors, and the Heir of Executors sued and
also the Heir.
the Debtor also, but he shall have but one Execution with satisfaction, see
the Statute of 23 H. 8. for such course in the Exche quer.

Note, that no Court of Equity, may examine any matter of Equity, Court of
Equity.
after Judgment which was precedent the Judgment, see the Statute of 4 H. 4.
chapt. 23.

Trinity 9. Jacobi 1611. In the Common Bench. Hamond against Jethro.
THe case was this, Edward Hamond was Plaintiff in Debt upon a Bill against
William Jethro, and the Bill was made in this manner, Debt upon a Bill.
Memorandum, that I William Jethro do owe and am indebted unto Edward Hamond
in the Sum of ten pound, for the payment whereof, I bind my self, etc. In
witness, and after the (in witness) it was thus subscribed, Memorandum, that
the said William Jethro be not compelled to pay the said ten pound until he
recovers thirty pound upon an obligation against A. B. etc. And in the Count
was no mention made of this Subscription; but this appears when the Defendant
prays, hearing of the Bill, the which was then entered Verbatim of Record, and
upon that the Defendant demurred in Law. Harris Sergeant for the Plaintiff
agreed, that if it had been Harris.
in the Body of the Bill, it ought to have been contained in the Count to
enable the Plaintiff to his action, but that which is after (in witness) is no
parcel of the Bill, and for that it need not to be contained in the Count, 9
H. 6. 15, 16. A thing which does not entitle the Plaintiff to action, need not
to be contained in the Count, 36 H. 6. 6. If the condition, be indorced or
subscribed, it need not to be contained in the Count; but if it be contained
before the (in witness) then it ought to be contained in the Count, 21 Ed. 4.
36. If a man be bound to pay ten pounds when the Obligee carries two hundred
load of Hay to his House, there the condition is precedent, and it ought to be
contained in the Count, 22 Ed. 4. 42. accordingly: so here the matter is
subsequent to the (in witness) and there is not any other matter upon which
the action is founded, nor contained in the body of the Bill, nor to be
performed by the Obligee, and for that he prayed Judgment for the Plaintiff.
Shirley Sergeant for the Shirley.
Defendant, that the sealing is immediately after the Proviso, and is adjoining
to the Bill in writing, and for that be it to be performed of the part of the
Plaintiff or Defendant, it ought to be mentioned in the Count, for this
intitles the Plaintiff to his Action of the case in 36 H. 6. 6. It is a
condition subsequent, and there need not to be showed; but if the condition be
precedent, and contained in the writing before the insealing there, it ought to
be mentioned in the Count: and in this principal case, this is either a
condition Precedent or nothing, for it is, that he shall not be compelled to
pay the said ten pounds until he had recovered thirty pound, and if he never
recover, he never shall pay the ten pound; and it is a condition of the part of
the Defendant, and it is adjudged in Vssards case, that where a condition is
precedent, there it ought to be contained in the Count, but where it is
subsequent, otherwise it is. So 15 H. 7. 1. Grant, that when the Grantor is
promoted to a Benefice that he ought to give to the Grantee ten pound, this is
precedent, but in the principal case it is a Condition or Covenant: and though
that it be subsequent, yet it may stay the Suit as well as an acquittance,
which is to be an acquittance if he be vexed, otherwise not, but a condition
that he shall not sue the Bill is void, for it is contrary to that, and bars
him of all the fruit of that, and precedent condition may be placed after the
(in Witness) as well as before, so he prayed Judgment for the Defendant: Coke
chief Justice said, that this which is after (in witness) is not part of the
Deed, but may be a Condition or Defeasance; but if it be not (in witness) in
the Deed, then it shall be parcel of the Bill; but though that this be put
after the (in witness) yet it shall have his force as Defeasance, but it need
not to be contained in the Count; for in Bonds and personal things, there need
not such strict words as in other Deeds, and for that this shall be a good
Condition or Defeasance; but then the Defendant ought to have that so pleaded,
and not demurr, for this makes the Bill conditional. VVarberton and Foster
agreed, VValmesley did not gainsay it, and for that it was adjudged for the
Plaintiff, if the Defendant did not show cause to the contrary, by such a day,
which was not done.

Note, It was adjudged by all the Justices, that fealty gives seisin Fealty
gives Seisin of all annual Services.
of all annual services sufficient to make seisin in avowry, but not in
Assise, but of accidental services, this gives seisin in Assise, and a man
cannot take excessiive distress for that, for this is more sacred service, as
Littleton says of Homage, the most honorable: See 42 Ed. 3. 26. 11 H. 4. 2.

Note, Two retain an Attorney, both dye, the Executor or Administrator of the
survivor shall be only charged, and not the Executors Attorney brings Action
of Debt for Fees.
of them both, for a personal contract survives of both parties, otherwise of
real contracts, as warranty: See 16 H. 7. 13. a. 3 Coke, Sir William Harberts
Case, 30 Ed. 3. 40. 17 Ed. 3. 8. The Attorney brought an Action of Debt against
both, and the Executors of both the parties which retained him for his Fees,
and both pleaded jointly, that they detained nothing, and it was found for the
Plaintiff, and upon motion in arrest of Judgment, the Judgment was stayed,
insomuch that the Executor of the survivor was only chargeable,
notwithstanding the pleading and admission of the Parties.

Note, That it was agreed by all the Justices, that by the Law of Merchants, if
two Merchants join in Trade, that of the increase Survivor does not hold
amongst Merchants to have all.
of that, if one dye, the other shall not have the benefit by survivor: See
Fitzherberts Natura brevium, Account, 38 Ed. 3. And so of two Joint
Shopkeepers, for they are Merchants; for as Coke says, there are four sorts
of Merchants, that is, Merchant Adventurers, Merchants dormants, Merchants
traveling, and Merchants residents, and amongst them all there shall be no
benefit by survivor.

Jus accrescendi inter Mercatores locam non habet.
Note, That Arbitrators awarded, that every of the parties should pay only
five shillings for writing the award to the Clark, and agreed Award void.
that the award was void to that part, and good for the residue, for they
cannot award a thing to be made to a stranger.

Action upon the Case was brought for these words, He is a Cozening Action upon
the Case for words.
Rogue, and has cozened Richard Wood of thirty pound, and goes about to do
the like by me, and agreed that the action does not lie: So for Rogue or
Cozener, for it is without aspersion and gentle, and words shall be taken in
the gentlest sense.

Devise that Executors shall sell Land with the assent of J. S. Devise that
Executors shall sell Land.
if J. S. dies before that he assents, the Executors shall not sell;
notwithstanding the death of J. S. was the act of God, and in the life time of
J. S. they could not sell without his consent, and so it was agreed in the Case
concerning Salisbury School, where the under Schoolmasters was to be placed
by the head Schoolmasters with the assent of two chief Bailiffs, and it seems
the head Schoolmasters cannot place without their consents.

Note, it was said to be adjudged that the Inhabitants of a Town A Town
incorporated with the consent of the greater part. Action on the Case for
slander.
cannot be incorporated, without the consent of the major part of them, and
incorporation without their consent is void.

In action upon the case, the case was this, The Brother of the Defendant spoke
these words to the Plaintiff, that is, Thou Theif, thou Goal whelpe, thou have
stolen a piece of Silver from my Master Hocken; and the Defendant said as
insued, that is, That which my Brother spoke is true, I will justify it, and
spend a hundred pounds in proof thereof; and it seems to the Court, that the
Action does not lie against the Defendant, insomuch that it does not appear by
the Court, that he had notice of the words which his Brother spoke; but that
this ought to be specially averred, and the Count contained that the Defendant
justified the aforesaid scandalous words to be true, as in these English words
following, That which my Brother, etc. and it seems that this was not
sufficient.

Michaelmas 1611. 9. Jacobi, In the Common Bench. Sir Richard Buckley against
Owen Wood.
NOte, It was said to be adjudged between these parties, that if Action upon
the Case for suing one in a Court which has no Jurisdiction.
a man exhibits a Bill in the Srarr Chamber, which contains diverse slanderous
matters, whereof the Court has no Jurisdiction; that an Action upon the Case
lies; so if the Plaintiff affirm his Bill to be true, action upon the Case
lies upon that, as it was adjudged upon that, as it was adjudged in the same
Case.

Michaelmas 9. Jacobi 1611, in the Common Bench. Patrick against Lowre.
IN Trespass the Defendant justifies, for that, that he was seized
Prescription for Common for Beasts without number.
of a House with the Appurtenances, and prescribes to have Common in the place,
etc. for all manner of Beasts, Levant and Couchant upon the said House, and
good prescription, notwithstanding it does not contain certain number, and it
shall be intended for so many of the Beasts, which may be rising and lying down
upon the said House, and if he put in more they may be distrayned, doing
Damage; and so is the usage and prescription in all Buroughs; that is, to
prescribe to have the Common by reason of the House, but the matter upon which
Nicholls the Sergeant which moved it insists was the uncertainty, that is, what
shall be said rising and lying down upon a House, for he thought beasts could
not be rising and lying down upon a House, unless that they are upon the top
of the House, but to that it was resolved, that infomuch that here the common
was claymed to the House, it shall be intended that it was a curtillage
belonging to the House, and if it be not; that ought to be averred of the other
party, and then the Beasts shall be intended to be rising and lying upon the
Curtladge, and if it had been alleged, yet it shall be intended so many of the
Beasts which may be tied and are usually to be maintained and remaining within
the House, for it was agreed that (rising and lying down) shall be intended
those Beasts which are nourished and fed upon the Land, and may there live in
summer and winter, and also Beasts cannot be distrained if they be not rising
and lying down upon the Land and receiving food there for some reasonable time,
but some thought that beasts could not be rising and lying down upon a house
without a Curtilage.

Note that it was agreed that all proceedings in inferior Court, Privilege
out of higher Court.
after a Writ of Privilege delivered out of this Court are void (and before no
Judge) and if they award Execution, this Court will discharge the party of
Execution.

Note that a Fine was levied between Charles Lynne and Walter Fine amended.
Long, and the Foot of the Fine was Longle, and it was amended*

Michaelmas 9. Jacobi 1611. In the Common Bench. Hamond Strangis Case.
THe Father for a valuable consideration infeoffs his eldest son and Feoffinent
to a Son and Heir for a valuable consideration. Avowry.
Heir, and adjudged that this was not within the statute of those, who infeoff
their eldest Sons, nor a valuable consideration.

In Avowry, the Defendant avowes upon the person of the Plaintiff, in a
Replevin, and the Plaintiff traverses the Tenure, upon which they are at issue,
and at the Nisi prius it is found for the Plaintiff, and agreed that this was
aided by the Statute of Ieofailes, for this is out of the statute of 21 H. 8.
and as it was at the common Law; or if the Defendant avow upon the person of a
stranger, the stranger has no plea, but out of his fee, which was mischeivous,
the which was aided by the statute of 11 H. 8. 19. for he thought he would have
traversed the Seisin.

The Test of a Venire facias was the twelfth of June returnable, tres Test of
a Venire facias amended after verdict.
Trinitatis, which was the same day that the Test was, and after Verdict it
was moved to be amended, and to be made according to the Roll, the which was
done accordingly, see 7 Ed. 4. for returning of Distring as which was amended
after Verdict, and Crompton one of the Prothonotaries said, that a Venire
facias bare date in the vacation after the Term returnable in the Term
before, and it was amended according to the Roll, and the principal case was,
the Roll was upon the entering of the issue, therefore you shall cause to come
here twelve good and lawful men, who neither, etc. within three weeks of
Michaelmas, and the return of the Venire facias was made accordingly.

Michaelmas 9. Jacobi 1611. in the Common Bench. John Weeks Plaintiff, Edward
Bathurst Defendant.
ALSO in Ejectione Firm, upon the Joining of the Issue, Ejectione firm.
the Defendant pleads not Guilty, and it was entered, and the aforesaid Lessor,
likewise, where it should have been, and the aforesaid Plaintiff likewise, and
it was amended: See this Case afterward here the Case was, the Defendant
pleads, that he is not guilty as the aforesaid Weeks, which was the Lessor,
above against him has declared, and upon this he puts himself upon the
Country, and the aforesaid Weeks likewise, where it should be the aforesaid
John likewise, and after verdict upon solemn argument this was amended by
Coke, Warburton, and Foster, and Foster cited 11. H. 7. 2. 26. H. 6. to be
directly in the point; and 14. Ed. 3. Amendment 46. Ed. 3. Amendment 53. and
Warburton seemed that first, that is Wekes for the aforesaid Wekes, etc. Is not
material, and the last shall be amended, insomuch that this does not alter any
matter of substance, Coke seemed that this was amendable the same Term by the
Common Law, if it were before Issue, see 5 Ed. 3. 7 H. 6. Which was immediately
before the statute of 22 Ed. 4. but in another term it was not amendable by
the Common Law, nor the statute of 14 Ed. 3. does not extend to that, for this
does not extend to a Plea Roll, 46 Ed. 3. 13. accordingly, but the statute of 8
H. 6. extends to any misprision, in the Plea Roll, or in the Record, and makes
that amendable, 26 H. 6. Amendment, 32. 9 and 10. Eliz. Dyer 260, 261. And the
difference is, where there there is an Issue that gives power to the Justices
of Nisi prius to try that, then another Misprision shall be afterward amended;
and he said that it was adjudged between Sir William Read and Lezure in the
Exchequer, that a Commission of these words (and the aforesaid Plaintiff
likewise) shall not be amended, but in the principal case here, they all
agreed that it shall be amended, and it was amended accordingly.

Michaelmas 1611. 9. Jacobi, in the Common Bench. Prowse against Worthinge.
Leonard Loves Case.
IN an Ejectione firm, special Verdict, the case was this, Leonard Ejectione
firm.
Loves the Grandfather, was seized of a Manor held in chief, and of other
Manors and Lands held of a Common person in socage, and had Issue four Sonns,
Thomas, William, Humphrey, and Richard. And by his Deed 12 Eliz. covenants to
convey these Manors and Lands to the use of himself for his life, without
impeachment of wast, and after his desease to the use of such Farmors and
Tenants, and for such Estates as shall be contained in such Grants as he shall
make them, and after that to the use of his last will, and after that to the
use of William his second son in tail, the Remainder to Humphrey his third
Son in tail, the Remainder to Richard the fourth Son in tail, the Remainder
to his own right Heirs, with power of Revocation, and after makes a Feoflment
according to the covenant, and after that purchases eight other acres held of
another common person in socage, and after makes revocation of the said Estates
of some of the Manors and Lands which were not held by Knights service, and
after that makes his Will, and devises the Land that he had purchased as
before, and all the other Land whereof he had made the Revocation to Thomas his
eldest son, and the Heirs Males of his body for 500. years, provided that if he
alien, and dye without Issue, that then it shall remain to William his second
son in tail, with the like proviso as before, and after dyed; and the Jury
found, that the Lands whereof no revocation is made, exceeds two parts of all
his Lands, Thomas the eldest son enters the 8. Acres, purchased as before,
and dies without Issue male, having Issue a Daughter, of whom this Defendant
claims these eight Acres, and the Plaintiff claims them by William the second
Son.

And Dodridge the Kings Sergeant argued for the Plaintiff, intending Dodridge.
that the sole question is for the 8. acres purchased; and if the devise of
that be good or not by the Statute of 34. H. 8. And to that the point is only,
a man which has Lands held in chief by Knights service, and other Lands held
of a common person in Socage, conveys by act executed in his life time, more
then two parts, and after purchases other Lands, and devises those, if the
devise be good or not. And it seems to him that the devise is good, and he
says, that it has been adjudged in the self same case, and between the same
parties; And this Judgment has been affirmed by writ of Error, and the devise
to Thomas, and the Heirs males of his body for 500. years, was a good estate
tail, and for that he would not dispute it against these two Judgments. But to
the other question he intended that the devise was good, and that the Devisor
was not well able to do it by the Statute of 34. H. 8. And he intended that
the statute authoriseth two things. 1. To execute estates in the life time of
the party for advancement of his Wife or Children, or payment of his debts, and
for that see 14. Eliz. Dyer, and that may be done also by the common Law,
before the making of this statute. But this statute restrains to two parts, and
for the third part makes the Conveyance void as touching the Lord: But the
statute enables to dispose by Will a parts, where he cannot dispose any part by
the Common Law, if it be not by special Custom, but the use only was
deviseable by the common Law, and this was altered into possession by the
statute of 27 H. 8. and then comes the statute of 32. and 34. H. 8. and
enables to devise the Land which he had at the time of the devise, or which he
purchased afterward, for a third part of this Land should remain which he had
at the time of the devise made; and if a third part of the Land did not remain
at the time of the devise made, sufficient should be taken out of that; but if
the Devisor purchase other Lands after, he may those wholly dispose: And for
that it was adjudged, Trin. 26. Eliz. between Ive and Stacye, That a man cannot
convey two parts of his Lands by act executed in his life time, and devise the
third part, or any part so held by Knights service; and also he relied upon the
words of the statute, that is, having Lands held by Knights service, that this
shall be intended at the time of the devise, as it was resolved in Butler and
Bakers Case; That is, that the statute implies two things that is property, and
time of property, which ought to be at the time of the devise. But here at the
time of the devise, the Devisor was not having of Lands held by Knights
service, for of those he was only Tenant for life, and the having intended by
the statute ought to be real enjoying, and perfect having, by taking, and not
by retaining, though that in Carrs Case, cited in Butler and Bakers Case, rent
extinct be sufficient to make Wardship, yet this is no sufficient having to
make a devise void for any part.

Also if the Statute extend to all Lands, to be after purchased, the party
shall never be in quiet, and for that the Statute does not intend Lands which
shall be purchased afterward; for the Statute is having, which is in the
Present tence, and not which he shall have, which is in the Future tence; and
4. and 5 P. and M. 158. Dyer 35. A man seized of Socage Lands, assures that to
his Wife in jointure, and 8. years after purchases Lands held in chief by
Knights service, and devises two parts of that, and agreed that the Queen shall
not have any part of the land conveyed for Jointure, for this was conveyed
before the purchase of the other, which agrees with the principal case, and
though to the Question, what had the Devisor; It was having of Lands held in
Capite, insomuch that he had Fee-simple expectant upon all the estates tail; he
intended that this is no having within the Statute, but that the Statute intend
such having, of which profit arises, and out of which the K. or other Lord may
be answered, by the receipt of the profits, which cannot be by him which has
fee-simple expectant upon an estate tail, of which no Rent is reserved: and
also the estate tail by intendment shall have continuance till the end of the
world: and 40. Edw 3. 37. b. in rationabili part bonorum, it was pleaded, that
the Plaintiff had reversion descended from his Father, and so has received
advancement. And it seems that was no plea, in so much that the reversion
depends upon an estate tail, and upon which no Rent was reserved, and so no
advancement. So of a conveyance within this Statute, ought such advancement to
the youngest son, which continues, as it is agreed in Binghams Case, 2 Coke,
that if a man convey lands to his youngest son, and he convey that over to a
stranger in the life time of his father for good consideration, and after the
Father dies, this is now out of the Statute; for the advancement ought to be
continuing until the death of the Father: And so he says also it was adjudged
in Butler and Bakers Case; that if a man devise Socage Lands, and after sell to
a stranger for good consideration, his Lands held by Knights service, this
devise is now good for all, for he has not any Land held by Knights service
at the time of his death, and so he concluded that the devise was good, and
prayed Judgment for the Plaintiff. Houghton Houghton.
Sergeant for the Defendant, he thought the contrary, and he argued that
before the statutes of 32. and 34. of H. 8. men were disabled to devise any
Land, and for that they cannot provide for their Wives, Children, or for
payment of their Debts, and for remedy to that, Feoffments to uses were
invented, and then to dispose the use by their Wills: and then experience finds
that to be inconvenient, and then the statute of 27. H. 8. transfers the use
into possession, and then neither use nor land was deviseable without special
Custom, and then this was found to be mischeivous, after five years
experience, and then was the statute of 32. H. 8. made, and where by the
statute of Marlebridg, of those which did enfeoff their begotten sons, a
Feoffment by the Father to his son and Heir was void for all. Now by this
statute this is good for 2. parts, and void only for the 3d part, and that for
the good of the Lord; but as to the party that is good for all, as it is agreed
in Mightes case, 8 Coke. Then to consider in the case here, if all things
concur that the statute requires; and to that here is a person which was
actually seized of Land held by Knights service in 12. Eliz. So that it is a
person which then was having within the statute. 2. If here be such conveyance
for advancement of his children, as is intended within the statute; and to that
he seemed that so, notwithstanding that it may be objected, that here is no
execution to the youngest children, insomuch that it is first limited to such
Farmers and Tenants, etc. But he intended that this is no impediment. Secondly,
also there is a limitation to the use of his last Will. Thirdly, also there is
a limitation to the use of such persons to whom he devises any estate by his
Will. But these are no impediments, for the last is no other but a devise to
himself and his heirs, and there is not any other person known, but merely
contingent, and it is not like to a remainder limited to the right heirs of I.
S. for there the remainder is in Abeiance, but here it is only in contingency,
and nothing executed in Interest, till the contingency happen, and the not
having of a son at the time shall not make difference, as in 38. Edw. 3. 26. in
formedon in Remainder, where the gift was in one for life, the remainder to
another in tail, remainder in fee to another stranger; and he in remainder in
tail dies without Issue in the life time of the Tenant for life, he in
remainder in fee may have formedon in remainder without mentioning the
remainder in tail. But here he intends that the devise shall be void in
respect of the Lands first conveyed, which were held in chief by Knight
service; for the words of the statute are by act executed, either by devise, or
by any of them, and they are conjoined: and it is not of necessity that the
time of the Conveyance shall be respected, but the time of the value. And
notwithstanding that the Testator does not mention any time; But in so much as
the provision of the statute is to save primor, seisin, and livery to the King,
as if the man had 20 l. by year in Socage, and one acre in chief, and makes a
conveyance of all that, it shall be void first to the livery, and pri^or seisin
to the third part: So if he make conveyance of the 20 l. by year, and leave
the said acre held in chief to descend, and after that purchase other Lands to
the value of the third part of all the conveyance of the 20 l. land,
notwithstanding which, for the advancement of his Wife, Children, or payment of
his Debts, for he had a full third part at the time of his death, which
descended. And he supposed that the having of a dry reversion depending upon
the estate tall, is sufficient, having within the words and letter of the
Statute, and yet he agreed the ease put in Butler and Bakers case; that if a
man devise his Socage Lands, and after alien his Lands held in chief by Knight
service to a stranger, bonafide, this is good. So if he had made a reservation
of his Lands held in chief to himself for his life, in so much that his
estate in that ended with his life, and he remembered the case cyted in Bret
and case, Comment. That if a man devise a Manor in which he has nothing, and
after he purchases it, and dies, the devise is good, if it be by express
name. But when a man has disposed of two parts of his Land, the Statute does
not enable him to devise the Residue; but he has done all, and executed all
the authority which the Statute has given to him. But he agreed also, that the
reversion is not such a thing of value, which might make the third part descend
to the Heir; but it is uncertain, as a hundred, and the other things of
uncertain value contained in Butler and Bakers Case. And also he intended, that
the remainder could not take effect, insomuch that the condition is precedent,
and it is not found that the eldest Son has aliened, and then dead without
Heir male, and so he concluded, and prayed Judgment for the Defendant.

In Replevin the Defendant avows for 9 s. Rent, the Plaintiff pleads a
Replevin, Grant without date.
Deed of feoffment of the same Land made before the Statute of (quia emptores
terrarum) by which 6 s. 8 d. is only reserved, and demands Judgment, if he
shall be received to demand more then is reserved by the Deed; See 4 Ed. 2.
Avowry, 202. 10. H. 7. 20. Ed. 4. 7. Edw. 4. Lung, 5 Ed. 4. 22 H. 6. 50. This
Deed was without date, and it was averred that it was made before the Statute
of (quia emptores terrarum) which was made in the 18. of Edw. 1. And also it
ought to be averred to be made after the beginning of the Reign of Richard 1.
For a writing after the beginning of his Reign checks prescription. But if a
man has a thing by grant before that, he may claim by prescription, for he
cannot plead the grant, insomuch it is before time of memory, and a Jury cannot
take notice of that, and for that the pleading before with the said averments
was good.

If debt be due by Obligation, and another debt be due by the same Obligation.
Debtor to the same Debtee of equal sum, and the Debtor pay one sum
generally, this shall be intended payment upon the Obligation.

Earl of Cumberland and Hilton
IN an action of Account, the (Venire facias) was returned by the Account.
Coroners; (The execution of this Writ does appear in a certain Pannell fixed
to this Writ) and the Pannell and names of the Jurors between the Earl of
Cumberland, Plaintiff, and Thomas Hilton Defendant, in a plea of Debt, where it
ought to be in a plea of Account, and yet after Verdict day was given to the
Coroners, to amend their Return, which was done accordingly.

Michaelmass, 1611. 9. Jacobi, in the Common Bench. Ferdmando Cross, Informer,
against Westwood.
IN Information upon the Statute of 5. Ed. 6. Chap. 14. exhibited by
Information.
Cross against Westwood, for that the Defendant had bought in gross, and
gotten into his hands by buying, and not by Lease, 40. quarters of Wheat meal,
price of every quarter 40. shillings, to the intent to put that in water, and
after of that being dried again, then of that to make starch, against the form
of the said Statute, and so demanded fourscore pounds for the King and
himself, according to the Statute; and upon this the Defendant demurred in
Law, upon the Information this case came in question: And it was argued by
Nicholls Sergeant for the Defendant, that there was not any Law against
Ingrossers known, what was engrossing before the making of this Statute, which
declares and describes who shall be an Ingrosser: Then he considered, if the
Ingrosser described in the Information, be such an Ingrosser which is intended
by the Statute, and he seemed that no, for he said, the Ingrosser contained in
the Information, is not one which bought Corn growing in the field, nor Corn,
nor dead Victuals, which are the words contained in the Statute; but he is
charged for buying of wheat meal, and it seems that that is not within the
words of the Statute. Also Ingrosser intended within the Statute, ought to buy
that, to sell the same again, and so is not the Ingrosser in the Information
charged, and if he be not within the words, he shall not be within the
punishment; for it is a penal law, and shall not be taken by equity, and so
much the more, because it inflicts corporal punishment upon the Offender. And
then to consider the words of the Statute, he supposed that Wheat meal is not
within the words, Corn growing, nor Corn; but the question is, if it be within
the words, dead Victuals: and to that he said, that it has been adjudged, that
a Costermonger which buys Apples to sell again, is not within the words (dead
Victuals) and he said, that Flower and Meal are things of which Victuals are
made, and not Victuals themselves. But there ought to be another thing done to
them by the industry of man to make them Victuals; As if a Baker buy Wheat, and
make that into Bread, this is out of the provision of the Law, and not aided by
the Proviso, which provides for Fish-monger, Poulter, and Butcher, which buys
such things which concern their Faculty, Craft, or Mystery, if it be not by
fore-stalling, but this does not extend to all Crafts. But he supposed that
when the nature is altered, that is out of the purviewe, and is another thing,
and shall not be ^eplevied, notwithstanding that Replevin lies of Sow and
Piggs, where the Sow only was imparked, but not of Leather made in Shoos. Also
he seemed that the Defendant is not charged that he had an intent to sell the
same again: And if a man buy Corn for the provision of his house, this is out
of the Statute, notwithstanding that it be by Engrossing. And so if a man buy
Barley, and make that into Malt, and sell it again in Malt: Or if a man buy
Oats, and convert that into Oatmeale, or other Flower, and then sell it again,
this is out of the statute: and if so it be, then upon this he inferred, that
this is not so much as if he had sold that afterward, when he had altered it
in nature, as in making of Wheat-meale into starch; for in the cases before
cyted, things bought are of another nature: So if a man has many Farms or
Grounds sowed with Corn, and he sells them to another, this is no fore-stalling
within the statute, if it be not driving to Market: and he says, that Regrater
is defyned by the statute, to be him which buys in one Market, and sells that
in another Market within four miles, and he is an Ingrosser, and Regrater also:
So if a man buy Wheat, and makes Cakes of that, this is out of the statute: Or
if a Merchant buy Corn beyond Sea, and sell that here, this is is out of the
statute, for it ought to be bought and sold also within the Realm; so if Corn
reserved for Rent be sold again, this is out of the statute, and so concluded;
First, that the buying of Wheat-meale is not buying of Corn growing, Corn, nor
dead Victuals, and the sale of that in starch, is not the sale of the same
thing again, and prayed Judgment for the Defendant.

Dodridge Sergeant of the King, for the King, and the Informer supposed the
contrary, and to him it seemed, that there are three Dodridge
things considerable, upon the Statute: That is, the Scope, the Letter, and the
offense, and to the offense, he intended that it is the offense which is
contained in the Information which is provided to be punished by the Statute,
and he said that the offense is confessed by the Demurrer: And he said there
were diverse good Laws against Ingrossers before the making of this Statute:
But it was not defined who was an Ingrosser, and this was the Evasion that such
Malefactors escaped without punishment. And he said, there are three notable
Enemies to the Common Wealth, first Forestallers, secondly Regraters, thirdly
Ingrossers: And forestaller is he which prevents the Sale in open markett,
Ingrosser is he which ingrosseth in his hands, and Regrater is he which sells
again, and he which will be an Ingrosser, will be a Forestaller also, and so
of the contrary, and these offenses make Dearth, and for that their gain is
called a (wicked gain:) See the Statute of 31. Ed. 1. Rastall Forestallers 1.
And they are basely to be esteemed, which merchandise of Merchants, because
they cannot gain unless at least they lie: And this Statute has given a
livery to those Malefactors by which they may be known, for he has them
discribed and defined, and this is the scope of the Statute; thirdly he
considered the Letter, and for the better intelligence of that he consi ered
the Body and Proviso of the Statute, and tie himself to an Ingrosser, and
would not meddle with the other offenses contained in the Statute, the words of
which are, whatsoever person or persons shall ingrosse or get into his or their
hands by buying, etc. (other then by Lease, etc.) and Corn growing in the
feilds, or any other Corn or grain, etc. or other dead victuals whatsoever,
shall be accepted, reputed, and taken an unlawful ingrosser, etc. And it has
been objected that it is a penal Statute, and for that shall not be taken by
equity, and also is declaratory, and for reason also shall be taken strictly:
But he supposed, that admitting that the offender contained in the information
be out of the Letter of the Statute, that yet he shall be within the equity,
and that the Statute shall be taken by equity, but he intended first, what was
within the Letter of the Statute, for Wheat made into meal is Wheat, and
Barley made into Malt is Barley, and so it is contained in the information,
that is, that he has bought Wheat made into Meal, and allowing that Corn is
victual, then a fortiori, meal is dead victual, for it is a degree nearer to
the use of man and to sustenance^; and by the same reason that it is not
victual, insomuch that another thing ought to be made to it, before it may be
used, by the same reason flesh shall be no victual, for that ought to be
boiled or roasted, which is another thing also before it can be used: and he
said that meal is the staff of sustenance, and of all dearths, the dearth of
Meal and Corn is the most greatest, and he which wants bread, wants all other
victuals, for all others without this breeds diseases, and for that Corn is
the victual of victuals, and so he supposed this remains Corn, and
admitting that not yet it is within the words (dead victuals) Also he intendes
that the Statute shall be taken by equity, notwithstanding it be penal,
insomuch that it is for public good, as the Statute of 25. Ed. 3. of petty
treason, contains the Master only: And yet if a Servant kills his Mistress,
that shall betaken within the Statute: And so if the Servant kills his Master
after that he is departed out of his service, upon malice conceived during the
time that he was in his service, this shall be also within the Statute, and yet
is not within the words of the statute, and so of the statutes of 13. and 27.
Eliz. of fraud upon taking by equity, and yet all these statutes are penal:
But insomuch that they are made for the public good, and for punishment of
offenses which tend to the contrary, they shall be out of the general rule;
But he intended that the same thing which was bought was sold again, for it is
confessed by the information, that he has sold Meal, and it was not the thing
that was first bought, and if it were sustenance before that the water was put
to it, the putting of water to it does not make alteration, and is contained in
the information, that the Defendant sold the same meal that he had bought by
the name of Starch, and this is confessed by the Demurrer, and by that if meal
be victual, then he has sold meal victual by the name of Starch, and to the
objection, that it is not the same thing, insomuch that the Replevin does not
lie, for the meal after that is made in Starch, he says Replevin does not lie
for the Corn it self if it be not in bags, and if the meal were in bags,
notwithstanding that water were put to it, yet Replevin lies, and it is reason
that this shall have a large and beneficial construction, insomuch as it
apperes by the preamble, that this is made against the Catterpillers of the
Common Wealth: And to the objection that the Statute is Declaratory, and for
that it shall not be taken by equity, if this rule shall be observed, then all
the questions in the Court of Wards, and in Butler and Bakers Case 3. Coke they
have been in vain. And yet it appears that equity was there taken for equity.
But in these cases the exposition may be besides, but not contrary to the
words, and also he intended that the Proviso expounds the Body of the statute,
and by the Proviso it appears, that the buying of barley and converting it
into Malt, and the Sale of that afterward, and the buying of Oats and the
converting of that into Oate-Meale, and the sale of that afterward should be
within the Statute, if it had not been excepted by the Proviso; and yet there
is an alteration of the thing which is bought: And if a man buy Barley by
forestalling, and make that in Malt, and then sell that again, this is within
the Statute, and there is no difference betwixt this Case and Malt, for the
Barley is put into water and dried again, and so it is here, the Meal is put
in water and dried again, and yet that is within the Statute: And the manner
and nature of offense, every one which has a Household and Family knows, for
the finest Wheat Meal makes sustenance for the Master of the Family, and the
other makes several sorts for the residue of the Family, and the Brann makes
Bread for Horses; so that the virtue of that is, that it feeds both Man and
Beast, and all this is prevented by making that new devised vanity, and the
quantity of Wheat which is employed is incredible, and may feed many, and if
the makers of that have gained the name of an occupation, this is worse, for
this furthers vanity, and takes away the sustenance of many, and inhanceth the
price of Wheat, and is so new aninvention that there is not a Latin word for
it, and so he concluded that he is an Offender, and within the scope of the
letter of the Law, and that the Preamble and Proviso has been so expounded,
and that as to mean occupations, as Tanners and such like which bought Hydes
and sold them again, and he said that they did them further for the use of man,
and made that more apt and fit for use, and without that a man could not use
them, but in this Case the Starch-makers further the abuse, and prayed Judgment
for the King, and for the Informer.

And at another day this case was argued again by Haughton for Hanghton.
the Defendant, that the statute is penal for forfeyture of Goods, as for
coporall punishment, and for that it shall not be taken by Equity, nor by
interpretation, but strictly according to the Letter, as in Reniger and
Fogassas case, Commentaries 18. By Pollard, it is a principal in Law, that a
penal statute shall not be taken by Equity, as in the statute of Westminster
1. chapter 35. Gives an attaint in real action, and notwithstanding that
perjury be an offense against both the Tables, and in attaint it is of
necessity that it be perjury in the petty Jury, and yet this does not extend to
personal Actions, 5 Ed. 3. 6. 34 Ed. 4. 7. 1 Ed. 3. 6. Gives attaint as well
for Damages excessive, as for the principal, and this shall be taken strictly,
also as it is said by Fineva, 14 H. 7. 14. a. and in 27 H. 6. 8. General
penal Statuts shall be limited to certain times as the statute of Westminster
2. chapt. 11. Which gives power to Auditors which find accountants in
Arrerages, to commit them to prison, but it ought not to be forthwith, and this
for the favor of the Defendants, and this is the reason also of the Judgment
in Fogassas Case by the statute of Agreements, that every agreement shall be
taken within the statute, and so the Statute of 23 H. 6. Provides that the
Sheriff shall not let out his County, and 20 H. 7. 21. It is agreed that the
letting out of a Hundred is not within the Statute, and it is also agreed in
Partridges case, Com. 87. that the statute of 32 H. 8. of buying of Tithes,
shall not be taken by Equity, and the reason is there given, insomuch that it
is a penal Law, and if it be so that the statute shall not be taken by Equity
he considered if it be within the words, and to that he intended that it is not
Corn which is bought, for it is changed into another thing, and also it is not
dead Victual, for it is not Victual till another thing is made of it, also
the same thing that was bought ought to be sold again, or otherwise it shall
not be within the Words of the statute, and by consequence out of the penalty,
as if a man buy Corn, and make that into Meal, Bread, or Puddings, this is not
within the statute, so the buying of Apples and selling of them again, it is no
victuals within the statute, so Butcher which buys Cattle, and those kill
and sells again is not within the statute, and he says that Starch is good
Food when it is dry again, which proves that this is another thing then the
Meal which was bought, and so out of the Letter of the statute, and to the
Proviso which excepts Barley that is bought and made in Malt, and Oats, made
in Oate-Meale and sold again, it seems that this is an idle Proviso and
surplusage, as in Porters Case, 1 Coke 24. 6. in the statute of 27 H. 8.
Proviso to except good uses out of the statute, inables men to devise to such
uses, and so the statute of 5 Ed. 6. chapter 16. the Body of which extends only
to Offices, Covenant, Administration of Justice, or the Revenue of the King, as
Receiver, Controller, etc. And yet a Keeper of a Park is excepted out of this,
more for the satisfaction of the ignorant Burgesses then for any necessity, and
so he concluded and prayed judgment for the Defendant.

Montague Sergeant of the King, for the King and for the Informer Montague.
argued to the contrary, that as to the objection that Costermongers are not
within the statute, he says, that that is a thing of Delicacy, and not
victuals within the statute, but he says it was adjudged in the Exchequer,
that the buying of Meal and the selling of that again was within this statute,
and in this case the Information is that the Defendant had bought Meal and
sold the same again by the name of Starch, which is confessed by the Demurrer,
and for the exposition of the statute, he considered the mischeife before the
making of that, the remedy which is provided by the statute, and the Office of
a good Judge, that is to advance the remedy and suppress the mischeife, and he
intended that this was punishable by the Common Law in another form, as Waste,
notwithstanding as Action does not ly, yet Prohibition lies at the Common Law,
and by the statute of 27 Ed. 3. Justices in Oyre, ought to inquire of all
greivances and oppressions to the People, and there cannot be greater greivance
or oppression then that is which deprives them of their food, and for that, he
is called the Oppresser of the Poor, and Fleta calls him Woolfe which ought to
be hunted from place to place, and 43 Assise. was punished by Fine and Ransom,
and yet then the offense was uncertain, but now it is made certain by defining
it by this statute, so that this is a statute of Definition only, and the
statute of 31. Ed. 1. inf^icts the punishment, and to the objection, that it is
not the same thing which is sold, which was bought, he said it is the same in
intent, for it produces the same mischeife.

Secondly, It is the same substance, and the same form, that is the formal
substance which gives the being, but not an accedentall form, and he says,
that if a man have Corn, and another by wrong takes it from him, and does
convert it into Meal, he may take that back again; otherwise of Iron made into
an Anvill, but trees made into Timber, and plate altered in fashion, may be
taken back again, otherwise if it be converted into Coin, and so upon the
Statute of 21 H. 8. If a Servant sells the Goods of his Master, and steal the
Money, that is out of the Statute, but if the Servant carry Corn to the Mill,
and this is converted into Meal, and then the Servant steals it, this is
within the statute, for this is the same thing, 28 H. 8. A man pleads (he
appearing seized to the same use) it shall not be intended the same, but such
uses, and Browning and Beestons case in the Com. A man is bound to pay twenty
pound at Michaelmas, and also afterward to pay twenty pound at the same Feast,
and that was intended the same Feast in another year, and not in the same year,
so that the word (same) shall not be so precisely taken, but as Patent of the
King for making of a thing, of which a man has made new invention is good, if
it be limited for certain time only, as Hastings has a Patent for making of
Frisado only, as a thing newly invented by him, but insomuch that this varyes
only in the form of making of that, and not in substance, the Patent was
adjudged void, so a Patent made to a Cutler for Gilding, insomuch that this
varies only in form, this was not allowed to be a new invention, so a Patent
made to Johnson for new casting of Lead, insomuch that that varies only in
form, and not in substance, this agreed with the ancient, this was also void,
and if the starch made be another thing then the Meal which was bought, then
it ought to be another in nature and quality, but this is not, for starch is
used for Victual in Spain and other Countries, as Ryce is used, see 46 Assise
8. 27. and he intended that the Proviso made that clear and without question,
for there cannot be a difference made between that and Malt, and if Malt had
not been within the Body of the Act, this would not be exempted by special
Proviso, and so the statute of 25 H. 8. chapter 2. for transportation of
Victual in Ireland, except Meal, which proves also that Meal is included
within the words, dead Victuals, and which has been within the Body of the
statute if it had not been excepted, and to the Objection that it is penal Law,
and for that shall have strict opposition, and not by equity, but he says that
this rule fails as to the interest of the Commonwealth, that is, when the
Commonwealth is intervenient; and to the Objection that this is a thing
invented after the making of the statute, he answered that, with the case of
Saint-John, 5 Coke 71. b. Which inhibits Hand-Guns, and it is there adjudged
that Dags and Stone-Bowes, which are of later Invention shall be within the
statute for they are their invention, and their form of the things which are
inhibited, and so Vernons case, 4 Coke, if he to whose use infeoffs his Son and
Heir, this shall be taken within the statute of Marlebridge, and yet he to
whose use cannot make a Feoffment, nor uses were not known till many years
after the making of this statute, and Baker furthers the Meal for the use of
man, and for that he may sell it in Bread without any punishment, and then he
said it was the Office of a good Judge to suppress the mischeife, and to
advance the remedy as the Lord Anderson says in Brownes Case, 3. Coke: And so
he concluded and prayed Judgment for the King and the Informer. And note that
this case was solemnly argued by all the Justices of this Court, and it was
adjudged, that this was engrossing within the statute by Warburton, Foster, and
Winch. But the Lord Coke agrued the contrary, Walmesley being absent that
Term.

The same question was argued the same Term in the Exchequer upon an
Information there exhibited by one Collins an Informer, and it was there argued
by Hitchcocke of Lincolnes Inn for the Defendant, and he argued that the
Starch was not the same thing which was bought, no more then if it had been
made in Bread, and he cyted the Book of 5 H. 7. 15. 16. Where it is agreed
that if a man takes Barley and makes Malt of that, that he from whom it was
taken, could not take the Malt, for that, that there the thing is altered in
another nature, and he intended that the Starch is not the same in number nor
quality, but he agreed, that if wheat be only grownd, that this notwithstanding
is within the Statute, but if it be made into Bread, then sold, it is not
within the Statute, for then it is another Body, and other things added to it,
and the form is also altered, and the form gives the being and the name, and
if Water be turned into Wine, it is no Water, though it be by miracle; so if a
Parson be made Bishop, he is not the same person, for Honors change Manners,
and this is his reason that the Writ shall abate, for it is newly created, as
of nothing, 7 H. 6. 15. 22 R. 2. Bre. 93. b. 2 R. 3. 20. Also the Statute of 21
H. 8. Which provides that the party from whom any Goods are stolen, after that
the Felon is indicted, shall have restitution of the same goods, but if Corn be
stolen, and converted into Meal, the Owner shall not have restitution, for it
is not the same which was stolen, but if Plate be stolen and altered in other
form, yet the owner shall have restitution of that as he said, which was
adjudged for the King, 40. Eliz. But where restitution upon a Writ of Error,
where the Judgment is the same thing shall be restored, that if yet term be
sold by fieri facias, and after the Judgment is reversed by Error, he shall
not be restored to the Term but shall have the money for which it is sold,
also he says it is not the same in number and substance, for the 1 thing was
corrupt, and the corruption of that was the beginning of the new, and the
Wheat is the matter of which, and also Water is, and fire and the heat of the
Sun, and after that it is made in Starch, it will not be dissolved and made
into victual, no more then Bread, and the worst Wheat will make the best
starch, also he intended, that it is not in the same condition nor similitude,
also he objected that (Ligamen) which is the word contained in the Count, is no
Latin word at all, but (Legumen) is the latin word, and that is latin for
Pulse, and that not being any latin word, the english which is added will not
help it, and so he concluded and prayed Judgment for the Defendant.

Dodridge the Kings Sergeant for the King and for the Informer, Dodridge.
argued that the starch is the same (Numero) in number, quality, and substance,
not in likeness, and that the statute, is no law of explanation but of
difinition of three severalls, which make dearth without want, and the
fore-stalling prevented the punishment of Law before the making of this
Statute; but now these are in several degrees, that is forestalling is
commonly engrossing and regrating, and Ingrosser is always Regrator, and that
the Defendant in this case is Ingrosser of Victuals, that is victuals which
is the staff of man's health, and the want of that is more grievous then the
want of all other things, and the dearth of that is the most pinching dearth
which may be, and the gain of that is a base gain, and they which basely buy of
Merchants that they may straightways sell not any thing unless they may get
great gains or save in the measure, and they are called Regrators, as Grators
of the faces of the People, and if this Statute had been executed, this had
prevented many Dearths, and to the objection, that it is a penal Law, and for
that shall be taken strictly, and there is a general rule, and as true as it
is general, but it is true if it be not within the exception, that is, if
public good does not intervene, and here it concerns the Commonwealth, as
much as the lives of men, and many other penal Statutes have been taken by
Equity, as the Statute which makes that to be petty Treason if the Servant kill
his Master, and in the 19 H. 6. It is agreed that if the Servant after he is
departed out of the service of his Master kill him upon any malice conceived
during the time that he was in his Service, this shall be taken within the
Equity of the statute, and so the statute of 33 H. 8. Was made precisely,
against Hand-Guns and Daggs, are taken to be within the Equity of that,
notwithstanding that they were invented after the making of that Statute, and
were not known at the time of the making of that, for they are the same in
intention, as it is resolved in Streches Case, in Coke 71. b. And to the words
of the Statute (who shall sell the same) it intends that starch is the same in
all, but only in similitude; for a thing which is of the same similitude is not
the same, but like the same (for no like is the same.) Also he intended that it
is the same both in number and form, and he agreed (that form gave the being)
for that is not the accidental as here it is, but it is the substantial
form, and every one knows that Meal of Wheat, is the same as Pepper beaten in
a Mortar, and Pepper and all other Spices, so that it is the same in number,
existence, substance, and essence, and he intended also the same in intention,
for Meal is Victual, and is dead Victual, be it Corn or Meal; and Corn
grownd, and made in Meal, then sold, yet that remains dead Victual, and Meal
is the same dead Victual, though that it be not the same Corn; and to prove
that Corn is Victual, he cyted the Statute of 25 Edw. 3. 5. Stat. Chap. 7.
Which provides that no Forester shall make any gathering of Victuals by color
of their Office; and he intended, that Corn was within this statute, and so
also of the statute of the 3. P. and M. Chap. 15. Rastal, Universities which
provides, that to the Purveyor, Bargainor for any Victuals within 5 miles of
any of the Universities of Oxford or Cambridg, where Grain and Victual are
joined together.

So the Statute of 25 H. 8. Chap. 2. abridged by Rastall, Victual, 15. which
inhibits the transportation of Victual, if it be not of Meal and Butter into
Ireland, by which it appears that Meal is dead Victuals: And he said, that
Victuals is that which refreshes men, and Victuals are those things, which to
the use of eating and drinking are necessary. So that Meal is the same in
number, though that the Corn were turned into Meal. And he cyted Peacock and
Reynolds Ca^e to be adjudged 42 Eliz. That if a man buy Corn, and convert that
into Meal, and so sell it, it is within this Statute: And he said, that if a
man be made a Knight, hanging his action, that this shall abate his action, but
yet he remains the same person, but his name is changed, which is the cause of
the abatement of his action, 7 H. 6. 15. Also the Defendant is concluded by his
demurrer upon the Information, to say that it is not the same thing, for this
is confessed by the Demurrer; and though that the name be changed, this is not
material, if the substance be the same; and he agreed, that a Baker which buys
Wheat, and makes it into Bread, is not within the Statute, for he furthers that
to the use of man, as a Curryer makes the Leather more fit and apt for use; but
so does not he which makes it into starch, for he furthers the abuse; for it is
no lawful Occupation, but idle and fri^olous furtherance of vanity of men. And
in 35. H. 6. 2. If a man enter into the Land of another man, and cut Trees, and
that square, and make into Boards, yet if the Owner enter, he may take them:
But if it be made into a House, otherwise it is, for there it is mingled with
other things, as it is 5 H. 7. 15, 16. So Iron made in Anvill: But of Leather
made in Shoes otherwise it is, insomuch that it is mingled with other things,
12 H. 8. 11. a. A dead Stag is not a Stag, but is a certain dead thing, and
flesh. As a man dead is not a man; but agreed the Book of H. 7. 15. and 16.
That Corn converted into Meal cannot be restored, nor reprized, no more may
that if it remains in Corn, if it be not in Baggs; And he said, that upon the
Statute of Merton, the Re-disseisin after the Recovery in Assise, if the same
Disseisor makes Re-disseisin, the Sheriff may examine that, etc. And it is
agreed in 27 H. 6. That if Tenant in tail be disseised, and recover in assise,
and is put in possession, and after his Estate is altered, and he become Tenant
in tail after possibility of Issue extinct, and then the Disseisor makes
Re-disseisin, that this is aided by the statute, not that it is alteration of
the Estate: And also he says, it appears more fully by the Proviso, by which
it is provided, that Barley turned into Malt, and Oats turned into Oatmeale,
if it be by Engrossing, it is within the purview of the statute. So if it be by
way of Fore-stalling; or if they sell them again before that they are
converted, shall be Regrators; And to the Objection, that other things; that
is, Water and Fire are added to that, he says that none of them remains; for
the Fire dryes the water, and the fire also goes out, and so he concluded and
prayed Judgment for the King, and the Informer, and it was adjourned.

Michaelmass, 1611. 9. Jacobi, in the Common Bench.
IN Dower against Infant which makes default upon the grand Cape Dower.
returned, and agreed by all the Justices, that Judgment shall be given upon
the Default, for the Infant shall not have his age, and so it was adjudge upon
a Writ of Error.

Charnock against Currey, Administrator of Allen.
IN debt upon an Obligation against the Defendant, as Administrator as above,
he pleads Judgment had against him in an action of debt, Debt against
Administrator.
and over that has not to satisfy, to which the Plaintiff replies, that this
Judgment was for penalty, and the condition was for a lesser sum; and that the
Plaintiff in the first action had accepted his due debt, and had promised to
acknowledge satisfaction of the Judgment at the request of the Defendant, and
at his charges: and the Administrator which was the Defendant, did not make
request upon fraud and Covin, to avoid the Plaintiffs action: Upon which the
Defendant has demurred, and so confesses the matter of the Plea. But Foster
seemed that the Plaintiff ought to aver, that the Plaintiff in the first action
has offered to acknowledge satisfaction, and that otherwise he should be put to
his action upon the Case; but Coke and Warberton intended that the Replication
is very good without such averment; for it shall be intended, that the Plaintiff
will perform his promise: But further, this Demurrer which was only for part,
was also for another part, an Issue joined for the other part, which was to be
tried by the Country; and which shall be tried of the Issue, or of the
Demurrer, was the question; and it was agreed by them all, that the Issue, or
Demurrer shall be first at the discretion of the Court, see 11 H. 4. 5. 38. Ed.
3.

Commission is granted to the Council in Wales, of which the President,
Commission to the Council in Wales.
Vice President, or Chief Justice to be one; And the question was, if they
might make a Deputy, and it was agreed that a delegate power could not be
delegated, but they might make an Officer to take an account in any such act.

Note that a Caveat was entered with a Bishop, that he should not Caveat to a
Bishop.
admit any without giving notice, that the admission, this notwithstanding is
good; but if he admit one which has no right, he is a disturber, but otherwise
the Caveat does nothing, but only to make the Bishop careful what person he
admits.

Foster Justice seemed, that if the Ordinary now after the statute of If
administraon to the next of blood cannot be repealed.
21 H. 8. grants administration to one which is next of Blood, that he cannot
repeal it; but Coke chief Justice seemed the contrary, and that he incurred
the penalty of the statute only. And if an Administration be granted to one
which is next of Blood, upon which the first Administrator brings an action of
debt, and hanging that, upon suggestion that the first Administration is void,
another Administration is granted; and it seems that this second Administration
granted upon this suggestion shall be repealed from the first, though it be
general, and without any recital of it. But if the second be declared by
sentence to be void from the beginning, then the first remains good.

Action upon the Case was brought for these words, that is, thou Action for
words.
have killed I. S. And it seems that the action does not lie, for a man may
kill another in execution, and as Minister of Justice, or in War, in which
things killing is justifiable.

Michaelmasse 1611. 9. Jacobi, in the Common Bench: George Barney against
Thomas Hardingham.
IN Trespass for breaking the House, and taking of a Cow, the Trespass for
breaking a House and taking a Cow.
Defendant pleades that the King and all those whose Estates he has in the
hundred, have had Turn, and at the Court held such a day it was presented,
that the Plaintiff has incroached upon the high Way, for which he was amerced,
and the amercement was affirmed by two Justices of peace, according to the
Custom of the Turn aforesaid: And that he being Bailiff of the hundred, by
virtue of a Warrant to him in due manner made and directed, has entered the
said house, and taken the said Cow for distress, for the said amercement, and
carrying it away, which is the same Trespass, and so demands Judgment, upon
which Plea the Plaintiff Haughton.
Demurred: And by Haughton Sergeant for the Plaintiff, the Plea in Bar is not
good, and first he conceived that it was not good, insomuch that the King has
made his Prescription by whose Estate, and he intended that he could not make
his Prescription by whose Estate, insomuch that this lies in grant, as it is
12. H. 7. 15. where it is agreed that by nothing which lies in grant, a man
may Prescribe, (by whose Estate.) Also the Plea is that the King was seized in
his Demesne as of Fee, where it ought to be in Fee only, insomuch that it is a
thing only in Jurisdiction or Signiory and not Manurable, as in 8. H. 7. 7. H.
4. 30. assis. In an Action of Debt upon Reservation made upon Lease of a Manor
and hundred, it is agreed that the hundred is not in Demesne nor Manurable:
Also the Plea is not good, insomuch that it is not Pleaded, before whom the
Turn shall be held: And allwaies when a man claims a Court by Patent, he
ought to show before whom his Court shall be held, otherwise it shall not be
good, so of Conusance of Pleas, otherwise it is if it be in a Turn, for that
shall be intended a certain ancient Court. See 44. Ed 5. 17. 1. H. 4. 6. 6. H.
4. 1. Also the Statute of Magna Charta, chap. 35. requires that it should be
held in the accustomed place, and so it ought to be alleged, or otherwise it
is against the Statute, and for that it shall not be good, for it is of the
nature of Sheriffs Turn and derived out of that: See the book of Entries in
Replevin 2. Also the Statute of Magna Charta, chap. 14. appoints that the
officers shall be the Sheriff, and this is not pleaded but generally by two
Justices of Peace upon their Oath: And also it is not pleaded to what Sum the
amercement was made. Also it is pleaded that he being a Bayliffe of the
Hundred, by virtue of a Warrant to him in due manner directed and made, has
taken the distress, and does not plead the Warrant certainly nor the place
where it was made, And for that the Plea is not good: Also he pleades that he
took and led away the Cow, in name of distress, and he ought to say that he
took it and impounded it, for that (he took it and carried it away,) imports
that he took it to his own use, 9. Ed. 4. 2. 20. Ed. 4. 6. And so he
concluded that the Bar is not good, and prayed Judgment for the Plaintiff:
And Barker (Sergeant for the Defendant) conceived that the Prescription for the
Hundred (by which the Estate) was very good, and for Barker.
that, See 12. H. 7. 17. a. 8. H. 7. 13. H. 7. Also he intended Bar not good.
that the title to the Court is very good, notwithstanding that it is
expressed, before that it shall be held, insomuch that the Law takes notice of
the Turn of the Sheriff, and that he is Judge of that, and that the Affirance
is very good, insomuch that this is according to the Custom of the Turn
aforesaid: And the Warrant of the Baylif^e is very well pleaded, and more is
pleaded then need, for it is the duty and appertains to his office to gather
the amercements, and he might do that without Warrant by force of his office:
But if it be upon plaint between party and party, otherwise it is, and for that
see the book of Entries 553. And also the charge in the Action is for that,
that he took and carried away, and of that he made Justification, and he cannot
Plead otherwise, and to the (whose Estate, etc.) That a man cannot Prescribe to
have a thing by (whose Estate) which lies merely in grant, without showing of
a Deed, yet when that is appurtenant to another thing, as here the Court is to
a Hundred, it may very well that do, and 33. H. 8. B. Leete, when the penalty
is Presented by the Jury it self, there needs not any affirance: And so he
concluded that the Plea in Bar is very good, and prayed Judgment upon that
for the Defendant: And Coke chief Justice said, that Turn of the Sheriff is
derived of Turner, which signifies to ride a Circuit, and so of that is derived
Turner, and of that the Turn of the Sheriff, and of this is derived the
Hundred, and from this the Leete: And it seems to him, that he ought to plead,
before that the Court shall be held, insomuch that it is against Right, and so
it was adjourned.

Michaelmas 1611. 9. Jacobi, in the Common Bench. Hill against Upchurch.
NOTE that Coke chief Justice says, that it was adjudged in Copyhold
intailed.
27. of Eliz. For the Manor of Northhall in the County of Essex, that
admitting that a Copyhold may be Intailed by the Statute, that then Custom
that a surrender shall be a Bar or discontinuance of such Estate tail is good,
for as well as the Estate may be created by Custom, as well it may be Barred
or discontinued by Surrender by Custom.

Brandons Case.
NOTE if a Manor or other signiory be extended upon a Statute, Extent upon a
Statute.
and a Ward falls which is a sufficient value to make satisfaction of the
Extent, yet this shall not be any satisfaction in tender to satisfaction:
Insomuch that this is only the fruit of Tenure, and not like to cutti ng of
Trees, nor to digging of Cole or other Ore: And so Coke chief Justice, that it
has been adjudged, and with this agreed the book of 21. Ed. 3. 1.

The manner to make Summons in Dower, if the Land lies in one Summons in Dower
County, and the Church in another County: Then upon the Statute the Sheriff
ought come to the next Church, though it be in another County, and there make
Proclamation, asthe Auditors in Account ought to commit the Accomptants found
in arrerages to the next Jail, and there ought to be committed though that
they are in another County.

The words of a Patent of a Judge of the Common Bench are as Patent of a Judge
of the Common bench.
follows, that is to say, James by the grace of God, etc. Know that we have
constituted Humphrey Winch Sergeant at Law, one of our Justices of the Common
Bench, during our good pleasure, with all and singular Vales and Fees, to the
same office belonging and appertaning, In Witness of which, etc.

Michaelmasse 1611 9. Jacobi, in the Common Bench. Jacob against Stilo. Sowgate.
IN an Action upon the Case for slanderous words: The declaration Action upon
the case for slander
was, that the Defendant said of the aforesaid Plaintiff, that he is perjured,
to which the Defendant pleads, that the Plaintiff another time has brought an
Action in the Kings Bench against the same Defendant for that, that he the said
Plaintiff was perjured, and had cozened John Sowgate, and that the Defendant
had pleaded to all besides these words, (Thou art perjured) not guilty, and to
the words (thou art perjured) he Justifies that the Plaintiff was perjured in
making an Affidavit in the Star Chamber, and this Issue was Joined, and it was
found for the Defendant, but it was not pleaded that any Judgment was given
upon it, And Haughton Sergeant Haughton.
for the Plaintiff, which had Demurred upon the Defendants Plea: Argued that
the Plea is insufficient, for if it shall be intended by that, that the
Plaintiff was before times barred, if it be in a real Action, it ought to be
averred, that it is for the same Land, and if it be in a personal Action it
ought to be averred that it is the same Debt or Trespass, and if it be pleaded
by way of Justification, then he ought to have averred also, that the Plaintiff
has taken a false and untrue Oath, upon which Issue might have been taken: But
here nothing is pleaded but the Record, and nothing averred (in Facto) So that
the Issue cannot be taken upon it, for the pleading is only of Record, and that
the Defendant for the cause aforesaid in the Record before said mentioned, spoke
the said words, and this is not good, for there is not contained any cause of
Justification, as in Quare* Impedit, in the 15. and 16 H. 6. The Defendant
pleads that he was Incumbent by the cause aforesaid (and without that:) But
this was no good Plea, for he ought to plead his Title specially. And also it
is not pleaded as Estoppell, for then he ought to have relied upon that
precisely, as 35. H. 6. in Replevin the avowant relies upon descent, 30. assis.
32. 2. H. 7. 9. Also Estoppell it cannot be, insomuch that Judgment was not
given in the first Action; Also it is not pleaded as Estoppell for the Plea is
concluded Judgment if Action, where he ought to have relied upon the
Estoppell, and peradventure also the Trial was void by unawarding of Venire
Facias, or other Error; So that without Judgment it can be no Estoppell, and
so he concluded and prayed Judgment for the Plaintiff. Barker Sergeant argued
for the Defendant, that the Barker.
Declaration is very good, and notwithstanding that the words are general;
that is, he is perjured, yet this may be supplied very well by the (Innuendo)
as it appears by James and Alexanders Case, 4. Coke. 17. a. And also that
Estoppell by the Verdict is good without Judgment, as in Action of Debt,
release was pleaded, and Issue joined upon that, and found for the Defendant,
and after another Action was brought for the same Debt, and agreed that the
first Virdict was Estoppell, 2. Ed. 3. 19. b. c. And he cited Baxter and Styles
Case to be adjudged in the point, that the Estoppell is good, and also Vernons
Case, 4. Coke where the bringing of a Writ of Dower, Estopped the Wife to
demand her Jointure, and so concluded and prayed Judgment for the Defendant:
Coke, the Count is good being of the aforesaid Plaintiff, and may after be
supplied by (Innuendo) though that the words after are general; But if the
words were general, that is, He is perjured, without saying that the Defendant
spoke of the aforesaid Plaintiff, these English words following (Videlicet) he
(Innuendo) the Plaintiff) Perjured Actionable.
is perjured, this is not good, and shall not be supplied by (Innuendo) and he
said that another time convicted is a good Plea in case of life without
Judgment, but this is in favor of life, but in trespass it ought to be
averred, that it is the same Trespass, and also there ought to be Judgment,
and the Defendant ought to rely upon that as an Estoppell, and agreed by all
that Judgment should be^given for the Defendant, if cause be not showed to the
contrary such a day, etc.

Michaelmass, 1611. 9. Jacobi, in the Common Bench. Hall against Stanley.
IN Trespass for Assault and Imprisonment, the Defendant justifies, Trespass
for imprisonment
insomnch that the Action upon the case was begun in the Marshalsey for a Debt
upon an Assumpsit made by the Plaintiff, and that upon that Capias was awarded
to this Defendant being a Minister of the said Court to Arrest the Plaintiff to
answer in the said Action, and that he by force of that Arrested the Plaintiff,
and him detained till the Plaintiff found suerties to answer to the said
Action, which is the same assault and Imprisonment: To which the Plaintiff
replied, that none of the parties in the said Action were of the Kings
household, and so demanded Judgment, upon which the Defendant Demurred in Law:
And Dodridge the Kings Sergeant for the Dodridge.
Defendant, that the Court of Marshalsey may hold Plea of Actions of Trespass,
by the parties or any of them of the Kings house or not, and he intended that
the Jurisdiction at the Common Law was general, and then they have
Jurisdiction of all Actions as well real as personal, and though that their
Jurisdiction be in many cases restrained, yet in an Action of Trespass there
is not any restraint, but at this day they have two Jurisdictions: That is, in
Criminal cases, and also in Civil causes, within the Virge: See Fleta book
the second and third, where he discribes the Jurisdiction of all Courts, and
amongst them the Jurisdictions of this Court, and also Britton which wrote in
the time of Ed. 1. lib. 1. chap. 2. which says it was held before Bygott who
was then Earl of Norfolk and Marshall, and their Authority and Jurisdiction
was absolute and their Judgments not reversable unless by Parliament, and
this appears by the Statute of 5. Ed. 3. chap. 2. that they might hold Plea of
things which did not concern them of the household, and also the words of the
Statute of Articuli super chartas chap. 3. 28. Ed. 1. provides that the
Marshalsey shall not hold Plea of free hold of covenant, nor of any other
contract made between the Kings people, but only of Trespass made within the
Kings house or within the Verge, and of such Contracts and Covenants which one
of the honse made with another of the house and within the house and in no
other place, where Trespass is Limited to the Kings house or within the Virge,
but no restraint that the parties shall be of the Kings House, or otherwise it
shall not be intended which shall be only those which are of the Kings House,
insomuch that the Trespass is limited to be made within the Virge, also he
said it was a statute made 30 Ed. 1. which provides, that if any causes arise
amongst the Citizens of London only, that this shall be tried amongst the
Citizens; but if it be between them of the House, it shall be tried by them of
the House, by which it appears that they may hold plea between Citizens of
London, where none of the parties are of the Kings House, also the statute of 6
Ed. 3. chapter 2. provides that in Inquests they shall be there taken by men of
the Country adjoining, and not men of the Kings Household if it be not betwixt
men of the Kings Household if it be not for Contracts, Covenants and Trespasses
made by men of the Kings Household of one part, and that the same House which
referrs to the statute of Articuli super chartas before cited, and this
expounds, and so the Statute of 10 Ed. 3. chapter 2. provides that in Inquests
they are to be taken in the Marshalsey, that the same inquests shall be taken
of men the Country thereabouts, and not by People of the Kings, House, if it be
not of Covenants, Contracts, or Trespasses made by people of the same House,
according to the Statute made in time of the Grand Father of the said now King,
and according to that the use has been, that is, if none of the parties of
were the Kings house then the trial had been by the men of the country
adjoining. And if one of the parties be of the house, and another not, then the
trial is by party Juries: and if both the par^ies be of the house, then all
the Jury has used to be of the house; and if the Cause be between Citizens of
London, then the trial has used to be by Citizens of London, and in the Book
of Entries, the same plea was pleaded in false Imprisonment, 9, 10. and the
Register, fol. 1 1. A. in action upon escape in Trespass, and to the Books of
7 H. 6. 30. 10 H. 6. Long, 5 Ed. 4 19 Ed. 4. 21 Ed. 4. He says, that none of
these Books are in action of Trespass but one only, and that is mistaken in
the principal point, and so may be mistaken in one by case: And the Book of
10 H. 6. 30. is directly in the point; but Brook in abridgement of that says,
that the practice and usage of the Court was otherwise: But it may be objected
that this is (Indebitatus assumpsi^) which is in nature of an action of debt,
and founded upon contract; he said that Fitzherbert in his Natura Brevium said,
that there are two sorts of Trespasses, that is, General, and upon the Case,
and Trespass is the Genus, and the other are the Species, and that the action
is founded upon breach of promise, which is the Trespass, as for not making of
a thing, which he has promised to do, and it is Majesteale breve, and not
breve formatu^, and so is an action of Trover and Conversion, or Assumpsit, are
Writs of Trespass; but admit that no, yet action of false Imprisonment does
not lie, for he ought not to dispute the authority of the Court; for the duty
of his Office is only to be obedient and diligent, for otherwise he should be
judged of the Judge: And who by the appointment of the Judge does any thing,
does not seem to do it deceitfully, because it is of necessity he should obey;
and 14 H. 8. 16. a Justice of Peace awarded a Warrant to arrest a man for
suspicion of Felony, where his Warrant was void, and yet the party to whom it
was directed, justifies the making of the Arrest by force of that. And 12. H.
7. 14. Capias was awarded to the Sheriff without original, and yet it was a
sufficient Warrant to the Sheriff: and 22 Assis. 64. Court awarded a Warrant,
where they had no Jurisdiction, and yet it was a sufficient Warrant for him to
whom it was directed. And so in Mansells case, if the Sheriff execute an
(habere facias sesinam) awarded upon a void Judgment, this is a sufficient
Warrant for him. So in this case allowing that the Court has no Jurisdiction,
yet the Plaintiff cannot be retained by this action, but is put to his Writ of
Error, or to his action upon the Statute, and so he concluded, and prayed
Judgment for the Defendant.

Hutton Sergeant for the Plaintiff argued to the contrary, and he Hutton.
intended that Judgment should be given for the Plaintiff, for the matter, and
also for the Parties, and that the Judgment, and all other proceedings in the
Marshalsey were merely void; and he denied that they had originally such
absolute jurisdiction, as Fleta pretended, for originally that was only for the
preservation of the peace, as it appears by the style of the Court, and also by
the diversities of the Courts, and that Criminal causes which require
expedition, are there only tryable, and that civil causes are incroached of
later times, and it was necessary to be restrained and reformed by Parliament:
And it appears by the Statute of Articuli super Chartas, that they have
encroached to hold plea for freehold; and for that the Court which is
mentioned in Fleta, cannot be otherwise intended then the Kings Bench, which
then followed the Kings Court. And also that they have not incroached only upon
matters, as to hold plea for Free-holds, but also to persons and place where
Contracts and Trespasses were made, and this was the cause of the making of the
said Statute. And to this action of Trespass for indebitatus assumpsit there
begun, he intended that it is for another thing, of which they could not hold
plea, and it might be criminal; for Civil is that which begun by contract,
and it is part of the commutative Justice, for which is recompense given by one
party to another, and is not founded upon the Contract, but is translated to an
action of Trespass, which manner of Trespass is not within the Statute: and so
he intended, that for the matter it is not within the Statute: and then for the
persons also, he intended that it is not within the Statute, and this appears
by the words of the Statute of 28. Edw. 1. Articuli super Chartas, and to that
10. H. 6. 130. it is adjudged that Judgment in such case there given is void,
and Coram non Judice, so 7 H. 6. 30. expresses the cause to be, insomuch that
none of the parties are of the household of the King, 4 H. 6. 8. 19 Edw. 4. 8.
5. Edw. 4. 32 H. 6. Rot. 27. And he cyted also Michelburns Case to be adjudged
upon a Writ of Error, in the Kings Bench, 38 Eliz. That they could not tender a
Plea in Trospasse for Trover and Conversion, if none of the parties were of the
Kings house: and further he said, that when a Court has Jurisdiction, and errs
in matter of proceedings, or in Law, there the Execution made by force of their
Process shall be lawful. But where the Judgment is void by default of
Jurisdiction, as in this Case, there it is otherwise, as 10 H. 6. 13. Recovery
of Land in the Spiritual Court is void; so Formedon commenced, and Judgment
given upon that Coram non judice.
before the Judges of Assizes void. So 36 H. 6. 32. Recovery of Land in Wales
in this Court is void; and 8 Edw. 4. 6. Recovery of Land in ancient demesne is
avoidable by Writ of Deceit: But in the other cases before, the Judgment and
Recovery is absolutely void, and (Coram non Judice) for default of
Jurisdiction: So in 9 H. 7. 12. b. Recovery of Land in Durham, Chester, or
Lancaster, here is void for the same cause: And in this case also the said
Statute makes that void by express words, see the statute of Articuli super
Chartas, Chap. 3. Judgment void.
And to the case of 14 H. 8. before cyted, of Warrant awarded by Justice of
Peace; he agreed, that insomuch that the Justice of Peace had Jurisdiction of
causes of Felony, and erred only in the form and manner of his proceedings,
and so in all the other cases which were put of the other part. And also he
agreed that a Writ of Error may be well maintained, if such Judgment which is
void, as it was in Michelburns case, for the party may admit the Judgment to be
but voidable if he will. And to the exceptions to the pleading, that is, that
the authority is not prosecuted, 1 Postea, that is, such a day, which was
before the Judgment, and yet it seems good; and that in the first the authority
was very well prosecuted in the 2 Postea was sufficient, and the other words,
that is, (such a day) is but surplusage; and so he concluded, and prayed
Judgment for the Plaintiff, and it was adjourned.

Michaelmas 1611. 9. Jacobi, In the Common Bench. Peto against Checy and
Sherman and their Wives. Tri^. 9. Jacobi, Rot. 1151.
IN Trespass and Ejectione firm, the Defendants pleaded, that one of the
Defendants made agreement with the Plaintiff for the said Trespass and
Ejectment with satisfaction, and demands Judgment, if action, upon which the
Plaintiff demurred in Law; and it was argued by Nicholls Sergeant for the
Plantiff, that the agreement was no plea, though it be said by Keble in the 11.
H. 7. 13. That though it be a Plea in Ravishment of Ward, quare Impedit, and
quare ejecit infra terminum, insomuch that they are actions personal: But Wood
denied that, insomuch that Inheritance is to be recovered, and in Ejestione
firm term shall be recovered; and for that it shall not be spoken, and of
this is Wood expressly in the 13. H. 7. 20. b. That in Ejectione firm agreement
shall not be a plea, insomuch that the term is to be recovered, which is the
thing in demand. And there also it is agreed, that in Waste brought against
Lessee for years in the Tenet, agreement is good plea, and so Vavasor
intended, if it be in the Tenet, but not if it be brought against Lessee for
life: And also he intended that by Recovery in Ejectione firm, more shall be
recovered then the term only, for by that the reversion shall be also reduced,
and for that the Inheritance is drawn in question; and it is said in 11. H. 7.
13. that it shall not be a plea in Assise, insomuch that there the Freehold is
to be recovered, and by the same reason he intended that shall be no plea,
insomuch that more is to be recovered then in Assise, for there the Tenant only
shall recover the freehold, and his damages; but here the Term and the
Inheritance also are reduced and revested: And this is the reason also which is
given in 11. H. 7. 13. b. by Fisher: That if a man make a Lease for years,
rendering Rent, and after brings Debt for the Rent behind, the Defendant cannot
wage his Law, notwithstanding that the action is personal: But this is more
high in his nature, as it is there said, and yet there nothing shall be
recovered, but only damages, for which a man may have satisfaction. Also he
intended that it was not well pleaded; that is, that such agreement was had
between the Plaintiff, and one of the Defendants, and betwixt those shall be
intended those two only, and also Ipsum and Alios by his command^ment, and does
not show that this was made by the other two by his commandment, and so he
concluded, and prayed Judgment for the Plaintiff.

Shirley Sergeant for the Defendant, that the Plea is good, and that Shirley.
the nature of the Action is only Trespass by force and arms, and differs from
a Quare ejecit, but Ejectione firm differs from predict. infra terminum, and
lies against the immediate Ejector; but Quare ejecit lies against him which
has title, as he in reversion, 7 H. 4. 6. b. Ejectione firm was brought by
Executors of Land let to their Testator for years, upon outing of the Testator
by the statute of 4 Edw. 3. Chap. 6. which gives action for the Executors of
goods taken out of the possession of their Testator: and it seems to him also
that process of Outlawry lies in an Ejectione firm, but in Quare ejecit infra
terminum only summons. So it is 11. H. 7. 13. There is a great difference
between Waste and this, for there the Process is Distress, and other special
Process: But so is it not here, but only the Process which is in other general
actions of Trespass, and so is the express opinion of Keble, in 11. H. 7. 13.
That in ravishment of Ward, Quare Impedit, and quare ejecit infra terminum,
that agreement is a good plea, and yet all these trench upon the Realty; and in
ejectione firm, if the term expire, hanging the action, this shall not abate
the Writ; but the Plaintiff shall have Judgment for his damages, otherwise in
a Quare ejecit infra terminum. And it was resolved 20 Eliz. That if an
ejectione firm be brought at the common Law of Lands in ancient Demesne, that
this shall not alter the tenure, insomuch that it is merely personal, and the
damages are the principal which are to be recovered; and in 21 Edw. 4. 10. b.
the difference is showed between ejectione firm, and quare ejecit infra
terminum, for one lies against the Lessor, or other Ejector immediately, and
the other lies against the Feoffee of the other immediate Ejector, and the
first is by force of arms, and the other not, and it always lies against him
that is in by Title, and the first against him which is the wrong doer; and he
intended that the agreement with one of these Defendants is good, for it is
satisfaction, and discharges the action as release, the which every one which
has it may plead; and here it is pleaded with satisfaction, that is
obligation, upon which the Plaintiff may have action, and so he concluded and
prayed Judgment for the Defendants.

Wynch Justice argued this case, notwithstanding that he had not Wynch.
heard any argument at the Bar, this being the first case that he argued after
he was made Justice of this Court, and he delivered his opinion that the
agreement was a good Bar; and he said, that the difference is where the thing
to be recovered is in the Realty, and where it is in the Personalty, as it is
agreed in Blakes Case, 6 Coke 43. b. So that here the only question is if this
action be in the Realty, or in the Personalty, and it seems to him that it is
in the Personalty, and that it is of the nature of Trespass, and the term is
not anciently to be recovered, as it is 6. R. 2. Fitz. Na. Bre. and it is
within the statute of 4 Edw. 3. Chap. 6. which gives action to Executors for
goods carried away in the life time of the Testator, as it is 7 H. 4. 6. b. And
to objection, that ancient Demesne is a good plea, and for that is in the
Realty, and he said, and so it is in Account, and Account is not in the
Realty; and the reason why it shall not be a Bar in Assise, is in so much,
that there the Freehold shall be recovered, but this fails here: so in Waste
also this touches the Inheritance; but here the Inheritance does not come in
question, but the term only; and it does not appear to the Court, that it
concerns Inheritance, for it may be betwixt the Lessor or another which claims
under him, and the Lessee. And if a Husband which has a term in right of his
Wife, submits himself to Arbitrament, this shall not bind the Wife, but shall
bind the Husband, and shall be a Bar, if the Wife has not Interest, and so he
concluded that Judgment shall be given for the Defendants, and that the
agreement is a good Bar.

Foster Justice intended that the agreement is a good Bar in an Ejectione*
Foster.
firm, etc. And it seems that it is no question but that the action is
personal, and yet he agreed that ancient Demesne is a good plea. So in debt,
receipt of part hanging the Writ abates all the Writ. And 21 Ed. 4. 10. b. Two
Tenants in Common were of a Term: and 7 H. 4. 6. b. Executors shall have an
action upon Entry made in the time of their Testator by the statute of 4 Edw.
3. Chap. 6. and in this the Plaintiff shall recover his Term; but he denied
that the reversion is reduced by the recovery, nor revested in the Lessor till
the Lessee enter. And to the Objection that the Realty and Inheritance may come
in question in this, that is not to the purpose, for so it may in an action of
Trespass. And he intended there is no difference between agreement and
Arbitrament, and agreed that none of those is a plea where the Inheritance or
Freehold comes in question. And he conceived that Arbitrament for freehold is
not good, unless the submission be by Deed indented; for by Obligation with
Condition is not sufficient, 11 H. 4. 44. b. and it is not in difference, 14 H.
4. that in ravishment of ward submission may be without Deed, insomuch as it is
in the personalty, and he intended that there is no difference between that and
Ravishment of Ward, and Ward is but Chatt^ll, so is term which may be sold by
word, as well ^s the possession may be sold by word, so may the right of that
be extinct by word. And as if a may be bound to pay a certain sum of money at
a certain day, and the Obligee accept parcel in satisfaction before the day,
and that is very good: So in this case acceptance of a sum of less value may
be a satisfaction of such personal thing, 4 H. 8. Dyer 1. 8 Edw. 6. Dyer, 19
H. 6. 9 H. 7. And so he concluded, that for that nothing is to be recovered but
Chattell, that for that the agreement shall be good plea.

Warburton Justice agreed that the agreement should be good in Ejectione Firm,
insomuch that this is merely personal: And he argued that it is no Plea in
assise insomuch that this is real, and there the Freehold is to be recovered,
and this is the reason that waging of Law lies in Debt upon arbitrament,
insomuch that the seal of the Arbitrators is not annexed unto it, and for that
to him it is but only matter in Deed, 13. Ed. 4. And he intended that agreement
Arbitrament:
with satisfaction is as much as Arbitrament, for a personal thing cannot be
satisfaction for a real thing, and that is the cause that it cannot be a Bar
in Debt upon arrerages of account, insomuch that that is founded upon Record,
and is a thing certain: And in wast it is no Plea, insomuch that this is a
mixed Action, if it be against a Lessee for life, otherwise if it be against a
Lessee for years, for a Term is taken in 7. H. 4. 6. b. to be within the
word (Goods,) and an Executor may have an Action upon that, (of goods carried a
way in the life of the Testator) And though that the Entry abate the Writ, yet
this does not prove that it is more then a Term, and though that the Term
determine hanging the Writ, this shall not abate the Action, but the Plaintiff
shall recover Damages; and in Ravishment of Ward, Summons and Severance lies,
and the Body of the Heir shall be recovered, and so in Quare Impedit Summons
and Severance lies, and the presentment shall be recovered and Damages, and
yet the principal is but presentmemt, which is but a Chattell, and for that
agreement shall be a Bar, and so he concluded that Judgment shall be given
for the Defendant, and that the agreement is a good Plea, Coke chief Justice
agreed that the agreement is a good Plea: and he thought that that savered of
Realty, for that, that the Term is to be recovered, and of the personalty in
respect of the Damages, which are to be recovered, and that in all Actions,
where money or Damages are to be recovered, (agreement) is a good Plea, as in
47. Ed. 3. 24. and 10. Ed. 3. in Debt upon a Lease for years, concord is a
good Plea, and 7. Ed. 4. 23. in Detinue for charters it is a good Plea, and in
6. Ed. 6. Dyer 75. 25. it is a positive rule, that in all Cases and Actions, in
which nothing but amends is to be recovered in Damages, there an agreement
with an execution of that is a good Plea, and for that in Detinue it shall be a
good Bar: So in Covenant it was adjudged in Blakes Case, 6. Coke 43. 6. As
where an Obligation is with a Condition, to pay money at such a day, the
payment of another thing is good, if the Obligation be to pay a certain Sum of
money: But if a man be bound in a Sum of money, to make another Collateral
thing, the acceptance of an other thing Collateral shall not be a Bar, for
money is to the measure, and the price of every thing, if a man be bound in two
Horses to pay one, acceptance of another thing shall be no Bar: But the
acceptance of such a Sum of money in satisfaction is good Bar, for this is the
just Estimation and measure of every thing, see 12. H. 4 Where a man was bound
in an Obligation with Condition, that he shall make acknowledgement of the
Obligation of twenty pound to the Obligee before such a day, etc. And
agreements are much favored, for it is a Maxim and Interest of the
Commonwealth, that there be an end of suits, for by Concord small thing
increase, and by Discord great things are consumed, and the beginning of all
Fines is, Et est Cordia talis, etc. and the 11. of Rich. 2. Bar. 242. In Debt
upon a Lease for years, the Defendant pleads that by the same Deed by which
the Land is let, the Plaintiff grants, that the Defendant ought to repair the
houses let, when they are ruinous, at the costs of the Plaintiff, and he
retains the Rent for the repair of the houses being ruinous and a good Bar:
And if it be a right of Inheritance or Freehold that cannot be barred or
extinct by acceptance of another thing, though it be of other Land, as of
another Manor, as it is agreed in Vernons Case 4. of Coke: A woman accepts
Rent out of the Land of which she is not Dowable in recompense of her Dower,
this shall not be a Bar, 5. Ed. 4. 22. 3. Eliz. Dyer, and he said that the
book of 11. H, 7. 13. is misprinted, insomuch that it is reported to be
adjudged: But in truth this was not adujdged, for then it would not say in 13.
H. 7. 20. the residue before 11. H. 7. 13. And in the 16. of H. 7. warranty, it
is agreed that in wast against Lessee for years. Agreement is a good Plea,
otherwise if it be against Lessee for life: And if they have adjudged, 11. H.
7. 15. which was so small a time before, they would not have adjudged the
contrary in 16. H. 7. and Hillary 6. Ed. 6. Bendlowes in wast against Lessee
for years in the Tenet: Agreement is affirmed to be good Bar: And in the book
of Reports in the time of H. 7. printed in time of H. 8. the year of the 11.
of H. 7. there was no print at all: And he then upon that inferrs, that as well
as a man might agree for Trees, so well might he agree for Term; and to the
book of 9. H. 5. 15. a. That release of one Plaintiff in an Action of wast is
a good Bar, he said that this is to be understood in wast of the Tenant, and
then it shall be a good Bar, see in the 12. of Ed. 4. 1. a. Two join in an
Action of wast, and the one was summoned and severed the other recovered the
half of the place wasted; and in the 26. H. 6. 8. Agreement is a good Bar in
an Action of wast, and he intended that in all Actions by force and Arms,
where a Capias lies at the Common Law: Agreement or Arbitrament are good Pleas,
as Ravishment of Ward which is given by Statute in lieu of Trespass, for
taking of a Ward, where a Capias lies at the Common Law, and Agreement was a
Bar, and for that now Agreement shall be a Bar in Ravishment of a Ward: And he
intended that an Ejectione Firm which is Trespass in his nature, and the
Ejectment is added of later times: And in all their Entries, this is entered
Trespass, and severs the Trespass from the Ejectment, and the Ejectment will
vanish, and the Statute of 4. Ed. 3. chap. 6. which gives Action to Executor,
of goods carried away in the life time of the Testator, extends to that which
proves this to be Trespass, for by the Statute the Executors may have
Ejectione Firm for Ejectment made to their Testator, notwithstanding that
ancient Demesne is a good Plea in that, and in the 44. Ed. 3. 22. That is
called an Action of Trespass, and so all the Entries are De Placito
Transgressionis, and in the book of Entries, in Mayhme it is cited to be
adjudged 26. H. 6. Trin. Rot. 27. that concord is a good Plea in an appeal of
main 35. H. 6. 30. But in an Action in the realty it is no Plea, otherwise in
Quare Impedit, for there nothing is to be recovered, but that which is
personal, and he intended that Agreement by one of the Defendants in personal
Action is a good Bar, as in 36. H. 6. Bar, concord made by the friend of one
of the parties was a good Bar Statham, Covenant accordingly, and 35. H. 6.
(...) 7. H. 7. One of the petty Jury in Attaint, pleads agreement and good, and
in an Ejectione Frime, Lease made to try Title is not within the Statute of
buying of Titles, if it be not made to great men, but to a Servant of him which
has the Inheritance; and cannot mainetaine or countenance the Action, and
Bracton. fol. 220. Lessee for years has three remidies if he be evicted, that
is Covenant, Quare Ejecit infra Terminum against the Feoffee of the Ejector, or
an Ejectione Firm against the Immediate Ejectors, and in Ejectione Firm the
Term shall be recovered, as 12. H. 4. 1. H. 5. and 11. H. 6. 6. Non-Tenure is
a good Plea in Ejectione Firm; ergo the Term shall be recovered, 7. Ed. 4. 6.
13. H. 7. 21 and 14. H. 7. It is adjudged that the Term shall be recovered
in Ejectione Firm, and so he concluded, that the agreement shall be a good
Bar, because Wise men seek peace Fools seek strifes: And that Judgment
shall be given for the Defendant, which was done accordingly.

M^hcaelmass, 1611. 9. Jacobi, in the Common Bench. Mallet against Mallet.
LANDS were given to two men; and to the Heirs of their two Bodies begotten,
and the one died without Issue, and the remainder of the half reverted to the
Donor, and he brought an Action of wast against the surviving Donee of houses
and Lands to him demised, and agreed that the Writ was good, but it was a
question if the Count shall be general, or of a half only, notwithstanding
that both the parties were Tenants in Common of the reversion.

Michaelmas 1611. 9. Jacobi, in the Common Bench. Ralph Bagnall against John
Tucker. after 83.
TRINITY 9. or Micaelmasse 8. Jacobi, Rot: 3648. The Case was, Copyholder for
life, remainder for life purchases the Frehold and levies a Fine with
Proclamations made five yeares-passe, and then he died, if the remainder were
bound by the Fine or not, was the question, and it seems that it shall not be
Bar, for he is not turned out of possession in right. So if a man has a Lease
for remainder for years and the first Lessee for years purchase the
freehold, and levy a Fine with Proclamations, and five years pass, this
shall not bar the remainder for years, insomuch that this was Interest of a
Term, and remains an Interest as it was without any alteration, and it was
not turned to a Right. And yet it was agreed that the Statute of buying of
pretenced rights extends to Copy-holds: See Lessures Case 5. Coke 125. See
Pasche 1612. for the Judgment.

Note if an Attorney of this Court be sued here by Bill of Privilege, he ought
not to find Bail: But if he be sued by Original, and comes in by Capias, then
he ought to find Bail.

In covenant upon a Lease made by the Dean of Norwich, Predecessor Lease by the
Dean and Chapter of Norwich.
to the Dean that now is, and the then Chapter of the Foundation of Ed. 6.
King, for enjoying of Land devised to the Plaintiff for three Lives discharged
of all encumbrances, and also to accept surrender of the same Lease, and to
make a new, and for breaking of covenant, the same Dean and Chapter in such a
year of the Rain of H. 8, had made a lease for years not determined, by which
the lands devised were encumbered, upon which the Defendant demurred. And Hutton.
Hutton Sergeant for the Defendant argued, that the Lease was by the Statute of
13 of Eliz. as to the successor of the Dean which made it, for that it was a
Lease for years in being at the time of the making of that, as it is resolved
in Elmers Case upon the Statute of 1 Eliz. if a Bishop makes a Lease for years,
and after makes a Lease for life* the Lease for life is void to the Successor,
and so it is in the case of Dean and Chapter, and though that the words of the
Statute are generally that such a Lease shall be void to all intents, purposes,
and Constructions, yet he intended that it shall not be void against the Bishop
himself, as it was resolved in the case of the next Advowson by the Bishop in
Singletons Case, cyted in Lincoln College Case 3. Coke 59. b. And he intended
if the Lease be void against the Successors that then the covenants also are
void, as it is agreed in the 28 H. 8. 28. Dyer 189. 190. and he cited one Mills
case to be adjudged in the 29 and 30. Eliz. in the Kings Bench, that if a
Parson make Lease and avoid by non-Residence, the Covenants also are void as
well as the Lease, and also he intended that the Lease for life was void,
insomuch that it was to be executed by a Letter of Attorney, and the Attorney
had not made livery till after two Rent days were past, and for that the
Livery was not good, for when a man makes a Lease for life rendering Rent, with
Letter of Attorney to make livery, here is an employed condition, that Livery
shall be made before any day of payment be incurred, and it is as much as if a
man had made a Lease for life, without any Letter of Attorney to make Livery
before such a day there, if the Attorney do not make Livery before the day, but
after the Livery is void, insomuch as it is contrary to the Condition, so in
the case here, for if Livery made be after a Rent day, it may be made after
twenty, and so immediately before the end of the Term, and if the Rent be
void, for this cause the Covenants also are void, and if a man bargain and sell
his Manor, and the Trees growing upon it, the Trees do not pass without
Inrollment, insomuch that it was the intent of the parties that it should so
pass, and for that they do not pass without the Manor, also he intended that
the Count is repugnant, insomuch that that contains that the last Lease for
life was made in the time of Ed. 6. and after by the Dean and Chapter of the
foundation of Ed. 6. and after that contains that the same Dean and Chapter
have made a former Lease in the time of H. 8. Which cannot be if the Dean and
Chapter were of the Foundation of Ed. 6. and for that the Count ought to have
contained the alteration of the foundation, as in case of prescription, as in
Tringhams case, 4. Coke 38. Wyat Wilds Case 8 Coke 79. 2. and 3. Phil. and Mary
Dyer 124. A good Case, and he intended that a declaration ought to have precise
certainty, as in 8. and 9. Eliz. 254. Dyer, for a thing which cannot be
presumed, shall not be intended, as it is agreed in Pigotts Case 5* Coke 29. a.
otherwise of Plea in Bar, for that is sufficient if it be good to common
intent, also he intended that there is variance between the Count and the
Covenant, for the declaration is that the Dean and Chapter covenanted with the
Plaintiffs, the Covenant is general, that is, that the Dean and Chapter
covenant, and does not say with who, and for that the Count also shall not be
good, and so he concluded and prayed Judgment for the Defendant.

Haughton Sergeant for the Plaintiff, intended that the Covenants Haughton.
shall not be void, notwithstanding that the Lease it self be void, and he
intended that a lease made by a Parson shall be good against himself, but it
shall be void by his death to the Successor, but a Lease made by a Dean and
Chapter shall be void to the Dean himself, and the Covenant shall be in force,
notwithstanding that the Lease be void, insomuch that the Covenants are
collateral, and have not any dependence upon the Lease, but to the inherent
Covenants, which depend upon the Lease and the Estate, as for Reparations and
such like shall be void by the avoidance of the Lease, but he intended that
Covenant to discharge the Land from encumbrances, does not depend upon the
Interest, but it is merely collateral, and for that it shall not be void, and
with this difference he agreed, all the Cases put of the other part, as in 45
Ed. 3. 3. Lease was made to the Husband and Wife, the Husband dies, the wife
accepts the Land, and shall not be charged with collateral Covenants,
notwithstanding that she agrees to the Estate, insomuch that they do not
depend upon the Estate, and to the Livery made after two Rent days incurred,
he intended that Livery is good, that notwithstanding for the deferring of the
Execution of a letter of Attorney shall not defeat the Lease, or other mean
act which amounts to a Command, for the Less^r takes the profits in the mean
time, and it is not like to Littletons case, that if a man devise his land to
his Executors to be sold, and they take the profits and do not make Sale, that
the Heir may enter, insomuch that the Executors have not performed the
Condition, and it was not the intent of the Devisor that they should take the
profits in the Interim to their own use, and he intended that the declaration
was not repugnant, for it is of the aforesaid Church, and not of the Dean and
Chapter aforesaid, and also there need not such congruity, as it were the
Foundation of the Action, insomuch that this is only Allegation of the truth of
the matter, see 1 H. 7. 18. For variance upon showing in Deed, and 17 Ed. 3.
33. b. and here the aforesaid show, that it is the same in substance though it
vary in words, and though that the name is altered, yet are the same persons in
substance and the same Body, and though that it be as it is intended to be of
another part, yet it is but name, and the Foundation then is not Issuable, as
if the King H. 8. had been the Founder and made special provision in the
Foundation, that after the Time of Ed. 6. it shall be said to be the Foundation
of Ed. 6. this shall be good, and so he concluded and prayed Judgment for the
Plaintiff, see after adjudged.

Michaelmas 9. Jacobi 1611. In the Common Bench. The Bishop of Ely.
THE Bishop of Ely granted an Office with the Fee for the exercising Office
granted by a Bishop.
of that, if it be an ancient office, it is a good grant, and if the Fee be
newly increased, yet Foster Justice thought that the Grant shall be good for
the Office, and for so much of the Fee as has been anciently granted with the
Office.

Michaelmas 1611. 9. Jacobi in the Common Bench. Holcroft against George French.
IN an Action upon the Case upon an Assumpsit, if the consideration be
Executory, then the Declaration ought to contain the time and place where it
was made, and after it ought to be averred In Facto, when it was performed or
executed accordingly, but if it be by way of Reciprocal agreement, then the
Plaintiff may count, that in consideration that he has promised for the
Defendant, the Defendant has promised to do another thing for him, there he
need not that the Declaration contain time or place for the consideration, or
otherwise that it is performed and executed.

But if in the first case, where it is executory, that is also an averment that
it is executed there, if the Defendant plead Non Assumpsit generally, and do
not plead the special matter, he cannot after take exception to that Count for
the Default aforesaid, where he pleads specially to that, as in an action of
Trover the Conversion ought to be averred to be in a certain place, and so in
submission and Arbitrament, they are contained in the declaration, it need not
to express any time or place certain, but if the Defendant, pleads that the
Arbitrators made no award, or that the parties have not submitted themselves to
their award, there the Plaintiff may reply, that the Arbitrament or Submission
was made at such a place, and this was agreed by all the Justices.

Michaelmasse 1611. 9. Jacobi, in the Common Bench: Sir Edward Puncheon against
Thomas Legate.
IT was adjudged in the Kings Bench, and affirmed upon a Writ of Error in the
Kings Bench, that an action upon the case upon an Assumpsit made by the
Testator is very well maintainable against Assumpsit.
the Executor, and this was for Money borrowed, and so the Count special, but
not upon general, Indebitatus Assumpsit, but is good without any averment,
that the Executors have assets over the payment of Debts due by specialty and
Legacies, and he said, that the Record of the Case of 22 H. 8. with this
agrees, and that the book in this is misprinted, and so Coke chief Justice who
publicly reported this Judgment in the Common place, said, which was adjudged
in the 11 H. 8. in this Court. Wilt of Right.


Note that Land of which a Writ of Right Close lies, shall be assetts in a
Formedon, and it is a Freehold and not a Copyhold, and so are all Lands in
ancient Demesne, 3 Ed. 3. 14 H. 4.

It is no matter what is known to the Judge, if it be not in the form of
Judgment.

Pasche 1611. fol. 50.
HAughton Sergeant for the Defendant, argued that the entry of him in Remainder
is not lawful, insomuch that he intended it is Haughton.
not any forfeiture of the Estate tail, and first he argued that the condition
is not good, but repugnant to Law, and for that void, and yet he agreed that
Tenant in tail may be distrayned from making unlawful Acts, but here the
condition tends to restrain him from doing of things which are lawful as if a
man makes a Gift in tail, upon condition that the Wife of the Donee shall not
be endowed, or that the Husband of the Donee shall not be Tenant by the
Courtesy, or that a Feoffee shall not take the profits of the Land, though that
the profits may be severed from the Land, as in 16 Ed. 3. Formedon was brought
of the profits of a Mill, yet the condition is void, insomuch that it is
against the nature of an Estate tail, or in Fee-simple to be in such manner
abridged, so if a man makes a gift in tail upon condition, that the Donee shall
not make waste, the condition is void, for the making of wast is a privilege
which is incident to an Estate tail, and for that the condition restraynes the
Tenant in tail of a thing which the Law inables him to do, the condition is
yoyd, so a Donee in tail upon condition, that he shall not make a Deed of
Feoffment or Lease for his own life, as it is agreed in Mildmayes Case, so here
when the condition restraynes Tenant in tail of concluding and agreeing, the
which in him is not any wrong no more then if a man should make a gift in tail
upon condition that the Donee should not bargain and sell the Land, this is
void, insomuch that he does not make any wrong or discontinuance: So in the
case here, for the thing which is restrained, that is (concluding and agreeing)
is in it self a lawful act, and also this is only the affections and qualities
of the mind, that they cannot make an Estate conditional, if an open act be
not annexed unto it, but he agreed that if a man make a gift in tail, or a
Lease for life of white acres, upon condition that the Donee or Lessee shall
not take the profits of Black acre, this is a good condition, for this does no
wrong, nor is repugnant to the Estate given, or leased. And secondly, he
argued, that admitting it is a good condition, yet here is no act done to
operate (conclusion or agreement) which might make a forfeiture, for he said
that Mildmayes case was an express condition, that Tenant in tail should not
suffer common recovery, the which he might lawfully do at the common Law, and
he was not restrained by the Statute of Donis conditionalibus, which was
doubted till 12 Ed. 4. but here he intends that the (agreement and conclusion)
in this case shall make no forfeiture, in respect that the Wife in whom the
Estate, was married at the time of the making, and then when her Husband joins
with her, it shall be said the agreement of the Husband, and not the agreement
of the Wife, and yet he aagreed the case in, 20 H. 8. b. Dyer 1. that if a man
makes a Lease for years upon condition, that the Lessee his Executor or
Assigns shall not alien, and there if the Wife executrix, and her second
husband alien, that this shall be forfeiture, insomuch that there the condition
follows the Estate, and is inherent to it, but here the agreement is
collateral and personal, and this depends upon the Estate, as if condition be
that a woman shall not beat J. S. and she takes a Husband which beats him,
this shall not be forfeiture, for the condition is annexed to the person of the
wife, and for that the beating of the Husband shall be no breach of the
condition, but the wast of the Husband is the Wast of the Wife also, for that
follows the Estate and is not personal, so he agreed that acts made by a Wife
married, the which she is compellable to do are good, as partition between
Coparceners, as it is said by Littleton, or Administration of Goods by Executor
or Administrator, or to make attornement, so of things made for her benefit, as
accepting an Obligation, or the bringing of an action of Wast upon a Lease made
by him are also good, but here the agreement and conclusion made by her and her
Husband, are for the disadvantage of the Wife, and for that they are merely
void, as to the Wife, as in 3 H. 6. 19. 50. Contract is made with the Husband
and Wife and they join in debt upon that, and the writ abated, insomuch that
the contract to the Wife is void, and shall be intended to be made with the
Husband only, and so in Russells case 5 Coke 27. b. It is agreed that a married
Wife cannot do any thing as Executrix to the prejudice of her Husband, so in 45
Ed. 3. 11. Lease was made by Husband and wife, and they covenanted to make
suerties, and after the Husband dies, and the Wife accepts the Rent, and she
shall not be bound by her Covenant, insomuch that this was Colaterall to the
Estate, and if it be so that the agreement made by the married Wife is void to
her, then it is no agreement and by consequence no forfeyture of the Estate:
Also he intended that the conclusion of the condition, for the words of the
condition depends only upon the agreement and conclusion, and not upon any Act
made: So that the suffering of any Act, does not make any matter in the case,
nor is to the purpose, and also the Replication relies only upon the agreement,
so that the Recovery is not material: And he intended that it is a condition,
and that it cannot be Limitation, insomuch that the words are, that the Estate
shall cease, as if such person had not been named in the Will, and so that the
Estate shall cease, as if he had been dead, which are words of Defeazance only
and not of Limitation, for he does not appoint the Estate to continue so long:
And also the words are repugnant, for it cannot make the Estate void as if he
had not been named, for this is only the office of an Act of Parliament to make
a man to be dead to one, and to be alive to another purpose; and so he
concluded, and prayed Judgment for the Defendant: Nicholls Sergeant for the
Plaintiff argued, Nicholls.
that it is a matter sufficient upon which Judgment shall be given for the
Plaintiff, and he first considered the words of the Condition; that is, if the
devisees by themselves or by any other, shall make any conclusion or agreement,
etc. This shall be a forfeyture; as in 28, H. 8. 13. Dyer 65. Where a Lease was
made to the Husband and Wife, Proviso that if they are disposed to sell and
alien the Term, that the Lessor shall have the first offer, and agreed, that
if that be a Condition, and the Wife survive the Husband, notwithstanding that
it was not her Deed, but the Act of the Husband, she shall be bound by that,
insomuch that her Estate is bound with that, and this was the pleasure of the
Lessor, and she cannot hold it otherwise then it was given, and 47. Ed. 3. 12.
If a man makes a Lease for years to the Husband and Wife, and after outs them,
they shall join in a Covenant, and so 48. Ed. 3. 18. They join in a Fine, yet
there the Husband only brings Debt for the money, notwithstanding that it be
the Land of the Wife which was sold, and 38. Ed. 3. 9. If the Husband and the
Wife join in Covenant: See 45. Ed, 3. 11. b. Where they join in Lease, and
also to make further assurance, and the Husband and the Wife also charged with
that, and so in the 20. H. 6. 25. Feoffment was made to a woman sole upon
condition, and after she takes a Husband, which breaks the Condition, so in
35. assis. 11. A woman sole makes a Feoffment upon condition to re-enfeoff upon
request, and after takes a Husband, and then makes request and good, and if it
be so in these cases, then in this case the Wife shall not be received, to say
the agreement was made against her will, and for this, see the Statute which
gives Cui in vita to the Woman, where the words are, to whom she in her life
could not contradict.

And after this agreement, if the Husband give warrant of Attorney to suffer
Recovery this is sufficient, as it is agreed in 4. Ed. 3. and in 6. Coke 41.
Mildmayes Case is agreed: That if a man make a Feoffment to a Husband and a
Wife upon condition that they shall not alien, it is good to restrain
alienation, by which it apeares that if they Join in Feoffment, that this
shall be forfeyture, and yet this is the Feoffment of the Husband only, So here
the agreement of them, notwithstanding it is the Act of the Husband, yet
insomuch that it is against the express words of the Condition, this shall be
breach of the Condition, and he intended that the words of the Condition amount
to as much, as if he had said, that neither the Daughter sole, nor the Daughter
with another Daughter, or with another person shall make agreement, and the
other person of necessity shall be intended her Husband, and so this agreement
by the Husband and the Wife is within the words of the Condition: And also he
says that it is argued in Becwiths Case 2. Coke that a married Wife may
declare a use of a Fine which is levied of her Inheritance, and if the Husband
declare uses, the Wife may controlle them: And if an Estate be conveyed with
power, that the Husband with the assent of his Wife may revoke that, the assent
of the Wife to such revocation is good: So if Proviso be, that a married Wife
only without her Husband may make revocation of uses and declare new this is
good, and revocation made by the Wife, and declaration of new uses are very
good, and he agreed that in matters of Record, the Husband cannot prejudice the
Wife without her consent, as Warrant of Attorney upon a Quid Juris Clamat, or
Per que servitia, or other Act which concerns her Inheritance, as in 9. H. 6.
52. 46. Ed. 3. 11. 43. Ed. 3. 5. and 27. H. 8. If a married Wife join with her
Husband in a Feoffment of her own Land, rendering Rent, and after the Husband
dies and the Wife accepts the Rent, this shall bind her, which proves that it
was her Feoffment as well as the Feoffment of the Husband. Secondly he
considered the words of the Condition, which are: (Conclude and agree) etc, the
which he intended not to be so uncertain, as going about, but they are
Issuable and triable, as it is agreed in 5. Ed. 4. 6. Com. 56. a. Wyrbish and
Taylbois Case, consent to a Ravishment within the Statute of 6. R. 2. is
Issuable and triable, so of consent and agreement within this Condition, for
though that the words are consent and agree, yet it ought to be otherwise an
Act subsequent, that is, reconvey, suffer, or other such Act or agreement shall
not be forfeyture, for to make Elopment which shall be a forfeyture of Dower,
there ought first to be consent, but that is not sufficient, but there ought to
be also departure from the Husband and then the Law adjudges upon all the Act:
So here when it is an agreement, and another Act subsequent, which is executed,
then the Law shall judgeupon altogether: and for that this agreement consists
of two parts, first when the Wife upon the motion of the Husband concludes and
agrees to do the Act, which is the beginning of the agreement, and then when
the Husband and the Wife upon that join in Deed indent, as in this case, this
is a consummation and makes a breaking of the condition, and this is not like
the condition in Myldmaies Case, where every going about ought to break that,
as if he go to Council to be advised upon his Estate: Thirdly he inten^ed
that the condition is not repugnant to the Estate, in respect that an other
thing is to be done before the forfeyture, and after the concluding and
agreeing, for the Wife remains in Seisin after the agreement, till the
Recovery or other Act be executed: And also he argued that before the Statute
of 4. H. 7. of Fynes: Tenant in tail might be restrained of alienation of his
Estate, for until that he could not Bar the Issue in tail. So at this day he
intended that a gift in tail upon condition that he shall levy a Fine without
proclamations this is good, and out of the power which is given to Tenant in
tail to Bar the Estate tail by the levying of a Fine: And levying of a Fine
without proclamations is only a discontinuance, and so tortious, so when a
Condition does not extend to all acts, but only to all unlawful acts, and for
that it does not extend to a Recovery, for that is a lawful Act, as it is
agreed in Scholasticas Case 10. H. 7. 10 11. H. 7. 6, 7. 21. H. 7. and 28 H. 8.
Leomans Case: If an ecclesiastical person has a Term with this condition,
that he shall not alien, and after comes the Estate, which inflicts punishment
upon him for keeping of a Farm, and yet it seems it is a good condition: But
so upon the Statute of 4. H. 7. of fines, If aman has agift in tail with
condition that he shall not alien: And after the Statute of 4. H. 7. is made
which inables him to bar the Estate tail by fine, yet he intended that the
condition should restrain him from all unlawful Alienations: And he intended
as well as such a condition annexed to a Lease for life is good, so is it being
annexed to an Estate tail; for as well as it is in one case for the
preservation of the reversion: So is this in the other case, and as in 6. Eliz.
Dyer 227. Grant of Rent, Proviso that it shall not charge the person of the
Grantor, shall not extend to the Executors of the Grantor, but shall be
determined by the death of the Grantor: And so as a condition that a married
Wife or an Infant shall not alien is good, insomuch that this is wrong, so he
intended that if this were a good condition at the Common Law, that Tenant in
tail shall not alien the Estate by 4. H. 7. and 37. H. 8. does not enable
Tenant in tail to make alienation against such condition: And it has been
agreed that if a man make a Feoffment in fee of the Manor of D. And after
makes a gift in tail of the Manor of S. upon condition that the Donee shall
not alien the Manor of D. this is a a good condition, and in the 21. H. 7. 12.
it is agreed that if a man make a Feoffment Causa Matrimonij Prol^cuti, and
after Divorce is sued, there the freehold shall be divested out of the Husband
without entry: And also he intended that a man might make a thing by devise,
the which he could not make by Act executed, as Authority to sell his Lands to
his Executors it good, and yet in all cases of Authorities by Acts executed the
Authority shall cease with the life of the party: And for that there shall be
one Law of devises, and another Law of Acts executed by the party in his life,
as 29. assis. 17. and Fitz. Na. Bre. in ex gravi querela last case, the
particular Estate being created by devise, ceases, and remainder takes effect:
And then to the exception, that the estate shall cease and remain to him which
had the next remainder, the which is repugnant, as it was intended, and so is
Jermy and Arscotts Case: But here the words are that the Estate shall cease, as
if the party to which that is limited were dead without Issue from the time of
the Contract and agreement, and the remainder to him which has the next
remainder, and not the Issue of him which made the forfeyture, and also this
Remainder from the time of the agreement and conclusion, and not from the time
of the Act executed, for then it would be too late, for then the Estate is
transferred to another, as it was in the cases put by Anderson in Corbetts
Case: But here all the Estate limited to him which made the forfeyture shall be
determined, and also he intended that the Reason that the Replication
contains, that the parties being in actual possession are only to satisfy
the words of the Condition: And so he concluded, and prayed Judgment for the
Plaintiff.

In dower the Demandant recovered Dower of tenths of Wool and Dower of tit^e of
Wool.
Lamb, and how execution shall be made was the question: And the Justices
intended that the Sheriff might deliver the tenths of every 3 yard land, and
assign the Yard Lands in certain: B^t after it was conceived that this would be
uncertain and unequal, and for that the Sheriff was directed to deliver the
third part of all in general, and yet the first was agreed to be good; but
only in respect of Inequalities, as in dower of a Mill, the third Toll dish,
and of a Villayne the third days work, as in 23 H. 8. And it was also agreed
that the Sheriff may assign this dower without a Jury.

It was moved, if an Attachment be granted against a Sheriff for Attachment.
contempt after he is removed out of his Office; and the Justices intended that
not, insomuch that now he is no Officer, and for that he cannot be now fined,
and without fine they did not use to Imprison, but the Judges would be advised
to see the Presidents of the Court in such a case.

M^chaelmas 1611. 9. Jacobi, in the Common Bench. Kemp, and Philip his Wife,
James, and Blanch his Wife, Plaintiffs, against Lawrere and Trollop, and the
Wife of Gun^er, Executrix, during the minority of the Wives of the Plaintiffs.
THe case was, An Executrix during the nonage; for so it was, and not
Administratrix, that is, she was ordained Executrix, till Executrix during
nonage.
the Wives of the Plaintiffs came to their full age, or were married, and then
they should be Executrixes. And this Executrix during the minority, brought an
action of Debt, and recovered; and before Execution the women Executrixes took
Husbands, and brought Scirefacias upon the Record, to have Execution upon the
Judgment against these Defendants as Ter-tenants, which pleaded specially that
they had nothing in the Freehold, nor in the Land, but only a lease for
years, and that the freehold was in another stranger, upon which Plea the
Plaintiffs demurred in Law. And Nicholls Sergeant Nicholls.
for the Plaintiffs, that there is the difference betwixt this Executor and an
Administrator during the minority, as in 26 H. 8. 7. a. if an Administrator
have Judgment, and dies before Executors or other have sued out their Letters
of Administration, they shall have no execution of this Judgment, insomuch as
he comes in paramount the first Administrator, and as immediate Administrator
to the first Intestate, as it is agreed in Shelleys case. So the Administrators
of one Executor shall not have execution of a Judgment given for the Executor,
as it is resolved in Brudenels case, 5 Coke, the 9. b. And in 21 Edw. 4. It is
agreed, if two are made Joynt-Executors, and one of them dies, the other shall
be sole Executor to the Testator: and if he make his Executor, and dies, his
Executors shall be Executors to the first Testator: And also there is in Fox
and Gretbrooks Case in the Com: that one may be Executor for certain years, and
another after, and this differs from the other cases; for in this case all
these Executors were in privity one to another: but in the other case one comes
paramount the other. But here they are all made by the first Testator and the
Will: And he cyted the 2 Case in the Lord* Dyer, and 18. and 32, Edw. 3. there
cyted, where a Purchasor brought a Writ of Error, and was not privy to the
first Record. And Grantee of a Reversion brought a Scire facias against Conusee
of a Statute-Merchant, alleging that he had received satisfaction. So if a
Parson of a Church recovers an Annuity, and after the Church is appropriate to
a house of Religion, the Sovereign of the said house shall have a Scire facias.
And so if union be made of two Benefices, and yet in all these cases there was
no privity to the first Judgment: so he in reversion shall have Error in
Attain^ upon Judgment against his Lessee for life, and the Reason is given in
Brudenels Case, that is, they which may have prejudice may have scire facias,
and it is not like where two Joynt-tenants are, and one makes a Lease for
years, and dies, the other shall have the Rent, insomuch that he comes in by
survivorship, and not in privity. But here the Executors come in in privity, as
in case of two Executors are jointly, one ^yes, the other which survives shall
have Execution of Judgment given for them; for Administrator during the nonage
is only to the use, commodity, and profit of an Executor, and of a Testator: so
that he being Executor to the Testator, he shall have execution. And to the
second, that is, that the Defendants have nothing but for years, and that the
freehold is to a stranger, he intended that this is not good, and yet he
agreed that in scire facias where a freehold is to be recovered, special
non-tenure is a good plea, as in 8 Edw 4. 19. and 8 H. 6. 32. but not of the
contrary, and there also general non-tenure is no plea: But here where the
freehold is not to be recovered, nor one nor the other is a Plea; for it may
be averred that the Defendant has a release from him that has the reversion:
and as in 14 H. 4. 5. in scire facias to account against an Executor who pleads
that the Testator was never his Bayliffe to give an account, and yet it is
agreed that this has been a good plea for the first Defendant, and this is the
reason that it was not taken, nor was allowed for a good plea in the 11 H. 4.
11. Insomuch that this amounts to non-tenure; and in 44. and 45. Eliz. Mich.
Rot. 834. it was adjudged in Scire facias, where the Defendant pleads that he
was not Tenant of the Freehold, and adjudged no plea: And so he said it was
adjudged in the case of All-soules College, in Scire facias to have execution
of a Judgment in Ejectione firm: and the Defendant in the Scire facias pleads,
that he was but Lessee for years, and adjudged no Plea, insomuch that nothing
was to be recovered but only the term, and not the Freehold, and so he
concluded, and prayed Judgment for the Plaintiff in Scire facias. Harris
Sergeant argued Harris.
to the contrary, and he intended that the Return of the Sheriff is void,
insomuch that the Writ commanded him to give notice to the Tenants of the Land
in Fee-simple, and he did not return, that those which he had returned were
Tenants of the Land in Fee-simple, and so these words of the Writ are not
answered, and so no Tenant is returned at all.

And it is not like to the Case in 2 H. 4. for there the Return was according
to the Exigent of the Writ, but here it is not so. And to the first matter he
intended, and agreed, that an Executor of an Executor may sue execution had by
the first Executor, insomuch that he comes in in privity. But he said, that so
it is not in this case, and that there is no difference betwixt this case, and
the case cyted in Shelleys case, that is, that Administrator of Administrator
shall not sue execution, insomuch that he comes in peramount Administrator, and
accords with this Case, 2 Eliz. in the Lord Dyer: If two Joynt-Tenants are, and
one makes a Lease for years, rendering Rent, and dies, the Survivor shall not
have the Rent, insomuch that he comes in peramount him; and to the other he
intended, that the special non-tenure is a good plea, as well in Scire facias
to have execution of damages, as of Freehold, as in 24 Edw. 3. 31. and 5 H. 5.
1. and 9. H. 5. 11. It is resolved, that in Scire facias special non-tenure is
a good Plea, and the books of 8 H. 6. 31. cyted before, there is Joynt-tenancy
pleaded to one part, and special non-tenure to the other part by Lease for
years, and the question is if it might be pleaded a part: And in 8 Edw. 4. 14.
Is Scire facias upon Recovery by Writ of Right Patent in base Court, and that
the Defendant cannot plead release of the Lessor, and so the joining of the
Mise may be forfeiture of his Estate: And he said that it was adjudged in 16
Edw. 3. Scire facias 5. that scire facias to have execution of a Fine shall not
be sued against a Lessee for years, but against him which has the Freehold;
but where Debt or Damages are to be recovered, there it may be sued against him
which has only Lease for years, insomuch that the possession is to be charged;
and so he concluded, and prayed Judgment for the Defendants, and it is
adjourned.

Michaelmas 1611. 9. Jacobi, in the Common Bench. Crogate against Morris.
THe case was this, Copyholder prescribes to have common in the Waste of the
Lord, and brings action of Trespass against a stranger Copyholder.
for his Beasts depasturing upon the Common there, and Harris Harris.
Sergeant argued that this action is not maintainable for two causes. First,
insomuch that he is a Commoner; for as it is said by Brook Justice, 12. H. 8.
2. a. Commoner cannot have an action of Trespass, for the Common is not
Common, but after the Commoner has taken that, and then before that he has
taken that he has no wrong nor damage, but the damage is to the Tenant of the
Land: As if a Lessee for years be outed, and he in reversion recovers in
Assise, he shall not have damage, insomuch that the damage was made to the
Lessee, and the 22 Assis. 48. 15 H. 7. i 2. b. agreed that Commoner cannot
maintain action of Trespass, nor no other but the owner of the Soil, but 13 H.
8. 15. by Norwich, 15 H. 7. 6. 5 H. 7. 2. 24 Edw. 3. 42. Commoner may distrain
and avow for doing damage. 2. He intended that this action is not maintainable,
insomuch that every other Commoner may also have the action of Trespass, for
if it be wrong to one, it is wrong to every one of them, and so the stranger
shall be infinitely punished, as in Williams Case, 5 Coke, 72. b. where it was
adjudged an action of the Case does not lie for the Lord of the Manor to
prescribe, that a Vicar ought to administer the Sacraments in his private
Chapel, to him, his Menservants and Tenants within the Precincts of the said
Manor, and adjudged that it does not lie, insomuch that then every of his
Tenants might also have action, and so the Vicar shall be always punished: So
in 27 H. 7. 27. a. A man shall not have an action upon the Case for nuisance
made in the high way; so it is 5 Ed. 4. 2. for trenching in the high way, see
33 H. 6. 26. a. accordingly; and so he concluded that the action is not
maintainable, and prayed Judgment for the Defendant.

Dodridge the Kings Sergeant, to the exception which has been Dodridge.
made by the other party, that the Plaintiff ought to averr that he has Beasts
which ought to Common there, and that his Beasts have lost their Common, that
need not to be averred, but it shall be pleaded by the other party; for if he
have distrayned the Beasts of a stranger, doing damage, he need to averr no
more in this action, and to the other matter, and the two Objections which have
been made by the other part: First, that the Commoner has no right to the
Common, till he have taken it by the mouth of his Beasts; to that he said, that
the Commoner has right to that before that it be taken by such mouths of his
Beasts: and notwithstanding that it seems by the time of Ed. 1. That Commoner
cannot grant his Common till he have Seisin of that, yet 12 H. 8. is otherwise,
and that a Commoner may have an action the name implies, for he has Common
with others, and a stranger which is no Commoner cannot do wrong, but this is
damage to him; and he cyted Bracton, 430. that there are two forms of Writs, 1.
Cursitory Writs, 2. Commanding Writs: The first of those which are formed, and
are of course, and the others such of which there is no form, but are to be
formed by the Masters of the Chancery, according to every particular Case: So
that there is not any Case, but that the Law affords a Writ and remedy for
that, as in 28 Edw. 4. 23. Action upon the Case was framed against an Officer,
which gave privilege to one as his servant, which was not his servant: and it
is not like to the Case in 11 H. 4. 47. a. where a Schoolmaster brings an
action upon the Case against another for erecting of a School in the same Town
to his damage, but this was damage without Injury. But here the Commoner has
received wrong and damage; but yet he agreed that the Commoner could not have
action of Trespass why he broke his Close, for that is proper for the owner of
the Soil. But it has been agreed to him, that he might distrain them, doing
damage; and the reason of that is, insomuch that he has received damage, and
amends may be tendered unto him in recompense of his damages, without any
regard to other Commoners, as it is agreed in 24 Edw. 3. 42. And to the
Objection, that if one Commoner may have action, then every Commoner may have
the action, and so the stranger shall be infinitely punished. And to that he
said it is a Public loss and private; and when the public wrong includes
private damage to any man, there he to whom the private damage is done may have
action: And he said, that the Register contains many Writs for public wrong,
when that is done to private men, as fol. 95. A man fixes a pale, cross a
navigable River, by which a Ship was cast away, and the Owner maintained action
of Trespass: And fol. 97. A man brought Trespass against one which cast dung
into a River, by which his Meadow was drowned; so if the River be infected with
watering Hemp or Flax, he which has fishing there may maintain action of
Trespass: and 2 H. 4. 11. Action of Trespass by one for ploughing of Land
where one had a common way; and so it is 13. H. 7. 17. One brings an action of
Trespass against another for erecting a Lyme Kill where many others are
annoyed by that: So by an assault made upon a servant, the Master and servant
also may have several actions; and so in the other cases many may have
actions, and yet this is no reason to conclude any one of them, that he shall
not have his action, for in truth those are rather actions upon the Case, then
actions of Trespass, for the truth of the Case is contained in the Writ. Also
in this case it does not appear that there are any other Commoners which have
Common there, and for that this Objection is not to the purpose: and it appears
by Heisman and Crackesoods Case, 4 Coke 31. That Copyholder shall have Common
by prescription in the demesnes of the Lord, and so he concluded, and prayed
Judgment for the Plaintiff.

Coke chief Justice said, that it was adjudged in this Court, Trinity, Coke.
41* Eliz. Rot. 153. b. between Holland and Lovell, where Commoner brings an
action upon the Case, as this Case is, against a stranger which pleads not
guilty, and it was found by verdict for the Plaintiff, and it was after
adjudged for the Plaintiff, for insomuch that the Plaintiff may take them
damage feasant that proves that he has wrong, and this is the reason that he
may distraine (doing damage.) And by the same reason, if the Beasts are gone
before his coming, he may have action upon his Case, for otherwise one that
has many Beasts may destroy all the Common in a night, and do great wrong,
and shall not be punished: and it is not like to a Nuisance, for that is
public, and may be punished in a Leet; but the other is private to the
Commoners, and cannot be punished in another place nor course: and he also
cyted one Whitehands case to be adjudged, where many Copyholders prescribe to
have Loppings and Toppings of Pollards, and Husbands growing upon the Waste of
the Lord, and the Lord cuts them, and one Copyholder only brings his action
upon the Case, and adjudged that it was very well maintainable, notwithstanding
that every other Copyholder may have the same remedy. And he said also, that
so it was adjudged in the Kings Bench, Hillary 5 Jacobi, Rot. 1427. in George
Englands Case: And 2 Edw. 2. b. Covenant 49. If a man Covenant with 20. to make
the Sea banks with A. B. and every one of them, and after he does not do it,
by which the Land of two is drowned and damnified, and they two may have an
action of Covenant without the others; Quere, for it seems every one shall have
an action by himself. But Foster and Wynch Justices seemed that the Plaintiff
ought to sue in his Court, that the Beasts of the stranger escaped in the
Common, or were put in by the Owner, for it may be they were put in by the Lord
which was owner of the Soil, or by a stranger, in which cases the Owner of the
Beasts shall not be punished: But Coke and Warburton seemed the contrary, and
that this ought to be averred and pleaded by the Defendant in excuse of the
Trespass, as in action of Trespass (why he broke his Close) And so it was
adjourned, see Gosnolds case, 490. see Judgment.

Pasche 1612. 10. Jacobi, in the Common Bench. Henry Higgins against George
Biddle.
IN Replevin the Defendant made Conusance as Bailiff to Sir Thomas Leigh, and
Daine Katherine his Wife, intimating that Isabel Bradburn Replevin.
was seized of the place where, etc. in their demesne as of Fee, and so seized
the first of June, 15 H. 8. gives this to the Lord Anthony Fitzherbert, and
Maud his Wife, and to the Heirs males of their bodies, which have Issue Thomas
Fitzherbert, Knight, John Fitzherbert, and William Fitzherbert, Anthony and
Maud dyed, and the said place where, etc. descended to Sir Thomas Fitzherbert
as Heir to the Donees to the Intayl: and the said Thomas Fitzherbert the 5. of
April, 6 Edw. 6. of that enfeoffed Humphrey Swinnerton, Ralph Cotton, and
Roger Baily; to the use of William Fitzherbert, and Elizabeth his Wife for
their lives, and after to the use of Sir Thomas Fitzherbert, and the Heirs of
his body; the remainder to the use of the right Heirs of the said William
Fitzherbert: William Fitzherbert dyed, Sir Thomas Fitzherbert disseised the
said Elizabeth, and the said John Fitzherbert had Issue, Thomas, and dyed, and
Sir Thomas Fitzherbert dyed without Heir of his body, and the said place where,
etc. descended to the said Thomas as Cousin and Heir of the said Sir Thomas,
and Son and Heir of the said John Fitzherbert, which enters, and was seized to
him and to the Heirs Males of his body, as in his Remitter. And the said Thomas
Fitzherbert, 4 of November. 39. Eliz. by Indenture of Bargain and Sale enrolled
in the Chancery within six months, bargained and sold the said Land to Sir
William Leighton and his heirs, and Sir William Leighton, 5 of November. 43.
Eliz. by Indenture enrolled within six months for 4000. l. bargained and sold
the said land where, etc. to Sir Thomas Leigh, and Dame Katherine, as
aforesaid, and so avowed the taking for doing damage. And the Plaintiff for
Bar to the said Avowry; pleads, that well and true it is, that the said Sir
William Leighton was seized of the said place where, etc. in his Demesne as of
Fee, as it was alleged by the Defendant: But further he says, that the said
Sir William Leighton so being thereof seized, 1 December. 44 Eliz. enfeoffed the
Plaintiff in fee, and by force of that the Plaintiff was seized, and put in his
Beasts into the said place where etc. without that, that the said Sir William
Leighton bargained and sold the said Land in which, etc. to the said Sir Thomas
Leighton, and Katherine his Wife, as in the Conusance has been alleged by the
Defendant, upon which the Defendants join Issue; and it was agreed by all the
Justices, that notwithstanding this admission of the Parties, is an Estoppell
by the pleading, yet as well the Plaintiff as the Defendant were admitted to
give another evidence to the Jury against their own pleading; that is, that Sir
William Leighton was not seized, and so nothing passed by the bargain and sale;
and also that Sir Thomas Fitzherbert had the possession by acceptance of the
surrender of the estate conveyed to William Fitzherbert and his Wife,
notwithstanding it was admitted by pleading, that he had that by Disseisin: And
all the Justices agreed, that the Jury shall not be concluded by the pleading
of the parties, insomuch that they are sworn to speak the truth.

Pasche 1612. 10. Jacobi, in the Common Bench. Brook Plaintiff, against Cobb.
IN Wast the Plaintiff assigns waste in cutting down of 20. Oaks in such a
Close, and 40. Oaks in such a Close, etc. Upon the Evidence Waste.
it appears that the said Oaks were remaining upon the Land for standils,
according to the statute; at the last felling of that, and they were of the
growth of 16. or 20. years, and that tithes were paid for it. And it was agreed
by the Lord Coke and all the Justices, that this was no Waste, insomuch it was
felled as Acre wood: And it was said by the Lord Coke, that though it be of the
age of 20. or 24. years, yet if the use of the Parties be to fell such for
seasonable Wood, this shall not be Waste; and if Tithes be paid for that, it
appears that it is no Timber.

Doctor Mannings Case in the Star Chamber.
ONe Golding as an Informer, and not as party greived, exhibits his Bill in the
Star Chamber against Doctor Manning, Chancellor Informer.
to the Bishop of Exeter, for Extortion, Oppression, and other offenses. It was
resolved, that when a Bill contains any particular offenses, and after the same
Bill contains general words, which includes many offenses of the same kind;
And the Plaintiff proves the particular offenses, he may examine other
particular offenses also included within these general words, in supplement
and aggravation of the particular offenses contained in the Bill; and if they
be proved, the Court will give the greater and high sentence against the
Defendant in respect of them, notwithstanding that they be not particularly
expressed in the Bill. But if the Plaintiff has not proved any of the offenses
particularly expressed in the Bill, the Defendant shall not be censured by the
particulars grounded upon the general words of the Bill. And if a man which is
not party greived, exhibit Bill for offense made to another person, as against
whom the offense was committed, he shall not be allowed as Witness, insomuch
as he is party greived, and by that he should be a witness in his own Cause.

Pasche 1612. 10. Jacobi, in the Common Bench. William Peacock Plaintiff,
against Sir George Raynell.
IN the Sar-chamber the Plaintiff exhibits his Bill against the Defendant
Lybell.
for Libelling and Infamous Letters, the which was in this manner, The
Plaintiff being Heir general to Richard Peacock which was of the age of
eighty six years, and had Lands of Inheritance to the value of 8. or 900.
pound per annum, and the Defendant had married the Daughter of Sir Edward
Peacock, which was a younger brother of the said Richard Peacock, and the said
Defendant perceiving that the said Richard Peacock, had purpose to settle his
Inheritance upon the said Plaintiff, and intending to remove the affection of
the said Richard from the Plaintiff, and to settle that in himself, writes a
Letter to the said Richard Peacock, containing that the Plaintiff was not the
Son of a Peacock, and was a hunter of Tavernes, and that diverse women had
followed him from London to the place of his dwelling, and that he did desire
to hear of the death of the said Richard, and that all his Inheritance would
not be sufficient to satisfy his Debts; and many other matters concerning his
Reputation and Credit, to that subscribed his name, and this ensealed and
directed to the said R. Peacock: And it was agreed that this was a Libell, and
for that the Defendant was Fined to two hundred pound, and Imprisonment
according to the course of the Court: And the Plaintiff let loose to the Common
Law for his recompense for the Damages he has sustained: But if the Letter had
been directed to the Plaintiff himself, and not to the third person, then it
should not have been a Libell, or if it had been directed to a Father, for
Reformation of any Acts made by his Children, it should be no Libell, for it is
not but for Reformation, and not for Defamation; for if a Letter contain
scandalous matter, and be directed to a third person, if it be Reformarory and
for no respect to himself, it shall not be intended to be a Libell, for with
what mind it was made is to be respected: As if a man write to a Father, and
his Letter contain scandalous matter concerning his Children, of which he
gives notice to the Father, and advises the Father to have better regard to
his Children, this is only Reformatory without any respect of profit to him
which wrote it: But in the first case the Defendant intended his profit and his
own benefit, and this was the difference.

Pasche 1612. 10. Jacobi, In the Common Bench. Randall Crewe against Vernon.
IN the Star Chamber it was resolved: That if the Defendant do not perform the
Sentence of the Court, as here he was to make acknowledgement of his offense
committed against the Court of Exchequer at Chester, and this acknowledgement
was to be made at the great Assizes at Chester, and he did nor perform the
Sentence, and yet the Defendant could not be fined for this contempt, but only
Imprisonment, and for that he was committed close Prisoner till he performed
it: But he could not be fined, insomuch there was not any Bill, upon which this
Sentence should be founded.

Pasche 1612. 10. Jacobi, in the Common Bench. Charnocke against Corey, See
before.
IN Debt against Administrator: The Defendant pleades two Debt against
Administrator.
Recognisances acknowledged by the Intestate, which were not satisfied, and
that he had not any Goods or Chattells of the said Intestate, unless Goods and
Chattells which did amount to the Debts due by the said Recognisances: And it
seemed to all the Justices, that the Plea was not good: But that the Defendant
ought to plead according to the Common form, that is, that he has no Goods
besides or beyond the Goods to satisfy the two Recognisances, or that he has
no Goods to such value, which do not amount to the said Sums due by the two
Recognisances: And in these cases this manner of pleading is Implied,
confession that he has Goods of such a value, and so they should be assets if
the Recognisances be discharged, or remain of Covin and fraud to deceive
Creditor.

Pasche 1612. 10. Jacobi, in the Common Bench: Bicknell against Tucker, see
before 75.
THE Case was: A Copyhold Estate was granted to one Copyhold.
for life, remainder to another for his life, the first Copyholder for life,
accepts a Bargain and Sale of the freehold from the Lord, and after that
levies a Fine with proclamations, and five years pass, and then he dies,, and
if this Fine shall be a Bar to him, which has the Copyhold Estate for life
in remainder was the question: And it was argued by Harris Sergeant, that the
Estate of Fines in the body of that binds all persons, but only some which
have Infirmities, and by the saving Rights, Titles, Claims, and Interests are
saved: But Title comes in the conditional perclose of saving, that is, so that
they pursue their Title, Claim, and Interest, etc. By way of Act or lawful
Entry within five years next after the said proclamations had and made: So
that in this case the principal matter to be considered is, what thing is
operated by the acceptance of the Bargain and Sale, for if by that the
remainder of the Copyholder be turned to right, then insues that the Fine
shall be a Bar: And it seems that this determines the first Estate for life,
and he agreed that it cannot be a surrender, insomuch that there is a mesene
remainder, as it is 37. H. 6. 17. b. 4. H. 7. 10. But this Lease to commence at
a day to come cannot be a surrender, but shall be determined and extinct by
acceptance of a new Lease, as it is there, and in 22. H. 7. 51. a. agreed and
so it was adjudged in Hillary 30. Eliz. between Wilmottand Cutlers Case, that
if a Husband which was seized of a Copyhold Estate in right of his Wife,
accept an estate for life, this determines the copyhold Estate which he has
in right of his Wife in possession: So if Lessee for years accept an estate of
one which has no Estate, yet this determines his Term, as it was adjudged
Hillary 31. Eliz. Rot. 1428. b. That if Lessee for years of a Lease made by
the Ancester accept an estate of Guardian in Soccage, this determines his
Lease, which he had of the Ancestor, and upon that he concluded, that in this
case the acceptance of a Bargain and Sale, turns the Copyholder in remainder
to a Right, and then it appears by Saffins Case 5. Coke 125. That he shall be
bound though that he has only Interest, and so of Title also, and he said that
it appears, by Kite and Quarintons case, 4. Coke 26. a. that a Right or Title
may be of Copyhold Estate, for it is there said by Wray chief Justice, that
it shall be with in the Statute of 32 H. 8. chapter 9. of buying of Titles; and
so concluded.

Dodridge the Kings Sergeant agreed, that the sole question is if any thing be
here done to turn the Copy-hold-Estate in remainder into a right, for then he
agreed that this shall be barred, otherwise not, and to that he intended, that
the first Estate for life shall be said to be in Esse, notwithstanding the
acceptance of the Bargain and Sale, as to all estrangers, and especially when
it is to their prejudice, as if Tenant grant Rent, and after surrenders his
estate, now between the parties, the Lease shall be extinct by the surrender,
but to the Grantee of the Rent it shall be said to be in Esse, and if during
his life, he in Remainder also grants a Rent, he shall hold the Land subject
to both the Rents, though that the grants be both to one self sameperson, so if
he in Reversion grants his Reversion with warranty, and after the Tenant for
life surrenders, and the Grantee be impleaded, he shall never vouch during the
life of the Tenant for life, 5 H. 5. Comment. 24 Ed. 3. And here also is a
custom which preserves the Copyhold Estate in Remainder, and their particular
Tenant cannot that prejudice, and for that also it shall not be turned into a
right, as if a Copyhold Estate be granted to one for life by one Copy, and
after the Lord grants another Estate for life by another Copy to another, and
then the first Copyholder commits forfeiture, he which has the second estate
cannot take advantage of that, but the Lord shall hold it during the life of
the first Tenant, for no act made by the particular Tenant shall prejudice him
in Remainder, for otherwise many Inconveniences would ensue upon that, as by
secret conveyances, or as if a grantee of a Rent charge, grant that to the
Tenant of the Land for his life, the Remainder over, the Remainder shall be
good, notwithstanding that the particular Estate be extinct and drowned, also
he intended that the Copyhold Estate is another thing, then the land it self,
and for that the Fine shall not be a Bar, no more then in Smith and Stapletons
Case, Com. Where a Fine levied of Land shall not be a Bar of Rent, insomuch
that it is another thing, so in this case he intended that the fine shall not
be a Bar of the Copyhold Estate, and concluded, etc. Wynch Justice was of
opinion that the Fine shall not be a Bar to the Copyhold Estate in Remainder,
for the acceptance of the Bargain and Sale does not determine the first
Copyhold Estate for life, as to him in Remainder but only to the first Tenant
and the Lord, and between those he agreed that the Copyhold Estate is
determined, as in Heydens Case, by acceptance of a Lease for years, and for
that the Remainder shall not be turned to a Right, and by consequence shall not
be barred, and for that he supposed that the reason that the Fine was a Bar in
Saffins Case 5 Coke 123. b. was insomuch that the Lessor entered, made a
Feoffment and after levied a Fine, and it is there agreed that the Feoffment
turns the Estate of the Lessee to a Right, and for that the Fine shall be a
bar, and also there the Lease was by limitation of time to have a beginning,
but if a man makes a Lease for years to begin at a day to come, and before the
beginning of that makes a Feoffment or is disseised, and Fine with proclamation
is levied, yet he which has future Interest shall not be barred, for this is
not turned to a Right, and it was not the intent of the Statute of Fines to
make a Bar of right, where there was no discontinuance or Estate at least
turned to right, and this was the cause that at the Common Law, Fine with
Non-claime was no Bar, but where they make alteration of possession, and he
cited Palmers case to be adjudged, that a Fine of Land shall not be a bar for
Rent, where the case was, Lessee for life, Remainder for life of Rent: The
first Lessee for life of the Rent, purchases Land and levies Fine of that, and
adjudged that this shall not bind them in Remainder of the Rent, no more, if
he in remainder levy a fine that shall not prejudice the particular Tenant, and
so he concluded in this case, that the Ramainder shall not be barred and that
the Plaintiff shall have Judgment. Warburton Justice accordingly, and he argued
that the Statute of Fines contains two parts.

The first, to bar those which have present right, and they ought to make
their claim within five years after the Fine levied, or otherwise they shall
be barred.

And the second those which have Right, title, or interest accrued, after the
Fine levied, by reason of any matter which preceded the Fine, and in both cases
the Estate which is barred ought to be turned into a right, or otherwise it
shall not be barred, the which cannot be here, for the estate is given by the
Custom, and it is to have his beginning after the Death of the first Tenant,
and though that the first Tenant commit Forfeiture, yet he in remainder cannot
enter, for his time is not yet come, as in 45 Ed. 3. is a collateral Lease
with warranty to the Tenant for life in possession, this shall not be a bar,
insomuch that it is made to him which has possession, so if a man make a
Feoffment upon condition, and the Feoffee levy a Fine with proclamations and
five years pass, and the condition is broken, the Feoffee may enter at any
time, otherwise if the Fine had been levied after the condition broken, and so
if the Lord be intitu^ed to have Cessavit, and Fine is levied by the Tenant and
five years pass, he shall be barred, and this was the cause of the Judgment
in Saffins case, insomuch as the Lessee had present interest to enter, and this
was altered into a Right by the Feoffment, and then the Fine was a Bar, but
here he in Remainder has no right till after the Death of him which was the
first Tenant, and then his right to the possession begins, and then if a Fine
had been levied with proclamation this shall be a Bar, and so he concluded,
that Judgment should be entered for the Plaintiff.

Coke chief Justice accordingly, and he agreed also that the sole Coke.
question is, if by acceptance of a Bargain and sale by the first Tenant for
life, the Remainder be turned into a right, and he said, that right sometimes
sleeps, but it never dies, but this shall be intended (the right of the Law)
and not right of Land, for that may be barred by Writ of Right at the Common
Law, and he intended that Copy-holdes are within the Statutes of Fines, be they
Copyhold for life, years, in tail, or in fee, for the third part of the
Realm is in Copy-holdes, and two parts in Lease for years, and if these shall
not be within the Statute, then this does not extend to three parts of the
Realm, and it is agreed in Heydons case 3 Coke 8. a. That when an act of
Parliament does not alter the Tenure, Service, Interest of Land, or other thing
in prejudice of the Lord or of the custom of the Manor, or in prejudice of
the Tenant, there the general words of such act of Parliament shall extend to
Copy-holds, and also it is resolved to be within the Statute of 32 H. 8. Of
Maintenance, and also it is within the express Letter of this, which contains
the word Interest, and Copyholder has interest and so also of Tenant by
Statute Merchant, then the question will be, if the acceptance of a Bargain
and sale turns that to a right, and he intended that his Estate for life
remains, though that it is only passive in acceptance of Bargain and sale, and
for that it shall not be prejudice more then if Tenant at will accepts a
Bargain and Sale, for his Estate at will, this notwithstanding remains, but
if Lessee for years or life, accepts a Fine upon conusance of right, this is a
forfeiture, insomuch that it is a matter of record, and it shall be an estoppel
to say that he did not take Fee by that, and does not admit the Reversion to be
in another, also insomuch that the Bargain and sale was executed by the Statute
for this cause it shall not be prejudice, as it was adjudged in the Lady
Greshams case in the Exchequer, 28 Eliz. Where two several conveyances were
made with power of Revocation upon tender of ten pound, and adjudged by act of
Parliament that a revocation was good, and also that no license of alienation
shall be made, insomuch that it was by act of Parliament, which does no wrong,
and it is for the Trespass, for which the Revocation of Uses.
party ought to have license, and if it be not Trespass there need no license
before hand nor pardon afterward: So if a man makes a Lease for years,
remainder for years, the first Lessee accepts Bargain and Sale, this shall
not turn these in remainder to prejudice.

Thirdly it seems to him also, that notwithstanding the acceptance of the
Bargain and Sale, the first Copyhold Estate for life remains in Esse, and is
not determined. For this differs from an Estate of Land, for it shall not be
subject to a Rent granted by the Lord: the first Estate remains, till all the
remainders are determined, for the first tenant for life cannot surrender to
the Lord, also it is customary estate, for by the Common Law this being granted
to three successively, this shall be determined and extinct for the third part,
for they three take into possession, and the word successively, shall be taken
as void, but here the Custom appoints, that the remainder shall not have his
beginning, till the death of the first-Tenant, and that they should take by
succession, and for that there is a difference between this customary Estate,
and other Estates at the Common Law, and other surrenders, for if a Copyholder
surrender to the use of another for life, nothing passes but for life only,
the Lord has not any remainder by this Surrender, and if this Tenant for life
commits forfeiture, he in reversion shall not take advantage of that, and if at
the Common Law Tenant for life, remainder for life or in fee be, and the first
Tenant for life makes a Feoffment, and after levies a Fine, and resolved that
he in reversion should not be bound till 5 years are incurred after the death
of the 1. Tenant for life, for then his title of Entry first accrues in
apparancy, and before that is in secrecy, of which he in remainder is not held
to take notice, and so in this case he in remainder shall not be bound till
five years are incurred after the death of the first Tenant, and the rather
insomuch as the first Estate remains, for that that the first Tenant was only
passive and not active, and so he concluded that Judgment shall be given for
the Plaintiff, insomuch that the Fine was no Bar, and upon this concordance of
all the three Justices in opinion, no other Justices being present this Term
Judgment was entered accordingly.

Pasche 1612. 10. Jacobi, in the Common Bench. Danyell Waters against the Deane
and chapter of Norwich.
IN covenant, The case was this in 37 H. 8. the then Deane and Chapter of
Norwich made a Lease to one Twaits for fifty years, which ended 35 Eliz. in
time of Ed. 6. The then Dean and Chapter surrendered all their possessions to
the King, which those newly endowed, and incorporated by the name of Deane and
Chapter of the foundation of Ed. 6. and in the 8. Eliz. Salisbury then Deane
and the then Chapter made a Lease to Thimblethorpe for 99. years to begin
after the said Lease for fifty years made to Twaits: And it does not appear
by the pleading; that Thimblethorpe entered: But the succeeding Deane and
Chapter in the 42. Eliz. made another Lease to Waters the Plaintiff for three
lives, rendering the ancient Rent quarterly, with warrant of Attorney to make
livery, and it was not executed till after the end of three quarters of a year
after the Sealing of it, and when the time of three rent days were Incurred:
And in this Lease the Deane and Chapter covenanted with Waters to acquit and
save harmless the Lessee and the premises during the Term, etc. By reason
of any Lease made by them, or any of their Predecessors or by the Bishop: And
then the Plaintiff in his Court, conveys the Lease made by Thimblethorpe to
Doylye, and that he intered and disturbed the Plaintiff, and so assigned breach
of covenant, upon which this Action was founded, upon which the Defendants
demurr in Law: And this was agreed by Dodridge.
Dodridge the Kings Sergeant for the Defendants.

First that the Lease made to Waters was void, and then the Covenants do not
extend to charge the Defendants: And he supposed the Lease to be void, insomuch
that the Attorney did not make Livery; until three Rent days were incurred,
and the Lease was made as well for the benefit of the Lessor, as for the
Lessee, for if the Lessee is to have the profits and the Lessor is to have the
Rent: And insomuch that the Livery was not made before a Rent incurred, this
tends to the prejudice of the Lessor, and for that the Authority is
countermanded, and the Livery made after void, for when a man has a Letter of
Attorney to make Livery, he ought to make that in such manner, as the Feoffer
himself would make it, and the Lessor cannot make that after a rent incurred,
for then he should loose that Rent: Also Authority ought to be strictly
pursued, as in 36. H. 8. Dyer 62. 24. Letter of Attorney was made to three
jointly and severally to make Livery, and re^ved that two cannot do it, see 11.
H. 4. For it ought to be made jointly or severally, so here the Attorney ought
to make the Livery as his Master will, and that ought to be made before any
Rent incurred: And for this cause he intended the Lease to be void: And then as
to a Collateral Covenant, which is in effect no other, but that the Plaintiff
shall enjoy the Land during the Term, which is of an Estate which is nothing,
for if the Lease be void, the Estate is nothing, and the Lessee has not any
Term or Estate in the Land: And he agreed that in the Record of Chedingtons
Case, 1 Coke 153. b. And in the Commentaries, Wrotsleys Case 198. And 2. Eliz.
Dyer 178. There is a difference between Tirminum Annorum, and the time or
space of years, or the life of such a man, but there is not any difference
between a Term and an Estate: Also he supposed that the words of the Covenant
extend only to save the Plaintiff harmless of Leases made by these Defendants
or any of their predecessors, and this Lease was made to Twaits in time of H 8.
Which was before their Corporation, for they have been but named a Corporation
in the time of Edward 6. and not before: And then a Lease made in the time of
H. 8. is not made by them nor by their Predecessors, and so the Covenant does
not extend to that, as it appears by 8. Ed. 4. in case of prescription, if
Corporation be changed in manner and form, and the substance of their name
remain, yet they ought to make special prescription, then a fortiori in this
case, where the substance is changed; and so he concluded, Nicholls.
and prayed Judgment for the Defendants.

Nichols Sergeant for the first argued, that the Livrey was well made, for
these Defendants shall be intended Occupiers, and to have the profits of the
Land till the Lessee entered or they waved the possession, and so no prejudice,
and the Lessee shall not be charged with Rent till he enters, or the Lessor
wave the posaession, as it was resolved in Bracebridges Case Com. 423. b. and
in the Deane and Chapter of Canterburies Case there cited: And for that the
Livery shall be good, and the Lessor not prejudiced by the deferring of it, and
then to the second, that is the Covenant, he agreed that if the Estate be
created, and Covenant in Law annexed to it, if the Estate cease, the Covenant
also shall cease: But if express Covenant be annexed, then the Covenantor
ought to have regard to perform it, or otherwise an Action of Covenant lies
against him, notwithstanding that the Estate be avoided: But here he intends it
against him notwithstanding that the Estate be void: But here he intends the
Estate continues till Thimblethorp entered: But admitting that he had entered,
yet the covenant shall bind the Covenantor, as in 12. H. 4. 5. a. Parson makes
a Lease for years, and after is removed; an Action of covenant lies against
him, and 47. Ed. 3. and 3. Ed. 3. If Tenant in (...) makes a Lease with
express covenant and dies, and the Issue outs the Lessee, the Lessee shall
have an Action of Covenant against the Executors of the Tenant in tail, and 9.
Eliz. Dyer 257. 13. Tenant for life, the Remainder over in Fee, by Indenture
makes a Lease, without any express covenant and dies, Lessee cannot have an
Action of covenant against his Executors, otherwise if there had been an
express covenant: See the book and many Authorities there cited to this
purpose, and also he cited one Rawlinsons Case to be here adjudged, that if a
man which has nothing in land makes a Lease, and an express covenant for the
enjoying of that, if he which has right enters, by which the covenant is
broken, Action of covenant lies upon the express covenant: So that admitting
that the Lease is void, yet the covenant is good and shall bind the successors;
and so he concluded, and prayed Judgment for the Plaintiff, and this case was
argued at another day by Dodridge the Kings Sergeant, by special Dodridge.
appointment of the Judges, and now he supposed, that the Count contains that
the same Dean and Chapter which made the lease to Twaits in 37 H. 8. also made
the Lease to Thimblethorp in the 18 El. which cannot be, insomuch that the
corporation was changed in the time of E. 6. and for that cannot be the same
Deane and Chapter, for if a Prior Covent be translated into a Dean and Chapter,
and the Dean and Chapter will make prescription, they ought to make that in
special manner, and not generally as Deane and Chapter, as it is resolved 39.
H. 6. 14. 15. and in 7. Ed. 4. 32. In Trespass against the Abbot of
Bermondsey, it is agreed that the Prior was not Predecessor to the Abbot, as it
appears by 10. and 11. Eliz. Dyer 280. 11, 12, 13. That the Deane and Chapter
of Norwich made a surrender in the time of Ed. 6. and then newly incorporate*
So that he which made to Twaits in the 37. H. 8. could not be Predecessor to
the Deane and Chapter which made to Thimblethorp in 18. of Eliz. for he could
not then be any Predecessor, and for that the Lease to Thimblethorp void, and
then there is no Eviction, but wrong to the Plaintiff, for which he may have an
Action of Trespass, and then he cannot have an Action of covenant, as it
appears by 22. H. 6. against the Lessor: But admitting that the Lease to
Thimblethorp were good, then this has his beginning in the 38. of Eliz. and
makes the Lease for three lives to the Plaintiff void by the Statute of 13.
Eliz. insomuch that the aforesaid Lease for years was then in beginning, and
the Statute is expressly that it shall be void, as the grant of next avoidance
of a Church in the case of the Bishop of Lichfeild and Coventry against Sale
cited in Lincoln College Case 3. Coke, as if a Parson makes a Lease for
years, and is Non-resident, the Lease is void by the Statute against the
Parson himself, and then if the Estate be void, all covenants which depend
upon that are also void: Also he supposed that there is not any good conveyance
of the estate of Thimblethorp to Doyley, which is intended to be the disturber
to make the Covenant to be broken; and then when Doyley entered without title,
the Covenant cannot be broken, and so he concluded, and prayed Judgment for
the Defendants.

Nichols Sergeant for the Plaintiff agreed, that if there be an alteration
Nichols.
of Corporation, and title is to be made by prescription, it ought to be so
specially showed as it has been said of the other part by Dodridg. But here it
is not so, for the same Dean and Chapter which made the Lease to the Plaintiff,
made the Lease to Thimblethorp, and this appears by the pleading; and the Lease
made to Twaits is not mentioned, but only to show the beginning of the Lease to
Thimblethorp: And then the Deane and Chapter which made the Lease in 18 of
Eliz. to Thimblethorp; were the same Deane and Chapter which made the Lease in
42. Eliz. to VValters. And he supposed the Covenant being expressed, this
remains; otherwise if it had been a Covenant created only by the Law, as it
appears by the Books of 9. Eliz. Dyer, 257. 13. and 32 H. 6. 32. And also when
a Covenant is created by Law, the Covenantee cannot have Covenant, if he be not
outed by one which has title, 26 H. 8. 36. otherwise of express Covenant, as
it is agreed in the 12 H. 4. 5. So in 47. Edw. 3. Covenant lies against
Executors: and 38 Edw. 3. Covenant lies against Heir being made by Tenant in
tail, if the Lessee be outed after his death; and so he concluded, and prayed
Judgment for the Plaintiff.

Wynch Justice supposed that Judgment should be given for the Plaintiff, and
that he had good cause of action; and he intended that Wynch.
the Livery and Seisin by the Attorney, after Rent incurred, was good.
Secondly, That the Covenant shall extend to the Lease made to Thimblethorp; for
it does not appear, but that it is the same Deane and Chapter, which was in
time of H. 8. For it is not pleaded that it was founded by Ed. 6. but had his
name by him. And also it is confessed by the Demurrer, that it is the same
Deane and Chapter, but admitting that it is not, yet it may be answered, as it
has been by Nichols before, that is, that the Deane and Chapter which made the
Lease in 8 of Eliz. to Thimblethorp, is the Deane and Chapter which made the
Lease to the Plaintiff in the 42 of Eliz. are all one: and the Lease to Twaits
is showed only, to show the beginning of the Lease made to Thimblethorp. Also
he supposed the conveyance of Thimblethorps Estate to Doyley to be good; and it
does not appear but that the Deane and Chapter were in possession at the time
of the making of the Lease for 3 lives: So that this has a good beginning, and
continued till it was avoided by the Entry of the succeeding Dean, for this
remains good against the Deane that made it: But Thimblethorp also may avoid it
during his Term, and now here is eviction by the Assignee of Thimblethorpe,
before that the L^ase be avoided by the succeeding Deane and Chapter, where the
Deane himself could not avoid it, for he is the party which made it: Also here
is express warranty against the Lease made to Thimblethorp, and for that also
action of Covenant lies, otherwise if it had been only warranty in Law, as if
Lessee for life had made a lease for years, and dyed: Upon the covenant in Law
action does not lie, for the Law does not constrain to Impossibilities, as in
the 40. Ed. 3. Covenant that the wind shall not pierce nor break the Trees: and
2 Ed. 4. 12 Ed. 4. Action of Covenant lies upon express Covenant, though that a
stranger enters without title, and he cyted one Dormans case to be adjudged,
that where a man borrows money upon a usurious contract, and the principal
gives security to the Surety that was bound with him by collateral Obligation:
and the Surety being arrested, takes advantage of the Counterbond,
notwithstanding that the principal Obligation was void by the Statute of
Usury. So here, notwithstanding that the estate was void, and that is the
principal: Yet the Covenant being expressed, and collateral, shall bind the
Lessor, and so he concluded that Judgment shall be given for the Plaintiff.

Warburton Justice to the contrary, and yet he agreed that the livery Warburton.
was good, notwithstanding that it was made by the Attorney, after three Rent
days incurred, and he seemed that it might be made at any time during the
term and the lives of the parties. And also he agreed that the Corporation
shall be intended the same Corporation, and yet Corporation had no Predecessor
nor Successor: but the Statutes say, Predecessors, Antecessors, and Progenitors
of the King, as 39 H. 6. 7 Ed. 4. 2 H. 6. But he did not insist upon that, but
agreed that: But the matter upon which he insisted, was, that the Lease to the
Plaintiff was void against the succeeding Deane and Chapter, insomuch that the
lease to Thimblethorp was in Esse at the time of the making of that, and this
by the Statute of 13 Eliz. And it appears that the Deane which made the Lease
to the Plaintiff is dead, for he is named in the Count, the late Deane; and
then when the Covenants depend upon the estate, be they expressed, or in Law,
these determine and end with the estate, as in Lemons case, 28 H. 8. Dyer 28.
189. resolved, that where the statute of 21 H. 8. makes Leases being in the
hands of Spiritual persons void, this avoids these Covenants also which depend
upon the Lease. So if a Parson make a Lease and Covenant that he will not be
non-resident, and binds himself for the performance of that, if the Covenants
be released, the Obligation also is released. So if the Lease be avoided, the
Covenants also are avoided: And as an action of Covenant does not lie for the
not enjoying of Land after a surrender, so Covenant does not lie after the
estate is avoided, see 4 H. 7. And to the case put by Wynch of counterbond,
where the Principal was void by the staiute of Usury: he said that there the
Obligation was not void, but voidable by plea. But here it is, the estate is
made void by the express words of the statute: and he intended that this
difference between express Covenant, and Covenant in Law, but that the one
determines with the estate as well as the other, and yet he agreed that express
Covenant shall extend to charge the Covenanter upon Entry by a stranger, which
has no title; but yet this does not charge the Lessor after the estate
determined, and so he concluded that Judgment ought to be given for the
Plaintiff.

Coke chief Justice accorded with Wynch that Judgment shall be given [Coke.]
for the Plaintiff: And he supposed that the livery was well executed by the
Attorney after the 3 Rent days incurred: and yet he agreed that it had been a
probable objection made against that: But he supposed that the Lessor was not
prejudiced, insomuch that the Law intends that they had the possession and the
profits of the Land till livery made, and the Attorney is only as a servant to
the Lessor: And he said, that this is not like to Cromwels and Andrews Case, of
grant of a Manor upon Condition to re-grant Advowson or Rent, in which cases
the Advowson or Rent ought to be re-granted, before that the Church becomes
void, or the Rent day be incurred, insomuch that they are followers of the
thing granted, notwithstanding that the Feoffee has time during his life to
make the re-grant, if it be not hastened upon Request. 2. He supposed that the
express Covenant shall bind the Lessor, though it be referred to the term; for
term includes Estate and Interest, but this is when it is Term; but when it
is no Estate, then it shall be intended during the continuance of the years, as
it appears by the Rector of Chedingtons Case: and this he held clear, and so of
promise also, as if a man makes a Lease for years, and before that the Lessee
enters, makes a lease to another, and promises that the second Lessee shall
enjoy during the term, if the first Lessee enter, the second Lessee may have
an action upon the promise, and he said that it was adjudged in the Kings
Bench, Hill. 35 Eliz. between Foster and Wilson, Plaintiffs, and Mayes,
Defendant; where the case was, A man made a Lease of a Rectory for years, and
covenanted with the Lessee to save him harmless against one Blunt Parson of
Dole, which entered and outed the Lessee, which brought Covenant against the
Lessor, and resolved that it lies notwithstanding that it does not appear
whether he had Interest or no: So that be the Lease good or void: yet when
there is an Eviction, Covenant lies, though the Lease be originally void, yet
till it be avoided, it shall be intended a good Lease: And if a Covenant of
Dean and Chapter do not bind them, none will take Lease of them, so they shall
be compellable to plow the Land themselves, and also he supposed that the Lease
was good against the succeeding Dean and Chapter, till it be avoided by Entry,
as it was adjudged, Trin. 30 Eliz. between Elmer and Page, where a Bishop made
a Lease for years, and dies, the Successor makes a Lease for 3 lives, the Lease
for years not determined: And it was resolved that the Lease for 3 lives was
void, notwithstanding that the Bishop might make a concurrant Lease for years,
which is not made void by the Statute of 1 Eliz. insomuch that the Statute is
in the definitive, that is, Leases for 3 lives, or 21 years, and so they cannot
make both, for then the Lessee for life should have the Rent reserved upon the
Lease for years, which is settled in the Lessee for 3 lives, by the regress of
the Lessee for years: and so he said also, notwithstanding that the statute of
18 Eliz. made void all Leases made by Deane and Chapters, where there are more
then 3 years in being; he agreed that a Lease for years, where there are so
many years in being is good: but if there be but two years in being, that makes
the Lease for life void. And he agreed that notwithstanding the statute, yet
any Lease shall be good against the Deane himself, insomuch that he is party
to that, and has a negative voice in the making of that: And he seemed that
the Proviso in the statute of 18 Eliz, did not extend to Leases in possession,
but to Leases in reversion, which are dormant, of which a stranger cannot take
notice, insomuch that they are invisible; and for that, if a Dean and Chapter
procure surrenders of them, and within 3 years, that shall make another Lease
good, and so they shall save their Covenant; and for that the Lease here made
to the Plaintiff had been good, if the Defendants had procured the Lease made
to Thimblethorp to be surrendered within 3 years after the taking of that. Also
he cyted the Case betwixt the Bishop of Lychfield and Coventry, and Sale to be
adjudged, Michaelmass 32. and 33. Eliz. That a grant of the next avoydance is
good against a Bishop himself that granted it, and not made void by the Statute
of 1 Eliz. as to him, but to all Successors only. And so in this case he said,
they all agreed that the Lease was not void which is made to Waters against the
Deane himself which made it, but only against the Successor. And he said also,
Covenant in Law extends to lawful Evictions, and to estates in being, and not
where an estate is determined, as if Lessee for life makes a Lease for years,
and dies, the Lessee shall not have an action of Covenant upon Covenant in Law,
as it is agreed in 9 Eliz. Dyer, and 38 H. 6. before cyted. So also he supposed
to express real Covenants which extends to Freehold, or Inheritance, as
Warrant and Defend, upon which a man cannot have an action, if he be not outed
by one which has title; and as in 3 Edw. 3. 7. and 21. A man makes a Feoffment
with warranty, nonfeoffavit, is a good Plea; for if the Feoffment be avoided,
the Warranty also is avoided, for that depends upon the Feoffment. But if a man
makes a Lease for years, and covenants that he will warrant and defend the Land
to the Lessee, if the Lessee be outed by one which has title, or without
title, he may have an action of Covenant, for the Lessor has the Evidences,
and ought to defend the possession of his Lessee, and the right also, and
damages are only to be recovered; and so is the difference between a Lease and
Inheritance, though that the words of the Covenant are all one. And also he
said that it may be objected, that the Incorporation (was not well pleaded) by
Edw. 6. Insomuch that he does not say after the Conquest, for Ed. 3. was Ed. 6.
in truth, sor there were 3 Edwards before the Conquest, and he was the third
after: And he says that he has known many exceptions to be taken to that, but
has not known any of them to be allowed, and for that he will not insist upon
it. But the principal matter upon which he insists, was, that it does not
appear by the pleading, that the Deane which made the Lease was dead: and it
appears by the pleading, that he entered in 4 Jacobi and was seized, and then
of necessity ought to be living; and such averment of his life is sufficient,
as it is agreed in the 13 Eliz. Dyer, where a Parson made a Lease for years,
and the Lessee brought an Ejectione firm, and in pleading it was said; that
the Parson is seized of the reversion, and this was allowed to be good without
other averment of his life, for he cannot be seized if he be not living: and
then if the Deane shall be intended to be living, then they all agreed that the
Lease shall be good against him; for it was adjudged in this Court between
Blackeleech and Small, that if a Bishop makes a Lease for years, and after makes
a Lease for life, the Lease for years being in Esse, and dies, and the
Successor accepts Rent, this shall bind him: and by this it appears that the
Lease was good against the Dean himself which made it, and also against the
Successor, till he enter and avoid it, and then by consequence the action of
Covenant shall be very well maintainable, and so he concluded also that
Judgment should be given for the Plaintiff, which was done accordingly.

Pasche, 1612. 10. Jacobi, in the Common Bench. Browning against Strelley.
MIchael. 2 Jac. Rot. 531. In debt, the Margent of the Count contains
Nottingham, and the Count it self contains that the Obligation was made at the
Town of Nottingham, which is a County of it self, and the Defendant pleads non
est factum, and the view was of the Town of Nottingham, and it was tried by the
Jury of the County of Nottingham, and this was moved in arrest of Judgment
after verdict for the Plaintiff, by Nichols Sergeant. And it was agreed by all
the Justices, that Judgment shall be given accordingly to the verdict, insomuch
that notwithstanding that the Town of Nottingham is a County of it self, yet it
may be that some part of the Town may be within the County, and for that
possibility they would not arrest the Judgment.

Ireland against Smith.
IN action upon the Case for these words, the Plaintiff counts that he was, and
is Proctor in the Arches: and in communication between one Morgat and the
Defendant of him, the Defendant said to the said Morgat, You take part with
Ireland against me, who is an arrant Papist, and has a Pardon from the Pope,
and can help you to such an one if you will: And after verdict it was moved by
Hutton Sergeant in arrest of Judgment, that the action does not lie; and he
says, that it has been adjudged in this Court, 3 Jacobi, Rot. 7031. between
Kingstone and Hall, that an action does not lie for like words, he is an arrant
Papist: And it were good that he and all such as he is were hanged, for he and
all such as he is would have the Crown from the Kings head if they durst: And
it was adjudged that an action does not lie for these words, which are more
strong then the words in this action: but of the other part it was said by
Haughton Sergeant that he did not insist upon these words, that he is a Papist,
but that he had obtained a Pardon from the Pope, the which by the Statute of 13
Eliz. is made High Treason, and then notwithstanding that no time was limited
when the Pardon should be procured, that is before the Statute or after, yet it
shall be intended such a Pardon which is against the Statute; for the
presumption of the Law shall be taken in the worst sense, and not like to the
Case, where a man says to another, that he has the Pox: And also it is
alleged by the Count, that the Plaintiff is not above the age of 40. years,
so that he cannot obtain a Pardon before the Statute of 13 Eliz. And for that
he supposed that the action is very well maintainable. Coke chief Justice said,
that it was adjudged in the Kings Bench in the time of Catlyn chief Justice
there; that an action upon the Case does not lie for calling a man Papist. And
Winch Justice said, that if a man call a Bishop or another man which is trusted
with government of the Church, and Ecclesiastical causes, that he thought the
action lies, otherwise not. Also he supposed that the Pardon might be for
Purgatory, or other matters which are not within the Statute of 13 Eliz. And
also the Pardon may be procured by another, and come to his hands by delivery
over afterward that it had passed two or three, and the averment is not
sufficient, for it is only Implication and Inference, Coke and Warberton
Justices said, that a Papist is one that errs in his opinion, and though that
the Papists are Authors of many Treasons, yet the Law does not intend so, and
so of Heretic, which is always in a fundamental point of Religion, and yet
an action does not ly for calling a man Heretic, also the Pope is a temporal
Prince in Italy, and for this cause also may pardon, and this is out of the
statute of 13 Eliz. and so they all agreed that the Action does not ly for
these words.

Pasche 1612. 10 Jacobi, In the Common Bench. Marstones Case.
IN a common Recovery the Tenant appears by Attorney, and Common Recovery.
vouches one which is present in Court, which appears, and vouches the common
Vouchee, and the Attorney has a Warrant of the party acknowledged before a
Judge, but this was not entered of record, and this was in Hillary term 16
Eliz. And it was moved by Dodridge the Kings Sergeant, that the Warrant of
Attorney might be now amended and entered upon the record, and Coke supposed
clearly that it shall not be entered, insomuch that it is a want of a Warrant of
Attorney, but if there had been a mis-construing of the Warrant of Attorney,
otherwise it is, for this seems to be within the Statute of 27 Eliz. Chapter 5.
Concerning amendments.

In Debt upon an obligation with condition to perform Covenants Obligation to
perferme Covenants.
in an Indenture of Lease the Defendant pleads, that after and before the
original purchased, the Indentnre was by the assent of the Plaintiff, and the
Defendant cancelled and avoided, and so demands Judgment if action, and it
seems by Coke clearly, that the Plea is not good without averment that no
Covenant was broken before the cancelling of the Indenture.

Pasch. 12. Jacobi, 1612. In the Common Bench. Barde against Stubbing.
IT was moved in arrest of Judgment, that the Venire facias Arrest of Judgment
wants these words, Et habeas ibidim nemina Juratorum, but the words, Venire
facias duodecim, etc. were incerted, and it seems by all the Justices that it
was good, and that the first words, are supplied in the last, and they are
aided by the statutes of Jeofai es, after verdict, and so it was adjourned.

In Audita querela sued by the sureties upon an escape made by the principal,
they being in execution offered to bring the Money into Audita querela.
the Court, or to put in sufficient Sureties to the Court, and so prayed that
they might be bayled, and it was agreed, that if Audita querela be grounded by
specialty or other matter in writing, or upon matter of Record, Supersedeas
shall be granted before that the party be in Execution, and if he be in
execution he shall be bayled, but if it be founded upon a matter in Deed, which
is only surmise, he shall not have Supersedeas in one case, nor shall be bayled
in the other case, and so was the Opinion of all the Justices.

In an Action of Waste for digging of earth to make Brick, Estrepement Wast.
was awarded, and upon Affidavit; that the Writ of Estrement was delivered to
the Sheriff, and that he gave notice of that Estrepement awarded.
to the party, and he notwithstanding that continues to make waste, attachment
was awarded.

Pasch. 12 Iacobi, 1612. In the Common Bench. Fetherstones Case, Trinity 1612.
IN Ejectione firm, The Plaintiff had Judgment, and an Habere Ejectione firm.
Refusal.
facias possessionem to the Sheriff of Coventry, which returns that he had
offered possession to the Plaintiff, and he refused to accept it, and it seems
that the Plaintiff cannot have Habere facias possessionem, insomuch that it
appears by the Record, that he has refused to have the possession.

The case was, A Dean and Chapter being Lord of a Maunor, parcel Lord of a
Manor enclose the Demesnes adjoining to the Common.
of the Demesnes of the Manor being several, adjoined to the Common, which
was parcel of the wast of the Manor, and one Copyholder which had Common in
the said Wast, puts his Beasts into the said waste to take his Common, and they
for default of enclosure escape into the said Demesnes, by which the Lord
brings his action of Trespass, and upon this the Defendant pleads the special
matter, and that the Lord, and all those whose Estate he had, in the said place
where the trespass is supposed to be made, have used to fence the said place
which is parcel of the Demesnes of the said Manor, against the Commoners
which have Common in the said Common, being parcel of the waste, and also of
the demesnes of the said Manor, and that the Beasts of the said Defendant,
escaped into the said place in which, etc for default of enclosure, and so
demands Judgment, upon which the Plaintiff demurrs in Law: In the agreement of
which, it was agreed by Hutton and Haughton the Sergeants which argued it,
whether a man by prescription, is bound to make fence against Commoners, as it
is agreed in the 22 H. 6. 7. 8. 21 H. 6. 33. But the doubt which was made in
this case by Haughton which demurred was, for that that the Lord which by the
prescription ought to enclose is owner of the soil also, against which he
ought to enclose, and so he ought to enclose against himself, and for that he
supposed that the pleading should have been, that there is such a custom
there, and of time out of mind that the Lord shall enclose against the Common,
insomuch that by that the Copyholder would bind the Lord, and upon that it was
adjourned, etc.

Pasch 12 Jacobi, 1612. In the Common Bench. Sir Henry Rowles against Sir
Robert Osborne and Margeret his Wife.
IN Warrantia Charte, the case was, Sir Robert Osborne and his Warrantia Charte.
Wife levied a Fine of the Manor of Kelmersh, with other Lands in Kelmersh, to
Sir Henry Rowles, against all persons, and this is declared for the Lands in
Relmersh to be to the use of Sir Henry Rowles for life, with diverse Remainders
over, and for the Manor no use was pleaded to be declared at all, and then a
Writ of Entry in the Post was sued against the said Sir Henry Rowles which
vouched Sir Robert Osborne, and his said wife^; and this was declared for the
said Lands to be to the use of the said Sir Henry Rowles for his life with
other Remainders over, which were declared upon the Fine of the Lands in
Kelmersh only, and of the Manor of Kelmersh no uses were declared, upon the
Recovery also, and upon this Recovery pleaded in bar the Plaintiff demurred,
and it was argued by Dodridge Sergeant of the King for the Plaintiff, that the
Plea in Dodridge,
Bar was not good, insomuch that it does not appear that the warranty which
was executed by the Recovery was the same warranty which was created by the
Fine, and also the Fine was taken for assurance against the Issue in tail, and
the Recovery to Bar the remainders, and so one shall not destroy the other,
and for the first he said, that a man may have of another several warranties,
and several causes of Voucher and all shall be together, for warranty is but
Covenant real, and as well as a man may have several Covenants for personal
things, as well he may have several real Covenants for one self same Land, as
if the Father infeoff one with warranty, and the Son also releases to the same
Feoffee with warranty, or if the Father infeoff one with warranty against him
and his Heirs and the Son release with warranty against all men, the Feoffee
may vouch one, and Rebut against the other, so of Warranty of Tenant in tail
and release of an Ancestor collateral with warranty in Law, and express
warranty, as it is agreed in 31 Ed. 1. Fitzh. Voucher 289. And upon that he
concluded that a man may have several warranties of one self same man, and
the one may be executed and the other remain, notwithstanding that it be for
one self same Land, and he supposed the effect of these warranties are as they
are used, for if that may vouch generally, and bind himself upon the Fine or
upon his own warranty, or upon the warranty of his Ancestor, notwithstanding
that the voucher be generally, as it is 31. Ed. 3. Warranty of Charters 22. So
if he be vouched as Heir, though that it were special, but if he be Heir
within age otherwise it is, for that is a good Counter Plea that he was within
age, and so prayed (that the word might demur) during his nonage, 17. Ed. 2.
Counter Plea of voucher 111. 21. Ed. 4. 71. Then he supposed here was general
warranty which is executed, and also another warranty which remains,
notwithstanding any thing which appears to the Court, for he has not demanded
any binding, 10. Ed. 3. 15. a. b. Also the warranty in the Fine is the warranty
of all the Conusees, and the warranty upon which the voucher is, is only the
warranty of Sir Robert Osborne, which cannot be intended the same warranty
which is contained in the Fine which is by two, as it is resolved in 10. Ed. 3.
52. But admitting that it agrees in all, that is the voucher and the warranty
in the Fine, that is, in number of persons and quantity of land and all other
circumstances, yet it shall be no Bar, for the Common Recovery is only as
further assurance, for it is for forfeiture if it be suffered by Tenant for
life, as it is resolved in Pelhams Case 1. Coke: Also he supposed that
notwithstanding that the Fine was levied hanging the Writ of entry, and ^o Sir
Henry Rowles made Tenant, yet this is good being by purchase, but not if it be
by descent or by recovery upon elder Title: And he supposed that if the
recovery and the warranty might be together by any possible means, they shall
not be distroied, insomuch that this is the common case of assurance, and for
that shall be taken, as in Pattenhams Case 4. and 5. Phil. and Mary Dyer 157.
and 2. Coke. Cromwells Case 77. b. where a man makes a Feoffment upon condition
rendering Rent, and after suffers common recovery, and yet this notwithstanding
the condition and Rent remains: And so it seems that in this case the
warranty remains notwithstanding the Recovery; and so he concluded, and prayed
Judgment for the Plaintiff.

Nicholls Sergeant for the Defendant, and he seemed that the Nicholls.
warranty is destroyed, first insomuch that the Recovery was to other uses, and
the Fine was when proved that there was no further assurance, also he supposed,
that insomuch that it does not appear to what use the Recovery was for the
Manor of Kelmersh, that for that it shall be intended to the use of Sir Robert
Osborne himself, and then for that also the warranty is distroied, insomuch
that part of the Land is re-assured to Sir Robert Osborne, as in 40. Ed. 3. 13.
The Father enfeoffes the Son with warranty, which re-enfeoffes the Father, this
destroies the warranty: So if they make partition by their own Act, as it is
agreed in the 34. Ed. 3. Also he supposed that the Tenancy in Sir Henry Rowles
is distroied before that the Fine was Levied, insomuch that this was Executed
by voucher, and so he did not purchase hanging the Writ, for this is also
conveied from him by the Recovery in the value before that the Fine is levied,
and it is all one with the case, where a man recovers upon good Title hanging a
Writ, and he agreed, that the recovery had been for further assurance, that
then it shall be as it has been objected by the other party, and the warranty
had remained, but this he supposes, it was not, insomuch it was to other uses
then the Fine was, and he intended that if the Estate to which the warranty is
annexed be distroied, the warranty also shall be distroied, 19. H. 6. 59. 21.
H. 6. 45. 22. H. 6. 22. and 27. So if the Estate be avoided the warranty is
distroied, if it be by the Act of the parties named, also he supposed that the
warranty is executed, and that it shall be intended the same tie upon which the
warranty is created as it is 10. Ed. 3. 51. Mauxells case Com: if he demand no
tie but enter generally into the warranty, there shall be execution of all
warranties and shall bind all his rights, for otherwise all the Estates tail
cannot be bound by that: But where the (Lieu) is demanded as where there are
three several Estates tail limited to one man, and upon voucher he enters
generally into the warranty, all the tails shall be bound, but if he demand
the Lieu's which he has to bind him to warranty, there shall be a Bar of that
only, upon which the voucher is, and the remedy is, that if he be impleaded by
the party, that has made the warranty, he shall be rebutted by his own
warranty: But if he be Impleaded by a stranger he shall vouche him that
warranted that, and if warranty be once executed by voucher and Recovery in
value, though that the Land recoverd in value be a defeasable Title, yet the
party shall not voucheat another time by the same warranty, as it is 5. Ed. 3.
Fitz. voucher 249. and 4. Ed. 3. 36. And for that in this case, insomuch that
the warranty was once executed, he shall not vouche again upon the same
warranty: Also it is not alleged in the Count that the Plaintiff was Impleaded
by Writ of Entry in the Post, but in the Per, in which he might have vouched,
and so shall not have this Action, where he might have vouched: And also he
supposed that Sir Henry Rowles shall not have benefit by this warranty without
praying aid of those in remainder, insomuch that he is but Tenant for life, but
he supposed that it was no Remainder but reversion, for otherwise they are but
as an Estate, and he may have advantage of the warranty, as it seems without
aid praying: But not where there is Tenant for life with the reversion
expectant; And so he concluded, and prayed Judgment for the Defendant: And he
cited one Barons Case, where Tenant in tail levies a Fine with warranty, and
after suffers Recovery: And it was agreed by all the Justices, that yet the
Recovery shall be a Bar to the Remainder, notwithstanding that the Estate tail
be altogether barred and extinct by the Fine, but Coke chief Justice said;
that Wray^ chief Justice would not suffer that to be argued, insomuch that it
was of so great consequence being the common course of assurances: But it
seems that the Recovery shall not be a Bar^ for the Remainders for the causes
aforesaid, and he said that he was of council in Bartons Case, and thought
this Objection to be unanswerable, and of this opinion continued.

Pasche 1612. 10. Jacobi, in the Common Bench. Richard Lampitt against Margeret
Starkey.
EJECTIONE Firm upon special verdict, the case was this; Devise of a Lease.
Lessee for five hundred years, devised that to his Father for life, the
remainder and residue of that after the death of his Father to his Sister, the
Devisor dies, the Sister which has a remainder takes a Husband, the Husband at
the request of the Father grants release, and surrenders all his Right, Term,
and Intrest, to the Father which had the Possession: And the question was; if
by that the remainder of the Term should be extinct or not: And it was argued
by Dodridge for the Plaintiff, that the remainder remains Dodridge.
that notwithstanding, insomuch that this is a possibility only, which cannot
be granted surrendered or released, and yet he agreed, that if Lessee for life
grant or demise the land, all his Estate passes without making of any
particular mention of it, as it is agreed in 10. Eliz. Dyer. And for that when
the Lessee has devised the Lands to his Father for his life, that which
remains is only a possibility, for it does not appear for what years the
Sister shall have it, and for that merely uncertain, 7. Eliz. Dyer 244. The
King Ed. 6. appropriated a Church to the Bishop to take effect after the death
of the present Incumbent, the Bishop after that makes a Lease for years to
begin after the death of the Incumbent, and void for the uncertainty, for the
Bishop has no perfect. Estate, but future Interest, which is merely
impossibility, and with that agreed Locrofts Case, in the Rector of
Cheddingtons Case, 1. Coke where Lessee for years makes assignement of so many
of the years as shall be to come at the time of his death, and void for the
uncertainty, insomuch that it is merely possibility, for that which may be
granted or surrendered, ought to be Interesse Termini at least: And he supposed
it could not be released, insomuch that he to whom the release is made, has
all the Term if he lived so long; and so he concluded, and prayed Judgment
for the Plaintiff.

Harris Sergeant for the Defendant; argued that the first devisee Harris.
had two Titles, one as Executor and another as a Legatee, and before entry,
and after that he had entered also the Law does adjudge him in as a Legatee, and
before that he enter he may that grant over, notwithstanding that he has not
determined his Election, Assent to a Legatee.
for the Law vests the property and possession of that in him, before any
entry, but to make an election there ought to be some open Act done, as it is
agreed in Welden and Eltingtons Case, where that the first devisee which was
Executor, also made express claim to have the Term as Legatee and not as
Executor, and so vested the remainder also, see Com. 519. b. And so in Paramore
and Yardlies Case, Lessee for years devises his Term to his Executor during
his Remainder of a Chattell.
life to educate his Issues, the which the Executor does accordingly, and this
open act was resolved to be a good election, and in Mannings case, 8 Coke 94.
b. The Executor which has the 1. Estate devised to him, says, that he to whom
the Remainder was limited shall have it after his Death, and this resolved to
be a good Execution and election, and it is there resolved, that such Election
made by the particular Devisee is a good Execution for him in remainder, but
here is not this Election to have this as Legatee nor Executor, for there is
not any overt Act made by which this may be done.

Secondly he conceived that this is no remainder, but Executory devise, as it
is agreed in Mannings Case, and that this may be done by Devise which cannot be
done by the party by act Executed, and for that he conceived that there is no
possibility, but an Estate Executed and vested in him which is Executor, though
there be no election made nor Execution of the Legacy, and admitting that it is
but a possibility, yet he conceived that it is Propinqua possibilitas, insomuch
that the Term is longer, then it may be intended, that any man might live,
insomuch that Adam lived but 950. years, and this is five thousand years,
which is longer then any man in the world ever lived, and he said that it is
agreed in Fullwoods Case, that possibility may be released to a possession, and
with this agreed the opinion of Strange, in the 9 H. 6. 64. And so warranty may
be released which is merely in contingency, as it is agreed in Littleton, and
power of revocation may be extinct by release of him that has the possession
of the Land, and so he concluded and prayed Judgment for the Defendant.

Nicholls Sergeant for the Plaintiff, conceived that the Remainder is in Esse,
and not determined by the Release.

And first he conceived that the Remainder was executed, insomuch that the
Release was made at the Request of the Father, which was the first Devisee, for
this shows his assent, and implies that he took notice of his Remainder, and
assented to it, and he said, it was adjudged in Doctor Lawrences Case, that the
speaking of these words by the Executors, that is (that they were glad of the
Devise) was a good Execution and assent of the Legacy.

Secondly, He conceived that it is only possibility, and for that cannot be
released or granted, and he says that the Law has great respect of
possibilities that Estates may revert, and for that it is adjudged in the 13 of
Richard 2. Dower 55.

If Tenant for life grants his Estate to him in remainder in tail for his own
life, the Tenant enters, takes a Wife and dies, she shall not be Endowed, but
the Tenant for life shall have it again, and it shall be as it had been let to
a stranger, and to this purpose also he cited, 18. Ed. 3. 8. Counter-Plea of
voucher 8. And it was adjudged in Middletons Case 5. Coke 28. a. that an
Executor before probate of the Will may release a Debt, but not an
Administrator before Administration granted, see Com. 277, 278. Fox and
Greisbrookes Case, and in 6. Ed. 3. Lessee for another life, rendering Rent,
the Rent was behind and the Lessor releases to the Lessee all Debts, he For
whose life dies, and there the Release determines and discharges the arrerages,
for it is a duty, and Debitum is Latin as well for Debt as for duty, also
release bars the Lord and Writ of deceit for reverser of a Fine levied of land
in ancient Demesne, as it is 7. H. 4, and yet Littleton says, that release of
a futrue thing shall not be a bar, and for that if Conusee of Statute
Merchant, release all his Right in the land yet he may extend the Statute 15.
assis. And so if a mad man release, and after come to his wits and dies, Quere
if the Heir may have a Writ of non compos mentis: And he said that it was
adjudged in the 25. of Eliz. If an Infant levy a Fine, and after he levies
another Fine, this shall be a Bar in a Writ of error for the reversing of the
first, otherwise of a release: And here to the principal case to a release
made by the Son in the life time of his Father without warranty: And so upon
all these cases he concluded, and prayed Judgment for the Plaintiff.

Shirley Sergeant for the Defendant argued, that the acceptance of Sherley.
Release by the first Devisee, shall not be execution of the Devise, as it was
adjudged in Barramores and Yardleys case by the Education of the Issue, or a
Devise upon condition to pay money, and the Executor pays it, this is a good
execution: But here the thing which makes the execution is only release, which
enures as Release. And for that the accepting of the release, it cannot be
execution of a Legacy. But if the Executor, to whom the first Devise was made,
had had any Co-executor, and he would not have suffered him to join in
occupation with him, that had been full Declaration of his Intent, that he took
it as a Devise, and not as an Executor, as it is agreed in the 10 El. 277. Dyer
50. And he said also, that it has been agreed to him, that it is such a
possibility that cannot be granted, as it is agreed in Fulwoods case, 4 Coke,
66. b. And he said it is not like to Harveys and Bartons case, where two
Joynt-tenants for life were, and one made a Lease for years to begin after his
death, and dyed, and his companion survived him, and agreed to be a good Lease
against the Survivor, notwithstanding the Contingency. And he conceived that
this might be released, and that it is not like to contingent actions, insomuch
that it is a release of right in Lands, see 5 H. 7. 31. b. Colts Assise, where
it is said, if Lord, Mesne, and Tenant are, and the Mesne is forejudged by the
Tenant, and after the Lord releases to the Tenant, and after by Parliament it
is enacted that the fore-judger shall be void, yet the release shall be good
against the Lord, and so of actions by Executor before Probate: and 14 Ed. 3.
Bar, Release of Dower by Fine does extingush it: and Althams case 8 Coke, if
it be made to the Tenant of the Land, that shall be a Bar. And 21 H. 7. fol.
the last, Release to a Patron in time of Vacation shall be a Bar in annuity
brought against the Incumbent: and if the Lessee for years be outed, and the
Disseisor makes a Lease for years to a stranger, and the first Lessee release
to them both, this is good, as it is 9 H. 6. and yet regularly such release is
not good without privity: But insomuch that it is of right to the Land, and to
one which has possession, it is very good. So Release by Copyholder, extincts
his Copyhold right, as it is resolved 4 Coke, amongst the Copyhold cases, and
yet he agreed that some possibilities cannot be released, as in Albayns case,
power of Revocation, if it be not to the Tenant of the Land, insomuch that this
is a mere possibility. So if an annuity depend upon a condition precedent; but
where the returning of the estate is to the party himself, as in Diggs case, 1
Coke 174. a. And also the release in this case is the more strong, insomuch
that the estate in this is recited, as in the case of 44 Ed. 3. in release of
Aid. And so he concluded, that admitting there be no election and execution of
the Legacy by the acceptance of the Release, then the title of the Defendant is
good, and if it be a good election and execution: Yet he conceived that all the
term remains in the first Devisee, and that the remainder is destroyed by the
release, and so prayed Judgment for the Defendant, and so it was adjourued.

Pasche 1612. 10. Jacobi, In the Common Bench. Manley against Jennings.
IN Debt upon an Obligation, with Condition to perform, observe, Debt by
Obligation.
fulfill, and keep, all Covenants, Grants, Articles, Payments, contained in a
Lease, etc. The Lessee does not pay the Rent at the day, and the Plaintiff
without making of any request, begins a Suit upon the Obligation; and upon this
matter pleaded in Bar, the Plaintiff replied Request is necessary for his
Rent, though that he have a bond for performing Covenants.
that he was not demanded, and upon this the Defendant demurred: And Harris
Sergeant for the Defendant argued, that when any penalty is annexed to a
payment of the Rent, be that annexed to the estate, or otherwise, yet it ought
to be requested, and without request to pay it, no penalty shall be incurred,
as in 22 H. 8. 57. a. b. by Newton, Ashton, and Port, where a difference is
taken between an Obligation taken for payment of Rent generally, without any
relation to a Lease, and where it is only for performance of Covenants, and
Issue taken upon the request, and after demurrer joined, and the question if
the Lessee ought to tender it, 14 Edw. 4. 4. accordingly: And in 21 Edw. 4. 6.
a. b. Pigott and Bryan agreed that there shall be no penalty nor Obligation
forfeited, without request, where the Obligation is for performance of
Covenants, and not precisely for the payment of Rent, and so he concluded, and
prayed Judgment for the Defendant.

Nichols Sergeant for the Plaintiff, conceived that the Lessee ought Nichols.
to make tender upon the Land to save the penalty, and this shall be
sufficient: and the Lessor need not to make request, and this is the Obligation
for performance of Covenants, for this does not alter the nature of the Rent;
but if it be for payment of Rent precisely, there the Lessee ought to seek the
Lessor, or otherwise for not payment, he shall forfeit his Obligation, for
there tender upon the Land shall not excuse him. And for that if a man makes a
Lease for years, rendering Rent at Michaelmass, with nomine poene, if it be not
paid within 10 days after Michaelmass, and within the 10. days, and these
differences appear, and are agreed in 22 H. 6. 57. and 6 Edw. 6. Brook tender
20. And he conceived that the Books of 14 Ed. 4. 4. 20. Ed. 4. 6. and 11 Ed. 4.
10. depends upon these differences, that is, that a man* shall not distrain for
Rent charge without Request, insomuch that it is as a Debt which is due upon
Request, and admit that the case were that a man made a Lease for years, the
Lessee covenants to pay the Rent at the day with a nomine pene in default of
payment of that, and after the Lessee assigns his Interest to one which
Covenants to pay the Rent, and perform all the Covenants in the Lease, he
demanded in this case who shall make the request, that is, the first Lessor or
the Lessee, insomuch that it is penal to the Assignee of them both, and so
many Suits may arise upon that, and also he said, that it was ruled here upon a
motion in arrest of Judgment, that in Debt upon an Obligation to perform
Covenants there need not to be alleged demand, upon Solvit or non Solvit put
in Issue, for it may be pleaded that it was tendered or paid, and so he said it
is confessed by the Demurrer, that the Obligation is forfeited, and for that he
prayed Judgment for the Plaintiff.

Coke cited Miles and Dragles Case, where a man was bound for performance of a
Will, he need not to pay Legacy devised by that for which is no day assigned
without request, so if the Obligation be for payment of Legacy expressly and no
day assigned, and so it was adjourned.

Trinity 1612. 10. Jacobi, in the Common Bench. Gravesend Case.
IN Debt, the case was this, that is, the Port-reeve, Jurates Debt*
and Inhabitants of Gravesend, brought Debt against one Edmonds a Water man,
which plied the Ferry betwixt Gravesend and London, and counts that Gravesend
and Milton are ancient Towns and next adjoining to the River of Thames, and
that the Inhabitants of these Towns have had time out of mind, etc. ancient
passage from thence to London, and have used to make By-Lawes, and
constitutions for the Government of that passage, and have provided Watermen,
Steer-men, and Rowers for the said Passage, the which used time out of mind,
to take of every Passenger and his Fardell two pence, and that for their
maintenance, and ought to hold the Passage, if their benefit at this rate
amounted to four shillings, or more, and that the Queen Elizabeth by her
Letters Patents under the great Seal of England, incorporated the said
Inhabitants by the name of Port-reevs, Jurats, and Inhabitants of Milton and
Gravesend, and this was in the tenth year of her Reign, and also that they
enjoyed the said Ferry without any Interruption, and that they held the tide
and Ferry, and that the Port-Reeve, Jurat, and twelve of the Inhabitants had
power to make Bylaws and Coustitutions for the government of the said Ferry,
and that every Water-man should observe his turn, and also to impose Fines for
the not observing of them, and that in the thirty seventh year of the said
Queen Elizabeth, a Constitution was made by the then Port-reeve, Jurats, and
twelve of the Inhabitants of the said Towns, insomuch that many Watermen ply
poor Passengers, before that the Barge was furnished, and so that many other
Passengers were enforced to loose their passage by the Barge, insomuch that the
passage did not amount to four shillings, so that they did not hold their tide,
so that the Barge which had such pre-eminence, that is, that no Watermen shall
ply any Fair or passenger till the Barge had received so many of their
passengers, by which they might receive four shillings at the Rate aforesaid,
and be removed from the Bridge at Gravesend unto the Land mark, and that if the
Tiltboate, or any other Water-man received any passenger before that the Barge
be so furnished, that he should pay the said Port-reeve, Jurats, and
Inhabitants for the maintenance of the said Barge for every passenger so
received two pence, and so assigned breach of the By-Law in the Defendants, and
that he had received so many of the passengers before the Barge was furnished,
which amounted to as much as is demanded, by which Action accrued to the
Plaintiff to demand it, to which the Defendant pleads that he owes nothing to
the Plaintiffs in manner and form as they have demanded it, and by the Jury at
the Bar it was found for the Plaintiffs, and after that upon motion in the
behalf of the Defendant, the Judgment was arrested, and now at this day
Judgment was prayed for the Plaintiffs.

By Dodridge Sergeant of the King, and he conceived that the custom was good,
notwithstanding that it was alleged in the Inhabitants, and he said it was no
prescription but Custom, and it is declared to be a good and laudable custom
and usage by the Statute of 6 H. 8. Chapter 7. Rastall Passage 8. and he agreed
that Inhabitants cannot prescribe to have matter of benefit, but to have matter
of Ease, he conceived they might very well, as it is 15 Ed. 4. 29. 22 H. 6.
Prescription 46. 18 Ed. 4. 2. 18 H. 8. 1.

Secondly, As to the Objection, that the living of the other Watermen which are
not employed in the Barge is by that abridged, and that when the Water-man is
willing to carry, and the Passenger to be carried by him, it is no reason that
a By-Law should abridge this voluntary act of a man, upon which his livelihood
depends, he said that so it is not, for nothing is challenged by the By-Law,
but only pre-eminence, and that provision be made for the Poor, which is for
the public good, for every one may go with any that he will paying two pence
to the Barge or after the Barge is furnished paying nothing, and he conceived
that the Liberty of the subject ought to be so abridged, but not altogether
abolished, as it is agreed in the Archbishop of Yorkes Case in the Register in
the Writ of Trespass fol. 105. b. c. 8 Coke 125. a. Wagoners Case, 8 Ed. 3.
37. a. 3 Ed. 3. 3. Where the Bishop of York claims in the Manor of Ripon such
liberty, that is, that he and all his Predecessors time out of mind, etc. have
had a custom that none in the said Town ought or had accustomed to use the
office or mistry of a Dyer, without License of the said Archbishop or his
Bailiff of the said Town: And also he cited a case in the Register, where the
Abbot of Westminster prescribed to have a fair in Westminster upon Saint
Edwards day, and for ten days after: And that no Citizen nor other in London,
during that time should sell any thing in London, but in this fair, and after
the Abbot remitted this privilege, and had of the Citizens of London for that;
one thousand five hundred pound: And so it was adjudged in Sir George Farmers
Case, for a bake-house in Tossiter, and that none shall bake any Bread to sell,
but in his bake-house and good: And so he conceived that Custom may be
restrained all passengers till the Bardge be furnished, as in 2. Ed. 3. 7.
Gran^ that all Ships, laded and unladed in such a Haven, shall be laded and
unladed in such a place, and a good grant, notwithstanding that it restraines
all people to a certain, and if this be good by grant, then a Fortiore shall
be good by custom* and to the other objection, that this custom shall only
bind the Inhabitance and not strangers, he conceived that custom might tie
strangers that came into the said Town very well, as it is agreed in 22. H. 7.
40. So the By-Law shall bind strangers, when it is only for Acts to be made
within the Town and for the public good, as it is agreed in the 44. Ed. 3. 13.
and 8. Ed. 2. assis. 413. ordinance against him which estops passage by water
and good, and so he agreed in the Chamberlain of Londons Case, that By-Law
made in London shall bind all, as well strangers as Citizens, which sell any
Drapery in the Hall there, though that they Inhabit in any place out of the
City: And also he said that the Bardge-men which have the loss, shall have the
benefit, for they shall have the two pence for every one that passes otherwise,
before that they are furnished, and this is recompense for them which are tied
to perpetual attendance, and he conceives that the demand is very well made,
notwithstanding that the duty accrues from many times, for he has carried so
many men at one time and so many at another, the which in all amonnts to the
sum demanded: And so he concluded, and prayed Judgment for the Plaintiffs.

Wynch Justice, that the Count is not good, for the Plaintiffs have Wynch.
not alleged that they have used time out of mind, etc. To maintain Ferrey,
but only that they have used to make Constitutions, Secondly, it is not
alleged that they only have used to maintain Ferrey, and if they cannot
prescribe in the sole using of that, and to exclude others, then others may use
that as well as they, being for the public good, for how shall they be
punished, if that they do not use and maintain; at the Common Law the
Inhabitants of a Town shall be punished for not repairing of a Bridge, or high
Way, the which may be maintained by the Inhabitants together, and if they do
not do it, then others may do it, as well as others may repair high Ways or
Bridges, as those which have used to repair them, as a common Host shall be
punished in Air if he refuse to lodge any man, and yet he which he refused to
lodge, may have an Action upon the Case for the refusal: Also the Patent gives
the forfeyture to the Port-reeve, but the By-Law does not make any mention who
shall have it, and he conceives that it shall not be as upon the Statute of 2.
Ed. 6. Which gives penalty for not setting forth of Tithes, but does not
appoint who shall have them: and this was adjudged to be to him which ought to
have the Tithes, but this cannot be so here, insomuch that it is against the
Grant, and agreed that a stranger shall be bound by By-Law, where it is for the
public good, but not otherwise, and also the custom that these Bardge-men
shall have the pre-eminence, may be good, as well as custom that the poor of
such a Parish shall have common in such a place till such a day, and then the
others, and so in this case; and so he concluded that Judgment shall be
Arrested.

Warburton Justice conceived that the Count is good, and that Warburton.
the Inhabitants may prescribe very well, as 47. Assis. four Towns were
charged for the repair of a High way, and so may the two Towns for the
Ferrey, that he intended to be high way upon the water, and also he conceived
that this is inquirable in Air, and also by the Justices of the Kings Bench,
and now by the Justices of Assizes by Indictment by the name of Inhabitants:
The which may be as good an Action upon the Statute of Winton against the
Inhabitants of the Hundred, and so he conceived, that in this case the
Inhabitants of Milton and Gravesed may be punished by Indictment if they do not
repair the Ferrey, and that the King there this day may erect a Ferrey in
place where it is necessary, for the King may erect office which is for the
benefit of the Common Wealth, but not to charge the Common Wealth. And that if
any will pass in his own Ferrey, without carrying of another, this is no
breaking of the By-Law; and so he concluded, that Judgment should be given for
the Plaintiffs.

Coke chief Justice seemed the contrary, for he conceived it is not showed in
the Count to whom the Ferrey belongs, for the owners of that are not mentioned,
the which it ought: And yet he agreed that a Ferrey may be without owner, as it
is agreed 12. Ed. 4* 8. Insomuch as this is local and need not any Agent, but
out of Leete and Ferrey otherways it is, for there ought to be Agent, or
otherwise the Ferrey should be of no use, and for that there ought to be an
owner.

Secondly it is alleged that Infra Eastern Towns, there is such a custom
that the Inhabitants may make constitutions, and that the Inhabitants shall
maintain a Ferrey, but not that there was a Ferrey, but that he conceived it
might be good, insomuch that it is not traversable.

Thirdly what Action the Inhabitants may have, if they be disturbed of it, for
this is no easement, and they have no Estate of Inheritance, and for that the
Prescription by the name of Inhabitants is not good, for they cannot have
Estate, and to the Satute of 6. H. 6. chapter 7. Which says, it is a laudable
custom and usage that a Bardge shall be maintained, but not that Inhabitants
shall maintain that, nor those incorporate, so that the Statute does not make
them capable of such a thing, for which a Writ of right, and assise by the
Statute of Westminster 2. lies.

Fourthly, That the custom and the Patent are repugnant, for by the custom
the Bardge has not any pre-eminence nor precedence, but equal liberty was to
all watermen to carry what passengers that they could, and with that also
agreed the Statute of 6. H. 6. And then if the custom were not so, this cannot
be made by the grant of the Queen, nor by the By-Law, for this is the liberty
of the Subject, the which cannot be abridged nor restrained by them, for if the
King may grant such preh^minence here, so may he do in all other Ferreis and
places, and also in the practice of the Law, to have preaudience in this Court,
and in all other Courts of Justice: And so should it be also of Butchers and
Bakers, and all others which used buying and selling: And he said that the King
has preemtion of time in some places, but this is not by his prerogative, but
by the custom of the place; And he agreed that custom in subject may have
preemption, but not by the Kings grant, for the King cannot grant that to
another that he himself has not by his prerogative, and perchance he which
has such grant, will not come to Market, till all the Market be ended, and he
conceived that the River of Thames is so public, that the King cannot
restrain that by his grant, no more then he can grant pre-eminence to a
Coachman to carry people into the Streets of London: The which is adjudged upon
the matter in the 50. of Ed. 3. Toll. 2. Where the King grants Toll for every
one which passes by a Common way: And agreed that it was not good if it be in
a Common Way, or in a Common River, for as it is resolved in the 22. assis. 93.
Every common River is as high Street, and Common Ways and the passengers Way
as the water increases, and the Thames is a branch of the Sea and a common
Street, as it appears by Bracton fol. 8. 5. The Plaintiffs have brought their
Action by the name of Corporation of Port-reeve, Jurats, and Inhabitants of
Milton and Gravesend, and they are incorporate by the name of Port-reeve,
Jurates, and Inhabitants of Gravesend, possessors of Ships, the which words are
left out in the name, by which the Action is brought, so that the By-Law is not
made by the same name, by which they are incorporate, nor the Action brought by
the same name: And yet he agreed that they might make a By-Law according to the
grant, without calling all the Inhabitants to it.

Sixthly, He conceived that the constitution is not pursued, for the
constitution is; that if any Water-man carries any passenger willing to go by
the Bardge, that such Water-man shall pay for every such passenger two pence.
And it is not averred that the passengers which the Defendant has carried,
were willing to be carried by the Bardge, and so not pursued.

Seventhly, The Constitution is further that no Wherry-man shall carry any
passenger, before the Bardge be fully dismissed and transmist, and this is not
good, for it may be the Bardge will not pass to London at all this Tide, and
for that it ought to be averred that the Bardge departs in convenient time
after that it is furnished, for otherwise custom that none shall put his
Beasts into such a place, till the Lord has put in his Beasts is not good, for
it is resolved in 2. H. 4. 24. And the reason is, insomuch that it may be, that
the Lord will not put in his Beasts at all: And to the objection that the
By-Law shall not bind a stranger, he conceives that if all other circumstances
had been concurrent; that had been very well, insomuch that it was within the
place where they had power to make By-Lawes, and also for the public good, and
this as well as the custom of Foreign bought, and Foreign sold, the which is
only for strangers: And to the objection, that they are several owners of
several Bardges, and for that ought not to join in this Action, he says this
does not appear by the Count, but it is said that they were possessed, and for
that they shall be intended Joint Owners; and so he concluded, that Judgment
shall be arrested.

Trinity 10. Jacobi, 1612. in the Common Bench. Downs against Shrimpshaw,
Trin. 9. Jacobi, Rot. 334.
IN action of Trespass for Assault and Battery, the case was this: The
Plaintiff in his Count supposes the Trespass to be made the first day of May,
8 Jacobi, at such a place. The Defendant pleads that the Plaintiff the same day
would have assaulted and beaten him, and that the Defendant laid his hands upon
him to defend himself, and if any hurt came unto him, it was by his own wrong,
the which is the same Trespass for which the Plaintiff has complained him.
The Plaintiff replies, of his own wrong without such cause, upon which Issue
was joined; and at the Nisi prius for Justification, the Defendant produced
Witnesses, which proved an assault to be made by the Plaintiff upon the
Defendant long time, that is, by the space of a year before the day contained
in the Count, and that at this time the Defendant to defend himself, has
assaulted the Plaintiff: And upon this Evidence the Plaintiff demurred,
insomuch that this proves an assault made at another day then is contained in
the Count, and the Defendant by pleading has confessed an Assault and Battery
made upon the Plaintiff, the day contained in the Count, and now upon Evidence
proves his Justification at another day: and if this Evidence were sufficient
to prove his Justification, was the question. And if by this pleading the day
be made material, in which it was agreed by the Court, and Council also, That
if the Defendant had pleaded not guilty, the day had not been material. But
the Plaintiff might have given in Evidence any Battery before the day
contained in the Count, or after before the action brought, and this is
sufficient to prove his Declaration: but the Parties, that is, the Plaintiff by
his Count and Replication, and the Defendant by his Justification, have agreed
of the day: And for that if they may now vary from that it was moved, and so it
was adjourned.

Trin. 10. Jac. 1612. in the Common Bench. Laury against Aldred and Edmonds.
IN Debt against the Defendants, as Executors of William Aldred, Debt against
Executors.
dead, upon an Obligation made by him in his life time, of 50. l. The case was
this, one of the Defendants confessed the action, the other pleaded that the
Testator dyed such a day, and that he intending to have letters of
Administration, caused the Corpse of the Testator to be buried, and his goods
safely to be preserved and kept, and that after administration was granted to
him by the Archdeacon, and that after that one Harnego brought action against
him as Administratrix by letters of Administration committed to her by the
Commissary of the Bishop, being Ordinary there, and recovered, and averred that
this was a true Debt, and that he had no goods which were the Testators,
besides the Goods and Chattels which did not amount to the said Debt, and so
demanded Judgment if action, and upon this the Plaintiff demurred in Law.

Davis Sergeant argued for the Plaintiff, that the Defendant ought Davis.
to have confessed and avoided, or traverse the point of the action, and not
conclude Judgment if action: See 1 Eliz. Dyer 166. 10. When intermedling made
men Executors of their own wrong, that is, when he meddles without any color
of title or authority, as receiving Debts, and disposing the goods to his own
use. But if a man administer about the Funerals, or be made a Coadjutor, or
Overseer, What acts do make an Executor, De son tort, what not.
this shall not make him Executor of his own wrong, or by reason of a Will
which is after disproved by probate of one Letter: and in these cases, if he be
charged as Executor, he ought to plead special matter, without that, that he
administered in other manner: and in 20. H. 7. 27. a. 28. b. adjudged in Debt
against one as Executor, which had Letters, ad Colligendum bona definisti only,
which pleaded the special matter, without that, that he administered any other
way, and other manner was out of the pleading; for he did not administer in any
manner with Intermedling by the letters ad colligendum: and 9 Ed. 4. 33. b. If
an action be brought against an Executor of his own wrong, and after
administration is committed to him by the Ordinary, this shall not abate the
action: upon which Books he inferred, that the Defendant ought to have
traversed, that he administered as Executor, and insomuch that he has pleaded
that he has not so pleaded, the plea was not good; and also insomuch that he
has pleaded, that he has no goods of the Intestate besides goods which do
not amount, etc. And this is uncertain, and not good, for he ought to have
showed what goods he had in certain, and the value of them, insomuch that they
remain as Assets in his hands, and so he concluded, and prayed Judgment for the
Plaintiff.

Barker Sergeant for the Defendant, argued, that though that the Barker.
action in which Harnego recovered, was begun after the action now hanging, yet
insomuch that judgment was first had in that: now that shall be preferred
otherwise before Judgment, for till Judgment the elder action shall be
preferred. And he conceived, that if the Writ was abateable, and the Defendants
would not abate it by plea, that shall not prejudice the Plaintiff which is a
stranger, and does not know if these Defendants are Executors, or
Administrators, as it is said by Danby, 9 Edw. 4. 13. And he conceived that the
plea is good, that the Defendants have not goods, besides the goods, which do
not amount, etc. And diverse presidents were cyted by him to this purpose, as
Trin. 18. Eliz. Rot. 1405. between Blanekson and Frye. Hillary, 40 Eliz. Rot.
902. Smalpeeces case: and Trin. 44 Eliz. Rot. 1900. between Goodwin and
Scarlet, in all which the pleadings were all one with the plea in question, and
no exceptions taken to that: and infinite other presidents may be showed in the
point, for which cause he demanded Judgment for the Defendants.

Coke chief Justice seemed, that in an action brought against one as Executor,
he may plead that Administration was committed to him for such intent that the
dead dyed Intestate, and demands Judgment if action without traverse, that he
was Executor, and with this agreed, 1 Ed. 4. 2. a. 20 H. 6. 23. And so if the
Ordinary be charged as Executor, he may plead that he administered as Ordinary
without traverse, that he was Executor, but only showed that the party dyed
Intestate, and the Plaintiff ought to reply, that he made a Will, and the
Defendant proved that, and traverse that he dyed Intestate, and with this
agreed 9 Edw. 4. 33. and 1 Edw. 4. 11. And if an action be brought against
Executor of his own wrong, he may plead that administration is granted to such
an one, and the Party dyed Intestate, and demand Judgment if action, for he
shall not be charged for more goods then came to his hands: But if a man
administer of his own wrong, and after rightful administration is committed to
him, yet he may be charged as Executor of his own wrong, insomuch that Right of
action is attached in him. But this seems for the goods that he has
administered before rightful administration committed unto him. And he cyted 14
Eliz. Dyer 305. b. where in debt brought against one as Executor, which pleads
never Executor, nor ever administered as Executor; and the Plaintiff replies,
that he administered as Executor of the Will, etc. and so to Issue. And in
Evidence the Defendant shows Letter of administration to him committed of goods
of the dead, by which he administered them, and before that he did not
administer, and this seems there to be good Evidence, but the Book was Quere of
that, and for that he would rather plead that in abatement of the Writ, and so
the Book inclined also. And he conceived here, that the meddling with the goods
here by the Defendant, as Administrator, made him Executor of his own wrong,
insomuch that it was for Funerals, and when it is a work of Charity, and the
other is to preserve them. And the Defendant has not conveyed himself to be
Executor, insomuch that he said, that administration was committed to him by an
Archdeacon, and he does not say that Administration of right belonged to him
to commit, insomuch that he has but a sub-ordinate Jurisdiction: And the
Common Law does not take notice, that he, nor no other but the Ordinary has
such power, and for that the power of all which have such subordinate and
peculiar Jurisdiction is pleaded, that ought to be showed, as it seems by 1 Ed.
4. 2. a. b. 22 H. 6. 23. And the rather when this is pleaded by the
Administrator himself, which ought to have notice of that, and make title to
himself; and if so it be, then he conceived that the Recovery by Hornego was
void, and so all the goods confessed, remain as Assets. Also he conceived, that
if the Executor allow a Writ to suffer Judgment to be had against him, upon a
Writ which is abateable, he shall not have allowance of that, but this shall be
returned as Devastavit, as in 10 Edw. 3. 503. a. If the Tenant vouch when he
might have abated the Writ, he shall lose the benefit of his Warranty: So here
and Com. Manwells case, 12. a. 22 H. 6. 12. (...) Also he conceived, if a man
be charged as Administrator where he is no Administrator, he cannot plead that
he never administered as Administrator, but he ought to traverse the Commission
of Administration, as it appears by 21 H. 6. 23. And it seems also to him, and
by 9 Edw. 4. 33. that if a man be an Executor of his own wrong, and after
administration is committed to him, and he is charged as Executor, after
administration committed, that the Writ shall abate, otherwise if
administration be committed, hanging the Writ. So if a man be made Executor,
and he not knowing of that, Iues letters of Administration, he shall be named
Administrator, and if after when he has notice of the Will, he proves it, then
he shall be impleaded by the name of Executor; for in such manner as the power
is given to him by the Bishop, he shall be charged: and it seems though that
he plead where he is Administrator, and is sued as Executor, or otherwise in
such manner, that he might have abated the Writ, or suffer Judgment, yet the
Writ shall abate: and he intended also, that Executor of his own wrong, might
pay debts due to another, and shall be discharged, and shall not be charged
with more then he has in his hands. And if two Executors are jointly sued, and
one confess the action, this shall bind him and his companion also for so much
as he has in his hands. But if an Executor of his own wrong confess the
action, this shall not prejudice him which is rightful Executor, and so he
conceived that judgment ought to be given for the Plaintiff.

Warburton Justice conceived that the Bar is good, notwithstanding Warburton.
that he did not show, that the Archdeacon had power to grant Administration,
insomuch it is no Inducement and the Defendant does not rely upon it, as
Littleton says, in Trespass where the Defendant pleades that it was made by
two, and the Plaintiff releases to one, and if the Defendant pay due Debts it
is not material, whether he have Authority or not, though that it be in
another respect: As if a man be Indicted of manslaughter and aquitted, and
after is Indicted of Murder by the same man, he may plead another time
aquitted, insomuch that these are matters of substance: But here it is but of
form, and then if it be not showed it is not material: But the matter upon
which he, relied was, insomuch that the Action was brought against two
Executors, and one has confessed the Action: And he intended without question,
that if this shall bind his companion, and for that he will not dispute the
other questions, but declares his opinion clearly, that the Plaintiff ought to
have Judgment against both these Defendants upon the confession of one, and
this shall bind his companion: Wynch Justice conceived Wynch.
that the Plea is good by Administrator without traverse, insomuch that it is
to the Writ, as it appears by 9 Edw. 4. 33. 37 H. 6. 32 H. 6. 1. Ed.. 4. 2. 50.
Ed. 3. And he conceived that the burying is not any Administration, nor the
taking of the goods into his custody to preserve them, no more then in Trover
and Conversion, when a man takes the goods for to preserve them: And he agreed
that where a man intitles himself to goods by Administration committed by any
but by the Bishop, he ought to plead specially, that he which committed it had
power to do it: But here it is not so, but only conveiance, and for that need
not here such precise pleading of that, insomuch it is only execution of
Administration, and for that it is good without intitleing the Archdeacon: And
he agreed that an Executor of his own wrong may pay Debts due to another, and
shall be discharged: And he agreed also that the Confession of one Executor
shall bind his Companion, and that Judgment shall be given upon that for the
Plaintiff: And they all agreed that the pleading, that the Defendant has no
goods, besides the goods which do not amount, etc. it was not good, and for
these causes they all agreed that Judgment ought to be given to the Plaintiff.

Trinity 10. Jacobi, in the Common Bench. Tyrer against Littleton 9. Jacobi,
Rot. 299.
IN Trespass for taking of a Cow, etc. Upon not guilty pleaded Trespass.
by the Defendant, the Jury gives special Verdict as it follows, that is,
that the Husband of the Plaintiff was seized of eighty Acres of Land, held of
the Defendant by Harriot service, Harriot.
that is, the best Beasts of every Tenant which died seized, that he had at the
time of his death, and that the Husband of the said Defendant, long time before
his death, made a Feoffment of that Land in consideration of marriage and
advancement of his Son, to the use of his Son and his Heirs, with such
agreement, that the Son should redemise to his Father for forty years, if he
so long lived, and that after the marriage was had, and the Son redemised the
Land to his Father, and the Father enjoyed that accordingly, and paid the Rent
to the Lord, and after died, and that the Plaintiff had no notice of his
Feoffment, and that the Husband at the time of his death was possessed of the
said Cow, and that the Defendant took it as the best Beast in name of Harriot,
and also found the Statute of 13. Eliz. of fraudulent conveiances to deceive
Creditors, and so prayed the direction of the Court, and this was agreed by the
Plaintiff aforesaid.

Nicholls Sergeant, first that all conveiances made upon good consideration
Nicholls.
and Bona Fide are by special Proviso exempted out of the Statute of 13. Eliz.
chap. And he conceived that this is made upon good consideration, and Bona
Fide, and for that it is within the said Proviso, and also he said, that as
upon the Statute of Marlebridge there is fraud apparent and fraud averrable, as
it appears 12. H. 4. 16. b. Where in ward the Tenant pleads that his Father
levied a Fine to a stranger, the Lord replies that this was by Collusion to
re-enfeoff the Heir of the Tenant at his full age, and so averred that to be
by Collusion to out the Lord of his Ward, and this is fraud averrable: But if
the Tenant had enfeoffed his Tenant immediately in Fee-simple, this is apparent
without any averment, and the Court may adjudge upon it: And so upon the
Statute of 27. Eliz. chap. 4. it appears by Burrells Case, that the Fraud ought
to be proved in Evidence, or confessed in pleading, or otherwise this shall not
avoid conveiance, for it shall not be intended, 6 Coke 78. a. and see 33. H. 6.
14. b. Andrew Woodcocks case, upon which he inferred, that this is but a fraud
averrable, if it be a fraud at all, and of this the Court could not take
notice, if it be not found by the Jury, and he said upon the Statute of 32 H.
8. Of Devisees, as it appears by Knights Case, 8 Coke, and 12. Eliz. Dyer 295.
8, 9, 10, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17. And so he concluded, and prayed
Judgment for the Plaintiff.

Harris Sergeant for the Defendant; argued that the Circumstances Harris.
which are found in the special Verdict are sufficient to satisfy the Court
that it is fraud, for as well as the Court may give direction to the Jury upon
Evidence that it is fraud and what not, as well may the Court Judge upon the
special matter, being found by special Verdict at large, as in 9 El. Dyer 267.
and 268. that is, the special matter being found by special verdict at large,
as in 9 El. Dyer 267. 268. that is, the special matter is found by Inquisition
upon Mandamus, and leave to the Court to adjudge if it be fraud or not, and in
12 El. 294. and 295. 8. the special matter was found by Jury upon Eligit
directed to the Sheriff, and by him returned to the Court: And in Trinity 27.
Eliz. between Saper and Jakes in Trover the Defendant pleades not guilty and
gives in Evidence as assignement of a Term to him with power of revocation:
And the Court directed the Jury, that this was fraudulent within the Statute of
27. Eliz. to defraud a purchasor, and in Burrells Case 6. Coke 73. a. before
the fraud to the Court upon Evidence to the Jury, and the Court gave direction
to the Jury that it was fraud, and that upon the Circumstances, which appears
upon the special Evidence: And so in this case he conceived, that insomuch the
circumstances appear by the Verdict, that the Jury may very well adjudge upon
it; and so he concluded, and prayed Judgment for the Defendant.

Coke chief Justice that the Statute of 13. Eliz. Does not aid Coke.
the Defendant, insomuch that the Feoffment was made for good consideration,
and for that shall be within the said Proviso, for if that shall be avoided at
all, that shall be avoided by the Statute of Marlebridge, which is ouly
affirmance of the Common Law, and this is the reason, that not withstanding the
Statute speaks only of Feoffment by the Father to his Son and Heir apparent,
yet a Feoffment to a Cousin which is Heir apparent, is taken to be within the
Statute, and in the 24. of Eliz. in Sir Hamond Stranges Case: It was adjudged
that if the Son and Heir apparent in the life time of his Father, purchase a
Manor of his Father for good consideration, this is out of the Statute, and so
it was adjudged in Porredges Case; also he said that the Law is an Enemy to
fraud, and will not intend it being a conveiance made for consideration of a
marriage to be fraudulent, no more then if the Father had made a Feoffment to
the use of a stranger for life, the remainder in Fee to his Son and Heir, the
which is not within the Statute of Marlebridge, as it is agreed in Andrew
Woodcocks Case, 33. H. 6. 14. b. Also he conceived, that the Feoffment in
consideration of marriage, natural love to his Son, and that the Wife of the
Son shall be Endowed, and that the Son should redemise that to his Father for
forty years, if he so long lived, and that the Father should pay the Rent to
the Lord, these he intended to be good considerations, and for that should be
within the said Proviso of the Statute of 13. Eliz. otherwise if it had been to
defraud Creditors: 253 Eliz. Dyer 193. a. Wrensfords case accordingly.
But if it had been to such intent, that is to defraud Creditors, this shall
not be extended to other intent, that is to defraud the Lord of his Harriot:
And in the 28. of Eliz. it was adjudged in the Kings Bench, if a man make a
Feoffment in Fee to the use of himself for life, remainder to his Son in tail,
with diverse Remainders over, with power of Revocation, and after bargains and
sells to a stranger upon condition, and after performs the Condition, that yet
the first conveiance remains fraudulent, as it was at the time of the making
of it: But this is only as to the purchasor and not as to any other, And in
Goodhers Case, 3. Coke 60. a. In debt against Heir which pleads nothing by
descent day of the Writ purchased, the other joins Issue, and gives in
Evidence fraudulent conveiance, and upon special Verdict adjudged that it was
very good: See also 4. Coke 4. b. c. Vern^ns Case, the Collusion to have Dower
and Jointure also: And so he concluded that Judgment should be given for the
Plaintiff.

Warburton Justice agreed that the fraud shall not be intended if Warberton.
it be not found, no more then if a man grant an Annuity to another, Quam diu
se been gesserit, in Annuity, for that he need not to averr that he has
behaved himself well, for this shall be intended, if the contrary be not
showed of the other party: So here insomuch that it is not found to be
fraudulent, it shall be intended to be Bona fide: And he agreed that if it had
been fraudulent at the first: If the Son had made a Feoffment over in the life
of the Father, as it is agreed in Andrew Woodcocks Case, 33 H. 6. 14. that then
the fraud is determined: So here when the Son has made a Lease to his Father,
this determines the fraud if any be, and so he concluded that Judgment should
be given for the Plaintiff.

Wynch Justice agreed, insomuch that it is express consideration Wynch.
found by the Verdict, and for that other consideration shall not be intended,
and also that it shall not be intended that the Conveyance was made to defraud
or to deceive the Lord of such a Peccadell as Harriot is, which is of small
consequence; but if it be a fraud within the Statute of 27 Eliz. apparent; that
is, if it contain power of revocation, which is declared to be apparent fraud
by the Statute, the Court may take notice of that without any averrment; And he
says, That in the 2. and 3. Eliz. Dyer, Wainsfords Case, 193. a. and 9 Eliz.
Dyer 267, 268. there is no averrment of fraud, but express Issue joined upon
the Fraud, and for that he need not any other averrment: And so he concluded
also that judgment should be given for the Plaintiff, and so it was Ruled
accordingly, if the Defendant did not show other matter to the contrary at such
a day, which was not done.

Trinity 10. Jacobi 1612. In the Common Bench. Strobridge against Fortescue and
Barret.
IN a Replevin the case was this, A man seized of Lands in Fee Release.
devises Rent out of it with clause of Distress and dies, his Son and Heir
enters and dies, the Rent is behind, the Son of the Son dies, and his Son
enters and makes a Feoffment to the Plaintiff, and the Devisee of the Rent,
releases all Actions, Debts, and Demands, to the Feoffor, and after distraynes
the Beasts of the Feoffee, for the Rent behind, before the Feoffment, and it
seems the Release is not good, insomuch that the Devisee had no cause of
Action at the time of the Release made, against him to whom the Release is
made, nor Demand against him, otherwise if the Release had been made to the
Feoffee, for he was subject to the distress, and this is a demand.

Trinity 10. Jacobi. 1612, In the Common Bench. Case of Cinque Ports.
NOTE that Coke said, that it has been adjudged by three Cinque Ports.
Judges against one in a Case of Cinque Ports, that the Cinque Ports cannot
prescribe to take the Body of a Freeman in Withernam, as they use for another;
for this is against the Statute of Magna Charta, Quod nullus liber homo
Imprisonet^r nisi per Legate Judicium, and also against the liberty of a
Subject, but they more inclined that they might take the Goods of one in
Withernam when another is arrested, and them retain, and this seems the more
reasonable Custom and Prescription.

The Case was, Tenant for life, the Remainder for life with warranty, Tenant
for life with warranty.
the first Tenant for life was impleaded, and he vouches him in Reversion, but
he first prays in aid of him in Remainder, and if this aid prayer shall be
granted this was the question.

And it seems by Nicholls Sergeant, that it shall not be granted, Nicholls.
see 11 H. 4. 63. Where it is agreed that if a man makes a Lease for life,
Remainder for life, Remainder in fee, and the first Tenant for life has aid of
him in remainder for life, and he in Fee jointly, and 44 Edw. 3. 20. in
Trespass against a Miller which takes Toll where he ought to grind Toll-free;
the Defendant says that J. had the Mill for life, and that he is his Deputy,
the reversion to W. in Fee, and prays aid of the Tenant for life, and of the
Tenant in reversion, and had it of the Tenant for life, and not of him in
reversion, and this for default of Privity, as it seems to Brook, Aid 30.

Haughton conceived that it should be granted for Tenant for life, Haughton.
notwithstanding that he may plead any Plea, yet he does not know what Plea to
plead without him in reversion, but by the aid, praying all the Estate shall be
reduced into one, and the warranty shall come; and for that he conceived, that
the first Tenant for life shall have aid of him in remainder for life.

Wynch Justice conceived that aid shall not be granted against the Wynch.
first Tenant for life, against him in remainder for life, for he conceived
that aid is always to be granted, when the defects of him and his Estate
which prays it, are to be supplied by him which is prayed; that this is the
reason that he may have aid of his Wife, and where there are many remainders,
the first Tenant may have aid of them all; otherwise where he is Tenant for
life, the remainder for li^e, and the reversion expectant, for the Tenant for
life cannot supply his defects; and with this agreed the express Book of 11
Edw. 3. Fitz. Aid 32. and so he concluded that it should not be granted.

Warburton Justice doubted, and insomuch that the granting of Warburton.
aid where it is not grantable, is no error, but otherwise of the denying of
that where it ought to be granted, he would be advised: But he conceived that
the cause for which aid is granted, is not the feebleness of the Estate of
him which prays it only, but to the intent that they may join together, and
one defend the other, for Tenant for life may plead some Plea, which he in
reversion may plead, saving the joining of Issue in a Writ of Right, and he had
Aid granted.
a Manuscript of the 11 Rich. 2. where Tenant for life, the remainder for life,
the remainder for life was, and the first Tenant for life had aid of them both
in remainder, and so concluded.

Coke chief Justice that aid ought not to be granted in this Case, insomuch
Coke.
that he which is the first Tenant has greater Estate then he in Remainder,
for his Estate in Remainder is more Remote and uncertain, and to the Book of
11 R. 2. He agreed, that the aid was granted of all in Remainder, but there
they in Remainder had Estate tail, and he said that aid is to be granted in
two Cases, in personal Actions to maintain Issue, and when Tenant for life
prays in aid of him in Remainder or Reversion, without which they cannot answer
nor plead, nor Issue cannot be deduced, but so it is not here, for the first
Tenant for life may answer and plead to the Issue, as well without him in
Remainder for life, as with him, for if Tenant for life, Remainder in tail,
Remainder in fee, if the first Tenant for life be impleaded he shall have aid
of him in Remainder in tail, otherwise if the Reversion had been to the first
Tenant for life, with a mesne Remainder in Tail, 41 Ed. 3. 42 Ed. 3. 10 Ed. 3.
And 11 Ed. 3. Receipt 118. Tenant for life, Reversion for life, Remainder in fee
was, he in Reversion for life shall be received upon default of the first
Tenant for life, and if he will not, then he in Remainder in fee shall be
received, and yet he shall not have Wast, as it appears by 24 Ed. 3. for this
destroys the first Estate; but the receipt maintains and preserves it, and he
said, that the 11 Ed. 3. Aid. 32. before cited, rules this case, and so of 4 H.
6. And so he concluded, and insomuch that Warburton doubted of it, it was
adjourned.

Trinity 10. Jacobi 1612. In the Common Bench. Yet Rowles against Mason, See
before 57.
WINCH Justice argued that the Defendant is not guilty, and that the Plaintiff
shall take nothing by his Writ, for he conceived Wynch.
that the verdict is uncertain, insomuch that it is not found that Livery and
Seisin was made upon the Lease for three lives of the Manor, but only one
Memorandum, that it was made in the house of the Lord, but it is not found that
this House was parcel of the Manor, but after it is found that the Lessee by
force of this was Verdict uncertain.
seized, by which it is employed that it was very well executed, and this being
in special verdict, would be very good, he conceived, there were two
principal matters in the Case.

First, Upon the Bargain and Sale of Trees, if they be reunited to the
Manor, or remain undivided.

Secondly, Upon the two customs, the which he conceived depend upon a
question, for the first warrants the second.

And to the first, When a man devises a Manor for three lives, and by the same
Deed in another clause, bargains and sells the Trees, and then insues the
Habendum, and this is of the Manor only, and limits Estate of that for three
lives without mention of the Trees, he conceived that the Trees pass before
the Habendum absolutely, and it is not like to a Bargain and Sale of a Manor
with Trees, or Advowson appendant, and here the purpose and intent appears,
that they shall pass together and as appendant: But in the first case they
shall pass as a Chattell immediately upon the delivery of the Deed before any
livery made upon this to pass the Manor, and if Livery had never been made,
yet he shall have the Trees, see 23 Eliz. 379. 18 Dyer, Where a man devises and
grants a manor and trees, Habendum the Manor for one and twenty years
without mention of the Trees, and yet by Windham, Periam, and Meade, against
Dyer, the Lessee cannot cut and sell the Trees, for there was all in one
sentence, that is, the grant of the Trees and the Demise of the Manor, see the
8 Coke Pexells Case, how a Grant shall be construed, and where that shall be
intended to pass Inheritance, and where to pass but a Chattell, where a man
grants a Chattell and ten pound yearly to be paid, and in 7 Ed. 4. If a man
has Inheritance and a Lease in one Town, and he by one and the same Deed,
gives, Grants, Bargains and sells all to one, Habendum, the Inheritance to him
and his Heirs, this is no forfeiture of the Lease, insomuch that the Fee does
not pass of that, so in the Principal Case, Fee-simple passes in the Trees,
and Freehold in the Manor, and he conceived that by the Demise over, the Land
and Trees are not reunited, and this he collected out of Herlackendens Case 4.
Coke and 12. Eliz. Bendlowes, a man made a Lease for another life, and
bargain and sold the Trees to him for whose life Lessee dies, he for whose
life becomes occupant of the Land, he shall have several Estates, one Estate
in the Land, and another Estate in the Trees, and so in Ives Case, 5 Coke 11.
a. Lessee takes a Lease first of Land except the woods, and after takes a Lease
of the Woods and Trees, and they remain distinct and though that after there
are general words in the Lease, that is, of all Meadows, Pastures, Profits,
Commodities, etc. That is not material, for these shall be referred to all
such things which belong to the Land, and so he concluded this point, that the
Trees remain several from the Land, and do not pass to Hoskins by the Demise
of the Copyhold only, and so he cannot take advantage of the forfeiture,
otherwise he did not doubt but that the particular Sum might take advantage of
the forfeiture.

Secondly, for the customs, he conceived that the first, that is, that the
Copyholder for life might nominate his Successor, and is good, and so for the
second, that such Copyholder may cut and sell all the Trees growing upon his
Copyhold, and he conceived that the validity of the custom, ought to be
adjudged by the Judges, and the Truth of that by the Jury, and when it is found
true by a Jury, and that it has such antiquity that exceeds the memory of man,
then this obtaines such privilege as the Prerogative of a Prince, and is part
of Law, and stands with it, and this is reasonable custom, and so it has been
adjudged in the Kings Bench, the reason is, insomuch that the custom is the
life of the Copyhold, upon which that depends, and the party is but a Conduit
to nominate the Tenant, and when he is nominated and admitted then he takes by
the Lord, and that stands with the rules and reasons of the Common Law, that
is, that a man devises that a married wife shall sell his Land, and she may
sell notwithstanding the Coverture, for she upon the matter nominates the
party, and he takes by the Devise, and by this reason, she may sell to her
Husband as it is agreed by the 8 of Assizes. And also by devise that Executor
shall sell, Executor of Executor may sell, notwithstanding that he is not in
Esse at the time of the Devise, and so a Lease for life to one, Remainder to
him that J. S. shall nominate is good after nomination, and then he takes by
the first Livery, as it is agreed in 10 H. 7. and J. S. Only has the
nomination, and nothing passes to him, and with this also agrees 43 Ed. 3. 19
H. 7. So if a man makes a Feoffment to the use of himself for life, with
diverse Remainders over, and power to himself to make Leases for three lives,
this is good, as it is agreed in Mildmayes Case and Whitlocks Case, 8 Coke, and
yet the Estate does not pass from him but out of all the Estates, and he upon
the matter has only the nomination of the Lessee, and of the lives, for all
the estates apply their forces to make that good, and the 2 El. Dyer 192. 23.
Custom that the Wife of the Copyholder for life shall have her Widows
Estate, is allowed to be a good custom, and there an Estate for life upon the
matter is raised out of the estate for life, and annexed to it, and this is by
the Custom, and the reason he conceived to be for that that Women should be
encouraged to marry with their Tenants, and by that the marriage with the
Tenant, and the custom in this Case does bind the Lord, and so 4 Coke, there
are diverse customs by which the Lord is bound, and the 8 Coke Swains Case,
where the Copyholder by custom has the Trees, in Case where the Lord himself
has them not, so if the Lord sell the Waste, yet the Copyholder shall not
loose his Common in that, notwithstanding that the Estate of the Copyholder be
granted after the Wast is severed from the Manor, and it is agreed in
Waggoners Case 8 Coke, that custom is more available then the Common Law: And
for that this cnse has been adjudged in this point between Crab and Varney by
three or four Judges, he would not further question it. And for the second
custom, he agreed that one bare Tenant for life, could not meddle with the
Sale or falling of the Trees, but here is a Copyholder for life which has Aut
ority given by the Lord, and the Custom to dispose the Trees; and he says
that Bracton and the old Laws of England calls Copyholders Falkland, and says
they cannot be moved, but in the hands of Falkland, What is so called.
the Lord they ought to surrender, and agreed that this is within the Rules of
the Common Law, for Consuetudo private communem legem and the Law does nor give
reason of that, for this is as a ground, and need not to be proved, for the
reason of every custom cannot be showed, as it was said in Knightly and
Spencers Case, and he said, that Manors are divided into three sorts of
Tenures.

The first holds by Knights Service, and this is for the defense of the Lord,
and they have a great number of Acres of Land, and pay less Services.

The second holds by Socage, and this for to plow and manure the Demesnes of
the Lord, and they shall pay no Rent nor do other services, and this was at the
first to draw such Tenants to inhabit there, and for that they have Authority
to dispose and sell the Trees growing upon theit Tenements.

The third, holds by base Tenure, and these were at the Will of the Lord, and
these were to do Services, and then these in many Cases have liberty for their
Wives in some cases to dispose that for another life, and to dispose the Trees,
and so it is in Ireland at this day, where some give more and greater
privilege then others, to induce Tenants to inhabit and manure their Land,
for there every day is a complaint made to the Council for enticing the
Tenants of the Lord, and 14 Ed. 3. Bar 277. The Tenant preseribes to have the
Windfalls, and if the Lord cut the Trees, that he may have the Lops, and 11 H.
6. 2. The Keeper of the Wood prescribes to have Fee, and 46 Ed. 3. is
prescription to stint the Lord in his own Soil, and all these are for the
Encouragement of Tenants to inhabit upon the Land, and time of Ed. 1.
Prescription 75. A stranger prescribed to have all the profit of the Land of
another, for a great part of the year, and to exclude the giver of the Soil,
and 6 Ja. It was adjudged in the Kings Bench between Henrick and Pargiter, that
the Lord may be stinsted for Common in his own Laud, and in the Book of Entries
563. It appears that by Custom Copyhold granted, Sibi and suis, was a good
Fee-simple, and the reason of all this is showed in the 4. Coke, amongst his
Copyhold Cases, where it is agreed that the Life of a Copyhold Estate is the
customs, and then if the Custom gives life to the Estate, this gives life
also to all the Privileges which are incident to the Estate, and the Lord is
but the means to convey the Estate from one to another, and as in 38 Ed. 3. A
man has a House as Heir to his Mother, and after a stranger grants Estovers to
him and his Heirs to be burnt in the same House, these Estovers shall go to the
Heirs of the Mother, insomuch that they are incident to the House, so of
Privilege incident to a Copyhold Estate by the Custom, and at the Common Law,
if Tenant for life has cut the Trees, he: has not forfeited his Estate, for
he was trusted with the Land, and was not punishable till the Statute of
Gloucester, and at this day if there be a mesne Remainder for life which remains
in Contingency, and that shall prevent that the Tenant shall be punished for
this waste, and to make innovation of this custom, will be dangerous, and for
that he concluded that the Plaintiff shall be barred.

Warburton Justice agreed: And the first Custom, that is, for Warburton.
the nomination of the Successor, he conceived that it is good, and that it is
good by the Common Law, and good by Custom by the Common Law, as a Lease for
life, remainder to him which the Tenant for life shall name: So by Custom as
the Custom, that if a Copyholder will sell his Copyhold Estate, that he
which is next of blood to him shall have the refusal, and if none of his
blood, then he which Inhabits in the nearest part of the part of the ground
shall have it before a stranger, giving for that as much as a stranger would,
and the Lord shall have him for his Tenant, whether he will or no, for it shall
be intended, that so it was agreed at the first, and it is reasonable; and if
it had not been ruled and adjudged before, yet he conceived it might now be a
rule and adjudged, insomuch that it is so reasonable and good, and for the
second custom, that is for the custom of cutting of Trees, by such
Copyholder which has such privilege, he conceived also that it was good: But
he agreed that a bare Tenant for life cannot be warranted by custom to do such
an Act, as it was here adjudged between Powell and Peacock: But here he had a
greater Estate then for life, for he has power to make another Estate for
life, and shall have as great privilege as Tenant after possibility, etc.
which is in respect of Inheritance which once was in him, and he may do it for
the possibility which he has to give to another Estate, as it is agreed in 2.
Ed. 4. that a Lease fo a hundred years is Mortmain, in respect of the
continuance of it, so here, for the Estate may continue by such power of
nomination for many lives in perpetuity, and that as when at the Common Law
they have in reputation and opinion of Law a greater Estate, may cut and sell
Trees, so here insomuch that the Estate comes so near to Inheritance, he
conceived that he might cut the Trees by the custom, and that the Custom is
good; and so he concluded, that Judgment should be given, that the Plaintiff
should be barred in respect of Customs; and then to the third, that is, when a
man lets Land, and by the same Deed, grants the Trees to be cut at the will and
pleasure of the grantee, there the Lessee has distinct Interest: But if the
Lessor by one self same clause had demised the Land and the Trees, there the
Intendment is: But notwithstanding that there are several clauses, and that he
has distinct Interests, yet he conceives that the Trees remain parcel of
the Inheritance and freehold till they are cut and are severed only in
Interest, that is, that may be felled and divided by the Axe, for Tithes shall
not be paid for them if they exceed the growth of twenty years, not it shall
not be Felony for to cut those and burn them: And it is not like to an
Advowson, for that may be severed, and for that he conceived that if the
Custom had not warranted the Cutting and Selling, that the Copyholder had
forfeited his Estate, and that the Lord might very well have taken advantage of
it, and 29. assis. 29. A man sells Trees to be cut at Michaelmasse ensuing, and
before Michaelmasse Hawks breed in them, the seller shall have them, by which
it appears that the property is not altered: So that though they are not
parcel of the Manor, yet they are parcel of the Freehold, insomuch that
they are not severed in Facto: And he agreed that Lessee for years of a Manor
shall take advantage of Forfeiture, and need not any presentment by the Homage,
and Littleton fol. 15, says, that the Lord may enter as in a thing Forfeited
unto him; and so for attainder of Felony: And if a Copyholder makes a Lease
for years, by which he forfeits his Copyhold Estate: And after the Lord
grants the Manor for years, the Lessee of the Manor shall take advantage of
this Forfeiture made before he had any Estate in the Manor without any
presentment by the Homage: But here in this case the Custom warrants the
cutting of the Trees by the Copyholder, and for that he concluded all the
matter as above, that the Plaintiff should take nothing by his Writ.

Coke chief Justice agreed, and he said that Fortescue and Littleton, Coke.
and all others agreed, that the Common Law consists of three parts.

First Common Law.

Secondly Statute Law, which corrects, abridges, and exp'aines the Common Law:
The third Custom which takes away the Common Law: But the Common Law Corrects,
Allows, and Disallows, both Statute Law, and Custom, for if there be
repugnancy in Statute; or unreasonablenesse in Custom, the Common Law
Disallowes and rejects it, as it appears by Doctor Bonhams Case, and 8 Coke,
27. H. 6, Annuity: And he conceived that there are five differences between
Prescription and a Custom: And all those as pertenent to this cause.

First in the beginning, Pugnant ex Diametro, for nothing may be good by
prescription, but that which may have beginning by grant, and also prescription
is incident to the Person, and Custom to some place, and holds place in many
Cases, which cannot be by grant; as in 11, H. 4. Lands may be devised by
Custom, and so descent to all the Sons, as in Gavelkind, and to the youngest
Son in Eurrough English, and others like, which cannot have their beginning by
Grant, but prescription and Custom are Brothers, and ought to have the same
age, and reason ought to be the Father. and Congruence the Mother, and use the
Nurse, and time out of memory to Fortify them both.

Secondly they vary in quality, for prescription is for one man only, and
Custom is for many, if all but one be not dead.

Thirdly they vary in extent and latitude, for prescription extends to
Fee-simple only, but Custom extends to all Interests and Estates whatsoever,
as appears by pleading, for Tenant in tail, for life or years cannot
prescribe in what Estate, nor against the Lord in his Demesnes, but they ought
to allege the Custom, and against a stranger they ought to prescribe in the
name of the Lord, and for that prescription b. Copyholder of Inheritance may
sell the Trees, is not good, but such Custom is good, and 5. Ed. 3. 24. And
the old Reports 196. One Tenant being a Freeholder prescribes to have
Windfalls, and all Trees-which are withered in the Top and if the Lord makes
them in Cole, to have so much in money: And so if they sell, and this for Sale,
and this was not-good, insomuch that it is alleged in the person as
prescription, but if it had been alleged as Custom, and to be burnt in his
house, then it shall be good as appendant, and 14. Ed. 3. Bar 227. Wilby says
to be adjudged that prescription to have Turbary to be burnt in his house is
good, but not to sell; and 11. H. 6. 17. accordingly, by which it appears that
this may be very well by Custom, and cannot be by prescription.

Thirdly he conceived that where a man may create an Estate without nomination,
there he may create that by nomination: And also that which may be done by the
Common Law, m^^ be done by Custom, and that an Estate may be created by such
nomination, it appears by the case, where a Remainder is Limited to him, which
the first Tenant for life shall nominate, and it is very good, and to prove
that the Custom is good, he remembered the custom of Millam in Norfolk, where
he was borne, that is, that if any Copyholder will sell his Land and agree of
the price, that at the next Court when a surrender is to be made, the next of
his blood, and if he will not any other of his blood may have the Land, and so
every one shall be preferred according to the neerenesse of his blood, and with
this also agreed the Leviticall Law, as it appears, Leviticus 25. chap. verse
15. which appoints this to be at the year of Jubilee, and the Common Law within
one year after the Alienation, and upon this he infers, that if Custom may
appoint Heir in the life of the party, then a Fortiore, he may appoint
Successor after his death, and he conceived that at the beginning, the
Copyholders might have had absolute Fee-simple of the Lord, and they rather
made choice to have such Estate, insomuch that they did not know, if their
Children would be towardly or not, and for that content themselves with the
nomination of a Successor only, and so is the Custom at Hamm also in
Middlesex, if any Copyholder will sell, the next Cleivener, which is he that
dwells next unto him, shall have the refusal, giving so much as another
will, and he which Inhabits one the East part first, and the South and the
West, and last the North shall be preferred, is the only way in his course, and
there the Successor is nominated by the Heavens, and by the quarters of the
Earth, and so is the custom in Gloucester: And if any Husband has an Estate
for twelve years, his Wife shall have it for twelve years also, and so ad
Infinitum, and this makes nomination, and so of Freehold, and so if it be good
without nomination, it shall be good by nomination: And if the Estate determine
by the Death of the Tenant, without nomination when the Lord revives the
Copyhold Estates, the privilege also shall be revived: But he conceived that
the Tenant cannot nominate part to one and part to another, nor that divided in
fractions: And he says that this point has been adjudged in the Kings Bench
by four Judges against Popham 5. Jacobi between Ball and Crabb: And so he
concluded this point, and to the second custom he said, he would speak to
that Transitive, but not Definitve, and that it has been adjudged 45. Eliz.
between Powell and Peacock that bare Copy holder for life, could not prescribe
to cut and ^ell the Trees, otherwise of Tenant in Fee-simple, for he has them
cherished and fostered: And it is against common reason, incongruent and
against the Common Law, that a Copyholder for life may cut and sell the Trees,
and custom ought to have reason and congruence, for 10. Ed. 3. 5. Leete cannot
be belonging to a Church, insomuch that it is Incongruent, and so in Writes
Case 2. Coke Tithes cannot be appurtenant to a Manor, insomuch that it is
incongruent; and a spiritual thing shall not be pertinent to a temporal, and
so e Converso: And so in the 5. Assis. 9. and Hill and Granges Case, Com.
Turbary cannon be appurtenant to Land, insomuch that it is incongruent, but it
ought to be to a house; so in time of Ed. 2. Tenant of the Manor prescribes to
have free Bull and Bare, and it is not good for the reason aforesaid, otherwise
it is of the Lord of a Manor, and 9 H. 5. 45. custom in Leete to present
common, and adjudged that it it is not good, insouuch that it wants congruity,
for it is not proper to the Court, and upon this he concluded that bare Tenant
for life cannot prescribe to cut Trees, for it is not congruent that such an
Estate shall have such a privilege, and this for three reasons.

First insomuch that Trees growing are parcel of the Inheritance.

Secondly in respect of the perdurablenesse of them, for it shall be intended
that they will endure forever, and so will not his Estate, for this is as a
shadow as Job said, and it is absurd that shadow should cut down the Tree: And
also it is for necessity of habitation and Plow and Husbandry: And it is for
the Common Wealth, that Copyholder of Inheritanc might cut them by such
custom, for otherwise he would not be incurraged, to plant and preserve them:
And notwithstanding that in this Case the custom be general, that the
Copyholder may cut down all, yet that shall have a reasonable construction,
avd that this notwithstanding he leave sufficient for House-boot; as if a man
grants Common without number, yet the Grantor shall not be excluded, but shall
have his Common there, for excess shall not be allowed.

As if a man which distraines another for Rent he shall not take excessive
distress, the Lessee for life excessive Tallage of villains, nor upon
excessive Fines of Copyholders, and so it was adjudged in Heyden and Sir John
Lenthorps Case, that the Lord shall not take all; but leave sufficient for
reparations, and so was the opinion of Wray chief Justice in the 33 of Eliz.,
In evidence to a Jury, but here he is in nature of Tenant in Fee-simple, and it
shall be intended that he has cherished the Timber, and every Copyholders
Estate granted is as a new Grant, and has affinity with Tenant in Fee-simple,
and he agreed that if Lessee for life, the Remainder for years, Remainder for
life be, and the first Lessee for life makes a forfeiture, he in Remainder for
years shall take advantage of that, and that it has been adjudged; that the
Lord of the Manor shall take advantage of forfeiture made by the Copyholder,
without presentment made by the Homage, and in one Bacon and Flotsims Case, and
so Lessee for years of a Manor shall take advantage of Forfeiture,
notwithstanding the Imbicillity of his Estate, but the principal matter upon
which he relied was, that the Trees were severed from the Freehold, and if the
Lessee die, his Executors shall have them, insomuch that they are mere
Chattells, and this.

First in respect of the Words of the Lease, that is, demise, and to farm let
the Manor, but bargain, sell, give, and grant the Timber Trees to be felled
and carried away at his Will: As if a man makes a Lease for years, except the
Wood, and after grants the Trees, the Lease determines, the Lessor shall not
have the Trees again.

Secondly, They are in two divided Sentences, and also in respect of divided
properties, for the Executor of the Lessee shall have them; and Quando duo
Jura, concurrunt in una persona, equum est ac si esset in diversis, also past
at several times, for the Trees pass by the delivery of the Deed, and the Land
does not pass till Livery and Seisin be made. Also the intent of the parties is
not that they shall pass together, for if the intent were otherwise the Law
would not devide them, as it was adjudged Hillary 15. Eliz. in the Lord
Cromwells case, where Tenant in Tail was of a Manor, with the Reversion to his
right Heirs, and he by his Deed gives and grants the Manor, and the Reversion
of that, and includes Letter of Attorney within the Deed to make Livery, but
Livery was not made, and yet the Reversion does not pass, for his intent
appears that it should pass by Livery and Seisin, and not by grant; and also
in Androwes case, the Advowson appendant to a Manor shall not pass without
inrolment of Bargain and Sale, yet there were words there, that that might
pass by Grant, for this was against their intent, otherwise if a man makes a
Lease for life or years of a Manor, and grants the Inheritance of the Advowson
by the same Deed, and so of the case of 23 Eliz. Dyer 374. Lessor devises,
Grants, and to farm lets the Manor and the Trees, and they pass jointly; and
the Reason is insomuch that it is but a Joint sentence, and not several as it
is here, also he intended, that the life of the Lessee for life is not averred,
and for that he shall be intended to be dead, and for that it is a several
grant of the Trees of the Freehold, for the Interest of them is settled in his
Executors, for if he had made Sale of them before that the Copyholder had cut
them down, then that had not been forfeiture, see 5. H. 7. 15 Ed. 4. 14 Eliz.
Dyer And then the Case is this, Tenant for another life of a Manor, makes a
Lease for years of the Freehold, of which an Estranger has a Copyhold
Estate for life in Esse, Lessee dies, and he conceived that the Copyholder
shall not be an occupant, for it ought to be Vacua Possessio, and this was the
reason of the judgment in Adams Case in 18 Eliz. Where a man makes a long Lease
for years, and after intending to avoid this Lease, makes a Lease to another
old man for another life, to the intent that the Lessee for years should be
occupant, when the old Lessee died, and so drowned his Term, and after the
Lessee died, and resolved that the Lessee for years shall not be an occupant,
insomuch that there was not Vacua Possessio, and for this it seems to him that
if Lessee for another life, makes a Lease for years and dies, that the Lessee
for years shall not be an occupant, notwithstanding that he made special
claim, and that for the reason aforesaid, but he agreed that a Lessee for
another life makes a Lease at will and dies, there the Lessee at Will shall be
an Occupant, insomuch that his Estate is determined, and yet there is not Vacua
Possessio, according to 38 H. 6. 27. But he did not say there should be an
occupant in these cases, but cyted Bracton fol. 8. that if the Sea leave an
Island in the midst of that, the King shall have it, and not Occupanti
conceditur, and so Quod non occupantur conceditur.
he concluded that the Plaintiff shall be barred, and that Judgment shall be
entered for the Defendant, which was done accordingly, and it was afterward
agreed, upon motion in this case, whether it would not make difference if the
Trees were cut by the Copyholder before that he has made his nomination or
not, notwithstanding it was objected, that when he has made his nomination,
then he was only bare Tenant for life, and the Privilege executed, and he in
Remainder was also Tenant for life only, for he cannot nominate till he comes
to be Tenant in possession, but this notwithstanding, insomuch that they had
power to make nomination, that is the first Tenant again, if the second died in
his life time, and the second if the first died in his life time, and so the
Peiviledge continues, all the Justices continued of their opinions, and
according to that Judgment was entered for the Defendant, and that the Plaintiff
should be barred, and should take nothing by his Writ.

Trinity 8. Jacobi 1610. in the Kings Bench. The Lord Rich against Frank.
THE Lord Rich brought an action of Debt against Frank Administrator Debt
against Administrator for Rent in the Debet and Detinet.
of one Frank, and this was for a rent reserved upon a Lease for years, made
to the Intestate, and the Action was brought in the Debet and Detinet, for rent
due in the time of the Administrator, and verdict for the Plaintiff, and after
moved in Arrest of Judgment by the Council of the Defendant, that this Action
ought to be brought in the Detinet only, and not in the Debet and Detinet; and
Chibborn of Lincolnes Inn conceived that the Chibborne.
Action was well brought in the Debet and Detinet, and to that he said that
Hargraves case 5 Coke is so reported to be adjudged, but he says that he has
heard the council of the other part insisted upon that, that this Judgment was
reversed, and for that he would under favor of the Court speak to that. And
he conceived that the Action so brought, is well brought; for three Reasons.

The first shall be drawn from the nature of the Duty, and to that the Case
rests upon this doubt, that is, if the Administrator is now charged for this
Rent, as upon his own duty, or as Administrator, and it seems to him not as
Administrator, but as upon his own duty, for he says, that it is not Debt nor
duty till the day of payment, as Littleton takes the diversity in his Chapter
of Release, between Debt upon an obligation and a Rent, and the day not being
incurred in time of the Intestate, this cannot be his duty, therefore that
ought to be duty in the Administrator, and to the cases of 19 H. 8. 8. Where
the Executor of a Lessee for twenty years, which had made a Lease for ten years
rendering Rent, brought action of Debt against the Lessee for ten years, for
rent incurred in the time of the Executor, and this is in the Detinet only, and
the Case of 20 H. Detinet only.
6. 4. Where an Executor brings an action of Debt upon Arrerages of Account of
an Assignement of Auditors by themselves in the Detinet only, and he said that
in these Actions, the Executors were Plaintiffs, and in all actions brought by
Executors where they are Plaintiffs, and the thing recovered shall be Asset,
the Action shall be brought in the Detinet, but in our case they are
Defendants, and so the diversity, and to the Objection, that may be made to
this Contract out of which this duty grows and arises, it was made by the
Intestate, and not by the Administrator himself, and so this is a duty upon the
first Privity of the contract, he answered that there is great difference, when
a thing comes due by the Contract of the Testator alone, and ought to be paid
in his time, in which the Executors are to be char^ed merely as Executors,
there the Writ shall be in the Detinet, but when the thing grows due in part
upon the contract of the Intestate, and part by the Occupation of the
Administrator, as in our case, there it shall be brought in the Debet and
Detinet, and he cited a Case which was adjudged 26 El. in the Common bench
between Scrogs and the Lady Gresham, where it was resolved that the Lady
Gresham, was made chargeable to the Debts of her Husband by act of Parliament,
and Action of Debt brought against her in the Debet and Detinet, and debated if
this were well brought, and after Argument, adjudged that it was well brought
in the Debet and Detinet, for though she was not chargeable for the Debts of
her Husband, upon his own Contract, yet where an act of Parliament has made
her chargeable, and a Debtor, and for that reason the Action shall be brought
against her in the Debet and Detinet, and to the principal case he cited the
Case of 11 H. 6. 7. Where it it said by Babington and Newton that if a man be
Lessee for years, and is in arrears for his Rent, and makes his Executors and
dies, and the Executors enter into the Land and occupy, in this case for the
Arrerages due in time of the Testator, Action shall be brought against them in
the Detinet, but for Rent due in their own occupation, the action shall be
brought in the Debet and Detinet, for that it rises upon their own occupation,
and with this agrees 20 H. 6. 4. And he said that he would demand this case of
the Council of the other part, that is, a man has a Lease for years as
Administrator, and Rent incurrs in his time, and he makse his Executors and
dies, and Administration of the Goods of the Intestate is committed over to
another, against whom shall the Action be brought for the Rent, that is,
against the Executors of the first Administrator, or against the second
Administrator: and it seems clearly to him, against the Executors of the first
Administrator, for their Testator had taken the profits, which case proves that
they shall not be charged merely as Executors or Administrators, but as takers
of the profits, etc. And Occupiers of the land.

And this was his second reason of the nature of Profits, insomuch that they
were raised by the personal labor of the Executor or Admistrator, 2.
and are their Goods, as he said, and they have them not merely as Executors or
Administrators, and for that the Action is well brought as it is, and he said,
that the Heir for Debt of the Father shall be charged in the Debet and Detinet,
and yet this was the contract of his Father, but he is charged in respect that
he has Heir charged in Debet and Detinet.
the land, and the occupation and profits of that, so here insomuch that the
Executors have the profit of the Term, by the same reason they shall be
charged in the Debet and Detinet, and he resembled the case to a case put in
Fitz. Na. Br^ In his Writ of Debt, where a woman sole has a lease for years,
and takes a Husband, and the Rent incurrs, and the wife dies, the Husband shall
be charged in the Debet and Detinet for this rent, and the reason is, because
he has taken the profits, so here the Administrator has taken the profits;
and is not answerable for the Profits, unless they amount to more then the rent
is. And by the same reason the action is well brought against him as it is.

The third and last reason, was for the Inconveniency; and to 3.
that he said, if this Action be brought in the Debet and Detinet, there is no
inconvenience, but if it should be brought in the Detinet only, then should the
Administrator be charged but of the Goods of the dead, where if he be not
charged of his own proper Goods, peradventure he shall not be so careful to
pay his rent; but would stop the Lessor in his Action, which should be trouble
and vexation, and so by this reason also he concluded the Action well brought
in the Debet and Detinet, and this was gaynsayd by Towse, George Crook, Towse,
Crook, and Harris.
and Harris of the other part, and it seems to them that it should be in the
Detinet only, insomuch that the cause of this Action grows of the contract of
the Testator, and the Term is Assets in their hands, and the Administrator
has the Term as Administrator, and by the same reason the Occupation shall be
as Administration: and by consequence he shall be charged as Administrator, and
not otherwise, and then the Action shall be brought against him in the Detinet
only, and that he shall be charged as Administrator they cited the Book of 14
H. 4. 28. Where it is said, if a man has a lease for years and makes his
Executors, and the rent incurrs in their time, and action of Debt is brought
against them, and they make default, he which first (...) all come by distress
shall answer according to the Statute of 9 Ed. 3. chapter 5. which Book proves
directly as they say, that they are charged as Executors, and not otherwise,
and then it follows that the Action should be in the Detinet, so it seems to
them that in all Actions, where they are named Executors or Administrators,
that the Action shall be brought against them in the Detinet only, but in this
action they ought to be named Executors or Administrators, for he does declare
of a lease made to the Intestate, and for that it seems it shall be brought in
the Detinet only, and this was the reason of Yelverton Justice, which was of
their opinion only against the other Justices, and to that which was said that
an Action shall be brought against the Heir in the Debet and Detinet for the
Debt of his Ancestor they answered, that this is now become the proper Debt of
the Heir, but it is not so in the case of an Executor or Administrator.

And it seems to Towse, that if an Administrator has a Lease for twenty
years, and makes a Lease for ten years rendering Rent, and brings an Action
for this Rent, that the Action shall be brought in the Detinet only, for that
this is a new contract made by the Administrator, and he has gained new
Reversion, because it was derived out of the Lease for twenty years, and so
this shall be of the same nature, and the Rent shall be Assets in his hands,
and in proof of this he cited the book in 17. Ed. 3. 66. Where an Executor
sold the Goods of the Testator, and the Vendee made an Obligation to them for
the money, and the Executors brought an Action of Debt upon the Obligation; and
this was brought in the Detinet only: And the exception was taken, because it
was duty of their own contract, and for that the Writ should be in the Debet
and Detinet, and yet the Writ awarded good, because it comes in Lieu of Goods
which they had as Executors, and shall be Assets in their hands as the Goods
should have been, and for that it is well brought in the Detinet only: And they
said that in the principal case it shall be mischeivous if the Action shall be
brought in the Debet and Detinet, for it may be the Rent reserved, is of more
worth then the Profits of the Land will amount unto, and that the Executors or
Administrators have no other Assets, now shall be the Executor or Administrator
be charged with his own proper Goods, which shall be mischeivous, and the case
of 10. H. 7. 5. and 6. that is direct in the point was often times cited, and
all these three things which were of council with the Defendant, informed the
Court that they were of Council with Hargrave when the Judgment given in the
Kings Bench was reversed for Error in this very point, and for this cause,
because the Action was brought in the Debet and Detinet, where it should be in
the Detinet only: And so they prayed that the Judgment should be hindered: But
by the whole Court except Yelverton: And so it was adjudged, that the Action
was well brought as it is, and especially for the reasons given in Hargraves
Case 5. Coke 31. And to that which has been said by Yelverton Justice, that in
all cases where Executors are charged by the name of Executors or
Administrators, that there the Action shall be against them in the Detinet
only: Flemming chief Justice answered, that ^rue it is in all personal
things, where they are named as Executors, Action shall be in the Detinet: But
as it is an Action of Debt for Rent reserved upon a Chattell real, and an
Executor is as an Assignee in Law, and so charged as privy in Estate, and not
merely as Executor, and if he have no more Assets then the Rent, which he is
to pay, he may plead nothing in his hands against all the World, and to that,
that has been said, that the Executor has been charged of his own Goods: If
the profits be not more then the Rent, or the Rent more then the profits, to
this he said that in this case where the Executor has the Term, and has not
any other Assets, that they may wave this Term: And in Action of Debt brought
against him for the Rent may plead to the occupation, and that recover: The
reason of the diversity between this case and the case of 28. H. 8. Dyer 14. is
plain, for in an Action of Debt against the Termor himself; Non habuit nec
occupavit, is no Plea, for there was a contract between them, and for this
privity of contract is the Lessee charged, though he did not occupy: But in the
case of an Executor the privity of the contract is gone, and so may be a
difference: But yet it seems if he have Assets sufficient to pay the Rent he
cannot wave it: And to the case 14. H. 4. 28. that has been cited that does
speak nothing, how the Action should be brought: And the Justices have seen
the record of Hargraves case, and the Reversall of that: And they said the same
error which was in Hargraves case, is in this case, and for that bring your
Writ of Error in the Exchequer chamber if you will, for we so adjudge: And then
it was moved that the Lord Rich was Tenant in Tail, of part of the reversion,
and Tenant in Fee-simple of the other part, and so it seems that he ought to
have two Actions, because he has as two reversions: But it was resolved by all
the Court, that if a man have a reversion of part in Fee-simple, and of the
other part in tail, and makes a Lease for years rendering a Rent, he shall have
but one Action, both being in the hands of one: But otherwise it had been if
the reversion had been in several hands they should not Join in Debt, and for
that Fenner put this case; two Coparceners are of a reversion and they make
partition, now the Rent is apportioned, and they shall sever in Debt: But if
one dies without Issue, and the part discends to the other Parcener, now he
shall have but one Action of Debt again, and so it is if a man makes a Lease
of two Acres rendering Rent, and after grants the reversion of one Acre to J. S.
and of the other Acre to J. N. now they shall sever in Debt for this Rent, but
if J. S. and J. N. Grant their reversions again to the first Lessor, he shall
have but one Action of Debt, and so the exception dissalowed by all the Court,
and the Judgment given for the Plaintiff, according to the Verdict.

Yates and Rolls.
THe case was this, J. S. covenants by Indenture with J. N. I. D. Joint
Covenant shall survive.
and A. B. to enter Bond to pay ten pound to J. N. and J. N. dies, and his
Administrator brings a Writ of covenant, and the question was insomuch that
this ten pound was to be paid to J. N. if his Administrator shall have Action
of Covenant, or if the Action shall survive to the other two, and it was moved
by Stephens, that the Action shall be well brought by the Administrator, for
this shall be taken as a several covenant, and this now is in nature of a
Debt, and enures only to him which shall have it, also the payment of the money
which is the effect of the covenant shall be to him only, Ergo the Damages for
the not performing of it shall go to him also, and by consequence to his
Administrator: But it was adjudged insomuch that this was a joint covenant,
that this shall survive to the others, and not well brought by the
Administrator: So also resolved that insomuch that the words are, that he would
enter Bond, and does not say to whom, that this shall be intended to the
Covenantees, and though that the Solvendo is but to one of them, yet that is
very good, as an Obligation made to three Solvendum to one of them is good, by
Fenner and by Williams, Obligation to two, Solvendum ten pound to one, and ten
pound to another, both ought to join in Debt upon this Obligation, and
Judgment for the Defendant.

Sammer and Force.
THe Case was this, The Lord of a Copyhold Manor where Copy holders are for
life, grants Rentcharge out of all the Copyholder shall hold charge.
Manor; one Copyhold Escheats, the Lord grants that again by Copy; the
question was, If the Grantee shall hold it charged or not; and by the whole
Court but Fenner, he shall not hold it charged, because he comes in above the
Grant; that is By the custom; the same Law of Statutes, Recognizances, or
Dowers; but the 10. of Eliz. Dyer 270. by the whole Court, that he shall hold
it charged; but this has been denied for Law in a Case in the Common Bench,
between Swain and Becket, which see Trinity 5. Jacobi: But to Coke Justice it
seemed, that if a Copyholder be of twenty Acres, and the Lord grants Rent out
of those twenty Acres, in the tenure and occupation of the said Copyholder
(and name him) There if this Copy hold Escheat, and be granted again, the
Copyholder shall hold it charged, for this is now charged by express words.

Trinity 8. Jacobi, 1610. In the Kings Bench. Goodyer and Ince.
GOodyer was Plaintiff in a Writ of Error against Ince, and the Case was this,
Ince brought an Action of Debt upon an Obligation Error.
in the Common Bench against Goodyer, and had Judgment to Elegit.
recover, and by his execution prayed an Elegit to the Sheriff of London, and
another to the Sheriff of Lancaster, and his request was granted, and entered
upon the Roll, after which went out an Elegit to the Sheriff of Lancaster upon
a Testatum, supposing that an Elegit issued out to the Sheriff of London, which
returned Nulla bona, and Quod Testatum sit, etc. That the Defendant has, etc.
in your County, etc. upon which Elegit upon this Testatum, the Sheriff of
Lancaster extended a form of the Defendants in a gross sum of a hundred
pounds, and delivered this to the party himself, which sold that to another;
and now the Defendants brought a Writ of Error, and assigned for Error, that
this Elegit issued upon a Testatum, where no Writ of Elegit was directed to the
Sheriff of London, and so this Writ issued upon a false supposall, and upon
that two Testatum where no Writ had issued.
points were moved in the Case:

First, As this Case is, if this were Error in the Execution or not.

Secondly, Admit that it were Error, if the Plaintiff shall be restored to the
term again, or if to the value in Money; and it was moved by Davenport of
Grayes Inn, that this was no Error; and to that he took this difference, That
true it is, when a man brings an Action of Debt in London and has Judgment,
that without request of the Plaintiff he is to have his Elegit to the Sheriffs
of London, where originally the Action was brought; and in such Case he cannot
have Elegit to the Sheriff of another County, without surmise made upon the
return of the first Elegit, and the surmise ought to be true, or otherwise it
is Error; but where upon the request the Elegit is granted to both Counties at
the first, and so entered upon the Roll: It seems to him that insomuch that he
may have both together, that if the surmise be false, that this is but a fault
of the Clarke, which shall be amended, and shall be no Error; and to that he
cyted the Case of 44 Edw. 3. 10. Where an Elegit issued upon a Recognizance of
a hundred Marks, and the Writ of Extent was a hundred pounds, and the Sheriff
extended accordingly of the Land of the Defendant, and he came and showed this
to the Court, and prayed that the Writ should abate, and a new Writ to the
Sheriff, that he might have restitution of his Term, and Thorp said this is
but a misprison of the Clark, and the Roll is good, and he shall have the Land,
but till the hundred marks are Levied, and after this you shall have
restitution of the Land, which case proves as he conceives, that if the Roll
warrant a writ in one manner, and the Clark makes it in another manner, that
this shall not be Error, and so in this case the Roll warrants an Elegit
originally to the Sheriff of Lancaster, and though that this is made upon a
Testatum, this shall not be Error, because warranted by the Roll: And to the
second point he would not speak, for if that were no Error, the second point
does not come in question.

Hillary 7. Jacobi 1609. in the Kings Bench. Marsam against Hunter.
IN Trespass the case was this, Copyholder of a Manor, within Confirmation
to a Copyholder, destroys Common.
which Manor, the custom was that the Copyholders should have Common in the
wast of the Lord: The Lord by Deed confirms to a Copyholder to have to him
and his Heirs with the appurtenances, and the point was insomuch that his
Copyhold was now distroied, whether he shall have his Common or not: And
Davyes of Linclones Inn, argued the Common is extinct, and his reason was,
that this Common was in respect of his Tenure and the Tenure is distroid, Ergo
the Common, and he cited the case of 5 Ed. 4. fol. ult. Where the office of the
King of Herraulds was granted to Garter with the Fees and profits, Ab Antiquo,
and also ten pound for the office, and there it is resolved if the office be
determined, the Annuity is determined also, and the case in 7. Ed. 4. 22. b.
Where an Annuity was granted to John Clark of the Crown, and for Term of
life, and after he was discharged of the office, and the oppinion of the
Justices then was, that the annuity was determined, and in 19. Ed. 3. Assis.
83. 12 Assis. 22. A man gives Land to his Daughter and I. S. within the years
of marrying, in frank-marriage, the Husband sues Divorce, the marriage being
dissolved, the Wife from whom the Land first moved shall have the Land again,
so in the principal case, insomuch that this common was in respect of Tenure,
the Tenure being distroied, the common is gone, and this was all his argument,
and he prayed Judgment for the Plaintiff, and another day Brautingham of
Grayes Inn seemed that the common remains for three reasons.

First of the nature of a prescription, and to that there are three manner of
prescriptions.

First personal prescription, and in that Inhabitants may prescribe, as for a
way or matter of ease, as it is said in 7. Ed. 4. 15. Ed. 4. and 18. Ed. 4. and
6. Coke, Gatwoods case.

Secondly real prescription, and this is Inherent to the Estate, and this is
where a man prescribes that he and all those whose Estate he has, etc.
Thirdly, local prescriptions an that is, where a man prescribes to have a
thing appendant or appurtenant to his Manor, and this is so fixed to the Land,
that whether soever the Land goes, the prescription is concommitant unto it,
and it seems to him that this common is annexed to the Land by prescription
and so local, and cannot be separated but always shall go with the Land, into
whosoever hands that comes, (but Dixit non Probant:) And for this he supposed
that the custom of Copyhold is that the Copyhold shall descend to the
youngest Son, if the Copy holder purchase the Freehold and the Fee-simple of
the Copyhold, so that this is made Freehold, this shall descend to the
youngest Son; so if a Copyholder by custom is discharged of payment of Tithes
in kind, so the office of the master of the Rolls has many liberties
pertaining to it, and this is granted but Durante placito, yet if the King
grant that in Fee as he may, yet he shall have all the Fees and Privileges
annexed to that, and so it seems to him that this common being annexed to the
Land, though that the Estate be increased, yet the common remains, his second
reason was of the manner of conveiance, and that was by confirmation, and if
that conveiance had been by Feoffment, peradventure the common had been gone:
But a confirmation enures allwaies upon an Estate precedent, and though that
this sometimes inlargeth the Estate, yet this does not alter the Estate, as to
any privileges annexed to it, his third reason was of the matter of the
confirmation, and that is; that he has confirmed it with the appurtenances,
and this seems to him, admitting that the common had been extinct, yet these
words with the appurtenances amount to a new grant of a common, as in the case
of Corody, in 22, Ed. 4. 17. and 18. If the King grant to one such a Corody as
I. S. had, he shall have so much bread and beer as I. S. had, so here when he
grants and confirms that with the appurtenances, this is with all such
privileges as I. S. had; so here when he confirms with the appurtenances,
this is with all the privileges that the old Estate had, and so this should be
a grant of such common as was annexed to that, and so it seemed to him for
these reasons that the common remains; to which it was said by Davies of the
other part, that he agreed all the manners of Prescriptions, but he denied that
it was a local Prescription, that is to Land, but only to an Estate, and this
proves well the words of the Prescription, for the Copyholder ought to
prescribe, that is, that every customary Tenant within the Manor, etc. So he
has his common in respect that he is customary Tenant, and this is in respect
of the Estate which he has by the Custom, and not in respect of the Land, and
that this shall not enure as a new Grant, he cited a case to be adjudged
Michaelmasse 43. and 44. Eliz. in the Kings Bench, Rot. 367, Where in
Trespass, the Defendant justifies the lopping of Trees in the wast of the
Lord, where the custom was that every Copyholder might shride the Trees in
the wast of the Lord, and that he was a Copyholder there, and the Lord granted
to him the Inheritance of his Copyhold, with all such Lands, Tenements, and
Commons of Estovers pertaining to the Copyhold, and adjudged that insomuch
that the Customary Estate was distroied, this custom was not now annexed to
the Land, but being determined with the Estate cannot be said appertaining to
it, and for that the Justification ill; and it seemed to him to be all one with
the principal case and it was adjourned, and after in Michaelmasse Term 8.
Jacobi, It was adjudged that the Common was extinct and not revived.

Hillary 7. Jacobi 1609. In the Kings Bench Proctor against Johnson
THE Case has depended seven years in this Court upon a Express Covenant
qualifies Covenant in Law.
Writ of Error, was this; Two Joint Tenants for years of a Mill, one grants
his Estate severally to another and dies, the Grantee does not enter yet: The
other reciting the Lease to him made and to his companion jointly, and that his
companion died, so that all belonged to him as Survivor (as he intended) grants
all the Mill to Johnson, and all his Estate, Right, and Interest in that: And
covenants that the Grantee there shall continue discharged and aquitted of all
Charges and Encumbrances, or other Act or Acts done by him, and after binds
himself in a Bond to perform all Grants, Covenants, and Agreements, contained
in the Indentures, according to the intent and meaning of the parties, and
after the Grantee of his companion entered into the half, and the question
was, If the Bond were forfeit or not; and it was adjudged in the Common Bench
that the Obligation was forfeited: And the matter was argued this Term in this
Court by Yelverton of Grayes Inn, that the Bond shall not be forfeited, for
the Bond was with Condition to perform all Grants, etc. According to the true
intent and meaning of the parties, and then let us see what was the intent of
the parties, and suerly this appears by the recital in the Indenture, and for
that he said that all appears to him as survivor (as he conceived) so that he
was doubtful of that, and for that his meaning was, that if he had all, then
to grant all; and if he had but a moity, then to grant but the moity, and this
proves well the words subsequent, where he says that he granted the Mill (and
all his Estate, Right and Interest in that,) so that he did not intend to grant
more then his Estate, and these words subsequent qualify the general words
precedent, and so it seems to him that the Obligation shall not be forfeited.

And Sir Robert Hitcham the Queens Attorney to the contrary, and that the Bond
was forfeited, for he has bound himself to perform all grants, and he has not
performed his Grant, for he granted all the Mill, and then though but a moity
passes yet he shall forfeit his Bond, if the moity be evicted, and for that if
a man which has nothing in the Manor of D. makes a Lease by Deed indented to
J. S. and binds himself to perform all Grants, though that nothing passes, yet
if he enter and be ejected he shall have Debt upon his Obligation, and he cited
one Yelvertons Case to be adjudged, but did not tell when, where a man which
has nothing in the Manor of Dale, covenants with J. S. to stand seized to the
use of him and his Heirs at Michaelmas, and before Michaelmas he purchases the
Manor of Dale, and it was resolved that no use shall be raised at Michaelmas,
for he had not the Manor at the time of the Covenant, and also it was resolved
that no Action of Covenant lies upon the Covenant, but he said that it is a
clear Case, that if he had entered into a Bond to perform all Covenants in the
Indenture, that the Bond shall be forfeited, though that he could not have
action of Covenant upon the Covenant, and also he said, that he well agreed the
Case of the Lady Russell, which was adjudged also (but Nescio quando) where a
man made a Lease for years of the Manor of Dale except one Acre, the Lessee
binds himself to perform all agreements, and after the Lessee enters into the
Acre, this shall be no breach of the condition, for this exception is no
agreement, for nothing shall be said an agreement in an Indenture but that
which passes in Interest, and so he said that though that the Lessee cannot
have an Action of Covenant in the principal Case, insomuch that this is so
special, yet the Bond shall be forfeited upon these Words, grants, and
agreements, and the Covenant special does not qualify the general express
grant; and after four Justices, that is Flemming the chief Justice, Willams,
Yelverton, and Crook, were of opinion that the Bond is forfeited, and this for
the generalty of the Grant, and his Intent was clearly to pass all, but
Williams, if he had said, Totum Molendinum suum, or all his Estate in the Mill,
there paradventure it should have been otherwise; and so a difference where he
says he grants the Mill and all his Estate in that, and where he grants all
his Estate in the Mill, for in the first case all passes by the Grant of the
Mill, and these words which are after, are but words explanatory, as ^rooke
said; and it was adjourned.

And after in Easter Term next ensuing, Hitcham the Queens Attorney, came
again, and prayed that the Judgment be affirmed, and Yelverton of Grayes Inn
said, that he has considered of Nokes Case 4. Coke, and this was all one with
this case, for the case was thus, A man lets a House in London by these words,
demise, Grant, etc. That the Lessee should enjoy the House during the Term
without eviction by the Lessor or any claiming from or under him, and the
Lessor was bound to peform all Covenants, Grants, Articles, and Agreements, as
our case is, and there by the whole Court, that the said express Covenant
qualifies the generalty of the Covenants by the Words Demise and Grant, which
is all one with our case, for first he granted, Totum Molendinum, and after
covenant that he should enjoy, etc. against himself, and all which claim, in,
by, from, or under him, and after binds himself to perform all Grants,
Covenants, Articles, and Agreements, and so it seems to him, that it is au
express Covenant, in this Case as well as in other, and qualifies the general
Covenant, employed by the word (Grant) and then the Grantee being outed by a
title Paramount, no Action of Debt upon such Obligation, and prayed that the
Judgment be reversed, and the Justices said they would consider Nokes Case, and
the next day their opinions were prayed again, and the chief Justice said that
he had seen Nokes case, and said, that there is but a small difference between
the cases, but he said that some diflemay be collected.

For first in our case, is a Recital of the Estate of the Grantor, that is,
that all belongs to him as Survivor, and for that this was a manner of
Inducement of the Grantee to be more willing, and forward to accept of the
Grant, and to give the more greater consideration for it, but in Nokes case
there is no recital, and so this may be the diversity.

Secondly, In Nokes Case, the Term past all in Interest at the first, and the
Grantee or Lessee, had once the effect of this Lease in Interest of the Lessor,
but in this case when two Tenants in Common, and one grants Totum molendinum,
there passes but a half at the first, and so the grant is not supplied for the
other half, and then if the special Covenant shall qualify the general, etc.
The Grantee shall not have any remedy for a half at all, and this may be the
other diversity, but admitting that none of these will make any difference,
then he said that all the Court agreed, that this point in Nokes Case was not
adjudged, but this was a matter spoken collaterally in the case, and the case
was adjudged against the Plaintiff for other reasons, for that that he did not
show that he which evicted this Term had title Paramount, for otherwise the
Covenant in Law was not broken, and for this reason Judgment was given against
the Plaintiff, and not upon the other matter, and so the whole Court against
Nokes Case: And the chief Justice said, that to that which is said in Nokes
case, that otherwise the special Covenant shall be of no effect, if it cannot
qualify the generalty of the Covenant in Law, he said that this serves well to
this purpose, that is, that if the Lessor dies, and any under the Testator
claim the Estate, that the Action of Covenant in this case lies against his
Executors, which remedy otherwise he cannot have, for if a man makes a Lease by
these words (Devise and Grant) and dies, Action of Covenant does notly against
his Executors, as it is said in the 9. Eliz. Dyer 257. But otherwise upon
express Covenant, and then this express special Covenant shall be to this
purpose. And also it seems to him that if a man devise and grant his Land for
years, and there are other Covenants in the Deed, that in this case if the
Lessor binds himself to perform all Covenants, that he is not bound by his Bond
to perform Covenants in Law, and he cited that to this purpose the Books of 22
H. 6. and 6 Ed. 6. B. Tender, that if a man makes a Lease for years rendering
Rent, this is Covenant in Law, as it is said, 15 H. 8. Dyer, and a man shall
have Debt or Covenant for that, and yet if a man binds himself in a Bond to
perform all Covenants where there are other Covenants in the Deed, and after
does not pay the Rent, no action of Debt lies upon this Obligation, nor the
nature of the Debt altered by that, and he said that the Monday next, they
would pronounce Judgment in the Writ of Error accordingly, if nothing shall be
said to the contrary, and nothing was said.

Hillary 7. Jacobi 1609. In the Kings Bench. Bartons Case.
THE Case was this, A man was taxed by the Parish for Reparations Prohibition.
of the Church, and the Wardens of the Church sued for this Taxation in the
spiritual Court: and hanging this Suit, one of the Wardens released to the
Defendant all Actions, Suits, and Demands, and the other sued forward, and upon
this the Defendant there procured a Prohibition, upon which matter showed in
the Prohibition was a Demurre joined, and Davenport of Grayes Inn moved the
Court for a Consultation, and upon all the matter as he said the point was but
this, If two Wardens of a Church are, and they sue in the Court Christian for
Taxation and one Release, if that shall bar his Companion or not. And it seems
to him that this Release shall not be any Bar to his Companion or Impediment
to sue, for he said, that the Wardens of a Church are not parties interested in
Goods of the Church, but are a special Corporation to the Benefit of the
Church, and for that he cited the Case in 8 Ed. 4. 6. The Wardens of the Church
brought Trespass for goods of the Church taken out of their possession, and
they counted, Ad damnum Parochianorum, and not to their proper damage, and the
11 H. 4. 12. 12 H. 7. 27. 43 H. 7. 9. Where it is said expressly, that the
Wardens of the Church are a corporation only for the Benefit of the Church, and
not for the disadvantage of that, but this Release sounds to disadvantage of
the Church, and for that seems to him no Bar, also this Corporation consists
of two persons, and the Release of one is nothing worth, for he was but one
Corpse, and the moyity of the Corpse could not release, and for these reasons he
prayed a consultation, and Yelverton to the contrary, and he took a difference,
and said, that he agreed, that if the Wardens of the Church have once
possession of the Church, there in Action of Trespass brought for these Goods,
one Warden cannot release, but this tax for which they sue is a thing merely in
Action of which they have not any possession of that before, and there he
cannot sue alone, and for that this release shall bar his Companion. And the
Court interrupted him, and said, that clearly consultation shall be granted,
and Flemming chief Justice, we have not need to dispute this release, whether
it be good or not, and there is a difference where a suit is commenced before
us, as if Wardens of the Church brought Trespass here for Goods of the Church
taken, and one Release, then we might dispute if this release were good or not,
but when the matter is original begun before them in the spiritual Court, and
there is the proper place to sue for this Tax and not any where else, we have
nothing to do with this Release, and for that by the whole Court, a
consultation was awarded.

Hillary 7. Jacobi, 1609. In the Kings Bench. Styles Case.
UPon a Motion made by Yelverton on the behalf of one Styles, the Case was
this, Styles had a Judgment in Ejectione firm, and Defendant reenters after
Possession delivered by Habere facias possessionem.
was put in possession by the Sheriff, by an Habere facias possessionem, and
after the Defendant enters again, within the two weeks after Execution, and
the Writ was returned, but not Fyled; and Yelverton moved the Court for another
Writ of execution; and by Williams he could not have a new Writ of Execution,
but is put to his new Action, and the Fyling of the Writ is not material, for
it is in the election of the Sheriff, if he will Fyle or return that or not;
but be said, if the Execution had not been fully made, as he said there was a
Case, where the Sheriff made an Execution of a House, and there were some
persons which hid themselves in the upper Lofts of the House, and after the
Sheriff was gone, they came down and outed those that the Sheriff had put in
possession before; and in this Case a new Writ of Execution was awarded; but
there a full Execution was not made, and so the difference: But the chief
Justice said, That if the Sheriff put a man in possession, and after the other
which was put out enters in forthwith, that in this Case the Court may award an
Attachment against him, for contempt against the Court.

Hillary 7 Jacobi, 1609. In the Kings Bench. Gittins against Cowper.
Custom of one Manor was, That if any Copyholder within Custom among
Copyholders.
the Manor committed any Felony, and this be presented by the Homage, that the
Lord may take and seize the Land; a Copyholder committed Felony, and this was
presented by the Homage, and after the Copyholder was Indicted, and by Verdict
acquit, and the Lord entered, and if his entry were lawful or not, was the
question: The points were two.

First, If the Custom were good.

Secondly, Admitting the Custom to be good, if this Verdict and acquittall
shall conclude the Lord of his entry.

And Walter of the Inner Temple argued that the Custom was good, and that the
Lord was not concluded by this Verdict: And to the first point he said, That it
was a good Custom; First insomuch it might have a reasonable beginning, and
for that he cyted the Book of 35 H. 6. where it is said, that such Customs
which might have reasonable beginning should be good, and to that he cyted a
Case which was adjudged, as he said, in 27 Eliz. and was one Delves Case, and
the Case was this, A Quo warranto issued against Delves, to know Quo warranto
he held a Leet, to which he pleaded, that he was seized of such a Message, and
that he, and all those whole Estate he has in the said Message have used
allwaies to have and hold a Leete there within the Message: If this
prescription, that is to have a Leete appendant to a single Message was good
or not, was the question: And it was adjudged insomuch that by reasonable
intendment it might be that this house was the Site of a Manor, and the Lord
granted that with the Leet, the Prescription adjudged good; and he said that
many Customs are grounded upon the nature of the place, and for that he said
that this Manor was adjoining to great Woods, and it might be that the
Copyholders committed Felonies and outrages, and after fled into the Woods,
and there lived, and yet enjoyed the benefit of their Copy-holds, and for that
it was reasonable for the Lord to annex such a restraint and condition; that
is, if they committed any Felony, this should be a forfeiture of their
Copyhold, and this should be a means to bridle them to commit such heinous
and odious offenses: And that Customs ought to have a respect to the place, he
cyted the Case of 12 H. 3. where the Custom of the Isle of Man was, That if
any man stole a Hen or a Capon, or such small matter, that should be Felony,
but if he stole a Horse that should not be Felony, for a man may privily convey
away a Hen or might consume it, but for the smalnesse of the place, and being
compassed with the water, he could not so do with a Horse; So in 39. H. 6.
That the married Wife of a Merchant in London, may sue and be sued by the
Custom, and the reason is that London is the chief City and place of
Merchandise within the Realm of England, and it is conceived that the
Merchants cannot be always resident there but sometimes beyond Sea, or other
where about their business and Affairs, and for that it shall be reasonable
that his Wife shall sue and shall be sued in his absence, and in time of E. 1.
Title Prescription, the custom of Hallifax, that if any Felon be taken with
the manner, he shall be forthwith beheaded, and this was as it seems for the
better suppressing the common Felonies there committed, and so he concluded for
this Reason, that this custom might have such reasonable beginning, and in
respect of the place that should be a good custom.

His second Reason was, that this might begin at this day lawfully, Therefore
this shall be good, and for that he cited the case of 10 H. 7. 11. That if a
man make a Feoffment upon condition, that the Feoffee shall not commit Felony,
that this is a good condition, but he said, that he supposed that if the
Feoffee commit Felony, and the Feoffor enter into the Land, and after the
Feoffee is attaint of this felony, that now the Lord shall enter by Escheate,
and his reason was, that the Statute of Westminster 3. De quia emptores
terrarum, prohibits any man to make a Feoffment, to the prejudice of the Lord,
to his Wardship or Escheat.

His third reason was, that this was a good Custom, insomuch that this was
annexed to an Estate created by custom, and for that he cited one Skeggs case
to be adjudged in 24 year of Eliz. and was thus, that is, The custom of a
Manor was, that a married wife Copyholder might surrender to the use of her
last will, and after might devise to her Husband, and it was adjudged, insomuch
that this was annexed to her Estate which begun by custom, this was a good
custom, and the 3 of Ed. 3. At the common Law such custom is void, and after
he cited a Judgment in the point given in this Court, 23. of Eliz. Rot. 5014.
or 504 or 5004. that the same custom was adjudged a good Custom: after he
answered some objections which might be made against this custom, that is.

First for the uncertainty of the time when the presentment shall be by the
Homage, and to that he said that the Lord may make that when he will, and the
time does not take away the offense, and no prejudice upon that discends to the
Heir, but is to his advantage.

Secondly, Because no number certain of the Homage, and that every trial must
be by twelve, and to that he answered, that we are not now in point of Trial,
but only for the information of the Lord.

Thirdly, this is against the nature of a Court Baron to inquire of Felonies,
and to that he said, there is not any inquiry made here, but only to inform the
Lord, and such a thing is not against the nature of the Court which inlargeth
this.

Fourthly, The offense is against the King, and a common person shall not have
the punishment of that, to that he said the King shall not have any benefit of
it, for he shall not have any Escheat of Copyhold lands for Treason or Felony.

Fifthly, This is against the Kings Prerogative, to that he said, that Custom
may be against the Prerogative of the King, as if a man claim Waife or stray by
prescription, these are things given to the King by his Prerogative, and yet
Prescription for them is good, and so he concluded this first point, that the
custom was good.

To the second point he conceived, that this verdict and acquittall shall not
conclude the Lord, and for that he said, that at the Common Law, if a Verdict
had been given and no Judgment upon it, the party was not concluded to bring
the same Action, 18 Ed. 3. 35. Then comes the Statute of 2 H. 4. And this outs
nonsuit after verdict, Nonsuit after* Verdict.
and yet if verdict be imperfect, or finds a thing not in Issue, there nonsuit
may be after verdict, as it is said in 22 Ed. 4. 10. And if verdict be given in
the point, and Judgment upon that, does not conclude the party to have action
of more high nature, as it is said in 3 Ed. 3. and 3 Assise 1. and Hudsons ease
in the 4 Coke, and as it is in Trials of Land, so it is in trials of life, as
2 R. 3. 14. 7 H. 4. 34. Then if the party himself shall not be bound by
verdict, A fortiori, a stranger shall not be, also every Estoppell there ought
to be a matter of estoppell, for the Jury is not sworn to give their verdict
according to the truth in Deed, but according to the evidence to them given,
and then if faint evidence or no evidence be given, it shall be hard that this
shall conclude any of his right, also there is no party to be estopped because
a stranger as is aforesaid, also the acquittall is in such manner, that is,
that he has not committed the Felony in manner and form as in the Indictment
is alleged, and this does not answer the Custom, because general, so it
seems to him, that this shall not be any conclusion to the Lord, and so for
both points the entry not congeable.

And Stevens to the contrary, and it seems to him briefly that the custom was
not good, and he denied the Rule, that is, that this might have reasonable
beginning by agreement of parties shall make a custom good, and for this
Littleton says in his chapter of villainage, that if the Lord of one Manor
will prescribe to have Fine, if any of his Tenants marry their Daughters
without his license, this is a void custom, and yet it may be such agreement
between the parties at the first, and it seems the custom not reasonable, for
it is too general, that is; if any Tenant, and this does not exclude Infants.

Secondly, if any Felony be committed, and this includes petty Larceny, and
Maime by involuntary means, for these are Felonies, and for that see, 13 H. 7.
19. 6 H. 7. That in Appeal of Mayme, a man shall count Felony, and yet it shall
be hard that a man shall loose his Land for these Felonies. Secondly, Homage
cannot inquire of the fact of Felony, but of the conviction of Felony, and so
it seems to him the custom ill, and to the other point it seems that the Lord
shall be concluded, and to that that has been objected that the Lord is a
stranger to the verdict, and for that cause shall not be estopped, he said that
the Lord is no stranger, for in this case every man is party, and every man may
give Evidence for the King, and he cited the case in the time and title of
Mortdancester, where the case was, where a man was as principal for the Death
of J. S. and another as accessory in receiving the Principal, after the
principal was Outlawed, and the Accessory hanged, and the Lord seized the
Land of the Accessory for Escheat, after came the principal and reversed the
Out-Lawry, and was found not guilty, and the Heir of him which was hanged,
entered upon the Lord, and adjudged, insomuch, that there cannot be an
Accessory, unless there be a principal; that the entry of the Heir was lawful
in this case, so he said in this case, insomuch that the Copyholder is
acquitted by verdict and found not guilty, and seems to him that the entry of
the Lord should not be lawful, and by the whole Court the custom was good,
but they did not deliver any opinion upon the second point, for they moved the
parties to Composition.

Hillary 7. Jacobi 1609. In the Kings Bench. Barwick and Fosters Case.
A Man made a Lease for two years at Michaelmas, rendering two Reservation of
Rent, Michaelmasse, or ten days after.
shillings yearly during the Term, at the Feast of the annunciation of our
Lady, and Michaelmas or ten days after, at the Feast of Saint Michaell in the
last year the Rent is not paid, the question was what remedy the Lessor has
for his Rent of this half year, and the opinion of Flemming chief Justice,
and Williams was, that he has no remedy.

And first they said, as this case is, the Lessee has election to pay either
upon the Feast or upon the tenth day after, and that is for the benefit of the
Lessee, then he has made his Election not to pay that at the Feast of Saint
Michaell, then it is clear that the Lessor has no remedy by way of distress,
for the Term is ended before; and by Action of Debt upon the Contract, he has
no remedy as it seems, as this case is, for the Contract is that the Rent shall
be paid yearly during the Term, then when the Term is ended, the contract is
determined, and for that the chief Justice said, That if a man makes a Lease
at Michaelmas for a year, rendering Rent yearly at our Lady day, and the ninth
of October which is after Michaelmas, that the Lessor has not any remedy for
the Rent of the last half year, for that is not reserved to be paid yearly,
according to the contract: And Yelverton Justice agreed that the Lessee has
election as above, but he says, when that is behind the tenth day after
Michaelmas, then the Lessor shall bring his Action of Debt, and declare that
the Rent was behind at the Feast of Saint Michaell, and shall not make mention
of the ten days after; and Coke Justice said, That it seems to him that the
Lessee shall not have the benefit of these ten days after the last Feast, for
the words of the Lease are (rendering Rent yearly) during the term at the
Feasts aforesaid, or ten days after; so that the Lessee shall have the benefit
of these ten days during the term, but not after, then he shall not have
these after the last Feast of Saint Michaell, for then shall the term be
ended: And after in Trinity Term, 8 Jacobi, The Case was moved again; and
then Flemming chief Justice conceived, That the Lessee shall not have ten
days after the last Feast, and this upon construction to be made reasonably,
for otherwise the Term being ended, the Contract should be determined with the
Term, and so the Lessor should be without remedy for his Rent, and he said,
that reservations are not taken so strictly, according to the letter.

And for that he cited the case of Hill and Granger in the Com. fol. 171. Where
a man makes a Lease for a year: And the Lease was made in August, rendering Rent
yearly at the Annunciation of our ^ady and Michaelmasse, upon condition of
Re-entry: In this case the first payment shall be at the next Michaelmasse
after the making of the Lease, and not at the Annunciation of our Lady, though
this is first in words, and this by reasonable construction, for otherwise this
word (Yearly) shall not be supplied, and of this see the Action, and so he
said in this case, Rent is reserved yearly during the Term, at the Feasts of
the Annunciation of our Lady or Michaelmasse or ten days after, he shall not
have ten days after the last Feast: But Williams held his old opinion that the
Lessor has no remedy for the last half years Rent, and it was adjourned.

Hillary 7. Jacobi, in the Kings Bench. Grymes against Peacocke.
IN Terspasse for his Close broken, The Defendant justifies, Grant of Common
extinct.
that it was used within the Manor of D. that every Farmer of such a house
(and averred, that that had been allwaies let to Farm,) had Common in the
Lords wast: The house came into Exposition of Usage.
the hands of the Lord in Possession: And he granted the house and the wast to
J. S. in Fee, J. S. Bargains and Sells the house to J. N. with all Commons,
Profits, and Commodities, used, occupied, and pertaining to the same: And after
grants the wast to another: If the Grantee of the house shall have Common in
the wast was the question: And Yelverton argued that the Common was gone, for
if he shall have Common, this shall enure as a new Grant of a Common, but this
cannot so enure for two reasons.

First, when a man will grant a Common, he ought to show the place in certain
where the Grantee shall have this Common, or otherwise the Grant is void; But
here no place is showed, and for that it cannot enure as a new Grant of a
Common.

Secondly, If that be a new Grant, yet this has reference to the usage, that
is, Quod Vsitatum est, etc. And this Vsitatum is void, for it seems to him
that Lessee for years cannot allege a usage, for every (Vsitatum) ought to go
in one self same current, not interrupted as in ths case of a Coppy-hold: But
here every new Lease, is a new contract, and so the usage is interrupted, and
then the Grant having the reference to the usage, and that is void usage,
nothing shall pass by this Grant, and for that in Long, 5. Ed 4. 40. If a
custom be against Law: And that is confirmed by the Act of Parliament, this is
void confirmation, for it has reference to a void custom, so here this Grant
has reference to the usage, and for that it seems to him that the Common is
gone.

Hutton Sergeant to the contrary, and that the Grantee of the Message, shall
have common, for this usage is not a thing by strictness in Law appertaining
to the Land, but this has gained his reputation, that that shall pass very
well in a conveiance by apt words: And for that it will not be denied, but if a
man makes a Lease for years to one, and grants him Common for all his Kine,
etc. And after this Lease expires, and he makes a new Lease, and grants such
Commons as the first Lessee had, that this shall be a good grant of Common to
the Lessee: So he said in this case, this grant of the house with all profits
and commodities used, occupied, and appertaining to the said Message, shall be
said a grant of such Common, which other Lessees of this Manner have used, and
this by reasonable construction in Law, to make good the conveiances of
Laymen, according to the common speaking, for Benign sunt Faciende
Interpritationes Chartarum, etc. and for that he cited the case of Hill and
Grange in the Comment: Where the case was: That a man made a Lease for years
of a house and a hundred Acres of Land appertaining to that, though the Land be
not appurtenant to the house, yet insomuch that this has been usually occupied
with the house, this shall pass as appertaining to it, and so 26. Assis. 38. A
man makes a Lease for life rendering Rent, and after grants over the Rent to J.
S. and dies: The Heir grants and confirms to the Grantee and his Heirs, the
same Rent with clause of distress, and the Tenant for life dies, now is the
Rent reserved upon the Estate for life determined, and yet this shall enure as
a new grant of another Rent in quantity: So in Sir Moyle Finches Case, the case
of uses, and Durham in Ejectione Firm: A Lease was pleaded of a Manor,
whereof the feilds in which, etc. Were parcel: And Issue was joined, Quod non
Demiset Manerium: And upon this Issue found it was, that there were not any
Freeholders, but diverse Copyholders, and this was allwaies known by the
name of a Manor, and it was adjudged that this shall pass for him which
pleads the demise of the Manor: Then if in Judicial proceeding the Law makes
such favorable construction to make that pass by a Manor which is no Manor
in truth, because it has been usually known by the name of a Manor, then it
seems to him, a Fortiore, that no more beneficial construction shall be made
in conveiances, which allwaies shall be construed to the intent and meaning of
the parties, and so it seems to him that the Common remains, and Crook,
Yelverton, and the chief Justice Flemming conceived that in reason he shall
have the Common, but they did not give any absolute opinion as to that: But
Williams Justice to the contrary, and that the Lessee for years cannot have
more, then he contracted for in his Lease, and then the Vsitatum void, and the
Lessees have taken that by wrong: And this Grant having reference to a void and
wrongful usage, is not good, and it is adjourned.

Hillary 7. Jacobi 1609. In the Kings Bench. Stydson against Glass.
Stydson brought an Ejectione Firm against Glass: and upon special Ejectione
firm.
Verdict the case was this: that is, That one Holbeame was seized of the Land
in question in Fee, and made a Lease for life to Margret Glass, and after
covenanted with John Glass Husband of the said Wife Lessee, that before such a
day he would Levy a Fine to A. B. and to the Heirs of A. of the same Lands,
which Fine should be to the use of the said Glass for sixty years, to begin
after the death of the said Margeret Glass, with Proviso within the same
Indentures, that if the said Holbeame at a certain day should pay to the said
John Glass a hundred pounds, that then the Lease should cease, and then of
that the Conusees should stand seized to the use of the said John for his
natural life, and after the said Holbeame disseised the said Margeret Glass
the Lessee, and made a Feoffment to the use of himself and one Alice, with
whom he intended to marry, and to the Heir of their two bodies begotten, the
remainder to the right Heirs of the Feoffor, and after the said Feoffor and
Alice intermarried, and after the said Holbeam tendered a hundred pound to the
said John Glass the Lessee for years, and after the said John Glass assigned
over his Term, and after the said Holbeam by Deed indented and enrolled,
bargained and sold the said Land to the said John Glass and his Heir, and
after John Glass dyed, and the Inheritance descended to the said Margeret
Glass Lessee for life, the Conusor dies, his Wife enters, and lets to the
Plaintiff, the Defendant enters upon him, and the Plaintiff reenters and
brings Trespass against the Defendant, which justifies as servant to the
Assignees of the Term, and if upon all the matter, etc. And it was argued by
Nicholls Sergeant for the Plaintiff, and he moved three points in the case.

First if by this feoffment upon such condition as this is, had been Extinct at
the Common Law, or remains to the Feoffor notwithstanding the feoffment, for
if he have interest in the Land, then it is extinct by the Livery, for it is
given of the Feoffor and past out of him, and yet the Feoffee cannot have, and
for that it is extinct, but if it were but Authority, as in 15 H. 7. Authority
to sell the land of the Devisor, then the Authority remains, and is not
extinct by the Feoffment of the land, so power of Revocation to a stranger
which is but authority is not extinct by a feofment: Albaines case Coke 112. a.
But if it be right in Interest, then it is extinct by the feofment, as power of
revocation to the Party himself, resolved to the point in Albains case, so of
Title to a Writ of Deceit, 38 Ed. 3.

So of a title to be Tenant by the Courtesy, 9 H 7. 1. But by 42 Edw. 3. by a
Feoffment made by a Parson of Land of his Rectory, the Tithes of that Land are
not extinct, but remains notwithstanding the Feoffment, for that it was
collateral to the title of the Land, as the Cases of Authority are, which were
put before; then if this power to alter a Lease by payment of a hundred pound
be not any right nor Interest, but a collateral power, and the authority not
extinct by the Feoffment, but remains; but admitting that it is in nature of
an ordinary Condition, and that before the Statute it should be extinct by the
Feoffment, for that it is the gift of the Feoffor, and yet it is not
transferable to the Feoffee: If now by the Statute of 32 H. 8. which inables
Grantees of reversions to take advantage of Conditions, if the condition be not
transferred to the Feoffees, and so over, to he to whose use, that then by
consequence this remains to the Feoffor, which was the he to whose use, and
then the tender of the money after, well may alter the Lease; it seems that so,
for before the Statute if a Lease for years had been made upon condition to
cease, and after the Lessor enters upon the Lessee and makes a Feoffment, and
the Lessee re-enter, and breaks the condition, the Feoffee shall take
advantage of that condition, being by way of ceasing of an Estate; so after the
Statute, the Feoffee of the Lessor shall take advantage of the condition of
Re-entry, and of every other condition annexed to the reversion, as well as of
one condition to cease, before the Statute, and as well that every Grantee
shall do since the Statute, for though that he comes in by Feoffment, which is
wrong to the Lessee, yet after the re-entry, the Lessee is in nature of a
Grantee: And he cyted the Case of Clyfford Error, 7. Ed. 6. to be, that Lessor
entered upon his Lessee and made a Feoffment, if the Lessee re-enter, the Rent
and the Condition are revived again and the Feoffee shall have both, see
Cliffords Error, 7. Ed. 6. Dyer the last case, and 1. M. Dyer 96. 43. but there
is not any such matter, and for that it seems that he has another report of
this case of Cliffords Error, or otherwise he meant some other case and not
Cliffords Error, so is our case the condition being inherent to the reversion
shall pass with the reversion, be that by grant or feoffment; and when the
reversion is revived by the entry of the Lessee, the condition shall be revived
also, and it is the more strong, insomuch that the Condition is, that upon the
payment of the money the Lease for years shall cease, and not that the Lessor
shall re-enter, that such Feoffee shall take advantage of a condition by way of
ceasing of that at the Common Law: 2. point, and for the second point he would
not argue against that, that he took to be clear, and for that he conceived the
Law to be against his Clyent in this point, though that after the Disseisin and
Feoffment the freehold could not accrue.

Thirdly, The third point was, that after the disseisin of the Tenant for life,
he that had future Interest of a Term to begin after the death of the Lessee
for life (during the disseisin) assigns over all his Interest, if this
assignement be good or not, and he argued that not, for by him the disseisin of
the Tenant for life, the future Interest to commence after the death of the
Tenant for life, is converted into a Right, and Right of a Term cannot be
transferred over, for though that Lessee for years to begin presently, may
grant over his Interest before his Entry, and it is well for that, that it is
an Interest forth with, yet if before his Entry the Lessor be disseised by a
stranger, yet by him now, he cannot grant his Interest over for that, it is
converted into a Right of a Term, but he ought to re-enter before that the
Lessee may grant over his Term, so in our case, though that before the
disseisin of the Lessee for life the future Interest was transferrable over,
for that, that it was Interest, though that it was not a Lease in posaession,
yet when the Tenant for life was disseised then his Interest of a Term was
turned into a Right of a Term, and then it is not transferable over till the
re-entry by the Lessee for life, and he said that it was resolved by the 2.
chief Justices in the Star Chamber as he has heard, that if Lessee for years
be, and before his entry a stranger enters, and disseises the Lessor, that now
the Lessee cannot grant his Term before that the Lessor has entered, or he
himself has gained the Term in posaession: And so it seems to him, that
the future Term does not pass by this assignement, and then it is
extinguished by the purchase which comes after, and then the Justification of
the Defendant as Servant to the Assignees not good: And so upon all the matter
he prayed Judgment for the Plaintiff.

Williams Justice said, that it was clear, if a man have a Lease for years, to
begin after the death of a Lessee for life, as is the case at the Bar, that
though that the Lessee for life be disseised, yet the Interest remains good
Interest to the Lessee, and is not turned into a Right of a Term, and for
that he may grant it over, notwithstanding the disseisin, and so is Sapphins
case 5. Coke 104. Otherwise if the Lessee for years had been any time in
posaession by force of his Lease, and it is Adjourned.

At another day the same Term the case was argued again by Yelverton of
Grayes Inn of the other part, that is for the Defendant, and first he said
that the Plaintiff which claims under the Wife, of Hlobeame has not any right
to one Moytie clearly, for the Husband and the Wife were Joynt-Tenants before
the coverture: So that they take by Moyties and not by Intirities, and when the
Husband bargains and sells all, that is a separation of the Joyntenancy, and
his Moytie is gone for ever, as it appears by 3. M. Dyer 149. 82. So that for
one moytie it is clear, that the Plaintiff has not any right any way, how ever
the case prove, for the other Moytie, and this Moytie which was conveied by the
Husband is descended to the Defendant, which has no special outer found by
the Verdict: But only that he entered which he well might, having the other
half, and then no Trespass found by the Jury, and also the Damages found by
the Jury are Entire, and then being no cause of Damages for part, there shall
be no Judgment for the residue: And the first point that he moved was, if
after this disseisin and feoffment over, the Feoffor might tender the money to
cease the first Estate, and it seems that not, for the Freehold cannot
accrue, as it seems to him by any tender after his disseisin, and so it has
been agreed to him as he said by the Council of the other part, and then by
him this condition consisting of two parts, this is Disseisin of one Estate and
Accruing of the other Estate, if by this desseisin the condition be distroied,
for the accruing of the Estate, it seems also that it shall be distroied as to
the ceasing of the first Estate; for if a condition be distroied in part it
shall be distroied in all, for it is Entire and cannot be apportioned, and by
consequence if one Estate cannot accrue, the other shall not cease: And he
resembled it to the cafe in the 14. H. 8. 17. And Perkins, condition being in
the Coppulative one part being dispensed with the other, was a discharge, so
when a man has election to do one of two things, if one be discharged (though
that it be by the Act of God) as by death, etc. Yet the other shall be
discharged by the Law, as it was in Langtons Case 5. Coke 22. a Fortiore when
one is discharged by the Act of the party, also by him if he had made any
Feoffment after this desseisin, yet the very disseisin would destroy the
accruing of the Estate, for though that he do not gain Fee by the disseisin
but only Estate for life, and retains his old reversion in him, according to
9. H. 7. 25. Yet the Fee and the Freehold are so conjoined by descent of that
Estate alters an entry, as it appears by 3. Ed. 3. Entry Congeable 58. And if
he in reversion disseise Tenant for life, the Contingent uses shall never rise,
by Chidleys Case first of Coke 158. Condition that he retain his old
remainder, no more of the accruing of the Fee in our Case, for by him it
appears by 10. Assis. and Nicholls Case Com. That Estate ought to accrue upon
posaession, or at least upon an Estate in being, and not upon a right of an
Estate only: And for that he cited 6. R. 2. Pleasingtons Case, Lease for years
upon condition, that if the Lessee be outed he shall have Fee, though that he
be outed yet he shall not have Fee, for that, that at the time of the condition
performed he had but a right of Term, and no Term in posaession, so is our
case after the disseisin, he having but right the Estate cannot accrue.

Secondly if the Grantee, or he to whose use, may perform the Condition,
either by the Common Law, or by Statute Law: And he conceived that none of
these might perform that, for first at the common Law, though that Grantees of
reversions may take advantage of a Condition by way of cesser of Estates, upon
the condition performed, yet this is only when the condition was to be
performed of the part of the Lessee, and so was the case cited by Sergeant
Nicholls of 11 H. 7. but if the condition were of the part of the Lessor,
otherwise it was, as the Book is in 26 H. 6. Entries. And then a Fortiori here,
the Assignee of a Disseisor cannot perform the condition, which may be
performed of the part of the Lessor.

But he agreed the case of Littleton, that an Assignee of an Estate may perform
a condition in preservation of an Estate, otherwise of an Assignee of a
Reversion, in destruction of an Estate, so at the Common Law it is clear, that
the Feoffee cannot perform the condition, and by him it is clearly out of the
Statute of 32 H. 8. for this Statute does not extend to a collateral
condition, as it appears by Spencers case 5. Coke, and so has been many times
after this adjudged, and this is a collateral condition, Ergo, etc. And so
concluded, and prayed Judgment for the Defendant.

Nicholls Sergeant to the contrary, and that this Disseisin has not suspended
the condition, but that he may pay the Money, and make the Estate to cease
notwithstanding the Disseisin, for-that, that the condition is collateral,
like to the 20 of Ed. 4. and 20 H. 7. That where a Feoffee upon a collateral
condition takes back an Estate for years, yet this shall not suspend the
condition, but it may be performed or broken, notwithstanding the Lease, for
that that it is collateral, so in our case, for suppose that the condition had
been if he marry Mistress Holbeam, that then his Estate shall cease, and as well
it shall be upon the Tender of the Money here, and he said that this case was
late in the Common Bench. This feoffment was made to the use of the Feoffor for
life, Remainder to another for life, the Remainder to the third in tail, the
Remainder to the right Heirs of the Feoffor in fee, with power of Revocation,
and after the Feoffor lets for years, and during the Term he revokes the mesne
Remainders, and it seems to the Justices that well he may, for that that the
Lease for years goes only out of the Estate for life, as he said, and for that
the power of Revocation as to the Mesne Remainders was not suspended, Quere of
the truth of this case in the common Bench, for perchance it is not truly
collected, but so entered, and so he prayed Judgment for the Plaintiff.

Flemming chief Justice said, that the point of the principal case would be,
if by the wrong of the Lessor the Estate of the Lessee shall be prevented to
accrue, then he might perform the condition to determine the ancient Estate,
that is, the Lease for years, and it is adjourned,

Pasch. 8. Jacobi 1610. In the Kings Bench. Earl of Shrewsbury against the
Earl of Rutland.
IN a Writ of Error, the Earl of Rutland brought an Assise of Error.
Novel Disseisin against the Earl of Shrewsbury and four others, and the
Plaint was of the office of the keeping of the Park of Clepson, and of the
vailes and fees of the said Park, and of the Herbage and Paunage of the same,
and the Demandant made his title, and alleged that the Queen Eliz. was seized
of Clepsam Park in fee in right of her Crown, and that she being so seized by
her Letters Patents under the great Seal, granted unto one Markham the keeping
of the Park of Clepson; with the vailes and fees; and the Herbage and Paunage
of the same Park for his life, after the Queen Eliz. reciting the Grant made to
Markham, and that Markham was alive, gave and granted by her Letters Patents,
to the Earl of Rutland the Office of the keeping of the said Clepson Park,
with the Fees and Wages to that appertaining; to have and to hold to him for
his life, after the death of Markham or after the surrender, or forfeiture of
his Letters Patents, and further granted the Herbage and Paunage to the said
Earl of Rutland for his life, and does not say when this shall begin, after
which the Queen Eliz. died, and the Eee-simple descended to our Lord the King,
which-now is as lawful Heir to the Crown of England, which granted that to the
Earl of Shrewsbury, after which Markham dyed, and the Earl of Rutland
entered, and was seized till the Earl of Shewsbury with four others entered
upon him, and dissersed him, and to that the Tenants alleged no wrong no
disseisin, and when the Assise was to be taken in the Country, the Array was
challenged by the Tenants, for that that one of the Tenants in the Assise, had
an Action of Trespass hanging against the Sheriff, and this challenge was not
allowed, and the Assise being perused at large for the Herbage and Paunage,
they found, that the said Queen Eliz. was seized of Clepson Park as aforesaid,
and by her Letters Patents as before is rehearsed, granted the Keeping of this
to Markham for his life, and further by the same Letters Patents granted to him
the Fees and Wages to that belonging, and further granted by Letters Patents,
and does not say (Easdem) to him, the Herbage and Paunage of the said Park, and
that the Queen after the reciting the Grant made to Markham, and that Markham
was alive, granted to the Earl of Rutland the keeping of the said Park and
vailes and fees, to have and to hold after the death, surrender, or forfeiture
of the Letters Patents of Markham for his life. And further by the said Letters
Patents, she granted the Herbage and Paunage of the same Park to him for his
life, as more fully appears by the Letters Patents, and it was not expressed,
as to the Herbage and Paunage when that began, and they found the death of
Markham, and that the Earl of Rutland put two Horses into the said Park to
take seisin of the said Herbage and Paunage, and they found further the grant
of the King to the Earl of Shrewsbury of the fee-simple, and of that prayed
the advice of the Court, and to the keeping of the Park they found the seisin
and disseisin of that, and of the fees and wages to the Damages, etc. And this
being adjourned into the Common Bench, was remanded into the Country, and there
Judgment was given for all for the Demandant, and after this it came into the
Kings Bench by Writ of error, and the Errors assigned by the council of the
Tenants, and argued at the Bar were four.

The first was that the Earl of Rutland himself, between the verdict and the
Judgment hunted in the Park and killed a Buck, and took a shoulder of that for
his fee, and so he has abated his Assise, and so the Judgment was given upon a
Writ abated, and therefore they cannot plead that in abatement, insomuch that
it was mesne betwixt the Judgment and the verdict, they assigned that for
error.

The second was, because the principal challenge was not allowed, where that
ought to have been allowed, and the challenge was, that one of the Tenants had
an Action or Trespass hanging against the Sheriff before the Assise.

The third was, Because the Jury have found the Letters Patents made to
Markham, and that the Queen granted to him by her Letters Patents the custody
of the Park of Clepson in Clepson. And further by the same Letters Patents
granted the vailes and fees, etc. And further granted the Herbage and Paunage,
and have not found that this was granted by the same Letters Patents, and then
if this be not granted by the same Letters Patents, then there is not any grant
of this to the Earl of Rutland, because there is no receitall of the Patent by
which the Herbage and Paunage was granted to Markham.

The fourth error was, that they have erred in point of Law, and to that the
point is but this, the King grants the Herbage and Paunage of a Park to one for
life, and after reciting that grant, and that the Patentee is alive, grants
that to another, and does not say when that shall begin, and it seems to them
that the Argument for the Plaintiffes in the Writ of error, that this was a
void grant, and so the Judgment erroneous, but I have not the Report of the
Arguments of the Conncellors at the Bar, but only of the Judges, which moved
two other errors in the case, not moved by the council at the Bar, and
Crook Justice rehearsed the case as before.

And to the first error he conceived that this is no error, and that for two
reasons,

First, He took a difference between a thing which abates the Writ by Plea,
as if a man brings an Assise against another, and Abatement of a Writ by entry.
mesne between verdict and Judgment, the Plaintiff dies, this matter shall
abate the Writ without Plea, and for that if Judgment be given upon such
verdict, the Judgment is erroneous, but in our case an entry does not abate the
Writ without pleading that, and now as this case is, this cannot be pleaded,
being between Verdict and Judgment, and for that it shall not be assigned for
Error, see 19 Assise 8, Where this difference is taken, and agreed.

Secondly, Admit that this entry might have abated the Writ in Facto without
Plea, yet there is no such entry alleged, which might abate the Writ in Facto
without Plea, for the entry is alleged that the Earl of Rutland entered to
hunt, and killed a Buck, and took a shoulder of that for his fee, and it seems
that this is no such entry that shall abate the writ, for he has now entered to
another purpose to hunt, the which he could not do, but the entry ought to have
been alleged that he entered to keep, for in every entry the intent of the
Entry is to be regarded, and to this purpose he cited the case of Assise of
Freshforce, Com. 92. and 93. Where entering into the Seller hanging the Assise
of that, to see the Antiquity of the House, there was no Entry to abate the
Writ and the case of 26 Assise 42. where the Disseisee, hanging the Assise
comes and sets his foot upon the Land, but takes no profits, and adjudged that
he should recover notwithstanding, so in this case the intent is not showed,
that is, that he entered to keep possession but to hunt, nor was it such entry
which should abate the writ, and to that which is said that he killed a Buck, and
took the shoulder of that for his fee, this does not help, for if that had been
a Buck which he might to have killed by virtue of his Office, he ought to have
showed his warrant, for otherwise a Parker cannot kill a Buck if not that it be
for his fee, and then he shall have the Buck, and not a shoulder only, also it
is alleged that he took a shoulder, and does not say the best shoulder or the
right shoulder, and this ought to be showed in certain.

And so for he first Error he couceived that this is no cause to reverse the
Judgment, and to the challenge he said, that he would speak to that at the
last, and for that he now spoke to the errors supposed in the grant.

And first to Markhams Grant, where the Jury found the Queen Eliz. granted to
him the keeping of the Park, and by the same Letters Markhams Grant.
Patents grant the fees and Wages, and further granted by her Letters Patents,
and does not say (Easdem) the Herbage and Paunage, it seems to him that this is
very well, for two reasons.

First, insomuch that there is a copulative, which is this word (Et) and also a
Relative, which is this word (Vlterius) and this word conjoynes the matter
precedent with the subsequent, and the word (Vlterius) has necessary relation
to the same Letters Patents, and so Ex precedentibus and subsequentibus, the
Jury has well found the matter.

Secondly, these words are supplied in the second Patent, for there the Jury
have found that the Queen has granted that to Marham by the same Letters
Patents, and so for these two reasons he Earl of Rutlands Patent.
concluded that this is no Error to reverse the Judgment: And to the Patent
made to the Earl of Rutland, it seems to him also, that this is very good,
and all that he said in effect was, that in construction of the Patents of the
King, such exposition is to be made, that if any reasonable meaning may be
conceived, they shall not be defeated but shall stand good: And so he said in
our case, that it is necessarily intended that this was also to begin after the
Estate of Markham determined, and for that good: And he said that a man ought
not to make a curious and captious interpretation of the Kings Patents, for
Talis Interpretatio injure Reprobatur: And to the Challenge.
challenge, that seemed unto him a principal challenge, and this not being
allowed, where it ought to be allowed, this is an error, as it is said 8. of
Assizes 23. and for this error it seems to him that the Judgment shall be
reversed, and to that he said he relied much upon the book of 11 H. 4. 25.
which takes a difference between Debt and Trespass for battery, for the book
says that a man may demand his Debt, without giving occasion of any malice:
But Battery is an evil Action, and there the book is resolved, that it shall
be a principal challenge, and so he says in Trespass, this being with force
and Arms, that, etc. And in 8. H. 5. in a Assise, the Tenant challenges the
array, because he had an Action of Trespass hanging against the Sheriff: And
there the array was affirmed because it appears that the Defendant had brought
this Action by Covin against the Sheriff, which case proves, as he said, that
if there be not any Covin this is a principal challenge, and 38 H. 6. 7.
accordingly, and the case 28. Assise 11. where the Defendant in Assise
challenged a Juror, because he had an Action of Trespass hanging against him,
and was outed by award, and in 21. Ed. 4. 12. it is said where there is an
apparent favor, or apparent displeasure, there shall be principal challenge,
and certainly though the Law may intend, that a man may lawfully demand his
right, and without malice, yet it appears that the nature of men is perverse
and froward, and few Actions are begun without apparent displeasure, especially
Actions of Trespass, Pedibus Ambulando, and vexation plainly appears, when
Actions are begun upon such slight occasions, and in Actions of Trespass there
issues a Capias for a Fine, and so the Defendant shall be Fined and
Imprisoned, and sure to be deprived of his liberty is a thing distastefull.

And it cannot be but that displeasure shall be between them, which endeavor
to restrain one the other of their liberty; and so he concluded that this was
a principal challenge, and not being allowed this is error, and so for this
cause he reversed the Judgment: Also it seemed to him as this case is, there
is no seisin found of the Paunage, for the Jury have found that the Earl of
Rutland has put in two Horses, and it seems to him that Horses cannot take
seisin of Paunage, which is properly meat for Hoggs, and so for this reason
also, insomuch that there is no seisin found of the Paunage, and the Jury ought
to find of necessity a Seisin and Desseisin, it seems to him that this is
error, and so the Judgment ought to be reversed, and at the same day Williams
Justice rehearsed the case as before, and in his argument he spoke.

First, to Grants. Secondly to the challenge.

Thirdly to the abatement of the Writ; And it seems to him, that none of these
matters were sufficient to reverse the Judgment, but yet he conceived for two
other causes that the Judgment shall be reversed.

And first concerning Markhams Patent, that the Jury have found very good,
though that they have not said by the same Letters Patents, but he said that it
had been more proper if they had found that the King had granted that by the
same Letters Patents, and for that he cited the case of Information of Mines in
the Com. And the pleadings before the case, there the Letters Patents of the
King are pleaded, and where the King grants diverse things, it is there said,
that the King by the same Letters Patents granted, and so the case of Grendon
against the Bishop of Lincoln, where the King by his Letters Patents, granted
to a Deane and Chapter that they should hold an Advowson to their proper use,
and further granted by the same Letters Patents, etc. And so he said in this
case that this had been more properly found; if it had been found that the King
(Per Easdem Litteras Patentes) granted, yet this is very good as it is, and
this as he said by the Intendment, for it cannot be otherwise intended, and for
that he cited the book of Entries in Title Covenant: That where a man brings a
Writ of covenant, and counts upon an Indenture, that is, that the Defendant
covenanted to do such a thing, and further covenanted, and does not say by the
same Indenture, yet this is very good because it cannot be otherwise intended,
but when that is by the same Indenture, and where things shall be taken by
Intendment, he cited the case of 5. Assis. 2. Where in Assise of Common, the
Plaintiff made him Title, that is, that he was seized after the Coronation of
King H. this shall be intended H. 3. See Brook Limitation 4. and the Case of
17. Eliz Dyer 342, Where these Letters H. R. A. F. shall be intended Henricus
Rex Angliae Franciae. etc. And he cited the case of 21. H. 7. 32. Where a man
pleads a release made in Villa de West. the County of Middlesex, and does not
say secondarily, In Predicta Villa: And there these Justices held that good,
and it shall be intended the same Town, so he said in this case, this shall be
intended that Grant by the same Letters Patents (though that (Easdem) be left
out: And to the Grant to the Earl of Rutland, he held that good, also though
that it is not expressed as concerning the Herbage and Paunage when that Earl
of Rutlands Patent.
should begin, and he said that this is also for the intent, and also he said
that this is not in prejudice of the King, nor in deceit of the King, nor to
the double Intendment, and for that good: And he put the case where the King
made a Lease for one and twenty years rendering Rent, and does not show when
that shall begin: That shall begin from the Date of the Letters Patents,
because it cannot be otherwise intended, so in the principal case the grant of
the Herbage and Paunage depends upon another Grant: That is, the custody of the
Park which was to begin after death, surrender, or, etc. of Markham, and
having relation to that by this word (Vlterius) that shall be necessarily
intended to begin at the same time, and he well agreed the books of 3. H. 7.
fol. the last, and 6. H. 7. 14. 8. H. 7. 1. 9. Eliz. 259. 7. Ed. 6. Dyer 80.
That there is no reversion of an office: But yet the King may grant an office
after the first Grant determined, and this shall be good: And so shall be in
our case of the Herbage and Paunage, and he cited the case of 8 H. 7. 12. 13.
where the King was Founder of an Abbey, and he had granted a Corody to another
for life, and after he released that, and granted it to the Abbot, this shall
not be a good release presently, because another has the possession for
present of it, but this shall be good after the death of him which has this
granted for his life: And he cited the case of the Lord Chaundois 6. Coke,
where the King grants the Manor of Dale in tail, and after grants the Manor
to another, this shall pass the reversion, for this is all that the King can
pass: So he said in this case, this shall pass in such manner as it may
pass, by which he concluded the Grant to the Earl of Rutland good: Also to
the challenge, it seemed to him it is no principal challenge, Challenge.
and for authority he cited the case in 11. H. 4. That has been cited of the
other part, which was for him as he said, for this takes the difference between
Debt and Battery, and 38. H. 6. a. Juror was challenged because one of the
parties had an Action of Trespass hanging against him, and this was not any
principal challenge, unless it be Trespass of Battery, and to the book of
20. Assis. 11. Where a Juror was challenged, because he had Trespass against
him before the Assis. he said it did not appear by the book, what Trespass
that was: So it shall be intended Battery, and he concluded with this
difference, that if such an Action be hanging which tends to the utter undoing
of him, against whom it is brought, then if the Defendant in such Action make
the array, this shall be a principal challenge, but if it be but such an Action
in which a man shall recover but his Debt or Damages or such lawful duties;
there to say that such Action is hanging between them, at the time of the array
made shall be no principal challenge: And for that he cited the book of 24,
Ed. 3. Where a Tales was returned by the Sheriff of Middlesex, and the party
challenged the Jury, because he sued the Sheriff for the death of his Servant,
and this was a principal challenge, for in such case his life was in question;
the same Law in case of Maintenance and Champerty, for the Law has inflicted
great punishment upon such Offenses, so these matters tend to utter subversion
of his Estate and life, but otherwise in Actions of Trespass, and so he
concluded no principal challenge: To the abatement Abatement.
of the Writ it seems no Error.

First he conceived that there is no entry, and for the reason that Crook had
given before, that is, because he entered to hunt, and not to keep possession,
and has not showed any Warrant to kill the Buck, and he cited the book of the
5. of Ed. 4. fol. 60. Where Babington brought an Assise of the house of the
Fleet, and hanging the Assise, Babington came to the Jury within the house
(when they had the View) with his Council to show Evidence for the view, and
this was not any entry to abate the Writ, and so the entry to hunt is an entry
for another purpose then an entry to keep possession (not being by warrant as
it is not found) and for that no entry to abate the Writ: But admitting that
this had been an entry to abate the Writ, yet being a thing which does not
abate the Writ without Plea, and that cannot be pleaded as the case is, he
conceived was no Error, but if it had been a thing which abated the Writ in
Facto without Plea, then to give Judgment upon a Writ abated is Error: As if
the party die hanging the Writ, or if a woman sole brings an Assise, and takes
a Husband hanging the Assise, Error?
or if the Plaintiff in a Assise be made Judge of Assise, as the 15. of Assise,
in all these cases the Writ is abated in Facto without Plea: But entry shall
not abate the Writ without Plea, and so it seems to him no error: But he
conceived that there were two other errors, for which he reversed the Judgment.

The first was, that this Assise was de Libero Tenemento in Clepson, Variance.
and the plaint was of the keeping of the Park of Clepsom and of the Herbage
and Paunage of the Park aforesaid called Clepsom, and made his Title for
Herbage and Paunage of the Park of Clepsom, and so he conceived that there is
variance between the Plaint and the Title and Park of Clepsom, and Clepsom
cannot be intended one, without special averment, and for that he conceived it
to be error. And to that he cited the case of twelve Assizes two. Where in
attaint the first original was of the Manor of Austy, and the Attaint was of
the Manor of Auesty, and yet for that that the Attaint is founded upon the
Record, and not upon the Original, and the Record was of the Manor of Auesty,
this was very good, but the Book says, that this variance between the
Original and the Record, was sufficient to reverse the Record for error, and
the case in 42 of Ed. 3. Where Scire facias was brought of Tenements in
Eastgrave, and the Fine was of Tenements in Deepgrave, and for the variance the
Writ abated; and in the case of 5 Coke 46. Formedon was brought of the Manor
of Isfeild; and the Tenant pleads in bar a recovery of the Manor of Iffeild,
and this shall not be amended unless it appear that this is a misprision of
the Clark or by other averment, he cited also the case of 3 H. 4. 8. Scire
facias upon garnishment in a Writ of Detinue of writings, the Original name
John Scripstead, and the Scire facias was made John Shiplow, and therefore
agreed that he shall sue a new Scire facias, so he said in the Principal case
the Plaint being of Herbage and Paunage of Clepson Park, aad the title being
at Clepsom Park, these shall not be intended to be the same Park without
averment, and there in no averment in our case, and for that such variance is
such error, that shall reverse the Judgment.

The second error for which he reversed the Judgment was that which was moved
by Justice Crook that the Jury have not found any seisin of the Paunage, for it
seemed to him that a Horse could Seisin.
not take Seisin of paunage, and for that he defined paunage, and he said that
Linwood title-Tithes says, the Paunagium est pastus Porcorum, as of Nuts and
Akornes of trees in the wood, and Crompton says, that this is, Pastus
Porcorum, and he says that Paunagium is either used for Paunage, or the
Paunage it self, and the Statute of Charta de Foresta, says; that every
Freeman may drive his Hoggs, into our royal Wood, and shall have there
Paunage, but he does not say Horses or other Beasts, but he conceived that if
the Earl of Rutland had right in the Park, that this had been sufficient
seisin of Herbage and Paunage also, for Hoggs will feed upon grass as well as
upon Akornes, and he cited the Book of 37 H. 6. says that Seisin to maintain
an Assise, ought not to be of a contrary nature to the thing of which seisin is
intended to be given, but in one case only, and that is where the Sheriff gives
seisin of a Rent by a Twig or by a Clod of Earth, and this is in case of
necessity, for the Sheriff cannot take the Money out of the purse of the Tenant
of the Land, and deliver seisin of that, and for that he cited the case in 45
Ed. 3. Where Commoner comes to the Land where he ought to have Common, and
enters into the Land, and the Lord of the Waste or the Grantor of the Common
outs him, he cannot have an Assise of his Common upon this outing, for this was
not any seisin of the Common: so it is in this case, the Horses cannot take
Seisin of the Paunage, and so there is no seisin or disseisin found by the
Jury, and then no Assise, and this being after Judgment no abridgment may be of
the Plaint, and so for these last reasons he reversed the Judgment.

And at another day the case was rehearsed again and argued by Abridgment of
the Plaint in Assise. Yelverton. Fenner.
Yelverton and Fenner Justices, but I did not hear their Arguments, insomuch
that they spoke so low; but their opinions were declared by the chief Justice,
and Yelverton affirmed the Judgment in all.

First he held that this entry shall not abate the writ.

Secondly admit that it is abated, yet being between Verdict and Judgment shall
not be assigned for error.

Thirdly, he held that no principal challenge. Challenge prin.


Fourthly, he held both the grants good.

Fifthly, that Clepsam and Clipsam are all one, and not such variance that
shall make Error.

And lastly, that a Horse may well take Seisin of Paunage, and Fenner agreed in
all, but he held that this was a principal challenge, and not being allowed
this was Error, and for this cause and another exception to the Record, which
was not much material, he reversed the Judgment.

And at another day Flemming chief Justice rehearsed the case, and this
argued; and to the first matter he conceived.

First, That it is no such entry that abates the Writ. Flemming.


Secondly, Admitting that it were yet this cannot be assigned for Error.

And to the first matter he took this ground, That every entry which may abate
a writ ought to be in the thing demanded, and for that he said, if a man brings
an Assise of Rent or common, and hanging this Assise, he enters into the Land,
this is not any Entry, which will abate the Writ, and he said that the Park,
and the keeping of the Park are two distinct things, and for that the entry
into one, that is, the Park will not abate the Writ for the keeping of that,
and to that which is said that he took a Fee, that is, a shoulder of a Buck,
that does not make any matter, for two reasons.

First, he has not showed a Warrant he had to kill the Buck.

Secondly the taking of the fee is no entering into the Office, but the
excercising of that, but admit that this were an entry, or the thing it self,
yet he said every entry into the thing shall not abate the Writ, and to that he
said, that if this entry of the Earl of Rutland to hunt was no such entry that
shall abate the Writ, for his office was not to hunt, and for that his entry
being to another purpose, it shall not be said an entry to abate the Writ; and
for that he cited a case, which has been cited, as he said, by Justice
Yelverton, that if a man have Common in the Land of J. S. between the
Annunciation of our Lady, and Michaelmas, and the Commoner brought an Assise of
his Common, and at Christmas* put in his Beasts and this shall not be any entry
to abate his Writ, for it cannot be intended for the same Common, which case is
agreed to be good Law, and he cited the case put by Brook in Assise of
Freshforce before remembered Com. 93. Where hanging a Formedon, the Tenant
pleads in abatement of the Writ, that the Demandant has entered after the last
continuance, and upon the evidence it appears, that many were cutting wood upon
the Land, and the Demandant comes into the Land to them, and warnes them upon
the peril that might ensue to them, that they should do no more then they
could do by Law, and this was found no entry: Also the case of 26. Assise
before cited by Justice Crook, and he said that the Statute of Charta de
Foresta, chapter 11. wills, that every Archbishop. Bishop, Earl, or Baron,
coming to the King by his command, and passing by his Forest, etc. Was
licensed to take one Beast or two by the sight of the Keeper; etc. Put case
then, that the King had sent for the Earl of Rutland, and he had passed through
this Park, and had killed a Buck, had this been an entry to abate this writ,
Quasi diceret non, for this was entry to another purpose, so he said in the
principal case the entry to hunt, and so no entry to abate the Writ, but
admitting that this had been an entry, which would abate the writ, then let us
see if this entry has so abated the writ, being Mesne between the Verdict and
the Judgment, it cannot be assigned for error, and to that he agreed the
diversity before taken What matter shall be assigned for Error after Judgment.
by Crook and Williams, where the writ is abated by Plea and without plea, and
he cited a Judgment in the Kings Bench, between Jackson and Parker 2 Eliz.
where in Ejectione firm the Plaintiff entered Mesne between Verdict and
Judgment, and this was assigned for Error in the Exchequer Chamber, and the
Judgment notwithstanding affirmed, and he said that if Memorandum had been
Variante.
made of it, or if a Jury had found it, and it had been prayed that that might
be Recorded, yet this had not been material, and that that be not assigned for
Error. And to the matter moved by my Brother Williams, that there should be a
variance between the plaint and the Title, he conceived that there is no such
variance, that shall make the Judgment errronious, and to that he examined the
matter.

First that the Assise was of a Freehold in Clepsom, and his title is made of
the park of Clipson, that that cannot be otherwise intended, but that of
necessity it ought to be the same park.

For first there is but one park by all the Record.

Secondly, the plaint says, De parco predicto, which has reference to Clepsom
park, and there is but one park put in view by all the record.

Fourthly, It shall be so taken according to the common speaking.

Fifthly, when he has made his plaint of the custody of the park of Clepsom,
and of the Herbage and paunage of the park aforesaid called Clepsom, these
words (called Clepsom) are but Idle and Trifles, and that which is but
Surplusage shall not annoy. Also he said that J. and E. are letters which do
not much differ in pronunciation, and they are all one as I and he shall be
pronounced as hi; and he cited the Book of 4 H. 6. 26. Where in Debt, variance
was taken between the writ and the Obligation, that is, Quatuordecem pro
Quatuordecim, and this variance was not material, but that the writ was
awarded good, and so he conceived that in this case the variance of Clepsom and
Clipsom shall not be such a material variance, that shall make the Judgment
erroneous, and to the title.

First to Markhams grant, that is, where the Jury have found, Quod ulterius
concessit, etc. And does not say, Per easdem, he held that good without
scruple, and this for the necessary relation, that this had to any thing before
granted, for he said that this should be a strange and marvelous patent which
begun in such a manner, that is, Et ulterius Rex concedit, etc. And there was
not any thing granted before. And for that he cited the case of 11 Ed. 4. 2.
where Debt was brought upon an Indenture against the Abbot of Westminster, and
the Indenture was between the Abbot of the Monastry of the blessed Mary of
Westminster, and rehearsed diverse Covenants, for performance of which
Covenants, the Abbot of Westminster bound himself in twenty pound, and does not
say that the aforesaid Abbot, and yet good, for it shall be intended the same
Abbot, for he is party to the Deed, and the case of 10 H. 7. 12. Where in
Assise of Common the plaintiff makes his plaint of Common appurtenant to his
Freehold in D. and shows for Title, that he was seized of a Message, and of a
Carve of Land in D. to which the Common is appurtenant, and that he and his
Ancestors, and all those whose Estates, etc. have used Common of pasture with
ten Beasts, and exception taken to the title, because he says that he was
seized, and not says, that he is, and yet good by this word (Fuit) for that
shall be intended that he continues seized, so he said that things which are
necessarily to be intended, though they be not so particularly expressed, yet
shall be good by Implication, and so he concluded that this is no Error, for
which the Judgment shall be reversed. And to the challenge, he conceived that
this is not any principal Challenge.
challenge, and to that he put this difference, that if a man brings an Assise
of certain Land, and has an Action of Trespass hanging against the Sheriff for
entering into the same Land, there shall be a principal challenge to the Array,
but if it be for entry into other Land not in demand, otherwise it is, and what
is principal challenge, and what not, he cyted the Books of 3 Ed. 4. 12. 6
Ed. 4. 1. 21 Ed. 4. 67. 14 H. 7. 1. 21. Ed. 4. 10. And to the point in
question, he cyted the Books before remembered by Crook and Williams and no
others, and for that I omit to recite them, and he agreed also that in actions
which concern life, Honesty, Mayme, Battery, to say that he has such action
hanging against the Sheriff, shall be a principal challenge, but Trespass for
entering into Land not, for in Trespass there is no Land to be recovered, also
no damages but to the value of the Trespass.

And in Debt a man shall recover more then in Trespass: And yet it is agreed
that this is no principal Challenge to say, that he has an Action of Debt
hanging against the Sheriff, as the Book of 11 H. 4. is, which has been
remembered, and for this I conceive it no Seisin.
principal challenge: And to the seisin of the Paunages, if a Horse may take
seisin of that, it seems that yea, for I conceive that the taking of seisin
does not consist in the eating or not eating of that, of which the seisin is to
be taken, and for that he cited, that if a man grant to me the Herbage and
Paunage of his Park, and I come into the Park and take the Grass and Herbs
into my hands, or if I gather Akornes, this is sufficient seisin for me to have
Assise, though that I do not eat the Grass, nor the Akornes, and for that,
let us put the case that a man has Herbage granted to him, and he puts in his
Beasts, and before that they eat the grass, they are driven out, none will
deny, but that, that shall be good seisin, for so is the Book of the 22. Assise
84. Where a man has Common granted to him, and he takes the Beasts of a
stranger: and puts them in, and them forthwith drive out, that shall be a good
seisin of the Common to have Assise, so that he said, that the eating is not to
purpose, also he said Horses will eat Akornes, as well as Cowes: And he says
that in the Country where he inhabits being a Wood-land Country, they will not
suffer the Beasts to go into the Woods at a certain time of the year, and
this is when Crabs are ripe, for then their Beasts will eat Crabs, and set
their teethes an edge, and then not being able to chew Akornes do swallow them
whole, and then those Ackornes being swallowed whole, will grow in the Mawe of
the Beast, and so kill them: And he says that though that Horses be not so
proper Beasts, to take seisin of Paunage as Porkes are, yet being put in for
the same purpose, if they are disturbed that shall be Seisin and Disseisin, and
it seems to him that when things are granted to one, that it shall not be
strange to say, that seisin of one shall be seisin of both, and for that if a
man grants all his arrable Land, all his Meadow, and all his Wood, Livery and
Seisin in one suffices for all, but I conceive that this is in respect of the
soil which passes, and so are all of one self same nature, and so he
conceives that this is sufficient Seisin and Disseisin found to have Assise.

And lastly to the Title of the Earl of Rutland, he said that this was good,
and to the Grants of the King he said two things are necessary in all Grants of
the King, that is, a Recital, and a certainty, and when a recital shall be
necessary and when not, and he said that in all cases, when a common person
makes a Lease for years or for life, and the reversion is conveied to the King,
if the King will make Estate to another, he shall not recite this Lease, for
this not being of Record, the King cannot take notice of it, and so he shall
not recite: But in all cases when the King makes a Lease for life, or for
years, and after will make a Grant to another, he ought to recite the first
Estate, because that is of Record: And Justice Yelverton as I heard of those
which were next unto him, put this case: That if the King grants a Lease for
years rendering Rent, and after the King reciting the Lease grants that to
another for years, or grants the reversion to another, and does not recite the
Rent which was reserved upon the first Lease, that this second Grant shall be
void for the not recital: And the chief Justice cited one Phillpotts Case to
be adjudged in the 2. of Eliz. That where the King made a Lease for one and
twenty years, and after reciting the said Lease, grants the reversion to
another, and before that the second Letters Patents were sealed, the first
Lessee surrendered: And said that the second Grant was adjudged void, for the
King intended to pass a reversion, and now he shall have a Possession, and all
that which is said to be in case of Land: Now let us see how it shall be in
case of office, and for that if a common person has ^n office in Fee, and
grants that for life, and after grants the Fee simple to the King, and the King
will grant that to another, there he ought to recite the common persons Grant,
as well as if it had been his one Grant, for there is not properly a reversion
of an office, as the Book cited by my Brother Williams said.

Secondly if the office be recited in Esse, and be not in Esse, the Grant is
void, as Blanyes Case is in the Lord Dyer 3 Eliz. 197. 47. And this suffices
for recitalls: Then for certainty of the Kings Grant, it is said in the 2. R.
3. it is said that the Grants of the King ought to be made in certain, and for
that where the King there Grants to Sir John Spencer that he shall not be
Sheriff, this was void, for the incertainty of the place: But if the Grant had
been of such a County, or such a County, the Grant should be good: Also there
ought to be certainty of Estates, as it is in 18. H. 8. Where the King gives
Lands to one and his Heirs Males, this is void for uncertainty of the Estate,
then it is so averred in our case if there be not sufficient recital and
certainty, and to the recital that is good without question, for she recites
that she has granted that to Markham for if^, and Markham is yet alive, and so
the recital good: Then for the certainty he said, that the rule is, that if
the certainty be declared by express words, or if the King may reduce that to
a certainty, the Grant of the King shall not be defeated, and for that he cited
the case of Information of Mines Comment. But if the King grant to me all Mines
in the Land of J. S. There I shall have all Mines Royal, for the Law says,
the King cannot have other Mines in the Soil of a Subject but Mines Royal, and
so there the Law supplies the Grant, so that they be Mines Royal, though not
expressed in the Grant in certain, so he said in the principal case, that the
Queen has expressly recited, that she has granted the Herbage and Paunage for
life to Markham, and that Markham was yet alive, and after grants that to the
Earl of Rutland, and does not say when that shall begin; the Law says that
shall begin after the death of Markham, for before that it cannot begin: But if
the Queen had expressed in the Letters Patents, that this shall begin forthwith,
then this had been void, as the Lord Gaudy said in Altonwoods Case, 1 Coke fol.
51. And so he concluded the Title of the Earl of Rutland good: So he affirmed
the Judgment in all: But Williams was very peremtory for the conceit of
Paunage that it was not good Seisin: But after Crook Justice recanted his
opinion of that, and insomuch that there were three which concluded for the
reversing of the Judgment: And yet for every point there were three against
two: It was doubted if this Judgment should be reversed or not: And they said
that they would advise with the rest of the Judges, and after that it was moved
again by Sergeant Nicholls in the next Trinity Term, and Yelverton and the
chief Justices would have the Judgment affirmed, but Williams, Fenner, and
Crook, to be reversed, and note well this President, where Judgment was
reversed, and yet for every point there were three Contra two, or four Contra
one, see the first Judgment in the Common Bench Michaelmasse 6. Jacobi
afterward.

Termino Pasche 7. Jacobi, 1609. In the Kings Bench. Trinity College Case.
THE Case was this; King Henry the eight Incorporated the Misnaming of a
Corporation.
Scholars of Trinity College in Cambridge by the name of Masters, Fellows,
and Scholars: Collegij Sanctae et Individuae Trinitatis, in the Town and
University of Cambridge, and in the 6. Ed. 6. They made a Lease by the name of
Master, and Fellows of Trinity College in Cambridge, leaving out the
University: And if this Lease were good or not was the question; And Yelverton
argued that this was not a good Lease, and that for the misnaming of the
Corporation: And to that he said, to every Corporation, two things were
incident: That is, name and place: and if any of those fayl and be not
certainly recited in a Lease, the Lease shall not be good: And he conceived
that this Corporation is founded upon two places, and that one of them: That
is, the University is left out, and for that cause the Lease is nothing worth,
for if a Corporation has two names, one of them cannot be omitted, as it is in
the first of Mary Dyer 96, 97. and 4. Mary 140. and 150. 11. Eliz. Dyer 278.
35. H. 6. 5. and 6. No more then when it consists of two places one of them may
be left out: And for that, if they had been incorporated by the name of Master
and Fellows of Trinity College in Norfolk and Suffolk in a Lease, they
could not leave out Norfolk or Suffolk, but both the places ought to be
incerted: And by him in the principal case, if the Lease had been made by the
name of the Master and Fellows of Trinity College in the Town, and leave out
the University of Cambridge, without question, this shall be void, so here this
being impliedly omitted shall be as strong, as if it had been by express words
excluded, so in the making of every Corporation, the intent of the Founder is
to be considered, and for that it seems the intent of the King in placing that
in both places, was first to erect a College, and that to grace the Town, and
then he has placed them in the University, and this was for the instruction in
good Arts and Learning, and so for these benefits they have of both these
places, nor one nor the other may be left out: And if the King had been
incorporated by the name of Master and Fellows of Trinity College in
Cambridge, and in the Market place of Cambridge: There though that the Market
place was parcel of the Town of Cambridge, yet it seems to him that this
cannot be left out, for peradventure the Founder has a special reason to
place that there, that is, to have all things necessary for them more near unto
them: Also where any stranger demands any possession of them in Precipe Quod
Reddat, or such like, he ought to ensue them certainly and precisely: Then a
Fortiore where they depart with their possessions by their own Act, there they
shall not be unknowing of their one names: And Walter of the inner Temple
argued to the contrary, and he conceived Walter
that the Lease is good, and first he argued the ground which has been taken
of the other part, that is, that every corporation ought to be in a certain
place, and he conceived that there is a certain place in this place, that is,
the Town of Cambridge: And to that, that is said that this Corporation is
founded upon two places, he denied that all together, for no more then one
material Body, may be but in one place Simul and Semel, no more may it be in a
Body Corporate, which has allwaies his resemblance to a Body natural, and for
that he denied the case, which has been put of the other part, of Norfolk and
Suffolk: And he cyted the opinion of the Lord Popham in Buttons Case, in which
the Lord North was Interested, that a Corporation cannot be limited to a
County, as Probos Homines of such a County, or Trinity College in such a
County, but it ought to be restrained to some certain place, or one County, or
a Town: But admit that the Corporation may be founded upon two places, yet he
faith that a University is not Local, but Personal: And to this purpose he
cyted two Records one, in 48 H. 3. Which was this: King H. 3. Intending to keep
a Parliament at Oxford, and knowing that the place was not sufficient to
contain all those, which should be there assembled, and the Scholars together,
sent his Writ which was directed to the Chancellor and University of Oxford,
commanding them that they should remove the University to such a place, till
the Parliament should be ended: And after he sent his Writ to them again,
which was directed to the Chancellor and University, by which he wild that they
should return again, the Parliament being ended, by which Writ he conceived
that it appears that the University was not Local: And this for two reasons.

First insomuch that this Writ was directed to the Chancellor and University,
and every Writ is directed to a person and not to a place.

Secondly the Writ that he should move and remove the University, which is a
thing impossible to do if it should be a place: The other Record was 49. Ed. 3.
And this declares, that there was contention between the Scholars of Cambridge
and the Townsmen there, and the Scholars went to Northampton, and there they
made a Petition to the King, that they might erect a University, and the King
sent his Writ to the Mayor, commanding him that he would not suffer the
Scholars to remain there, and that he would there erect a University, which
proves that a University may be erected at the Kings pleasure, and so cannot a
place, then admitting that a Corporation may consist upon a place, yet the
University not being a place, that shall not be any prejudice to omit it: And
he cited a case which was adjudged as he said, in the 26. of Eliz. which was
thus; The Deane and Canons of Winsor made a Lease for years by the name of
Deane and Canons of new Winsor: And this was adjudged no variance, and the case
of 5. Ed. 4. 5. of the Abbot of Saint Mary's in York which see there, and he
said the Lord Norths Case was thus: That Christ Church in Oxford was
incorporate by the name of Deane and Canons of Christ Church in Oxford: And
they made a Feoffment by the name of the Deane and Canons of Christ Church in
the University of Oxford, and adjudged a good Feoffment: And he said that in
the argument of this case it was said by Gaudy, that if a corporation were made
of Dale, and after Dale is made into a City, they may make a Lease by the name
of a City of Dale, and the Lord Popham (as he said) put these cases: That is,
that if a Corporation be founded of Oxford: And that they made a Lease by the
name of, etc. In the Precincts of Oxford, this shall be a good Lease, yet a
thing may be within the Precincts of another place, and not in the place, and
in the 32. Eliz. was the case of one Jermin and Wylles, that if a Corporation
be made, by the name of Deane and Chapter of Saint Mary's in Exceter is good:
But they agreed in this case as he said, that if it appear that they cannot be
intended allone, otherwise it should be, and he conceived in the principal
case, that it is not necessarily that it should be intended the same place, and
for that he conceived in all those cases that the Lease shall be good, and he
said that there were near two hundred Leases upon the same Title, for which,
etc.

And after this it was argued in Michaelmasse Term 1609. 7. Jacobi by the
Justices: And the opinion of Crook and Williams Justices was, that the Lease
was good: But Fenner and Yelverton to the contrary, and Flemming chief Justice
argued that the Lease was not good; but he said this should not be absolutely
his opinion, but moved a composition betwixt the parties: But insomuch that the
matter was not compounded, in the same Michaelmasse Term, Judgment was
prayed: And Williams Justice brought into the Court a decree out of the Court
of Wards concerning the Case which is put in 7. Eliz. Dyer and 1. Coke Porters
Case: And upon the decree appears, that an Information being exhibited there
against the Master and fellows of Trinity College in Cambridge concerning
certain Land they made Title to, by a Devise made to them, by the name of
Masters, Fellows and Scholars, of Trinity College in Cambridge, and this
Devise was made, four and five of Phil. and Mary, and the Decree recyted, that
upon this were two great Doubts and Questions conceived.

First, If this Devise were good, and also by the Statute of 1. and 2. Phil.
and Mary, which enabled to devise to spiritual Corporations.

And the second point was, That where they were incorporated by the name of
Master, Fellows and Scholars De sancta and Individua Trinitate, in the
University and Town of Cambridge, if this devise made to them by the name of
Master, Fellows, and Scholars of Trinity College in Cambridge was good, and
the Decree rehearsed, that the opinion of all the Justices in England was.

First, That it was a good Devise within the Statute of one and two Phillip and
Mary, as it is reported in the Book before cited.

Secondly, That this was not such a mis-naming of the Corporation which made
the Devise void, and Williams Justice produced this Record, as he said to
fortify his opinion: And he conceived no difference between a Grant and a
Devise, nor no difference when an Estate or conveyance made unto them, and
conveiance made by them, and for that he cited the Case in the 19 H. 8. in
Dyer, where if a man devise Land to the Abbey of Saint Peter's, where the
foundation is Saint Paul, this is a void devise, and so in a grant. And Crook
Justice, to the same Intent. Yelverton Justice to that Yelverton.
Decree showed by my Brother Williams, I conceive a great Difference.

First a Will and a grant, for in case of a Will, it suffices if they be
described by a name, by which the Intent of the Devisor may be sufficiently
known, and a man is intended to be Inops consilij at the time of the Devise
made, and for that that he has not any to instruct him o^ the precise name of
the Corporation for which, etc. And Fenner Justice to the same intent, and if a
man devise to one, Fenner.
and his Assigns, as it is a Fee-simple in case of a Devise, so it is not in
grant, and so devise to one and his Children, is an Estate Tail in case of
Devise, but not in a grant: Flemming chief Justice to the Flemming.
same intent, and to the Decree he said, that this is as good Law, as ever he
heard in his life, but yet he conceived also, that there is a great difference
between a Grant and a Devise, as if a man devise to a Monk the Remainder over,
this is a good remainder, so devise to one the Remainder over, and the
particular Tenant refuse, this is good in a Devise, contrary in grant, and to
the case which is put by my Brother Williams out of the 19 H. 8. Dyer, there is
a great difference, where there is not any such person at all to take, there
the Devise shall be void, as where the Devise to the Abbot of Saint Peter,
where the foundation is of Saint Paul, and where it is a person certain, but
all the name is not so precisely recyted, and to that which is said by my
Brother Williams, that no difference between conveiance made to them and by
them, I agree to him with this difference, that is, if conveyance be made to
them, of what by presumption in Law they are knowing, and are parties as a Fine
levied to them, and such like, but of a Devise it is not presumed, that they
have knowledge of that till the Death of the Devisor, and he conceived that the
Lease is void, and this Decree showed, has not changed his opinion, but he
moved the parties again to an agreement, and would not as yet give Judgment.

Hitcham the Queens Attorney, moved the Court for a Prohibition, Prohibition.
and the case was this, two Merchants covenanted by Deed with their Factor to
allow him ten pound a Month for his Wages, and one Merchant sealed the Deed in
England and the other sealed that upon the Sea, and the Factor came and sued
the Merchants in the Admiralty for his wages, and by the Court insomuch that
one of them sealed it upon the Land, this is not any thing done upon the Deep
Sea, and for that Prohibition was granted to him.

Upon a Motion made by Wincolt of the Middle Temple to dissolve Prohibition.
a Prohibition granted to the spiritual Court, upon a Libel for Tithes, there
the Court took this rule, that when a Consultation is lawfully granted, there a
new Prohibition shall not be granted upon the same L^bell, and yet they
qualified that with this difference, that is, when a Consultation is granted
upon any fault of the Prohibition in form by the M^sprision of the Clark, or by
mis-pleading of any Statute in that, or such like, there a new Prohibition may
be granted upon the same Libell, but if Consultation be granted upon the right
of the thing in question, there a new Prohibition shall not be granted upon the
same Libell, see the Statute of 5 Ed. 3.

Pasch. 9. Jacobi 1609. In the Kings Bench.
BRomehead and Spencer Plaintiffs, Rogers Defendant, where an Action of Debt
was brought by the Plaintiffs against the Defendant as Administrator during the
minority of one J. S. and the Plaintiffs show in their count, that the said J.
S. at the time of the Writ brought, was, and yet is within age of one and
twenty years, and verdict passes against the Defendant, and Crewe moved in
arrest of Judgment, that the Declaration was insufficient, for they have
declared that the Executor was within the Age of one and twenty years, and the
Administration during the nonage shall cease when the Infant comes to the Age
of seventeen years, so that he may be of the age of 17. 18. 19. or 20. years,
and yet the Administration cease, and so of Action against Administrator, and
so was the Opinion of all the Justices, and the Judgment was stayed upon that,
according to the resolution of Piggotts Case 15. Coke 29. a.

PLomer against Hockhead, the Plaintiff declares in Ejectione firm, A married
Wife cannot make a Letter of Attorney.
upon a Lease made to him by three Husbands and their wives, and that the
Defendant ejected him, and at the Issue upon not guilty, and in evidence to
prove this Lease, and the delivery of that, was showed a Letter of Attorney
made by the Husbands and their wives, and the council of the Defendant takes
exception to the Declaration, for they have declared upon a Lease by three
Husbands, and their Wives, with a Letter of Attorney to make delivery, and a
married Wife cannot make a Letter of Attorney: And so this is not a Lease of
the Wives, and so the Plaintiff had declared upon no Lease: And the opinion of
all the Court was, that a married Wife could not make a Letter of Attorney. And
Williams Justice compared this to the case of an Infant, as if an Infant makes
a Feoffment or a lease, and delivers that with his hand, this is not, but
voidable: But if it be executed by Letter of Attorney, that is a disseisin to
him, but by Flimming and Williams, if the Plaintiffs had declared upon a Lease
made by the Husbands only; this had been very good.

Thomas Malin Plaintiff in Replevin against Thomas Tully, the case was; The
Queen Mary was seized of a Park called Eestwood Replevin.
Park in her Demesne as of Fee as in Right of her Crown, and so being seized by
her Letters Patent's, let the said Park to two for their lives, and after died:
And the Queen Elizabeth by her Letters Patents recyting the said Lease for
lives, and that the said Lessees were alive, granted the said Park to Humphrey
Lord Stafford and his Wife, and to the Heirs of the said Lord Stafford of the
Body of the said Wife lawfully begotten: And by the said Patent the same Queen
by these words, Ac de Ampliori et Vberiori Gracia, Nostris Volumus et
Declaramus, quod si Predictus Dominus Stafford, Solvat seu Solvi faciat
prefacto Dominae Reginae 20 s. ad tal^m Diem, Tunc Concedimus, quod predictus
Dominus Stafford habebit revertionem predictam sibi et Heredibus suis: And the
Lord Stafford paid the said sum of twenty shillings according to the said
Letters Patents, and if he shall have Fee-simple or not was the question. And
it was objected that he shall not have it, for the words of the Patent are;
that if the Lord Stafford paies the money, Tunc concedimus, the which words
seem that the Grant shall take effect, in futuro, and it was not a present
Grant, but when the money shall be paid then she granted, but it seems to the
Justice, that it was a good Grant immediately to take effect upon the payment of
the money, and the condition was precedent, till that be performed the
reversion remains in the Queen Eliz. And the Queen might grant by one self
same Patent as by diverse: See 10. Assise 13. 7. Ed. 3. 8. Ed. 2. Feoffments,
and that the reversion shall not extinguish the Estate Tail, but they may well
be together, but otherwise it is of an Estate for years or for life.

Warburton Justice, that the King is specially favored in the Law, Warburton
Justice.
and for that he shall not be enforced to attend in case, as other persons
ought to make attendance: And for that in case where a common person may make a
good Grant, the King also may make a good Grant, and in the case at the Bar,
if the Grant had been made by a common Person, it had been good without
question: But the first objection that has been made was, that where a man
has made a Lease for life or for years, upon condition to have Fee, there the
particular Estate shall be drowned upon the increasiing of the Estate, but the
Statute of Westminster 2. preserves the Estate tail that it shall not be
drowned, and that the Fee in this case does not vest till the condition be
performed, for if the Lessee for years or life, surrender before the
performance of the condition, the Fee does never increase, as it is 14. H. 8.
20. and the Lord Chandois Case, 6* Coke: But the Estate tail remains after the
condition performed, and then has the Fee dependant upon the Estate tail, and
that there is a necessity that there shall be an office, as it was in Nicholls
Case in the Com because of the right and that after the condition performed
then the Fee shall vest, Ab Initio, and this corporates together partly by the
Letters Patents, and partly by the performance of the condition, and so it is
in Butler and Bakers case that it is not a Grant in futuro, but one immediate
Grant to take effect In futuro, see 2. H. 7. for the execution of Chantrey and
Grendons Case in the Com. and 2. H. 7. If the King grant Land to J. S. for
life, the remainder to the right Heirs of J. R. which is in life, the
remainder is good, as well as in case of a common person, and so he seemed that
Judgment shall be given for the Plaintiff.

Walmesley Justice agreed, that it shall be remainder and not reversion,
Walmesley.
as if Lands begin to the Husband and the Wife and to the Heirs of the Body of
the Husband, the Husband dies, this is a remainder, in the Heirs Males and not
a reversion, for it cannot grow higher, and it was not in the King as one
distinct Estate, before the Grant, and Formedon in remainder lies for it, and
though it be misrecited yet it shall be good, and aided by the Statute of
Misrecitalls, and grant of a thousand is suffered to convey the reversion of a
thousand by the common Law; and if the recital were that it was a reversion
depending upon the Estate tail, it was good without question, and the King may
grant five hundred reversions if he will, and that the last (Damus) is ex certa
scientia et mere motu nostris, Damus et concedimus, that if the Patentee pay
twenty shillings, Tunc sciatis, quod nos de ampliori gracia ea certa scientia
et mero motu, nostris concedimus, etc. and that the word Volumus will amount to
a Covenant or a Release, as 32. H. 6. The King by his Patent by these words
(Nolent) that he shall be impleaded, and this amounts to a release, and so
words which intends expressly words of Covenant may be pleaded as a Grant in
case of the King, as it is 25 Ed. 4, So is a common person license another to
occupy his Land, this amounts to a Lease of Land if the time be expressed, so
if a man grants to another that he shall have and enjoy his Land to him and his
Heirs, that by that Fee passes: And if the King grant reversion to begin at
Michaelmasse, the Grant is void, for that it is to begin totally at
Michaelmasse, and does not look back to any precedent thing: But if it relate
to any precedent Act, then that shall be good by relation, and shall pass ab
Initio; see Com. Walsinghams Case 553. b. that in such case the performance of
the condition divests the Estate out of the King, and there is no difference in
this case betwixt the King and a common person, and agreed in the case of
Littleton: Where a man makes a Lease for years upon condition to have Fee,
that the Fee shall not pass till the condition be performed, and with this
agrees 2. R. 2. But if a man makes a Charter of Feoffment, upon condition, that
if the Feoffee enjoy the Land peaceably for fifteen years, that the Feoffment
shall be void: In this case the Fee-simple determines by the performance of
the Condition, and in this case the Fee passes, ab Initio, by the Livery as in
10. Assise 18. Assise 1. 44. Assise 49, Assise. And he agreed that the words
Habeat et Teneat the Reversion passes, and this is good Fee-simple, and this
refers to the first Damus et Concedimus, and so concluded that he seemed that
Judgment shall be given for the Plaintiff.

Coke chief Justice accordingly, and he conceived that there are two questions
upon the substance of the Grant.

And to the first objection, that has been made, that is, that reversion was
granted, and increase of an Estate cannot be of a reversion, and in all these
cases which have been put they are of an Estate in possession, and so is the
case of Littleton also, and he agreed that it shall not be good, if it be not
good, ab Initio, that though there be not other words then Reversionem
predictam: That it shall be good.

And to the second point upon the former: He conceived that the Grant is but a
Grant, and that the condition is but precedent Limitation, when the Estate of
Fee-simple shall begin, and so it is said by Montague, in Colthurst and
Brinskins Case in the Com. And further he says that there are four things
necessary for increasing an Estate.

First, that it ought to be an Estate, upon which the increasing Estate may
increase.

Secondly, the particular Estate ought to continue, for otherwise it is grant
of a reversion in Futuro.

Thirdly, That the Estate which is to increase ought to vest by the performance
of the Condition, for if there be disturbance that it cannot then vest, then it
can never vest.

Foutthly, that both the Estates as well the particular Estate as the Estate
which is to increase ought to have their beginning by one self same Deed, or by
diverse Deeds delivered at one self same time.

And to the first and to prove that he cyted 44 Ed. 3. Attaint 22. Lessee for
years upon condition to have Fee, granes his Estate, the Fee does not increase
upon the performance of the condition, for then it shall pass as a Reversion,
and so the particular Tenant surrenders his Estate, as it is said 14. H. 8. For
if the Privity be destroyed the Fee will never increase, but there is no such
^ycity, but that if the substance of the Estate remains, though it does not
remain in such form, as it was at the first Reversion, the Estate may well
increase, as if Lands be given to the Husband and wife and to the Heirs of the
Husband, upon the Body of the Wife to be begotten, the Wife dies, and the
Husband is Tenant after possibility of Issue extinct, yet he may well perform
the condition, for the Estate remains in substance, and with this agrees, 20
H. 6. Aid; and so it is if a Lease be made to two for years upon condition to
have fee, one dies, the other may perform the Condition, and shall have
Fee-simple, as it is agreed by 12. Assise 5. the reason is that the privity
remains and the Estate also in substance.

Thirdly, As to that also, it seems that it ought to vest upon the performance
of the condition, which is the time limited for the beginning of the Estate,
and if it do not vest then, it shall never vest, and if it do not vest without
Office in this case, it shall never vest at all, but it is for the Honor of the
King, that his grant shall have his effect, and 49 Ed. 3. 16. Isabell
Goodcheaps case, she devised her Lands to her Executors to be sold, and dies
without Heir the King has that by Escheat, yet the Executors may sell it, and
for that divest the Estate out of the King, and so was the Lord L^vells Case,
and the reason is for the necessity, for the Prerogative of the King shall do
no wrong, and there need no continuance of the Estate of the part of the
Lessor, but of the part of the Lessee, and for that if the Feoffor make a
Feoffment, or grant his Estate, this shall not make prejudice or alteration of
the Estate, and for that if the King refuse to receive the Money* yet if it be
tendered the Fee-simple shall vest in the Patentee, and the simple upon that
shall shall increase, see 31 Ed. 1. Feoffments and Deeds B. 32. Quid Iuris
Clamat be.

And to the fourth it seems also, that both the Estates ought to be created and
granted by one self same Deed, or by diverse delivered at one time, Quia quae in
continenti fiunt pro uno habeantur and reputentur, as if a man makes a Lease
for years upon Condition to have in tail, upon condition to have in Fee, this
second condition is void, for it ought to be all one Crant, and cannot be
entire, upon the privity of the first grant, and it is not material though that
the first Estate be drowned upon the performance of the condition, as if the
King makes a Lease for life, the Remainder in tail upon condition, that if the
Tenant for life pay twenty shillings, that he shall have Fee, this shall be a
good Grant, and the Fee well vested by the performance of the condition, though
that the particular Estate for life shall not be drowned.

And to the second point, that is, that the Grant of the King shall not be
good, for that that it is by the words, Reversion aforesaid, he agreed that if
the King makes a Grant to one intent, that shall not enure to another intent:
But this shall enure to the intent for which it is made, Vt res magis vale et
quam periat, and it is for the dishonor of the King, to make an unconscionable
Grant. And to the Objection which is made, that the King is not understanding
of Law, to that he answered, that the King is (Caput Legis) and for that shall
not be intended to be ignorant of it, and for that if a grant may have two
intendments, one to make the Grant good, the other to make the Grant void, it
shall be intended, and expounded in the better sense, that is, to make the
Grant Good, and not to make the Grant void, for this was Iniquae expositio, and
also he said that the Grant shall be good for the first word (Concedo) though
it had not been subsequent also, as if a man grant a Rent charge, and if it be
behind, that the Grantee may distrain for the first Grant, and the Grant is
not of a Reversion In futuro, but grant that if the condition be performed that
then the Fee does pass In futuro, and it seemed to him, that it was a good
devise to prevent that the Estate tail should not be discontinued by Fine nor
otherwise, until the Condition were performed, and so of recovery also; for if
the King grant an Estate tail, and after grants the Reversion in tail, this
second intayl is within the intent of the Statute, and when the Issue of the
first Tenant in tail shall not be barred, the Estate of the Tenant in tail in
Remainder shall not be barred, see the Lord Barkleys case in the Com. fol and 7
Ed. 4. and as to the pleading he said, that when the Issue is offered, which
depends upon matter in Law, there is no necessity to take travers upon the
matter in Law, for it does not belong to lay men to decide the matter in Law,
and for that he concludes, that the Grant in substance is good, and in form
exquesite, and that the Issue in tail in Reversion shall not be barred, for
Quod non in principio valet, non valebit in accessario, and that Judgment ought
to be for the Plaintiff, which was done accordingly.

IN Ejectione firm against Gallop, after Verdict and Judgment for Re-entry
after possession executed.
the Plaintiff a Writ of Habere facias Possessionem was awarded and executed,
and returned and fyled, and after the same Defendant re-entred and outed the
Plaintiff, and Attachment was awarded, and it seems that if the Writ had not
been returned, that then a new Writ shall be awarded, and the Attachment was
awarded upon Affidavit.

IN Action upon the case against Trotman, the words were, Thou Slander of
Attorney.
say thou art an Attorney, but I think thou art no Attorney, but an
Attorneys Clark in some Office, but if thou be an Attorney I will have thee
picked over the Bar the next Term, and thy Ears nailed to the Pillory, and
it seems that these words are not Actionable.

IN waging of Law of Summons in Dower, In petit Cape, there Grand Cape Petit
Cape.
ought to be two summons only, and if it be Grand Cape, then there ought to be
two Summoners and two Veiwers, and Summons upon the Land is sufficient to give
notice of the Demandant, of the thing demanded, and the day in Court. That in
Waging Law, the Waging Law.
Lord Coke said, that the Defendant himself ought to swear, De fidelitate, and
elev^n others, which are named in the Statute of Magna Charta, chapter, Testes
fideles ought to swear De credulitate. IF Tenant for life be the Remainder in
tail to another; the Remainder in Fee to the Tenant for life, and the Tenant
for life releases Release.
to the Tenant in Tail, the Release is good to pass the Remainder in Fee to
the Tenant in Tail, for to this purpose the Tenant in tail has sufficient
possession, upon which the Release may enure, but it shall not be good to pass
the Estate for life, and 19 H. 6. and 9 H. 7. If Tenant in Tail in Remainder,
Disseise Tenant for life, he does not gain Fee-simple by Fulthorp, but if there
be Grandfather, Father, and Son, and the Father makes a Feoffment the
Grandfather dies, the Father dies, the Son is barred, so if the Son had
levied a Fine being Tenant in tail, 33 and 39 H. 6. 43. a. 21 Ed. 4.
Discontinuance.

Pasch. 7 Jacobi, 1609. In the Common Bench. Warbrooke and Griffin.
BEtween Warbrooke and Griffin, a Guest brought a Horse into an Inn in London
to be kept, the which stayed there so long, till Innkeeper in London.
he had eaten out his Worth, and then the Innkeeper caused the said Horse to
be prysed, and then sold him according to the custom of London, and it seems
well he might do it, and that the Sale was lawful, for the Inne-Keeper, as to
the Person of his Guest ought to receive him, and he is compellable to do it,
as it is 5 Ed. 4. 2. and 22 Ed. 4. And for his Goods he ought to keep them
safe, and of the other part the Guest ought to pay the Inne-Keeper, as well for
the meat of his Horse as for his own, as it is 28 H. 6. And it should be
inconvenient that he should be put to his Action for, etc. And for preventing
this mischeife, the Inne-keeper may detain the Horse of his Guest, till he be
satisfied, and it seems to Coke chief Justice, that an Inne-Keeper is not
chargeable with the Goods of any, which is not lodged in the Inn, and the
Goods must be lost by default of the Inne-Keeper, and that the Inne-Keeper is
not compellable to receive the Horse of any, if the Master be not lodged, and
if a Neighbor of the Inne-Keeper come to the Inne-Keeper he shall not answer
for the Goods, for he is not lodged, but as a Tipler, and so if an Innkeeper
invite any to his House Ad Praudendum aut Caenandum, the Inne-Keeper shall not
be charged, as it 35 H. 8. For it was agreed that the Guest ought to averr that
he was lodged in the Inn. And Foster Justice said, that it was adjudged in the
case of one Perin of the Black Swan in Holborne, that by the custom of London,
an Inne-Keeper may sell a Horse which remains with him to be Kept, and has
eaten more then he is Worth, and so it was said by Foster, that where a
Haberdasher of London came to an Inn, and there sold diverse Hats, and after
went to a Fair, and left diverse other Hats in the Inn, the which in his
absence were stolen, and the Inne-Keeper should not answer for them, for that
that the Haberdasher was not lodged in the Inn at that time, and this was the
Case of one Coley in the 25. of Eliz. But Sir Edwin Sands lodged in an Inn and
there left a Trunck, and went to meet the Kiug, the Trunck remaining in the
Inn, in his absence it was stolen, and the Inne-Keeper was charged, Quere the
Difference, if the Owner desire that his horse should go to grass, the
Innkeeper shall not answer, but if an Innkeeper receive the horse, and of his
own head puts the horse to grass, and he is stolen, there the Inn Keeper shall
be charged, and though the Inne-Keeper deliver the Key of the Chamber to the
Guest, yet the Inne-Keeper shall answer for the goods which are stolen, for it
is an employed promise of every part, that is, of the part of the Inne-Keeper,
that he will preserve the Goods of his Guest, and of the part of the Guest,
that he will pay all duties and charges, which he caused in the house, and that
the Inne-Keeper may retain (without custom, by the Common Law, the Horse of
the Guest as a pledge till he be satisfied of all dues, and so a Tailor, and
Goods taken in Withernam, But the Inne-Keeper cannot work the horse of his
Guest in such a case, nor sell his Goods though that they be Bona peritura.

Trinity 7. Jacobi, 1609. In the Common Bench. College of Physicians Case.
THOMAS Bonham brought an Action of false Imprisonment Action of false
Imprisonment.
against Doctor Alkins and diverse other Doctors of Physic: The Defendants
justified, that King H. 8. Anno Decimo of his Reign, founded a College of
Physicians, and pleaded the Letters Patents of their Corporation.: And that
they have Authority by that to chose a President, etc. as by the Letters
Patents, etc. and then pleads the Statute of 32 H. 8. chapt. 40. And that the
said Doctor Alkins was chosen President, according to the said Act and Letters
Patents, and where by the said Act and Letters Patents it is provided, that
none shall practice in the City of London or the Suburbs of that, or within
seven miles of the said City, or exercise the faculty of Physic, if he be not
to that admitted by the Letters of the President and College, sealed with
their common Seal, under the penalty of a hundred shillings, for every Month
(that he not being admitted) shall exercise the said faculty, further we wiland
grant for us and our Successors, that by the President and College of the
Society for the time being, and for their Successors for ever, that they may
chose four every year, that shall have the overseeing, and searching,
correcting, and governing, of all in the said City being Physicians, using the
faculty of Medecines in the said City, and other Physicians abroad whatsoever
using the falculty of Phisicking by any means frequenting and using, within
the City or Suburbs thereof, or within seven miles in compass of the said
City, and of punishing them for the said offenses, in not well executing,
making, and using that: And that the punishment of those Physicians using the
said faculty, so in the premises offending, by Fines, Amercements,
Imprisonments of their Bodies, and by other reasonable and fitting ways shall
be executed: Note the preamble of these Letters Patents is, Quod cum Egregij
officij nostri munus arbitremur, ditionis nostrae, Hominum selicitati omni
ratione Consulere: Id autem vel inprimis fore, si improborum conaminibus
tempestave occurramus, apprime necessarium fore duximus, improborum quoqur
hominum, qui medicinam Magis avaritiae snae causa, quam ullius bonae
conscientiae fiducia profitabuntur undi Rudi et credulae plebi plurima
incommoda oriuntur, audaciam compescere. And that the Plaintiff practiced in
London, without admission of the College, and being Summoned to appear at the
College, and examined if he would give satisfaction to the College according
to the said Letters Patents and Statute, he answered that he had received his
decree to be Doctor of Phi^ck by the University of Cambridge, and was allowed
by the University to practice, and confessed that he had practiced within the
said City, and as he conceived, it was lawful for him to practice there, that
upon that the said President and Commonalty fined him to a hundred shillings,
and for not paying of that and his other contempt, committed him to Prison, to
which the Plaintiff replied as aforesaid, and upon this demurrer was joined:
And Harris for the Defendant, says, that Serieant Harris the younger.
this has been at another time adjudged in the Kings Bench, where the said
College imposed a Fine of five pound upon a Doctor of Physic which practiced
in London without their admission, and for the non payment of that, brought an
Action of Debt, and adjudged that it lay well, and that the Statute of 32. H.
8. extends as well to Graduats, as to others, for it is general, and Gradiots
are not excepted in the Statute, nor in the Letters Patents, and all the
mischeifes, intended to be redressed by this, are not expressed in that, and
the Statute shall not be intended to punish Imposters only, but all other which
practice without examination and admittance, for two things are necessary to
Physicians, that is, learning and experience, and upon that there is the
proverb, Experto credo Roberto: And the Statute intends that none shall
practice here but those which are most learned and expert, more then ordinary:
And for that the Statute provides, that none shall practice here without
allowance and examination by the Bishop of London and the Deane of Paul's, and
four learned Doctors: But in other places the examination is referred only to
the Bishop of the Diocese, and the reason of the difference is, for that, that
London is the heart of the Kingdom: And here the King and his Court, the
Magistrates and Judges of the Law, and other Magistrates are resident, and with
this agreed the government of other well governed Cities in Italy and other
Nations, as it appears by the preamble of the said Letters Patents: and it
appears by the Statute, that this was not intended to extend to Imposters
only, for that that the word Imposter is not mentioned in the Statute: And the
Statute provides that they shall be punished, as well for doing and using, as
for ill using: And also it is provided that the Statute of 1. Marie 1.
Parliament, chap. 9. That the Gardians, Goalers, or Keepers of the Wards,
Goales, and Prisons within the City and precinct of that, shall receive into
his Prison all such person and persons so offending which are sent or committed
to them, and those safely shall keep without Bayl, till the party so committed,
shall be discharged by the said President, or other person by the said College
to that authorized, by which it appears, that the Goalers, Keepers of Prisons,
have power to retain such which are committed: That then the President shall
have power to commit, for things Employed are as strong as things Expressed; as
it appears by the Com. Stradlinge and Morgans Case: And also in the Earl of
Leicesters Case, where it is agreed, that Jointure before Coverture cannot be
waved, and this is employed within the Statute of 27. H. 8. And so the Statute
of 2. Ed. 6. Provides that after seven years Tithes shall be paid, by which it
is Collected by Implycation, that during seven years, Tithes shall not be
paid; and so he prayed Judgment for the Defendants.

Dodridge Sergeant of the King, for the Plaintiff said, that the Statute of 24*
H. 8. chap. 5. and the Letters Patents gives power to four Censors to punish
for ill executing, doing, and using the faculty of a Physician, and the
Plaintiff was not charged for ill executing of it, doing or using: But it is
averred, where Revera the Plaintiff was nothing sufficient to exercise the said
Art, and being examined, less apt to answer, and thereupon they forbade him,
and being sent for and not appearing, was amerced five pound, and order that he
should be Arrested, and being Arrested, upon his appearance, being examined if
he would submit himself to the said College, he answered and confessed, that
he had practiced within the said City, being a Doctor of physic as aforesaid,
as well to him it was lawful, and that he would practice here again, for which
he was committed to Prison: So that he was amerced for his contempt in the
using of the said Art, and committed to Prison for his answer upon his
examination: And he conceived that there are two questions considerable.

First, if the College may restrain a Doctor of physic of his practice in
London.

Secondly, admitting that they may, then if these are the causes for which they
may commit by their Letters Patents; the first reason is drawn from the Letters
Patents, and the said Statutes, in which he said that the intent of the King
was the end of his work: And this intent shall be expounded for three reasons
apparent Walter
in the words contained in the Grant.

First, Intempestive Conatibus occurrere.

Secondly, Improborum Hominum, qui medicinam Magis avaritiae suae causa, quam
ullius bonae Conscientiae fiducia profitebantur, audaciam Compescere.

Thirdly, which would invite learned men to practice here, and for that would,
quod Collegium prefectum Doctorum et graviorum virorum qui medicinarent in urbe
nostra Londino et suburbibus infra septem millia passium in urbe quaq^^ versus,
public Exerceant institui volumus et imparamus: And further he said, that
there are three sorts of men, which meddle with the Body of a man.

First, is the learned man which reads all Books extant, and his knowledge is
speculative, and by that he knew the nature of all simples.

And the second is practive, the knowledge of which is only his experience, he
may give Probatum est: But the ignorance of the cause of the disease, and the
nature of the things which he applies for the cure of that.

And the third is an Imposter, which takes upon him the knowledge which he has
not, and every of them the College may punish, for Male utenda, faciendo vel
exequendo, by what way they will: And this was not the first care which was
had, for in the 9. H. 5. was a private Act made for Physicians, by which there
is great regard to them which are learned and educated in the University: And
for that the Act provides that they shall not be prejudicall to any of the
Universities of Oxford and Cambridge, and with this agrees 3. H. 8. 11. and the
privileges of them, and the Docti et graves homines, mentioned in the Letters
Patents, are the learned men mentioned in the Act, for the Statute provides
that they shall punish according to these Statutes, and late edicts: And by the
former Laws the Universities, that their privileges were excepted, and by
their former Statutes, the Letters Patents ought to be directed, for it is
referred to them: Also the Statutes of this Realm have always had great
respect to the Gradiats of the Universities, and it is not without cause, for
Sudavit et Alsit, and has no other reward but this degree which is Doctor, and
for that the Statute of 21, H. 8. prefers Graduates, and provides that Doctors
of Divinity or Batchelors shall be capable of two Benefices with Cure without
dispensation: And so 13. Eliz. provides that none shall be presented to a
Benefice above the value of thirty pound per annum, if he be not a Doctor or
Bachelor of Divinity: And to the objection, that none shall practice in London
or seven miles circute of it without license, that this clause shall be
expounded according to the matter, and to that he agreed, for the other
branches of the Statute are made to cherish grave and learned men, and for that
it shall not be intended, that this branch was made for the punishment of
those, but of others which the Statute intended to punish.

And to the second objection, that every Doctor is not the learned and grave
man intended within the Statute, for the knowledge of many of them is only
speculative without practice, to that he answered, that all their Study is
practice, and that if they have no practice of themselves, then they attend
upon others which practice, and apply themselves to know the nature of Simples.

And to third objection, that in London ought to be choice men, for the Statute
appoints that they shall be examined by the Bishop and Deane and four others at
least, and for that there is a more strict course for them, then in other
places, to that it is agreed: But he said that in the University there is a
more strict course then this, for here he ought to be publicly approved by
many after that he has been examined and answered in the Schools, to diverse
questions, and allowed by the Congregation house: And 35. H. 6. 55. Doctor is
no addition, but a degree, (quia gradatim et progress^one Doctrine provenit, to
that, and that Doctor is teacher, and that he was first taught by others as
Scholars, afterward he is Master, and Doctor dicetur a docendo, quia docere
permittitur, and they are called Masters of their faculty, and that the
Original of Doctor came of the Sinagogue of Jews, where there were Doctors of
Law; and it appears that they had their ceremonies in time of H. 1. And when a
man brings with him the Ensign of Doctrine, there is no reason that he should
be examined again, for then if they will not allow of him, he shall not be
allowed, though he be a learned and grave man, and it was not the intent of the
King to make a Monopoly of this practice.

And to the second point that he propounded, it seems that the Justification
is not good, which is, Quia non comperuit, upon Summons, he was amerced, and
ordered that he shall be arrested, and being arrested, being examined if he
would submit himself to the College, he answered that he was a Doctor, and had
practiced and would practice within the said City, as he conceived he might
lawfully do, and for that showing of this case he was committed to prison, and
he conceived two things upon the Charter.

First, That it does not inhibit a Doctor to practice, but punishes him for
ill using, exercising, and making, and may imprison* the Emperick and Imposter,
and so prayed Judgment for the Plaintiff, and after in Hillary Term, in the
same year, this case was argued by all the Justices of the Common Bench, and at
two several days, and the first day it was argued by Foster, Daniell, and
Warburton Justices, at whose Arguments I was not present, but Foster argued
against the Plaintiff, and Daniell and Warburton with him, and that the Action
of false imprisonment was well maintainable. And the second day the same case
was argued again by Walmesley Justice, and Coke chief Justice, and Walmesley
argued as follows, that is, Walmesley.
that the Statute of 3. H. 8. was in the negative, that no person within the
City of London or seven Miles of that, take upon him to exercise or occupy, as
Physician or Surgeon, etc. And he does not know in any case where the words
of the Statute are negative, that they admit any Interpretation against that
but one only, and that is the Statute of Marlebridge chapter 4. Which provides
that no Lord shall distrain in one County, and the beasts distrayned drive into
another County, in which case though that the words are uegative, yet if the
Lord distrain in one County, he may drive the Beasts to his Manor in another
County, of which the Lands, in which the distress was taken were held, but it
is equity and reason in this case, that the Statute should admit such
exception, for it is not of malice, but for that, that the Beasts may remain
within his Fee, but in the principal case there is not the like reason nor
Equity, And also the King H. 8. in his Letters Patents recites as follows,
that is, Cum Regij officij nostri munus arbitremur, ditionis nostri hominum
felicitati omni ratione consulere, id autem vel imprimis fore, si Improborum
conatibus tempestive occurremus, apprime necessarium duximus improborum quoque
hominum, qui medicinant magis avaritiae sue. causa quam ullius. bonae
conscienti^ fiducia profitebantur, etc. By which it appears, that it is the
Office of a King to survey his Subjects, and he is as a Physician to cure their
Maladies, and to remove Leprosies amongst them, and also to remove all fumes
and smells, which may offend or be prejudicial to their health, as it appears
by the several Writs in these several cases provided, and so if a man be not
right in his Wits, the King is to have the Protection and Government of him,
least he being infirm, wast, or consume his Lands or Goods, and it is not
sufficient for him that his Subjects live, but that they should live happyly,
and discharges not his Office, if his Subjects live a life, but if they live
and flourish, and he has care as well of their Bodies as of their Lands and
Goods, for Health for the Body is as necessary as virtue to the mind, and the
King H. 8. to express his extraordinary care of his Subjects made the said Act,
in the third year of his Reign, which was the beginning of his Essence, to
that purpose, and by the Common Law, any Physician which was allowed by the
University might practice and exercise the said faculty within any place within
England, without any dispensation, examination, or approbation of any, but
after the making of the said Act made in the third year of King H. 8. none may
practice, exercise, or occupy as Physician or Surgion within theCity of London
and seven miles of that, if he be not first examined, approved, and admitted by
the Bishop of London, and the Dean of Paul's for the time being, calling to
them, four Doctors of Physic or Chirurgions, etc. And that no practiser may
occupy or exercise the said faculty out of the said Precincts, if he be not
first examined, approved, and admitted by the Bishop of the Diocese, or in his
absence, by his Vicar general, every of them calling unto him such expert
persons in the said faculty, as their discretions thinks convenient, and the
reason of this difference as he conceived, was for that that in this City, and
the said Precincts, the King and all his Council, and all the Judges and Sages
of the Law, and diverse other men of quality and condition, live and continue,
and also the place is more subject unto Infection, and the Heir more
pestiferous, and for that there is more necessity, that greater Care,
diligence, and examination be made of those which practiced here in London and
the precincts aforesaid, then of those which practice in other places of the
Realm, for in other places the People have better air, and use more exercise,
and are not so subject to Infection, and for that there is no cause that such
care should be used for them, for they are not in such danger, and in the
Statute there is not any exception of the Universities nor of those which are
Gradiats there, and for that they shall be tried by the said Act, and the
Statute of 14 H. 8. chapter 5* Only excepts those which are Gradiats of Oxford
or Cambridge which have accomplished all things for the form without any Grace,
and if this Exception shall be intended to extend to others, then all the
University shall be excepted by that, and such exception was too general; and
over he said, that the Plaintiff gave absurd and contemptous answer, when he
being cyted before them, said that he would not be ruled nor directed by them
(being such grave and searned men* and for that that he has practiced against
the Statute he was worthily punished and committed, for it should be a vain Law
if it did not provide punishment for them that offend against that, and Bracton
says, Nihil est habere Leges, si non sit un^s qui potest Leges tueri, and for
this here are four grave and discreet men to defend and maintain the Law, and
to punish all Offenders against that, according to the Statute, by Imprisonment
of their Bodies and other reasonable ways, and the said four men have the
search as well of those men, as of other Mediciners, and the Statute of 1 Marie
provides that the Keepers of Prisons, shall receive all which committed by the
said four grave and learned men, and though there be great ^are committed to
them by the said Statute, and the said Letters Patents, yet there is a greater
trust reposed in them then this, for we commit to them our lives, when we
receive Phis^ck of them, and that not without cause, for they are men of
Gravity, learning, and Discretion, and for that they have power to make Laws,
which is the Office of the Parliament, for those which are so learned may be
trusted with any thing, and for the better making of these they have power to
assemble all the Commons of their Corporation, and the King allows of that by
his Letters Patents, for it is made by a Congregation of Wise, learned, and
discreet men, and the Statute of 1 Marie inflicts punishment upon Contempts,
and not for any other offenses, and they held a Court, and so may commit as
every other Court may for a contempt of common right, without act of
Parliament, or Information, or other legal form of proceeding upon that, as it
appears by 7 H. 6. for a contempt committed in a Leet, the Steward committed
the Offender to Prison, and it was absurd to conceive that the Statute will
allow of commitment, without cause, and it is a marvelous thing that when good
Laws shall be made for our health and Wealth also, yet we will so pinch upon
them, that we will not be tried by men of experience, practice, and Learning,
but by the University, where a man may have his Degree by grace without merit,
and so, for these reasons he concluded that this Action is not maintainable.

Coke chief said, that the Cause which was pleaded for, that Coke.
the Plaintiff was committed, was for that that he had exercised Physic within
the City of London by the space of a Month, and did not very fitly answer, for
which it was ordained by the Censors that he should pay a bundred shillings,
and that he should forbear his practice, and that he did not forbear, and then
being warned of that, and upon that being summoned to appear did not appear,
and for that it was ordained, that he should be arrested, and that after he was
summoned again; and then he appeared, and denied to pay the hundred shillings,
and he said that he would practice, for he was a Doctor of Cambridge, and upon
that it was ordained that he should be committed, till he should be delivered
by the Doctors of the College, and upon this was the Demurrer joined, and in
pleading the Plaintiff said, that he was a Doctor of Philosophy and Physic,
upon which the Lord took occasion to remember a saying of Gallen, that is, Vbi
Philosohpia desinit, ibi medicina incipit, and he said the only question of
this case depends not upon the payment of the said hundred shillings, but upon
the words of the Letters patents of the King, and the said two Statutes, the
words of which are, Concessimus eidem presidenti, etc. Quod nemo in dicta
Civitate, aut per septem milliaria in circuita ejusdem exerceat dictam
facultatem, nisi ad hoc, per dictum presidentem and communitatem seu sucscires,
eorum qui pro tempore fuerunt, admissus sit, per ejusdem presidentis and
Collegij titeras sigillo suo commui sigillat as sub paena centum solidorum pro
quolibet mense quo non admissus eandem facultatem exercuit, dimidium inde
nobis, and heredibus nostris and dimidium dicto presidenti and Collegio
applicandum, and preteria volumus and concedimus pro nobis, etc. Quod per
presidentem and Collagium communitationem pro tempore epistentium, and eorum
successores in perpetuum, quatuor singulis annis per ipsos eligantur, qui
habeant supervisum, scrutinium, and correctionem and gubernationem omnium and
sigulorum dictae Civitatis medicorum utentium facultate, medicinae in eadem
Civitate, ac aliorum medicorum, fornisicorum quorumcunque facultatem illam
medicinae, aliquo modo frequentantium and utensium infra eandem civitatem and
suburbia ejusdem sibi septem milliarea in circuitu ejusdem Civitatis ae
putationem eorundem pro delectis suis, in non been exequendo, faciendo and
utendo illa, nec non supervisum and scrutinium hujusmodi medicorum and eorum
receptionem, per predictos medicos sive aliquem eorum hujusmodi legeis nostris
pro eorum; Infirmitatibus curandis and suavandis, dandis imponendum and utendis
quoties and quando opus fuerit, probo modo and utilitate eorundem legiorum
nostrorum; Ita quod punitio hujusmodi medicorum utentium dicta facultate
medicinae sic in premissis de linquentium, per Fines Amerciamenta,
Imprisonamenta corporum suorum and per alas vias rationabiles and Congr^as
exeqnantur, as it appears in Rastal Physicians 8018. 392. So that there are two
distinct Clauses.

The first, if any exercise the said Faculty by the space of a Month without
admission by the President, etc. shall sorfeit a hundred shillings for every
Month be that good or ill, it is not material, the time is here only
material, for if he exercise that for such a time, he shall sorfeit as
aforesaid.

The second clause is, that the President, etc. Shall have Scrutinium
Medicorum, etc. and punitionem eorum pro dilictis suis in non been faciendo*
utendo and exequend^, etc. And for that the President and the College may
commit any delinquent to Prison: And this he concluded upon the words of the
Statute, and he agreed with Walmesley, that the King has had extraordinary
care of the health of the Subjects. Et Rex censetur habere omnes Artis in sermo
pectoris, and he has here pursued the Course of the best Physicians, that is,
Removens and promovens, removens Improbos illos, qui nullis bonae conscientiae
fiducia profitabantur and audaces, and promovens ad sanitatem: And for that the
Physician ought to be profound, grave, discreet, grounded in learning, and
soundly Studied, and from him comes the medicine, which is removens and
promovens.

And it is an old rule, that a man ought to take care, that he do not commit
his Soul to a young Divine, his Body to a young Physician, and his Goods or
other Estate to a young Lawyer, for in Juveni Theologo est Conscientiae
detrimentum in Juveni Legislatori bursi detrimentum et in Juveni Medico
Cimitorij incrementum, for in these cannot be the privity, discretion, and
profound learning which is in the aged: And he denied that the College of
Physicians is to be compared to the University, for it is subordinate to that,
Cantabrigia est Academiae nostrae nobilissima totius Regni occulus, et sol ubi
humanitas et doctrina simul fluant: But he said, when he names Cambridge he
does not exclude Oxford, but places them in equal Rank: But he would allwaies
name Cambridge first, for that was his Mother: And he says that there is not
any time, Pro non been faciendo, utendo et exequendo for this, non suscipit
Manus et Minus, for so a man may greviously offend in one day, and for that in
such a case, his punishment shall be by Fines, amercements. Imprisonments of
their Bodies and other ways, etc. But if practice well, though it be not an
offense against the Letters Patents and the Statutes yet the punishment shall be
but pecuniary, and shall not be Imprisoned, for if he offend the Body of a man,
it is reason that his Body shall be punished, for Eodem modo quo quis
delinquit, eodem punietur, but if a grave and learned Doctor or other, come and
practice well in London by the space of three weeks and then departs, he is
not punishable by the said College, though that they be without admition, for
peradventure such a one is better acquainted with the nature and disposition of
my Body, and for that more fit to cure any Malady in that then another which is
admitted by the College, and he said that it was absurd to punish such a one,
for he may practice in such manner in dispite of the College, for all the
Lords and Nobles of the Realm, which have their private Physicians, which have
acquaintance with their Bodies, repair to this City, and to exclude those of
using their advise, were a hard and absurd exposition, for the old verse is,
Corporis auxilium medico commit sodali: And also he said that the said
President and College cannot commit any Physician, which exercises the said
faculty without admission, for the space of a Month, nor bring their Action
before themselves, nor levy that by any other way or means: But ought to have
their Action or exhibit an Information upon the Statute, as it appears by the
Book of Entries, for they ^ught to pursue their power which is given to them by
the Statute, for otherwise the penalty being given, the one Moytie to them, and
the other to the King, they shall be Judges in Propriacausa, and shall be
Summoners, Sheriffs, Judges, and parties also; which is absurd* for if the King
grant to one by his Letters Patents under the great Seal, that he may hold
Plea, although he be party, and if the King does not appoint another Judge,
then the Grantee which is party, the Grant is void, though that it be confirmed
by Parliament, as it appears by 8. H. 6. 44. Ed. 3. The Abbot of Readings
Case, for it is said by Herle in 8. Ed. 3. 30. Tregores Case, that if any
Statutes, are made against Law and Right, and so are these, which makes any man
Judge in his own cause, and so in 27. H. 6. Fitz. Annuity 41. that the Statute
of Carlisle will that the order of Cistertians and Augustines, which have Covent
and Common Seal, that the Common Seal shall be in keeping of the Prior, which
is under the Abbot, and four others which are the most Sages of the house, and
that any Deed sealed with the Common Seal which is not so in keeping shall be
void, and the opinion of the Court that this is a void Statute, for it is
impertinent to be observed, being the Seal in their keeping, the Abbot cannot
seal any thing with it, and when that it is in the hands of the Abbot, it is
out of their keeping, ipso facto: And if the Statute shall be observed, every
common Seal shall be defeated by one simple surmise, which cannot be tried,
and for that the Statute was adjudged void, and rep^gnant: And so the Statute
of Gloucester which gives Cessavit after Cesser by two years to be brought by
the Lessor himself, was a good and equitable Statute: But the Statute of
Westminster 2. chap. 3. which gives Cessavit to the Heir for Cesser in time of
his Ancester, and that, that was Judged an unreasonable Statute in 33. Ed. 3.
for that, that the Heir cannot have the arrerages due in the time of his
Father, according to the Statute of Clocester, and for that it shall be void:
And also the Physicians of the College, could not punish any by Fine and also
by Imprisonment, for no man ought to be twice punished for one offense, and the
Statute of 1. Mariae does not give any power to them to commit for any offense
which was no offense within the first Statutes, and for that he ought not to be
committed by the said Statute of 1. Mariae: But admitting that they may commit,
yet they have mistaken it, for they demand the whole hundred shillings, and one
half of that belongs to the King: And also they ought to committ him
forthwith, as well as Auditors which have Authority by Parliament, to commit
him which is found in arrerages: But if he do not commit him forthwith, they
cannot commit him afterward, as it appears by 27. H. 6. 9. So two Justices of
the peace may view a force and make a Record of that, and commit the offenders
to Prison, but this ought to be in Flagranti Orient: And if he do not commit
those immediately upon the view, he cannot commit them afterward, and the
Physicians have no Court, but if they have, yet they ought to make a Record of
their commitment, for so was every Court of Justice: But they have not made any
Record of that: And Auditors and Justices of Peace, ought to make Records, as
it appears by the Book of Entries: So that admitting that they may commit, yet
they ought to do it forthwith, but in this case they cannot commit till the
party shall be delivered by them, for this is against Law and Justice; and no
Subject may do it, but till he be delivered by due course of Law, for the
commitment is not absolute, but the cause of that is traversable, and for that
ought to justify for special cause, for if the Bishop returns that he
refuses a Clark, for that he is Schismaticus Inveteratus, this is not good, but
they ought to return the particular matter: So that the Court may adjudge of
that: Though it be a matter of Divinity and out of their Science, yet they by
conference may be informed of it, and so of physic: And they cannot make any
new Laws, but such only which are for the better government of the old; and
also he said plainly, that it appears by the Statute of 1. Marie: That the
former Statutes shall not be taken by equity, for by these the President and
Commons have power to commit a Delinquent to Prison, and this shall be
intended, if they shall be taken by equity, that every Jailer ought to receive
him which is so committed: But when it is provided by 1. Marie, specially that
every Jailer shall receive such offenders: That by this appears, that the
former statute shall not be taken by equity: And so he concluded, that
Judgment shall be entered for the Plaintiff, which was done accordingly.

Trinity 7. Jacobi, 1609. In the Common Bench.
IN Debt upon escape brought by John Guy an Attorney of the Privilege.
Common Bench, by an Attachment of privilege against Sir George Reynell Knight.
Deputy Marshall of the Prison of the Kings Bench, the Defendant pleads his
privilege, that is, that he was Deputy Marshall, and he ought not to be sued
in other Court, then in the Kings Bench, according to the ancient Custom, and
Jurisdiction of the said Court, upon which the Plaintiff demurred, and upon
argument of both parties, it was adjudged that the Defendant should not have
his Privilege, and the principal reason was, for that the Plaintiff was an
Attorney, and ought to have his privilege in the Common Bench, and for that
that this Court was first possessed of the Suit, it shall not be stayed,
because of the Privilege of the Defendant in another Court, see 9 Ed. 4. 53.
the last case, where it is agreed, that one of the Courts may send Supersedeas
to another, for there it is agreed that if an Accountant in the Exchequer be
sued in the Common Bench, he shall send Supersedeas to them to surcease, and if
he be sued in the Kings Bench, these of the Exchequer will show the Record that
he is accountable, for they cannot make Supersedeas to the King, and the Plea
is there held Coram Rege, etc. And he shall be dismissed, for he may be sued in
the Exchequer; and also 10 Ed. 4. 4. b. It appears that if one which has cause
to have privilege in the Common Bench sue an Attachment, as our case is,
against a Clark of the Kings Bench, such Writ shall not be allowed, for that
that the Common Bench was first seized of the Plea, by their Plea, and the
Privilege of the common Bench is as ancient as the Privilege of the Kings
Bench, and one Court is as ancient as the other, for every of them is before
time of memory, and it is by prescription.

Walmesley said, that the Possessory shall be preferred, Quia melior est
conditio possidentis, but he agreed that if the privilege of one Court be not
so ancient as the other, then the most ancient shall be preferred, and it was
agreed that though there be Difference in respect of parties, or though that
the attendance of one be of more necessity then the other, as it was objected
in this Case; that the Defendant ought to attend, otherwise he shall loose his
office; to that it was answered, and resolved that the cause of the Suit in the
Common Bench was voluntary, and the attendance of the Attorney or Clark more
necessary, then of the Defendant, for he may exercise his Office by a Deputy,
but a Clark or an Attorney cannot, for their office is Opus Laboris, But the
Office of the Defendant is only Opus Labrum, and he is to deal with Gyves and
Irons and such like, so that in this Case the Office and place of a Clark or
Attorney is to be preferred before the Office of Marshall, but admitting that
one Inferior Officer of the Common Bench, which is to have his privilege sue
a superior Officer of the Kings Bench which is also to have his Privilege
there, this shall not make any difference: And so was the opinion of all the
Court, and upon this, Judgment was given that the Defendant should answer over.

Trinity 7. Jacobi 1609. in the Common Bench.
IN Assise between William Parson alias Chester Plaintiff, against Assise.
Thomas Knight alias Rouge Cross tenant for the office of one of the Heralds
called Chester, the Recognitors of the Assise had view at a View.
Funeral at Westminster, where the Officer ought to attend, and it was
objected that this was no good view, for it was not in any place certain, where
the Recognitors may put the Demandant in Possession, and the Disseisin was
alleged to be at Westminster at the said Funeral, and it seems that the view
was good, but admitting that it were not good. It seems to Coke chief Justice,
that the Assise in this case well lies without view, for the Office is
universal, as Coke.
the Office of the Clark of the Market, and an Assise for Tithes, and the
Office of the Tennis Court, these are universal, and not annexed to any place,
and for that an Assise well lies for them without view, but for an Office in the
Common Bench, view may well be made in the Court, for the Court is always held
in a certain place, but for an Office in the Kings Bench, Quere, Inquit Coke,
for this ought to follow the Court of the King by the Statute of Articuli
Cleri, Chapter 3.

But Walmesley Justice, that this Court cannot be sitting in Clouds, Walmesley.
but in some place or other, and for that the view ought to be here made, and
then Coke said, by the same reason the Office of the Herald cannot be
exercised in the Clouds, but at Funerals, and by this the view ought to be
made there also, but the Opinion of all the Court was, that the view was well
made: the Tenant in Assise also challenged diverse of the Recognitors, for that
they were of a Challenge.
former Jury upon the same question, and this was agreed to be a principal
cause of challenge, but the Court would not allow of that without showing the
Record, but allowed that to be a cause of challenge for favor, and for that
they were tried by their Companions, being sworn to speak the Truth, and they
were found to be indifferent, and for Seisin for the Demandant in the Assise,
it was showed that diverse Fees were due to the said Office, as seven pound for
every day that he attended upon the Kings person, and for the Dubbing of every
Knight, and that diverse of those Fees were received (and this office being
litigious) were delivered to be detained in Deposito, and to be delivered to
him which was Officer, and the plaintiff brought an Action by the name of
Chester as Officer and recovered those Fees, and this was resolved good Seisin,
and also that Seisin after the grant of the Office, and before the investing of
the Patentee by the Marshall was good, for the Investing was but a ceremony, it
was also resolved that where an office extends to all the parts of England, and
that here an Assise does not lie in any County, though that the dissesin were
made in one County, but the Assise be brough for the profit of the office in
one County and not for the office it self, 43. Ed. 3. Feoffments and Deeds:
That by Grant of the profits of a Mill and Livery, the Mill it self passes, so
that taking of the profits is dissesin of the office, also it was objected that
the Demandant was no officer, for though that he has a Patent of it, yet he
was not Invested nor Installed in the office, which appears to the Marshall,
and for that he was no Officer, and so has no cause to have Action: And that
this is an office which is incident and annexed to the office of Earl
Marshall, and though that he be not Earl Marshall, yet there are Commissioners
have his power and authority, and for that the Investing and Instalment of the
Plaintiff in the said office appears to the said Commissioners; but it was
resolved clearly by all the Justices, that the Demandant was Officer by the
Kings Grant, without any Installation or Investing, and that this without that,
all the Fees and Profits of the office appertayning to him, and that the
Investing and Installation, was but a ceremony, in the same manner as if the
King has a Donative, and gives that to another, the Donee shall be in actual
possession by the gift, without any Induction or other ceremony: But admitting
that the office were annexed to the office of Earl Marshall, then it was
agreed that the Commissioners cannot give it, as the chief Justice of the
Common ^ench has diverse offices appertaining to his place, and he may dispose
of them; But if he die, the King in time of vacancy, nor the most ancient
Judges cannot give or dispose of any of them being void, as it appears by
Serrogates Case, Eliz. Dyer: And so the chief Justice is made, and allwaies
has been made by Patent, and so are the other Justices, and for that they
cannot be made by Commissioners, and so the chief Justice of England, has all
times been made by Writ, and for that cannot be made by Patent, nor by
Commission: And so in the case at the Bar, though that the Commissioners have
the power and authority of the Earl Marshall, yet they are not Earl Marshall,
it was also objected that the Fees were not due to the Plaintiff, for that he
did not attend: But to that it was answered and resolved, that the Fees were
due to the office, and for that non attendance of the office, was no forfeyture
of the Fees: And upon these resolutions the Recognitors found for the
Demandant, according to the direction of the Court.

Trinity 7. Jacobi, 1609. In the Kings Bench. Godsall.
GODS ALL and his Wife: The Proclamations of the Fine Error in a Fine.
were well and duly entered in the Original remaining with the Chirographer:
But in the Transcript with the Custos brevium was error, and it seems that
this notwithstanding the Fine was good, but the Transcript was amended.

Trinity 7. Jacobi, 1609. In the Kings Bench The Town of Barwicke.
THE King which now is, by his Letters Patents, Incorporated Barwick.
the Mayor, Bailiffs, and Burgesses of Barwicke, and granted to them the
execution of the Return of all Writs: And after Return of Writs.
a Writ of Extendi facias was directed to them, and they made no return of
that, and upon this was the question, if that shall be executed by them, or by
the Sheriff of Northumberland: And it seemed to Nicholls Sergeant, that argued
for the Plaintiff in the extent that desired execution and the return of that,
that they ought to make execution and return, for it seems to him that this
was English, and that this appears by the Act of Parliament, by which the
Incorporation was confirmed, and so it appears also by the Letters Patents of
the King, by which the Incorporation is made, for if it were not English,
neither the Letters Patents nor the Act of Parliament are sufficient to make
Incorporation of that, and also they certified Burgesses to the Parliament of
England: And the Kings Bench sent Habeas Corpus to it, and for the not return
of that inflicted a Fine upon the Corporation: See 21. Ed. 3. 49, and 1. Ed. 4,
10. But Hutton Sergeant seemed to the contrary, and that they ought not to make
execution, for he said it is a part of Scotland, and not part of England, and
it was conquered from that, and it was a Sherifwicke, and has the same
privileges of ancient times, which they now have by their new Grant: See 24
Ed. 1. and 2. Ed. 2. Obligation, etc. That one Obligation dated there shall not
be tried in England, and also that it is not within the County of
Northumberland, nor part of it, nor the Sheriff of Northumberland cannot meddle
in it, see 2. H. 7. 31. 26. H. 6. 23. and it is adjourned.

It seems that Jacob and James are all one name, for Jacobus is-Latine
Idemptitas nominis.
for them both, but Walmesley conceived that if he be Christened Jacob,
otherwise it is, as if one be Christened Jacob, and another James, then they
are not one self same name.

Note that Coke chief Justices said, that if Commissioners by force Fine.
of Dedimus potestatem, take a Fine of an Infant* that they are Fynable Infant.
and ransomable to the value of their Lands, and that this shall be sued in the
Star chamber.

Trinity 7. Jacobi, 1609 In the Common Bench. Robinson.
RObinsons Case: A man devises Lands to his Wife for life, Tail.
the remainder to his Son, and if his Son dies without Issue, not having a Son,
that then it should remain over, and it seemed that this it a good Estate
tail, and it was adjudged accordingly.

If a man makes a Lease for three years, or such a small Term, Maintenance.
to his Son or Servant to try an Ejectione Firm, or if it be made to another
Inferion by a Superior, which cannot countenance the Suit, it shall not be
intended Maintenance, nor buying of Tytles, which shall be punished.

Trinity 7 Jacobi 1609. In the Common Bench.
NOte, an Attorney of the Common Bench was cited before the Habeas Corpus.
High Commission and committed to the Fleet, for that he would not swear upon
Articles by the Commissioners ministered, and Habeas Prohibition.
Corpus was awarded to deliver him, and a Prohibition to the Court of high
Commission, see 1. and 2. Eliz. Scroggs case 175 b. Dyer, and there in Margery
Hynds case, who 18 Eliz. Noluit jurdre coram Justiciarijs Ecclesiasticis super
articulos pro usura, and Leyes case 9. and 10. Eliz. Michaelmas Rot. 1596. and
it is written in the Book of the Lord Dyer but not printed, the case was, Ley
being an Attorney of the Common Bench was committed to the Fleet, by the Bishop
of London and two others of the high Commissioners Ecclesiastical, for that
that he was present at a Mass, and he refused to be examined upon his oath
upon Articles administered by the high Commissioners, see also 5* Edw. 4.
Keysers case upon the statute of 2. H. 4. chapt. Which gives authority to the
Archbishop to imprison, etc. And see the Register fol. 36. b. The form of an
Attachment against the Bishop, which cited Aliquos Laicos, ad aliquas
cognitiones faciendas, vel sacramentum prestandos nisi in casibus matrionalibus
and Testimeutarijs, etc. But it was urged that the Judges of the Common Law,
shall not have the exposition of the statute of 1. Eliz. because it was an
Ecclesiastical Law, but it was resolved by all the Justices, that it belongs
to the Judges of the Common Law to expound this, for the Statute was temporal
merely, and with this 4. Ed. 4. 37. b. c. upon the Statute of 5 H. 5. chapt.
Which provides, Quod libellus sit deliberatus parti in casu, ubi per legem
deliberandus est, and hoc sine difficultate, And though that this Act be mere
spiritual, yet the Exposition of that lies open to the common Law.

Michaelmas 7. Jacobi 1609. In the Common Tench. Estcourt and Harrington
IN Trespass upon the Case between George Estcourt Plaintiff, and Trespass for
Slander.
Sir James Harrington Knight Defendant, for that, that the Defendant said that
the Plaintiff was a forsworn and perjured man, which the Defendant justified,
for that that the Plaintiff exhibited and English Bill, in the Marches of
Wales, before the President and Council there, and in the same suit made an
Affidavit, upon which an Injunction was granted for the possession of Land in
question between them, for the said Plaintiff, and that the said Affidavit was
false, and the Plaintiff has committed perjury in that, and this was allowed
good Justification, the Jury was of the Counties of Gloucester and Salop, and
the words of the Distringas were Party Jury of two Counties.
ordinary till toward the end, and that was Ad faciendam quendam Juratum simul
cum alijs Juratoribus comitatus nostri Salop, and this was the Distringas
directed to the Sheriff of Gloucester, and so Mutatis mutandis in the Distringas
directed to the Sheriff of Salop; and note that the Jurors were sworn one of
one County and another of another County, Alternis vicibus, and 24. were
returned of every County.

Michaelmas 7. Jacobi 1609. In the Common Bench. Simpson and Waters.
SYmpson against Waters in an Action of Trespass upon the case for Action upon
the Case for Slander.
Slander, that is, thou art drunk, and I never held up my hand at the Bar, as
thou have done, and agreed that an Action does not lie for these Words, for
peradventure he intended buttery Bar, And by Foster Justice, if he had said
for Felony, that the Action does not lie, for many honest men are arrained, but
if he says he was detected Action does not lie, but if he says he was
convicted for Perjury Action lies as seemed to him.

In Trespass the Original bore Test 3. January 6. Iacobi and in the Count the
Trespass is supposed 20 January 6. Iacobi, which is after Error.
the Test of the Original, and agreed that this shall not be aided by the
Statute o^ Jeofailes, but if it were original otherwise it is.

Michaelmas 7. Jacobi 1609. In the Common Bench, Hare and Savill.
IN Covenant by John Hare and Hugh Hare against John Savill, the Plaintiffs
made a Lease for years to the Defendant, rendering Covenant for Rent.
Rent at two Feasts, or within ten days after every of those, at the Temple
Church, and the Defendant covenanted to pay the Rent according to the
reservation, and for the non payment these Plaintiffs brought an Action of
Covenant, to which the Defendant pleads levied by distress, and upon this the
Plaintiffs demurred, and adjudged with the Plaintiffs accordingly, for that the
Defendant for his Plea, has confessed that it was not paid according to the
reservation, for the Plaintiffs cannot distrain, if it were not behind after
the day, and it was agreed, that where a Rent is reserved to be paid at such a
Feast or within twenty days, that the Lessee in this case shall have Election
if he will pay that at the Feast; or at the end of twenty days, for he is the
first Actor, and the Lessor cannot distrain nor have action of Debt, till the
twenty days be past, and it was agreed, that the Covenant shall not alter the
nature of the Rent, but that nothing behind, or payment at the day, were good
Pleas.

Defendant in Debt pleads to the Law, and was ready at the Bar Continuance.
to wage his Law; and it was resolved by the Judges upon conference with the
Prothonotories that it might be continued, but the Court would advise.

IN Action upon the Case upon Assumpsit, the Plaintiff counts, that diverse
Goods were delivered to him in pawn, and that in consideration Assumpsit.
Consideration.
that he should deliver them to the Defendant, the Defendant assumed and
promised to pay to him the Debt for which the Goods were pawned, and it was
objected that the Count was not good, for that it does not contain the
certainty of the Goods which were pawned; and delivered to the Defendant, but
to that this difference was agreed, that when Goods are to be recovered and
Damages for them, and are in demand, the certainty of the goods ought to
appear in particular, as if a man pleades, that he was never Executor, nor
administered as Executor, it is a good Plea, for the Plaintiff that he
administered Diversa bona in such a place, so if he plead that he has Diversa
bona natabilia in other Diocese, it is good i^ both cases without showing what
goods in certain, see 11. H. 7. 29. Ed 3. Also it was objected that the
consideration was not sufficient, and then it shall be Nudum pactum ex quo non
oritur actio, for the Plaintiff has not any Interest in the Goods, and they
were delivered him to keep, and not to deliver over, so that the delivery was
vicious, and for that it shall be no good consideration, and of this opinion
was Foster Justice: But Coke, Wraburton, Danyell, and Walmesley being absent,
it seems that the condition was good, as if a man in consideration that
another will go to Westminster, or cure such a poor man, or mary a poor
Virgin, assume to pay to him a sum of money: And though this consideration were
not valuable, yet it seems good: And he that pawned has a property in the
goods, and may have them again.

In debt against three Executors, two of them are out lawed, and the third
pleads and Verdict against him, and it was resolved that the Debt against
Executors.
Judgment shall be against all by the Statute of 9. Ed. 3. for they all are
but one Executor, and the Cost shall be against him which pleades, if the
others confess or suffer Judgment by default: And there shall be but one
Judgment and not diverse, see 17 Ed. 3. 45. b. 11 H. 6.

Upon a Venire Facias awarded, the Sheriff returns but 21. and Error. Ve. fa.
and hab. Carpus.
the Habeas Corpora was against 21. only, and this was also returned, and upon
that ten appeared, and upon this Tales was awarded, and trial had, and but ten
of the principal Pannell sworn: And this was Error, but if twelve of the
principal Pannell had appeared and served, it seems that it shall not be
error, for so it was resolved in Graduers case, where twenty three were
returned, but twelve appeared and tried the Issue, and this was resolved to be
good and no error.

Michaelmasse 7, Jacobi, 1609. In the common Bench. Buckmer against Sawyer.
A Man seized* of Land in Gaelvelkind has Issue three Daughters, that is, A.
B. and C. devises all his Land to A. in tail, the remainder of one half to B.
in tail, the remainder of the other Formedon in Remainder.
half to C. in tail, and if B. died without Issue, the remainder of her Moytie
to C. and her Heirs, and if C. died without Issue, the remainder of her Moytie
to B. and her Heirs, the Devisor dies A. and B. dies: And the question was, if
C. shall have a Formedon in remainder only, or several Formedons for this
Land: And it seemed to all the Justices, that one Formedon lies well for all,
for that, that it was by one self same conveiance, though that the Estate come
by several deaths, and this Action was to be brought by the Heir of C. after
the death of C. See the three and four Phil. and Mary Dyer.

Note that after appearance of a Jury, and after that diverse of Challenge.
them were sworn, others were challenged, so that it could not be taken by
reason of default of Jurors: But a new Distringas awarded, and at the day of
the return of that, these which were sworn before appeared, and then were
challenged: But no challenge shall be allowed, for that, that they were sworn
before, if it be not of after time to the first appearance.

Michaelmasse 7. Jacobi, 1609: In the Common Bench. Baylie against Sir Henry
Clare Partition.

BAYLIE against Sir Henry Clare, the Writ was of two parts, without saying in
three parts to be divided: And it seemed to Nicholls Sergeant which moved this,
that it was not good, but error: But the opinion of the Court was that it was
good: See 17. Ed. 3. 44. 19. Ed. 3, breife 244. 17. Assise with this
difference, that if there are but three parts and two are demanded, there it is
good without saying in three parts to be divided, for when parts are demanded
it is intended, all the parts but one, and that it is only one which remains,
see the Register fol. 16. 12. Assise: And it was adjudged in the Kings Bench in
the case of one Jordan, that demand of two parts where there are but three
parts is good, see 39. H. 6. Salford against Hurlston in Formedon which
demanded two parts where there is but three, and so of three parts where there
is but four, it is good without saying, in three or four parts, to be divided:
But if a man grant his part, this shall be intended the half, for Appellatio
partis dimidium partis contenetur, and a Writ of Covenant ought to be of two
parts without saying in three parts to be divided, for so is the form, and if
in such case in three parts to be divided be incerted, the Writ shall abate,
see Thelwell in his digest of Writs, 146. and by Coke if a man bring Ejectione
Firm for ten Acres, and by evidence it appears that he has but the half Ex
vigore Juris it shall not be good, but he said he would submit his opinion, to
the Judgment of ancient Judges of the Law which have often time used the
contrary.

Note that the Husband may avoid his Deed, that he has Sealed Dures.
by the duresse of Imprisonment of his Wife or Son: But not of his Servant, and
so Mayor and Commonalty may avoid a Deed sealed by duresse of Imprisonment of
the Mayor, for it is Idemptity of person, between the Husband and the Wife: See
21. Ed. 4. and 7. Ed. 4. A man may avoid Se^sin for payment of Rent by coersion
of distress but not his Deed.

Michaelmasse 7. Jacobi, 1609. In the Common Bench. Pain and Mutton.
IN an Action upon the case by Pain against Mutton, the Plaintiff Action upon
the case for slander.
counts that the Defendant called him Sorcerer and Inchantor: And agreed by all
the Justices that Action does not lie, for Sorcerer and Inchantor are those
which deal with charms, or turning of Books, as Virgill says, Carminibus
Circes socios mutavit ulissis, which is intended Charms and Enchantments, and
Conjuration is of Con et nico, that is to compel the Devil to appear, as it
seems to them against his will, but which is that to which the Devil appears
voluntarily and that is a more greater offense then Sorcery or Enchantment,
which was adjudged that Action does not lie for calling a man Witch, and said
that he bewitched his Wear that he could not take any Fishes: Dodridge the
Kings Sergeant says that an Action lies for calling a woman, gouty pockye
Whore, and said that the Pox had eaten the bottom of her Belly out, and so it
was adjudged that it lies well for these words, get thee home to thy pokey
Wife the Pox has eaten off her Nose: But for the Pox generally Action does not
lie: But if he says that he was laid of the Pox, then Action well lies, for
then it shall be intended the great Pox.

Note that in Prohibition and Replevin, the Defendant may have nisi prius by
Proviso without default of the Defendant, for he himself Prohibition.
is re vera Defendant, and there are two Actors, that is the Plaintiff and
Defendant: But the Court appointed that Presidents should be searched, the
Plaintiff is not bound to prosecute Cum Effectu in this Court, as he is in the
Kings Bench: And it was agreed that the manner of Pleading was agreement, as
for Returno Habendo, in the Replevin and Pro consultatione habenda in the
Prohibition.

Michaelmas 7. Jacobi, 1609. In the Common Bench Miller and Francis.
MYLLER Plaintiff in Replevin against Thomas Francis, the Will.
case was, Richard Francis was seized of Land held in Socage, Devise.
and devises that to John his eldest Son for a hundred years, the Remainder
to Thomas his second Son for his life, and made his four other youngest Sonns
his Executors, and after made a Feoffment to the said uses, the Remainder to
the said John his eldest Son in tail; Proviso that if the said John disturbed
the Executors of taking his Goods in his House, that then the said use and uses
limited to the said John Francis and his Heirs shall cease, and after declared
that his intent was, that in all other points his Will should be in his force,
and it was pleaded that John did not suffer the said Executors to take the said
Goods in the said House, and if his Estate for years, or in Tail, or Fee-simple
shall cease was the question, and it seemed to the Judges that the Condition
shall not be Idle; but shall have hi^ operation, as it appears by Hill and
Granges case and the Lord Barkleyes Case in the Comment. and the Lord Cheneyes
Case, Coke, And it seems also, that it shall not be referred to Estate in Fee
simple, for then it shall be void, and it shall not be referred to a Term, for
it is limited to an Estate limited to the said John and his Heirs, but it
seems it shall be referred to an Estate tail only, as it is 2 and 3. P. and
Mary Dyer 127. 55. 11 H. 7. 6. But the case was adjudged upon one point in the
Pleading, for it was not pleaded that John Francis had notice of the Devise,
nor that he had made any actual disturbance, and peradventure he entered as
Heir and had no notice of the Condition, and when the Executors came to demand
the Goods which were belonging to the Heir, and annexed to the House, and he
said that it does not appear to them to prove that an express notice was given
in this case, the Books of 43 Assise where a man was attaint and after was
restored by Parliament, and a Writ being directed to the Esceator, the
Escheator returns, that he was disturbed, and upon Scire facias the disturber
pleads, that he had no notice of the said act of restitution, and for this he
was excused of Disturbance: And see 35. H. 6. Bar, 162.

Michaelmas 7. Jacobi, 1609. In the Common Bench. Waggoner against Fish.
WAGGONER brought a Writ of Privilege, supposing Privilege. Postea 218.
that he had a suit depending here in the Common Bench, which was directed to
the Mayor and Sheriffs of London, and upon the return it appears, that 4.
Iacobi an Act of Common Council was made that none should be retayler of any
Goods within the same City, upon a certain pain, and that the Chamberlain of
the said City for the time being, may sue for the said penalty to the use of
the said City, at any of the Courts within the said City, and that the
Defendant has retailed Candles, and held a shop within the said City being a
stranger, and against the said Act, and for the said penalty, the Chamberlain
has brought an Action of Debt within the said City, according to the said Act
of Common Council, and upon the return it appears, that by their Custom the
Mayor and Aldermen with the Assent of the Commoners of the said City, may make
Bylaws for the Government of the said City, and that the said custom, and all
other their Customs, were confirmed by Act of Parliament, and upon this it
seems, that though there be not remedy given, for this penalty in another place
then in London, that yet if it be against Law he shall not be remanded, and if
a Corporation has power to make Bylaws, that shall be intended for the
Government of their ancient Customs only, and not to make new Laws, see 2 Ed.
3 John De Brittens Case, but it seems if this By-Law be for the Benefit of the
Commonwealth, that it shall be good, otherwise not, and it was Adjourned, see
Hillary next ensuing, for then it was adjudged, that he shall not be remanded,
see afterward Michaelmas 7. Iacobi, It was adjudged.

NOte that this Term was adjourned until the Month of Michaelmas
Adjournment of Term
by reason of the Plague, and upon the adjournment this insued, and was moved
by Yelverton and Crook at the Bar, and the Case was this.

Michaelmas 7. Iacobi, 1609. In the Common Bench.
POynes being an Infant levies a Fine, and in Trinity Term last past brought
his writ of Error in the Kings Bench, and assigned for Infant levies Fine
brings Error
Error, that at the time of the Fine levied was, and yet is within age, and
prayed that he be inspected, and insomuch that he had not his proofs there, he
was not inspected but Dies datus est usqu^ Octabis Michaelis Proximas, at which
time came the said Poynes the day which was wont to be the day of the Essoyn,
and prayed Justice Crook (which was there to adjourn the Term) to inspect
him; and to take his proofs, who did inspect him accordingly, De been esse, and
now before the Month of Michaelmas the Infant came of full age, and if this
inspection were well taken, and what authority the Judge had upon that day to
adjourn, was the question.

And Flemming chief Justice said, that the day of Essoyn is a day in Term,
and that the Court was full though there was but one Judge, and if the
inspection had been the day of the Essoyn, and before the fourth of the Post,
he had come of full age, this shall be very good, but the doubt rose as the
case is, if upon the day of Adjournment the Judge had power to do any thing but
to adjourn the Term, and for that it was appointed to be argued, and for the
Argument of that, Quere of my Author Lane.

Michaelmas 7. Iacobi 1609 In the Common Bench. Rivet Plaintiff, Down
Defendant.
IN an action upon the case upon an Assumpsit, the case appears to be this,
Copyholder makes a lease for a year according to the custom of the Manor the
Lord distrains the Farmer of the Copyholder for his Rent, and the Copyholder
having notice of that, comes to the Lord, and assumes that in consideration,
that the Lord should relinquish his Suit against his Farmer, touching the same
distress he would pay the Rent by such a day, the Lord delivers the Distress,
and for default of payment at the day, brings an Action upon the case, and upon
Non Assumpsit pleaded, Verdict passed for the Plaintiff: And Barker Sergeant
came and moved in arrest of Judgment.

First that a man cannot distrayn a Copyholder but he ought to seize, but
Williams Justice and others to the contrary; and by him if a man makes a Lease
at will Rendering Rent he may distrain for this Rent, 9 H. 7. 3. The case of
Rescous.

Secondly, He moved that when the Lord distraines, that now the Tenant has
cause of Action, that is Replevin, and for that it cannot be said Sectam suam,
and so the consideration fails, but all the Court against that, and that this
was a good consideration, and by Flemming chief Justice, Distress is an Action
in it self, because this is the cause of a Replevin, and when the Tenant brings
his Replevin and the Lord avowes, now is the Lord an Actor, and so it is secta
sua, and by him secta is not only an Action hanging, but that which is cause of
an Action, And Judgment was given for the Plaintiff.

Michaelmasse 7. Jacobi, 1609. In the common Bench. Action upon the Case.
Flemming and Jales.
ACTION upon the Case for these words: Thou have Action upon the Case.
stolen my Goods, and I will have thy neck, and maintainable.

Michaelmasse 7. Jacobi 1609. In the Common Bench. Airs Case.
ACTION upon the Case for these words; Air is an arrant Theife, and has
stolen diverse Apple Tres out of J. S. Garden, and the Action well maintainable,
otherwise if he had said, for he has stolen, etc. for then it should not be
Felony to steal Trees, and the word (For) shows the reason why he called him
Theife, but the word (And) not.

Michaelmasse 7. Jacobi, 1609. In the Common Bench. Bryan Chamberlaines Case
against Goldsmith.
IN Debt upon an Obligation, in which the under Sheriff was bound to the
Sheriff, for the performing of diverse Covenants Debt for Obligation.
contained in an Indenture made between them for the exercising of the said
Office, and the Plaintiff assigned breach of Cevenant, by which the under
Sheriff has Covenanted, that he would not execute any process of execution
without special warrant and assent of the Sheriff himself: And the sole
question was, if this Covenant be a good and lawful Covenant or not, and it
was argued by Hutton Sergeant for the Defendant, that counted that the Sheriff
is a public Officer, and may execute the office by himself, Hutton.
yet when he has made an under Sheriff, he has absolute authority also, and
it is not like to private authority, but it is as if a man make an Executor,
provided that he shall not administer, his debts above the value of forty
pound: And as if an Obligation with Condition, that if an Obligor shall keep
the Obligee without damages for four Beefes taken in Withernam, that the
Obligation shall be void, or as if a man takes an Obligation of his Prentise,
with Condition that he shall not use his Trade within five years, or within ten
miles of such a place, or as a Steward takes an Obligation of another man with
Condition that he shall not sue in other place but where he is Steward, or in
the Common Bench, this abridges the subject of his right, and that the under
Sheriff is a public officer and mentioned in many Statutes, though he shall
not be an Attorney the same year in which he is under Sheriff: And the Statute
of 23. H. 8. restraines the under Sheriff, that he shall not let any prisoners
to Bayl, but in the same manner as is contained in the Statute, and further he
said, that all Obligations which have Impossible conditions are good, and the
Condition void, but if the Condition be against Law, the Obligation and
Condition also is void: And so he concluded that the under Sheriff is a public
Officer, and that his office cannot be apportioned, and that the Condition was
performing of a Covenant which was against Law and void, and so by consequence
the Obligation void: And so prayed Judgment for the Defendant: And for the
Plaintiff is was argued by Dodridge Sergeant of the Dodridge.
King, that the Obligation is good and not void: And he said that there are two
Officers to all the Courts of the King, which are to execute all Writs, and
that these Officers are Sheriff and Bishop, and the Law does not take any
notice of under Sheriff, or Warden of spirituallties, for the Sheriff himself
shall be amerced and not the under Sheriff, which is but his substitute, and it
appears by 3. H. 7. 2. b. That all Writs shall be directed to the Coroner, and
by him ought to be executed, and 10. H. 4. 42. The Sheriff was merced for an
Arrest made by a Bailiff of a franchise, and and though that the Warden of
Westminster Hall is an Officer to the Kings Courts to some purpose, yet no Writ
shall be directed to him, as it appears by 8 Ed. 4. 6. Also he agreed that the
power of the Sheriff is double, that is Ministerial and Juditiall, and some
times he executes both together, as in Redisseisin, for of that he is Judge and
also is Minister to the Court of the King, and yet he is but one man, for the
Law does not take any notice of under Sheriff, nor intends, that he shall
supply any of these Offices, for the under Sheriff is but servant to the
Sheriff, and to execute his Ministerial power only, and if it be so, he may
limit his Authority at his pleasure: And if the Sheriff make a false return,
or otherwise retard, or make an uncertain return, he himself shall be
punished by Action, for the Law requires knowledge and intelligence of the
Sheriff, and the ancient Statutes made in the old time, make mention of
Sergeants at Mace, and yet they make not any mention of under Sheriff, which is
but servant.

And he agreed that an Obligation taken with Condition, against Law is void,
but he said that this is not against Law, for the under Sheriff is a person of
whom the Court does not take any notice, for he is but servant of the Sheriff,
and for this case, and removeable at his pleasure, and he may exercise his
office by himself when he pleases, and also he argued that the authority which
may be totally countermanded, may be countermanded in part, and that the under
Sheriff has Derivata potestas, quae semper talis est qualis committitur: And
by 35. H. 6. A man may make two Executors, one for his Goods in Middlesex, and
the other to administer the Goods in London, and this is good between them: But
not against a stranger, for he ought to sue them both, and he shall not be
prejudiced by that, and so 32, H, 8. Brook Executor, 155. A man made two
Executors Proviso that one should not administer in the life of the other, and
36, H. 8. 61. Feoffment and Letter of Attorney to make Livery to three or to
any of them, Livery cannot be made to two, and also he said that there is no
difference between power derived from a private person, and power derived from
the public, when this power comes to execution: And admitting that the Sheriff
may limit the authority of his under Sheriff for a time, as it seems that he
may, then of this it follows, that he may allwaies abridge and apportion his
authority: And he agreed that when an under Sheriff is made, diverse Statutes
have been made to punish him if he offend: But the Sheriff is not compellable
to make under Sheriff: And as to the Obligation, that if an execution be
delivered to the under Sheriff, against one which is in his presence, that he
ought to execute it, he says that the Law is not so, for the party ought to
deliver the execution to the Sheriff himself, for it does not appear that he
has an under Sheriff: if he have received a Writ of discharge or not: And also
the Office of the Sheriff is of charge to the King and to the Common Wealth,
and the execution of Writs may be prejudicall and penal to the Sheriff
himself: And for that he may well provide, that he shall have notice of every
execution which are most Penal: And also in all the Indenture now made, he
does not constitute him to be his under Sheriff, but only for to execute the
Office, and for these reasons he seemed the Obligation is good, and demands
Judgment for the Plaintiff: But it seems to all the Court, that Court.
the Covenant is void, and so by consequence the Obligation, as to the
performance of that void, but good to the performance of all other Covenants:
And Coke chief Justice said, that the Sheriff at the Common Law was elligible
as the Coronor is, and then by the death of the King his Office was not
determined, and also it is an entire Office, and though the King may
countermand his Grant of that, entirely, yet he cannot that countermand by
parcells, and also that the under Sheriff has Office which is entire, and
cannot be granted by parcells, and this Covenant will be a means to nourish
bribery and extortion, for the Sheriff himself shall have all the benefit, and
the under Sheriff all the pain, for he is visible, the under Sheriff and all
the Subjects of the King will repair to him, and the private contracts between
the Sheriff and him are invisible, of which none can have knowledge but
themselves.

And Warburton said; that in debt upon escape, etc. are against the Sheriff of
Notingham, he pleaded Nihil debet, and gives in evidence, that the Bailiff
which made the Arrest, was made upon condition, that he should not meddle with
such executions, without special warrant of the Sheriff himself, and his
consent, (but it was resolved (this notwithstanding) that the Sheriff shall be
charged in: and in the principal case, Judgment was given accordingly, that
is, that the Covenant is void

Note that the Sheriff of the County of Barks, was committed to Sheriff
committed to the Fleet.
the Fleet, for taking twenty shillings for making of a warrant upon a
general Capias utlagatum, for all the Justices were of opinion, that the
Sheriff shall not take any Fees for making of a warrant or execution of that
Writ, but only twenty shillings and four pence, the which is given by the
Statute of 23. H. 6. for it is at the Suit of the King: But upon Capias
utlagatum unde convictus est, which is after Judgment, it seems it is
otherwise.

A man grants a Rent to one for his life, and half a year after to Grant of a
Rent.
be paid at the Feasts of the Anunciation of our Lady, and Michaell the
Archangell by equal portions, and Covenants with the Grantee, for the payment
of that accordingly; the Grantee dies 2. Februar^, and for twenty pound which
was a moyity of the Rent, and to be paid at the anunciation after, the
Executors of the Grantee brings an Action of Covenant, and it seems it is well
maintainable. And Coke chief Justice said, That if a man grants Rent for
another life, the Remainder to the Executors of the Grantee, and Covenant to
pay the Rent during the Term aforesaid, this is good Collective, and shall
serve for both the Estates, and if the Grantee of the Rent, grant to the Tenant
of the Land the Rent, and that he should distrain for the said Rent, this shall
not be intended the same rent which is extinct, but so much in quantity, and
agreed that when a Rent is granted, and by the same Deed the Grantor covenants
to pay that, the Grantee may have annuity or Writ of Covenant at his Election.

Michaelmas 7. Jacobi, 1610. In the Common Bench. Waggoner against Fish,
Chamberlain of London.
JAMES Waggoner was arrested in London, upon a Plaint entered Privilege of
London.
in the Court of the Mayor in Debt, at the suit of Cornelius Fish Chamberlain
of the said City, and the Defendant brought a Writ of Privilege; returnable
here in the Common Pleas, and upon the return it appears, that in the City of
London there is a custom, that no forrainer shall keep any shop, nor use any
Trade in London, and also there is another Custom, that the Mayor, Aldermen,
and Commonalty (if any custom be defective) may supply remidy for that, and if
any new thing happen, that they may provide apt remedy for that, so if it be
congruae and bon^ fidei consuetudo rationi consentiae and pro communi utilitate
Regis, civium and omnium aliorum ibidem confluentium, and by Act of Parliament
made 7 R. 2. All their customs were confirmed, and 8 Ed. 3. The King by his
Letters Patents granted that they might make Bylaws, and that these Letters
Patents were also confirmed by Act of Parliament, and for the usage certified,
that in 3 Ed. 4. and 17. H. 8. were several acts of Common Council, made for
inhibiting Forrayners to hold any open shop, or shops or Lettice, and penalty
imposed for that, and that after, and showed* the day in certain was an Act of
Common counsel, made by the Mayor, Aldermen, and Commonalty: And for that it
was enacted, that no Forrayner should use any Trade, Mystery or occupation,
within the said City, nor keep any Shop there for retayling, upon pain of five
pound, and gives power to the Chamberlain of London for the time being to sue
for that by Action, etc. in the Court of the Mayor, in which no Essoyn nor
wager of Law shall be allowed, and the said penalty shall be the one half to
the use of the said Chamberlain, and the other half to the poor of Saint
Bartholomewes Hospital: And that the Defendant held a shop and used the
Mystery of making of candles the seventh day of October last, and for that the
Plaintiff the ninth day of the same month then next ensuing, levied the said
plaint: And upon this the Defendant was Arrested, and this was the cause of the
taking and detaining, etc. And upon argument at the Bar by Sergeant Harris the
younger for the Defendant, Harris.
and Hutton for the Plaintiff, and upon sollemne arguments by all the Justices,
Coke, Walmesley, Warburton, Danyell, and Foster, Hutton.
it was agreed: That the Defendant shall be delivered, and not remanded: And
the case was divided in to five parts.

The first the custom.

Secondly, the confirmation of that by Act of Parliament.

Thirdly, the grant of the King, and the confirmation of that by Act of
Parliament.

Fourthly, the usage and making of Acts of common council according to this.

Fifthly, the Act of common council upon which the Action is brought, and upon
which the Defendant was Arrested.

And to the first, which is the custom, it was also said, that this consists
upon three parts:

That is, first if any custom be difficult.

Secondly, if it be defective.

Thirdly, if Aliquid de novo emergit, The Mayor, Aldermen, and Commonalty:
Possunt opponere remedium, and that there are four incidents to that remedy.

First it ought to be Congruum Retione.

Secondly, (...) one fidei consonum.

Thirdly, consentaneum rationi.

Fourthly, Pro communi utillitate regis, civium and comodum aliorum ibidem
confluentium: But all the question was upon the remedy, for it was agreed that
the custom shall be good: But it was doubted by Foster and Danyell that there
was no good return, for it was but as recyted; and it was not averred and
positively said, that there was such a custom, and to prove that the case of
28 H. 6. was cited, where in debt upon an Obligation, the Defendant demands
Oyer, and upon the view says, that it appears by the said Obligation, that
two others were jointly bound with him not named, Judgment of the Writ, and
24. Ed. 4. Where it was pleaded, as it appears by the Letters Patents of one
King, and in 11. H. 4. in return of a Sheriff: But Coke answered and took a
difference between return upon a Writ of privilege, and upon which no Issue
may be joined, nor demurrer, and that it is but for an Informer of the Court,
and other pleads: And for this it seems to him, that it is good as to that,
and he conceived that by the Grant of the King the custom is destroyed, for
the King by his Grant cannot add nor diminish any thing of the custom, no more
then of Prescription, and exceptance of Grant shall be extinguishment of one as
well as of the other, as it appears by 8. H. 4, 25. H. 7. 5. 38. H. 8. B.
Prescription, 7 R, 2. But to this the Lord Coke gave no answer, and for that it
seems they were no Grants, but confirmation rather of customs, and they
further denied that the customs are confirmed by the Statute of 7. R. 2. for
this is only for the confirmation of Magna Charta, and of all former Statutes,
and of Charta de Foresta, and the liliberties of the holy Church, and there is
not any mention of the customs of London, but to this the Lord Coke answered,
that they ought to credit their return, and for that it seems, that it is a
private Act, and they ought to adjudge of that as it is made, as 7. H. 6. 6.
And if it be false the party greived may have an Action upon the case, so it
was agreed that the custom, that no forrainer shall hold any shop, nor sell in
any shop by retayl, and that they may make By-Lawes, for the ordering of their
ancient customs, are good customs without any confirmation by Act of
Parliament, or Grant of the King or otherwise: And if any thing happen De novo,
that they can apponere remedium with the restrictions aforesaid, for the Lord
Coke says that London is Antiqua civitas, and was of great fame and reckoning,
amongst the most ancient Cities, for it was said by Anianus Marcellinus which
wrote 1200. years past, that London was then Opidum vetustum, and Cornelius
Tacitus in vita Neronis says, that then there was under the Romans Government,
there was here Negotiorum copia, and commercia maximorum celebris, and he well
knew for he was here seven years, and married the Daughter of Agricola, who was
ancient Guilda Mercatoria, and for that it was well governed and continued in
good Order, for Vbi non est ordo, ibi est infirmium and sempiternus Horror and
confusio, and Gilda is a Saxon word, and is the same for Fraternitas, and
Northfolk and diverse other places in the Country the name continued, but this
is another sense, for Gyld fignisies to pay, and for that it is sometime
demanded if a man inhabit in a place gildable or within Franchise, and the
Place gildable is subject to scot and Lot, and all other charges, but the
Franchises are places exempt, but no person which is of a Gyld or fraternity,
may be exempted not by the Grant of the King nor otherwise, but shall be
subject to all the charges of the Gyld, and Fraternity, and the King cannot
make any man free of their Guyld when that is created, for there are but three
ways to make a man free of that.

First, by Birth which is the most eldest.

Secondly, by Service which is of merits.

Thirdly, By redemption which is power which only remains in the Mayor, and
the Court of Aldermen, in this case in London, and such Gyld can never have
beginning but by Grant, but by prescription, as the custom of Gavelkinde, that
a man may devise his Lands, or that the Land shall descend to the youngest Son,
and that the King cannot make, any stranger free of such Gyld or Fraternity
appears in Rotulo patentium, 32 Ed. 3. Where the King by his Letters patents
granted to one John Faulchon, that he should be frank and free of the City of
London, and that he should keep an Apothecaries shop there, but the Patentee
could not have his Freedom by this grant, and for that the King wrote his
Letters to the Mayor and Aldermen, and requested them to make the said Faulchon
free of the said City, and upon that it was done accordingly, but not upon the
Grant, and so it was adjudged in Darcies case 44. Eliz. Trinity, that if the
King grant to one the sole making of Cards in England, and that none shall
bring any Cards into England to be sold but the patentee, and it was adjudged
that though none may may have Park or Warren, and such other matters of
Pleasure without the Kings Grant, and though that playing with Cards be but a
matter of Pleasure, yet the making of them is a matter of profit, and the
bringing of them into England is a matter of Trade, and the inhibition of that
is hinderance of Trade, and makes a Monopoly, that the Grant was void, and 3
Ed. 3. 3. John of Sudfords Case, where the Case was, a Freeholder levied a
fold upon his Soil, and Freehold of his own, and the Defendant spoiled it, and
broke it, aed upon that the Plaintiff brings a Writ of Trespass; the Defendant
justifies that he was Lord of the Town, and there had been a usage there, and
had been of time out of memory, etc. That no man of the same Town ought to levy
a fold without the agreement and leave of the Lord: And for that that the
Plaintiff had done it, the Defendant pulled it down as well to him it was
lawful, and it seems a good custom, and with this agrees 5 Ed. 3. John de
Hayes case, and 10 and 11 Eliz. Dyer 279. 10. prescription, by the Mayor
Sherif, and Citizens of York; Goods foreign bought and foreign sold shall be
forfeited, and that he may seize them it was adjuged a good prescription, but
the King by his Letters Patents, cannot give such power to them.

And Coke was clearly of opinion, that the case was not within the Statute of 9
Ed. 3. chapt. 2. 25 Ed. 3. 11 27 Ed. 3. 11. And it was agreed by them all, that
a Merchant or any other man may sell Goods in gross, as he may sell a hundred
tun of wine, or pieces of Cloth, and one Tun of Wine to one man, or a piece of
Cloth to one man, and another to another man, till he has sold all, that this
was not retailing, but they cannot sell by the yard or keep a shop, but it was
also agreed that some goods a man might sell as well in their Market, if he do
not keep a shop here without any offense, and it was objected that this By-Law
was not good, for that it was for private good, and also the penalty which was
to be inflicted was too great.

For first the Mayor, Aldermen, and Citizens, make the Law, the suit for the
penalty ought to be before the Mayor, and the Mayor and Citizens ought to have
part of the Penalty, so that the Mayor shall be Judge in his own cause, which
also was one of the Reasons of the Judgment in the Chamberlain of Londons case
5. Coke for that that the penalty was so small, that is a penny for every cloth
which shall be sold in Blackwell hall, and this was for public good, for here
shall be search if it were good and merchantable, but it was agreed by all,
that every Town may make a By-Law, which is pro bono publico, without any
prescription or custom, and this shall be good, and being made by the greater
part shall bind the residue, but if it be for private good, as for the ordering
of the common or such like, shall not be good to bind any man without his
assent, without special custom, according to the Judgments in the
Chamberlain of Londons Case, and Clerks case 5. of Coke in his cases of
By-Lawes: But Coke is clear that the remedy, that is, the By-Law was good and
agreeing to the custom in every point, and that the penalty was fit and good,
and for quantity and quality, and that to the quantity he agreed, that they
could not inflict confiscation of Goods nor Imprisonment, but may inflict
pecuniary punishment, as it appears by Clerks Case, and the Action may be
brought for that, so that for the quality it was good: And so as to the
quantity which was Secundum quantitatem dilicti, for he conceived it was a
greater offense, to hold a private shop then public, for this is not in view
nor subject to search and reformation, as well as if it were public, and for an
old Act of Common Council, he which keeps a public shop shall forfeit ten
shillings, and clam delinquens punietur magis quam palam, and now the ounce of
silver is increased in value, for it is worth five shillings four pence, and
then it was worth but three shillings four pence, and so for quantity and
quality Et congruum and ratione causarum: And it seems to him that it is not
Bona fide, that a Forrainer should hold a private shop, but Dissentaneum, for
London is a Market overt, every day in the Week, but Sunday, as it appears by
11 H. 6. 19. And in Dunstable, the Prior brought an Action against a Butcher,
for that that Dunstable was an ancient Town, and that this was a market overt
two days in the Week, and the Defendant sold flesh in an inward room, the
Defendant pleads custom to warrant that, and adjudged that it was not good,
for the usage of Trade in such Corners is not, Bonae fidei consonant, and after
he pleaded that he sold the flesh in an open shop in the Market, and this was
allowed to be a good Plea, and if it be so in Dunstable, a fortiori, it shall
be so in London, and for the same reason also it shall not be Rationi
Consentaneum, to hold such inward shops, and also it is for Communi utilitate,
that is, of the Citizens of the King, and of all others, that Forrainers shall
not hold any shops in London, for it appears by the return that Forrainers
shall not be subject to Scot and Lot in London, and shall not be Officers which
are matters of great charge, so that if it shall be so they should be preferred
before Free men, and without question it is discomodious for the Citizens, that
any Forrainer should use any Trade here, and it would be a destruction to
Citizens, that a Forrainer should not be subject to their charges, and yet
should take benefit of the Trade within the City.

Secondly, And for the Benefit of others that strangers should not be received
to use any Trade within the City, for this is the cause of Depopulation,
depradation, and destruction in all other Towns and Buroughs in England,
which is prejudice to all others.

Thirdly, it is prejudicial to the King, that such a company of Inhabitants
should be resident in London, which is Camera Regis, for this is the cause of
Iufection of the Air and sickness, so that the King and all the State is
prejudiced by it, but the sole doubt which was conceived by Coke, was for that
that it does not appear by the return, that the Defendant had used the Trade of
Tallow Chandlor nor sold any Candles, but only that he kept a shop, and used
the mystery of making Candles, but if the return had been that he used the
Trade of Tallow Chandlor, this had been good, for that implies Tantamount, for
that had been, that he had sold, for Trade is in Tradendo, which is to deliver
over, and the Intent of the act is not that he shall be punished for making of
Candles, if he do not sell them, for the sale is the wrong, and so the Servant
of every Noble man or other which makes Candles or other thing for his Master,
or for his own use, should be within the penalty of the Act, and with this
agreed Foster and Daniel, and for this cause only it was resolved that he
should be delivered and not remanded.

Hillary 7. Jacobi, In the Common Bench. Cholke against Peter.
THE Case was this, The Lord Rich being seized of the Chase of Where the Owner
of Wood may Enclose.
Hatfeild, granted and sold to Sir Thomas Barrington Knight, and his Heirs,
all the Wood growing, and to grow upon a part of that, and excepted the soil,
and further that he might enclose every sixteen Acres of that, and this to hold
in several for the Prservation of the spring, according to other Statutes of
the Realm, and this Grant was confirmed by a private Act of Parliament, and
that the Grantee might hold it in several without suit of the Kings Officers,
with a saving of the right of all strangers, and a Commoner put in his Beasts
to take his common in one parcel of that which was enclosed, against whom the
Grantee, brought an Action of Trespass, and in this the only question was, if
this Grantee of the Trees, which had not any Interest in the Soil, might
enclose against a Commoner by the Statute of 22. Ed. 4. chap. 7. was the
question, for it was agreed, that if a man grant Trees growing and to grow, to
one and his Heirs, and except the Soil, the Grantee has Fee-simple in the
Trees, but has nothing in the Soil, according to the 14. H. 2. and 3. H. 6.
45. Ives case, 5. Coke 11. So if a man make a feoffment of land except the
Woods, all woods are except by that, and if Woods be cut, and after grow again
in the same place, this is also excepted; But if woods after grow in another
place this shall not be excepted, for it was no wood in Esse at the time of the
feoffment, so if a man grants to another to dig Coals in his Soil, this is but
to take profit, and the Soil does not pass, as it is agreed in 11. Eliz. Dyer
245. And it was said by Hutton Sergeant that he had seen an Ejectione Firm
brought upon a Lease Hutton.
of Vsura terra: But it was agreed by Coke chief Justice and Foster, that the
Statute of 22. Ed. 4. chap. 7. was repealed by the Statute of 35. H. 8. for
this is the negative, and for that is repeal of a former Statute, but if the
last had been in the affirmative otherwise it should be, and it was also agreed
that this was not within the Statute of 35. H. 8. for that appoints of what age
the wood shall be when it shall be enclosed, and by this recompense is given to
the Commoner; but here it is not averred by pleading of what age this wood was
which was enclosed, and for that it was adjudged that the Action is not
maintainable against the Commoner, see Pasche 8. Jacobi for another argument at
the Bar, and also by the Judges.

Hillary 7. Jacobi, 1609. In the Common Bench. Vivion against Wild.
A Man was bound in an Obligation to another with Condition, to stand to,
abide, and perform the award of two Arbitrators, Arbitrament. Submissior.
Revocation.
and before the award, by his writing the Obligor revoked the authority of one
of the Arbitrators: And it was agreed by all, that this Obligation is become
single without Condiion, and yet it was not pleaded that the Arbitrator had
notice of the revocation before the award made: And yet for that it was
pleaded, that Revocavit, it was agreed that that implies notice, for without
notice it is no revocation: But it was agreed that if a man submit himself to
the award of another, and after he revokes his authority: But before the
Arbitrator had notice of that he makes the award, the award is good and shall
be performed; so if a man make a Feoffment and Letter of Attorney to make
Livery: And before Livery made he revokes the power of the Attorney: But before
notice the Attorney makes Livery, this is good, but if the Feoffor makes a
Lease or feoffment to another before the Livery made by the other, this is a
Countermand in Law, and shall be good without notice, for Fortior est
dispositio legis quam hominis: But where a man makes actual revocation of the
authority, and before notice the other executes his authority, and in pleading
the other pleades; Quod revocavit, the other party may reply, Quod non
revocavit, and give in evidence that he has no notice of that before the
execution of his authority, and this is good, for without notice it is no
revocation, where revocation is the act of the party. The case is entered
Trinity 7. Jacobi Rotulo 2629. Vivion against Wild.

Hillary 7. Jacobi, 1609. In the Common Bench. Smallman against Powys.
A Man made a Lease for life rendering Rent, and after the Lessor Devise and
grant ^enures to bargain and Sale.
by Indenture in consideration of fifty pound, devises and grants the
Reversion, to have from the day of the date for 99. years rendering a Rent
also, which was less then the first Rent, and the Grantee of the reversion
destraines for the rent reserved upon the Lease for life being behind: and the
sole question in this case was, if the reversion shall pass without
Attornment, and it was said, that in all cases where a use may be raised by the
Common Law, and that it shall be performed by order of Chancery, that in these
cases, the use shall be executed by the Statute Harris.
of 27. H. 8. of uses; and one case was cyted by Harris Sergeant 14. and 15.
Eliz. where the Brother was Tenant in tail, the remainder to his Sister in
tail, the Brother by Deed which was Indented in parchment, but made in the
first person, and no mention of Indenting in the Deed, and the Deed was
Enrolled with three months, and after Livery and Seisin was made, and it w^
adjudged that the Deed enures as a Bargain and Sale, and that nothing passes
by the feoffment, so that it was no discontinuance, but that the Sister might
enter after the death of her Brother without Issue.

Coke chief Justice said, that it was a good Bargain and Sale, though that the
words Bargain and Sell were not in the Deed, but he conceived if a Letter of
Attorney be incerted in the Deed, so that it may appear that the intent of the
parties is, that it should not enure as a Bargain and Sale, but as a feoffment,
there it is otherwise, so if a man covenants to stand seized to a use, if it be
in consideration of money, and the Deed is enrolled: there this shall enure
well, as Bargain and Sale, as it was adjudged in Bedels case 7. Coke 40. a. but
the Statute of 27. H. 8. of inrollments does not extend to a Term, for the
words of the Statute are, that no freehold shall pass, etc. But it seems in
the principal case, that the Statute of uses, executes the use which is raised
by this Grant, and that the Grantor shall stand seized, etc. And all the
Justices insisted strongly upon the Limitation of the Estate, from the day of
the date of the Grant and the Reservation of the Rent immediately, and upon this
concluded, that it was the intent of the parties that the Grantee should have
the Rent reserved upon the first Lease; and should pay the Rent reserved upon
his estate, and that when words of diverse natures are incerted in one
conveiance, the Grantee has election to use which of them that he will, as it
appears by Sir Rowland Haywards case, and by Danyel, if a man makes a Bargain
and Sale in english, and makes Livery, Secundum forma Chartae, this shall not
be good: But if it be in Latin otherwise it is, for this word Vendo is
compounded of Do, and it is an apt word for Sur. that Livery might be made: And
agreed all that the reversion passes well without Attornment, and that these
words Demise and Grant shall be taken and enure to a Bargain and Sale, and
Judgment was given accordingly.

A man made a Lease for years, to two if they lived so long, Lease to
determine upon Limitation.
and it was resolved by the Court, that this determines by the death of one of
them, according to the resolution in Bradwells Case 5. Coke 9. a. and Judgment
was given accordingly, and there the case of Trupenny was recited, which was
this; Lands was let to one for one and twenty years, if the Husband and wife,
and the Issue male of their Bodies so long live, and it was there adjudged,
that the Lease does not determine, during the lives of any of them, for in this
disjunctive, it is referred to an Inti^e Sentence, and is as much as if he had
said, if the Husband or the Wife, or the Issue of their Bodies so long live.

Hillary 7. Jacobi 1609. In the Common Bench. Borough of Yarmouth.
THE King John by his Letters Patents granted that the Borough of Yarmouth
should be incorporated, and the grant is made Grant of the King that the
Borough should be incorporated.
Burgensibus without naming of their Successors, and also he granted,
Burgensibus teneri placita coram balivis, and in pleading it was not averred
that there were Bailiffs there, and it was objected that the Borough cannot be
incorporated, but men which inhabit in that, but to that it was resolved that
the Grant is good, and the Lord Coke said, that he had seen many old Grants, to
the Citizens of such a Town and Good, and so that the Grant Burgensibus, that
the B^rrough should be incorporated, being an old Grant should have favorable
construction, but the doubt was, for that that it was not averred that there
were Bailiffs of Yarmouth; and if a Grant to hold Pleas, and does not say
before whom, the Grant is void, according to 44 Ed. 3. 2 H. 7. 21 Ed. 4. and
for that it was adjourned: But the opinion of all the Court was that the Grant
made Burgensibus was good without naming of their Successors, as in the case of
Grant civibus, without more.

Note that Executors or Administrators shall not find special Bail for the
Debt of the Testator, though that the debt be for a great sum Bail.
as three thousand pound or more, for it is not their Debt, nor his Body shall
not be liable to execution for that.

43 Ed. 3. Suit was commenced, hanging another Writ, it is a Suit begun,
hanging another Writ.
good Plea, though that the Writ was returnable in the Common Bench, and the
last Suit was begun in a Base Court, but if so be, and does not appear to this
Court, that the Plaintiff begun suit in a base Court, for the same Debt, for
which the Suit is here begun Attachment shall be awarded, see 2 H. 6. 9 H. 6.
but this ought to appear to the Court by Affidavit, etc.

Hillary 7 Jacobi 1609. In the Common Bench. Chapman against Pendleton.
IN second deliverance, the case was this, A man seized of a house Casual
entire Services.
and fifty Acres of Land held by Rent, fealty, and Harriot service, enfeoffs
the Lord of three Acres parcel of the Land, and after infeoffs the plaintiff
in this Action of three other Acres, and upon this the sole question was, if by
this Feoffment to the Lord of parcel Harriot service is extinct or not.

Harris Sergeant conceived that the Harriot remains, for he said Harris.
that it is reserved to the Reversion of the Tenure, but it is not as anuall
Service, but casual, and it is not like to rectify, for that it is incident to
every service, And by 43 Ed. 3. 3 It is no part of the service but Improvement
of the service: And Bracton in his Tractate De Relevijs 2 Book 2, 7. says,
that Est alia prestatio vocata Harriot etc. Que magis fit de gratia quam ex
Jure, and it is not like to a releife, see the Book at large, and he agreed
that if the Tenant had made fifty several Feoffments to fifty several men,
that every of them shall pay a several Harriot, as it appears by Bruertons
Case, 6 Coke 1. a, 34. Ed. 3. Harriot 1. 2 Ed. 2 Avowry 184. (...) Ed. 2.
Ibidim 206. 11 Ed. 3. Avowry 101. 24 Ed, 3. 73. a, 34 Assise 15. 22. Ed. 4. 36.
37. 29 H. 8. Tenures 64. But he grounded his Argument principally upon
Littleton 122. 223. Where it is said, that the reason why Homage and Fealty
remain, if the Lord purchase part of the Tenancy is for that that they are of
annual Services, and it seemed to him, that Littleton is grounded upon 7 Ed.
4. 15. Extinguishment 2. 8 Ed 3. 64. 24. Ed, 3, B. Apportionment last case,
which accords the reason, and upon this he concluded, that for that that the
Harriot is not annual, it shall not be extinct by the Feoffment but remains,
but he agreed if a man makes a Lease for years rendering Rent, and parcel of
the Land comes to the Lord, the Rent shall be apportioned if it be by Lawful
means, as it appears by 6 R. 2. F. Quid Juris clamat 17. Plesingtons Case, and
24 H. 8. Dyer 4. 1. Rushdens case, by which, etc.

Nicholls Sergeant, that it has been agreed that it is entire service,
Nicholls.
and that then he concluded upon that that it shall be of the nature of other
entire services, as it apperrs by 2 Ed. 2. Avowry 184. and 34 Ed. 3, F. Harriot
1. 5. Ed. 2. Avowry 206. And he agreed that in the case of Littleton the Homage
and Fealty remain, and the escuage shall be apportioned, but this is not for
the reason alleged in Littleton, that is, for that that they are not annual
services, but for that that the Homage is incident to every Knights service,
and as the Lord Coke said, fealty is incident to every service in general, and
the Tenant shall make Oath to be faithful and loyal to his Lord for all the
Tenements which he holds of him, and the reason for which the Escuage shall be
apportioned, is for that that it is but as a penalty which is inflicted upon
the Tenant for that that he did not make his services, as it appears by the
pleading of it, and shall be apportioned according to the Assesment by
Parliament, and by 22 Ed 4. It appears that this purchase by the Lord, is as a
release, and if the Lord release his services in part, this extincts the
services in all, and he said there is no difference where an entire service is
to be paid, every third or fourth year, and where it is to be paid every year
as to that purpose, and yet in one case it is annual, and in the other it is
casual, and yet in both cases if the Lord purchase parcel of the Land of the
Tenant, all the entire services shall be extinct and gone, though that they are
to be performed every third or fourth year, by which, etc.

Foster Justice, that the Harriot is entire service, and for that Foster.
though that it be not annual, it shall be extinct by purchase of parcel of
the Tenancy by the Lord, as if a man makes a Feoffment with warranty, and takes
back an Estate of part, the warranty is extinct, as it appears by the 29. of
Assise; so if a man hold his Land by the service to repair parcel of the
fence of a Park of the Lords, and the Lord purchase parcel of the Tenancy, the
Tenure is extinct, as it appears by 15 Ed. 3. And it is agreed in the 21 H. 7,
In Kellawaies Reports by Frowick, that there is no difference between Harriot
and Releife, and Releife shall be extinct, and so he concluded that the Harriot
is extinct. Dauiell.


Danyell Justice accordingly; and he said that this purchase shall be as strong
as release: And if the Lord has released the service entire for part, it shall
be extinct for all, and if Tenant holds by Suite to the court of the Lord, and
the Lord purchase parcel of the Tenancy the Suit is extinct, as it appears by
27. H. 7. and Fitz. Na. Bre. And so concluded that the Harriot service is
extinct by the purchase aforesaid.

Warburton accordingly: And says that in Littletons Case, the Homage and
Fealty shall remain, for they are personal services, Warburton.
and for that shall remain entire, and of Rent shall be an apportionment by
the Statute of Westminster 3. De quia emptores terrarum: But for other entire
services by the purchase of the Lord, be they annual or casual, and they are
extinct, and 21, Edward 4, was a Suite for a Hawke, which was kept back twenty
years, and so for Suit if the Tenants make a feoffment to diverse, they shall
make but one Suit, but they all shall make contribution to the Suit, but if the
Lord purchase parcel, he cannot make contribution: And though that the Homage
and Fealty are personal services, the Horse and Hawke are of the nature of
land, so the Harriot is of his goods, and if the Tenant has no goods, the Lord
shall loose it, and for that he concluded as above.

Walmesley accordingly: And he said, if a Tenant hold by entire Walmesley.
services of two Lords, and one purchase parcel of the Tenancy, all the entire
services shall not be extinct, but the other Lord which did not purchase, shall
have them, for Res inter alios acta, nemini nocere debeat: To which Coke chief
Justice agreed, and he said if Harriot custom be due, peradventure it shall
not be extinct by purchase of parcel of the Tenancy, for that is personal,
and it is not Issuing out of land, but for entire services, which are Issuing
out of land, he said there is no difference betwixt annual services and
casual services which are entire, and so he concluded, as above.

Coke chief Justice accordingly, and he said there is no difference Coke.
between annual entire services and casual, so that they are services to be
paid at the death or alteration of every Tenant, or otherwise, but he said
there is no doubt, but that Rent service shall be apportioned, though that the
Lord purchase parcel, be that in the Kings case, or of a common person, and
this by the common Law without the aid of any Statute, for there is not any
Statute that shall aid that, if it be not remedied by the Common Law, and he
said that some Entire services may multiply, as if a man holds by payment of a
pair of gilt Spurrs, or of a Hawke, or a Horse, or others such like, and makes
a feoffment of parcel, the Feoffee shall hold by the same entire services: But
if the Tenant hold by personal services, as to cover the Table of his Lord, or
to be his Carver, or Sewer at such a Feast, or such like, these personal
services cannot multiply, if the Tenant makes a feoffment of part, for by this
the Lord may be prejudiced, for peradventure at his house he will not include
them, but he may distrain every of them to make the service: And he says the
reason for which Knights service shall be apportioned, is for that it is for
the public good, and for the good of the Common Wealth* But so are not the
other personal services, and in the principal case he conceives, that if the
Tenant had made a feoffment first to a stranger, and after the stranger had
infeoffed the Lord, that by that all the entire service shall not be extinct,
for by the feoffment of the estranger, was severence of the services, and he
holds by a Harriot as well as his Feoffor, and for that nothing shall be
extinct, but the Harriot due by that parcel, of which the estranger was
infeoffed; and he agreed with Walmesley, that a Harriot custom shall not be
extinct, where the custom is that every Tenant shall pay a Harriot, for there
it is paid in respect that he is Tenant, and custom shall not be drowned by
unity of Tenancy and Signiory: And for that he concluded that the Harriot for
that, that it was entire service though that it were casual and not annual,
that yet it shall be extinct, and Judgment was given accordingly.

Hillary 7. Jacobi, 1609. In the Common Bench. Michelborne against Michelborne.
UPON a motion made for consultation upon Prohibition awarded: It was said by
the Lord Coke, that no Subject of Trade with Infidels without, License.
the King, may trade with any Realm of Infidells, without license of the King,
and the reason of that is, that he may resinquish the Catholic faith and
adhere to Infidelisme, and he said that he has seen a license made in the time
of Ed. 3. where the King recited that he having special trust and confidence,
that his Subject will not decline from his Faith and Religion, licenced him ut
supra) And this did rise, upon the recital of a license made to a Merchant to
trade into the East Indies.

Hillary 7. Jacobi, 1609. In the Common Bench. Read against Fisher.
IN debt the Defendant exhibits his suit in the Court of Requests, Prohibition
to the Court of Requests.
and there the Plaintiff in that Court denied, that the debt was paid, and the
Court of Request awarded an Injunction, and upon Information of that, this
Court awarded a Prohibition to inhibit the Suit there.

Hillary 7. Jacobi, 1609. In the Common Bench. Mors against Web.
IN Replevin the case was this; A man was seized of two Virgates Approvement of
Common.
of Land, and prescribed that he and his Ancestors, and all those whose Estates
he has in the said Virgates of Land, have used to have common in the feilds,
etc. That is, when the feilds are fallow all the year, and when they are sown
with Corn or otherwise several, when the Crop is mowed and removed, for two
Horses, four other Beasts, and a hundred and twenty Sheep, as appertaining to
the said two Virgates of Land: The Defendant traverseth the prescription, and
upon this they are at Issue, and the Jury found that there is such
prescription: But further they say, that the Plaintiff made a Lease of six
Acres parcel of the said two Virgates of Land in one of the feilds of, etc.
with the Common of that thereunto belonging for the Term of ten years, and
the Beasts for which the Replevin was brought, were in another field of, etc.
And if the prescription be suspended or remains, they prayed the advice of the
Court, and it was agreed that common appendant and appurtenant was all one to
the severance, for if such a Commoner grant parcel of that Land to which the
Common is appurtenant, or appendant, the Grantee shall have Common, Pro Rata,
but if a commoner purchase parcel of the Land, in which he has Common
appurtenant, that this extincts all his Common: And it was agreed that Common
may be appendant to a Carve of Land, as it appears by the 6 Ed. 3. 42. and 3.
Assise 2. as to a Manor, but this shall he intended to the Demesnes of the
Manor, and so a Carve of Land consists of Land, Meadow, and Pasture, as it
appears by Tirringhams case 4. Coke 37. b. And Common appendant shall not be
by prescription, for then the Plea shall be intended double, for it is of
common Right, as it appears by the Statute of Morton chap. 4. And the common
is mutual, for the Lord has Right of Common in the Lands of the Tenant, and
the Tenant in the Lands of the Lord: And it was urged by Nicholls Sergeant,
that the Common shall be apportioned as if it were Rent, and that the Lessee
shall have Common for his Lease, and then the Lessor has no Common appurtenant
or appendant to the two Virgats of Land, and for that the Prescription was not
good.

Coke chief Justice, if it had been pleaded, that he had used to have Common
for the said Beasts Levant and Couchant upon the said Land, there had been no
question but it should be apportioned, for the Beasts are Levant and Couchant
upon every part, as one day upon one part, and another day upon another part,
and for that extinguishment or suspention of part shall be of all, as if a man
makes a Leaf of two Acres of Land, rendering Rent, and after bargains and
sells the reversion of one Acre, there shall be an apportionment of the Rent,
as well as if it had been granted and attornment: And he agreed that if a man
have Common appurtenant, and purchase parcel of the Land in which he has
Common, all the Common is extinct, but in this case common appendant shall be
apportioned for the benefit of the Plow, for as it is appendant to Land, Hyde,
and gain: And in the principal case there was common appendant, for it was
pleaded to be belonging to two Virgats of Land, and for commonable Beasts: And
he conceived also that the prescription being as appertaining to such Land,
that this shall be all one, as if it had been said Levant and couchant, for
when they are appurtenant, they shall be intended to Plow, Manure, Compester,
and Feed upon the Land: And also he conceived that the right of Common remains
in the Lessor, and for that he may prescribe, for after the end of the Term
shall be returned, and in the intermin he may Bargain and sell and the Vendee
shall have it, and shall have common for his Portion.

And Walmesley Justice agreed to that, and that during the Walmesley.
Term the Lessor shall be excluded of his Common for his proportion.

Foster Justice agreed, and that the possession of the Lessee is the Foster.
possession of the Lessor, but he conceived when the Lessor grants to the
Lessee six acres of Land in such a field where the Land lies, and then the
Beasts were taken in another field: And so they agreed for the matter in Law,
and also that the pleading was ill, and so confess and avoid the prescription:
But upon the traverse as it is pleaded, the Jury shall not take benefit of it,
and Judgment was given accordingly.

Termino Pasche 7. Jacobi 1609 In the Common Bench.
THOU art a Jury man, and by thy false and subtle means have Action upon the
Case for Slander.
been the Death and overthrow of a hundred men, for which words Action upon the
case for slander was brought, and it seemed to Coke chief Justice that it did
well lie, if it be averred that he was a Jury man, and so of Judge and Justice,
for Sermo relatus ad personam intelligo debet de qualitate person, as Bracton
says, and in the like Action brought by Butler, it was not averred, that he
was a Justice of Peace, and resolved that an Action upon the case does not lie.

But Walmesley Justice conceived that an Action does not lie, for one Juror
only does not give the Verdict, but he is joined with his Companions, and it is
not to be intended that he could draw his Companions to give Verdict against
the truth, and false and subtle means are very general.

Warburton Justice agreed with Coke, and conceived that the Action well lies,
being averred that he was a Jury man, as if one calls another Bankrupt Action
well lies if it be alleged that the Bankrupt actionable.
Plaintiff was a Tradesman, and it is common speaking that one is a Leader of
the Jurors, and a man may presume that other Jurors will give Verdict, and may
take upon him the knowledge of the Act.

Walmesley conceived that the Action did not lie, for that the words are a
hundred men, which is impossible, and for that no man will give any credit to
it, and for that it is no slander, and for that Action does not lie, no more
then if he had said that he had killed a thousand men, But Coke, Warburton,
Daniell, and Foster, agreed that the number is not material, for by the Words
his malice appears, and for that they conceived that the Action does well lie.

Pasch. 7. Jacobi 1609. In the Common Bench. Denis against More.
ANthony Denis Plaintiff in Replevin, William More Defendant, Grant of Reversion.
the case was this, Two joint Lessees for life were, the Remainder or Reversion
in Fee being in another person, he in Reversion grants his Reversion, Habendum,
the aforesaid Reversion, after the death, surrender, or forfeiture of the
Tenant for life, it happens, that the Lease determines, for the life of the
Grantee, and Remains to another for life, and resolved that this shall be a
good grant of the Reversion to the first effect of Possession, after the Deaths
of the Tenants for life, according to the 23 of Eliza. Dier 377. 27. And it
shall not be intended to pass a future interest, as if it were void of the
other party, and so was the opinion of all the Court, see Bucklers case 2. Coke
55. a. and Tookers case 2. Coke 66.

Upon a Fine the first Proclamation was made in Trinity Term 5. Error in
Proclamation.
Jacobi.

And the second in Michaelmas Term 5. Jacobi.

And the third in Hillary Term 6. Jacobi, where it should be in Hillary Term
5. Jacobi.

And the fourth and fifth in Easter Term 6. Jacobi.

And this was agreed to be a palpable Errrour, for the fourth Proclamation was
not entered at all, and the fifth was entered in Hillary Term 6. Jacobi, where
it should have been in Hillary Term 5 Jacobi, and it shall not be amended, for
that it was of another Term, and the Court conceived that this was a
forfeiture of the Office of the Chirographer, for it was an abusing of it, and
the Statute Forfeiture of Office of a Chiroghapher.
of 4. H. 4. 23. and Westminster 2. Are that Judgment given in the Kings Court
shall stand, until they be reversed by Error.

A man is bound in an Obligation dated the third of January, and Release.
by Release dated the second day of the said Month of January, releases all
Actions, etc. From the beginning of the World until this present day, and
delivered the Release after he had delivered the Obligation.

And Coke chief Justice conceived, that a Release of all Actions until the
Date, shall not discharge duty after, but a Release, Vsque confectionem
presentium, that discharges Duties after the Date, and before the Delivery: But
he conceived that the Day of this present time shall be the Day of the Date,
and it shall not be averred that it was delivered 20. years after, and it shall
not wait upon the Delivery of the Deed.

A Writ of Dower was brought by Frances Fulgham against Sergeant Harris the
younger in this manner, Precipe, etc. Quod, etc. Error in a Writ of Dower.
Frances Fulgham, Widow, where the form in the Register (Que fuit uxor) and
not Widow, and the words of the Writ are, Rationabilem detem Tenementorum que
fuerunt Fran. Fulgham quondam viri su^, and yet it was resolved to be Error,
see the Register, and yet it does not vary in substance, and 38 Ed. 3. In re
nisi sunt, all one, yet for that the form in the Register is otherwise: The
Justices would not amend it.

John Warren Plaintiff in Trespass, and Ejectione Firm against Copyhold.
Cicely Spackman, it was resolved that the admittance of a Copyholder for life
was sufficient for him in remainder.

In a Writ of Dower by Mistress Fulgham upon Ne Vnques Certificate of the Bishop.
couple etc. pleaded, a Writ was awarded to the Archbishop (in the time of the
vacation of the Bishopric of Lychfeild and Coventry) who returned that he had
a Delegate, which made a Commission to Babington Chancellor of the said
Diocese, to make inquiry, and certificate of the said matter, which have
certified that they were lawfully coupled in lawful matrimony: And adjudged
without question, that the return was not good, for the Archbishop himself
ought to execute it, and Delegata potesta^ non potest delegari, and for that it
was ordered that he should amend her Certificate.

See the Statute of 5 Ed. 3. That an Arrest, Eundo and rediundo, Minister
Arrested.
from celebrating divine service, And it seemed to the Justices, that such
Arrest is not lawful, for he ought to be privileged rather then a man which
comes to any Court, to procecute or defend any suit here.

Pasche* 7. Jacobi, 1609. In the Exchequer. The Duke of Lenox case.
IN Trespass the case was this, the King by his Letters Patents Grant of the
King of Alnage.
created the Duke of Lenox Alneger, and he made his deputy: And the Duke by the
said Letters Patents of the King, was to measure all Clothes, and to have so
much for every Piece, and to search and to view that if it be well and
sufficiently made or not, and he made his Deputy, which offers to measure,
search, and view, certain parcel of Worsted, and demanded the duty due to the
Alneger for that, and for that, that the owner refused to pay it, he seized
certain pieces of Worsted, and kept them, upon which this Action was brought.

And Haughton Sergeant for the Defendant, conceived that the Haughton.
sole question rests upon these Letters Patents of the King, and for that he
would first consider.

First if these duties of Subsidies and Ausnage are due by the Common Law, and
if they are not due by the Common Law, then if they are due by Statute Law: And
if they be due, neither by the Common Law, nor Statute Law; then if the King by
his Letters Patents may grant it.

And to the first he said: That Subsidy is aid or help: And there are two
manners of aid, one which is Inheritance in the King, as aid to make his Son
Knight, or to marry his Daughter, and others which are given by grant of
others, and these are not Inheritances in the King; and these duties were not
demandable by the Common Law, nor by Custom: And this appears by the 25. Ed.
3. 6. Where any prises were demanded which were due by the common Law, and some
which were not due, and subsidy for Woolls were not due by the Common Law, but
it was granted to the King and is now due, but this is by grant, and not by the
Common Law, and in the 14. Ed. 3. A Statute was made for the King for his
subsidy for Woolles, what part he should have, which part was given to him in
quantity; and in time of H. 6. A Statute was made by which subsidy was given to
him during his life, and 36, Ed. 3. Subsidy was granted for three years, and
after should not be any subsidy paid, as appears by 45. Ed. 3. And if
subsidy were not due by the Common Law for Woolles, then may it be concluded,
that it was not due for clothes, for Woolles grow without man's labor, and the
11. H. 4. and 13. H. 4. The King makes a grant of Alnage of clothes, and a Writ
is awarded to the Mayor and Sheriffs of London, to give possession to the
Patentee, which returns the Writ, that the Office was not granted before this
time: And the Statute of 24. Ed. 3. was the first Statute that gave profit to
the King for clothes: But he granted that the Office of Alneger was of ancient
times, and an ancient Office, but it was no Office of profit, but an Office of
Justice and Right; and no Fee was due for the exercising of it, and that 1. Ed.
2, was a Grant of the Office of the Alneger, and 11. H. 4. was a Grant of the
Office of Alneger for Canvas, but it does not appear by any account, that the
King had any profit for the Alnage it self, or upon the said Grants, either
before or after, and allowing that there were accounts for Cloth, yet it does
not appear that there were any accounts for Worsteds, The Statute of 27. Eliz.
gives subsidy of four pence for every broad Cloth, so that the Statute made
express mention of broad Cloth, but there was not any mention of Worsteds, and
this Statute shall not be taken by equity, though that the Statute of 1. R. 2.
12. for escapes by the Warden of the Fleet, being a penal Statute, yet for
that, that it was for a general mischeife, shall be taken by equity, as it
appears by Platts Case in the Comment: So the Statute of 9. Ed 3. chap. 3.
provideth that where Debt is brought against diverse Executors, that they shall
have but one Essoyn, and the Statute mentions Execurors only, yet
Administrators are taken within the equity of this Statute, as it appears by
3, H. 6. yet in this case at the Bar, the Statute of 27. Eliz. was not for the
remedy of a mischeife, but is a Grant to the King, and Grant of one thing
cannot be Grant of another thing, as if the King pardon an Offense, another
Offense cannot be pardoned by this: As it appears by the Archbishop of
Canterburies Case, 2. Coke, where the Statute of 1. Ed. 6. by which diverse
Chantryes were granted to the King, it shall be intended a Grant within the
Statute of 31. H. 8. of Monastries which was before: But further he said that
the matter is insufficient to raise a duty to the King, for in vain is the
property of any thing in one man if another man may charge it: And in this case
the King cannot grant these Clothes, and for that he cannot charge them, and
the Letters Patents of the King are not sufficient only to charge the Goods of
any man, see the case of 11. H. 4. But he agreed that if the King grant a
Ferrey, and that every passenger shall pay for his passage four pence, this is
good, for every man may chose whether he will pass by that or not: And none
shall be constrained to pass by that, but Grant of the King to one, that none
shall bring in any Cards into England but the Patentee only is vord; and it was
adjudged in Nicholls Case in 18. Eliz. That if any man offend in not repayring
of a Bridge, the King cannot pardon it, for the Subjects of the King have
Interest in that, and further he says, that the Grant was against an express
Statute made in 7. Ed. 4. 1. for this appoints that the Alneger shall not take
any Fee, by which the Grant of the said Office shall be without Fee, and this
Grant is with a Fee, that is, so much for every Cloth, he agreed that this is
an affirmitive Law, and for that it shall not bind the King generally, but when
it is for determination of right or wrong, the King shall be bound by that, and
the Patent is grounded upon the Statute of 27. Eliz. or 47. Ed. 3. 1. which are
made for the breadth of Clothes; and here the Patent has not any respect to
it, for if the piece be but of the breadth of a foot, if it be in length
according to the Statute, so much shall be paid for that as if it were a broad
Cloth, and for that there is not any equity in it, that the Statute seems to
intend, for the charge ought to be correspendent to the quantity of the Cloth,
as 41. Ed. 3. 16. Avowry for distress of sixteen Oxen for nine pence Rent, and
adjudged that it was found outrageous, and therefore he was amerced for taking
of an excessive distress, and so he demanded Judgment for the Plaintiff.

Dodridge the Kings Sergeant, that the question is if the Alneger Dodridges*
may meddle with this new kind of Drapery and shall take Fee for that, and it
seems to him that he may meddle with all things, which consists in Measure,
Waying, and Searching: And may exercise his Office in this for necessity of
Merchandise, for Common Wealth cannot consist without commerce, and Pecunia est
rerum mensura, and provides to make recompense in value for every thing, as it
is said by Keble 12. H. 7. 24. b. and then to reduce all other things in
certain, for it is the certain value of money, is known to be a direct means
to know the quantity of all other things, and that is by weight and measure,
etc. And for this for the necessity of commerce, there ought to be a public
Officer, which shall have the care and charge that such things shall be well
and duly made, for the profit and benefit of the Common Wealth, and this.
Officer is as ancient as there has been any commerce within this Realm, and
he made illustration thereof by diverse Rolls of the Exchequer in time of 2 H.
4. By which it appears, that then there were Marts for cloth: And that then was
an Officer, to search, measure, and see the said clothes opened, for then was
an Officer made of purpose to measure and search the clothes, which were sold
in a Fair at Worcester, by which Rolls also it appears, that there was an
Assise of breadth and length of clothes before any Statute for that purpose, by
the Statute of Magna Charta, made 9. H. 3. chap. 25. It is provided that una
mensura, and una latitudo pannorum tinctorum, russatorum, and Haubergettarum,
that is, Duo ulne infra list as per totum Regnum Anglie, and 1 Ed. 1. amongst
the Rolls of the Patents in the Tower, it appears that the Office of Alneger
was granted De omnibus pannis tam ultra mare quam infra mare: And 1. R, 2. was
another Grant of the Office of Alneger, and 14. R. 2. the King granted the
Office of Alneger in Ireland, and by the Statute of 5. Ed. 2. it is provided
that the estretes by the Warden of the Alnage should be delivered into the
Exchequer to the Treasurer of the Exchequer, and 17. Ed, 2. the Office of
Alneger was granted to one J. Griffin of all the clothes made beyond Sea, till
the 1. of Ed. 3. by which the use appears in the time of the Reign of King
Ed. 3. upon which records he observed, that the Office of an Alneger is an
ancient Office, and that he has power to see, search, and measure, omnies
pannas tam ultra marinas quam infra marinas, without any exception, and for
that it cannot be denied, but that he ought to meddle with woollen clothes, and
he ought to meddle with all for one self same end and purpose, that is to
fasten a Seal to them. Secondly, That the Law depends upon the Art and
invention of Artists, then no Law shall prevent more mischeifes, for there is
no end of Art and Invention. And thirdly, and that in this Individuo, for there
is not any Invention made of Worsteds, till the time of Ed. 2. for it was a new
commodity, and then first Invented, and after it was first invented, there was
immediately an Officer made for that, and for this it appears that 1 Ed. 3.
Nicholas Shoverler was made general Alneger for that, and after that came
Wadlowes and Says, and also an Alneger was immediately made for them, by which
it appears, that so soon as new stuff was invented by the Artist that there was
a new Officer to search, and see that, and prevent that deceit should not be
used in it, and then for the Fee of the Alneger, that is grounded upon a just
Law, which is the Law of Retrebution, for Dignus est operarius mercede, and
though it does not appear by their Patents, that they had taken any Fee for the
exercising of their said Office, yet it appears by their Accounts that they
have had a Fee for it, and if they have no Fee of the King, then it follows
that they ought to have a Fee of the Subject by Common Law, the Office being
for the public good, and the Patent is, upon which the Duke shall have the
said Office as hitherto they have had it, and it appears by the 11 of H. 4. 58.
and the 12 of H. 4. That the King may grant and annex Fee to a necessary Office
to be taken of the Subjects, but it was objected that the Alneger had no Fee,
and if he had that, he was abridged of that by the Statute of 2 Ed. 3. 14.
Where it is said that they shall be ready to make proof; when they should be
required to measure, without taking any thing of the Merchant, but this refers
only to the Majors and Bailiffs of Towns, where such Clothes shall come, and
not to the Alneger, and that the Statute of 11 Ed. 3. chapter 3. consists upon
two parts.

First, that Clothiers may make Cloth of what length and breadth that they will.

The second, that no Cloth shall be brought into England, Wales, or Scotland,
but that which is made in them, and then if the Clothiers have such liberty to
make Cloth of what length and breadth they will, then there is no need of
Alneger: As to that it was answered, that there was need of him to see and
search the Goodness of that, as well as the length and breadth, And also the
Statute of 25 Ed. 3. chap. 4. Provides that all Clothes vendable, which shall
be sold whole Clothes in England, in whose hands soever they are, shall be
measured by the Alneger of the King, and the Statute of 27 Ed. 3 chapter 4.
Statute the first, provides that no Clothes shall be forfeited, though they be
not of the same Assise, but the Alneger of the King shall measure the Cloth
and mark it, with such a mark, that a man may know how much that contains; so
for these Statutes, and for the reasons aforesaid it appears, that it belongs
to the Office of an Alneger to survey, measure, and mark Clothes, as well by
the Common Law, as by the Statute Law; It was objected, first that the Statute
of 27 Ed. 3. limits and appoints that the Alneger should measure broad Cloth,
and does not make mention of any other Clothes, but broad Clothes, and for
that it seems that he shall not meddle with any other Clothes, but it appears
by diverse Accounts, that he should meddle with Wadlowes and Says, and the
Statute of the 17 R. 2. chap. 2. Provides that none shall sell any Cloth
before that it be measured by the Alneger of the King, and that none shall make
any deceit in Kerseys.

The second Objection that Clothes of Lesser Assise then half broad Cloth,
the Alneger shall take nothing by the Statute of 27 Ed. 3. This is intended of
Broad Cloth which has used to be sold, and these be in lenght above the broad
Cloth, and in breadth as Kerseyes, and others were but as Remnants which have
not been used to be sold, no subsidye was due by the Common Law, for that is
granted by the Statute of 27 Eliz. And in this Grant two things are to be
considered.

First, the Statute of 2 Ed. 3. and the Statute made at Northampton, where it
was petitioned to the Parliament, that the King would remit the penalties, aad
the Kiug should have recompense for the loss, and for this the Statute gives
subsidy, this was no private gift, but a public gift, and the reason of this
was the retribution of his loss and the King paid for it, and that for this he
should have a Subsidy.

Secondly, Woolls are the continual Treasure of the Realm, and let them be of
what nature they will they are called Panui: And for that when the King has a
settled Inheritance, it is no reason that the slight of an Artist should
prejudice the King: And it appears by the Statute of 11 H. 4. 7. that was made
to prevent the barrelling of Clothes, and the making of them into Garments, and
the transporting of them beyond Sea.

And also the third reason is usage, for all other clothes pay Subsidy, and
there is no other Law to charge them but the Statute of 27 Ed. 3. 4. That this
subsidy is settled in the King, and no devise of man may divest it, the Statute
of 27. Ed. 3. and 47. Ed. 3. Set down and alter the length and breadth of
clothes, and yet the Custom remains.

The fifth objection that the Statute does not extend in equity to a thing
which is not in Rerum natura at the time of the making of the statute which is
false position, for how can makers of statutes prevent all mischeifes, Eaton
and Studdes case Com. Aristotle in Ethics liber 5. chap. 10. says, that
Equitas est correctio legis Statutes, how to be understood, etc.
generatim late, qua part deficit.

And Bracton in his first Book of new Division Chapter 3. says, that Equitas est
rerum convenientia que in paribus causis, paria desiderat jura and omnia been
coequi paret and dicitur equitas quasi equalitas, and for that it is enacted by
the Statute of 11 Ed. 1. Acton Burnell for understanding of the Statute, that
if praysers of Goods praise them at too high a value, that they themselves
shall have them at the same price at which they were praised, and after another
Statute is made, which provides, that lands shall be extended upon a Statute,
which is taken to be within the Statute of Acton Burnell, which was made
before, and so it appears by Littleton that the Statute of Gloucester provides,
that warranty by Tenant by the Courtesy shall not bind the Heir without Assets,
and an Estate tail was not then created but it was afterward created by the
Statute of Westminster 2. which was made the 13 of Ed. 2. Yet this Warranty
shall not bind the Heir in tail, and also two objections have been made
against the Patent.

First, That it was against an express statute.

Secondly, That it did not observe any rate or proportion, proportionable to
the quantity of the piece, to that he answered, that it is not against any
statute, see 7, Ed. 4. 2. 27. H, 7. 5. H. 8. 2. 1. and 2. Phil. and Mary: It is
not against any of those, for those provides and ordaines, that there shall be
Wardens for the better performance of all things which are to be done by the
Alneger, and does not deprive the King of any thing given to him by any former
statute, but adds further care and deligence, and when there is a Law which
adds care and Manner and Form to a former Law: That does not abridge and
deprive the former Law, of any thing given by that, and if the Wardens do not
do their Office, yet that cannot prevent but that the Alneger may do it, which
to him belongs, as in 1 Ed. 4. 2. For Indentures taken in Sheriffs Turns,
which should be delivered by Indenture to the Justices, yet the Justices may
proceed, though they be not delivered by Indenture, and so it is in 43. Ed. 3.
11. The Sheriff ought to array his Pannell four days before the taking of
that, and adjudged that if he does not, it shall be no error in 43. Ed. 3.
Assise 22. and so the Statute of 5. and 6. of Ed. 6. provides that the Mayor
appoints to viewers and searchers, this does not abridge the power of the
Alneger, for this is but an addition of greater care and diligence, and by the
statute of 39. and 43. Eliz. If upon a search they find any forfeyture, they
shall have it, but if they do not find the Alneger may find it, and then the
King shall have it.

And to the Second he answered; that true it is for every 64. of clothes, the
Alneger ought to have four pence, for his Fee, and though that some pieces of
cloth are more broad then others, yet the lobour of the Alneger to measure
them is all one: So he concluded, and demanded Judgment for the plaintiff.

Hillary 7. Jacobi, 1609. In the Common Bench. Rutlage against Clarke.
IN Account the Plaintiff declares, that the Defendant has received Account.
of his money by the hands of a stranger to give an account: The Defendant
pleades in Bar, that he received to deliver over to a stranger, the which he
has done accordingly, without that, that he received it to make any of account
otherwise then in this manner, and it was resolved that the Plea in Bar was
good without traverse, for when he received the money, he is to deliver it
over, or to give an account of it to the Plaintiff, so that he is accountable
Conditionally, but the traverse is repungnant to the Plea, though it be
otherwise, or another way, against the Book of 9. Ed. 4. 15 See 41. Ed. 3. 7.
1. Ed. 5. 22. H. 6. 49: 21 Ed. 4. 4. 66, 1. Ed. 5. 2. that it is a good Bar
without traverse. But Brook in abridging the case of 21. Ed. 4. 66 in Title of
account, says, that it seems that the traverse ought to be without that, that
he was his receiver in other manner; and there and in the Book at large are,
that Justices, that is, Coke, Nele, and Vavasor against Bryan; that it ought to
be traversed: But here in the principal case, it was adjudged that the
traverse made the Plea ill.

Hillary 7. Jacobi, 1609. In the Common Bench. Dunmole against Glyles.
THE case was this; Grandfather, Father and Son, the Grandfather was
possessed of a Term for two and twenty years to Devise of a Teerme.
come, devised to the Son the Land for one and twenty years, and that the
Father should have it during the Mynority of the Son, and makes the Son his
Executor and dies, the Son being within the age of one and twenty years, the
Father enters into the Land, and makes a Lease for seven years by Indenture,
until the Son came to full age, the Father makes his Son his Executor and
dies: The Son enters by force of the devise made by the Grandfather: And the
question was if the Son shall avoid the Lease made by his Father and it was
agreed that he might, in proof of which a Judgment was cyted which was in the
Kings Bench, Mich. 5. of Eliz. Rot. 459. or 499. In the Prioresse of Ankoresse
Case, where a Term was devised to one, and if he died within the Term, then
to such of the Daughters of the Devisor, which then should not be preferred,
the Devisor dies; the Term was extended for the Debt of the first Devisee,
and then he died, the extent was avoided by the Daughters not preferred, and
they grounded their Judgment upon the former Judgments in Weltden and
Eltingtons case, and Paramores and Yardleys case in the Comment. and for that
the Law intends that a Devisor is Inops consillij, and for that his devise
shall have favorable construction according to his intent appearing within the
devise, and it was said by Coke that in many cases, a man may make such an
Estate by devise, that he cannot make by an Act executed in his life time, as
it was adjudged in Graveners case, where a man devises his Lands to his
Executors for payment of his Debts, that there the Executors have Interest,
that there the Executor of Executors shall have that, and such Estate cannot be
executed by Act in the life of the Devisor, and so it was concluded by them
all, that the Son shall avoid the Lease made by the Father, for the Devise was
Executory, and does not vest till the full age of the Son, and then Executor,
and shall avoid all Acts made by the Father, by which Judgment was given
accordingly.

Freeman against Baspoule, See 9. Coke 97. b.
THE case was this; A. was indebted to B. and they both Award.
died, the Heir of A. for good consideration, assumed to the Administrator of
B. that he would pay to the said Administrator the said Debt, and for the not
payment of that, according to the Assumption the Administrator after brought an
Action, and then the said Heir and the Administrator submitted themselves to
the award and arbitrament of C. and became bound one to the other; to stand to
the award accordingly, so that the said Arbitrator makes his award of all the
matters and controversies between them before such a day, C. the Arbitrator
before the day recyted the Assumpsit, and the debt as aforesaid, and agreed
that the Heir should pay the Administrator so much money, and that published
according to their submission: And in Action upon the case, Submission.
Nullum fecit Arbitrium was pleaded, and upon demurrer, it was objected that
the award was void.

First, For that it was for one party only, and nothing was arbitrated of the
other, and to prove this the Book of 7. H. 6. 6. was cited, and 39. H. 6. 9.
see 2 R. 3. 18. b. And this also appears by the pleading of an award, for he
which pleades it; that he has performed all things which are to be performed
of his part: And that the other pleades performance of all thing which are to
be performed of his part, by which it appears that there ought to be
performance of both parts, and by consequence one award to both parties,
according to 22. H. 6. 52.

Secondly, that the award was void, for that, that the submission was of all
controversies, so that the Arbitrator delivered his award of all controversies,
etc. And there was no award of the said Suit between the parties, and for that
he has not Arbitrament.
made an Arbitrament of all controversies, and by that the award was void, and
to prove that, the Books in 4 Eliz. Dyer 216. Pumfreies award, and 19. Eliz.
Dyer 356. 39. and 39. H. 6. 9. Where it is said, that if the submission were of
all things, and the Arbitrament of one only, that is a void Arbitrament.

Thirdly, For that it was not limited within the award, at what day, nor at
what place the money should be paid by the Heir to the Administrator, and for
this cause also it shall be void, for it ought to be paid immediately; and if
the Heir cannot find the Administrator, he forthwith has forfeyted his
Obligation, and for that in this point it is uncertain, and for that shall be
void, as it is in Samons case, 5. Coke 77. b. Where the Arbitrator awards, that
one party shall enter into Bond to another for enjoying of certain Lands, and
does not say in what Sum, and adjudged void for the uncertainty, and so in this
case by which, etc. But it was answered and resolved, that the Arbitrament was
good.

And to the first objection it was resolved, and agreed, that every award ought
to have respect to both parties, if it be not a matter which concerns one
party only, and neither recompense nor acquittall due to the other party in
which case the award shall be good: And it was resolved in the principal case,
that the award was made of both parties, for one was to have money, and the
other though there was no express mention, that the other should be discharged
of his Assumpsit, yet the award was a good discharge in Law, and may be pleaded
in Bar upon an Action brought upon the Assumpsit, and so it was for both
parties.

And to the second objection, it was agreed, that where submission is, with Ita
quod, etc. as above, that there the Arbitrators ought to make arbitrament, of
all the variances and controversies, referred to their arbitrament, and if they
do make no arbitrament, of all the matters of which the submission is made, the
award is void, but if the submission be general, as of all matters in variance
or controversy between them: There if the Arbitrator makes his award of all
matters which are known to him, the award shall be good: As my Lord Coke
conceived, though that there are other matters in variance, of which the
Arbitrator has no notice, as if diverse Creditors sue a-commission, upon the
statute of Barkrupts, and an another person to whom the Bankrupt was indebted,
does not come in as a Creditor, nor give notice to the Commissioners, that the
Bankrupt was indebted to him, he shall not take benefit of the commission, for
the Commissioners cannot relieve those Creditors of which they have no notice,
as it appears by the case of Bankrupts in 2. Coke.

And to the third objection it was answered and resolved, that the award was
good, notwithstanding that no place be expressed where the money shall be paid,
for in Law that ought to have reasonable construction, and the party ought to
have reasonable time for the payment of that, but Foster conceived that it is
not good, for it seemed to him, that if the award shall be good, that the
Obligation of submission shall be immediately forfeyted, for that there was
neither time nor place, where the money should be paid, but this was answered
with the Books of 3. H. 7. 16. Ed. 4. Where it is said that if an Arbitrator
award that one party shall pay such a sum of money at such a day, and keeps the
award in his Pocket till such a day be past, that yet the Obligation shall not
be forfeyted: And so it was resolved and adjudged by all the other Justices,
that the award was good, and Judgment was entered accordingly.

Hillary 7. Jacobi, 1609. In the Common Bench. Foster against Jackson.
RICHARD Foster Plaintiff in Scire Facias against Anno Where the death of the
Defendant in Execution shall be satisfactory.
Jackson and Miles Jackson Executors of Thomas Jackson, upon Judgment had
against the said Thomas in an Action of Debt: The Defendants pleades that the
said Thomas Jackson the Testator was taken upon a Capias ad Satisfaciendum,
awarded upon the said Judgment, and in execution for the said Debt, by force
of the said Capias, and there died in execution, and so demands Judgment, etc.
And the sole question was, if the said Testator being in execution for the said
Debt by force of the said Capias, and there dies, if this be satisfaction of
the Debt or not.

And Dodridge the Kings Sergeant which argued for the Plaintiff Dodridge.
in the said Scire Facias conceived that it is no satisfaction, but that
notwithstanding the Debt remains, for the words of the Writ are, Capias ad
satisfaciendum, and all others Executions, as Fire Facias, and Eligit are
satisfactory: But the Capias is but a restraint of his liberty, till he has
satisfied the Debt, and for that it is no plenary satisfaction, but only
restraint of his liberty, which the Law more respects then Goods or Lands, and
for that Custodia ought to be Salva and stricta: So by this the party may be
Enforced to pay his Debt Salva, to the party, so that by this the party may be
safely detained, till he has satisfied the Debt, and Stricta to the King, so
that by this Justice may be satisfied, and for that Bracton says; that it is
only to compel the party to make satisfaction: And it is resolved in the 33.
H. 6. 47. That it is no satisfaction, but that the Body should remain as a
Pledge, till satisfaction a were made, or as return Irreplevisable, and yet
neither the one nor the other are satisfaction: And the words of the Writ are
Capias ad satisfaciendum, the party, but if he will satisfy then there is no
reason that the Defendant shall be Imprisoned by the Writ: But if he will not
pay, then he shall continue in Prison, Quousque satisfecerit, by which it
appears that the Imprisonment is no satisfaction, and it appears also by the
Register, and Fitz. Na. Bre. 246. b That if a man recover Damages of Trespass,
before the Justices of Oyer and Terminer, and has the party in execution by
force of this Judgment, now if the parry which is in execution dies in Prison,
he which recovered may sue Certiorari to the Justices to remove this Record
into the Kings Bench, that the Justices there may make upon that Record, as the
Law will in such case: And it seems by this that the party shall have
execution by Elegit, or by Fieri Facias, for it is not reasonable as it is
there said, that the death of him which died in Prison, shall be satisfaction
to the party which recovered: (but Fitzh. here says, Tamen quere, for he
doubted of that) Certiorari.
but in the Register there is a special Writ of Certiorari to this purpose,
that is to remove the Record into the Kings Bench, so that the Justices may do
there upon that, as the Law will, and if the Law will not allow the party to
have new execution, it were in vain to have such Certiorari, for other course
cannot be taken, and the end of every suit is to have payment, and so is the
Judgment that the Plaintiff should recover his Debt, and so is the Writ, and
the count, and the Capias also, and to the end of Justices in Suum cuique
tribuere: And the party has not any of these ends, if the death of the
Defendant in prison shall be satisfaction, and in the 47. Ed. 3. Fitz.
execution 41. Persey said, that if in Trespass the Plaintiff recover, and the
Defendant is taken for the Kings Fine, if he pray that the Defendant continue
in Prison, till he have made agreement with him, perchance he shall not have
Elegit, and for that being in Prison, he prayed execution of his Body, and had
it, but if the party gets out that he has no execution, that it is not his
default, he shall have Elegit after, for that, that he cannot have his purpose
according to his first election. And if any be in this case, then upon that he
inferrred that the party in this case may have a Fieri Facias against the
Executors. And also it is resolved by the whole Court in the Common Bench, 29
H. 8. B. Execution 132. That if two are bound in an Obligation, conjunctim and
devisim, the Obligee impleads one, and has execution of his body, and after
impleads the other, and condemns him, he may have Execution against him also,
for the taking of the body is good execution, but it is no satisfaction, and
therefore he may take the other also: but if he have satisfied the Plaintiff,
he shall not have execution afterward. And therefore this Order, that the
Plaintiff upon an Obligation shall have but one Execution is intended such an
Execution, which is a satisfaction: See 33 H. 6. 48. b. 4 H. 7. 8. 4 Edw. 4.
38. 5 Edw. 4. 4. 5 Coke 92. Blumfields case, resolved by all the Court, that if
the Defendant in debt dye in Execution, that the Defendant shall have new
execution by Elegit or Fieri Facias, for the death of the Defendant is the act
of God, which shall not turn the Plaintiff to prejudice, as it is said in
Trewynyards case, 38 H. 8. Dyer 60. The Plaintiff shall not be prejudiced of
his Execution by act in Law, which makes no wrong to any. And to the first
Objection which may be made against him, that is, That all process are
determined after the party is taken, and in execution; to that he answered,
that this is where the Plaintiff has satisfactory execution, as it appears by
41 Edw. 3. 13. where an action of Account was brought against two, one was
outlawed, and the other comes by Outlawry.
the Exigent, and enters in the Court; and he which was outlawed, obtained his
charter of pardon, and for that, that process was determined against him. And
the Plaintiff has chosen to have his action against the other, he prayed that
he may be discharged. But it was resolved, that the process was not
determined, nor he which was outlawed shall not be discharged, till the
Plaintiff be satisfied, by which it appears that the process is not determined
till execution with satisfaction. Two other Objections also he endeavored to
answer, that is, that the Plaintiff has determined his election by taking the
Capias, and that cannot resort to any other Process: and to that he agreed,
that where the party has made such election, that he cannot resort to any
other Process, during the life of the party. But if the satisfaction be
prevented by the act of God, as in the principal case. But when his person
which was the pledge for the debt, and was to remain in prison till the debt be
satisfied, is discharged by the act of God, and the Plaintiff has not the
fruit of his Suit, nor the Judgment is not satisfied, and the Plaintiff has
done all that he can, and there was no defect in him, it is no reason, but
that he may have new process; and the third objection is a Judgment which was
given in the Kings Bench, Pasche 43. Eliz. Rot. 58. between Williams and
Curtiz: And to that he said, that he he conceived, that this was a rule for
default of prosecution, for the cause was referred to Arbitrament, and so
hanged for long time: and so though the Judgment was directly against Law in
the principal points, yet for that, that it was not upon solemn argument of
the Judges, he says it is not to be compared to other authorities by him
cyted before, for which he includes, and prayed Judgment for the Plaintiff.

Hutton Sergeant that argued for the Defendants conceived the Hutton.
contrary, and first he examined how the body of a man comes subject and
liable to any Execution, and to that he said, that by the Common Law the body
was not subject to Execution for the debt of any man, but in account only a
Capias ad computandum lies, and no other process in this action, but distress
infinite till the Statute of Marlbridge, Chap. 23. and West. 2. Chap. 11.
Capias was given in Account; for by the Common Law, the Process in that was
Distress Infinite as aforesaid, and after by the Statute of 25 Edw. 3. Chapter
17. Such like Process was given in debt, as in account, and before that the
body of the Defendant was not liable to execution for debt, if it be not in the
Kings case, as it appears by Sir William Harberts case, 12. a. And upon this
he inferred upon the words of the Statute of 25 Ed. 3. Chap. 17. which says,
that such like Process shall be in debt, as were in account: That after the
Plaintiff has determined his election, and taken a Capias, that then he is in
the same case as if it had been in account, and for that he cannot resort to
any other Process. And he said that the words of the Elegit and Fieri Facias
do not differ in substance from the words of Capias, for there is to satisfy
the party, as well as in the other: And when a man has made his Election to
have Elegit, he shall not have other Execution. But when the Defendant has
neither goods nor Lands, Then qui non habet in are licet in Corpore, and the
Plaintiff at the first when he has Judgment has election to have Fieri
Facias, Elegit, or Capias, then he cannot have fieri facias; but if he
determine his Election at the first, and sue Elegit or Capias, then he cannot
have fieri facias, but may first sue fieri facias, and after Elegit or Capias,
as it appears by the 15 H. 7. 15. 14 H. 7. 28. and 7 H. 6. 7. But if it be upon
Statute staple, Then he may have execution for his Body, Goods, and Land
together, as it appears by 31 H. 6. 47. Lynnacres Case is put in Blunfields
case, 5 Coke 92. b. and 15 H. 7. 15. But the reason of this is, that a special
Execution by statute is given in this case. And he agreed, that where a
Judgment is given against 2 or 3. and the Plaentiff sue Capias against one of
them, by that he has determined his Election: So that if he dye in Prison or
otherwise, he may sue another Capias against the others, but he cannot sue
fieri facias, or Elegit, as it appears by 33 H. 6. 47. before; and Blunfields
case, 5 Coke 92. b. 4 H. 7. 8. And he said that the body is the principal, and
becomes chargeable by statute: and it appears by 22 Assis. 43. That when the
party is in Prison, that this is adjudged in Law an Execution for the party:
and further in the Book of 33 H. 6. 47. is but the opinion of Prisot and
Lacon: And the principal case there depends upon another point, Fitz. 246.
before cyted, is but a quere, and Eitz. himself doubted of it; and the book of
44 Edw. 3. Fitz. Execution, 41. is but the opinion of Percye; But the Judgment
upon the principal point is otherwise. And the principal case in Blunfields
case, 5 Coke, was upon another point also, as it appears by the Book, and so
he concluded with the Judgment before cyted to be in the Kings Bench, Pasche 43
Eliz. between Williams and Cuttris, which was direct in the point according to
his opinion, and prayed Judgment for the Defendants in the Scire Facias, and
it is adjourned.

This Case was argued in Trinity Term next ensuing, by all the Judges of the
Common Pleas: and first Foster the youngest Judge argned, Foster.
that the death of the Defendant in Prison being in Execution, was no
satisfaction, but the Plaintiff may have a new execution against his
Executors, for he said it was an old saying, That debts went before deadly
sin: And that every one ought to satisfy his debts by the Law of God, before
Legacies given to charitable uses: And so by the Law of the Realm, if it be not
the default of the Plaintiff, as it was not in our Cause; for the death of the
Defendant in Prison was the act of God, and the Executors have confessed by
pleading that they have assets, and the Plaintiff has nothing but grief and
pain; and he said as before, that at the Common Law no Capias lay, till the
Statutes of Marlebridge, Chap. 23. and Westminster, the 2. Chap. 11. Capias was
given in Account, and then the statute of 25 Edw. 3. Chap. 17. gives such like
Process in debt which was in Account, and then in Account Capias ad
Computandum lies, and in debt Capias ad Satisfaciendum: And if in Account the
Defendant was adjudged to account, and Capias ad Computandum be awarded, and he
taken by force of that, and committed to Prison, and here dies, a new Writ
shall be awarded: So in debt, if the Defendant be taken by Capias ad
satisfaciendum, new Writ shall be awarded against his Executors, see 1 Edw. 3.
24. 1 H. 7. 5 Coke 92. Blundfields case; for it is only the default of the
Defendant, that the debt is not satisfied, and for that it is no reason that
the Plaintiff should be prejudiced by that: Debt upon escape against whom.
and 11 H. 4. 44. and 45. by Skreene, Debt upon an Escape does not lie against
the Executor of the Sheriff, but new Process shall be awarded against the
Prisoner which is escaped; for a man shall not take advantage of his own wrong,
as in the case of Littleton. If the son makes disseisin, and enfeoffs the
Father, which dies, the son shall not take advantage of this Descent, because
he was particeps criminis, and he said it was no wrong to any, if execution
were made of the goods of the Testator, and it is mischievous to the
Plaintiff, for he shall loose his debt: And to the Objections which have been
made, that there is an end of Process when the Defendant is taken by Capias,
and dies in Execution, the which he agreed as long as the Defendant lived, but
after his death he may make new election, 47 Ed. 3. Fitz. Execution, 41. by
Percye. And it appears by the pleading in 17 Ed. 3. That Judgment and Execution
without satisfaction is no Plea in Bar. And also he cyted the Register, 285.
and Fitz. Na. Bre. 246. 19. Ed. 3. 21 H. 6. 5. where the Plaintiff had
effectual execution, which was satisfaction, 44 Ed. 3. 21 Edw. 4. 1 Edw. 4. 8
H. 7. 16 H. 7. to the same purpose, for which Dodridge cyted them before. And
also he said, that the Judges have always had respect to the satisfaction of
Debts, and for that would not bail one in Execution upon a Writ of Error,
where Error indeed was assigned, but suffers him to remain in Prison till the
Judgment were reversed. But here the Plaintiff has neither Bale nor any
satisfaction but grief and pain: And in the 21 of H. 7. the Sheriff returned,
that the Defendant had no land, but lands in use, and was adjudged that he
should execute the Elegit upon these Lands, such was the respect that the
Judges have to Executions, and to the Case of 35 H. 6. 47. This is but the
opinion of Lacon, which erred in the principal case, and may as well err in
this point: and his opinion also is so intricately penned, that he cannot
understand it: And Martins opinion also in 7 H. 6. 7. is against the Judgment
of the principal case. And to the Objection, that the Party had determined his
Election by the Execution of the Capias, he agreed to that with this
difference, that is, if the Plaintiff sue Scire facias, and the Sheriff levied
part, that this notwithstanding the Plaintiff may have Capias for the residue,
and so Elegit after Fieri facias, or Capias, for there is not any Entry made of
awarding of fieri facias, or Elegit: But the Plaintiff only sued that out of
the Court, see 44 Edw. 3. 18 Ed. 4. 31 Ed. 3. 17 Ed. 3. 20 Ed. 2. 22 Assis. 17.
H. 7. 1. And so he coucluded that the Judgment shall be given for the Plaintiff
in the scire facias.

Warburton Justice conceived the contrary, that is, that the Plaintiff
Warburton.
in the Scire facias shall be barred: And he agreed and said, that none will
deny but that Debts shall be paid, but that ought to be according to the rules
of the Law: For by the Common Law the body of the Defendant was not liable to
execution, and then it is to examine in what cases he is at this day subject to
execution: and though in Trespass Capias lies at the Common Law, but in Debt
no Capias lies till the Statute of 25 Edw. 3. which gives the same process
which was in Account, and this is as well in the Original process, as in the
Judicial, and Elegit was first given by the statute of Westminst. 2. And this
was of the half of the Land: But Levari facias was at the Common Law of the
profits of the Land: That in debt Acceptance and Election binds the party, and
so this remains; for the said Statutes being in the affirmative, does not take
away that, nor abate it: and by that if Conusee of a statute accepts Land
extended Land extended at too high rate.
at too high a value, he is bound by that, 22 Edw. 3. 32. H. 6. 15 H. 7. And
that when the Party has Judgment, he has election to have execution by Fieri
facias, Elegit, or Capias, for he has determined his Election. So if he makes
his Election of a Capias at first, he cannot have Elegit after, 30 Edw. 3.
adjudged 32 Edw. 3. Process 52. according, Long 5 of Edw. 4. by Markeham and
others, and the reason which is given in 47 Edw. 3. 17 Edw. 4. and 21 H. 7.
that have been remembered to the contrary is only, that it is reason that the
Plaintiff should have the same process: which was at the Common Law, and there
was not any such process as Capias in debt at the Common Law, and 21 H. 7. may
be understood that the Elegit was not returned, and so no record of that. And
50 Edw. 3. a man may recover in Debt, and pray Elegit, and after brings Debt
upon the Record, but it does not lie. And he agreed to the Book of 23 H. 6. For
there the Defendant was bound in an Obligation to make satisfaction of Debt,
and he dyed in Prison, and this cannot be satisfaction according to the
Condition. And in the Case of Fitz. Not. Brev. the same doubt of that, and this
was the more strong case then the case at the Bar: and if he doubted of that,
is the cause that he doubts also. And cyted Williams and Cuttis case, Rot. 88.
in the point, where the reason of the Judgment was for that, that the Plaintiff
had his plain and full satisfaction, and says that it was apparent difference
between that and Blunfields case, for there was 2 Defendants: and here if one
dies, there shall be no satisfaction, and so these reconciled. And so if a man
be taken upon a Statute Merchant, and dies in execution, that shall not be
satisfaction, for this is special process given by statutes. And 14 H. 7. 1.
If a man being in Execution escape, he shall not be taken again: and in the 14
H. 7. in debt upon an Obligation Capias profine was awarded, and the Defendant
taken by that. And the Plaintiff prayed that he might be in Execution for his
debt also, and could not, for that he had sued Fierifacias, and it does not
appear if the Sheriff have that executed or not. And so he concluded that the
Judgment should not be revived by the Scire facias against the Executors, and
that Judgment shall be given for the Defendants in the Scire facias.

Walmsley Justice accordingly. He specially observed the form of Walmsley.
the Writ which suggests, quod executio adhuc restat facienda, etc. And to that
the Defendants in the Scire facias plead that Capias was awarded at the suit of
the Plaintiff, and upon that the Defendant was taken in execution and there
dyed, by which it appears that the words and suggestion of the Writ was
answered directly, and upon that the strongly relied, and then said that there
were 3* ways to have Execution, that is, by Fieri facias, Capias, and Elegit:
And there is a special order to be observed in the suing of that, for a man
may have Fieri ficias, and if the Defendant have not goods, may have Elegit, or
Capias: But if he make his Flection to have Capias, he cannot have Fieri
facias, nor Elegit, or if he sue Elegit, he cannot have a Fieri facias, nor
Capias: In 33 H. 6. and 44 Edw. 3. which have been cyted, the Plaintiff sues
Elegit, and after that would have sued Capias, supposing that he had not
accepted the Elegit; but of the other part it was said, that the Sheriff had
made Execution of it, the which he could not contradict it. And if the
Plaintiff had Fieri facias, and goods delivered to him in Execution, and the
Writ returned, he shall not have a second Execution: and so if Elegit executed
and returned, 14 H. 7. 15 H. 7. and said that Executions are tickle things; for
if the party escape, he delivers himself out of Execution, and the Plaintiff
shall not have other Execution against him, for that he has had one Execution,
2 Edw. 4. And so if a man sues a Writ of Privilege out of Parliament, and by
that is delivered out of Execution, he shall not be taken again. And so if a
man be delivered upon a Writ of Error, for when the Party has made his
Election to take process against the body, it was his folly that he made such
Election; for though that death be the act of God, yet for that, that statutum
est omnibus semel mori, and for that God has done no wrong, for he has but
performed his Eternal Decree, and for that it is not the act of God only, but
the folly of the party to make such Election, and the Book of 47 Edw. 3. by
Percy is but his opinion, and more other Books are against that, and (...). H.
6. Danby and Prisot are against Lacon: and though that the death of the Party
in Execution is no satisfaction in rei veritate, yet in Law it is satisfaction,
for that that the party has no other remedy, the Writ in the Register is
certiorari ad faciendum in omnia and singula que secundum legem and
consuetudinem fieri, etc. And there is not any Law nor Custom to warrant any
such Course, and here is not any other proceedings upon it. But if he may have
a Writ of Scire facias ostensurus quare satisfactionem habere non debet, then
it may be that the Defendant's ought to give another answer, but for that, that
there is not any such Writ, it seems that Judgment shall be given for the
Defendants.

Coke chief Justice seemed the contrary, and he agreed with Foster, Coke.
and he said, that it is vexata et spinosa question, for the Books vary, and
great arguments have been made of both parts. There are three things
considerable.

1. Reasons. 2. Authorities. 3. Answers of Objections.
And for the Reasons: First, he considered in whom the default is for which the
Plaintiff shall lose his Debt.

2. That the Debt remains after the body is taken in Execution.

3. If the body taken in Execution be satisfaction.

4. If the dying in Execution be a discharge.

5. The Mischiefs, if so they shall be.

And to the Objections.

First, Escape, which is the wrong and act of the Party, it is no satisfaction
nor discharge, and here is the act of God, and election of the party.

2. Execution by Elegit, If Lands be extended upon that, this is no
satisfaction. And so if he be delivered by a Writ of Error, and so in this case.

And for the first, the fault was in Jackeson, for he did not keep his day in
the Condition, and upon this was sued, then he pleaded a false plea, and upon
that Judgment was given against him, in all which actions the default was in
the Defendant, and no default in the Plaintiff, for he took the Body which is
the visible execution, not in satisfaction, but to satisfy, and the Defendants
have not pleaded fully administered, but confess that they have Assets, and
there is more reason that the Plaintiff shall be satisfied, then the Executors
keep the goods to their own use; for it is Summa Injustitia nocentem habere
totum lucrum, and innocentem totum damnum.

Second reason was, that it is no satisfaction for the Defendant to dye in
Prison, and agreed that if 2 Precipes are contained in one Original, there
shall be but one satisfaction. But if one be taken by Capias, and remains in
Execution, Capias shall be awarded against the other, and he shall remain in
Prison till satisfaction be had, for execution is no satisfaction, as it is
said in 29 H. 8. b. Execution 132. adjudged: See 4 Ed. 4. 38. 5 Ed. 4. 4 H. 7.
8. And Hillaries case, 33 H. 6.

And to the third, that is, that the Debt remains after the taking of the body
in execution, and agreed that when execution is made of goods or lands, no Debt
remains, but otherwise it is of execution of the Body, as it appears by 29 H.
8. before cyted, B. Execution 132. and 41 Assis. 15. where a man was condemned
in Damages in Trespass, and committed to Prison by Capias, and escaped, the
Jailer dyed, the Plaintiff prayed debt against his Executors, and could not
have it, for they are not charged without specialty: and the Plaintiff
alleged that the Defendant was vagrant in the County of M. and prays Capias
to the Sheriff of M. to take him, and it was granted, for his remedy against
the Sheriff was determined, and this proves also, that the Debt remains after
escape, and scire facias is, licet Judicium redditum sit, tamen executio restat
ad huc facienda de debito, for the body is but as a pledge, and the form of the
Writ in the Register Capias ad satisfaciendum, and not in satisfaction, which
proves that there is no satisfaction, but upon the payment of the money his
body shall be delivered out of Prison, and this is execution with satisfaction,
for there are two Executions; that is, Medius and finalis, the first is the
Capias, the second Satisfaction, which is Vltimus Finis: And it is a good rule,
quod nihil videtur factum, ubi aliquid restat faciendum; and here is aliquid
faciendum, that is, Satisfaction, for in all acts there is a beginning,
progression, and consummation, and Consummation in this case fails, Mors est
horendum divortium, which is the act of God. And when the act of God has
delivered him which lies in prison for his own default, it is no reason that
the Plaintiff should be prejudiced, 43 Ed. 3. 27. A man enfeoffs the Father
with Warranty, which infeoffs an estranger which enfeoffs the son: the father
dies, the son may vouch, for it is the act of God: And to the Mischiefs, nec
crudelis creditor, nec delicatus debtor sunt audiendi, for they play at Bowls,
and keep Hospitality in the Prison: Or if a man be arrested, and makes a
tumult, and is slain in endeavoring to break the Prison, and breaks his Neck,
it is no reason that he by such act should defraud the Plaintiff of his Debt,
the opinions against him are coupled with absurdities, as 7 H. 6. 8. Martins
opinions is also imparted with absurdity, 33 H. 6. 48. The opinion of Lacon is
also coupled with another absurdity: and 22 Assis. b. Execution is also coupled
with absurdity, that is, if the Defendant escape, this determines the debt, and
is satisfaction: and 15 Edw. 3. Quare Impedit, 174. in Writ of Right of
Advowson, the Plaintiff has Judgment, and habere facias sesinam in the life
time of the Incumbent, and after his death sues Scire Facias, the first is
Execution, but not with satisfaction, and the last is satisfaction, for by this
he has the fruit of his Judgment: So 19 Ed. 3. Execution 12. a younger statute
is extended, and Liberate sued, executed, and returned: And after an elder
statute is extended, and after satisfaction of that, he that has the youngest
may sue Scire Facias, and have execution of the youngest: So of Beasts
distrained, and put into the Pound, and there dye, he which distrayned, may
distray^ again, for this is no satisfaction of his Rent, 14. H. 4. 4. 15 Edw.
4. 10. 11 Eliz. Dyer 280 And so Capias ad computandum* is not Account, nor
Capias ad acquietandum, Acquital, Register, 30. 39. 285. And it is said in
Bract. lib. 7. Chap. 17. Sunt brevia Magistralia and f^rmata, the first are
made by Masters of the Chancery, the others which are Original by Cursitors,
which are founded by acts of Parliament* and cannot be changed without
Parliament; and as Fitzherbert in his Preface to his Na. Bre. says, that every
Art and Science has certain Rules and Foundations, to which a man ought to
give faith and credence, and the Writ of Fieri facias being founded upon a
Statute, and the form, that executio adhuc restat facienda: he says that this
was the Judgment of the Parliament, that the first Execution was not
Satisfaction. But as the Writ is also in the Register, 245* That where a man is
condemned in Trespass, and committed to prison, detinendum quousque, he
satisfy the party, by this it appears that he is but a pledge: And Fitz. Na.
Bre. 63. 65. 67. and Register, If a man be taken by Capias Excommunicatum, ad
satisfaciendum and parendum Clavibus Ecclesiae, and is delivered by Writ, which
issues improvide, another Writ of Capias shall be awarded. And to the matter of
Election he agreed, that if Elegit were awarded, the party cannot have Fieri
facias, nor Capias, for there is Entry made, quod Elegit sibi executionem de
meditate. But when Fieri facias or Capias is awarded, no entry at all is made.
But if any of them are returned executed, then he cannot resort to another
Process; and with this difference agrees all the Books of 15 H. 7. 15. 21 H.
7. 19. 30 Ed. 3. 24. 31 Edw. ^3. Process 52. 19 H. 6. 4. 34 H. 6. 20. 45 Edw.
3. 19. 50 Edw. 3. 4. and 5. 18 Edw. 4. 11. 20 Edw. 4. 13. 11 Eliz. Dyer, 296.
And to the case of Williams and Cuttrys, cyted to be adjudged, 43 Eliz. the
which he cyted as Lambs case, he said in this was many apparent Errors in form
of pleading, so that the matter in Law cannot come to Judgment, 35 H. 6. Prisot
seemed that by the law of God the Imprisonment of the body of a man was no
satisfaction, for by that the Creditor may sell his Debtor and his Children for
the payment of his Debts, Matthew. chap. 18 verse. 24. 4 Kings 4 Chap. verse. 1.
Matthew. chap. 5. Luke chap. 12. And so he agreed with Foster in opinion, and
concluded, that the death of the Defendant in the action of Debt was no
satisfaction, nor determination of the Process, nor of the election, But that
the Plaintiff may have new Execution against the Executors, and by consequence
that Judgment shall be given for the Plaintiff in the Scire facias, but no
Judgment was given for that, there was equality of opinions, that is, Coke and
Foster against Walmesley and Warburton, Danyel being dead, and for that it was
adjourned.

Pasche 8. Jacobi 1610. See Hillary 7. Jacobi the beginning. Chalk against
peter.
THis Case was argued this Term by Harris youngest Sergeant for the
Defendants, and by Haughton for the Plaintiffs: And Harris.
Sergeant Harris conceived that Sir Francis Barrington was within the Intent of
the Act of 22. Ed. 4. chap. 17. For he has grant of Trees of Inheritance, and
this was all the profit which rise upon the Soil, and for that it shall be
intended of the Soil it self: And to prove that, he cyted Parromor and
Yardlyes Case in the Com. 542. and 543. 2. H. 8. 159. Crook, 11. Eliz. Dyer
285. Where it is agreed by three Justices, that the Patentee or Grantee of
Herbage in a Forest shall have Trespass against any which consumes and
distroies the Grass, but not the Trees, nor of the fruit of that; and the
Trespass of that shall be Quare clausum fregit, as well as i^ it were of Land:
And may enclose the Forest by such Grant: See 17. Ed. 4. 6. a. by Littleton
that Vestura terrae does not pass without Livery: Also admitting that he is not
owner of the Ground within the Statute, yet it seems by the Statutes that they
are: It shall be lawful for the same Subjects, Owners, etc. And to such other
persons to whom such VVood shall happen to be sold: Immediately after the VVood
so cut, to fence and enclose the same Ground with sufficient Hedges able to
keep out, etc. Upon which words he inferrd, that S. Francis Barrington is such
a Person to whom the VVood is sold, and for that may enclose: And also he
conceived, that the Statute is general, and concerns all persons in general:
and also all Forests and Chases whatsoever: And for that it is not like to the
Cases, put in Hollands Case, 4. Coke upon the Statute of 13. Eliz. Which
concerns all Ecclesiastical persons in general, that this is a general Act,
and yet concerns but one Genus in particular: But the Statute of 1. Eliz. Is
otherwise, which concerns the Bishop, which is but a species of this Genus, as
it is resolved in Elmers Case, 5. of Coke: And also he conceived that it shall
be releeved by the Statute of 35. H. 8. And so prayed Judgment for the
Defendant.

And Haughton conceived, that the words of the Statute intend Haughton.
such a person to whom VVood is sold, for one turn only: And not he which has
Inheritance of Wood: and that there is no word in the statute to exclude
Commoner, and such a Vendee is not without remedy, for he is within the statute
of 35. H. 8. If he pursue his remedy according to the statute, and so prayed
Judgment for the Plaintiff.

And at another day Foster Justice argued, that the Plaintiff in Foster Justice.
the Replegiare shall recover, and said that the cause consists of three parts.

First, the Arbitrament.

Secondly, the assurance.

Thirdly, the private Act of Parliament, of 27. H. 8. And to those the
Arbitrament and the assurance shall tie only those which are parties to it, and
no others, and the Commoner is not party to that nor shall not be bound, and
the private Act confirms the assurance, saving the Right of all strangers, by
which the Commoner is exempted, and also the statute is made only as
confirmation of the Grant, and for that it shall not extend to any other thing,
nor to other parties, but those only which are parties to the Grant, as if the
Queen had made a voydable Patent, and after had made a Lease for years, and
after by the statute of 18. Eliz. All Letters Patents made within such a time
were confirmed, this makes the Letters Patents good, against the Queen, but
against the Lessee: And also all the Covenants in the Grant, extend only to the
Lord Rich and his Heirs, and these which claim under him: And for that it
shall not extend to the Commoner, and also the private Act saves the Right of
all strangers, by which the Right of the Commoner was saved: And he conceived,
that the Commoner shall not be excluded by the statute of 22. Ed. 4. chap. 7.
which recites, that if any Subjects have any Woods growing in his own Ground,
within any Forest, Chase, etc. Shall cut the same VVood by lycense of the King
or his Heirs, in Forest, Chases, etc. Or without lycense in the Forest,
Chase, etc. of any other person, or make any Sale of the same VVoods: It shall
be lawful to the same Owners of the same Ground, whereupon the VVood so cut
did grow, and to other such persons to whom the said Wood shall happen to be
sold Immediately, etc. to cut and enclose the same Ground, with sufficient
hedges, able to hold out all manner of Cattle and Beasts, and to continue the
same by the space of seven years, without suing of any other Lycense, of him
or of his Heirs, or of any other persons, or of any their Officers of the same
Forest, Chases, etc. By which words it appears, that the statute does not
extend to any Wood of the King, but only to the Wood of the subject lying in
Forest of the King, or of other person owner of the Forest, or Chase: And if
it be in the Kings case, and he has lycense from the King to cut the Wood,
then may he cut it without other lycense, according to the perclose of the Act:
And the statute does not give lycense to Enclose, without the assent of the
Commoner, but without other lycense of other Officers of the Forest: And by
this Statute the Owner of the Ground, may first cut the Wood, and then Enclose:
But by the Statute of 35. H. 8. Otherwise it is, for by this he may first
enclose, and then cut within four Months; and that Sir Francis Barrington has
no interest in the Soil, and that this Statute of 22. Ed. 4. is a private
Statute and ought to be pleaded, for it concerns only forests and Chases, and
it is no other, then if it had been of al Woods in Parks, and resembled that to
the statute of 1. Eliza. of the Bishop, which concerns only the Bishop, and it
is resolved in Elmers case to be private; and the same Judges shall not take
notice of that without pleading, and it is not like the statute of 13 Eliz.
which concerns al manner of spiritual persons in general, and also that this
statute is repealed by the statute of 35. H. 8. which is a negative Law, and
Leges posteriores priores contrarius abrogant, and it is agreed in Porters case
1. Coke, and so he concluded that Judgment should be given for the Plaintiff.
Warburton Justice to the contrary, and yet he agreed that neither the
Arbitrament, nor the conveyance, nor the private act, excludes Warburton.
the Commoners for these reasons, which have been urged by Foster; but he
relied only upon the statute of 22 Ed. 4. and to that he said that the statute
gives power to the owner of Ground to enclose, and it should be frivilous for
him to enclose, if the Commoner shall not be by that excluded, and he said that
the persons mentioned in the statute are two.

The first is the owner of the ground, and such person he agreed Sir Francis
Barrington is not.

The second is such person to whom such wood shall happen to be sold, and such
Person it seems, is Sir Francis Barrington, and yet he agreed that he has an
Inheritance in the Trees, and the Owner of the soil cannot cut them, nor dig
the soil from the Roots of the Trees, for then the Grant could not take effect,
and he said there is no difference between sales of Wood, though that the
statute speaks of the Person to whom Wood shall be sold, and another person to
whom it shall be given without consideration, and to that he resembled the
statute Westminster 2. Chap. Si quis alienavit terram uxoris suae, non
deferratur, etc. sed expectet emptor, etc. though that the statute mention
buyer only, yet Donee without any consideration shall be intended in it, and
that the statute does not intend within it, and that the Statute does not
intend sale Vinca vice tantum, but rather sale of Inheritance, for such Vendee
may rather intend the preservation of the wood then the other: And he inferred
upon these words of the statute, to enclose the same Grounds with hedges
sufficient to keep out al manner of Cattle and beasts out of the same Grounds,
and these words expound themselves, for they shall not be intended Deer, but
Cattle which belong to Commoners, and so is the statute of West. 2. Chap. If
Infant suffer Usurpation, this shall not bind him, but this shall be intended,
where he has Advowson by descent and not by purchase, and this appears by the
words of the statute, which are, Cum aliquis vis presentandi non habens
presentavit ad aliquam ecclesiam, cujus presentatus sit admissus, ipse qui
verus est patronus, per nullum aliud breve recuperare potuit advocationem, quam
per breve de recto quod debet perminare per duellum vel per magnam assisam per
quod heredes infra etatem existentes per fraudem and negligentiam custodis
multities ex heriditatem patiebantur, etc. By which words it appears, that
there ought to be presentation which passes by fraud and negligence of the
Guardian, which the Statute remedies, and that is presentation which he had by
descent, and not by purchase, and in the Time of Ed. 1. Fitz. trespass 239. It
is said, the Law of the Chase, that none may enclose his own Wood, without the
view of the Forrester, and if the statute of 22 Ed, 4. Gives license to
enclose, and that notwithstanding the Commoner may put in his Beasts, then is
the statute made in vain; and it is resolved in the 30 of Ed. 3. Fitz. trespass,
that if a man hunt in a Park or Chase, that this is not within the statute of
Westminster 1. Chap. 21 Ed. 1. So the statute of 22 Ed. 4 Extends to the Kings
Dear, and also to other Beasts, which shall be intended ^he Cattle of the
Commoners, and it is not repealed by the statute 35. H. 8. For these statutes
are made for several purposes, and consist upon several grounds, and if the
statute of 22 Edw. 4. be repealed, then there cannot be enclosure in forest or
Chase at al: And which is general Law, and the Justices ought to take notice of
that without pleading, and that al Laws to some respects may be intended to be
special as the statute of 13 Eliz. Concerns only spiritual men, and so Charta
de foresta, concerns only forests, and the statute of 3 H. 7. Chapt. 1. Gives
appeal to the Wife for the death of her Husband, and though that al these
statutes concern one thing only, and for that to some intent may be said to be
special, yet they are al general Laws, and so he concluded that Judgment shall
be given for the Defendant. Walmsley.


VValmesley agreed with Foster in all, that is, that Sir Francis Barrington has
nothing but profit, In alieno solo, and for this cause was not within the
statute of 22 Ed. 4. Which might enclose, and the Common Law does not exclude
the Commoner, for the Lord Rich granted the Wood, and this Transit cum onere,
to Sir Thomas Barington, and said, that it was in vain to dispute if the
statute of 22 Ed. 4. was private Law, or if it were repealed, which makes
nothing in the Case, and so he briefly concluded that Judgment shall be given
for the Commoner, which is the Plaintiff.

Coke chief Justice agreed, that Judgment shall be given for the Coke.
Plaintiff, and did agree that the Arbitrament, the Convaiance, nor the private
Act made nothing in the Case, for by these the Commoner cannot be barred of his
Common; but for the statute of 22 Ed. 4. He would first consider how the Law
was before the making of that, and as to that it appears by the statute of
Charta de foresta, that by the Common Law, no man which was Owner of Wood in
which Charta de Foresta.
another had Common; that they could not enclose, but Assise of Common or
action upon the case lies, as it requires, and if it be several Wood within
the Kings Forest, in which none has interest of Common, then may he enclose
by the view of the Forresters, and this hold enclosed by the space of three
years, as it appears by the Preamble of the Statute of 22. Ed. 4. Cum parvo
fossato and bassahaia, that is a Little Ditch, and Low Hedge, for that the
Kings Dear are not shut out, and this appears in the Register, in the Writ of,
Ad quod damnum, Fitz. Na. Bre. 226. f. And then comes the statute of 22 Ed. 4.
and gives power to enclose with such sufficient Hedges able to keep out al
manner of Beasts and Cattle. And then considered between what persons the
statute is made: And to that he conceived it is made between the King and his
Successors of one part, and Subjects having woods growing upon their own
Grounds, and such persons unto whom such woods shall happen to be sold of the
other part; and a Commoner is not named in the statute, and also the Body of
the statute is not general, but there are some words in one sentence, and this
is but a sentence and cannot be divided; the words are.

First, The said Hedges so made, may keep, etc.

Secondly, And repair and maintain them, as often as need shall be, within
seven years.

Thirdly, without suing any other License of him (that is the King) or his
Heirs or other persons (that is, which have forests or Chases) or any of their
Officers, and here the sentence concludes, and there is no period before them,
so that this statute being made between the King and owners of forests and
Chases of one part, and Owners of woods in their own soil, and other persons to
whom such woods should be sold other part, this shall not extend to other
persons, Commoners, and it is like to the case in 9 Eliz. Dyer 257. 13. A man
makes a Lease for years, and covenants that the Lessee shall enjoy the Term
without eviction of the Lessor, or any claiming under him, if he be evicted by
a stranger, this shall be no breaking of the Covenant, for a stranger is no
party to the Deed, nor claims under the Lessor, and for this his Entry shall not
give Action to the Lessee, and so is the Case in 21 H. 7. between the Prior of
Castleton and the Dean of Saint Stephens, which was adjudged the 18 of H. 7.
Pasch. Rot. 416. Though that no Judgment be reported, where it appears that the
King Ed. 3. seized all the Lands of Priors aliens, in time of War, for that that
they carried the Treasure of the King out of the Realm to the Kings Enemies,
and so it was made by H. 4. also during the time of his Reign, and then in the
second year of the Reign of King H. 5. by a statute made between the King, and
the said Priors aliens, all the Possessions of the said Priors were resumed into
the hands of the said King, and adjudged in 21. H. 7. 1. before that this shall
not extend to the Prior of Castleton, which had Annuities issuing out of the
Possessions of the said Priors, for the said Prior of Castleton was not party
to the said act of Parliament, and for that he shall not be prejudiced by that,
and so it was adjudged, 25. and 26. Eliz. In the Court of Wards in the case of
one Boswell, where the King made a Lease for years which was voydable, and
after by another Patent granted the Inheritance, and then came the statute of
18. Eliz. to confirm al Patents made by the said Queen within her time, and
adjudged that the said Act shall not make the said patent void to the Patentee,
which is a stranger to the act of the Parliament, but only against the Queen,
her Heirs and successors, for by the statute it is made only against one person
only, and shall not be good against another, though there be no saving of such
person in the said Act. And also he conceived that the statute of 22 Ed. 4.
Does not extend to any woods in forest, in which another has Common, for it
does not extend only to such woods which a common person has in the Kings
forest, or common person, and that it may be enclosed for the space of three
years after the cutting of the wood in this, before the making of the said
statute, and this was no wood in which an Estranger had Common, as it appears
by the Preamble of the said statute; and then after in the said statute it is
said, such woods may be enclosed.

And also he conceived where the statute says, that they may enclose the same
Grounds, with such sufficient hedges, able to keep out all manner of Beasts and
Cattle out of the same Grounds, but this refers to the quality of the hedge,
for before it ought to be a small Ditch, and by this statute it ought to be
with such hedge which shall be able, etc. And it shall not be referred to the
manner of the Cattle: But for the difference between Beasts of Forest, Beasts
of Chase, and Beasts of Warrain, see the Register, fol. 96. 43 Ed. 3. 13. 12.
H. 8. 12. b. Hollinsheads Cronicle, fol. 20. b. 32. And he conceived that Sir
Francis Barrington is such a Vendee of Wood, that is within the statute, though
that he be Vendee of Inheritance, and has a greater Estate then Vnica vice,
but for that, that he conceived that it was not within the statute for other
reasons before cyted, he would not dispute it: But he conceived if this had
been the question of the Case, that this was within the statute, and also he
conceived that this was a general statute, of which the Judges shall take
notice without pleading of this; And this reason was, for that that the King
was party to it, and this which concerns the King, being the head, concerns
all the Body and Common Wealth, and so it was adjudged in the Chancery in the
case of Sergeant Heal, that the statute by which the Prince is created Prince
of Wales was a general statute, and for that see the Lord Barkleyes case in
the Commentaries: Also he conceived, that the said statute of 22 of Ed. 4. was
repealed by 35. H. 8. for this was in the Negative, that none shall cut any
wood, but only in such manner as is prescribed by the said statute, and for
that shall be a repeal of the first, and that by the first Branch of the said
statute it appears, that if such giving of Wood in his own Soil within any
forest, he cut to his own use, he cannot enclose, and by that Branch Commoner
is not excluded, but by the second Branch it is provided, that he may enclose
the fourth part of his Wood, and cut that in such manner as is appointed by the
said statute, and then he shall loose his own Common, in the three other parts,
and so he concluded that Judgment ought to be given for the Plaintiff, which is
the Commoner, and Judgment was entered accordingly.

Pasch. 1610. 8. Jacobi, in the Common Bench. Caesar against Bull.
THomas Caesar Plaintiff in Assise against Emanuel Bull, for the Assise Office.
Office of Clock-Keeper to the Prince, and this he claims by grant of the King
during his own Life, with the fee of two shillings a day for the exercising of
it, and three pound yearly for Livery, and the patent purports only the Grant
of the Office, and not words of creation of the Office, as Constituimus
officium, etc. And the Plaintiff could prove that it was an ancient Office, and
for that was nonsuited in the Assise, though that the Tenant had made default
before.

Pasch. 1610. 8. Jacobi, In the Common Bench. Heyden against Smith and others.
THE Plaintiff counts in Trespass against these Defendants, and Trespass.
these Defendants justify as Servants to Sir John Leventhorp, who was seized
of a freehold of Land, in which the Tree, for which the action was brought,
was cut, and so demands Judgment if action, the Plaintiff replies, that the
place where, etc. was parcel of a house and twenty Acres of Land, which time
out of mind, etc. have been demised and demisable by Copy of Court Roll, which
was parcel of the Manor of A. of which the said Sir John Leventhorp was seized
in his Demesne as of see, and by Copy at a Court held such a day and year
granted the said Message and twenty acres of Land, whereof, etc. To the
Plaintiff and his Heirs, according to the custom of the said Manor, and
prescribes that within the said manor was a Custom that every Copyholder may
cut the boughs of all the Pollingers and Husbands growing upon his Copyhold
for fire to be burnt upon his Tenement, and also prescribed for House-boot,
Plow-boot, and Cart-boote, and averred that he had nourished the growing of the
Trees upon his said Copyhold, and that the said Message and buildings, upon
that were ruinous, and the Trees growing upon that twenty Acres of Land were
not sufficient for the repairing of it, and so demanded Judgment if he should
be debarred of his Action, upon which these Defendants demurred in Law, and it
was adjudged by Coke, Warburton, and Foster, Daniel being absent, that the
Action was well maintainable; against Walmesley who objected, that if a
Copyholder may cut Trees, as it was here pleaded at his pleasure, without
pleading first, that his House was in decay and ruinous, and that then he cut
trees for the repair of that, that then he has an Estate at will according to
the Custom, and not at the Will of the Lord, and he said that he could not cut
a tree, and employ that for Reparations twenty years: But the cause of this
cutting, which is the Ruins, ought to precede the cutting; and he said that
such Copyholder has no property in the Trees, by such prescription, no more
then he which has Common of Estovers, or tenant at will, and if he cut a tree
without special custom, he shall be punished in trespass, as Littleton says
of Tenant at Will, and also he ought to plead how the House was ruinous, and
what place and what part of that was in decay, and then that this so being in
decay, that he cut trees for the repaires of that, and also that the
Prescription to cut off the boughs, Pro ligno combustibili, is not well pleaded,
for by that he may cut all the timber and others also, and he who prescribes to
hate Estovers, ought to prescribe to have reasonable Estovers for Estovers.
Fuel, and the averment that all the trees are not sufficient for reparations
is surplusage, and so he conceived that the Action for these causes is not
maintainable, that is, that it is not maintainable, without special custom,
and that the custom as it is pleaded here is void, but it was answered and
resolved, by Coke and the other Justices before cited, that the Action was well
maintainable at the Common Law without such Custom, and that the pleading of
the custom was surplusage, for it was agreed that the Copyholder has special
property, and the Lord a general property: and it was said by Coke and Foster,
that the Lord may as well subvert the Houses as cut down the Trees, for without
them the Copyholder has no means to repair that, and for that if the Lord
cut the Trees, the Copyholder may take them for repair of his house, for the
Copyholder has as large an Estate in the trees, as in his Copyhold Land, and
it was resolved that the Prescription, was very well pleaded, insomuch that the
Copyholder pleads that as a custom, and also that prescription, Pro ligno
combustibili is Good, and this is an apt word by which he may claim it, and
that boot in any sense is maintainable, and in some sense is Recompense or
Reparation, and it is House-boote, Hedge-boote, Fire-boote, Plow-Boote, etc. Is
in it self a Saxon word, and the Lord Coke said, that it was adjudged Boot,
its signification, etc.
Michaelmas 25. and 26. Eliz. in Doylyes Case, Where it was a custom that the
Copyholder might cut Merisme for to repair, that if the Lord carry it away,
that an Action of Trespass lies for the Tenant, and Pasch. 36. Eliz. Taylers
Case: A man was Tenant by copy of Court Role of wood, and the soil was
excepted to the Lord, and yet the Copyholder maintained an Action of trespass
against his Lord for cutting of wood, And Trinity 4. Eliz. Stebbings Case,
Copyholder prescribes to have the Loppings of all the trees growing upon the
Copyhold, and the Lord cut a tree himself, and the Copyholder brought an
action upon his case, and adjudged that it lies well, and 9 H, 4. Fitz. Waste
59. by Hull, that Tenant by copy of Court Roll cannot make waste, nor cut woods
to fell, but for his Benefit in repairing of his House, and 2 Henr. 4. 12. a. It
seems that if a stranger cut a Tree, the Lord may have an Action of trespass,
and the Copyholder another, and every one of these shall recover Damages
according to his interest, that is, the Lord by his general property, and the
Copyholder for his special property; and it appears by Clark and Pennyfathers
case 4 Coke 23. b. That the Heir of the Copyholder, may have an Action of
Trespass, before admission, by which it appears that the heir does not take his
Estate of the Lord but of his Father: and also agree, that if such an Heir dye
before Admission, the Heir may enter, and take the profits, and so it was
adjudged that the Action of Trespass brought by the Copyholder against his
Lord was well maintainable.

Pasche 1610. 8. Jacobi, In the Common Bench. Earl of Rutlands Case.
EARL of Rutland Plaintiff in an Action of trespass upon the Case against
Spencer and Woodward Defendants, the case was, The last Queen Elizabeth Anno
42. Eliz. by her Letters Patents under the great seal of England, granted to
the Earl of Rutland the Office of the custody of the Porter-ship of the Castle
of Nottingham, Habendum to the said Earl to be executed by him or his Deputy
during his natural* Life, and further the same Queen, by the same Letters
Patents, granted to the said Earl, the Office of Stewardship of diverse
Manors, Habendum and exercendum, cum omnibus feodis, vadis and proficuijs
eidem Officio pertinentibus, to the said Earl, from the time that he should be
of full age, during his Life, and further the said Queen granted to the said
Earl the Office of Keeper-ship of diverse Parks and forests, Habendum and
exercendum Officium predictum cum omnibus and singulis suis proficuijs, vadis,
feodis, and emolumentis, quibuscunque, eidem Officio pertinentibus, aut ratione
ejusdem percipiendis per se vel sufficiendem deputatum sunm, etc. And after in
the said Patent it is recyted, that the said Earl was of full age An and 40
Eliz. Vt informamu, r mandamus quod omnes and singuli Officiarij, and alij
quicunque sint intendentes and obedientes dicto Commiti, and deputatis suis, in
exerendo officium predictum, and if this patent were good or not was the
question.

And Hutton sergeant conceived, that the Patent was good, and that the said
Earl may exercise the said Office of Stewardship, for which this Action was
brought, by Deputy by force of the said Grant.

The first question, which he moved was, if Steward of a Court may execise his
Office by Deputy, without special Grant of that.

Secondly, if there be words within the Patent, to enable him to execute that
by Deputy.

Thirdly, if upon this disturbance, action upon the case, Quare vi and armis,
lies.

And to the first, he conceived, that the Patentee may exercise the Office by
Deputy without special words of Deputation in the Patent, for he conceived that
it is not merely an Office of trust, for he has not the keeping of any
Records, for the Courts of which he was steward were not Courts of Record, and
yet that all the Books are, that ancient grants of Office of stewardship,
contain that the Patentee may exrecise, Per se, vel per sufficientem deputatum
suum, though they are not of Courts in which the steward is Judge, but the
suitors, but if a Grant be of such an Office of Inheritance, then there needs
words of Deputatum, for here it is apparent, that there was not special trust
reposed in the Patentee: And he also agreed, that if it be not an Office of
profit, the Grantor may enter and out the Patentee, but the fee shall remain, as
it appears by the 31 H. 8. Brooks Novell Case and 18 Ed, 4. And it was not the
intent of the Queen, that the Earl of Rutland should execute the Office in
person, for that should be an undervaluing of him, the which he said was proved
by Sir Robert VVrothes Case in the Commentaries, where an Officer to the Prince
was discharged of his attendance, by alteration of quality of the Prince, and
making of him King, and yet the Fee remained.

And to the second it seems, that the patent has express words of Deputation.

And the third Grant, which has a reference to the Grant precedent, and all the
words being put together make a perfect Grant, and this such construction has
been always made of Grants of the King, as it appears by Sir John Mullyns
Case, 6 Coke 56. And Justice VVindhams case 5 Coke 7. a. So if the King makes a
Lease of a Manor, except a Grove next to the Manor, this shall be intended
next to the Manor House, for otherwise it shall be out of the Manor, and so
the exeption void, but Coke and Foster doubted of that.

And to the third point, that the Action was maintainable, Vi and armis, for
when the Deputy of the Earl, of Rutland proclaimed the Court as Deputy of the
Earl of Rutland, and these Defendants proclaimed that as stewards of the Earl
of Shrewsbury, and after adjourned that; and after held all the Courts and
received the profits, it seemed to him, that for this outing and disturbance
which is disseisin, action upon the case lies, Quare vi and armis, as well as in
the Book of Entries 15. two men had Warrens adjoining, and one of them puts
Cats, and other vermin into the Warren of the other to destroy it, and the
Action of trespass, Vi et armis lies, and so for menace action of trespass, Vi
and armis lies, as it appears by 3 H. 4. and this disturbance is sufficient to
maintain an Assise, and upon that he concluded that the Plaintiff in the Action
ought to recover, and to have Judgment.

And Harris the younger Sergeant argued, that the Grant is not good, for
default of certainty, as to this Grant of Stewarship, for the Grant is of the
Office of Stewardship of the Manor of Mansfeild, and does not show where the
Manor is, nor in what County; and it appears, and is put for a Rule by Hussy
chief Justice, in the 25. of H. 7. 60. b. That when a man will have advantage
of Letters Patents of the King, it behooveth that they extend certainly to
things of which he will have advantage, see 2. R. 3. 7. a. By Hussy 44. Ed. 3.
17. 5 Ed. 4. Garters Case, 17 Ed. 3. 15. and Doddingtons Case, which is Hill,
and Pext, 2 Coke 1. 31. b. If the Town be misnamed it is good, if there be
another certainty, but if it be not named at all, otherwise it is. And to the
Point moved by Hutton, he concived that this Office of Stewardship could not be
exercised by a Deputy, as it appears by Littleton in his Chapter of Estates
upon condition, where he says, that there are Estates upon condition in Law,
of which Stewardship is one, fol. 89. Sect. 379. That cannot make Deputy
without special Grants, and with this agreed Sir Henry Nevills Case Com. 379.
and Long 5. Ed. 4. 26. b. and by 21 E. 4. 20. and Sir Henry Nevills Case
before, he could not grant over his office, but if he do not attend to the
Execution of that, it is forfeiture, 11 Ed. 4. so if he wants skill 29 H. 6.
42. Per totam curiam, He conceived that the Law does not make any difference,
between the person of an Earl and another, to the executing of this Office, and
that the words of the Patent do not contain words of deputation, for in the
Grant the words are, Habendum Officium predictum, briefly written, Cum omnibus
vadis and feodis eidem Officio, sue ratione ejusdem, etc. The which last words
are expository of the first, that is, that it shall be intended that the Office
is contained in the last Grant, and shall not be referred to a Grant precedent,
in which the Stewardship is contained, and also he conceived that this Action
upon the case does not ly, Quare vi and armis, as it appears by Fitzherberts
Naturabrevium 86. H. Where it is said, that in trespass upon the case, these
words, Vi and armis are contained in the Writ, shall be sufficient cause to
abate the Writ, see 11 Assise 25. He which councels to make Disseisin, shall not
be a Disseisor with force, for he ought to do some manual Act, either to the
person or to the possession, see 41 Ed. 4. 24. a. and 44. Ed. 3. 20. b. And so
he concluded that this Action is not maintainable, and that Judgment ought to
be given for the Defendant for the causes aforesaid.

This Case was argued again by Nicholls Sergeant for the Plaintiff, Nicholls.
and by Dodridge the Kings Sergeant for the Defendants, to the same intent, and
it was urged by Dodridge, that the Patent contains three several express
Grants, which are distinct Grants in themselves, as there be three distinct
several Patents, though they have but one Parchment and one Seal, and if the
King grant the Office of parkship of two parks by one self same Grant, if the
Patentee be disseised of them, he may have several Assizes, though that it be
but one self-same grant. And he agreed that the words, officium predictum, in
the 3. grant shall be intended officium predictum, and so supply the defect in
the second grant, if it were not limitation of the estate in the second grant,
but for that, that the second grant was perfect in it self, there need not of
necessity any such construction, and that these words shall be referred to the
last words, appears by the last words of the habendum, that is, cum vadis and
feodis, eidem officio, aut ratione ejusdem officij, and these Relatives are
exposition accordingly. And to the objection of the clause of Assistance in the
end of the Patent: he answered that if the grant were ill and void in it self,
this Clause does not supply that. For this is but notification to the Officers
of the Queen, that they should be attendant to the said Earl. For though that
the Intent of the Queen was, that the Earl of hutland should execute this
office by Deputy, yet this intent shall not make the grant good, for though
that the Intent of a common person be apparent within the Deed, yet this intent
shall not make a void grant good, 19 H. 6. 20 H. 6. 22 H. 6. 15. Grant to 2. Et
heredibus, with warranty to them and to their Heirs, this clause of warranty,
though it were the intent of the parties apparent, yet it was not sufficient to
make the grant which was void good, and so it is in 9 H. 6. 35. Abbot by his
deed in the first person grants a Tenement, and the Grantee in the third
person, renunciavit totum Commune quod habuit in uno tenemento: and though that
in this Grant the Intent of the parties is apparent, yet this Intent shall not
make the Grant which is void in it self to be good. So if a man makes a Lease
for life to the Husband and Wife, and after grants the reversion of the Land
that the Husband held for term of life, that grant of the Reversion is void,
though that the Intent was apparent, 13* Edw. 3. Grants 63. And so in Patent of
the King, grant to a man, and heredebus masculis suis, is void, though that the
Intent also is apparent, that he should have an estate tail, 18 H. 8. b.
Estates 84 But admitting that the Grant may be supplied by the last words, that
is, that in the last Grant the words are officia predicta, and in the clause of
Assistance, yet these words may be supplied, for there are two other Grants, in
which there is express mention that the Patentee may exercise it by Deputy:
and so the words shall have full Interpretation, Reddendo singula singulis. And
he conceived that the Writ shall abate for that, that it contains Vi and
armis. And also the Declaration; for the Jury have not found any disturbance at
all. And he agreed that in some cases, Trespass Vi and armis well lies, as it
is Fitzh. Na. Bre. 92. 86. as where it is actual taking, 45 Ed. 3. 30. 44 Edw.
3. 20. where trespass Vi and armis is maintainable against a Miller for taking
of Toll against the Custom, for here is actual taking, and 8 R. 2. 7.
Hosteler 7. In an action of Trespass, Vi and armis against an Host, for that,
that certain evil persons have taken the money of the Plaintiff, and good. But
where there is not any actual taking, there the Writ ought not to contain Vi
and armis, for, for not scowring of a Ditch, or stopping of Water, as it is 43
Ed. 3. 17. But for casting of Dung into a River, action of Trespass Vi and
armis lies, 12 H. 4. But for burning of a house it does not lie Vi and armis,
48 Ed. 3. 25. And so for turning of watercourse, 3 H. 4. 5. But in this case
there is but disturbance with a word, and commandment to hold a Court, and no
Court held, nor no Proclamation made, and so no disturbance at all; 16 Edw. 4.
11. one has the office of a Parkership, and another man was bound, that he
should not disturb. And in debt upon the Obligation he pleaded that the
Obligor has threatened to disturb him, and adjudged that this is no breaking of
the Condition, for there is no disturbance: and in 2 Ed. 3. 25. and 40. Quo
minus by Jeffery Scorlage, where the King grants to the Mayor of Southampton
the Customs of the same Town, and in quo minus for taking of them, it was
adjudged that words are no assault, but there ought to be an act done. But in
this Case is nothing found but words, and no act done, but it is found that
after the Defendants held the Courts. But that does not appear if it were
against the will of the Earl of Rutland or not, and so concludes that the
action is not mayntainable. And this case was argued again in Trinity Term
next ensuing by the Justices, Danyel being dead, but I was not present at the
argument of Foster and Warburton Justices: but I heard the arguments of
Walmsley Justice, and Coke chief Justice.

And first Walmesley conceived that the Grant was good, and that Walmesley.
the Earl of Rutland by this Grant might exercise his Office by Deputy, and
this only in respect of the quality of his person, for the Patentee is a Noble
man, which has been employed as an Ambassador of the King into other Realms,
and this Grant of this Office being amongst others, varies from them; for this
wants the word, exercendum, which is contained in the others: and also the
office of a Steward is too base for an Earl to execute, for the Steward is but
as a Clark, and not a Judge, for he shall not be named in a Writ of false
Judgment, nor shall hold plea of any actions but under 40. s. and for that it
is not fit nor convenient that an Earl should exercise such a bas Office in
Person. For if Recovery here be pleaded, it shall be tried by the Country, 1
Edw. 3. And the Steward shall not give Judgment, but the Suitors, and no trial
shall be by Verdict, but by waging Law, and the fee of the Stewardis but a 1 d.
for every Plaint. And for that it was not the Intent of the Queen that the Earl
should exercise such a base office in person, and her Intent is apparent, for
that, that the word Exercise is not contained in the Patent. And the Intent of
the Queen is to be considered, for the other Offices are fit to be executed by
the Earl: for the exercising of them is but a matter of pleasure, as in hunting
in the Forests and Parks of the Queen: and for that if these Grants have not
contained words of deputation, the Earl ought to exercise them in person,
according to Littleton. And Noble men are not to be used as common people, for
they are not to be Impannelled of a Jury, and Capias does not lie against him,
by which he cannot be outlawed, and for that he shall not be bound to sit in
such a base Court, as this base Court is: And all this matter is well declared
and expounded in the last clause of the Patent, where the words are, Et
ulterius volumus and mandamus quod omnes, etc. Sint intendentes and
auxiliantes, etc. Where the words volumus in Patents of the King, to amount to
as much as concedimus, or a Covenant, which is all one with a Grant, as in 32
H. 6. The King releases all his right in an Advowson, Nolentes, that the
Patentee shall be grieved or disturbed, and adjudged that this shall amount to
a Grant, and so the word Volumus, in the principal case: and also he conceived
that the action is well maintainable, Vi and armis, as Quare Impedit, for
disturbance by word, or presentment by word. And it is also found that the
Defendants did take all the profits, and that the Deputy of the Plaintiff came
to the usual place where the Court was kept, and that could not be intended to
be out of the Manor. And so for these reasons he concluded that Judgment
should be given for the Plaintiff.

And Coke chief Justice argued to the same intent, that is, that the Coke.
Plaintiff ought to have Judgment. And first he conceived, that the Patent is
good, notwithstanding the uncertainty, that the Manors are not named in what
Counties they are, either in England, France, or Ireland, for the Manor is
named very certain, by which it may be granted though it be in the Kings case,
as it appears by 32 H. 6. 20. where the King grants all Manors, Messuages,
etc. which were parcel of the possessions of I. S. attaint, and good. And such
grant was made to Charles Brandon Duke of Suffolk, and adjudged good, though
that the person of a man is more uncertain then the Manor, and yet, Id certum
est quod certum reddi potest. And 39 Ed. 3. 1. in the Abbot of Reddings case,
where a grant was made to the Abbot and his Successors, that the Prior and
Covent shall take the profits in time of vacation, Fitz. Na. Bre. 33. b. And 23
Ed. 3. 20. The King grants to the Queen the Barrony, and all Manors, etc. till
John of Gaunt be able to govern himself, and that shall be intended till the
Law intends him able to govern himself, and Manor is very certain, of which a
view shall be awarded. The second exception which was taken to the grant was,
for that, that it was to take effect at the full age of the Earl. And after it
is recyted in the Patent, that he was of full age before the making of the
Patent, and so by consequence the Patent is to take effect from the time that
it was past: And to that he said, that it shall be intended to the profits of
the Office only, for it appears by the Patent that the Queen had granted it
to another during his Minority: That is, the office.

And to the third mattter, That is, if he cannot make a Deputy, then he has
forfeited the said Office, by the not using of it. And to that he said, it
appears by Waltons case, 10 Eliz. Dyer, fol. 270. That if a man grants a Fee,
pro concilio impendendo, or keeping of Courts, the Fee shall not be forfeited
without special request to the Fee when forfeited.
Patentee to give Council, or to hold his Courts, for he does not know if the
Grantor will have his Courts held or not: and so it is 39 H. 6. 22. Brewens
case, where it is also agreed, that it shall be no forfeiture of an office
without special request to hold the Courts, or to give Council: But in the
case of the Queen otherwise it is, for she ought not to make demand in case of
Rent nor Condition, though that it be within the Statute of 32. H. 8. And yet
it was argued in Sir Thomas Hennages case, that if the King make a Lease for
years upon condition to cease; this shall cease without office upon the
breaking of the Condition, but a Lease for life shall not cease without office,
though that the Condition be broken: And so if the King grants an Office for
life, this shall not be avoided without Office: And he doubted the case of the
Lease for years: And also he agreed, that the Grantee of a Stewardship, cannot
make Deputy to exercise his Office, without special words in the Patent: But
if the Office be granted to him and his Heirs, or to him and his assigns, it
is suf^^cient without other words to make a Deputy: And also he said that the
word Steward, is the name of an Office, and is derived of Steed and Ward, which
are Saxon words, and intend the Keeper of the place, which the party himself
ought to hold; and it appears by Cambdem and Lambert: And so the word
Senescalls also signify, for this is but a Custos sive officiarius loci: See
Fleta liber 2. chap. 72. Senescallum providebit Dominus circumspectum fidelem,
Modestum and pacificum qui in consuitudinibus, etc. and Jura Domini sui teneri,
etc. Quique balivos suos instruere potest, Cujus officium est curia maneriorum,
etc. And a Deputy is a person authorized by the Officer in the name and right
of the Officer, and for all that he does the Officer shall answer, for he is
but as a shadow of the Officer: But assignee is in his own right, and he shall
answer for himself, and forfeiture by assignee of Tenant for life, shall not
be forfeiture of the reversion, 39. H. 6. And he agreed that a Marshall,
Steward, Constable, Bailiff, and such like cannot make Deputies, without
special words in the Grant, as it appears, 39. H. 6. 11. Ed. 3. 10. Ed. 4.
14. 17. and 7. 21. Ed. 4. Nevills case in the Com. and Littleton: And to the
exceptions which have been taken to the Writ and Count, he says that an Action
of Trespass, which is founded upon the case, does not lie, Vi et armis, where
the point and cause is Action, is supposed to be made Vi et armis, and for that
he takes difference between. Causa causans, and Causa causata, for where the
matter which is supposed to be done Vi and armis, is not the point of the
Action: But the cause of the Action there lies very well Vi and armis: But
wherein the point of Action is supposed to be made Vi and armis, there the Writ
shall abate: As if a man brings an Action of Trespass for casting dung into a
River, Trespass.
by which his Land is drowned, in this case an Action of Trespass upon the
case, Vi and armis lies very well, for here the casting in of the Dung, is but
Causa causans, And the drowning of the Land is Causa causata, 8. R. 2. And so
disturbance to hold a Leet, by which he has lost his offerings 19. R. 2. 52.
And the Earl has election to have Trespass or Assise, though it be not
Manurable: As if a man prescribe to have seven pence of every Brewer which
sells strong Beer, for disturbance to have the seven pence, Action upon the
case lies, for this disturbance is Dissesin 15. Ed. 4. 8. 14. Ed. 3. 4. 1. Ed.
5. 5. 19. R. 2. Action upon the case 51. And to the objection which has been
made, that disturbance found by the Jury, is not the same disturbance, which is
mentioned in the Count, for in the Count the disturbance is supposed to be made
Vi and Armis, but the Jury do not find any distubance to be made Vi and Armis:
But this notwithstanding, it seems that the Count is good: As if a Sheriff
enters a Franchise and executes a Writ, this is disturbance, and Action upon
the case lies: And so in Quare Impedit: And also he said, that the Earl cannot
make a Deputy but by writing, as it is resolved 28. H. 8. Br. deputy 17. Where
it is said that Deputation of an Office which lies in Grant, ought to be made
by Deed and not by Word: But here the Jury have found, that the Earl has made
his Deputy, this shall be intended in lawful manner, and cannot be but by
writing: And also he agreed that the Habendum mentioned in the third Grant,
shall extend only to this Grant, which is his proper Grant, that the Office of
the Habendum: And it appears by Wrotsleys and Adams case, Comment. 17. That
the Office of Habendum, is to make certain* the Estate and not the thing
granted, for this is the Office of the Premises of the Deed: And if the
Habendum in the third Grant, had had reference to the second Grant, this would
make the Grant void: And in Grants of the King other construction shall be
made, as it was adjudged in the Court of Wards, Michaelmasse 28. and 29, Eliz.
between Brunkar Plaintiff and Robotham Defendant, where the case was, the King
Hen. the 8. had two Manors, whereof diverse Lands of one Manor extended the
other Manor, and then the King granted one Manor and all his Lands in the
same Manor, Nec non omnies and singulas Terras, etc. In the same Town, and
adjudged that the Lands which were parcel of the other Manor, which was not
granted, pass by this Grant, though that they are in the other Manor, in the
same Town, and he denied that the words Precipientes and volentes shall be
taken as a Grant, for they are not spoken to the Patentee, but to other
Officers, which are strangers to the Grant: But if the thing granted had been a
Chattell, that a Covenant might enure as a Grant, and 10. Eliz. Dyer 270. 22.
The King Phillip and Queen Mary, granted for them and their Heirs and
Successors, Grant le Roy.
to A. B. That he and his Factors and Assigns might Tavern, and keep a Tavern,
etc. Commanding all Mayors and Sheriffs, etc. and other Officers and Subjects
and their Heirs and Successors, to permit and suffer the said A. B. during his
life to hold and use a Tavern, and to sell Wine without Impeachment, and it
seems that the Grant is void, for that that there is not any time limited, for
how long it shall endure, and the mandate in the last clause shall not make any
limitation,, for by the death of the Prince this altogether cease, for Omne
mandatum morte mandantis expirat: And for that all Proclamations made in time
of the Reign of Queen Eliz. cease and determine by her death: And to the person
of the Earl, he said that it was a Maxim, that Honor and Order shall be
observed, and that was a common saying of the said Queen, and for that it was
not her intention, that this Maxim should be broken, and that the said Earl
should exercise the said Office in person, but she intended the said Earl
should overlook the said Manor, and place here a sufficient able man to
exercise the said Office, because he should answer, for the misdemeanour of
such a Deputy is the forfeyture of the Office, and he says that the Dignity of
an Earl, was the most high Dignity in this Realm, that any Subject does
possess, till the 11. Ed. 3 The black Prince was the 1 Duke, and Aubry de Vere
the 1 Marquess in the 11. R. 2. and Beamount the first vicount in the time of
H. 6. And none of these Dignyties are above an Earl in degree, but only in
precedence, for Bracton lib. 1. chap. 8. says, Quod Comites dicunter a
socitate, quia Comitantur Regem: And in ancient time none were made Earls but
only those which were of the blood Royal, and this is the reason that they are
called Consanguinij Regis, and also they may be called Consules a Consulendo,
Tales enim Regis sibi associunt ad consulendum and regendum populum Dei: And at
their creation the King gives to them a Robe and Cap, which signifies Council,
and Corronet, which signifies the greatness of his Blood and Honor, and also
sword, Vt sit in ntrumque tempus, as well ready for War as peace: And for that
it should be unfit, that one of such Honor, State, and Dignity; should be
employed in holding of Court Barons, and there sit to enter Plaints, and have a
penny for every Plaint for his pains, and to make Copies and such like base
employments which are Vividae rations, which was not the intent of the Queen,
that he should exercise the said Office in person, and the Law requires
conveniences in all Grants, as in 12. and 13. H. 8.

One licensed a Duke to come and hunt in his park, and the Duke came with his
Servants and many others of his Retinue, and hunted there, and it was adjudged
that the Grant was sufficient, to warrant his hunting in this manner, in
respect of the convenience, for it is not fit and convenient that the Duke
should go alone, and 21. Ed. 3. 48. The Bishop of Carlisle sued the Executors of
his Predecessor the Ornaments of the Chapel of the said Bishopric: and then
recovered, and though that the said Chapel was in the private House of the
said Bishop,, yet it was thought fitting, that such Chapel should be adorned
with convenient Ornaments, and that these Ornaments should go in succession to
the Successors, and not to the Executors, and if convenience be so required in
all these cases, then by the like Reason such inconveniency shall not be
admitted, that the Earl should be Clark to Suitors as every Steward is. And for
that he conceived that the Grant is good; And that the said Earl may exercise
this Office by a Deputy, as well as if a Common person grant an Office of
Fostership to the King, he may exercise that by any party, or grant it over,
though therebe no words of deputation in the Grant, and this in respect of the
quality of his person, and in many other cases an Earl or another Noble man
shall be privileged, as in 3 H. 6. A Noble man shall not be examined upon his
Oath in account, And 48 Ed. 3. 30. He shall not be sworn upon Inquests, which is
to serve God and his Country Register 179. And if a common person be in debt to
me a hundred pound, I may have a Capias and arrest his person for this Debt,
but if the King create him Baron or Earl, then his person is so privileged,
that that cannot be attached for this Debt, and this is without wrong to me* as
it appears by the Countess of Rutlands case 6. Coke; And if a Baron be
returned of a Jury, and if Issue be taken, if he be a Baron or not, this shall
be tried by Record whether he be a Baron or not, 35 H. 6. 46. 22 Assise 24. 48
Ed. 3. 8. Register 47. And in case that one common person has any Office,
which he cannot exercise by a Deputy, yet if he be employed in the Kings
service, as if he be made Ambassador out of the Realm, or other such
employment, he may during his absence make a Deputy, and this shall not be
forfeiture of his Office, and an Earl in ancient time was not only a
Counselor of the King, but by his Degree was Prefectus sive prepositus
commitatus, as it appears by Cambden 106, 107. Comes prefectus Satrapas, which
is Prepositus comitatus, and was in place of the Sherif at this day, and when
that he was Sherif, though that he had the custody of the county committed unto
him, which was a great trust, yet then by the Common Law, he might make an
under Sherif which was but a Deputy, the like Holinsheads Chronicle 463.
Amongst the customs of the Exchequer, he called the under Sheriff Senescallus,
which agreed with the Definition before, for he held the place of Sherif
himself, and by the statute of Westminster 8. chapt. 39. It is said that Vice
comes est viccarius commitatus, and if a Barony descend upon the Sheriff, yet
he shall continue Sheriff, 13. Eliz* Dyer and Britton 43. If a Rybaud strike a
Baron or a Knight, he shall loose his Land: And Tenant by Knights service, may
execute it by Deputy. 7. Ed. 3. Littleton: And if it be so in the case of a
Sheriff, which has the County committed to him, that he may make a Deputy by
the Common Law, upon that he inferred, that the Steward which has but the
Manors of the King, committed to him, that he may make a Deputy: And also he
said that the words in the last clause, that is, (Volentes and precipentes)
that the Officers and the Subjects should be attendant, expoundes and declares
the intent of the Queen, for the words are; Omnibus premises, and the Grant of
the Office of the Stewardship is one of the premises, and so he concluded upon
these reasons, that Judgment shall be given for the Plaintiff, and that the
Grant was good, and the Action well maintainable: And o^ this opinion were
Warburton and Foster, Justices: And Judgment was given accordingly; this
Trinity Term 8. Jacobi.

And Coke chief Justice remembered a Report, made by him and Popham chief
Justice of England, upon reference made to them, that this Patent was good, and
that the Earl of Rutland, might exercise this Office by Deputation, and he
conceived, that there were other words in the Patent which were found by the
Jury, that the said Earl should have the said Office, Cum omnibus Juribus and
Jurisdictionibus, etc. as full. etc. as any other Patent has been had, and
withal the Appurtenances, and it seemed that a former Patentee had power by
express words to execute that by a Deputy, and he conceived though these words
Adeo plene etc, do not enlarge the Estate, yet this inlargeth the Jurisdiction
of the Officer, as in 43. Ed. 3. 22. Grant is made by the King of a Manor, to
which an advowson is appendant, Adeo plene, and tam amplis modo and forma, etc.
And these words past the advowson without naming that, and he said it was
adjudged Hillary 40. Eliz. in Ameridithes case, where the case was, the Queen
granted a Manor, Adeo plene and intigre and in tam amplis modo and forma, as
the Countess of Shrewshury or any other had the same Manno, r and Queen
Kathrin had the same Manor and diverse liberties with it of great value,
during her life, and adjudged that these liberties should pass also by this
Patent by these words, and so in the principal case, if the former Patent had
been found also by the Jury, and so was the opinion of Popham and him, and was
certified accordingly.

FINIS.
A Table of the Second Part.
Archbishops Jurisdiction, 1, 2. 28. Admiralties Jurisdiction, 10, 11. 13* 16,
17. 26. 29. 31. 37. Arbitrament satisfaction, what 31. 131. Assumpsit, 40, 41.
273. Arrianisme, one committed for it, 41. Assets, 47. Almony, 36. Apurtenant,
what shall be said, 53 Action sur Case by a Commoner for words, 55. 84. 100.
119. 122. Avowry the whole plea, 62, 63. 102 Agreement, what, 72 Account, 76
Audita Querela. 81. 83. 168 Atturnment good by one under age, where and why. 84
Award void. 100 Age not allowed in Dower. 118 Administration repealable. 119
Accord with satisfaction good plea, where, where not. 131 Attorney ought to
find Bail in an Original, not Bill. 134 Action sur Assumpsit. 137 Assu^psit
against an Executor where maintainable, 138 Assets in Formedon, what, 138
Attachment, 144. 168 Assent to a Legatee, 173 Aid prayer, 191 Attachment for
contempt of the Court, 216 Accessory null, unless there is Principal, 220
Assignment of an estate suspended, 225 Assise of novel Disseisin, 229 Abatment
of brief per entry 231, 232 Abatement de facto, and by plea differ in what, 235
Agreement and Arbitrament good pleas, where, 132 Agreement by word to keep
back tithes, 17 Admiralls Commission for measuring of Corn, 29 Administration
during minority of etc. 83 Attorney brings Debt for Trees. 99. Arbitrament.
130. 131. Arrest of Judgment. 167. Acts what to make an Executor de seu tort.
184. Attachment of Privilege for an Estate against the Marshall etc. 266.
Assise where it may lie, sans view, 268. Assise, the Recognitors challenged,
ibid Ajournment of the Term. 278. Annuity or Writ of Covenant where 273.
Arbitrament, submission, and revocation 290. Approvement of Common, 297.
Account. 308. Award submission, 309. Arbitrament, 310 Arbitrament who it binds
323. Assise del Office 328.
B
BIshop not displaceable. 7. Baron alone cannot sue for not setting forth
Tithes without the feme proprietory. 9 Ballast granted to Trinity House a
Monopoly. 13. Baron and Feme join where. 66. Baron Judgment against an Executor
83 Baron how chargeable, pur sa feme, 92. 93. 95. Bar in trespass, 121.
Bylaws, whom they bind. 180. To what extended 258. Baron and feme take by
intirity, where. 226. Barwick whether part of England or Scotland. 270. Bail
293 Banckrupt actionable 299.
C
CHase an action not to be divided. 56 Cui in vita of Copyhold 79. Custom for
pound breach, 90. Common Recovery 16. Copiholder shall hold charged, where 208.
Confirmation to a copiholder destroys common 209 210. Consultation, after it no
Prohibition grantable upon the same Libell 247. Cape grand and Petit, 253 Cause
of a commitment traversable 266. Count in trespass after the test del Breife
273. Covenant to pay Rent 273 Continuance Ibidem. Chellenge 275 Customs of
London argued by the Justices. 284. 285. 286. Certiorari 312. Capias ad
satisfaciendum no satisfactory execution 312. 313. 314. 315. 316. Copyhold at
common Law 44. Creditor may sue both heireand Executor 97. Court of Equity not
proper after Judgment, 97. Copyhold intayled 121. Covenants direct and
collateral how they differ 136. Condition repugnant void 138. Condition in rei
and in persona diff. 139. Covenant where it lies 160 Covenant express and
employed, or in Law, how they differ 162. Copihold customs 197. Covenant P.
Administrator 207. Covenant joint surviveth, ibidem and 208. Churchwardens not
interessed in church Goods 210 Consultation awarded 216. Challenge for favor
229. Challenge to the Array for action against the Sheriff 230 Consultation
awarded 26 Citation for defamation 28. Charter part beyond sea where to be sued
34. Citation out of the Deocess 34 Consultation granted 26. Clerk of a Parish
who shall nominate him 38. Covenant destroyed 56. Common Recovery 75. Custom
76. Uncertain void 85 Void for inconveniency 86 Copyhold what Authority 77 Its
nature and reason 79 It is within the statutes which speaks of Lands and
Temements 79. 80 Its several customs 86, 87 Consuetudo sola quia non
totaliter disallowed 86 Customs unreasonable void 87 Commission to the
council in Wales 119 Caveat to a Bishop 119 Coram non Judice where 127
Commoner cannot have an Action of Trespass 147 Chase in possibility not
grantable 173 Cinque Ports the custom of taking the Body of a man in Withernam
not good 195, 196, 197 Common of a Copyholder destroyed by confirmation 211
Corrody granted 211 Common Law where void 38 Clam delinquens etc. 288 Covenant
express does qualify covenant in Law where 212, 213 Covenant in Law not
binding Executors where 214 Copihold custom 12 15 Custom ought to be
reasonable 217. Custom in the Isle of Man 217 Custom of London 218 Custom of
Hallifax 218 Copyhold custom for a married-wife a Devise to her Husband 218
Court Baron cannot inquire of Felonies 219 Condition entire not to be
apportioned 227 Challenge principal, what is and what is not 240 Cestercians
their Privilege 20 Contra formam collationis to who given 22 Contract made in
the straites of Malico 30 Custom for thithing 30 Cpoihold anciently villinage
44 Corporation cannot be limited to a county 244 Certificate of a Bishop 301
Charta de foresta 325
D
DEfamation Sint ex officio 28 Debt Sur Judgment 39 Debt Sur Award, 48 Sur
Judgment 39, 40 Damages in dower 41 Devise of lands how taken 74 That
executors shall sell etc. 100 Devastavit where 81 83 Damages uncertain,
therefore a fine certain for them void 86 Debt Sur bill P. memorand. 97 Debt
Pur fees P. attorney 99 Devise of lands in cap. and the stat. of 32 and 34 H. 8
expounded 105, 106, 107 Deed without date 107 Dower 118 execution in it 141
Debt against an Administrator 118 Dower ass. by the Sheriff without jurors good
141 Damnum five injuria 148 Debt against an administrator 153 Debt sur oblig
pur Pf. cove. 167 176 177 Debt 177 178 pur penalty of a by-law 179 Demurrer sur
evidence 183 Ddvastavit 185 Debet and detinet for Rent against an administrator
202, 203 Damages found entire, where it is error 272 Defendant entered after the
habere fac. poss. executed 216 Dower recompense what 132 Delapidation suit for
it 27 Dreprivation for drunkenesse 37 Debt P. executor 283 against executors
183 Demurrer in ejectione firm 128 Discontinuance 142 Dower of tyth wool 143
Devise of a lease 172 Devise to a corporation 246 Debt against an administrator
during minolity 248 Debt against executors 274 Duress where 276 Distress a
quasi action 289 Devise enures to bargain and sale where 291 Devise of a Term
308
E
Ejectione firm 40 Shall not abate if the Term end 131 Estrepment 401 68
Election by an Executor 51 Executor refuses when too late 58 when good ibid
Ejectione firm 74, 102, 103 Accord with satisfaction good 130 131 Elegit 97
sur testatum 208 Extent sur stat. 122 Executrix during nonage 144 Ejectione
firm 168 172 168 223 Election by an executor of a legacy 173 Executor de seu
tort who 184 Executor de seu tort 184 185 Executors two jointly sued one
confess the action good 286 Elegit sur testatum where it is necessary 207
Ejectione firm Judgment in it 216 Estoppell 219 Escheate 220 Election
implicit 220, 221 Error sur judgment in assise 230 Entry to abate an assise
what, what not 235 236 Ejectione firm and a good bar where 133 Executor sued
and also the heir 67 Executrix during nonage 144 Express covenant qualifies
covenantin law 212 213 Exposition of usage 222 Estate increasing sur condition
when it ought to vest or not at all 251 Error in ve. fa. and hab. corp. 274
Essoyn day is a day in term 279 Entire services casual 293 295 Error in
prolcamation 300 Error in writ of dower 300 Common of Estovers 329
F
FOrm edon lies for copyhold lands intayted 43 44 Forgery by Scrivener who
lost his ears for it 50 Franchise the lord shall answer for his baily 50 Feme
covert what she may do sans Boron 71. how punishable 9495 Fealty seisin of ser.
au. 99 Fine amended where 101 Feoffment to a son for valuable consideration 102
Forstaller, regrator, and ingrosser, who 109 False imprisonment 124 Feme covert
how she is bound by joining with her husb. 140 141 142 Fine where it binds 154,
155 Fradulent conveyances within the stat. 13 Eliz. 188 Fraud what by the
statute 27 Eliz. 190 Fyling a writ not material where 216 Formedon in
remainder 274 Frank almoigne, gift to the Templers* 21 Formedon in discender 79
Fine and ransom 113 False imprisonment action for it 255 Fine, error in it 270
Fine by deb. potest: of an infant 271 Freedom of London how many ways obtained
286 287 Forfeiture of office of the Chirographer 300
G
GRants how construed 193 Grant of common extinct 222 Grantee of a reversion of
what conditions he may take advantage of by the common law of what by statute
32 H. 8. 228 General pardon 37 Gravi que^ela 72 Grant le roy when not good 252
Grant le roy incorporate a burough 292 Grant of a reversion 299 Grant del roy
of alnage 301 302 303 304 Grant del portership 330 Grant Pro concilio
impendendo 336 Grant P. Letters Patents 333
H
HAb. corp. granted to a br^wnist counted 3 Heretic his censure 4 High
commissioners their jurisdiction 4, 5, 14, 15, 16, 18, 19 Harriot unreasonable
89 Hab. fac. poss. the Shereffs officers poss. the plaintiff refuses 168
Harriot service 187 Habere fa. possessionem in ejectione firm 216 Hab. corpus
and prohibition to the high commissioners 18 Hospital of St. John of
Jerusalem 21 Hab. corpus granted 36 Husband and wife where they shall join 66,
67 Hab. corpus and prohibition 271 Harriot an entire service. 294
ISsue imperfect* 47 Justification for calling one perjured, 49 Judgment in
Debt 76 preferred before a statute etc. 81 Innuendo shall not help the Action
84 Jus accrescendi where it holds not 99 Information sur le statute 5 Ed. 6.
Chapt. 14 108 109 110 Jurors non concluded by Pleas of the parties, 150
Information for extortion 151 Jeofailes stat. 168 Judgment arrested 182 Joint
Tenants for years of a Mill and grants etc. 212 Judgment in a Writ of error
215 Intendment where 234 Judgment Sur breife abatest error 235 Imprisonment
unlawful 20 Impropriation 24 Instruction for the Presidents of Wales 29
Judgment reversed for the Outlawry only and confirmed for the other 39 Jointure
52, 53 Information sur stat. 21. H. 8 chap. 13. For non-residency 54 Judgment
void 127 Informer exhibits a Bill in the Star chamber 151 Imprisonment for a
force when or not 266 Justices of Peace and Auditors ought to make Record where
and when Ibid. Indemptitas nominas 270 Jurors from two countyes 272 Infant
levies a Fine brings error 278, 279
K
KIngs Grant void for defect in recital 241 King is specially favored in the
Law 249 Kings Patent how to be taken 250
L
LIcense from the Ordinary where 1 License how many kinds 3, 27 Legates
Jurisdictions ibidem License to a Copyholder when pleadable by whom 40
Limitation and Condition their difference 68 Levant and couchant what 101 Lease
by a Dean 134 Livery void where 135 Libellous Letters 152 Law of England of
what it consists 198 Lateran Council concerning Tithes 24 License to
appropriate 25 License to a Copyholder 40 Lord of a Manor enclose the
Demesnes 168 Letter of Attorney cannot be made by a wife 248 London the custom
for an Inn-holder 234 Lease to determine upon limitation 292 Letters Patents
how expounded 323 License in a Forest 323
M
MArriage disagreed to at years of consenting etc. 36 Misnosmer in an
obligation what it effects 48 Marriage a gift of all goods personal 91
Merchant 4 sorts 99 Meal accounted dead victual within the stat. 5, Ed. 6
chap. 14. 116 Mayme is felony 220 Modus decimandi 33 Murder sur Thames where
tryable 37 Maxim in law 43 Misnosmer of a corporation 243 Maintenance 271
Minister arrested 301 Marshall court its jurisdiction 125, 126, 127
N
Nonsuit 41 Nisi prius record amended 41. Non-residencie the statute 21 H. 8.
13 expounded 54 Nonsuit after verdict 219 Nisi prius by proviso for whom 276
Notice where requisite 278
O
ORdinary cannot imprison 4 Ordinary may imprison a priest by 1. H. 7. 4. Ibid
Obligation taken for a legacy incourt court Christian 11 Ordinary may transmit
28 Office granted by a Bishop 137 Occupancy where ^02 Outlary in felony was
reversed 229 Offenses exorbitant what 19 20 Obligation to perform covenants
167 Officers grad^all of the Kings bench who 282 Obligation with condition
against law or impossible 281 Outlary 313 Office exerciseable by deputy where
334, 335
P
PRohibitionupon the stat. of 13 H. 8 chap. 9 Polygamy punishable where and how
7 Prohibitionjoynt and severallcounts 7 Prohibition surle stat. de simony 7 for
not settingforth of tithes 9 Prescription for tithes 31 33 34 Prohibition to
the admiralty 34 to court Baron 34 Prison private and common 41 Prescription
for inhabitants 178 Prohibition for common 47 Prescription none after
consultation duly granted 36 Parson deprived for drunknesse 37 Proof what 57
Privilege out of higher court to inferior 101 Payment directed how 107 108
Patent of a Judge 122 Papist that not actionable 166 Possibility reasonable
where 173 Prescription and custom do differ wherein 198 Prescription 210 211
Prohibition to court Christans 215 Prerogative del roy 219 Prescription for
waife and stray 219 Paunagium quid 236 Prohibition good sans action pendecit 17
Privilege determined 22 Process from the admiralty 29 Prohibition not
grantable after consultation 36 Possessio fratris 43 Plurality with
dispensation 45 Pardon of one attaint pro false verdict 47 Prescription where
good where not 64 Per que servitia 84 Prescription for beasts, sans number 101
Physicians college the authority 256 Physitans examined by whom 257 Privilege
of attorney allowed before the Deputy Marshall where 267 Partition without
naming the parts good, where 275 Prohibition to the Court of request 297
Copyholder prescribes Pro ligno combustibuli 330
Q
QUare impedit 45 Quo warranto 217 Quare ejecit infra terminum 133 Quare
clausum fregit, where it lies 322 Quare Vi and Armis where it will and of what
331, 332, 334
R
RIght to a spiritual Office is temporal 12 Residency where 13 Ravishment
against feme covert 59 91, 92, 93 Replevin 84, 52, 149 Right the Writ 138
Remainder in a Chattell 173 Release where not good 190 Release of one Church
warden shall not bind the other 216 Restitution to the Heir of an accessory
where the principal reversed the outlawry 220 Reservation of Rent at
Michaelmas ten or days after 220 Reservation not taken strictly 221 Right to a
term not grantable, 226 Revocation the power when suspended 228 Return of the
sheriff where good, 145 Revocation of uses 157 Remainder of a Chattell 173
Request where necessary 176 Release of Dower by Fine 175 Replevin 248 Re-entry
after possession executed 253 Release 254 Return of writs granted to a
corporation 270 Replevin 297 Release 300
S
STatutes ecclesiastical by whom to be expounded 2, 3 Surrender an attornment
where 51 Scire fac. by bail 76 Scire fac. against an Executor 83 Surrender by
Cognisor, etc. 97 Statutes pro bono publ. taken by equity 110, 111 Summons in
Dower 122 Scire facias for whom 145 Seisin of a Rent p. vic^^nt 237 Submission
awarded 48 Survivorship not a^ongst Merchants 99 Statute penal 112 Scire
facias special non-tenure a goodplea 146 Seisin to have Assise what sufficient
241 Slander of an Attorney what 252 Slander 272, 276, 299 Sheriffs power what
281 Under sheriff how limited ibid Sheriff may limit the Authority of his Under
Sheriff 282 Sheriff committed for taking undue Fees 283 Suit beg^n hanging
another 293 Statutes how to be understood, 305, 306 307
T
Tithes what Lands are free of them P. 8 21, 22, 23, 24 Taxes for
Church-Reparations and other like duties who are chargeable and how 10 Tithes
not grantable P. Parol unless by way of Retainer 11 Tithes where discharged by
unity of possession 26 Transmission of causes where 27 Tenant in Dower
disseised 41 Tail its incidents 67 By Copyhold custom 77 Its Creation and
nature 79 Testibus lies what comes after no part of the Deed 99 Town cannot be
corporate without the assent of the Major part etc 100 Trespass for a commoner
good 149 By the Lord against the commoner 168 Trespass for assault 182 Tales
challenged 235 Tithes their antiquity 24 Tithes of what not payable 32 33
Trespass for breaking of a close 65 Test of a ven. fac. amended post verdict
102 Trespass for imprisonment 124 125 Tenant pur view with warranty 191
Testatum where no writ issued 209 Tithes not paid for seven years of what 257
Tail 271 Trade with Infidells without license 296
U
VEn. fa. amended after verdict 102 Voucher P. attorney 167 Voucher sur bre.
abateable the danger 185 Verdict special 187 188 189 Verdict does not cast a
man off an action of a higher nature 219 Usage its exposition 222 Usitatum whom
it does advantage ibid Variance what 239 Valuable consideration out of the
statute 102 Unity of possession 26 Uoluntas donatores how to be taken 77
Vexation unjust remediable how 100 University of Oxford was removed for a
certain time 244 University not local ibid Variance what 245
W
WAles council and presidents Jurisdiction 29 Wast 46, 150, 168 Wittall who 37
Westminster 2 chap 35 expounded 92, 93, 94, 95 Writs 147 Warrantia chartae 169
Warranty to a tenant pur view 191 Warrantia chartae not upon two deeds 56 Writ
of error 137 208 Wife join with her husb. in feoff. what shall bind 141 Wager
of law 255
FINIS.

