CAMERA REGIS, Or, A SHORT VIEW Of LONDON, Containing the Antiquity, Fame,
Walls, Bridge, River, Gates, Tower, Cathedral, Officers, Courts, Customs,
Franchises, etc. of that Renowned City. Collected out of Law and History and
methodized for the Benefit of the present Inhabitants. By JOHN BRYDALL, Esquire

Imperium Regis Salus per quam Civitas Subsistit
Imperium Regis Decus per quod Civitas Floret
LONDON, Printed: for William Crook at the Green Dragon without Temple Bar
1676.

TO THE LOYAL LONDONERS.
SIRS,
THE subject of this small Treatise may justly entitle its self to your
Patronage; for seeing some Circumstances, relating to renowned London fill up
the ensuing Sheets, the Dedication thereby becomes no less an act of Justice,
then Civility. Under whose protection indeed ought any thing, respecting the
Honor of this Metropolis see the Light, but under yours!

But besides the Consideration of your interest, the known Candor, and
Ingenuity, the worth, and Endowments of your now Lord Mayor, of his immediate,
and others his Predecessors, since his Majesty's Restoration, do not only
invite, but command all ingenuous Addresses, as must be confessed by every one,
who has had the least Taste of their generous, and obliging Conversation.

And though what is here presented, be of no Considerable worth, yet your
Acceptance thereof, will inhaunce its value, And so recommend it to the world,
as that it will be loath to censure, what you have once deigned to approve, not
to be too troublesome, My Aim in the Publication, is the benefit of you, the
present Inhabitants; And my Ambition in the Dedication, is to give the world a
Testimony, that I am,

SIRS, Your most Obliged Servant JOHN BRYDALL.
Whitehal 15. Nov. 1675.
CAMERA REGIS: OR, A VIEW OF LONDON.
BEfore I come to present the Courteous Reader a view of the most renowned City
of London, it will not be much amiss to premise somewhat, concerning the
Description of the words, Civitas, Vrbs, Oppidum, etc. The definition of a
City, and a Corporation; the Commencement of Corporations, the Causes, why
Cities were at first instituted, and lastly the number of Cities within this
Realm.

1. Of the words Civitas, Urbs, and Oppidum.
THe same place (says one) is called Vrbs, Civitas, and Oppidum; it is called
Civitas in regard that it is governed in justice; and order of Magistracy:
Oppidum, for that there are therein great plenty of Inhabitants: and Urbs,
because it is in due form begirt about with Walls.

Latches Reports Le Roy verse. Mayor of Oxford.
The Walls, says another, do not make the City, but the Men; Maenia, and
Edificia faciunt Urbem, homines faciunt Civitatem.

Co. Littl. 109.8.
Civitas and Urbs, says a third Person, in hoc differunt, quod incolae
dicuntur Civitas; Urbs vero complectitur aedificia, but with us, the one is
commonly taken for the other.

In the Civil Law we find it thus written, D. 50.16 2. de verborum signif.
touching Vrbs and Roma. Urbis appellatio muris: Romae autem continentibus
aedificiis finitur, quod latius patet.

D. 50.16.87.
Ut Alfenus ait, Vrbs est Roma, quae muro cingeretur. Roma est etiam, qua
continenti aed ficia essent. Nam Romam non muro tenus existimari, ex
consuetudine cotidiana posse intelligi, cum diceremus Romam nos ire, etiam si
extra urbem habitaremus.

2. What a City, what a Corporation is.
A City, in Latin Civitas, Co Littl. ^. 109. B.
and in Greek (...), is a Borough incorporate, which has, or have had a
Bishop; and though the Bishopwrick be dissolved yet the City remainerh: And
therefore in 35. Eliz. c. 6. Westminster is called a City, notwithstanding that
now it has no Bishop; and in 27. ejusdem Cap. 5. (of Statutes not in print.)
Westminster is alternatively called a City or Borough. It appears by the
Statute of 35. H. 8. c. 10, That then there was a Bishop of Westminster.

Grotius thus defines a City, Lib. 1. c. 1. nu. 14. de jure bell^ ac pac.
Civitas est coetus perfectus liberorum hominum, jurisfruendi, and communis
utilitatis Causa sociatus; hence Civitas is, quasi Civium unitas.

It is said before, that a City is a Borough, or Town incorporate, now a
Corporation is a permanent thing, that may have succession: And it is an
Assembly, and joining together of many into one Fellowship, Brotherhood, or
mind; whereof one is Head and Chief, the rest are the Body, and this Head and
Body knit together, make the Corporation.

3. How a Corporation does commence.
A Corporation, or Body incorporated, Co. Lit. 250. a
may commence and be established three manner of ways, viz. by Prescription,
by Letters Patents, or by Act of Parliament: and let the Body incorporate
commence which way it will, it must be first derived from the Royal Authority
and License of the Kings of England: For without it Corporations, be they
Spiritual or Temporal, are mere chymaera's, fictitious, and illegal Societies,
erected contrary to the Laws and Constitutions of the Kingdom. In proof of this
matter, Co. lib. 10.33. b. 49. E. 3.4.
vide 9. H. 6.16. b. Co. Lib. 4. Adams and Lamberts Case, fol. 107. b. Co. 3.
Inst. 202.49. Ass. pl. 8. le Case de Whittawers. Co. lib. 8. f. 125. the Case
of London. With our Law does concur the Laws Imperial.

D. 3.4.1.
Collegia Romae certa sunt, quorum corpus Senatusconsultis, atque
constitutionibus principalibus confirmatum est: veluti pistorum, and quorundam
aliorum, and naviculariorum, qui and in provinciis sunt.

Collegia siqua fuerint illicita mandatis, and constitutionibus, D. 47.22.3.
and Senatusconsultis dissolvuntur. In summa nisi ex Senatusconsulti
auctoritate, vel Caesaris, Collegium, vel quodcunque tale corpus coierit,
contra Senatusconsultum, and mandata, and constitutiones Collegium celebrant.

Note, London, our famous City, is a Corporation by prescription. Co. 2. Inst.
f. 330.

4. How Corporations are divided in our Law.
EVery Body politic, or Corporation, is either Ecclesiastic or Lay:
Ecclesiastical, either regular, as Abbots, Co. Lit. f. 250. a.
Priors, etc. or secular, as Bishops, Deans, Archdeacons, Parsons, Vicars, etc.
Lay, as Mayor and Commonalty, Bailiffs and Burgesses, etc.

Also every Body politic, Co. lib. 3. f. 73. in the Case of the Dean and
Chapter of Norwich.
or Corporate, is either elective, representative, collative, or donative.

And again it is either sole, or agregate of many.

This Body Politic or Corporate, aggregate of many, is by the Civilians called
Collegium Vniversitas, Collegium sodalitium, and Municipium.

5. Why Cities were at first instituted.
IN the time of William the Conqueror it is declared in these words, Item
nullum mercatum vel forum sit, nec fieri permitratur nisi in Civitatibus regni
nostri, and in Burgis clausis, and muro vallatis and Castellis, and locis
tutissimis, ubi consuetudines regni nostri, and jus nostram commune: and
dignitates Coronae nostrae, quae constitutae sunt a bonis praedecessoribus
deperire non possunt, nec defraudari, nec violari; sed omnia rite, and per
judicium, and justitiam fieri debent: and ideo Castella and Burgi and Civitates
sunt and fundatae, and aedificatae, Sc. ad Tuitionem gentium, and populorum
regni, and ad defensionem regni, and idcirco observari debent cum omni
liberate, and integritate, and ratione.

Out of this same Record we may pellucidly and clearly collect, that Cities,
Towns or Boroughs were instituted for three purposes. Sc.

First, Ad consuetudines regni nostri, and jus nostrum commune and dignitates
coronae conservand.

Secondly, Ad Tuitionem gentium, and populorum regni; and

Thirdly, Ad Defensionem Regni; This in three particularities.

1. For conservation of Laws, whereby every man enjoys his own in peace. 2.
For Tuition and defense of the Kings Subjects, and for keeping the Kings peace
in time of sudden uproars. 3. For defense of the Realm against outward and
inward Hostility.
Thus much out of our own Records, I now come to speak somewhat of this matter,
that I have seen in foreign Authors.

Tully says thus, Hanc ob Causam maxim, ut sua tenerentur Respublica and
Civitates constitutae sunt, nam etsi, Lib. 2. de Offic.
duce natura, congregabantur homines, tamen spe Custodiae rerum suarum urbium
praesidia quaerebantur.

Aristotle thus, 1 Pol. 2.
Civitas a natura profecta est, homo animal aptum est ad coetus proinde
Civitatis Origo ad vivendum, institutio ad been vivendum refertur.

In Pol. Arist. lib. 3.
Donatus Acciaiolus speaks in this manner; Civitas constituitur, aut propter
possessiones, aut ut simul vivatur, ut aut contrahat Societatem belli causa, ut
propter commercia, aut propter saelicitatem, and bonam vivendi rationem.

By these authorities, foreign and domestic, it appears, that Cities, and
Towns, were at the first invented, to the end that men might lead a civil Life
amongst themselves, and be saved harmless against their Enemies.

6. and lastly, The number of Cities in this our Kingdom.
CAssaurus writes, that France has within the Territories thereof 104.
Cities, and he gives this reason of that his saying, because that there are so
many Sees of Archbishops and Bishops: Co. Lit. f. 109.6.
So say we, that there be within England, two Archbishopwricks and 23 other
Bishopwricks, therefore so many Cities there be, and Westminster, and my Lord
Cokes Alma Matter, being added, there are in all within England 27 Cities,

Thus much for Cities and Towns in general. I now purpose to speak more
particularly concerning the renowned City of London: in relation to which
famous Metropolis, I shall presume to offer the Reader these particulars,

1. The Origination, or Etymology of the word London. 2. Its several
Appellations. 3. The Antiquity of this City. 4. Its Fame for Trade and
Traffic. 5. The honorable Titles that have been and are given to it. 6. The
walls thereof. 7. Its River. 8. Its Bridge. 9. Its Gates. 10. Its Tower. 11.
Its Cathedral. 12. Its Division and Extent for the better Government thereof.
13. The Reason, why the Archbishop never makes any Visitation in London
Diocese. 14. Its Governors and Officers. 15. Its several Courts. 16. Its
Customs. 17. and lastly, The Liberties, Franchises, and single Rites of this
most glorious City.

SECT. I. Of the Origination or Etomology of the word London.
TOuching the name of London, from what occasion the City should be so
denominated, diverse Authors conceit diversely.

Some are of opinion, that London took the name of Ludstone; for King Lud not
only repaired this City, but also increased the same with fair buildings,
Towers, and Walls, and after his own name, called it Cair Lud, i. e. the Town
of Lud, and the strong Gate, which he erected, in the west part of the City, he
likewise for their own honor and reputation named it Ludgate.

Others say, it is so called from the word Llhwn; for seeing Caesar, and Strabo
do write, that the ancient Britains called those woods, and Groves by the names
of Cities, and Towns which they had fenced with Trees, cast down and plashed,
to stop up the passage; and seeing that such VVoods or Groves are in the
British tongue named Llhwn, they are in inclined to the opinion, that London
thence took name, as one would say, by way of excellency, the City, or a City
thick of Trees.

Again, Others are of opinion (which seems to be the most probable) that
whence London had the same, there also it took the name, even from Ships which
the Britains in their dialect call Longh; so that Londinum may seem to sound
as much as a Ship Road, or City of Ships: for the Britains term a City Dinas,
whence the the Latins have fetched their Dinum. And hence it is, that
elsewhere it is called Longidinum, and in the Funeral Song of a most ancient
British Poet, Llong Porth, that is an Harbor or Haven of Ships: And by this
very term Bononia, or Bolea in France, which Ptolomy calls Gessoriacum
Novale, in the British Glossary is named Bolung-Long. For many Cities have
drawn their names from Ships, as Naupactus, Naustathmas, Nauplia, Navalia
Augusti, etc. But of these none has better right indeed to assume unto it the
name of a Ship Road or Haven, than our London, as you shall understand at
after. See more of this business in Hollinshead, Stow, Geoffry of Monmouth, and
Cambden.

SECT. II. Of the diverse Appellations of this glorious City.
TAcitus, Ptolomy, and Antonine call it Londinium, and Longidinium; Ammianus,
Lundinum, and Augusta; Stephen in his Cities (...); our Britains, Lundayne; the
old Saxons, Londen, Lunden-ceaster, Lunden-berig; Strangers Londra, and
Londres; the Inhabitants London; Fabulous Writers Troia Nova, Tronovant, or
Trenovant, that is, New Tory; Dinas Belin, that is Belius City, and Caer Lud of
King Lud; and Caesar in his Commentaries styled it Trinobantum civitas.

SECT. III. Of the Antiquity of this renowned City.
FOr proof of the Antiquity of this City, I shall produce some known, and
approved Writers, as Herodian, Ammianus Marcellinus, Fitz Stephen, Stow, etc.

1. Herodian says thus, in the Life of Severus the Roman Emperor; Londinum
est urbs magna, and opulenta.

2. Ammianus Marcellinus, an Author above 1200 years since, calls it Vetustum
Oppidum.

3. Fitz Stephen tells us, that this City of London far exceeds Rome in
Seniority; his words are these, Haee civitas urbe Roma, secundum Chronicorum
fidem, satis antiquior est, etc.

4. Stow in his Survey of London says, that as the Romans to glorify the City
of Rome, drew the original thereof from gods, and Demy-gods, by the Trojan
Progeny: So Geoffry of Monmouth, the Welsh Historian, deduceth the foundation
of this famous City of London, for the greater glory thereof from the very same
original. For he reports, that Brute, lineally descended from the Demy-god
Aeneas, the Son of Venus, Daughter of Jupiter, about the year of the World
2855, and 1108 before the Nativity of Christ, builded this City near unto the
River now called Thames, and named it Troynovant, or Trenovantes.

SECT. IV. Of the Fame of London for Trade, and Traffic.
HIstorians do inform us, this City has been long since renowned for Trade and
Commerce: the livelihood of Merchants, and the life of the Commonwealth, Co. 2.
Inst. 28.
wherein the King and every Subject has interest; the Merchant being the good
Bailiff of the Realm to export, and vent the native commodities of the Realm,
and to import and bring in the necessary commodities for the defense, and
benefit thereof.

Cornelius Tacitus, who in the days of Nero, 1540 years since, reports it to
have been a place very famous for fresh Trade, concourse of Merchants, and
great store of Victuals, and all things necessary.

London was (says Bid) a Town of Trade and Traffic a long time since
frequented with many Nations, resorting thither by Sea and Land,

William of Malmesbury says, that London was replenished with rich Citizens,
and frequented with the Commerce of Occupiers, and Factors, coming out of all
Lands.

Speed informs us, that London was ever famous for concourse of Merchants and
of great renown for Provision of all things necessary in the time of Suetonius,
Nero's Lieutenant here. Thus much of the ancient Estimation of this City for
Trade and Commerce.

SECT. V. Of the Honorable Titles, that have been, and are given to this City.
IT is styled the Epitome, Cambden.
or Breviary of all Britain; the Seat of the British Empire: the King of
Englands Chamber, Co. 4. Inst. 24^
Camerae Regis, Reipublicae Cor, and totius Regni Epitome.

Civitas nobilissima, Stephanides. Regni firmata Columna, Stow. The most noble
and able part of the English Empire, Speed, A noble and wealthy City, William
of Malmesbury.

Pupilla Oculi Regis, Cor Regni: the Treasure of the Kingdom, Bulstrode in his
Reports. Caput Regni, and legum, Lambard.

SECT. VI. Of the Walls belonging to this renowned City.
TOuching the Walls of London there are three things worthy of your
Observation, scil.

1. The First Founder of them. Simeon of Durham, an ancient Writer, reports,
that Hellen the Mother of Constantine the Great, was the first that inwalled
this City, about the year of Christ, 306.

2. That the City was walled round about by the River of Thames, as appears by
William Fitz Stephen, who writing in the Reign of King Henry 2. and writing of
the Walls of this City, has these very words. Muro Urbis alto and magno,
duplatis Heptapylae portis inter continuante, turrito ab Aquilone per inter
capedines. Similiterque ab Austo Londonia murata, and Turrita fuit; sed fluvius
maximus piscosus Thamensis, mari influo, refluoque qui illic allabitur, maenia
illa tractu temporis alluit, labefactavit, dejecit: The Wall is high, and
great, well towred on the North side, with due distances between the Towers. On
the Southside also the City was walled, and towred, but the fishful River of
Thames with his ebbing, and flowing, has long since subverted hem.

3. The circuit of the wall on the Lands side. Stow tells us, that the circuit
of the wall of London on the Lands side, to wit, from the Tower of London in
the East, unto Aldgate is 82. perches: from Aldgate to Bishopsgate, 86.
perches: from Bishopsgate, to the postern of Criplegate 162. perches: from
Criplegate to Aldersgate, 75. perches: from Aldersgate to Newgate 66. perches:
from Newgate to Ludgate, 42. perches, in all 573. perches of Assize. From
Ludgate to the Fleet-Dike, west, about 60. perches: from Fleete-Bridge South to
the River Thames, about 70. perches; and so the total of these perches
amounts to 643. every perch consisting of 5. yards, and a half, which do
yield 3536. yardes, and a half, containing 10608. foot, which make up two
English miles, and more by 608. foot.

SECT. VII. Of the River of Thames.
TOuching the River of Thames accept the writings of Cambden', Stow, and of one
that wrote in defense of this famous City.

Cambden says, that in regard of both Elements most blessed and happy is
London, as being situate in a rich and fertile soil, abounding with plentiful
store, of all things, and on the gentle ascent and rising of an hill, hard by
the Thames side, the most mild merchant, as one would say, of all things, that
the world does yield; which, swelling at certain set hours, with the Ocean
Tides, by his safe and deep Channel, able to entertain the greatest ships that
be, daily brings in so great Riches from all parts, that it striveth at this
day with the Mart-Towns of Christendom for the second prize, and affords a
most sure, and beautiful road for shipping.

Stow says thus of Thames; Thames the most famous River of this Island,
begins a little above a village called Winchcombe in Oxford Shire, and still
increasing passes first by the University of Oxford, and so with a mavelous
quiet course to London, and thence breaks into the French Ocean by main
Tides; which twice in 24. hours space does ebb and flow, more then 60. miles
in Length to the great commodity of Travelers, by which all kind of
Merchandise be easily conveyed to London, the principal store house, and staple
of all Commodities within this Realm, so that omitting to speak of great Ships,
and other Vessels of Burden, there pertains to the Cities of London,
Westminster, and the Borough of Southwarke, above the number, as is supposed of
2000. Wherries, and other small boats, whereby 3000. poor people at the least
be set on work, and maintained.

The Anonymous Author has these words; this Realm has only three principal
Rivers, whereon a Royal City may well be situated; Trent in the North, Severne
in the South-west, and Thames in the South-east: of the which Thames both for
the straight course in length reaches furthest into the belly of the Land, and
for the breadth, and stillness of the water is most navigable up, and down the
stream: by reason whereof London standing almost in the middle of that course,
is more commodiously served with provision of necessaries, than any Town
standing upon the other two Rivers can be, and does also more easily
communicate to the rest of the Realm the commodities of her own intercourse,
and Traffic. Thus much for the honor of the River of Thames.

SECT. VIII. Of London Bridge.
LOndon Bridge was first made of Timber, and maintained partly by the proper
Lands thereof, partly by the liberality of diverse persons, and partly by
Taxations in diverse Shires, for the space of 215. years before the Bridge of
stone was builded; which Bridge of stone was 33. years in building: A work very
rare, having with the Drawbridge, 20. Arches made of squared stone of height
60. foot, and in breadth 30. foot, distant one from another 20. foot, compact,
and joined together with vaults and sellars, upon both sides be houses builded,
so that it seems rather a continual street, then a bridge; for the fortifying
whereof against the incessant assaults of the River it has Overseers, and
Officers, viz. Warders, and others.

SECT. IX. Of the Gates of this praecellent City.
LEt us now come to the Gates of this City. Cambden in his Britannia speaks
thus of them: On the Westside, says he, there be two: to wit* Lud gate
Lud-gate of King Lud, or Flud-gate, as Lelandus is of opinion, of a little
flood, running beneath it, built again of Late from the very foundation:
Newgate
and Newgate, the fairest of them all, so called of the newness thereof,
whereas before it was termed Chamber-Laugate, which also is the public Goal
or Prison. On the North-side are four, Alders-gate.
Alders-gate of the Antiquity, or as others would have it, of Aldrich a Saxon.

Criple-gate, Creeple-gate.
of a Spittle of Lame Creeples sometimes adjoining thereunto.

Moore-gate of a Moory ground hard by, now turned into a field, Moore-gate.
and pleasant walks; which gate was first built by Falconer, Lord Mayor in the
year of our Lord 1414.

Bishopsgate of a Bishop, which gate the Duch Merchants of the stilyard were
bound by Covenant both to repair, Bishops-gate.
and also to defend at all times of Danger, and extremity.

On the East side there is Ald-gate alone, Ald-gate.
so named of the oldness or Elbe-gate, as others term it, which at this
present is by the Cities charge re-edifyed.

It is thought (says he) that there stood by the Thamis, beside that on the
Bridge, two Gates more, namely, Belins-gate, Belins-gate.
a wharfe now, or a Key for the receipt of Ships, and Doure-gate, that is,
Dow-gate
the Watergate, commonly called Dow-gate.

These Gates in Latin are called portae a portando, from carrying, and lifting
the plough; and it was upon this occasion: In the building of Cities, the
founders thereof did usually consult with their Gods in their Augural
Observations; Godw. Antiq. lib. 1. sect. 1. c. 7.
after which observations, they marked out the place, where the Wall of the
City should be built, by plowing up the ground; and because they left that
space of ground unplowed, lightly lifting the plow over it, where they
appointed the gate of the City, thence a portando, from carrying, and lifting
the plough, they called the Gate Porta.

Both the Gates, and Walls of Cities were looked upon as sacred things among
the Romans; for the Civil Law Text speaks thus;

Sanctae res veluti muri, Just* 9.^. ^
and portae Civitatis, quodammodo Divini Juris sunt; and ideo nullius in bonis
sunt. Ideo autem muros sanctos dicimus, quia poena capitis constituta est in
eos, qui aliquod in muros deliquerint. Vide D. 1.8.11. Siquis muros violaverit.

SECT. X. Of the Tower of London.
FOr the Description, and use of this Tower we shall make bold with Cambden,
and Stow.

The former describes it after this manner, It is a most famous, Cambden.
and goodly Citadel, encompassed round, with thick and strong walls, full of
lofty, and stately Turrets, fenced with a broad, and deep ditch, furnished also
with an Armory, or Magazin of Warlike Munition, and other Buildings besides: so
as it resembles a big Town.

The latter says thus; This Tower is a Citadel to defend, or command the City:
a Royal place for Assemblies, and Treaties. A Prison of estate, for the most
dangerous offenders: Stow.
the only place of Capnage for all England at this time: the Armory for Warlike
provision: the Treasury of the Ornaments, and Jewels of the Crown, and general
Conserver of the most ancient Records of the King's Courts of Justice at
Westminster.

The Chief Keeper of this same Fortress is styled by the name of Constable; And
his Deputy is called Lieutenant of the Tower; and at this very time, the former
officer is the Right Honorable, the most loyal, and valiant person, James Earl
of Northampton; the latter is the Right worshipful, and most loyal person Sir
John Robinson, who has been likewise Lord Mayor of London.

SECT. XI. Of the Cathedral of London.
THere are worthy of our notice, in relation to the famous Cathedral Church of
London, these five things.

1. The Founder of this Church; Aethelbert, King of Kent, under whom Sebert
reigned in this tract of Ground, Stow
as it were his vassal and by courtesy, founded here a Church, and Consecrated
it to S. Paul, and about the year of Christ, 610. he gave thereto Lands; and so
did afterward Athelstan, Edgar, Edward: the Confessor, and others also.

2. The Magnificence of its Building; Anno 1086.
William of Malmesbury, informs us; That the beauty of St. Paul's Church is so
magnificent that it deserves, to be numbered in the Rank of excellent Edifices:
so large is that arched Vault underneath, and the Church above it of such
Capacity, that it may seem sufficient to receive any multitude of people
whatsoever.

3. The Dimensions of this Fabric, in point of Longitude, Latitude, and
Altitude.

St. Paul's Church (says Cambden out of an old writer) contains in length
690. foot: the breadth thereof is 130. foot: the height of the west arched Roof
from the ground carries 102. foot: and the new Fabrique from the ground, is
88. foot high. The stone work of the steeple from the plain ground rises in
height, 260. foot, and the Timber frame upon the same, is 274. foot high, etc.

Stow thus, the height of the Steeple was 520. foot, whereof the stone work is
260. foot, and the Spire was likewise 260. foot, the length of the whole Church
is.240. Taylers yards, which makes 720. foot: the breadth thereof is 130. foot,
and the height of the body of the Church, is 150. foot.

4. The Governors of this Church: This Church has a Bishop, a Dean, a
Praecentor, Stow.
a Chancellor, and a Treasurer, five Archdeacons, viz. of, London, of which
place, he that now is the Archdeacon, is (my ever honored Tutor) Doctor
Lamplugh, Dean of Rochester, Prebend of Worcester, and one of his Majesty's
Chaplains in ordinary. Middlesex, Essex, Colchester, and St Albons.
It has likewise 30. Prebendaries, Canons 12. Vicars Corals six, etc.

Note, Stow.
that the College of Petty Canons there, was founded by King R. II. in honor
of Queen Anne his wife, and of her Progenitors, in 17. of his reign. In the
year 1408. the Petty Canons then building their College, the Mayor, and
Commonalty of this Celebrious City, granted them their water courses, and other
easements.

5. The sad Accidents, that have befaln this famous Church at several times.

In the year 1087. this Church of St Paul was burnt with fire, and therewith
the most part of the City: which fire began at the entry of the West-gate, and
consumed the Eastgate. Mauritius, then Bishop, began therefore the foundation
of a new Church of St Paul's.

In the year 1444. the Steeple of Paul's was fired by Lightning, in the midst of
the shaft or spire, and in the year 1462. this Steeple was repaired, and the
weather Cock again erected.

In the year 1561. the fourth of June, betwixt the Hour of three, and four of
the Clock in the afternoon, the great Spire of the Steeple of S. Paul's Church,
was fired by Lightning, which brake forth (as it seemed) two, or three yards,
beneath the foot of the Cross, and from thence it brent downward the Spire to
the Battlements, stone work, and Bells so furiously, that within the space of
four hours, the same Steeple with all the Roof of the Church were consumed.
After this mischance, the Queens Majesty directed her Letters to the Lord
Mayor, willing him to take order for speedy repairing the same. And she of her
princely, and gracious disposition, for the furtherance thereof, did presently
give and deliver in gold 1000. marks, with a warrant for a thousand Loads of
Timber, to be taken out of her woods or elsewhere.

Stow.
The Citizens also gave first a great benevolence, and after that 3. fifteens to
be speedily paid. The Clergy of England likewise, within the Province of
Canterbury, granted the fourtieth part the value of their benefices, charged
with first fruits, the thirtieth part of such as were not so charged, but the
Clergy of London Diocese, granted the thirtieth part of such as paid their
fruits.

Six Citizens of London, and two Petty Canons of Paul's Church, had charge to
further and over see the work.

In the year 1650. etc. It was made a stable for Horses, and a Denn for
Thieves, and Rebels.

In the year 1666. it was burnt again to the ground together with all the City;
and there is now (this being the year 1675.) began the Foundation of a new
Church of St Paul, so that the foundation of this London Cathedral, has been
thrice laid; God Speed the work.

SECT. XII. Of the distribution of this renowed City into parts, and likewise
of its extent.
AS for the Division of this City for the better Regiment thereof, I shall
vouch three several Authors, viz. Sir Edward Coke, Fitz-Sephen, and Stow.

1. Sir Ed. Coke tells us, Co. 4. Just. 249.
that in this City there are twenty and six wards, divided for the government
of the Trenobants, or Citizens of London, amongst the 24. Aldermen of the City.

2. Fitz-Steven says, that this City, even as Rome, is divided into wards; It
has yearly Sheriffs, instead of Consuls, it has the Dignity of Senators, and
Aldermen, it has under Officers, and according to the Quality of Laws, it has
several Courts, and general, Assemblies upon appointed days.

3. Stow informs us, that this City of London is divided into Wards, or
Aldermanries, and the number of them in London, were both before, and in the
Reign of H. 3. twenty four in all, and in the year of Christ 1393. the 17. R.
2. Faringdon Ward, which was then one entire Ward, but mightily increased of
buildings without the Gates, was by Parliament appointed to be divided into
twain, and have two Aldermen, to wit, Faringdon within, and Faringdon without,
and so the number was 25.

Moreover in the year 1550. the Lord Mayor, Commonalty, and Citizens of London,
purchasing the Liberties of the Borough of Southwarke, appointed the same to be
a Ward of London, which in all arise to the number of 26. and 26. 4. E. 4.17.
Cro. 3. pant. Adams verse. Hiske.
Aldermen of London.

Note, the City of London is a County, and every Ward is an hundred in the
County, and the Parishes are as Vills or Towns. But note likewise; Co. Litt.
109. b.
that it is not necessary, that a. City be a County of it self, as Cambridge,
Ely, Westminster, etc. are Cities, but are no Counties of themselves, but are
part of the Counties, where they be.

Thus much of the Division of this Metropolis, I now proceed, to show, 5. E.
4.1.41. E. 3.26.11. E. 4.5.26. Eliz. Dyer 38. Co lib. 7. Bulwers case.
what I have found in our books of Law, touching the extent thereof.

It is said, that London extends into 2. Counties London, and Middlesex; But
sc. London cannot join with Middlesex, or with any County in Trial. 4. E. 4.17.


Part of the Tower of London is within London, but not within the Jurisdiction
of it.

The ancient Wall of London (says Coke) extends through the Tower of London,
and all that which is on the West part of the Wall, Co. 3. Inst. 136. Co. 4.
Inst. 251.
is within the City of London, viz. in the Parish of Barbing, in the ward of
the Tower of London and all that is on the East part of the Wall is in the
County of Middlesex. And this upon view, and examination was found Mich. 13.
Jac. Regis, in the case of Sr Thomas Overbury, who was poisoned in a Chamber in
the Tower, on the West part of that wall: And therefore Weston, the principal
murderer, was tried before Commissioners of Oyer, and terminer in London, and
so was Sr Gervais Elvis, Lieutenant of the Tower, as Accessory.

SECT. XIII. Of the reason, why the Archbishop of Canterbury never makes any
visitation in London Diocese.
THe reason, why the Archbishop of Canterbury never makes any visitation in
London Diocese, appears in one Gobbets Case, where it was said by Mr Justice
Jones, that he was informed by Doctor Ducke, Chancellor of London, that there
has been for a time, a composition betwixt the Bishop of London, and the
Archbishop of Canterbury, that if any suit began before the Archbishop, it
shall be always permitted by the Bishop of London; so as it is quasi a general
License, and so not sued there but with the Bishops assent, and for that Reason
the Archbishop never makes any visitation in London Diocese.

Having hither-unto handled the Antiquity, Walls, River, Bridge, Gates, the
Cathedral Church, the Division, Extent, etc. of this most glorious and renowned
City, I am now to proceed, to speak of its Magistrates, and Officers, of its
Courts, or Assemblies, its Customs, and lastly of the Franchises, Liberties,
and singularities of this noble City.

SECT. XIV. Of the Magistrates and Officers of this Precellent City.
THe Governors, and Chief Officers of this City, are these, sc. The Lord Mayor,
the Aldermen, the Recorder, the Sheriffs, the Chamberlain, the common Clerk, or
Town Clerk, the common Sergeant. The Coroner, the Escheater, and Constable. Of
these in their order.

The Lord Mayor.
A Mayor of a Town is termed among the Latin, Godw. Antiq. Lib. 3. sect. 2. c.
4, etc. 20.
Praefectus Vrbis, Praefectus annuus Urbis, Praefectus Praetorio, and Praetor,
quasi praeitor, a praecunde, vel a praeessendo, quod aliis praesit, vel quod
praeiret populo.

Pomponius says thus; In Civitate Romae duo olim fuerint Praetores, Vrbanus
and peregrinus, qui peregrinorum causas agebat, quorum hic Major unde Major
dictus est, ille Minor; Praetor Vrbanus, seu Major, and Praetor peregrinus,
sive minor. Vide more Godw. Ant. l. 3. s.c. 6.

Touching the Lord Mayor of London I shall present to the Reader these
particularities worthy of his observation, sc.

1. That the Citizens, or Burgesses of London were before, and after the
conquest, governed by Port-graves, or Port-greves, until the Reign of Rich. I.
by whose Charter, they were governed by two Bailiffs; Co. 4. Instit. 253.
and yet King R. in the first year of his Reign appointed them a Mayor, who
continued therein, until the eighth year of King John, and then King John
appointed them a Mayor. And forasmuch as sometimes the Mayor appointed by the
King was no Citizen of London, King John in the tenth year of his Reign,
granted to the Citizens Liberty, And Authority to choose de seipsis a Mayor,
etc. And so it continues unto this day; Thus far Sir Edward Coke. and to the
same effect are the words of Mr. Stow, in his survey of London; King William
the Conqueror, says he, found a Port-Reve at London, whose name was Godfrey,
and his office was no other, then the charge of a Bailiff, or Reve, as by the
self same continuing yet at Gravesend, and certain other places may well
appear: But the Normans, using their own Language, called him sometimes a
Provost, and sometimes a Bailiff; whatsoever his name and Office were, he was
Perpetuus Magistratus, given by the Prince, and chosen by the Citizens, as it
seems; for what time King Ric. I. needed money, toward his expedition in the
Holy Land, they first purchased of him, the liberty to choose yearly from
amongst themselves two Bailiffs, and King John, his successor, at the like suit
changed their Bailiffs, into a Mayor, and two Sheriffs.

Co. 3. Inst. 73,
2. That the Lord Mayor ought to be principal in all Commissions of felony etc.
Perpetrated within the City of London, by the charter of the City.

Co. 4. Inst. 250.
3. That in all Commissions, touching the water of Ley, the Lord Mayor of London
is always one.

4. H. 7. C. 15.
4. That the Lord Mayor of London for the time being, has the conservation, and
rule of the water, and River of Thames.

49. E. 3.16. a. Cro. 2. part. f. 531.
5. That his Lord-ship is perpetual Coroner, and also Escheator within the City
of London.

Bulstrods Rep. 3. part. f. 21.
6. That the Lord Mayor of London is chief Butler to the King at his Coronation:
And in 1. H. 4. this was so allowed unto him, when Fitz-Allen was Lord Steward,
who then allowed this unto him.

21. E. 4.14.
7. That if the Commonalty of the City do choose a Mayor at the Feast of St
Michael, in the absence of the ancient Mayor, it is a void Election.

Stow.
8. That there be certain Officers, appertaining to the Lord Mayors house, and
they are these following.

The Sword Bearer, the Common Hunt, the Common Crier, the Water-Bayliff,
Esquires four.

Sergeants Carvers 3. Sergeants of the Chamber 3. Sergeant of the Channel.
Yomen of the Waterside 4. under-Bayliffs. Yeomen of the Chamber two;
Meale-Weighers 3. Yeomen of the Wood-Wharfs two.

Gentlemen's men 7.
The Sword-Bearers Man Common Hunts men 2. Common Cryers man. Water-Bayliffs
men 2. The Carvers man.
Whereof nine of these have Liveries of the Lord Mayor, viz. The Sword Bearer,
and his Man, the three Carvers, and the four Yeomen of the Waterside. All the
rest have their Liveries from the Chamber of London.

9. That there are days of Mendance, the Fellow-ships do give to the Lord
Mayor at his going to Paul's, and they are in number 7. viz. 1. Alhallowen day.
Stow.
2. Christmas day. 3. St Stevens day. 4. St John's day. 5. New years day. 6.
Twelf day. 7. Candlemas day.


To conclude, as touching this grand officer; Stow in his Annalls reports;
that Henry Picard vintner, Mayor of London, in one day did sumptuously Feast
Edw. III. King of England, John King of France; the King of Cyprus; David, King
of Scots; and Edward, Prince of Wales.

2. The Aldermen.
IN relation to Aldermen three things are worthy of notice, sc.

1. The Etymology of the words (Alderman, and Senator.)

An Alderman is among the Romans, Laticlavius, Senator, and Optimas.

An Alderman from the Saxon word Ealderman, i. e. Senex, quod Senes solummodo
illum dignitatis gradum accipiant: Hence among the Latins, he is called Senator.

Gothofredus tells us, that Senatores dicti non sunt ab assentiendo, as
Hugolinus, and Bartolus suppose, but a senili aetate, or a virtute, for
heretofore, Senes apud Romanos Viri optimi appellati sunt.

Olim apud Britones (says one) temporibus Romanorum in regno isto Britanniae
vocabantur Senatores qui postea temporibus Saxonum vocabantur Aldermanas, non
propter aetatem, sed propter sapientiam, and dignitatem, cum quidam
adolescentes essent, Jurisperiti tamen and super hoc experti.

2. Their election; The Aldermen of London were changed by election every year,
until 28. E. 3. Then it was ordered, that they should not be removed, without
some special cause. Co. 4. Inst. 253.
But Rot. Parl. 17. R. 2. nu. 25. it is enacted, that the Aldermen of London
shall not from thenceforth be yearly chosen, but remain, till they be put out
for reasonable cause, notwithstanding the Ordinances of Ed. II. and Ric. III.
And so it still continues.

Yearly on the Feast of St Michael the Archangel on of these Aldermen is
elected to be Mayor, Stow.
for the year following, to be begun on the 28. of October, the other Aldermen
his brethren, are to him assistents in Counsels, Courts, etc. With what has
been said agrees the Description given by another Author, that I have read;
Aldermannus Civitatis Londinensis (says he) est unus ex Senatu Civitatis, cui
Regimen Civitatis praecipue incumbit: ex quorum numero praefectus annuus
eligitur.

3. The privilege of these Aldermen in respect of offices in the Country,
which will appear by this following case.

John Abdy, Alderman of London, having a House at.... in the County of Essex,
where it was pretended, that Constables should be elected out of the
Inhabitants in every house by presentment every year in Leet of Sir William
Hickes, Lord of the said Manor, and Leet; the said Alderman Abdy, by the name
of John Abdy Esquire was nominated in a Leet such a day, Cro. 3. part. Alderman
of London's case.
to be Constable for the year following; and because he refused, the Steward of
the Court imposed a fine upon him, and denied him any privilege, to be freed
by reason of his being Alderman of London, whereupon this being suggested; It
was moved, to have a writ out of the Kings Bench, directed to the Lord of the
said Manor, to his Steward, to discharge him, because he being an Alderman of
London, ought to be there resident, the greatest part of the year, and if
absent, is fineable; and all the Court of the Kings Bench held, that he ought
to be discharged by his privilege, and although it was said, he might execute
it by Deputy, and his personal Attendance is not requisite, by the custom of
the sad Manor; yet non allocatur; whereupon the said privilege was awarded.

3. The Recorder.
A Recorder, is he, whom the Mayor, or other Magistrate of any City, or Town
Corporate, having jurisdiction, or a Court of Record within their precincts by
the Kings grant, does associate unto him for this better direction in matters
of Justice, and proceedings according to Law.

Thus much in general of the Recorder-ship of any City, or Town, but more
particularly, we say, That the Recorder of London, is the person, whom the Lord
Mayor, and Aldermen do associate unto them for their better direction in
matters of Justice, and proceedings according to Law; and therefore he ought to
be a grave, and Learned Lawyer, well seen in the Common Law, and skillful in
the Customs of the City; and such a one indeed is that honorable and very
grave person, Sir John Howell (a member of the Royal Society of Lincolns Inn,)
who at this very time is Recorder of this most glorious City.

The Recorder of London, takes place in Councils, Stow.
and in Courts, before any man, that has not been Lord Mayor, and learnedly
delivers the Sentences of the whole Court.

By the Stat. of 23. H. 8. c. 6. the Mayors of the Staple at Westminster, and
the Recorder of the City of London, jointly together, have full authority to
take Recognizances for the payment of debts, in the absence of the Chief
Justices out of Term.

32. E. 1. Geoffry Hertilepole, Alderman, was elected to be Recorder of London,
and took his Oath, and was appointed to wear his apparel, as an Alderman.

4. The Sheriffs.
BEfore I speak in particular of the Sheriffs of London, I shall present to the
Reader several Queries, (with resolutions given unto them out of our books of
Law) touching Sheriffs in general. For the better Information of all such
Officers through the whole Kingdom.

Quaere 1. Whence the word Sheriffs is derived?

Resp. Sheriff is a word compounded of two Saxon words, viz. Shire, and Reve,
Shire, Satrapia, or Comitatus, comes out of the Saxon verb Shiram, i. e.
partivi, for that the whole Realm is parted, and divided into Shires. Co. Litt.
168. a.
And Reve is praefectus, or praepositus; so as Shireve is the Rive of the
Shire, Praefectus Satrapiae, Provinciae, or Comitatus; And he is called
Praefectus, because he is the chief officer to the King within the Shire; for
the words of his patent be Commissimus vobis custodiam Comitatus nostri, etc.

Quere 2. How a Sheriff was, Quere 2.
and is to be elected?

Resp. It is to be known, that the office of a Coroner ever was, and yet is
eligible in full County by the Freeholders, by the Kings writ, de Coronatore
eligendo: and the reason thereof was, for that both the King, and the County
had a great interest, Co. 2. Inst. fol. 174. and 175. and 558. and 559.
and benefit in the due execution of his office; and therefore the Common Law
gave the Freeholders of the County, to be electers of him. And for the same
reason of ancient time the Sheriff called Vice-Comes, who had Custodiam
Comitatus, was also eligible: for, first the Earl himself of the County had the
office of the Sheriff of the County, and when he gave it over, the Vice-Comes
(as the word signifies) came instead of the Earl, and was eligible by the
Freeholders of the County; but this way by election is altered by diverse Acts
of Parliament, 14. E. 3 c. 7.23. H. 6. c. 8.12. R. 2 c. 3.
viz the Act. of 9. E. 2. Lincoln de Vice-Comitibus 14. E. 3.12. R. 2. and 23.
H. 6. vide the Statuts themselves.

Quaere 3. Whether the Day of the Billing of Sheriffs, may be deferred from the
usual day?

Resp. Upon the sixth of November the Term of Michael 16. Car. Regis, the Lord
Keeper of the great Seal, the Lord Treasurer, the Lord privy Seal, Earl of
Arundel, Earl Marshall, the Earl of Pembrok, Lord Chamberlin, Cro. 3. part.
Term Mich. 16. Car. Regis in Banco Regis
the Lord Cotington Chancellor of the Exchequer, were assembled in the
Exchequer Chamber, to nominate three persons, of every County throughout
England, to be presented unto the King, that he might prick one of them, to be
Sheriff of every County, which is usually done according to the Statute upon
the 3. of Nov, being Crastino animarum; But because it was the first day of
Parliament, and the Lords were to attend the King, It was resolved by the advice, and resolution of the Major part of the Justices, with whom Conference
was had in this cause, that it might be well put off to another day. And the
Lord Keeper notwithstanding the Statute deferred it until this day.

Quaere 4. In what the office of the Sheriff does consist?

Resp. It belongs to the Sheriff, to serve the Kings writs of process, be
they summons, or Attachments, to compel men to answer, to the Law, and all
writs of execution of the Law, according to judgments of superior Courts, for
taking men's goods, Lands or bodies, as the cause requires; and by the Order of
the Common Law, and Statutes of the Realm, he may for the better execution of
his Majesty's writs, and process of Law, after resistance, take posse Comitutus.

He is to return indifferent Juries, for the Trial of men's Lives, Liberties,
Lands, and Goods.

He ought to see, that the public Peace be kept, which is the Life of the
Commonwealth; and therefore he is said to be Principalis Conservator Pacis,
within the County.

It is his duty, to gather the public moneys, and profits of the Prince in
his County, to collect, and bring into the Exchequer, all fines imposed, even
by distreining.

He is to see condemned persons executed. To conclude, he is to determine, and
examine certain smaller pleas Civil and Criminal; the former are decided in the
County Court; the latter in his Court, called the Town.

Quaere 5. If one be in the Sheriffs Custody, by process of Law, and then
another writ is delivered to apprehend the body of the party, that is already
in Custody, whether he be in Custody by virtue of the second writ, without an
Actual Arrest?

Resp. It was adjudged, Co. Lib. 5. Frosts case f. 89.
that when a man is in Custody of the Sheriff, by process of the Law, and
afterward another writ is delivered unto him, to apprehend the body of him, who
is already in Custody; Immediately he is in Custody, by force of the second
writ, by judgment of Law, although he make no actual Arrest of him, for to what
purpose should the Sheriff arrest the party, that is already in Custody; and
Lex non praecipit inutilia; quia inutilis Labor est stultus.

Quaere 6. Whether a Sheriff, Bailiff, etc. may arrest one without showing the
warrant?

Resp. It was adjudged, Co. Lib. 9. Mackaleyes Case Lib. 6. Count of Rutlands
Case. Cro. 2. part. Hodges verse. Marks.
that an Arrest without showing the warrant, and without telling at whose suit,
until the party demand, is Legal, and well enough, and that he need not show
the warrant, until the other obey, and demand it.

Quaere 7. Whether an Arrest made in the night be good.

Resp. It is said, that an Arrest made in the night time is valid in Law. Cro.
2. part. Mackaleyes Case Co. lib. 9. Mackaleyes Case.

Quaere 8. Whether Arrests be good on the Sunday.

Resp. An Arrest upon the Sunday, and other ministerial Acts are good, but not
judicial Acts; for a judicial writ bearing Test upon a Sunday, or a
Proclamation of affine upon a Sunday are ill, Cro. 2. part. Wait verse. Hundred
of Stoke 496.
and erroneous; for they shall be intended, as fictions, because it is well
known the Court do not sit that day, but an original writ, or patent, bearing
Test upon the Sunday, are good enough, for the Chancellor may seal writs, or
patents upon any day.

An Arrest made by a Sheriff, or his Officer, Cro. 2. part. Mackaleyes case.
is valid, although it be done upon a Sunday.

Quaere 9. In what Cases a Sheriff may break open houses to execute process?

Resp. As to this Quaere take these particularities, sc.

1. When any house is recovered by any Real Action, or by Ejectione firmae, the
Sheriff may break the house, and deliver seizin or possession.

2. In all cases, where the King is party, the Sheriff may break the house (if
the doors be shut) and make execution of his writ, but before he break the
house, he ought to signify the cause of his coming, and make request to have
the Doors opened: but if the Officer break the house, when he might have the
Doors opened, he is a Trespasser; for felony, or suspicion of felony the
officer may break open the door.

3. The Sheriff cannot break open an house upon private process; neither can he
upon private process rush into a house, which by craft, as knocking at the door
etc. he procured to be opened unto him.

4. In all Cases where the door is open, the Sheriff may enter, and make
execution of his writ, either for body, or goods, at the suit of a subject.

5. The Sheriff at the suit of Common person (upon request made, and denial
thereof) ought not to break open the doors, or the house, to execute any
process at the suit of any subject; or to execute a Fierifac. Being a writ of
execution, but he is a Trespasser, yet if he do execution in the house it is
good in Law, being done; according to the rule of Law; sunt multa, quae
impediunt promovendum, quae non dejiciunt jam prometum.

6. The house of a man is not a Castle, or defense for any other person, but
for the owner, his family and goods, and not to protect another, that flies
into the same, or the goods of another, for then the Sheriff upon Request, and
denial, may break the house, and do execution.

7. Although, a Sheriff cannot break open an house, being to take execution by
fieri facias, yet when the Door is open, that he enters, and be disturbed in
his execution by the parties, who are within the house, he may break the house,
to rescue his Bailiffs, and to take execution. Vide all these particulars Cro.
1. part. Seyman verse. Gresham. Co. lib. 5. Semaines case. Hobarts Reports,
Water house verse. Salt-marsh, Park and Percival verse. Evans. Cro. 1. part.
Smith ver. Smith. Yelvertons Reports Seyman verse. Gresham. Cro. 2. part.
Aenonymus f. 555. pl. 19.18. E. 4.4.13. E. 4.9.

Quaere 10. Whether a writ, or Commission may be awarded to a Sheriff, to
enquire of the Death of a man?

Res. It was found before the Coroner, super visam corporis, Cro. ^. part,
Harlestons Case
that J. Harleston fell into a Marlepit fortuito, and so died. Afterward by
the procurement of the Queens Almoner a Commission issued out of the Crown
Office ( Quaesi in nature of a Melius Inquirendum) and was awarded to the
Sheriff to enquire of his death, and of what goods, and Chattells, he was
possessed at the time of his death. And it was found before the Sheriff, that
he was felo de se, etc. It was moved, that the writ, or Commission was not well
awarded, but utterly void; for the Stat. of 28. E. 3. c. 9. is expressly, that
no such Commission shall be granted, and that the Sheriff shall not take
Indictment by writ, or Commission. But Ive, the Clerk said, that they have
diverse Presidents, since that Statute, of such Commissions awarded.

Quaere 11. Whether Rescous be a good Return upon mean process?

Resp. It has been adjudged, that in an Arrest upon mean process, and not upon
execution, the Sheriffs are not bound to take the poss^ Comitatas with them,
Cro 2. part. May v. Proby, and Lum Sheriffs of Middlesex.
and therefore upon such process, it is a good return, the Rescous, and that
afterward he was not found within their Bayliwick; and process shall,
thereupon be awarded against the Rescussours: But if the Prisoner had been in
the Goal, the Sheriff ought at his peril to keep him, and a Rescous from thence
is no excuse for him: And upon process of execution, as upon a Capias ad
satisfac. or upon a Capias ut legatum, after judgment, such a Return is no
excuse for him, either against the King, or the party; for he at his peril
ought to keep his prisoners taken in execution; for there the process is
determined* which being the Life of the Law, and being once executed, the party
may not have any new process, and therefore he shall answer to the party for
the escape. And it is at the Sheriffs peril, to see that his prison be strong
enough, to keep his prisoner, when he is once in execution. And being a
mischief to one it ought rather to fall on the Sheriff than on the party: But
in the other cas^ there is not any great mischief, for the party has only lost
his process, which he may renew; and he may also have an Action upon the Case
against the Rescussours.

Quaere 12. Whether an Averrement may be admitted against a Sheriffs Return?

Resp. There is a difference between Acts ministerial, and Acts judicial, for
against Acts, which a Sheriff does as ministerial, an Averrement may be, but
not against that, which is done judicially, and by one as judge. Cro. ^. part.
Arundel ver. Arundel.
vide 3. H. 7.15. a. 7. H. 7.4. ab. 10. H. 7.28. a. Yelvertons Reports Arundel
ver. Arundel.

Quaere 13. Whether a prisoner for debt, making an escape, can be taken again
upon fresh suit?

Resp. Although a prisoner in execution escape out of view, yet if fresh suite
be made, and he be taken again in recenti in secutione, he shall be in
execution, otherwise at the turning of a corner, or by entering into an House,
or other Means, the prisoner may be out of view, and although he fly into
another County, Co. lib. 31 Ridgewayes. Case.
yet because the escape was of his own wrong, whereof he may not take
advantage, the Sheriff upon fresh suite may take him there, and he shall be in
execution.

Quaere 14. Whether a Sheriff upon a voluntary escape, can retake his prisoner?

Cro. 2. part. Whiting ver. Reynel. Co. lib. 3. ^ogt^ns Case. lib 3. Ridgewayes
Case.
Resp. If the Sheriff, or Bailiff voluntarily lets a Prisoner at large, he
cannot retake him, as if a Sheriff assent, that one, who is in execution, and
under their Custody, may go out of the Goal for a time, and then to return, yet
although he return at the time, it is an escape.

Quaere 15. Whether there may be an escape, although the party always continues
in prison?

Resp. If a man be in prison upon two executions, at the suit of two several
persons; Cro. 1. part. Westly ve Skinner Co. lib. 3. Westbreys Case.
and then the old Sheriff delivers over this prison to the new Sheriff by
indenture, according to the usual course, and in the said indenture makes no
mention of one of the said executions, this omission shall be said an escape in
Law instantly, for which the old Sheriff shall answer, although the execution
was matter of Record, whereof the new Sheriff might have taken notice, so that
you see, a man may be said to escape, notwithstanding he always continues in
prison.

Quaere 16. Whether the escape of one in execution be cause of discharge of the
other Debtour?

Resp. Where two are bound jointly, and severally in a bond, and the obligee
recovers against one of the obligors, Cro. 3. f. 75. White Acres ver. Hamkinson.
and has him in execution upon a Capias ad satisfac. and then he escapes with
the Sheriffs consent, in this case, although he escaped by the voluntary
permission of the Sheriff, yet that shall not deprive the obligee of his remedy
against the other obligor, for an execution against one is no bar, but that the
obligee may sue the other obligor: Execution without satisfaction being in Law,
not any bar, vide Co. lib. 5. Blomfields case. Cro. 1. part. Blofields case.
Cro. 2. part. Pendavis ver. Kenshem 532.

Qaerre 17. Whether the sale of goods upon a fieri facias by a Sheriff, Cro. 2.
part. Air ver. Aden Yelverton Reports Air ver. Aden.
after he is discharged of his Office, be good?

Resp. A Sheriff upon a fieri facias seized goods in his hands to the value of
the debt, and paid part of the debt; and the goods not being sold, nor the writ
returned, the Sheriff was discharged of his Office, and afterward sold the
Residue of the goods, without any writ of Venditioni exponas; and whether this
sale were good, or not, was the Question; and resolved, that it was good, for
the writ of fieri facias gave authority to him, to sell, without any other
writ; and the sale by him after is good, although he were discharged of his
office.

Quaere 18. A Term sold by a Sheriff and after the Judgment reversed, whether
the party shall be restored to the Term, or the money.

Co. lib. 8. Mannings Case: Co. 1. Part. Air ver Woodfine.
R. If a Sheriff sell a Term upon a fieri fac. and Judgment is reversed, the
sale shall stand, and the party shall be restored only to the money, and not to
the Term.

Quaere 19. Whether the Sheriff can be restrained by the King in any part of
his Office?

Co. lib. 4. Mittons Case.
R. Though the King may determine the office ad been placitum, yet he cannot
determine this in part, as for one Town, or Hundred, nor abridge him of any
Incident to his Office, for the Office is entire, and ought to continue so,
without any fraction, ordiminution, without it be by Parliament.

Quaere 20. Whether the Sheriff can abridge any part of his Under Sheriffs
power, in executing of process?

R. If a Sheriff will make an Under Sheriff provided, Hobarts Reports Norton
ver. sum f. 13.
that he shall not serve executions above 20. pound without his special
warrant, this proviso will be void, for though he may choose, not to make an
Under Sheriff at all, or may make him at his will, and so remove him wholly,
yet he cannot leave an Under Sheriff, and yet abridge his power, no more then
the King may in case of the Sheriff himself.

Quaere 21. Whether the Sheriffs Office be determined by the descent of a
Barony?

Resp. Sir Lewis Mordant, being Sheriff of the Counties of Bucks, and Bedford,
Cro. 1. part. Sir Lewis Mordants Case 12. and 13.
the Lord Mordant his father dyed, tempore parliamenti, it was held by all the
Justices, the Attorney, and the Solicitor of the Queen, that his office by this
matter, is not determined, although he be now a Baron of the Parliament, and
that he yet remains Sheriff, ad voluntatem Reginae.

Hitherto touching Sheriffs in general throughout the Realm, I proceed to speak
more minutely of the Sheriffs of London; And there are these things concerning
them, that deserve our special notice, scil. Their Antiquity, Election, Tenure
of their office, Fee-farme paid by them, their Officers, Direction of writs to
them; and their return of writs.

1. Their Antiquity.
tempore H. 1.
IN the Book of the Abbey of Ramsey, to a Conveyance made in the Court of the
Hustings of London, of a certain house in Walbrock within the City, between
Wilcnothun de Wallroc and Renaldum Abbatem de Ramsey, the witnesses were
(amongst others) Willielmus de Einsford Vice-Comes de London, C. 4. Inst. 248.
and Johannes sub Vice-Comes ejus, and Gervasius Clericus ejus.

More might be said of their Antiquity, but it is clear, that so long as this
City has been a County of it self, so long, there has been Sheriffs, for it
cannot be a County without Sheriffs.

2. Their Election.
The Sheriffs of London, of old time were chosen out of the Commonalty,
Commoners, Stow.
and oftentimes never came to be Aldermen, as many Aldermen were never
Sheriffs, and yet advanced to be Mayor, but of late (by occasion) the Sheriffs
have been made Aldermen, before or presently after their Election.

Nicholas Faringdon (says Stow) was never Sheriff yet four times Mayor of this
City, and so of other, which reproves a Byword, such a one will be Mayor, or
he be sheriff, etc.

3 The Tenure of their Office.
The Lord Mayor, Co. 2. Inst. 32.11. Eliz. Dyer f. 278.
and Citizens of London have the shrievalty of London ^n see, and the Sheriffs
of London are Guardians, under them, and remo^eable from year to year.

4. The Fee-Farme paid by the Citizens.
King John granted the Sheriffwicke of London, Stow.
and Middlesex to the Citizens of London, as King H. I. before had done, for
the sum of 300. pound yearly, which also is yet paid by the City into the
Exchequer, until this day.

5. Their Officers.
The Sheriffs of London, in the year 1471. Stow.
were appointed each of them to have sixteen Sergeants, every Sergeant, have
his Yeoman. And 6. Clerks viz. A secondary, a Clerk of the Papers, and four
other Clerks, besides the Under-sheriffs Clerks, their Stewards, Butlers,
Porters, and other in Household many.

6. The Direction of Writs to them.
Sciendum est (says the book entitled Not. Brevium) quod quodlibet breve, quod
tangit liberum tenementum in London debet dirigi Majori, and vic. London. Sed
omnia alia brevia, quae sunt ad Communem legem in eadem Civitate debent dirigi
vic. tantummodo. Every writ, that touches Freehold in London, ought to be
directed to the Lord Mayor, and Sheriffs of London, but all other writs, which
are ad Communem legem, in the same City, ought to be directed to the Sheriffs
only.

One atteinted of Felony at Newgate, for Felony committed in Middlesex; Moors
Reports 178. an. 317.
the Sheriff of London cannot deteine him in execution upon process, unless the
direction be to the Sheriff of Middlesex.

7. Their Return of Writs.
In London every of the Sheriffs may arrest a man; 30. H. 6.43:
yet the Return shall be made in the name of both the Sheriffs.

The Court of Common pleas, was of opinion that if one Sheriff of London make
his return without his fellow, Hobarts Rep. Lamb. verse. Wiseman f. 70.
that this would not be helped, by the Statute of Je^ffayles, as being no
return at all; or a return without the Sheriffs name subscribed, because the
Court knows that one Sheriff there, is two persons.

Debt. The process upon the Original were directed to the two Sheriffs of
London, Cro. 1. part. Allen v. Sir Rob. Salisbury.
the writ was returned by two, the one of them was Sheriff, the other, not: And
it was prayed, that it might be amended; for it is apparent to the Court, that
it was the default of the Clerk, in writing the names, and the return by one
Sheriff alone had been good, and the Addition of a strange name thereto shall
not make it ill, and afterward by advice of all the Justices, it was amended.
Hitherto of the Sheriffs of London.

5. Of the Chamberlain of London.
A Chamberlain of a City is termed (among the Latins) Quaestor Aerarius,
Aerarii praefectus, Quaestor Urbanus, and Camerarius.

The word ( Camerarius) expresses the function of this officer, Chamberlain of
a City, for Camerarius, dicitur a Camara, Graec. (...), i. e. fornix, sive
testudo, a vaulted Roof, or Arch, quia praecipue in Camaris, and fornicibus,
Thesaurus Civitatis reservari antiquitus solebat. It seems (says one) to be
borrowed of the Fendists, Zazins de Fendii part. 4. nu. 7.
who define the word thus, Camara est Locus, in quem Thesaurus recolligitur,
vel Conclave, in quo pecunia reservatur. Another says, Peregrians de jure
fisci lib. 6. tit. 3.
that Camerarius, vel Camerlingus, quem Quaestorem Antiqui appellarunt, in
rebus fisci primum locum tenet, quia Thesaurarius, and Custos est publicae
pecuntae. Having given you the origination, and description of the Chamberlain
of a City, or Town incorporated, I shall speak a little of the Chamberlain of
this most renowned City.

The Chamberlain is the person, that has the conservation and keeping of all
the Lands, moneys, and goods of such Orphans as happen within the City. And to
that end he is deemed in the Law a sole corporation, to him, and his successors
for Orphans, and therefore a Bond, or Recognizance made to him, and his
successors shall go to his successor.

This office of the Chamberlain of London seems not unlike to a public
Treasurer, which collecteth the Customs, money, yearly revenues, and all other
payments belonging to the Corporation of this City.

In a word; he receives all complaints made by Masters against their servants,
and vice versa, and affords Justice, and Remedy to each of them.

6. Of the Town Clerk.
THe Town Clerk (in Greek (...)) is he who (for his Ability, and learning) is
entertained by the Lord Mayor, Aldermen and Commonalty of the City, to keep the
Books, Rolls, or other Records, wherein are registered the acts and proceedings
of the City: He may be termed the Register, Preignotary, or Actuary of the
famous City of London.

7. Of the Common Sergeant.
THe Office of the Common Sergeant is (as I am informed) to attend the Lord
Mayor and Court of Aldermen, on Court days.

To be a Council with them on all occasions within or without the precincts of
this City.

To take care of Orphans Estates, either by taking the account of them, or to
sign their Inventories, before the passing of them by the Lord Mayor, and Court
of Aldermen; Also this same Officer is to let, set, or otherwise dispose of
their Estates, as he shall deem to be most beneficial to the interests of
Orphans.

8. Of the Deputy Coroner.
THe Lord Mayor being (according to the Custom of the City) perpetual Coroner,
does always constitute a Deputy, that acts for his Lordship, even as Coroners
do in the several Counties throughout England.

Now touching Coroner are worthy of Observation these particulars following, sc.

1. The Etymology of the word Coroner.
Coroner in Latin Coronator, is derived a Corona, Co. 4. Inst. 271. Co. 2.
Inst. 31.
so called, because he deals principally with pleas of the Crown, or matters
appertaining to the Imperial Crown of England.

2. His Antiquity.
As for his Antiquity we shall find* that Coroners were in the days o^ King
Alfred, Mirror c. 1. nu. 3.
as appears in the Book, Entitled The Mirror, where it is said, Auxi ordains
faer Coronours en chesum County, etc.

3. His Election.
He is eligible by the Free holders of the County, Co. 4. Inst. 27^ Co. 2.
Inst. 174, 558, 559.
and so continues to this day, as of ancient time the Sheriff, and Conservators
of the Peace were, because the People had an Interest and safety in the due
execution of their Offices, and so long as they were eligible, they continued,
notwithstanding the Demise of the King, as the Coroner does at this day.

4. His Dignity.
Of ancient time this Office was of great estimation, Co. 4. Inst. 271.
for none could have ^it, under the degree of a Knight.

5. His Qualifications.
It is requisite, that a Coroner should have five Qualities. Co. 2. Inst. fol.
174.


1. That he should be Probus homo. 2. Lawful, i. e. Legalis homo. 3. Of
sufficient Understanding, and Knowledge. 4. Of good ability and power to
execute his Office, according to his knowledge. 5. And lastly, Of Diligence and
Intendance for the due Execution of the said Office.
6. His Fees.
3. E 3. Coron 372.
A Coroner received a penny of every Visue, when they come before the Judges in
Air, as belonging to his Office.

By the Statute of 3 H. 7. c. 1. he has given him a Fee of thirteen and four
pence, upon the view of the Body of the goods of the murderer, etc.

1. H. 8. C. 7.
But if the Coroner sit upon the view of any slain by misadventure, he shall
have nothing.

7. His Jurisdiction and Authority.
As the Sheriff in his Tourn may inquire of all Felonies by the Common Law,
saving the death of Man, so the Coroner can enquire of no Felony, but of the
death of Man, and that super visum Corporis.

He has authority solely to take an Indictment, super visum corporis, Co. 2.
Inst. f. 32. Co. 4. Inst. f. 271.
and to take an Appeal, and to enter the Appeal, and the County. But he can
proceed no further either upon the Indictment or Appeal, but to deliver them
over to the Justices.

He has power to bind over Witnesses to the next Goal delivery in that County,
whereof he is a Coroner.

Besides his judicial Place he has also Authority ministerial, as a Sheriff
has, viz: when there is just exception taken to the Sheriff, Co. 4. Inst. f.
271.
judicial process shall be awarded to the Coroners, for the Execution of the
Kings Writs, in which Case he is Locum tenens Vice-comitis, and in the same
special Case the Kings Original Writ shall immediately be directed unto him.

But the Quaere may be, if one person be Coroner both of the Kings House and
County, whether an Indictment taken before him alone, may be good and valid in
our Law?

Its answered, that an Inquisition taken before B. Coroner of the Palace Royal,
Co. 3. Inst. 134:
and of one of the Coroners of Middlesex is well taken, and within the Statute
of Articuli super Chartas c. 3. Co lib 4 Wrote and wigges Case.
Though the Statute requires two persons; for the intent of the Act is
performed, and the mischief recited avoided; for though the Court removes, yet
he may proceed as Coroner of the County. And the Rule of Law is, Quando duo
Jura concurrunt in una persona, aequum est, ac si essent in diversis. Thus much
of the Coroner, as to his Antiquity, Election, Dignity, Fees, and Jurisdiction.

9. Of the Deputy Escheator.
THe Lord Mayor, as he is Coroner, so likewise is he Escheator, within the
famous City of London, and appoints one always as a Deputy Escheator, who is
to act within the verge of this City, as Escheators do in the several Counties
of England.

These Escheators are to look to all Escheates and other Casualties belonging
to the Crown, and certifie^ them into the Exchequer.

Note, In ancient time there were but two Escheators in England, the one on
this side of Trent, and the other beyond Trent, at which time they had
Sub-Escheators. But in the Reign of King Edward 2. the Offices were divided,
and several Escheators made in every County for life, etc. and so continued,
till the Reign of Edward 3. And afterward by the Statute of 14. E. 3. it is
enacted, that there should be as many Escheators assigned, as when King Edward
3. came to the Crown, Vide 14 E 3. c. 8.1 H. 8 c. 8.3 H. 8 c. 2.
and that was one in every County, and that no Escheator shall tarry in his
Office above a year. And by another Statute to be in Office, but once in three
years, the Lord Treasurer names him.

10. Of the Constables within this Renowned City.
COnstable, or Cunstable, is compounded of two Saxon words, C 4. Inst. f 123.
Cunning, per contractionem King, and Stable, i. e. Columen, quasi columen
Regis, anciently written Cuningstable.

This Office is ancient here in England, and mentioned by Bracton, seeming to
answer him, that was called amongst the Romans Tribunus celerum, and afterward
Magister Equitum.

This word Constable is diversely used in our Common Law: And first, The
Constable of England, who is also called Marshal; of whose Authority and
Dignity a man may find many arguments and signs, as well in the Statutes, as in
the Chronicles of this Realm, his sway consists in the care of the common
Peace of the Land, in deeds of Arms, and matters of war.

Out of this Magistracy were drawn these lower Constables, which we call
Constables of Hundreds, and Liberties, and first ordained by the Statute of
Winton 13. Ed. 1. which appoints for the conservation of the Peace, and view of
Armor, two Constables in every Hundred, and Liberty, and these be at this time
called High Constables, because the increase of People and Offenses, has again
undet those made others in every Town, called Petty Constables, who are of the
like nature, but of inferior Authority to the other.

Besides these, there are Officers of particular places called by this name, as
Constable of the Tower, Constable of the Exchecquer, Constable of Dover Castle,
Constable of Windsor; and the now Constable of the famous Castle of Windsor is
his Highness Prince Rupert, Duke of Cumberland, a Person most renowned, not
only for his brave conduct and fortitude in martial affairs both by Sea and
Land; but also for his great zeal and Love, shown abundantly in defense of the
Protestant Religion.

For the derivation, and diverse acceptance of the word (Constable) I proceed
to show what Authority pety Constables have in Cities, Towns, and Villages,
according to our Law.

If any be threatened, 4. E. 3. Bar. 102.
upon complaint to the Constable, he may enforce the Party to put in a Surety,
and if he do not commit him to Prison, till he has found a Surety.

A Constable may arrest one which makes an Assault, 21 H, 4.21.5 H. 7.6.
though it be of himself.

A Constable can take an Obligation to keep the Peace, Kitchen.
but he cannot take a Recognizance.

12 E 4.35.
The Constable may arrest one, that makes an affray, and carry him to the next
Jail, till he find surety of the Peace, but not imprison him in his house, or
put him in the Stocks, unless it be in the night, that he cannot carry him to
the Jayl, for any other reasonable cause.

The Constable may search for suspicious persons, and may arrest night walkers.
2 E. 4.9.


The Constable may search suspicious Bawdy Houses, where women of ill same are,
and may arrest suspected persons, 3 H 7.10.13. H. 7.10.
which walk in the night and sleep in the day, or keep suspicious Company; and
if he be not of power, he may have aid of his neighbors by the Law.

38. H. 8. Tit. False Judgment. 6.
It is said, That a Constable cannot arrest for a Fray after it is done, without
a warrant, but before it be done, or whilst it is doing, he may.

3 H. 7.1.
A Constable may take the power of the County, where there is a Fray, and
especially to take Felons.

If a man be stricken, and in peril of death, the Constable ought to arrest the
Offender, and to keep him in Prison, till it be known, Kitchen.
if he will live or die, or till he have found sureties to appear before the
Justices at the Goal delivery:

If the Constable do not part Affrayors for the preservation of the Kings
peace, and apprehend them, being within his view, or do not his utmost
endeavor, to part and apprehend them, he may be fined, and imprisoned for his
neglect thereof, for he may command others to assist him; and therefore the
Rule in him, Idem est facere, and nolle prohibere cum possis, and qui non
prohibet, cum prohibere possit, in Culpa est.

And if any be commanded to assist him therein, and refuse or neglect the same,
it is a contempt in them to be punished by fine and imprisonment.

I shall conclude this Learning touching our Constables with these Queries.

1. Quaere. Whether a Constable may bring an Offender to what Justice he
pleases?

Resp. It is adjudged that the Constable having a Warant to bring one Coram
aliquo Justitiar. etc. it is at the Election of the Officer, to bring the Party
so attached, Co. lib. 5. f 53. Fosters Case,
to what Justice he will; for it is greater Reason, to give the election to the
Officer, who (in presumption of Law) is a person indifferent, and sworn to
execute his Office duly, then to the Delinquent, and upon the refusal to find
surety, the Constable may commit the Delinquent without a new Warrant.

2. Quaere whether the Constable of a Town be bound to make Huy and Cry?

Resp. Huy and Cry is, when any Felony is committed, or any Person grievously
and dangerously wounded, or any person assaulted, and offered to be robbed, Co.
3. Inst. 116.
either in the day or night; the Party grieved, or any other may resort to the
Constable of the Town, and acquaint him with the causes, describing the party,
and telling which way the Offender is gone, and require him to raise Huy and
Cry, and the Duty of the Constable is to raise the power of the Town, as well
in the night as in the day, for the prosecution of the Offender, and if he be
not found there to give the next Constable warning, and he the next, until the
Offender be found.

3. Quaere, What is the punishment of them, that shall not levy or pursue an
Huy and Cry?

Resp. They, Co. 3. Inst. 117.
which levy not Huy and Cry, or pursue not upon Huy and Cry shall be punished
by Fine, and Imprisonment.

Note, it is an Article of the Leet, Stat. de 1^. E. 2
to enquire of Huy and Cries levied, and not pursued.

The City of London has been taken into the Kings hands, for not levying a Huy
and Cry, as appears by this Record, Scil.

Mandatum est Gulielmo de Haverhull Thesaurario Regis, Co. 3: Inst. f. 118.
quod Civitatem London capiat in manum Regis, eo quod Cives ejusdem Civitatis
non levaverunt, Hutesiam and Clamorem pro morte Magistri Guidonis de Arretio
and aliorum interfectorum secundum Legem and Consuetudinem Regni. Test Rege
apud Wendestock, 22 die Augus^i.

4. Quaere Whether an Arrest be lawful, where the cause of the Huy and Cry be
feigned?

Resp. Where Huy and Cry is levied upon any person, the arrest of such person
is lawful, Co. 3 Inst. 118.
although the cause of the Huy and Cry be feigned; and if the Case be feigned,
he that levy the same shall also be arrested, and shall be fined, and
imprisoned. But common fame and voice is not sufficient to arrest a man in Case
of Felony unless a Felony be done indeed. vide 5. H. 7.5. a. 21. H. 7.28. a.
Cro. 2. part Cox verse. Wirral. Bridgemans Reports Weal ver. Wills. Hobarts
Reports Cuddington ver. Wilkings, Searls ver. Styles, Poland ver. Mason.
Hitherto of the Governors and Officers, appertaining to the most glorious City
of London.

SECT. XV. Of the several Courts within the City of London.
THe principal Courts that appertain to this City are four, viz. The Court of
the Hustings, the Court of the Sheriffs, the Court of Equity, and the Court of
the Lord Mayor and Aldermen. Of these in their order.

1. Of the Court of the Hustings.
TOuching this Court, are worthy of notice these particularities, scil. The
Etymology of the word Hustings, its Antiquity, its pre-eminence, and its
Jurisdiction.

It is called Hustingum, or Hustings of two Saxon words, viz. Hus, 1. The
Etymology.
i. e. Domus, and Things, i. e. Placitum; so as Hustingum is as much as to say,
Co 2. Inst. 312. Co. 4. Inst. f. 47
as the Bench, or Court of Pleas, Domus placitorum, or Forum Contentiosum,
where Causes are pleaded.

Other Cities and Towns also have had a Court of the same name, as Winchester,
Lincoln, York, and Sheppey, and others, Fleta lib. 2. c. 55.
where the Barons and Citizens have a Record of such things as are determinable
before them.

For the Antiquity of this Court of Hustings amongst the Laws of Saint Edward,
you may read these words, 2 The Antiquity of this City.
scil.

Debet enim in London, quae caput est Regni, and Legum, semper Curiae Domini
Regis singulis septimanis die Lunae Hustingis sedere, and teneri, etc.

3. Its pre-eminence.
The Court of Hustings is the highest Court, and of greatest Celebrity within
the City of London, and its holden before the Lord Mayor, and Sheriffs. Co. 2.
Inst. 322. Co. 4. Inst. f, 247.

4 Its Jurisdiction.
As touching the Jurisdiction, Power, and Authority of this Court, are worthy of
our Observation these Particulars, Scil.

16 H. 7.12.11 H. 7.10. a 6 H. 7.15.
1. That there be two Hustings in London, one is de communibus placitis; The
other is de placito Terrae; And therefore upon return of Writs, to mention a
Recovery at the Court of Hustings in London (where there are two kinds) and it
is not said, at which of the Hustings, it is not good.

2. The manner of proceedings upon a Foreign Voucher;

It is provided by a Statute made in 9 E. 1. That if one be impleaded in the
City of London, 6 E. 1. c. 12.
do vouch a Forreigner to warranty, the Mayor and Bayliffes shall adjourn the
Parties before the Justices of the Common Bank at certain day, and shall send
their Record thither. And the Justices shall cause the warrantor to be summoned
before them, and shall try the warranty. And the Mayor, and Bailiffs in the
mean time shall surcease in the matter, that depends before them by a writ,
until such time as the warranty by determined, before the Justices of the
Bench. And when the matter shall be determined, Commandment shall be given to
the Vouchee to depart into the City, and to swer the first plea. And the
Demandant at his suit, shall have a writ from the Justices of the Bench, unto
the Mayor, and Bailiffs, that in case the Tenant have last his Land, they shall
cause it to be extended, and return the same extent unto the Bench at a certain
day. And after it shall be commanded to the Sheriff of the Shire, where the
warranty was summoned, that he shall cause the Tenants to have the Lands of the
Warrantor to the like value Vide more in the Statute aforesaid.

In Dower in the Hustings of London against the Husband, and Wife, who vouch a
foreigner in warranty, 18. E. 2.3. a. b. Tit. Receipt. 106. Co. 2. Inst. f. 326.
whereupon the plea is adjourned into the Common Pleas at a certain day, at
which day the husband, and Wife sued out a writ against the Vouchee; whereupon
the Vouchee appeared, and the Baron made default, and the Wife prayed to be
received upon his default; and by the Rule of the Court she was received, and
that it was within their Commission, for that the default was made in this
Court, whereupon the Land was to be lost, if she were not received; for it is a
Maxim in Law, Necessitas sub Lege non continetur, quia quod alias non est
Licitum, necessitas facit licitum, but yet others are of another opinion.

In a pr^^cipe in the Hustings in London, the Tenant voucheth one in London,
and other foreign Vouchees in the County of Norfolk, etc. In this case, as well
the Voucher within London, as the foreign Vouchers shall be removed, Co. 2.
Inst. f. 325.
for although the words of the Stat. of Gloc. c. 12. Vouch foreign a garrantie;
yet because process should be made by the Court of Common Pleas only against
the foreign Vouchees, although they came in, they should not warrant, nor
answer without the others, before process were determined against them in
London; so as necessity requires, that process should be made against all at
one time, and that ought to be done in the more worthy Court, and when the
Warranty is determined in the Court of Common Pleas, all shall be remanded.

It is worthy of observation (says Coke) that at the Common Law in case of a
foreign Voucher in the Hustings of London, Co. 2. Inst. 327.
the plea was adjourned before the Justices in Air, when they came to the
Tower of London, for the Court of Hustings, London, was not derived out of the
Jurisdiction of the Court of Common pleas, as other Courts, that have power to
to hold pleas Real, are, and therefore the Adjournment was, before the Justices
in Air.

3. The manner of proceedings upon the plea of Bastardy, or the plea ne unques
acconpte en Loyal Matrimony.

If in an action Ancestrel the Tenant plea Bastardy in the Demandant, Co. 2.
Inst. f. 271
or in a writ of Dower the Tenant plead Ne unques acconpte en Loyal matrimony,
neither the Court in London, Co. Litt. fol. 134.
or any like Inferior Court cannot award a writ to the Bishop for Trial
thereof; for nullus alius praeter Regem possit Episcopo demandare inquisitionem
faciendam; And therefore if such pleas be pleaded in London, the Record shall
be removed; and after a writ to the Bishop, and certificate made by the Bishop,
the Record shall be remanded into London again.

4. That a suit upon a poenal Law cannot be brought either in the Court of the
Hustings, Cro. 3. part. Miller ver. Regem 538.
or in any other Court at Guild Hall, but it must be commenced in the Kings
Courts at Westminster, where the Kings Attorney is to acknowledge, or deny.

2. Of the Courts of the Sheriffs.
Touching the Courts of the Sheriffs of London is observable the Manner of
proceeding in two things. scil.

1. In a writ of error. 2. In an execution upon a Condemnation in the Sheriffs
Courts.
1. The manner in a writ of error.

If an Erroneous Judgment be given before either Sheriffs, the party, grieved
shall have a writ of error, and remove this before the Mayor, and Sheriffs in
the Hustings; If they do not yield redress there, then shall certain Justices be
assigned by the Kings Commission, to sit at St Martyns le Grand, by nisi prius
for to redress the said Judgment and if there be default found in the Mayor,
and Sheriffs, they shall be punished for their Misprisions, by the form, that
is contained in the Statute of 28. E. 3. c. 10.

2. The manner upon an Execution,

Cro. 3. part. Cusackes Case f. 128.
One taken in execution in London, upon a Condemnation in the Sheriffs Court,
and removed by Habeas Corpus into the Kings Bench, shall be committed there in
execution for that Debt, and having discharged all Causes in the Kings Bench,
shall be remanded.

3. Of the Court of Equity.
This Court of Equity before the Lord Mayor, is called commonly the Court of
Conscience, or the Court of Requests, in Latin Curia Requisitionum, sive
Requestarum; seu Requisitorum, and the Lord Mayor himself, by whom this Court
is swayed, and governed, may be termed by us, Magister a Libellis supplicum.

Touching this Court of Equity I propose these Cases, that I have met with in
our books.

If a man be impleaded before the Sheriffs, Co. lib. 8. f. 126.10 H. 6.14 Co 4
Inst. 268.
the Mayor upon the suggestion of the Defendant may send for the parties, and
for the Record, and examine the parties upon their plea and if it be found upon
his examination, that the Plaintiff is satisfied, his Lordship may award, that
the Plaintiff shall be barred.

There is a special Act of Parliament for the Relief of poor Debtours 3. Jac.
where by it is enacted, 3. Jac. c. 15.
that every poor Citizen, and Freeman inhabiting in London, being sued for debt
under forty shillings, may exhibit his suite in the Court of London, called the
Court of Requests in London, who shall nominate Commissions to the number of
12. and three of that Commission may send for any Creditor, who is complained
of, in sueing for such a Debt under 40. s. and if he refuse to come, or perform
not their Orders they may cause him to be arrested, by any Sergeant of London,
and commit him to prison there to remain, until he perform the said order.

A Citizen of London sued another Citizen in the Common Pleas, Cro. 1. part. f.
33. pl. 14^.
and the Mayor, and Aldermen would have him, put the matter, to compromise, and
he refused, they did disfranchise him: all those, that were parties to the
disfranchisement, were fined an hundred Marks a piece, and the party was
restored to his Franchise, that is to his Liberty; for Franchise in the Common
Law signifies sometimes, the incorporating a man to be Free of Company, Co.
Litt. 137 b.
or body politic, as a Free man of a City, or Burgess of a Borough.

Quere.
To conclude; The Quoere may be; How this Court of Equity in London was raised?
Whether by Act of Parliament, prescription, or by Letters Patents.

Resp.
It is answered, that this Court of Equity must of necessity be raised, either
by Act of Parliament, or by prescription, for a Court of Equity cannot be had
by the Kings Grant, or Letters patents, as appears by our books; and therefore
it must be by one of the former ways; and my Lord Hobart in the Case, Co. 4.
Inst. 248, 87, 97. and 121 Hobarts Reports Martin ver. Marshal and Kerb. f 63.
betwixt Martin and Marshal tells us that London, and the Cinque Ports have
Acts of Parliament for their Courts of Equity; But Chester and Durham by
prescription.

4. Of the Court of the Lord Mayor and Aldermen.
The Court of the Lord Mayor, and Aldermen is a Court of Record, and consists
of the Lord Mayor, the Recorder, and Aldermen, whereof the two Sheriffs, being
Aldermen, are part.

This Court principally was instituted (amongst other Causes) for the
redressing, and correcting the Errors, Defaults, and misprisions, which be
used in the City of London.

In this Court are comprehended several other Courts, as namely.

1. The Court of Orphans. 2. The Court of Ward-mote. 3. The Court of Hull-mote.
4. The Court of the Conservation of the Water, and River of Thames. 5. The
Court of the Coroner in London. 6. The Court of Escheatour in London. 7. The
Court of Policies, and Assurances in London. 8. The Court of the Tower of
London. 9. The Court of Common Council, wherein are enacted Constitutions, and
Laws, for the advancement of Trade, and Traffic; And lastly, the Court of the
Chamberlain for Apprentices, which concerns the making Free of Apprentices;
touching which Freedom I shall present to the Reader what I have met with, in
the Books of the Common and Roman Laws.

The Common Law.
One may be a Freeman of London three manner of ways, viz. Co. lib. 8. le Case
of London. Co. 4. Inst. 250. Bustrods Reports 2. part. Allen ver. Tooly.
1. By service, as in the Case of Apprenticeship. 2. By Birthright, the Son of
a Freeman. 3. By Redemption, by order of the Court of Aldermen.


So the Freedom of the City of Rome was three ways obtained, scil.

The Civil Law.
1. By Manumission, which was thus, when as a Servant was presented by his
Master before the Consul, or Praetor, Godwins Antiq. Lib. 1. sect. 2. c. 6. and
lib. 3. sect. 4. c. 4 de jure civium Romanorum.
the Master laying his hand upon his Servants head, used this form of words,
Hunc liberum esse volo, and with that turning his Servant round, and giving him
a Cuff on the ear, he did emittere Servum e manu: the Praetor then laying a
certain Wand, or Rod called Vindicta, upon the Servants head, replied in this
manner, Dico eum Liberum esse more Quiritum. Then the Lictor, or Sergeant
taking the Wand did strike therewith the Servant on the head, and with his hand
struck him on the face, and gave him a push on the back, and after this he was
registered for a Freeman.

2. By Birth, both, or at least one of the Parents being Free, Municipium aut
nativitas facit, aut manumissio, aut adoptio. D. 50.1.1.
and such where called Cives Originarii, or Cives nati.

3. By Gift, and Cooptation, when the Freedom was bestowed on any Stranger, or
Nation, and they were termed Civitate donati, and so we read that Caesar took
in whole nations into the Freedom, that is, they had the Roman Privileges:

So says Philo of Agrippa (...); He gave the Privileges of the Roman
Citizenship to whole Countries of some of his Friends.

Hence is it, that Cicero tells us, Omnibus municipibus duas esse patrias, Lib.
2. de Legibus.
unam naturae, Alteram Juris, Catonis exemplo, qui Tusculi natus, in populi
Romani societatem susceptus est.

Thus much of the several Courrs, that are within the verge of this most noble
City of London; I come now to the Customs of the same place, of which I shall
present but very few in this Treatise, and my Reason is, because I have written
already of the Customs appertaining to this City, in a Tract, called Speculam
Juris Anglicani, lately exposed to the public view.

SECT. XVI. Of the Customs of the renowed City of London.
OF the Customs of this City, some have been approved of, in the Courts at
Westminster; and some disallowed because of their unreasonabless.

Customs allowed at the Courts of Westminster are such as these following. 1.
Customs allowed.


Its a Custom of London, More Reports Watbrooke ver. Griffith number. 1229.
Bulstrods Reports 1. part. Moss verse. Townesend.
That in Case a horse at an Inn, eats more, then he is worth, the same may be
praised by the next Neigbour, and sold for the payment of the money.

Its a Custom of London to have, Dyer 257.370.
Plegiis acquietandis sans fait.

A Custom of London, to make Ordinances, and by Laws.

Its a Custom of the City, Pasch. 15. Car. in B. R. Marsh. 15.
That the Lord Mayor may appoint a Citizen a place, in which he may erect his
Tavern.

By the Custom of London, in every shop there is a Market all the days of the
Week, saving Sundays, and Holy days.

5. E. 4.30.
By the Custom of London, if a Debtour become fugitive, he may be arrested
before the day of payment.

Co. lib. 8.5. Smellings case.
It is a Custom of the City, that if one Citizen be indebted to another in a
single Contract, it shall be equal to an obligation.

21. H. 7, 18. a.
Its a Custom, that a Feme Covert, sole Merchant, shall be impleaded, and
implead without her husband.

Thus much for Customs allowed in the Courts at Westminster. 2. Customs
Dissallowed.


Customs of London pleaded, and disallowed by the Judges, are such these.

Plowd. Com. 243. b. 35, H. 6.25. b. Davys Reports 33. b. le Case de Tanistry.
A Custom of London pleaded, that he to whom goods are pledged, shall retain
them, Cujuscunque fuerint, till he be satisfied of the sum, for which they were
pledged, this Custom was not held good; for this Custom shall not bind the
King, or his goods, that were pledged by a Stranges.

A Custom of London, to make Corporations, was held void; 29. Ass. pl. 8. le
case de Whi^tawers.
for the King only may do it by his prerogative.

Custom of London for an Abuse offered to an Alderman opon the Exchange, and
committed thereupon, Cro. 1. part. Deans Case 689.
is not good.

Debt for an Escape, and the party counts, that whereas he had a Judgment in
Debt against one in London, and a Capias ad satisfac. against him, upon a non
est inventus was returned, Cro. 1. part. Devered verse. Ratcliff Sheriff of
London.
for which one of his suretyes being in Prison thereupon a plaint, under the
Custody of the Defendant, was detained in execution, secundum Consuetudinem
Civitatis praedict. and after he escaped, etc. upon this the Defendant
demurred: And one of the Causes of this Demurrer was, that the Custom was not
good, for he ought to have a scire facias against the Bail; for it is
unreasonable, to take him in execution without answer, for he might plead a
Release of the Party, or that the principal is dead, and so discharge himself;
and for this Cause the Custom by the Court of Kings Bench held unreasonable.

Qu.
But the Quaere may be, whether ill Customs (such as these, I have here named,)
confirmed by Act of Parliament, be thereby made good, or not.

Resp.
It is answered, that the Statutes, which confirm the Customs of London shall
never be construed for the Ratification of any ill, or irrational, Custom,
which has been made use of within the City of London; And this is agreeable with
the Interpretation of Mr Horn, whose words are these. In point, que demand,
que le City de Londres cit ses franchises, and ses frank Customs, est
interpretable en cest manner, que les Citizens eient lour Franchises, don't ils
sont inherit per loyal Title, de dones, and confirmements des Royes, and les
queux ilz ne out forfeites per null abusion, and que ilz eient lour franchises,
and Customs, quae sont sufferable per droit and nient repugnant al Ley; And
this very interpretation agrees with diverse of our later books (as Plowd. Com.
f. 400. Davys Reports. le case de Commenda f. 75. b. Co. Litt. f. 381. b. 11.
H. 7.21.45. E. 3.26.) which prove, that the words of an Act of Parliament shall
be taken in a Lawful, and Rightful sense.

SECT. XVII. Of the Franchises, Liberties, ad singularities of the most
glorious City of London.
THrough the special favor, and Indulgence of our Princes, the Kings of
England, the Citizens of London have obtained very large, and great Immunities,
or Privileges; of which some are given to the Londoners by Royal Charters; and
some by the Royal Assent in Parliament.

1. Of the Franchises, and Liberties that are derived to the Trenovants by
Charters Royal.
Privilege 1.
Omnes homines London sint quieti, and Liberi, and omnes Res eorum per totam
Angliam, and per portus maris de Theolonio and passagio, and ab omnibus aliis
Consuetudinibus. Vide Chartam H. 1. de Libert. London.

Privilege 2.
H^nting.
King H. I. by his Charter granted for the Recreation of the Londoners, Quod
Cives London habeant fugationes suas ad fugandum, sicut melius, and before
habuerunt Antecessores eorum, scil. Silve, and Middlesex, and Suer. Co. 4.
Inst. f. 314.

Privilege 3.
Toll-free.
King H. 3. Granted, that the Citizens of London should pass Toll-free,
throughout England.

Privilege 4.
In 11. H. 3. The King granted, and confirmed to the Citizens of London
Free Warren, Free Warren.
or Liberty to hunt a certain circuit about the City, in the warren of Stones,
etc.

Privilege 5.
King H. 3. granted to the City of London, quod nullus Civis faciat Duellum,
Duells.
and quod de placitis ad Coronam, pertinentibus, se possint disrationare,
secundam antiquam consuetudinem Civitatis. Citizens of London, no battle shall
be gaged against any of them. Co. 4. Inst. 252.

A Citizen of London sued an Appeal of Robbery, the defendant gaged Battle, the
plaintiff said, that he was a Citizen of London, that they have there such
Franchise, that no battle shall be gaged against any of them, this extends to
every particular Citizen. Bulstrodes Reports 3. part. f. 16.21. E. 4. f. 12.
and 27.

Privilege 6.
In 11. H. 3. the King granted to the City of London this special, and rare
Liberty.

Si illis qui pro tempore fuerint Vice-Comites constituti aliquod delictum
fecerint, Sheriffs of London.
unde misericordiam pecuniae debeant incurrere, non judicentur ad plus nisi ad
miserecordiam vigint. Libr. and hoc sive damno aliorum Civium si Vicecomit* non
sufficiantur ad miserecordiarum suam solutionem. Co. 4. Inst. 254.

Privilege 7.
King John by his Letters granted to the Citizens of London, Election of a
Mayor.
Liberty yearly to choose to themselves a Mayor. Co. 4. Inst. 253.

Privilege 8.
In the year 1282. King Ed. I. granted to H. Waller Mayor, Walls.
and the Citizens of London to take toward the making of the wall, and
enclosure of the City, certain Customs, or Toll, as appears by his grant.
Stow.

Privilege 9.
Mayor.
In the Reign of Ric. I. The Citizens of London obtained to have a Mayor to be
their principal Governor, and Lieutenant of the City, as of the Kings Chamber.
Stow.

Privilege 10.
For the repairing of Bishops-gate H. 3. granted, Bishops-gate.
and confirmed to the Merchants of Hanced, that had an House in the City of
London, called Guildhalla Theutonicorum, certain Liberties, and privileges.
Stow.

Privilege 11.
Kind Ed. III. granted, Justice of Oyer.
that the Lord Mayor should be Justice for the Goal delivery at Newgate. Stow.

Privilege 12.
Ed. III. granted, Maces.
that the Sergeants of the Lord Mayor should bear Maces of silver. Co. 4.
Instit. f. 252.

Privilege 13.
Ed. III. granted, that no Escheator should be in the City, Escheator.
but the Lord Mayor for his time. Stow.

Privilege 14.
Clerks.
King H. 3. granted that either Sheriff should have two Clerks, and two
Sergeants; Seal.
also that the Citizens should have a Common Seal. Stow.

Privilege 15.
It is a Liberty of London granted, Quod nullus Civium sit implacitatus extra
muros.

Privilege 16.
Walls and Ditch.
It was granted by Ric. II. That a Toll should be taken of the Wates, sold by
Land, or by water, toward the Repairing of the walls, cleansing of the Ditch
about London. Stow.

Privilege 17.
London Bridge
King John gave certain void places in London, to build upon, the profits
thereof to remain, toward the charges of rebuilding, and repairing of London
Bridge. Stow.

Privilege 18.
By the patent of Ed. II. London Bridge.
a Subsidy was granted toward the Amendment of London Bridge. Stow.

Privilege 19.
In H. III. time, ships of the Ports arrested, Corn brought into ports.
and forced to bring their Corn to Queen Hithe, but the ships of the Citizens
of London were at liberty to arrive where the owners would appoint them.

Privilege. 20.
Aldermen of London were used to be changed yearly but it was ordered in 28. E.
3. Aldermen.
that they should not be removed, without special cause. Stow.

Privilege 21.
Ed. III. in the 3. Paving.
year of his Reign gave the Citizens of London License to take a Toll, toward
the charge of paving the Borough of Southwark with stone.

Privilege 23.
Physicians.
King H. 8. by his Letters Patents erected a Body Corporate of Physic in
London, and seven miles compass.

Privilege 22.
Sales in gross.
It was granted in some Kings Reign, that all Clothes, or other Merchandises
should not be sold in gross, but only to the Citizens of London.

Privilege 24.
The City of London has by the Kings Charter the soil, and ground of the
River of Thames granted to them, by virtue of which grant, the City at this
day, receive Rents of them, that six posts or make wharses, or other Buildings
upon the soil of the said River. Davys Reports le case de Royal Pischary.

Privilege 25.
Lands, etc. in South-wark.
In the year 1550. King E. 6. granted to the Mayor and Commonalty, all his
Lands, and Tenements in Southwark, except, and reserved the Capital Message,
two Mansions, called Southwark place, and all the gardens, and Lands to the
same appertaining, the Park, and Message, called the Antelope.

He gave them the Lordship, and Manor of Southwark with all members, and
Rights thereof, late pertaining to the Monastery of Bermondsey. All messuages,
places buildings Rents, Courts, waifs, and strayes, to the same pertaining, in
the County of Surry. He granted to them, in, and through the Borough and Town
of Southwark, and in all the parishes of St Savior, St Olave, and St George,
and the Parish of St. Thomas Hospital, and elsewhere in the said Town, and
Borough of Southwark, and Kentish street, Bermondsey street, in the Parish of
Newington, all waifs, and strays, Treasure Trove, all felons goods, etc. within
the Parishes, and precincts aforesaid, etc. The Return of writs, processes, and
warrants, etc. Together with a Fair in the whole Town for three days, with a
Court of Pypowders; a view of frankepledg, with Attachents, Arrests; etc. Also,
to arrest all felons, and other Malefactors, within their precinct, and send
them to ward, and to Newgate. Stow.

Privilege. 26.
Bridewell.
In the year 1553. Ed. 6. gave unto the Lord Mayor, Commonalty, and Citizens,
his house of Brid-well, and 700. marks Land, late of the possessions of the
house of the Savoy, and all the Bedding, and other furnitute of the said
Hospital of the Savoy toward the maintenance of the said workhouse of
Brid-well, and the Hospital of St. Thomas in Southwark. Stow.

Privilege 27.
King John gave the City of London Authority: Sheriffs.
to choose, and deprive their Sheriffs at their pleasure. Stow.

Privilege 28.
The Citizens of London are by a Charter of King Ed. 3. excepted from paying of
prisage. Prisage.


Touching this Franchise or Liberty of Prisage I shall present to the Reader
these resolutions, showing who shall be a reputed Citizen, and who not, as to
the being exempted of paying Prisage.

A Question was in the Court of Exchequer 44. Eliz. If a Citizen of London,
that had not a family, and did not pay Scot, and Lot, but sojourne in another
house, shall have the benefit of the Kings Charter? In the argument of the
case, Coke, then Attorney General, put this difference of Citizens, viz. That
there was

A Citizen Nomine. Re. Re, and nomine;


It was said, that a Citizen Re, and nomine. He, that is a Freeman of London,
and an Inhabitant, and one that paid Scot, and Lot there, shall be discharged
of prisage by the said Charter, etc. Davys Reports le Case de Customs f. 10. b.

He that is to have benefit, and advantage of this Charter, ought to be integre
Civis, and an entire Citizen, as it was adjudged in 4. H. 6. in one Knowls
case, a Citizen, and Free-Grocer of London, removed his household cum pannis,
and did dwell at Bristol, but yet kept his shop at London, and he, having a
ship laden with wines, which was unladen in the port of London, would have had
the benefit of this Charter of discharge of prisage; But it was ruled against
him; for that he was not such a Citizen as was capable of this discharge; for
that he ought to be Civis, Incola, Commorans. 4. H. 6. Knowls Case.

14. H. 6. etc. A private Act of Parliament: Complaint was made, that the Lord
Mayor would make strangers Citizens; it was there declared, that this benefit
to be discharged from payment of prisage, did not extend unto such Citizens as
were Dotati, made free, but unto those Citizens only, which are Commorant,
Incolant, and Resiant within the City.

A person disfranchised before the arrival of his ship, shall lose the benefit
of prisage, he was entitled to at the lading, and a person made free after the
lading shall have the benefit of discharge.

Bulstrodes Reports 3. part. The King, and Sir Thomas Waller verse. Francis
Hanger.

A Woman cannot be capable of this Immunity, though a Citizen; to what end say
I; She cannot bear Civilia, or publicae onera of the City; she cannot do any
thing for the benefit of the City; she cannot perform Watch, and Ward; she can
bear no office in the City; neither can she be of any of the Companies; she
cannot be an Attorney; she may be a Freewoman, but this is only to have her
will (as many so have) but to no other purpose.

Thus much of the Franchises granted to the Londoners by Charters Royal, and
such as are allowed to be good, and agreeable to the Laws of England; I shall
now put a Case, or two of such singularities, or Privileges as have been
adjudged to be contrary to the freedom, of the subject, and consequentially the
Kings grants are deemed void in Law.

King H. 6. granted to the Corporation of Dyers within London, power to search,
etc. and if they found any Cloth died with Logge wood, that the Cloth should be
forfeit: and it was adjudged this Charter concerning the forfeiture, was
against the Law of the Land.

For no forfeiture can grow by Letters Patent. Co. lib. 8. Trin. 41. Eliz. f.
125. le Case de Londres.

So the Company of Merchant Taylots of England, having power by their Charter
to make Ordinances, made an Ordinance, Co. 2. Inst. 47. Tr. 41. Eliz. coram
Rege ^ot. 92. in Tr. inter Davent and Hurdes.
that every Brother of the same Society should put the one half of his Clothes
to be dressed by some Cloth-worker free of the same Company; upon pain to
forfeit 10 s. etc. and it was adjudged that this Ordinance was against Law,
because it was against the Liberty of the Subject, for every subject has
freedom to put his Clothes to be dressed by whom he will, and sic de similibus:
And so it is, if such, or the like grant had been made by his Letters Patents.

So if a grant should be made to a Londoner, to have the sole making of Cards,
Trin. 44. Eliz. Coram Rege Co. lib. 11 fol. 84. and 85 etc. Edward Darries Case.
or the sole dealing with any other Trade, that grant is against the Liberty,
and freedom of the Subject, that before did, or lawfully might have used that
trade and consequently is against the Great Charter of England.

Hitherto of franchises granted by the Charters of the Kings of England, we
proceed to those that have been given to the Citizens of London by our Kings in
their several Parliaments.

2. Of the Franchises, Liberties, or Singularities, which the Londoners have
obtained from the favor of our Kings in the high Court of Parliament.
Singularity 1.
King Athelstan in his Laws or Constitutions, appointing, Mint-Masters.
how many Mint-Masters should be in each City, allows 8. to London, and not
so many to any other City.

Singularity 2.
King H. 1. in his Laws, Amerciament.
commands that no Citizen of London shall be amerced above 100 s. for any
pecuniary pain.

Singularity 3.
It is granted to the Citizens of London, Gavelet.
that the Lords of Rents in London may recover them by a writ of Gavelet. 10.
E. 2.

Singularity 4.
The Kng granted, that the Citizens of London should not be constrained to go
out of the City to any War, War.
and that the Liberties of this City should not for any cause whatsoever be
taken into the Kings hands Rot. Parl. 1. E. 3. Authoritate Parliamenti.

Singularity. 5.
Erroneous Judgment.
It is enacted, that the Statute of 28. E. 3. c. 10. shall not extend to any
erroneous judgment given, or to be given in the City of London. Parl. 7. R. 2.
nu. 26.

Singularity 6.
Aldermen.
The Aldermen of London shall not be hereafter elected yearly, but remain, until
they be put out for reasonable cause. 17. R. 2. c. 11.

Singularity 7.
Malt.
The Lord Mayor, and Aldermen may reform the defaults of Victuallers.
Victuallers.
7. R. 2. c. 11. vide 31. E. 3. c. 10.

Singularity. 8.
Malt sold to London shall be cleansed from Dust. 17. R. 2. c. 3. Malt.


Singularity 9.
It is Enacted in the Reign of R. 2. That the Mayor, Guardian-ship of Orphans
and Chamberlain of London, shall have the keeping of all the Lands, and goods
of such Orphans, as happen within the City.

Singularity 10.
The Mayor of London shall redress such Errors, Defaults, Redressing of Errors.
and Misprisons, notoriously used in the same City. 1. H. 4. c. 15.

Singularity 11.
The Stat. of Ed. 4. c. 2. does not extend to the Sheriffs of London, Sheriffs
of London.
as touching Indictments and Presentiments.

Singularity 12.
Citizens, and Freemen of London, may carry their wares to any Fairs, Wares.
or Markets throughout England. 3. H. 7. c. 9.

Singularity 13.
Butchers shall kill no beasts in London. Butchers.
11. H. 7. c. 21.

Singularity 14.
By the Stat. of 9. H. 7. c. 8. no scavage, Scavage, or Shewage.
or shewage shall be paid in any place, but it shall be taken by the Mayor, and
Sheriffs of London.

Singularity 15.
The Mayor of London, and his Successors have like Authority in all issues,
Breaches, Sewars.
ground over flown, as far as the water ebbeth, and flows, grown out of the
River of Thames, as touching the punishment for using unlawful nets, and
engines, as his Lordship has within this said River 4. H. 7. c. 15.

Singularity 16.
For all issues forfeited by Jurors in the Mayors Court, Issue forfeited
it is lawful for his Lord-ship, and his Successors, to distrein, and the same
distress detain, until he, or they be satisfied of the said issues. 4. H. 8. c.
3.

Singularity 17.
All Strangers within two miles of London shall be under the Reformation of the
Wardens of Handy Crafts within the City of London. Warden: of Handy-Crafts.
15. and 16. H. 8. c. 2.

Singularity 18.
Wardens of Cowpers shall search, Wardens of Cowpers.
etc. and gage all manner of Barrells, etc. For Ale, Soap, to be put to sale
within 2. miles compass, without the Suburbs of the City of London. 23. H. 8.
c. 4.

Singularity 19.
A Londoner returned upon a Jury to the Courts at Westminster, having goods to
the value of 40. marks, shall be sworn, Jurors.
and do, in all such Juries, in every thing, as other persons may do, having
Lands, or Tenements of the yearly value of forty shillings. 4. H. 8. c 3. and
5. H. 8. c. 5.

Singularity 20.
By the Stat. of 4. H. 8. c. 14. It is Enacted, that the Mayor of the City of
London may search oil, Oils.
in the City of London, and punish all such as sell false oil.

Singularity 21.
The Lord Mayor of London may set fines upon those, Paving.
which do not pave or repair any street, or Land, 32. H. 8. c. 17.

Singularity 22.
Woods growing within the compass of 22. miles from, and about London, Woods.
or the Suburbs of the same, shall not be felled, to be converted to Coals, for
making of Iron works 23. Eliz. c. 5.

Singularity 23.
The Mayor in the Reign of Edward 3. procured an Act of Parliament, Whores.
Vide Daniels History f. 243.
that no known Whore should wear any hood, or attire on her head; except reyed,
and striped Cloth of diverse Colors.

If this Law should now be put in force I am afraid; there would be very few
black hoods worn.

Note, the Athenian Law was, Floridas.
Meretrices vestres indutae sunto.

Singularity 24.
By the Stat. of 1. Jac. c. 19. Garbler of London.
the ancient officer of London, called the Garbler of Spices has authority at
all, and every time, and times, in the day time to enter into shops,
warehouses, or Cellar to view, and search Drugges, and Spices, etc. and to
garble, and make them clean.

Singularity 25.
All wares from hence forth shall be utterly, Wares.
put down by Thames and Medway. 9. E. 3. c. 22.

Singularity 26.
Damages.
King E. 1. Of his grace granted unto the Citizens of London, that whereas
before times they, that were disseized of freehold in the same City, could not
recover their damages, before the coming of the Justices to the Tower, that
from hence forth the Disseizees shall have damages by Recognizance of the same
Assize, whereby they recovered their Lands. 6. E. 1. c. 14.

Singularity 27.
Salmons.
By the Stat. of 20. R. 2. c. 9. it is enacted, that the Mayor, or Warden of
London shall have the Conservation of the Stat. touching Salmons (viz. 13. E.
1. c. 47.13. R. 2. c. 19.) in the waters of Thames, from the Bridge of Stane to
London, and from thence over the same water, and in the water of Medway.

Singularity 28.
In 12. R. 2. c. 13. There is a punishment ordained for him, Corruption.
which shall cast corruption into any place near the City of London.

Singularity 29.
In the 13. and 14. year of the Reign of the King, (our most Gracious and
Serene Sovereign) that now is, Higwayes and streets.
there was an Act made for Repairing of High ways, and for paving, and keeping
clean streets, etc. in and about the City of London; and by that Act it is
ordained, that the Lord Mayor, Recorder, and Aldermen shall be joint
Commissioners in exercising all the powers of this said Act, within the City,
and Liberties thereof.

Singularity 30.
Curriers
In the Stat. of 14. of this Kings Reign (which was enacted for the restraining
the exportation of Leather, and Raw Hides out of the Realm) it is ordered, that
the Master, and Wardens of the Company of Curriers shall enter into any
Warehouse, etc. within the City of London, or 3. miles of the same City,
belonging to any of the Cordwayners, etc. to search for, and seize, all such
Leather, intended to be prohibited, to be used, by a clause in the said Act,
etc.

Singularity 31.
In the 19. Imposition on Coals for building^ of Cathedral, etc. Churches.
year of the same King there was an Act made for the Rebuilding of the City of
London, and for the further enabling the Lord Mayor, etc. to perform all the
works mentioned in the said Law; It is ordained, that for all sorts of Coals,
which shall be brought into the Port of London, shall be paid by way of
Imposition thereupon, viz. For such sort of Coals as were usually sold by the
Chauldron the sum of 12. pence, and for such sort of Coals as are sold by the
Tun the like sum of 12. pence. And likewise in 22 year of his Majesty's Reign
it was enacted, that there should be paid for every Chauldron, or sum of
Coals, two shillings over, and beside the aforesaid Imposition of 12d. for the
Rebuilding Cathedral, and Parochial Churches, within the City of London; His
Majesty's beloved and native City, toward which his Royal Heart has been so
gracious, and so full of Princely designs, to inprove its Honor, Wealth and
Beauty.

Having thus attempted to present to the Courteous Readers view some of those
Notable, Rare, and Special Liberties, and Privileges, that the Citizens of
London have, and do claim by virtue of Charters Royal, and Acts of Parliament,
I shall now come to a conclusion of this small, and slender Treatise with a
Rehearsal of some of the Statutes, both conservant, and confirmant,
appertaining to this most glorious, and most renowned City of London.

Amongst the Acts of Parliament, that are called preserving, Statutes
Conservant or saving.
or saving Laws viz. of the Liberties, belonging to London, take these
following, sc.

3. E. 4. c: 4,
The liberties of great Saint Martins in London reserved by the Statute of 3. E.
4. c. 4. touching Marchandizes.

7: H. 4. c. 17.
The Citizens of London may take Apprentices, according to their old Custom
notwithstanding the Stat. of 7. H. 4.

19. H. 7. c. 23:
By the Stat. of 19. H. 7. c. 23. All Acts made in Derogation of the Merchants
of Stillyard are void, provided that the Statute shall not prejudice the
Liberties of London.

5. Eliz. c. 4.
In the Stat. of 5. Eliz. touching Apprentices there is a proviso, that the Act
shall not be prejudicial to the City of London, or privileges of the same City.

1. Jac. c. 21.
In the Stat. of 1. Jac. touching Sale of goods purloyned in London, etc. Is a
proviso; that the said Act shall not be prejudicial to the ancient Trade of of
Brokers, within the City of London, etc. or other trades within the said City,
and Liberties of the same, being settled, as it is mentioned in the said Act.

In the 12. of the King that now is, it was enacted in the Stat. touching
Wards, and Liveries, that the Act shall not extend, to alter, or prejudice the
Custom of the City of London concerning Orphans.

In the 14. year of his Majesty's Reign there is a Law made for preventing
Abuses in printing; in which Act there is this proviso, that this said Act
shall not extend to prohibit any Bookseller, who has served 7. years, and is
Free of the Company of Stationers of London, from importing into the Realm any
Books ready bound, not formerly prohibited.

Amongst the Statutes, that have been enacted for the strengthening, Statutes
Confirmant.
and confirming of the Customs and Liberties of London, there are 3. of them
most notorious; one enacted in the Reign of H. 3. Another, in the time of E. 3.
And a third made in the days of R. 2.

In the Reign of H. 3. it was enacted in these words. sc. Civita. London habeat
omnes Libertates suas antiquas and Consuetudines suas, the City of London shall
have all the old Liberties, and Customs, which it has been used to have.

In the Reign of Ed. 3. it was ordained, that the Liberties of this City shall
not for any cause be taken into the King Hands. Rot. Parl. 1. E. 3. authoritate
Parliamenti.

In the Reign of R. 2. there is a most beneficial Statute made which no other
Corporation has; it is enacted that the Citizens of London shall enjoy all
their whole Liberties whatsoever with this Clause, licet usi non fuerunt, vel
abusi fuerunt, Co. 4. Inst. f. 250,
and notwithstanding any Statute to the contrary, etc. Lege Statutum; for by
this Act the City of London may claim Liberties by proscription, Charter, or
Parliament, notwithstanding any Stat. mad before 7. R. 2.

Note; the most gracious, and Royal Concession of his late Majesty (the most
glorious Martyr, that willingly died for the preservation of established
Religion and Laws) at Newport was, That an Act be passed for granting, and
confirming, the Charters, Customs, Liberties, and Franchises of the City of
London, notwithstanding any Non-user, Misuser, or Abuser.

I have no more to say, in honor of this City, but only to conjure the
Inhabitants thereof for all these singular tokens of the Liberal favor and
good likeing of our Princes, to honor, and obey their King, that now is, and
to say with me, their fellow subject, scil.

VIVAT REX, ac Maxim floreat Triplex Corona Serenissimi, Potentissimi,
Sacratissimique Principis nostri, Caroli a Carolo.

FINIS.
Books Printed for William Crook at the Green Dragon without Temple Bar.
1. THe Complete Vineyard, or an excellent way for Planting of Vines in
England; and how to make Wine of their Grapes. By W Hughs, price 2 s. 2. The
Complete Measurer or a new exact Way of Mensuration. By Thomas Hammon, price 1
s. 3. The Deaf and Dumb Man's discourse. A Treatise of those born Deaf and Dumb;
to which is added the Rationality of Beasts, particularly of the Elephant,
showing the wonderful understanding of that Creature, Octavio, price 1 s. 4.
The Flower Garden, showing how all sorts of Flowers are to be ordered; the time
of Flowering, the taking them up, and of Planting them again, etc. Being all
necessary observations relating to a Flower Garden, by the Diligence and
experience of W. Hughes. Twelves, price 1 s. 5. The Court of Curiosity; being
the Most Witty and Facetious Fortune book that was ever published in English,
with a most judicious Interpretation of all Dreams drawn from the Wisdom and
Doctrine of the Ancients; also a Treatise of Physiognomy. All written in
French, since Translated (for the excellency of it into Spanish, Italian, High
Dutch, Low Dutch, etc. now out of French) into English. The second Edition,
much improved and explained. In Twelves, price 2 s. 6. The American Physician,
showing all the Virtues and Uses of all Roots, Herbs, Trees, Fruits, etc. in
the English Plantation in America. By W. Hughes. Twelves, price 1 s. 7.
Shafto's Great Law of Nature of Self-preservation, Examined and Vindicated
against the Abuses in Mr Hobbs his Leviathan. Twelves, price 1 s.
These new Books Printed for William Crook, in the year 1675.
1. HOmers Odysses Translated into English by Tho. Hobbs of Malmsbury. With a
large Preface, concerning the Virtues of Heroic Poetry. Price 4 s. 2. The
Jurisdiction of Court Leets, and Court Barons, Marshalfey, Py-powder, etc. and
all other Courts; to which is added Choice Writs. By R. A. and T. J. price 6 s.
3. The Third Volume of Mr. Hobbs his Works in Quarto, price 10 s. 4. The Golden
Rule of Arithmetic made easy. By C. H. Octavio, price 3 d. 5. De Mirabilibus
Pecci, Carmen. Tho. Hobbs, price 6. d. 6. Euterpe Revived; being Epigrams on
the most eminent persons now living, price 1 s. 7. Amourons Gallant, or, Love
in Fashion. A Comedy in Heroic Verse. By J. B. Gent, price 1 s. 8. The Mock
Duellist, or The French Vallet. A Comedy acted at the Theater Royal. Quarto,
price 1 s. 9. The Grounds of Soveraingty and Greatness. In Quarto, price 6 d.
10. Gees Steps of Ascension unto God, or A Ladder to Heaven. Twenty fours.
Books Printing and Printed for William Crook for the year 1676.
1. HOmers Iliads, Translated out of Greek into English, by Tho. Hobbs of
Malmesbury. printing 2. The present state of the Jews, relating all their
Customs and Practices now in use. The second Edition. By L. Addison, D. D.
Twelves. printed. 3. A Sermon Preached at the Bishop of Chichesters first
Visitation. By W. Howel, Minister at Fittleworth in Sussex. Quarto. Printing.
4. The Potable Balsam of Life, described by Dr P. Belon. printed 5. Historians
Guide in 2. parts, First the Recovery of lost time being a Compendious
Chronology of the world from the Creation to this time Translated out of
Italian. Secondly Englands Remembrancer, being a Sumary of the Actions,
Exploits, Seiges, Battles, etc. Happened in England, from the year 1600. to
1675, price 1 s. Octav- printed.

FINIS.

