THE DUKE OF Buckingham's SPEECH; Spoken in the House of LORDS, FEB. 15th.
1676. Proving that the PARLIAMENT is DISSOLVED.

Whose Suffering's Svveet, since Honor does Adorn it;
Who Slights Revenge; not that he Fears, but Scorns it.
Amsterdam, 1677.

THE DUKE OF Buckingham's SPEECH, etc.
My Lords,
I Have often troubled your Lordships with my Discourse in this House, but I
confess I never did it with more trouble to my self than I do at this time; For
I scarce know how I should begin what I have to say to your Lordships.

On the one side, I am afraid of being thought an Unquiet and a Pragmatical
Man; for in this Age every man that cannot bear every thing, is called Unquiet,
and he who does but ask Questions, though about those matters for which he ought
to be most concerned, is looked upon as Pragmatical.

On the other side, I am more afraid of being thought a Dishonest Man, and of
all men, I am most afraid of being thought so by my self; for every one is best
Judge of the integrity of his own Intentions. And though it does not always
follow, that he is Pragmatical, whom others take to be so, yet this never
fails to be true, That he is most certainly a Knave, who takes himself to be
so.

No body is answerable for more Understanding than God Almighty has given him;
and therefore though I should be in the wrong, if I tell your Lordships plainly
and truly what I am really convinced of, I shall behave my self like an Honest
Man; For it is my Duty, as long as I have the Honor to Sit in this House, to
hide nothing from your Lordships, which I think may concern either his
Majesty's Service, your Lordships Interest, or the Good and Quiet of the People
of England.

The Question, which in my Opinion does now lie before your Lordships, Is not
what we are to do, but, Whether at this time we can do any thing as a
Parliament? It being very clear to me, That the Parliament is Dissolved. And if
in this Opinion I have the misfortune to be mistaken, I have another misfortune
joined to it, A desire to maintain this Argument with all the Judges and
Lawyers in England, and leave it afterward to your Lordships to decide,
Whether I am in the Right or no. This, my Lords, I speak not out of Arrogance,
but in my own Justification. Because if I were not througly convinced, that
what I have now to urge, were grounded upon the Fundamental Laws of England,
and that the not pressing it at this time, might prove to be of a most
dangerous consequence, both to his Majesty and the whole Nation, I should have
been loath to start a Notion, which perhaps may not be very agreeable to some
People. And yet, my Lords, when I consider where I am, who I now speak to, and
what was spoken in this Place about the time of the last Prorogation, I can
hardly believe that what I have to say, will be distastful to your Lordships.

I remember very well how your Lordships were then displeased with the House of
Commons, and I remember too as well, what Reasons they gave you to be so. It is
not so long since, but that I suppose your Lordships may easily call to mind,
that after several odd passages between us, your Lordships were so incensed,
that a motion was made here, for to address to his Majesty, about the
Dissolution of this Parliament. And tho it failed of being carried in the
Affirmative by two or three Voices, yet this in the Debate was remarkable, That
it prevailed with much the Major part of your Lordships that were here present,
and was only overpowered by the Proxies of those Lords who never heard the
Arguments. What Change there has been since either in their Behavior, or in
the state of our Affairs, that should make your Lordships change your Opinion,
I have not yet heard. And therefore if I can make it appear (as I presume I
shall) that by Law the Parliament is Dissolved, I presume your Lordships ought
not to be offended at me for it.

I have often wondered how it should come to pass, that this House of Commons,
in which there are so many Honest, and so many worthy Gentlemen, should yet be
less respectful to your Lordships, as certainly they have been, than any House
of Commons that ever were chosen in England; and yet if the matter be a little
enquired into, the reason of it will plainly appear. For my Lords, the very
nature of the House of Commons is changed* They do not think now that they are
an Assembly that are to return to their own homes, and become Private men again
(as by the Laws of the Land and the Ancient Constitution of Parliaments they
ought to be) but they look upon themselves as a standing Senate, and as a
number of men picked out to be Legislators for the rest of their whole Lives.
And if that be the case my Lords, they have reason to believe themselves our
Equals.

But, my Lords, it is a dangerous thing to try new Experiments in a Government;
Men do not foresee the ill Consequences that must happen when they go about to
alter those essential parts of it, upon which the whole Frame of the Government
depends, as now in our Case, the Customs and Constitutions of Parliament. For
all Governments are artificial things; and every part of them has a dependence
one upon another. And as in Clocks and Watches, if you should put Great
Wheels in the place of Little ones, and (...) Little Wheels in the place of
Great ones, all the Fabric would stand still: So we cannot alter any one part
of a Government without prejudicing the motions of the whole. If this, my
Lords, were well considered, people would be more cautious how they went out of
the old, honest, English way and method of proceedings. But it is not my
business to find Faults, and therefore if your Lordships will give me leave, I
shall go on to show you, why, in my opinion, we are no Parliament.

The Ground of this Opinion of mine is taken from the ancient and
unquestionable Statutes of this Realm, and give me leave to tell your Lordships
by the way, That Statutes are not like Women, for they are not one jot the
worse for being Old. The first Statute I shall take notice off is, That in the
fourth year of Edward the Third, Chap. 14, thus set down in the printed Book;

Item, It is accorded, That a Parliament shall be holden every year once, and
more often if need be. Now though these words be as plain as a Pike-Staff, and
that no man living that is not a Scholar could possibly mistake the meaning of
them, yet the Grammarians of those days did make a shift to explain, that the
words, If need be, did relate as well to the words Every year once, as to the
words more often; and so by this Grammatical Whimsey of theirs, had made this
Statute to signify just nothing at all. For this Reason, my Lords, in the 36th.
year of the same Kings Reign, a New Act of Parliament was made, in which these
unfortunate words, If need be, were left out, and that Act of Parliament is
printed thus; relating to Magna Charta, and other Statutes made for public
Good:

Item, For maintenance of these Articles and Statutes, and the redress of
diverse Mischiefs and Grievances which daily happen, A Parliament, shall be
holden every year: as another time was Ordained by another Statute.

Here now, my Lords, there is not left the least Color or Shadow for any
further mistake, for it is plainly declared, That the Kings of England must
Call a Parliament once within a Year: And the Reasons why they are bound to do
so, are as plainly set down, Namely, For the maintenance of Magna Charta, and
other Statutes of the same Importance, and for preventing the Mischiefs and
Grievances which daily happen.

The Question then remains, Whether these Statutes have been since Repealed
by any other Statutes or no?

The only Statutes I ever heard mentioned for that, are the two Triennall
Bills, the one made in the last Kings, and the other in this Kings Reign.

The Triannal Bill in the last Kings Reign, was made for the Confirmation of
the two mentioned Statutes of Edw. 3. For Parliaments having been omitted to
be Called every year according to those Statutes. A Statute was made in the
last Kings Reign to this purpose* That if the King should fail of Calling a
Parliament, according to those Statutes of Edw. 3. Then the Third year the
People should Meet of themselves without any Writts at all, and Choose their
Parliament Men.

This way of the Peoples Choosing Parliament Men of themselves, being thought
disrespectful to the King, A Statute was made by this last Parliament, which
Repealed the Triennal Bill; And after the Repealing Clause (which took notice
only of the Triennal Bill made in the last Kings Reign) There was in this
Statute a Paragraph to this purpose: That because by the Ancient Statutes of
this Realm, made in the Reign of Edw. 3. Parliaments are to be held very often,
It should be Enacted, That within three years after the Determination of that
present Parliament, Parliaments should not be discontinued above three years at
most, and should be holden oftener if need required.

There have been several half kind of Arguments drawn out of these Triennal
Bills against the Statutes of Edw. 3. which I confess I could never remember,
nor indeed those that urged them to me ever durst own; For they always laid
their faults upon some body else, like ugly offish Children, which because of
their Deformity and want of wit, the Parents are ashamed of, and so turn them
out to the Parish. But, My Lords, let the Arguments be what they will, I have
this short Answer to all that can be wrested out of these Triennal Bills. That
the first Triennal Bill was Repealed before the matter now disputed of was
in Question, and the last Triennal Bill will not be in force till the Question
be Decided, that is, till this Parliament is Dissolved.

The whole matter therefore, My Lords, is reduced to this short Dilemma, Either
the Kings of England are bound by the Acts mentioned of Edw. 3. or else the
whole Government of England by Parliaments, and by Law is absolutely at an End.
For if the Kings of England have Power by an Order of theirs to invalidate an
Act made for the mainteinance of Magna Charta, they have also Power by an Order
of theirs to invalidate Magna Charta it self; And if they have Power by an
Order of theirs to invalidate an Act made for the maintenance of the Statute,
De Tallagio non concedendo, they have also Power when they please, by an Order
of theirs to invalidate the Statute itself De Tallagio non concedendo; and then
they may not only without the help of a Parliament, raise Money when they
please, but also take away any man's Estate when they please, and deprive every
one of his Liberty or Life as they please.

This, My Lords, I think is a Power that no Judge nor Lawyer will pretend the
Kings of England have, and yet this Power must be allowed them, or else we that
are Met here this Day cannot Act as a Patliament. For we are now met by virtue
of the last Prorogation, and that Prorogation is an Order of the King's point
blanck contrary to the two Acts of Edw. 3. For the Acts say, That a Parliament
shall be holden once within a year; And the Prorogation says, A Parliament
shall not be held within a year, but some months after, and this (I conceive)
is a plain contradiction, and consequently that the Prorogation is void. Now if
we cannot Act as a Parliament, by virtue of the last Prorogation, I beseech
your Lordships by virtue of what else can we Act? Shall we Act by virtue of the
Kings Proclamation? Pray, my Lords, How so? Is a Proclamation of more force
than a Prorogation? Or, if a thing that has been Ordered the first time be not
Valid, Does the Ordering it the second time make it good in Law? I have heard
indeed, that two Negatives make an Affirmative, but I never heard before, that
two nothings ever made any thing. Well, But how then do we meet? Is it by our
own Adjournment? I suppose no body has the confidence to say that: Which way
then is it? Do we meet here by accident? That I think might be granted, but an
accidental Meeting can no more make a Parliament, than an accidental clapping a
Crown upon a Man's Head, can make a King. There is a great deal of Ceremony
required, to give a matter of that moment a legal Sanction.

The Laws have reposed so great a Trust, and so great a Power in the hands of a
Parliament, that every Circumstance relating to the manner of their Electing,
Meeting and Proceeding, is looked after with the nicest Circumspection
imaginable.

For this reason the Kings Writts about the Summons of Parliament, are to be
issued out verbatim according to the Form prescribed by the Law, or else that
Parliament is void and null. For the same reason, if a Parliament Summoned by
the Kings Writ, does not meet at the very same day it is summoned to meet upon,
that Parliament is void and null: And by the same Reason, if Parliaments be not
Legally Adjourned De die in diem, those Parliaments must also be void and null.

Oh, but some say, There is nothing in the two Acts of Edw. 3. to take away
the Kings power in Prorogation, and therefore the Prorogation is good. My
Lords, under favor that is a very gross mistake; for pray examine the words of
the Acts: The Acts say, A Parliament shall be holden once a year; Now to whom
can these words be directed, but to them that are to Call a Parliament? And who
are they but the Kings of England? It is very true, that this does not take
away the Kings power of proroguing Parliaments; but it most certainly limits it
to be within a year.

Well then, but it is said again, If that Prorogation be null and void, then
things are just as they were before, and therefore the Parliament is still in
being.

My Lords, I confess there would be some weight in this but for one thing,
which is, that not one word of it is true; for if when the King had Prorogued
us, we had taken no notice of the Prorogation, but had gone on like a
Parliament, and had Adjourned our selves De die in diem; then I confess things
had been just as they were before: But since upon the Prorogation we went away,
and took no care our selves for our Meeting again, if we cannot meet and Act by
virtue of that Prorogation, there is an impossibility of our meeting and acting
any other way. One may as properly say, that a man who is killed by Assault is
still alive, because he was killed Unlawfully; as that the Parliament is still
alive, because the Prorogation was Unlawful.

The next Argument that those are reduced to who would maintain this to be yet
a Parliament, is, that the Parliament is Prorogued Sine die, and therefore the
King may Call them again by a Proclamation.

In the first part of this Proposition, I shall not only agree with them, but
also do them the favor to prove that it is so in the eye of the Law, which I
never heard they have yet done. For the Statutes say, That a Parliament shall
be holden once within a year; and the Prorogation having put them off till a
day without the year, and consequently excepted against by the Law; that day in
the eye of the Law is no day at all, that is, Sine die; and the Prorogation
might as well have put them off till so many months after Doomsday; and then I
think no body would have doubted, but that it had been a very sufficient
Dissolution.

Besides, My Lords, I shall desire your Lordships to take notice, that in
former times the usual way of Dissolving Parliaments was to Dismiss them Sine
die; For the King when he Dissolved them, used to say no more, but that he
desired them to go home, till he sent for them again, which is a Dismission
Sine die.

Now if there were forty ways of Dissolving Parliaments, if I can prove this
Parliament has been Dissolved by any one of them, I suppose there is no great
need of the other thirty nine.

Another thing which they much insist upon is, that they have found out a
President in Queen Elizabeth's time, when a Parliament was once Prorogued three
days beyond a year* In which I cannot choose but observe, That it is a very
great confirmation of the Value and Esteem all people ever had of the
forementioned Acts of Edward the Third, since from that time to this, there
can but one President be found for the Proroguing a Parliament above a year,
and that was but for three days neither.

Besides, my Lords, This President is of a very Odd kind of nature; For it was
in the time of a very great Plague, when every Body of a sudden was forced to
run away one from another, and so being in haste, had not leisure to calculate
well the time of the Prorogation, though the appointing it to be within three
days of the year is an Argument to me, that their Design was to keep within the
Bounds of the Acts of Parliament. And if the mistake had been taken notice of
in Queen Elizabeth's time, I make no question but She would have given a
lawful Remedy to it.

Now I beseech your Lordships, what more can be drawn from the showing this
President, but only that because once upon a time a thing was done illegally,
therefore your Lordships should do so again now: Though My Lords, under favor,
Ours is a very different Case from theirs; for this President they mention was
never taken notice off; and all Lawyers will tell you, that a President that
passes Sub Silentio, is of no Validity at all, and will never be admitted in
any Judicial Court where it is Pleaded.

Nay, Judge Vaughan says, in his Reports, That in Cases which depend upon
Fundamental Principles, from which Demonstrations may be drawn, Millions of
Presidents are to no purpose.

Oh but say they, you must think prudentially of the Inconveniences which will
follow upon it: For if this be allowed all those Acts which were made in that
Sessions of Parliament, will be then Void.

Whether that be so or no, I shall not now examine; But this I will pretend to
say, That no man ought to pass for a prudential person, who only takes notice
of the Inconveniences of one side; it is the part of a wise man to examine the
Inconveniences of both sides, to weigh which are the greatest, and to be sure
to avoid them. And, My Lords, to that kind of Examination I willingly submit
this Cause; for I presume it will be easy for your Lordships to judge, which
of these two will be of the most dangerous consequence to the Nation, either to
allow, that the Statutes made in that particular Sessions in Queen Elizabeth's
time are Void, (which may be easily confirmed at any time by a lawful
Parliament) Or to lay it down for a Maxim, That the Kings of England by a
particular Order of theirs, have Power to break all the Laws of England when
they please.

And, My Lords, with all the Duty we owe his Majesty, it is no disrespect to
him to say, That his Majesty is bound up by the Laws of England; For the Great
King of Heaven and Earth, God Almighty himself is bound by his own Decrees: And
what is an Act of Parliament but a Decree of the Kings made in the most Solemn
manner it is possible for him to make it, that is, with the consent of the
Lords and Commons.

It is plain then in my Opinion, that we are no more a Parliament, and I humbly
conceive, your Lordships ought to give God thanks for it, since it has pleased
him thus by his Providence to take you out of a condition, wherein you must
have been entirely useless to his Majesty, to your selves, and the whole
Nation: For, I do beseech your Lordships, if nothing of this I have urged were
true, what honorable Excuse could we find for our acting again with this House
of Commons? Except we could pretend to such an exquisite art of forgetfulness
as to avoid calling to mind all that passed between us the last Sessions, and
unless we could have also a faculty of teaching the same Art to the whole
Nation; What opinion could they have of us, if it should happen that the very
same men, who were so earnest the last Sessions, for having this House of
Commons Dissolved, when there was no question of their lawful sitting, should
be now willing to join with them again, when without question they are
Dissolved.

Nothing can be more dangerous to a King or a People, than that Laws should be
made by an Assembly, of which there can be a doubt Whether they have power to
make Laws or no: And it would be in us so much the more unexcusable, if we
should overlook this Danger, since there is for it so easy a Remedy; A Remedy
which the Law requires, and which all the Nation longs for,

The Calling of a New Parliament.
It is That only can put his Majesty into a possibility of receiving Supplies;
That can secure to your Lordships the Honor of Sitting in this House like
Peers, and of being serviceable to your King and Country; and That can Restore
to all the People of England their undoubted Rights of Choosing Men frequently
to represent their Grievances in Parliament. Without this all we can do would
be in vain; the Nation might languish a while, but must Perish at last: We
should become a Burden to our Selves, and a Prey to our Neighbors.

My Motion therefore to your Lordships shall be, that we humbly Address our
selves to his Majesty, and beg of him for his own sake, as well as for all the
Peoples sakes to give us speedily a New Parliament. That so we may
unanimously, before it is too late, use our utmost Endeauours for his Majesty's
Service, and for the Safety, the Welfare, and the Glory of the English Nation.

THE END.
Whilst another Lord was speaking, the Duke took a Pen and wrote this
Sylogism: And then appealed to the Bishops, Wether it were not a True Sylogism;
And to the Judges, Whether the Propositions were not True in Law?

The Sylogism.
IT is a Maxim in the Law of England, That the Kings of England are so bound
up by all Statutes made pro bono Publico, that every Order or Direction of
theirs contrary to the Scope and full Intent of any such Statute is Void and
Null in Law But the last Prorogation of the Parliament was an Order of the
King's contrary to an Act of Edward the Third, made for the greatest Common
Good, Viz. The Maintenance of all the Statutes of England, and for the
Prevention of the Mischiefs and Grievances, which daily happen. Wherefore the
last Prorogation of the Parliament is Void and Null: Law.

