A SERMON Preached on the Coronation day OF K. CHARLES I. March 27. 1644. in S.
Mary's in CAMBRIDGE.

By Bishop BROWNRIGG when he was Vice Chancellor of the University, for which
he was cast into Prison.

LONDON, Printed for John Williams at the Crown in S. Paul's Churchyard. 1661.

Haggai 2.23. In that day, says the Lord of Hosts, will I take thee, O
Zerubbabel my servant, the Son of Shealtiel, says the Lord, and will make thee
as a Signet; for I have chosen thee says the Lord of Hosts.
THis Prophecy of Haggai, for the time and date of it, was directed to the
Jews soon after their Captivity, and contains a mixture and composition of
expostulation and promises. The chiefest expostulation is for the Peoples
backwardness in building the Temple. The Israelites upon their Return from
bondage, fell on good Husbandry, to set up their Houses, to sow and plant, and
to plough their ground; they thought it yet time enough to settle upon the
costly work of building the Temple; and indeed flesh and blood would think this
delay excusable, if not reasonable to get their own private wealth settled
before they set upon the work of public magnificency. But God looks for the
first service that his worship and glory should have the first pre-eminence.
For me, says the Prophet, and then for thy self and thy child. Noah's first
care after his coming out of the Ark, was to build an Altar of thankfulness,
which are the two first structures we read of in Scripture: and it is
observable, that God commanded him to build an Ark; but his own thankfulness
sets him on the building of an Altar: and this he does presently; he pleads not
the preservation of store, or tarrying till there were increase of all things;
but rather takes of every Creature, clean and unclean, as he had with him in
the Ark, and offers. Some count it for a cheek given to Jacob for his
backwardness, that God calls to him to pay his vow, and to go up to the
Mountain to build an Altar. God sends two Prophets unto the Israelites,
Haggai and Malachi; Haggai reproves them for not building the Temple; Malachi,
because of the Priests portion which was delivered for other uses. Here, that
the Prophet Haggai may the better stir them up, he uses gracious promises in
his expostulations with them.

1. Here is a promise of settling Religion, and maintaining his public worship,
I will fill this House with glory, c. 2. v. 7. he would pitch his Tabernacle
among them, and make this place of his rest glorious. What promise can be more
precious than this? than for God to say, here will I dwell and have a delight
in them.

2. After having settled Religion and maintained it, he would make a fence to
secure and preserve it: and that is the promise of peace; In this place will I
give peace, says the Lord of Hosts. Peace does preserve Religion, but War
defaceth and ruineth it. The Churches had rest and were edified, Acts 9. To
have Jerusalem built in boisterous times was a sad prediction, Dan. 9. they
went but slowly forward with a sword in one hand and a Trowel in the other.
Blows will not build up, but blow down the Church. When the Temple was
building, there was not the noise of any Instrument to be heard; but when it
was a ruining, they brake down the carved work thereof with Axes and Hammers.

3. He would bless them with prosperity. Peace and poverty are poor comfort:
but to make peace in the borders, and to fill them with the flower of Wheat,
these are high mercies. They are the Ingredients that make up a complete
Blessing. A Nation blessed by God with piety, peace, and plenty may sing the
song of the Prophet Isaiah of the Vineyard. There is 1. Turris Religionis. 2.
Propugnaculum pietatis and securitatis. 3. Torcularia abundantiae. Here is one
mercy encompassing and incircling another, bunches and clusters of blessings:
not simple blessings, but the meeting and kisses of mercies. Were we but our
own Carvers we would say, enough Lord, thou have richly loaded us with thy
benefits, neither could we find room for Esau's desire, Have thou not one
blessing more, my Father? but even here God sends one thing to make up all
complete; and that is, the blessing of Magistracy and Government. For it is not
sufficient to have Religion, but there must be Defensor Religionis: not only
Peace, but Custos Pacis: not only Plenty, but Anonae Curator, without which
neither Peace, Plenty, nor Religion can continue long: and this, in the last
place, viz. the setting up of the Supreme Magistrate. This mercy is like the
work of Creation. When God had finished the World, and blessed all in it, he
made Man to be Lord over all; so God brings here Zerubbabel to dress his
Garden, and to over-see his Inheritance. Here is piety, peace, and plenty, and
all three supported by one Sovereign authority. Happy are the people that be in
such a case.

The Text contains in it God's gracious intendment to Zerubbabel for to put
honor upon him. You may consider it under three notions.

As under the notion 1. Of Prophecy. 2. Of Promise. 3. Of a Reward.


The first was under the notion of a Prophecy, acquainting him with the future
events of the earth; what should betide him and his People. It Is the privilege
of God's Church and chosen ones to have the Arcana Imperii made known unto
them, the successes of ages and generations, the risings and fallings of People
and States; God discloseth them unto his Servants. He will not conceal from
Abraham his purpose of overthrowing Sodom and Gomorrah. Joseph is made
acquainted with the future condition of Egypt. He tells Daniel of the
beginnings and endings of all the great Monarchies of the World. The great
Famine under Claudius Caesar, which none of the Sages of the time knew of, was
revealed to a poor Prophet of his at Jerusalem, who admonishes the people of
it. Daniel the beloved Prophet, and John the beloved Disciple, did foreknow,
and foretell the destinies of all generations ensuing: As his love was on them,
so his care was for them to prepare them for Future Events. I told you these
things (says our Savior) that you might remember when they came, that I told
you of them. This is the great end why God discloseth things future, that we
might sit our selves for them. Sudden surprisals are far more uncomfortable
than expected events. Things which are foretold teach us, that they are not the
casualities of blind Fortune, nor the violence of unreasonable men; but the
gracious dispensations of our God.

As under the notion of a Promise that does betoken some good to Zerubbabel.
The Jews were now in a sad condition. Their eyes might behold the miseries and
ruins and poor relics of Church and State. It Is true, the tide was now
turned, and they came out of captivity; but things went so hard with them, such
poor beginnings had their Commonwealth, their Neighbors maligning, and
opposing their work, that Zerubbabel might not despair of ever seeing the work
finished, or himself and his people in their former condition; for the
upholding of his heart God sends him such promise that might not only
support, but advance him forward with cheerfulness. In the poorest condition
that can be the Church of God is rich in promises; and he is no poor man that
has rich men for his debtors, though he be destitute of present supplies, yet
he has Bills in abundance; who has despised the state of small things?
Zerubbabel has laid the foundation, and shall see the top-stone.

Under the notion of a Reward assured unto Zerubbabel for what he had done; he
had been zealous for God's Temple and worship, and God does not only accept of
it, but reward him for it. Honorantem me honorabo, he that will honor God, God
will honor him. Has David a purpose to build God an House? God requiteth his
Intentions, and says, I will build thee a sure House. What comfort and
confidence did this bring to Nehemiah! he contended with the Elders and
compelled them to bring Tithes into the Temple; and then his heart breaks forth
unto God, Lord remember me for good: and remember David and all his troubles,
his afflictions. What were those afflictions? his toil, his pains, his trouble
to uphold Gods worship: his readiness not only to do good for the Church, but
to suffer for it. Remember the afflictions of David; and it follows; the sure
mercies of David shall be performed.

The text is, a Royal Charter, sealed to Zerubbabel, and in it a promise of
future advancement. I know that the Text is interpreted in a mystical sense
concerning Christ. And indeed Luther's saying is true, that then we understand
the Prophets aright, when we find Christ in them. Christ is the true
Zerubbabel, the true anointed of the Lord; the Diadem, Scepter and Crown of the
Throne of David belong to him. But this hinders not the intendment of it
literally to Zerubbabel, or the application of it to those that be as
Zerubbabel, the anointed of the Lord: and so we may use it, but with this
reservation, that Christ only has the pre-eminence; he is the King of Kings,
and the Lord of Lords, before whom all the Kings of the Earth must throw down
their Crowns, and give him homage. But by him, and after him, the Text is a
royal Charter made to Zerubbabel, wherein are these particulars.

1. The time and season, when this shall befall, In that day.

2. The Author and advancement. The Lord.

First, I will take thee.

Secondly, I will make thee.

Thirdly, I have chozen thee. It is the Lord, the Lord only.

3. The person to be advanced. Zerubbabel my servant.

4. The advancement it self. I will make thee as a signet.

5. The ground and reason, and withal, the stability of the advancement; the
assurance of it is sealed with the Seal of the living God: it passes through
three Seals, the ratification thrice repeated. Thus says the Lord, and again,
and the third time sealed with the broad seal of Heaven. Thus says the Lord of
Hosts.

1. And first of the time wherein this Chater should be made good to
Zerubbabel. In that day, and it is called a day of overthrowing the kingdoms of
the Heathens, when the Chariots of the horsemen shall come down, when Heaven and
Earth shall be shaken: in that day Zerubbabel shall be exalted. So these words
may have the force of several things.

1. The force of a supposition, or an etsi; and then this is the meaning,
though all the world shall be in an uproare and confusion, yet Zerubbabel shall
be exalted. 2. The force of a condition, or a potius, rather then Zerubbabel
shall not be exalted, the Kingdoms of the Heathen shall be overthrown. 3. The
form of a fined relation and determination, or a quando, when the Nations shall
be rooted out, then Zerubbabels throne shall be exalted.
1. The first of a supposition, etsi. Though all the earth be in an uproare,
yet Zerubbabels Throne shall be set up. And this supposition is not merely
imaginary: no impossible thing to see the world in an uproare. We must not
(...), think it strange to see this lower region full of storms and tempests,
the roaring of the waves, the raging of the Sea, and the madness of the
people, are put all together; and this speaks the world, as truly subject to
tumults, as the Sea. Tempests there are venti Typhonici, unquiet spirits, whose
work is to take peace from the Earth, and to bring all to confusion: and now
suppose all this; yet Zerubbabel shall have a charter of safty, Gods Church,
his chosen ones, his darlings, they have a patent of security. When God sends
forth his judgments, he gives charges, as David did to his Soldiers, that
they should spare the life of his Son. Let not Zerubbabel my servant be harmed.
The world it is in a tumult, as Psa. 2. Why do the Heathen rage, and the people
of the Earth imagine a vain thing? Yet have I set my King upon my holy Hill of
Sion, David, and the Sons of David are Sealed up; the Psalmist delights to put
their cases to imagine them, and so to strengthen their faith, Psalm. I will not
fear though the Earth be removed; when the earth does quake, then does David
stand immovable, see the courage of his Faith in the rebellion raised against
him, Ps. 3. 4. I will not be afraid for ten thousand men, that have set
themselves against me round about. See his security in the midst of these
dangers. I laid me down and slept.

2. As a Condition, potius: rather than Zerubbabel shall miscarry, he will
overthrow all that shall oppose him; nay, he will shake Heaven and Earth, the
whole creation. Nothing too costly to redeem him from destruction. Zerubbabel's
advancement met with great opposition, the Prophet compares it with a great
mountain: but what art thou great mountain before Zerubbabel? Thou shall become
a plain, Zach. 4.7. All oppositions, that rise against him shall become flat.
God is the God of nature, and the Lord of the whole world, and so he is
merciful to all his creatures: but when they come in comparison, or stand in
opposition to his Church, they shall be all parted with. Thus Isaiah shows
how much he esteemed the welfare of his chosen; Isa. 43. 34. I gave Egypt for
thee Aethiopia, and Sheba for thy ransom. I will give men for thee, and
Nations for thy life; One David, one Zerubbabel is more dear than thousands of
Heathens and Aliens.

3. As the force of a Quando, It sets forth the time when, and herein are three
gradual periods. 1. In the day of adversity he will stand for Zerubbabel, and
defend him: usually when the Church is in adversity, God suffers the men of the
World to be in prosperity: and so when the day comes, he will remember his
own, and do good to them. The Sun of prosperity shines not in both their
Hemispheres at once God usually sets a pillar of cloud betwixt them: when it is
dark on the one side, it is light on the other. The world shall rejoice, but
thou shall have sorrow, says our Savior. David says, the time of the
Church's affliction is but till the pit be dug up for the ungodly. The Ark
of Gods people then rises higher, when the world lies lowest and sinketh under
water. 2. In that day when he shall revenge the opposition of the Church on
their enemies, Zerub. shall be exalted. High revenge on the enemies of the
Church, is accompanied with remarkable mercies to the Church; St. Paul showed
that the Lord destroyed Sodom and Gomorrah in an extraordinary way, so likewise
he preserves his own in an extraordinary manner; judgments on the enemies of
the Church are mercies to the Church. He slew mighty Kings, for his mercy
endures for ever. Their oppositions of the Church are not only repaid with
fury, and revenge on her enemies, but recompensed with comfort on her self. 3.
In that day, that great day, that last day, the throne of Zerubbabel shall be
exalted. The promise reaches unto the time when there shall be a full
accomplishment of all things: Other judgments were but praejudicia ultimi
judicii, even then, when all Thrones shall be cast down, Zerubbabels Throne
shall be exalted. In that time that he makes up his Jewels, Zerubbabel shall be
remembered, then shall he set him as a signet in his right hand. And indeed till
then neither Zerubbabel the Type, nor Christ the Antitype shall be at their
full glory. Christ indeed sits now on his throne, but he treads not on his
footstool. Sit thou on my right hand, till I make thine enemies thy footstool,
when Heaven and Earth, and the powers thereof shall be shaken, then shall
Christ and his Saints appear in glory. Here is the happiness of true Christian
Kings, they shall not be terminated, they shall not end with others; but shall
reign with Christ for ever. When Pagans and Heathens shall be brought to the
bar of justice, true Christian Kings shall be taken up, as assisters to the
Bench: Here Christ reigns in and by them, where they shall reign with Christ.
I now come to the second part of my Text, The person to whom, Zerubbabel my
servant.

1. By compellation. He calls him by his name, he directs a special message
to him.

1. It is an honor to be owned of God by name, It Is a testimony of his favor
to Zerubbabel, and to such, it shows how high he esteems of them, like the
great officers of State, their names and persons are precious; or as the great
Constellations in heaven and stars of just Magnitude, for which we have
particular names, and not for the rest. 2. It Is affectionate as well as
honorable, it is the language of love thus to speak in those personal sweet
expressions. God delights thus to express himself to his servants,
Chrysostom observes that it is a sign of Gods displeasure, either not to
speak, or not to speak by name, I have called thee by name, says God to Moses.
3. It is comfortable, especially in the days of trouble when adversity besets
us, thus sweetly to be called by him; Fear not Abraham, said God to his
servant. Genesis 15. Thus David incourageth himself. O God thou have known my
Soul. Fear not Jacob. Be of good-chear Paul, Christ says to his persecuted
Disciples. Thus Jacob prays for the blessing when he was in destresse, and
the blessing assured him by the imposition of his name. Thy name shall be
called Israel, for thou have prevailed.
2. He describes him by his relation, Zerubbabel my servant; a title of high
honor and worth. Noble men are more honorable in their Courts, attendances,
and service unto their Sovereigne than in all the commands they exercise in
their own country. King James of blessed memory, counting up the titles which
the Scriptures put upon Christian Kings, glories in this most, that God
calls them the servants of the Lord. Bellarmine esteems it servile and
trivial, and mocketh him for it, as Micah did David for dancing before the
Arc; but this our gracious Prince made it his blessing. Indeed though it be a
title otherwise communicated to all the servants of the Lord, yet it does most
especially belong to those that are in supreme authority. Moses my servant,
David and Zerubbabel my servants, a title given by God to those that are
immediately subordinate to himself: and it were wisdom to preserve these
titles to that they belong to. Titles given by God are real conveiances, and
not to be transported (as the Cardinal would have it) to inferior subjects.
Zerubbabel is the servant of God.

1. Officio, The high calling of Kings and Princes, is an office which they
perform to God. St. Paul calls them Gods servants and Ministers. Supremacy is
not any intrusion or usurpation, as Corah, and his accomplices would have it;
were it so, it were good to be rid of it; or were it an aberration, 'twere good
to forsake it; were it but a permission made for a time, it must in time give
place: but it is an authority from God, set up by original institution. The
Apostles call it the Ordinance of God, David compares it to the Sun at Noon.

2. Speciali functione. Zerubbabel Gods servant, by a special service, above
all other employments, even the restoring of Gods worship to the full beauty
thereof, and the building of the Temple. This was the work expected from
Zerubbabel. The Jews say that the keys of the Temple were laid every night
under Solomon's pillow, they hang not at their priests girdle. When Kings serve
God as Kings, when they do that service which none but Kings can do for him: to
establish the truth of religion, to maintain and uphold it, to safeguard the
Church, to see men be religious, and not suffer them to be sacrilegious, is the
great service that belongs unto Kings.

3. Gratiosa acceptatione, God graciously accepted of the service that
Zerubbabel did for him. Zerubbabel might meet with those that would quarrel and
wrangle with his proceedings: But let others malign him; here is his comfort,
that God, whom he serves, accepts of him. It Is the lot of the servants of
God to be liable to the quarrels of disaffectionate men; so Moses the beloved
one; so David, the man after Gods own heart though for a while, the People had
very Loyal and Honorable thoughts of Him, He did seem to please them; yet 2 Samuel 3. There did arise discontent about his Government and ruling over them.
Well, what says God of him? notwithstanding all this, this is his Testimony of
him: He feeds them with a faithful and true heart, and rules them prudently
with all his power. So Solomon his Son, even his Government was complained of
as too heavy: yet all the burdens he loaded the people withal, were an
over-charge of wealth. The Taxes and Sums for the building of the Royal
Temple and Palace were not imposed on the Israelites, but the Strangers among
them. The Spirit that is within us lusts after envy, and shows it no where
more then toward our Superiors. We should consider their temptations and
allurements, and compassionate them and pity their failings and weaknesses,
and pray for their proceedings, and acknowledge the benefits we receive by
them. They may sometimes overcharge us; but are always a shield and defense
unto us. Tully tells us of those Sicilians, that because of the great benefit
they enjoyed by the Roman Government, would not quarrel with them for some few
trivial matters. So should we do here.

4. Exclusive Zerubbabel is Gods Servant, This interest cutteth off all other
ministrations that can be laid on him. The King's service is the Supreme
dignity. He finds no equal on Earth, much less Superior: Dominion is the
image of God not of the Pope: This Signet is not annulus piscatoris, the ring
of Peter or his feigned Successor, the Pope. I'ts true, when the Imperial Power
turned Vassal to the Sea of Rome, the Scripture calls it the Image of the
Beast. But a lawful Supremacy is a most legible impression of the image of God.
There is a service in Government, and that an hard one too, so that the
Subjects Duty is the easier of the too. Diis minoribus in unum Iowem conversis:
veritas nominum est salus proprietatum: facilius est imperantibus obedire, quam
obedientibus imperare. It Is a more easy thing to obey than to govern or rule,
so Hug on the hard task of Government. Kings are serviceable to the good of
the People, but not unto their Power; not like to the Pope, that can hear his
Cardinal Sing, Ecclesia data est Papae. The Church is brought in by a Father
saying, I am not thine, but thou art mine, and all things else. This shows
how Kings may be said to be servants. He is properly a servant, that is so in
respect of his employments for another, and from another. The Supreme power
has employment of God, and his authority, and so his servant. But respectu
finis, their end is to the great good of others. St. Paul determines it Romans
13. The Servant of God for our good. So then this truth, that Kings and Princes
are servants of God, must be unto them monitorium officii; it should put them
in mind their duty: so to govern as to remember they are under government. I
know it a preposterous Solecisme, to preach unto the people the duty of their
Kings, or unto Kings the duty of their people. It was the method of the
Pharisees, when they found fault with Christ or his Disciples; they would
complain of Christ to his Disciples, why eats your, Master with Sinners? and
of the Disciples to Christ why do not thy Disciples fast? Just the spirit of
the Pharisees, to beget jealousies, and for dissension to tell the King that
his Subjects are false, and the People, that the King usurpeth. This is not to
give every one his true portion: every truth is not for every person. This
here, that Kings and Princes are Gods servants, secureth their persons, seals
upon them a charter of a protection. Princes in point of honor are bound to
safeguard their servants. David pleads for this privilege in his danger.
Undertake for thy servant for good, Psalm. 11.8. King Hezekiah prayed, Lord I am
oppressed, undertake for me. David prefixeth this title unto his Psalm of
thanksgiving. A Psalm of David the Servant of the Lord. Likewise it must bind
us to our obedience, and not only manacle our hands and pinion our arms not to
offer violence, but bridle our tongues from speaking any unreverent speech. How
dare you speak against my servant Moses? It was the check that God gave not to
the common murmurers, but unto those that were sombody in the congregation,
even Princes. And Gods calling of him Servant was not to teach Aaron to call
him fellow servant, but my Lord as it follows.

This affords us three great excellencies in the governing of Gods people.

1. In his person, Monarchy. 2. In his stock and original, Nobility. 3. In his
descent, a lineal succession in the Royal Family.
Three great excellencies in this Government.

1. In the Person, Monarchy. The Supreme Authority sealed in Monarchy, has
this privilege and advancement above other forms of Government, that it
carries a more ample stamp of Gods institution. We condemn not other forms
of Government, they are not aberrations; but justly praise the form which God
chuleth for his own. The Israelites for a time were under Judges, but the
settling of the Government was to be in Kings. Its true the first King was
extorted by the People: but that hinders not that the office of Kings was by
Divine intendment. It was promised to Abraham, Kings shall be born of thee.
This Royal Charter was drawn up before Saul's time. That which blemished Readiness
setting up was the peoples overhasty desire to enjoy a King. Saul the King and
Saul the Apostle were both born out of time, the one too soon the other too
late: but both their functions were of, Divine Institution.

2. In his stock and original nobility; the son of Shealtiel. God takes notice
of his nobility and dignity, and puts honor on it. It Is an ill Symptom of
the worst of times ( quae non instant, sed extant) when the vile shall rise up
and behave themselves irreverently against the Nobles, especially the Nobility
out of which God raises the Princes of his people. Blessed art thou O Land,
when thy King is the son of Nobles Queen Elizabeth, when they inquired of her,
whom she would have to succeed after her, answered. My Throne is the Throne of
Kings. No mean person must be my successor. The precepts of Philosophy tell us,
that Nobility is in a great capacity for rule and authority: Every shoobuckle
will not make a signet, or bramble a King.

3. As he establishes Monarchy and raises it out of Nobility; so he preserves
it in a constant descent from David. This is that which David calls the
establishment of his throne. Lord thou have spoken that of thy servants house,
there shall sit a man for ever on his Throne. Rather then this course should be
interrupted, God takes such care to fulfill this succession, that he will set
Ioas a young child on his Throne. It was the exception made against Herod, Quod
nec nascendo, nec vivendo Rex suit. He was neither a King by birth, nor by
life. This hereditary succession preventeth much inconveniency which would fall
out by reason of a vacuum. A vacuum is of a strange nature, which makes things
of a low condition to ascend higher.

3. The Author of this advancement. It Is no other then God himself. I will,
take thee, I will make thee, I have chosen thee. God is the fountain of all
lawful authority: unto him the shields of the Earth belong, supremacy and
sovereignty which are the beams of Majesty. Promotion comes neither from the
East nor from the West, nor any point of the Compass. Magistracy is the Image
of God which fell from the Heaven to the Earth. Exemplum habet de coelo. Lo our
Savior shows John so. It is written in the Law, I have said ye are Gods. He
it was that made them so. We must not have gods of our own making; the holy
Oil wherewith they were anointed is his, with my holy Oil. (says the Lord) I
have anointed him. The Throne they are placed in is Gods Throne, 1 Chr. 29.23.
Solomon sat on the Throne of the Lord. The Judges they exercised Gods
Judgments. For the judgment is Gods, you shall not therefore respect persons
in judgments Deuteronomy. 1.17. Hence they are called the sons of the most high,
hence they are all the sons of God. In his thigh is there names written. All
this betokens their high descent. This thing considered, that Kings are
authorized by God; it will prove a comfort that our Government is of Gods
appointment: and God will bless his own ordinance. Men's inventions, though
never so wise, have no such promise as his institutions. They that set up
Abimeleck to be King over Israel took delight in him, and he in them: but how
long did he last and their joy continue? But if God sets one over us, let us
not question how he shall save us. Gedeon suspected himself, and Moses groaned
under his burden, yet both of them prevailed.

The advancement it self. I will make thee as a Signet. Zerubbabel shall be
unto God as his seal ring. It Is a Symbolical expression: take it literally,
and no great matter to be found in it. Bernard says, Annulus nihil valet ad
hereditates quas expecto. It is not so much the Ring, as the thing sealed with
the Ring: the purpose unto which it was destined is that which puts the
excellency on it. Materiam saperabit opus, and so we may consider it threefold.

1. As a seal and testimony, and conveyance of authority, in the ruling of
places unto great officers. By a Ring Governments were disposed of. Joseph was
thus admitted to advancement: Pharaoh took off his Ring, and put it on Joseph's
hand. Alexander declared his Successor by delivery of a Ring. So then, the
impression or Signet of Supreme Authority is fixed on Zerub. It Is his Royal
Charter. None shall lift up hand or foot against thee in the land of Egypt,
says Pharaoh to Joseph; all other governments must pass under this seal. As
Ambrose speaks of the King given to Joseph. It was for a seal unto others.
Let the metal be what it will, without this Sculpture it bears no authority.

2. Rings were for ornament. The Ring and the Robe were brought forth for
ornaments Luke 15. And such is the power of Magistracy; it is the ornament of
the Creation, the luster of all the great Workmanship of God. He made the Sun
to rule the Day, the Moon and Stars to rule the Night: But the splendency of
these lights is the beauty of the Creature: Take them away, and what remains
but horror and darkness? See how God describes the beauty of his people. I
decked thee with Gold and Silver, and thou wast comely. A due proportion of
Sovereignty and subjection, is the beauty of the body politic: and also, as
every good government has its beauty, so the Royal Government is most
beautiful. It sets forth the Glory of Gods name, that he governs by Kings
and Princes, they are his anointed, as the great constellations of the
Firmament. Solomon reckons it amidst the four happinesses. And Kings against
whom there i^no rising up.

3. God will make Zerubbabel his signet; and this betokens care and custody.
He will wear, keep, and hold him as a signet. The Scripture does represent
this care of God by a signet, in nameing three places wherein God sets it
for safe custody.

1. On his right hand: and this his usual way of wearing Signets. Set me as a
signet at thy right hand. So then custodia dextrae, this is the first, and this
contains an ordinary preservation. There are crosses and mischances, which
daily happen to the life of man, unto which even Princes are subject; did not
this good right hand of the Lord protect them in their going out and coming in?
In all the turnings and passages of their lives this hand protects them. They
are viri dextrae.

2. There are extraordinary cases and hazards, and they require more powerful
preservation: and for them there must be a stronger place. Set me as a seal on
thy arm. Beside the preservation of his hand, he has for his Anointed the
deliverance of his arm, of his strong arm, of his outstretched Arm. David, to
shelter himself from ordinary dangers, cries out, God is my house, its he that
makes David to dwell in safety: But in great distresses, as when the conspiracy
was raised against him, he puts himself in a strong protection. God is not
only my house, but my rock, my fortress, my strong tower and refuge. For daily
preservation, let thy hand be on the man of thy right hand: but in strong
assaults, awake, awake, put on strength thou arm of the Lord.

3. Thirdly there is yet a closer and safer place, and it is his heart: The
Spouse says, set me as a seal on thy heart. And this betokens great care.
The heart is Loves Palace, in it she keeps her Jewels; and such a sure Keeper
God is. He stretches out hand and arm to preserve Zerubb. No snatching him out
of his hand. Here is the safety of Gods people, of his Anointed Zerubbabel; his
hand shall hold him fast, and his arm shall strengthen him, and his heart
shall be a hiding place, and a Sanctuary.

The ground of this advancement, for I have chosen thee. This election is a
sure foundation, this Charter of God is sigillum signatum, this preferment is
an impression from the Great seal. This election is like the great stone which
supported the Throne of Nebuchadnezzar. I will place his Throne on this Throne,
says God. Its like building on a Rock. Let the storms come, and the wind blow,
this rock of election will keep it immovable: Yet will I make Zerubbabels
Kingdom steadfast.

This Election appears in five things.

1. Ex Electione, non tantum ex permissione; this is too weak and Sandy a
foundation. Permission falls short of approbation, and Kings are not carried by
this, but by Gods steady Election. In the Kingdom of Providence there is
nothing of casualties and permissions, the Spirit of God which governs the
world is a Spirit of Counsel, and not of temerity. So then Zerubbabel reigns
by Gods election and purpose; it is not a matter of mere tolleration or bare
permission.

2. Exelectione tam cum rejectione aliorum. Bernard says, Gods choice must
stand when all other competitors are rejected. It was this election that
transferred the Kingdom of Saul. Speak not of him, for I have rejected him.
This advanced David and not Eliah. Anoint him not; for the Lord has refused
him. Though all Israel set their faces toward Adonijah, to make him King; yet
Solomon shall have the Crown. Let others be what they will be, either for
parts, power or favor, it is not the metal, if the ingraving stamp of God be
wanting.

3. Ex electione cum dilectione. Election comes from dilection. The delight
which God takes in the prosperity of his people, puts him on to place a
Lord over them. Should we expostulate with God as they did. Wherein have thou
loved us? This would be a clear evidence of it. The Queen of Sheba takes
notice of the happiness of Israel in this. Blessed be the Lord thy God that
takes delight in thee, to place on his Throne so wise a King. Because the Lord
loved Israel to establish them for ever, therefore he gave them such a King. If
we pass by this token of Gods love, the Queen of the South will rise up in
judgment against us, her speech will condemn us.

4. Ex electione cum deliberatione. Election proceeds from deliberation. It
implies study and search and great consultation. We must understand it (...)
leave out all ill circumstances, and take in all its perfections. God does it
exactly out of the full depth of his Counsels, and forecast of his providence,
all things being considered. The setting up of Magistracy over us is a work of
consultation. God pitcheth on Zerubb. as Pharaoh on Joseph. Can we find out
such a man? This work is one of the chiefest pieces of Gods providence in the
World: not any one that comes next to hand can serve the turn: no God makes
searchings and inquiries, and then concludes, I have forund me out a man.

5. Electio personalis. The election it is personated, it is fixed on a person.
Election is not a mere description of a form of a power; but carries the
designation of the person: it does not only frame a model, and constitute an
Office, or ordain a place; but chooses out a man. God sends not qualities or
notions or forms, sets not up Platonical Ideas; But consecrates a person.
For conformation of all these, is that great ratification at the end of all. He
has spoken and will make it good: he that says it is the Lord of Hosts. This
promise is not like a Papal grant, which disposes of Kingdoms, but affords
no help or assistance to those unto whom it gives them. Let them fight for
them, if they will have them: The Lord of Hosts will make them good. It Is
observed that the Prophets after the Captivity, never almost named God, but
with this title, The Lord of Hosts. When Zerubb. and his people are at the
weakest, God affords himself strongest. This title is Zerubbabels lifeguard; it
stands round about, in the front as in the foreward; in the close of the Text
as in the rereward: it speaks unto him, as the Prince of the host of God. These
heavenly Auxiliaries, these Chariots and Horses of fire, shall resume him from
all the Chariots and Horses of the Heathen; th^se being with Zerubb. no matter
who oppose him: by faith in his name shall be discomfit them all.

Let us (...), apply this Text unto our selves; let us see the blessing we
enjoy; let this put us in mind to stand on these terms with God, if the
promises of his people may be made good unto us, it is not for every Nation to
do so; only for the people in Covenant with God. It is a comfort to us to have
a Zerubbabel to be a Prince, and Leader to this people of God. Zerubbabel, some
give it, a stranger from Babel, one that renounceth communication with the
Whore of Rome. Zerubb. is one appointed by God to fan out the chaff from the
Wheat. This our Governor shall be as a Torch of fire amidst the heap of Chaff,
and all their Superstition as stubble before him.

Is it not a comfort to us that a son of Shealtiel is a Prince over us, one of
the Royal Race, no stranger or servant, no Assyrian or Philistim; but an issue
of Royal Progenitors, designed to his Throne by God himself from the birth,
Womb, and conception? Is it not a great favor unto us, that our Zerubbabel is
counted a servant of God? and that not only by place; but by piety: not only
High Steward of his House, and so servant by office, but by devotion. What a
mercy this is, we may acknowledge, if we remember the imprecation of David; set
an ungodly man to rule over them, or the commination of the Prophet, A Leopard
shall rule over them. Let us now acknowledge our happiness, who have no Pharaoh
for our King, one that knows not God, and fears to know the Lord; but one
that religiously both knows and fears God. Did England ever know a Prince
more frequent, constant and attentive in the service of God? It Is a commendable
thing in a private person, how much more in a King to keep his daily and
constant hours of prayer, to bring his children up in the Worship of God: to
teach them betimes to know the God of their Fathers. He is the servant of the
Lord, and all these precious, titles which God lays upon his servants, belong
to him: servus quem elegit, quem comprobavit, quem sustentavit, filius
ancillae: He is his choice Servant, in whom his Soul delights, his servant,
whom his hand upholdeth, his servant, and the son of his handmaid, and a true
Member of the true Church of Christ.

Lastly, so we pray and hope, and trust, he is a servant of his, whom he will
use as a blessed instrument of his glory: he is a servant of his own, on whom
his stamp is. Clemen Alex. forbids four sorts of Characters to be on any
Signet. The contrary are not to be found in him.

1. The stamp of an Idol; our Zerubbabel is free from this Character. He
neither names, knows, nor worshippeth any God, but the God of Israel.

2. No instrument of cruelty to be engraven on it. Our Zerubb. is free from
this: he bears the signature of clemency on him; and this is a Royal virtue.
Kings must sing the song both of Mercy and judgment; but the sweetest song is
that of mercy. Do justice and love mercy: he both does it, and delights in it.

3. No Emblem of Intemperance. This Royal signet, which we behold; bears
sobriety: It Is a confessed virtue emninent in him. He has learned that it is
not for Kings to drink wine. He is far from the Disease which the Prophet
complains of in the Kings of his time; he does eat and drink for strength, and
not for intemperance.

4. No wanton or Luxurious stamp. Our Royal Signet bears the seal of
Chastity. What Virgin has he deflowred? Whose bed has he defiled? Whose
Virginity has he assaulted? Bishop Latimer presented a great person with an
Handkerchief, this written on it, whoremongers and adulterers God will judge:
this is his Motto. Survey the World, and see how many such Princes your thought
can present you with. Surely their names may be written in a small compass. We
may and should boast of Gods mercy: All Christendom cannot afford such another.

FINIS.

