THE HISTORY of the Life and Reign of RICHARD The Third.

Composed in five Books By GEO: BUCK Esquire.

Honorandus est qui injuriam non fecit, sed qui alios eam facere non patitur,
duplici Honor dignus est.

Plato de legibus. Lib. 5. Qui non repellit a proximo injuriam si potest, tam
est in vitio quam ille qui infert.

D. Ambros. offic. Lib. 3. LONDON, Printed by W. Wilson, and are to be sold by
VV. L. H. M. and D. P. 1647.

The true Portraiture of Richard Plantagenest, of England and of France King
Lord of Ireland the third King Richard


TO THE FAVOVRABLE ACCEPTANCE Of the Right Honorable PHILIP Earl of Pembrooke
and Mountgomery, etc.
Sir,
HAving collected these papers out of their dust, I was bold to hope, there
might be something in them of a better fate (if mine obscure pen darken not that
too.) Please your Lordshipp to let your name, make them another witness of
your nobleness, it may redeem and improve them, to a clearer opinion and
acknowlegedment of these times, in which I am to meet every Critic, at his
own weapon, who will challenge the Book at the very Title: The Malicious and
Malevolent, with their blotted Coments; the Captious and Incredulous, with
their jealous praecisian^sines, whose inclinations shows them of envious
perplexed natures, to look at other men's actions and memory by the wrong end
of the perspective, and (me thinks) I fancy them to our shadows, which at
noone creep behind like Dwarfes, atevening, stalk by like Giants; they will
haunte the noblest merits and endeavors to their Sunset, then they monster it*
but to the Common-rout, they are another kind of Genius, or ignis fatuus;
leads them into dark, strange, wanderings, there they stick: for to persuade
the opinionated vulgar out of their ignorant selves, is of as high a belief to
me, as to transpeciate a Beast into a man; I (therefore) shall crave favor, to
protest these papers beyond their Censure, and humor: But to those they are
wished (I hope) their weak accesses may be the more pardonable since they are
the kindlings and scintillations of a modest Ambition, to truth and gratitude,
which gives me the encouragement to assure your Lordship, that if mine Authors
be sincere and faithful, my penis free and innocent, having learned, that a
story (as it ought) must be a just, perspicuous Narration of things memorable,
spoken, and don. The Historiographer, veritable; free from all Prosopolepsyes,
or partial respects, and surely his pen should taste with a great deal of
Conscience, for there is nothing leaves so an infected a sting, or scandal, as
History, it rankles to all posterity, wounds our good names, to all memory and
places, by an Authentic kind of prejudice: I am with his opinion, in his
excellent Religio Medici, who holds it an offense to Charity, and as bloody a
thought one way, as Nero's in another; My Lord, under these humble addresses,
this sues to your honored hand, Presented by the unfeigned wishes of

your Honors avowed and humble Servant, GEO: BUCK.

The ARGUMENT and CONTENTS of the First Book. The Lineage, Family, Birth,
Education, and Tirociny of King Richard the third.
THe Royal house of Plantagenest, and the beginning of that name; What
Sobriquets were: The antiquity of Sirnames; Richard is created Duke of
Gloucester, his marriage, and his issue; His martial employments; His Journey
into Scotland, and recovery of Barwick; The death of King Edward the 4th. The
Duke of Gloucester made Lord Protector, and soon after, King of England, by
importunate suite of his Barons and of the People, as the next true and lawful
heir. Henry Teudor Earl of Richmond practices against the King; He is
conveyed into France. The Noble Lineage of Sir William Herbert, his Employment;
He is made Earl of Pembrooke. King Edward the 4th. first, and after King
Richard, solicit the Duke of Britain, and treat with him for the delivery
of the young Earl of Richmond his Prisoner. The success of that business.
The quality and title of the Beauforts or Sommersets. The Lineage and Family of
the Earl of Richmond. The solemn Coronations of King Richard, and of the
Queen his wife, his first at Westminster, the second at York. Nobles, Knights
and Officers made by him; Prince Edward his Son invested in the Principallity
of Wales, and the Oath of Allegiance made to him; King Richard demands the
Tribute of France; His Progress to York; His careful charge given to the
Judges and Magistrates; He holds a Parliament, wherein the marriage of the
King his Brother with the Lady Gray is declared and adjudged unlawful, their
children to be illegitimate and not capable of the Crown: The Earl of
Richmond and diverse others attainted of Treason; Many good Laws made; The K.
declared and approved by Parliament to be the only true and lawful heir of
the Crown. The King and Queen dowager are reconciled; He has secret
advertiseme^ts of Innovations and practices against him; Creates a
vice-Constable of England. His sundry treaties with Foreign Princes. Doctor
Morton corrupts the Duke of Buckingham, who becomes discontent, demanding
the Earldom of Hereford, with the great Constableship of England; He takes
Arms, is defeated and put to death by marshall Law.

THE FIRST BOOK OF THE HISTORY OF RICHARD THE THIRD, OF ENGLAND, AND OF
FRANCE, KING, AND LORD OF IRELAND.
RIchard Plantagenet, Duke of Gloucester, and King of England, and of France,
and Lord of Ireland, the third of that name, was the The House and Title of
York.
younger son of Sir Richard Plantagenet, the fourth Duke of York of that
Royal Family, and King of England, designate by King Henry the sixth, and by
the most noble Senate, and universal Synod of this Kingdom, the High Court of
Parliament. The Mother of this Richard Duke of Gloucester, was the Lady Cecily,
Daughter of Sir Ralph de Neville, Earl of Westmerland, by his wife Ioane de
Beaufort, the natural Daughter of John Plantagenet (alias) de Gaunt, Duke of
Guiene and Lancaster, King of Castile and Leon, third Son of King Edward the
third, for in that order this Duke is best accounted, because William of
Hatfield, the second Son of King Edward the third dyed in his infancy, and
this Duke of York, and King designate, was propagated from two younger sons
of the same King Edward the third, whereby he had both Paternall and Maternall
Title to the Crown of England and France: But his better and nearer Title, was
the Maternall Title, or that which came to him by his Mother the Lady Anne de
Mortimer, the Daughter and heir of Phillippa Plantagenet, who was the sole
Daughter and heir of Lyonell Plantagenet, Duke of Clarence, and second Son
of King Edward the third, according to the account and order aforesaid.

And this Lady Phillip was the Wife of Sir Edmond de Mortimer, the great and
famous Earl of March, and that Duke Richard, King designate, by his Father
Richard Plantagenet, Duke of York (surnamed also de Conningsb^rrough) issued
directly, and in a masculine line from Edmond Plantagenet, alias de Langley,
the first Duke of York, and the fourth Son of King Edward the third, who was
the most renowned The Lineage of Edward 3.
and glorious Progenitor to those Princes of York and Lancaster, and the first
King in a Lineall descent from that great Henry, surnamed Plantagenet, famous
for his great Prowess and many victories, King of England in the right of his
Mother the Empress Matil^^, or Maud, daughter and heir of King Henry the
first, and styled Angl^rum Domina, sometime wife of the Emperor Henry the
fifth, by which he was also surnamed, filius imperatricis: The French men
called him, Henry du Court Mantea^, or Court Mantle, because he wore a cloak
shorter then the fashion was in those times. By his Father Galfride, or Geoffry
Plantagenet, he was Earl or Duke of Anjou (for then Dux, and Comes, and
Ducatus and Comitatus, were Synonomies and promiscuous words,) he was also
Earl of Maine, of Torraine, and hereditary Seneschall, or High Steward of
France, and by his marriage of Elianor Queen of France Repudiate, Daughter and
heir of William Duke of Gascoigne and of Guiene, and Earl of Poictou: He was
Duke and Earl of those Principalities, and Signiories, also by the Empress
his Mother Duke of Normandy: He was Lord of Ireland by Conquest, and confirmed
by Pope Adrian. But these were not all his Seigniories The Empire of K. Henry.
2.
and Dominions; for after he was King of England, he extended his Empire and
Principate in the South to the Pyrerean mountains, (The Confines of Spain and
France) in the North to the Isles of Girald. in Topog. Hibernie. Sari^bur. in
Pol. Newbrig. Lib. ^.
Orkney, and in the East and West with the Ocean, as Giraldus Cambrensis, G^l.
Neubrigensis, and Ioannes Sarisburiensis, grave and credible Authors affirm,
who styled him, Regum Britanniae maximus; and doubtless he was the greatest
King of Britain since King Arthur.

But it is controverted amongst the Antiquaries and Heralds, which Earl of
Anjou first bare the surname and Sobriquet of Plantagenest, or Plantagenet
after the vulgar Orthodoxe, by what occasion, and for what cause it was taken
and borne, and from what time and age it had beginning: Some would have the
forenamed Geoffry Plantagenet, Father of this Henry, the first Earl of Anjou,
which bare it. But we shall find stronger reasons to derive it from a much
more ancient Earl of Anjou, and better causes then can be found in him, if we
step but a little back to their stories, and compare the men and their times.
Geoffry Plantagenet being a man of a gallant and active fire, disposed to the
Courts of Princes, to Justs Tournaments, etc. and to the Courtship of fair
Ladies, those of the highest rank, and had so amorous a Star, That Philippe le
Gross K. of France, suspected him for too familiar commerce with his bed. But
it was of better influence when he archieved and married the Empress Matilda,
by which we may very well calculate, he neither had, nor would be intent or at
leisure for such a mortified and perilous Pilgrimage to Jerusalem. But Fulk
Earl of Anjou.
if we would know the man, let us look upon the first Fulke, Earl of Anjou,
who lived about an hundred years before the Norman Conquest of England, and
was Son of Godefray, or Geoffry Grisegonell the first Earl of Anjou
(according to du Haillon) Ancestor and Progenitor to the foresaid Geoffry
Plantagenet, some seven or eight degrees in the ascending Line, as Paradin
accounts, a man raised upon the foundation of a great courage and strength
(two of the best Principles when they have good seconds, and make too a
glorious man, where they serve his virtues, not affections, as in this Prince
they did) whose disposition on the other side being let out into as vaste an
ambition and covetousness, never looked upon the unlawfulness of his desires,
how horrid soever (which amongst the many rest) run him upon the shelves of
wilful perjury, and murder; the one for defrauding and spoiling a Church of
certain Rights, and the other for contriving the Tragedy of his young Nephew,
Drog^, Earl of Britain, to make himself Lord of his Country and
Principallity. The secret check and scourge of those crimes had a long time to
work upon his conscience, and of a great sinner made a great Penitent, being
old and having much solitary time, and many heavy thoughts (which naturally
accompany old age, and suggest better considerations of our former and
youthful sins.) he opens the horror of them, and his afflicted mind to his
Confessor, (as great Constantine to AEgyppus) who enjoined him to make the same
confession before the holy Sepulcher, at Jerusalem, which Pilgrimage the Earl
performed in all lowly and contemptible manner, passing as a private and
unworthy person, without train or followers, save two of his meanest, which he
took rather for witnesses then servants, whose service was, when they came
near Jerusalem, the one with a cord (such as is used for the strangling of
Criminals) thrown about his Masters neck, to draw or lead him to Acoustre in
criminal and condemn. Paradin.
the holy sepulcher, whilst the other did acoustre and strip him as a condemned
person, and with extremity scourge him until he was prostrate before the
sacred Monument where he gave evidence of his unfeigned From this example Henry
2. submitted his body to be scourged by the Monks of Canterbury for the death
of Tho. Becket.
contrition and sorrow. Amongst other devout expressions, uttering this, Mon
dieu and Signeur rec^y a Pardon le perjure and homicide and miserable Foulque;
And after this pilgrimage he lived many years of prosperity in his Country
honored of all men. To justify this, there be many Examples of other Princes
and Noble Persons, who lived about the year of our Lord one thousand, and
somewhat before, and in three or four ages after, who under went the like
Pilgrimages imposed under base and mechanicke nicknames and persons, as of a
Carpenter, a Smith, a Fisherman, a Mariner, a Shepherd, a Woodman, a
Broome-man, etc. In my Inquiry after that of Plantagenet, I met with an ancient
Manuscript, that afforded me a large Catalogue of many such, by the French*
called Sobriquets, from whence I have transcribed these few for a taste.

Sobriquets.
Berger, Shepherd. After this manner and long after K. H. 2 the heir and
successor of this Earl, Fulko was enjoined by the Pope to go to the
Holy Land, and to fight against the Infidels, Hovend. Rival. etc.
Grisego^nelle, gray-coat Test de Estoupe, Head of towe. Arbuste, A Shrub.
Martell, A Hammer. Grande boeuf, Ox-face. LaZouch, Branch upon a Stem.
Houlette, a sheep-hook. Hapkin, Hatchet. Chapelle, Hood. Sans-terre, Lackland.
Malduit, Ill taught. Geffard, Ieuvencas, or Heyfer. Filz de Fleau, Son of a
Flaile. Plantagenest, the Plant or stalk of a Broom.
And under the name and habit of a Broome-man our Pilgrim performed this
Penance, and took the Sobriquet of Plantagenest from wearing a stalk of
Broom, or plant of Genest; this is generally received, but the time and reason
neither set down nor rendered by any of our Heralds and Antiquaries, French or
English; for the time when he performed this, I observe it about the year of
our Lord, one thousand certainly. But for the particular relation, this Count
had to choose the genest plant, or Broom stalk before any other vegitall or
thing, I shall lay down that opinion which is mine own noting for a
circumstance by the way, that the Broom in Hieroglyphicall Learning is the
Symbol of humility, and the Poets, particularly Virgil the best of Poets, give
it the Epithet of humilis, humilis genista; and the Etymologists derive it from
genu the knee, the part most applied, and as it were dedicate to the chief Act
of Reverence, kneeling, to which the natural Philosophers say, there is so
mutual a correspondency, and so natural a sympathy between genu and gen^sta,
Leon. Fuchius.
that of all other plants or vegitals, it is most comfortable and medicinable
to the pains and diseases of the knees. Pliny a great Master amongst them
says, Genista tuscae, cum, etc. genua dolentia sanat. Plin. Lib. 24. cap. 9.


But the considerable reason is, as I conceive it, from the use he was
constrained to make of the twigges of Broom when he came to be scourged at
Jerusalem, the place necessitating the use of them to that purpose, being (as
Strabo relates) a stony, sandy, and barren soil, only Strabo, Lib. 16.
natural and grateful to the genest, as the watery and moist to the Birch,
Willow and Withy, of which there could be none there, for that reason. And from
hence it must most conjecturally take the beginning of that Honor, which
afterward his Princely and Noble Posteries continued for their surname, who
became Dukes and Princes in sundry places, and some of them Kings of England,
France, Scotland and Ireland; and (as the pious people of that Age verily
believed by their observation) were the more prosperous and happy for his Du
Haillon.
sake.

For the continuance of the Name, some (who pretend to see further and better
in the dark then others as clear sighted) would have it taken of late time,
and not used by the Kings and Princes of England, of the Angeume race. But
there are many proofs to be adduced against them; Let us look into Master
Brooks genealogies of England, In his Catalogue of Honor.
we shall find nothing more obvious and frequent in the deductions of those
Princes of the House of Anjou, then the addition and surname of Plantagenet;
Edm. Plantagenet, Geo. Plantagenet, John Plantagenet, Edward Plantagenet,
Lyonell Plantagenet, Humphry Plantagenet, etc. In the French Historians and
Antiquaries, Ion de Tillet, Girard du Haillon, Clande Paradin, and Iean Baron
de la Hay, we shall often meet with Geoffry Plantagenet, Arthur Plantagenet,
Richard Plantagenet, and diverse the like, all of the first Age, when the
Angeume Princes first became English, and some before. Master Camden also in
his Immortal P^^tannia, mentions some very ancient, as Richard Plantagenet,
John Plantagenet, etc. And witnesses, that the forenamed Geoffry Plantagenet
used to wear a Broome-stalke in his Bonnet, as many Nobles of the House of
Anjou did, and took it for their chief surname. It might be added, that these
Earls of Anjou were descended out of the great house of Saxon in Germany,
which has brought forth many Kings* Emperors and Dukes; and that they were of
kindred and alliance to the ancient Kings of France, and sundry other Princes.
But I will close here for the high Nobility of King Richard, as the good old
Poet did for another Heroical Person: -- Deus est utroque parente.
Ovid. Deus. i. Rex.


And come to the other matters of his private story. And first for his Birth
and native place, which was the Castle of Fotheringay, or as some write, the
Castle of Birkhamsteed, both Castles and Honors of the Duke his Father, about
the year of our Lord 1450, which I discover by the calculation of the Birth,
Reign, and death of King Edward his brother, who was borne about 1441, or
1442. and reigned two and twenty years, dyed at the age of one and forty, Anno
1483. The Duchess of York their Mother had five children betwixt them, so
that Richard could not be less then seven or eight years younger then King
Edward, and he survived him not fully three years.

This Richard Plantagenet, and the other children of Richard Duke of York,
were brought up in Yorkshire, and Northamptonshire, but lived for the most
part in the Castle of Midelham in Yorkshire, until the Duke their Father, and
his Son Edmund Plantagenet Earl of Rutland were slain in the battle of
Wakefield, Anno Dom. 1641, upon which the Duchess of York their Mother
(having cause to fear the faction of Lancaster, which was now grown very
exulting and strong, and of a mortal enmity to the House af York) secretly
conveyed her two younger sons, George and Richard Plantagenet (who was then
about some ten years old) into the Low Countries, to their Aunt the Lady
Margaret, Duchess of Burgundy, Wife of Charles Duke of Burgundy and Brabant,
and Earl of Flanders. They continued at Utrich, the chief City then in
Holland, where they had Princely and liberal education, until Edward Earl of
March their eldest Brother had revenged his Fathers death, and taken the
Kingdom and Crown (as his right) from Henry the sixth, when he called home
his two Brothers, and enters them into the practice of Arms, to season their
forwardness and honor of Knighthood which he had bestowed upon them; and
soon after invests George into the Duchy of Clarence, and Earldom of
Richmond, which Earldom he the rather bestowed upon him, to darken the young
Earl of Richmond, Henry Teudor. Richard had the Dukedom of Gloucester, and
Earldom of Carlisle, as I have read in an old Lib. manus. in quarto apud D.
Rob. Cotton. Comes, i. Praeses^.
Manuscript story, which Creation the Heralds do not allow. But whether he
were Comes thereof after the ancient Roman understanding, that is, Governor*
or Comes, or Count, after the common taking it by us English, or others; that
is, for a special Titular Lord, I will not take upon me to determine, but
affirm I have read him, Comes Carliolensis.

And after the great Earl of Warwick and Salisbury, Richard de Neville, was
reconciled to the Kings favor, George Duke of Clarence was married to the Lady
Isabell, or Elizabeth, the elder Daughter of that Earl, and Richard Duke of
Gloucester to the Lady Anne, which Ladies by their Mother the Lady Anne de
Beauchamp, Daughter and heir of Sir Richard de Beauchamp, Earl of Warwick,
were heirs of that Earldom. But Anne, although the younger sister, was the
better woman, having been a little before married to Edward Plantagenet, Prince
of Wales, and Duke of Cornwall, only Son of King Henry the sixth, and was now
his Princess and Dowager, by whom Duke Richard had a son called Edward,
created Prince of Wales when his Father came to the Crown.

The employment of this Duke was for the most part in the North, as the
Country of his birth, so more naturally affected by him according to the Poet:
-- Natale solum dulcedine cunctos mulcet.
Ovid.

And there lay his Appanage and Patrimony, with a great Estate of the Duchess
his Wife, of which the Signiory of Penrith, vulgo, Camden* in Cumberland.
Perith in Cumberland was part, where he much resided, and built or repaired
most of the Castles, all that Northern side generally honoring and affecting
his Deportment, being magnificent, (to apply Sir Thomas Moore something above
his ability which he expressed Sir William Haward.
most in his hospitality. And surely, if men are taken to the life best from
their actions, we shall find him in the circle of a Character (not so
commaculate and mixed, as passionate and purblinde pens have purblind Quasi part
blind.
dashed it) whilst we squint not at those virtues in him, which make up other
Princes absolute; His wisdom and courage, had not then their nicknames and
calumny, as now, but drew the eyes and acknowledgment of the whole Kingdom
toward him; and his brother had a sound experience of his fidelity and
constancy in diverse hazardous congresses and battles, through which he had
faithfully followed his fortune, and returned all his undertakings
successful: as at Barnet, where he entered so far and boldly into the
Enemies Army, that two of his Esquires, Thomas Parr and John Milwater being
nearest to him were slain; yet by his own valor he quit himself, and put
most part of the Enemies to flight, the rest to the sword. With the like valor
he behaved himself at the battle of Exon, Doncaster, St Albans, Blore-heath,
Northampton, Mortimers Cross, and Tewkesbury. And it was then confessed a very
considerable service to the State, his taking of the famous Pyrate, Thomas
Nevill* alias, Faulkonbridge, The Bastard Faulconbridge.
Earl of Kent, with whom complied Sir Richard de Nevill, Earl of Warwick, a
near kinsman to the Earl of Kent his natural Father, which ^^^d him up in
the better esteem, and whetted him to any Attempt ^or this haughty Earl, who
had drawn him from the House of York (to which he had done valiant service
not long before) to the party of Henry 6. and his Lancastrian faction; and
fearing what forces and aid King Edward might have from beyond Sea, provides a
warlike Fleet for the narrow Seas, of which this Faulconbridge was appointed
Admiral, with Commission to take or sink all Ships he met, either of the
Kings friends or Subjects; who did not under act it, but made many depredations
on the Coasts, and put many to the Sword becoming an Enemy, the more
considerable, King Edward finding (as the case stood then with him) his Attemps
by Sea would be of too weak a proof to surprise him, which the Duke of
Gloucester contrived by an advertisement he had of his private stealth into
several of the parts, sometimes where he had recourse to some abetters of that
Faction, and coming too shore at Southampton, by a ready Ambush seized and
apprehended him, from whence he was conveyed to London, so to Middleham Castle,
and after he had told some Tales, put to death. And whilst he continued in the
Northern parts, he governed those Countries with great Wisdom and Justice,
preserving the Concord and Amity between the Scots and English, though the
breaches were not to be made up with any strength and continuance, the borders
living out of mutual spoils, and common Rapines, ever prompt for any cause
that might beget braules and se^ds. And in the last year of the Reign of the
King his brother, the Quarrels grew so outrageous and hostile, that nothing
could compose them, but the Sword and open War arising from an unjust detaining
the Tribute, King James was yearly An Army sent into Scotland under the D. of
Gloucester.
bound to pay, as Polidore thus writes.

King Edward took it very ill at the hands of James fourth King of Scotland,
that he refused to pay the Tribute whereunto he was bound by Convenant; And
therefore resolved by Arms to compel him to it: But King Edward being
distracted with a jealous care and watching of France, neglected that business
of Scotland, and in the mean time Alexander Duke of Albany, Brother to King
James, pretending earnest business in France, makes England in his way, and
instigates King Edward to put on Arms against his Brother, promising to
return shortly out of France, and raise a power in Scotland for his aid:
Hereupon the King resolved it, and sent the Duke of Gloucester with a good Army
into Scotland, who marched master of the field near to Barwicke, having a
little before sent thither Thomas Stanley to besiege it, and soon after took
it himself. But the Duke of Albany failed him, and had underhand struck up a
peace with his Brother of Scotland; yet Richard of Gloucester accomplished the
expedition Anno 24. Ed. 4.
very honorably and happily: Thus Polidore. But to enlarge what he reports
desertively, and abridgeth; King Edward, notwithstanding that negligence (noted
by him) levied strong forces (the King of Scotland being as vigilant in that
business) and made the Duke of Gloucester his General, under whom went Sir
Henry Peircy Earl of Northumberland, the Lord Stanley after Earl of Derby,
the Lord Lovell, the Lord Gray of Grestocke, the Lord Scroope of Bolton, the
Lord Fitzhugh, Sir William Parre of Rose a noble and valiant Gentleman, Father
of the Lord Parr of Rose, Kendall, and Fitzhugh, and Grandfather to Sir William
Parr Earl of Essex, and Marquess of Northampton, Sir Edward Woodville Lord
Rivers Brother to the Queen Elizabeth, with many other of Eminency and Noble
quality. The Duke marched first with his Army to the borders and frontieres of
Scotland, giving the overthrow to such as resisted, then made up to the strong
Town of Barwicke, which at that instant the King of Scotland possessed by the
surrender of Henry 6, and had the like success with those Troops of the
Enemies he met and found about the Town. After a short siege the besieged upon
Summons and Parlee (finding themselves too weak to make good the opposition)
were easily persuaded to be at quiet, and safely rendering the Town and Castle
upon very slender conditions, as is recorded in the Chronicle of Croyland.
Having placed a Governor and Garrison in the Town, he Chron. Croy.
continued his march toward Edenborough, with a purpose to besiege and sack
it, but was met in the half way by Ambassadors from thence, who (after a
favorable audience and access craved) in the name of their King and Nation
implore a League, or at least a Truce between the Kingdoms, offering so fair
conditions for it, that the General after a deliberate consultation, granted
to suspend or intermit all hostile proceedings, with a fair entertainment to
their persons, and a public Edict throughout the Army, that no English should
offer any violence or offense to any Scot or their goods, and by this provident
truce, that ruddy storm (which seemed terrible to impend) was diverted and
made a calm preface to the famous League, afterward concluded by him when he
was K. and James the 4th. of Scotland. But whilst these employments staid him
there, news arrived of King Edwards death, and was muttered very doubtfully by
some who had confidence and ground to suppose it hastened by treachery. The The
doubtful death of K. E. 4 vid. lib 4.
Nobles at London, and in the South parts speedily call the Duke home by their
private letters and free approbation, to assume the Protection of the Kingdom,
and two Princes committed unto him by the King. Rex Edwardus 4. filios suos
Richardo Duci Glocestriae, in tutelam The Duke of Gloucester made Lord
Protector.
moriens tradidit: as Polidore testifies.

The Army and affairs of those parts disposed, he came to York, where he made
a few days stay to pay some religious Offices and Ceremonies to the manes and
exequies of the deceased King, so hastened to London, having in his Train
(besides his own ordinary Retinue) six hundred voluntary Gentlemen of the
North parts, brave Horsemen and gallantly mounted, upon the way he dispatched
certain seguall messengers to the young King (who was then at Ludlow Castle in
Wales) to provide for his honorable Conduct of London where he arrived not
long after the Lord Protector, and was magnificently received and lodged at the
Bishops Palace; his Brother the Duke of York was then with the Queen Mother
in the Palace at Westminster, who out of a pretended motherly care (rather
indeed her policy) would not let him stir from her to see the King, who had
desired his company, but instantly takes Sanctuary with him in the Abbey. The
Lord Protector sollicites her by some Noblemen to send or bring him to the
King, which she peremptorily stood against, until Cardinal Bourser,
Archbishop of Canterbury, was made the Messenger, who so gravely and
effectually persuaded with her, that she delivered him the Duke: After some
days respite in London-House, the King (according to ancient custom) was to
remove Court to the Tower of London, the Castle Royal, and chief House of
safety in the Kingdom, until the more weighty affairs of the State, and such
troubles (if any happened, as often interceeds the alterations of Reigns were
well dispatched and composed (some threatening evils of that kind being
discovered and extinguished before the Protector came to London.) And until
all things proper to his Coronation were in preparation and readiness, the
Lord Protector still being near unto Phil. de Comines in Lud. 11.
him with all duty and care, and did him homage, as Honorable Phillippe de
Comines, Le Du^ de Gloucester avoit fait homage a son N^ph^n Comme a so^ Roy and
souverain Seigneur; but this Testimony being a voucht by one who loved not the
Protector may leave more credit; who says, when the young King approacht
toward London, the Lord Sir Tho. Moore.
Protector his Uncle rode barehead before him; and in passing along, said with
a loud voice to the People; Behold your Prince and Sovereign, Chronic* Abbat.
Croy.
to which the Prior of Croyland, who lived in those days, reports, Richardus
Protector nihil reverentiae, quod capite nudato, genu Flecto aliove quolibet
corporis habitur insubdito exigit, regine potisuo facere distulit aut
recusavit; And why should these services and his constancy be judged less real
to the Son then to the Father, his care and providence looking pregnantly
through all turns that concerned him and his State; and therefore timely
removed such of Danger as were vehemently suspected for their Ambition and
insolent assuming Power and Authority not proper to them, and so stood
ill-affected to their Prince, and turbulent Maligners of the Government. And
thus his strict justice to some, begat the envy of others, as it fell out in
the time of King Edward, between those of the blood Royal (with whom the
ancient Barons sided) and the Reginists, who being stubborn, haughty, and
incomputable The insolency of the Queens Kindred.
of the others nearness to the King, stirred up Competitions and turbulencies
among the Nobles, and became so insolent and public in their pride, and
Outrages toward the people, that they forced their murmurs at length to bring
forth mutiny against them: But finding the Kings inclination gentle on that
side, they so tempered it, as they durst extend their malice to the Prince of
the blood, and chief Nobility, many times by slanders and false suggestions,
privately incensing the King against them, who suffered their insinuations too
far, whilst his credulity stood abused, and his favor often alienated from
those, whose innocence could understand no cause for it. The Engines of those
intrusions and supplantations, were the Grayes, the Woodvills, and their
kinsmen, who held a strong belief, to have bettered their power with the young
King their kinsman, and then they might have acted their Rodomontades and
injuries in a higher strain, removed the Prince of the blood, and set up what
limits they pleased to their Faction and Power during the minority of the
King, and after too, whilst the Queen Mother could usurp or hold any
superintendency upon the Soveraigntie, or her Son. These things, and the
mischiefs that seemed to superimpend the State, equally poised, and consulted,
by the Lord Protector, and others of the principal Nobility, it was resolved,
to give a timely remedy or period unto them; all which Sir Thomas Moore
acknowledges, Sir Thomas Moore, in Edward 5. Rich. 3.
and confesses, the Nobles of the Kingdom had reason to suspect and fear the
Queens Kindred, would put their power more forward when their Kinsman came to
be King, then in his Fathers time, although then their insolences were
intolerable. And this Author further acknowledges there had bin a long grudge
and heart-burning between the King and Queens Kindred in the time of King
Edward; which the King, although he were partial for the Queens Faction, was
earnest to reconcile, but could not: And after he was dead, the Lord Gray,
Marquess Dorset, the Lord Rich. Gray, and the Lord Rivers, made full account
to sway the young King; and having learned, it was best fishing in a troubled
stream, threw all occasions of dissension amongst the great men of this
Kingdom, that so, whilst the other Nobles were busy in their own quarrels,
they might take an opportunity to assault and supplant where they hated. And
for provision toward the Design, the Marquess had secretly gained a great
quantity of the Kings treasure out of the Tower, and the Woodevills made good
preparations of Arms; of which, some were met with by the way as they were
conveyed close packed in C^rts. It was therefore high time for the Protector
and ancient Nobility to look circumspectly about them, and fasten on all
occasions that might prevent such growing Treacheries, which could be no way
but by taking off their heads. Which being resolved, the Marquess of Dorset,
the Lord Richard Gray their Uncle, Sir Anthony Woodeville, Lord Rivers, and
some other of that kindred and Faction were apprehended, and at Pomfret
executed (only the Marquess, by some private notice given him, fled, and
took Sanctuary) At the Lord Hastings.
same time the Lord Hastings (who much favored the Queen and her party,
especially the Marquess (therefore the more to be suspected dangerous) was
Arrested for High Treason, and in the Tower upon the Green had his head chop't
off, an Act of more strange and severe appearance then the other, having the
esteem of a good Subject, and generally supposed much affectionate to the
Protector, and the Duke of Buckingham. And Sir Thomas Moore, reports, Sir
Thomas Moore.
that the Protector was most unwilling to have lost him, but that he saw him
joining with their Enemies, and so his life had ill requited them and their
purpose; this was a Dilemma; But what that purpose was, and what they had in
Agitation at that instant is not disertly said only from other places of the
Story. And those which follow Sir Thomas Moore, it may be conceived, they
doubted him for his affectation of the Soveraigntie, and some practice against
the King and his Brother for those be the charges they press upon him,
although it is neither said, nor made good by any direct and just proof. But
admit he was now grown jealous of him, and sent Sir William Catseby, a man in
great credit with the Lord Hastings, to ^ound what opinion he held of that
Title and Claim he might lay to the Crown, who (presuming upon Catsebies
gratitude and trust that had been advanced by him) without circumstance, and
even with indignation expressed an utter mislike thereof, and engaged himself,
his uttermost power and ability against it, peremptorily adding, he had rather
see the death and destructions of the Protector and Duke of Buckingham, then
the young King deprived of the Crown: Which reply, Catseby, (being more just
to his employment then honor in this point) returns the Protector, who laid
hold upon the next occasion to seize his head, which is the greatest and
bloodiest Crime that brings any proof against him; and yet not so clear, but
that there may be some other State-mistery or fraud suspected in it. Let us
leave it up on that account, and but consider how much more we forgive the
fames of H. 1. E. 3. H. 4. E. 4. H. 7. because they had their happy Stars and
success; and then, Prosperum scelus virtus vocatur, there is applause goes
with the Act and Actor: Julius Caesar, was, and ever will be reputed a wise and
a great Captain, although his Emulation cost an infinite quantity of
excellent humane blood, and his Nephew, Octa. Augustus, never ceased
proscribing banishing and massacring, until he had dispatched all his proud
Emulators: Julius Caesar thought it, Crimen sacrum vel crimen Regale; or,
Crimen sacrum Ambitio: Ci^. lib 3. de offic. and Suet. in vi^a Iul^i Caesaris.
who^e rule was, Si violandum est jus, regnandi gratia
Violandum est, ali is rebus piet atem colas.
If right for ought may e're be violate,
It must be only for a Sovereign State.


Drawing it from that rule (though Apocrypha) in Euripides. (...) Eurip. in
Phoeniss.

(...)


Si injuste agere oportet, pro tyrannide (aut regno) pulcherrimum est injuste
agere, in aliis pietatem colere exped^t.

And Antonius Caracalla, alleged the Text to justify the killing of his
Brother Geta his Colleague, in the Empire. Polynic^s, the Brother of Eteocles
was of the same Religion, and said, A Kingdom could not be bought at too high
a rate, put in Friends, Kindred, Wife, and Axiom. Polit.
Riches. Via ad potentiam est tollere ^^^ulos and premere Adversarios, which
the great M^ster of Axioms allowed, has been countenanced by many great
examples of State-reason, and policy in all times, even since the Ogygian Age
for an old observation, and general in all foreign Countries says, --
Regnum furto Senec. in trag.

Et fraud ademptum antiquum est specimen imperii.


So King Atreus, by his own experience could say; -- Vt nemo doceat fra^dis
and sceleris
vias, Regnum docebit.


But what those Ages called Valor, Wisdom, and Policy, in those great
Scholars of State, who with credit practiced their Arts Arts imperii.
Imperii, and rules of Empire, comes not under the license or warrant of our
Christian times; yet we may speak thus much for Richard (to those who cry him
so deep an homicide) that he had either more conscience or less cruelty then
they attribute to him, that by the same Act of power could not secure himself
of others he had as just cause to fear; especially Jasper Earl of Pembroke,
his Nephew Richmond, and the subtle Doctor Morton, who was extremely his
Enemy, and the Chief Instrument that secretly moved against him. And although
the King had no certain notice which way his Engines wrought, yet he knew enough
to suspect him for, and to remove him from the Councell-Table unto the custody
of the Duke of Buckingham, the man he had reason to suppose nearest to his
trust, though his expectation leaned on a broken Reed there; for the Duke was
now secretly in his heart defected from the King, and become malcontent;
Morton but touched his pulse, and knew how the distemper lay, which he irritated
into such sparklings as gave him notice where his constitution was most apt and
prepared; yea, so subtly mastred it, that he had leave to steal from
Brecknock Castle to Ely, so for good store of Coin found safe passage into
France whither his desires vehemently carried him, in hope to fashion the Earl
of Richmond to his Plot; and under pretense of a Lancastrian Title, to stir
him to take up Arms and invade England, with the Assurance of many mighty
friends here, which would make the Design of an easy and quick dispatch; nor
forgot he how much Artificial and Eloquent persuasions add to the Blaze of
Ambition, knowing the Earls temper like other men's in that, and observing him
with a kind of pleasure listen, he gave such a studied gloss and superlation
to the Text, that the Earl was now so full of encouragement and hope for the
invasion, that their purposes spread as well into England as in France. The
Protector having also certain intelligence of some particular Designs,
disposed himself in his actions more closely, and knew what Friends and
Confederates had engaged themselves to Richmond, who yet kept a face of love
and fidelity toward him, as did the Duke of Buckingham, and the Countess of
Richmond, who appeared at this instant an earnest Suitor to reconcile her Son
into favor; and that the King would be pleased, to bestow on him any of King
Edward the fourth his Daughters. But this took not the vigilance of his eye
from him and his party, the cause being of greater danger and apprehension
now, then in King Edwards time; for the Earl had drawn unto him many of the
English Nobility and Gentry; and some Foreign Princes had in favor to him
promised their aids. But in the time of King Edward, his Title and he, was so
little understood by his blood of Lancaster, that the better judging-sort of
the English Nobility and Gentry, King Lewis the eleventh of France, Francis
the second Duke of Britain, and other Foreign Princes looked very slightly
upon it. And yet, as John Harding observed, the King might be jealous of him,
being given out for an Heir of the House of Lancaster, and Nephew to Henry the
sixth: With this he considered, that some Foreign Princes stood not
well-affected to him; or that some at home, envying his House and Posterity,
would catch at any spark to trouble his peace, and kindle a Sedition;
therefore he had good reason to think, that as his liberty might make these
beginnings more popular, so their ends more dangerous and ungrateful (the
vulgar tasting all things by the ear, and judging by the noise) which he
sought early to prevent. For Phillip Comines reports, When he first came to
know this Earl, he was then a Prisoner in Britain, and told him, he had
been either in Prison, or under strict command from five years old* which is
not unlikely; for I find him but young when he was committed to the custody of
Sir William Herbert, Lord of Ragland Castle in Montmouthshire, where he
continued not long; for Jasper, Earl of Pembrooke, who was Uncle unto Him
(being then in France, whether he had fled after the overthrow of the
Lancastrians at Tewkesbury, (as John S^ow) having advertisement that his Nephew
was under Sir William Herberts custody, with whom he had Alliance and
friendship, came secretly out of France into Wales, and at Ragland Castle found
only the Lady The flight of Richmont with his Uncle Pembrooke.
Herbert, her Husband being with the King; in whose absence, the Earl
practiced so cunningly with her, that he got his Nephew from thence, and
conveyed him to his own Castle of Pembrooke, (the young Earls native place)
presuming upon the strength of it The Earl of Rich. borne in Pembrooke Castle.
and the peoples affection, but over-weaned in his opinion and hope. For so
soon as the King received notice of the escape, Sir William Herbert was
commanded to Levy Forces, and make toward them, a man of a wise and valiant
disposition, descended from Herbertus, who was Chamberlain and Treasurer of
the Kings, William Rufus, and Henry Beauclerke, and was created Earl of
Pembrooke afterward; from this Noble Herbertus, are descended the Herberts,
Earls of Pembrooke and Montgomery, and many other Wel^h Gentlemen of that Sir
name and Family.

The two Earls being informed of his approaches and strength, distrusting
their own, fled by night, and posted to the Port of Timby, where they kept
close until a fit opportunity, offered them transportation for France,
intending to see the Court there, where This slight of theirs was in Anno 11.
E. 4. John Stow.
the Earl of Pembrooke had not long before received very favorable
entertainment. But a violent storm diverted their course, and run them upon
the coasts of Little Britain, which fell out as a sad disaster, and cross to
them and their Design for a long time after, the Duke of Britain being no
friend to it; but at the Port of St. Malos they must land. What success they
met with in this flight (and other Noble Englishmen which followed the unluckie
party of Henry the sixth, being constrained when he was overthrown by Edward
the fourth to fly) will fall into our discourse hereafter: there is this
memorial in the Stories of Britain.

Plusieurs du Seigne^rs d' Angleterre qui tenoyent la party du Roy H. 6. sen
fairent par mer h^rs du Roya^lme and entr* autres le Conte du Pembrooke ^aisant
sauue un jeune Prince de Angleterre nomme Henry Conte du Richmont.

Whilst these Earls made some stay in Saint Malo to refresh Earl of Rich.
Prisoner in Britain.
themselves, Francis the second, Duke of Britain had notice of their landing,
who sent as speedily a Command to the Governor to arrest them both into safe
custody, an act, as it appeared, both strange and injurious, being subjects to
a Prince with whom the Duke had league. But for a better gloss, he had found a
considerable clause to detain the Earl of Richmond until he had received
satisfaction of him for usurping and holding the Title and Estate of Richmond,
belonging The last D. of Britain, who was Earl of Richmond, and possessed of
the Earldom, was John de Montfort, who flourished An. Dom. 1440, and had
sons, but not Earls of Richmond, as Rob. Glou. writes, and now this Francis
1. renewed the claim which was about 30 years after John de Montfort, Duke of
Britain.
to the ancient Dukes of Britain (whose heir and successor he was) though
diseised by the space of thirty years, now he would expect either restitution
or compensation for it; and the better to assure himself, he conveyes them
with a good guard to the Castle of Vanes, where himself often resided,
continuing a more cautious and strict eye upon the Earl of Richmond, as Nephew
to Henry the sixth, and he that laid claim to the Title and Crown of England,
by the blood of Lancaster: For which he made their imprisonment more
honorable, as Philip Comines says, Le Duc les traict'e do^cement pour
Prisonniers. And Iean Froisard calls it, Prison Courtoise; for the Duke had well
considered what expectation and use he might raise by them, and knew the news
could not be distastefull to the King of England, whose Throne had been
threatened so much by the Earl of Richmonds liberty; and therefore, from hence
he hoped an answerable benefit, and to contract the King in a firm amity and
acknowledgment unto him; nay, which is further, (if we may believe Iac. Nyerus)
he thought by this occasion to bear the reins so hard upon King Edward, as
that he should not dare to make any breach with him, Iac. Nyerus in Annal.
Fland. lib. 17.
propter Henricum Richmontiae Comitem non audebat Anglus ab amicitia Brittani
discedere.

Nor was this Author much mistaken, for the King would have accorded to any
reasonable thing to purchase the Earl into his hands, and it was no little
perplexity to him when he heard of their flight, but was the better calmed when
he understood where they were, the Duke of Britain being his friend and
Allie, in whom he supposed so near an interest (set off by some other
conditions) that he saw a fair encouragement to demand and gain them both;
whereas had they fallen into France, he must have expected the greatest
disadvantage King Edward treats for the delivery of Richmond.
could have been contrived out of such an occasion. For Lewis, though he were
then in truce and league with him, was merely a Politician, and studied only
his own ends, yet fears him as a King famous for his Prowess and Victories,
and as ably supplied in his Coffers for all undertakings: But (which did
equally quicken the hate as well as fear of France) had threatened to enter it
with fire and sword, for the reconquest of the Duchy of Normandy and
Aquitaine, the Counties of Poictou and Turaine; wherefore we may believe that
bears the credit of an Oracle, which good Ennius said: -- Quem met^unt
^derunt, Ennius apud Cicer. ta Offic.

Quem oderunt, periisse expetunt.


And doubtless in his heart he was favorable to any chance that might have
ruined or insested England, and could have wished the Earl of Richmond and his
Title under his Protection. King Edward seasonably prevented this, that such
attempts, though at first they appeared but like the Prophets Cloud, might not
spread after into spacious storms. And to prevent all underhand Contracts with
the Duke of Britain, dispatched Letters unto him, further interpreted K. ^. 4
sends for Richmond.
by a rich Prssent, and richer promises. The Duke receives both with as
Honorable Complement, protesting none could be more ready to do the King of
Englands Commands then he. But where he treated for the delivery of the Earls,
he hoped to be lawfully excused* being an Act would cast a stain and scandal,
not only upon his credit and honor, but upon all Princely and hospitable
Privileges, and could appear no less then a mere impiety to thrust such
distressed persons as fled to their protection, into the Arms of their
enemies; and it was his opinion, if any malice or violence should be acted upon
them, the guilt must reflect on him. But that the King might believe he was
forward to come as near his desires, as in honor could be, he engaged himself
to keep so careful and vigilant a watch upon them, that they should have no
more power to endanger him, then if they were in strict Prison. This being
returned, though not agreeable to the Kings hope and wishes, yet bearing such a
Caution of Honor and Wisdom, he remained satisfied; and so it paused for the
space of eight years, (as I conjecture) for the King made this demand in the
twelfth year of his Reign 1472, all which time he was very intent to preserve
the League with good Sums of Money, and costly Presents. In the twentieth of
his Reign 1480, he received intelligence* that the Earl of Richmond had stird
up fresh Embers, and new friends in the French Court to blow them, and that the
French King had dealt by solicitation of the Earl of Pembrook, and others
privately, to get the Earl of Richmond, and offered great Sums Hist: de Brit.
to the Duke of Britain. This gave new disturbance, and the King must now by
the best means he could, renew his former s^te to the Duke of Britain; for
which employment, he intrusts Doctor Stillington Bishop of Bath, his Secretary,
a man of a Wise, Learned, and D. Stillington sent for Richmond.
Eloquent endeavor, of good acquaintance and credit with the Duke of
Britain, who gave him an honorable and respective entertainment. The Bishop
(after he had prepared him by the earnest of a very rich present) tenders the
Sum of his Employment, not forgetting what he was now to Act, and what to
promise on the Kings part. And (for a more glorious insinuation) tells him how
the King had elected him into the noble Society of St. Georges Order (as the
most honorable intimation he could give of his love;) to qualify all
exceptious too, and jealousies, assures him, the King had no intent to the
Earl of Richmond, but what was answerable to his own worth, and quality of
the Kings Kinsman; having declared a propensity and purpose, to bestow one of
his daughters upon him. The Duke well mollified and persuades, delivered the
Earl by a strong Guard to the Bishop at St. Maloes Port: a change of much
passion and amazement to him, whose sufferings took hold upon the affable
disposition of the Noble Peir de Landois Treasurer to the Duke, who had the
Earl in Charge and Conduct, to St. Malo. He urges the cause from him of his so
altered and present condition, with Protestation of all the aid he could: The
Earl thus fairly and happily provoked (and perceiving the sparkles of his
sorrow had hapt into a tender bosom) freely exposed himself, and with such an
overcomming Countenance, of tears and sighs, framed his own Story, and pressed
Landois, that it so wrought upon his temper, he persuaded the Earl to put on
clearer hopes, assures him there should some means be found to shift the
Tempest; thereupon writes a sad Relation to the Duke, to move his compassion
and favor, and knowing the Baron Chandais, (a great man in credit with him)
well affected to the Earl by a long and reciprocal affection, he repaired to
his house near Saint Malo, and prevailed with him to use his power with the
Duke, for returning the Earl; who posted to Vanes, where the Court was then,
and took the Duke at such an advantage, by suggesting his credulity abused,
and cunningly drawn into this contract by the King, that there was a Post
dispatched to stay the Earl. In that interim, Landois had not been Idle, to
find a way to let the Earl escape into the Abbey Church of St. Malo, where he
claimed the benefit of the holy Asyle, which was easily contrived, by
corrupting his Keepers. But the Duke to stand clear of the Kings suspicion,
sent over Maurice Brumell to satisfy him, that the Earl according to promise
was sent to Saint Malo, there delivered to his servants deputed, whose
negligence let him escape; and that he had demanded him of the Covent, who
denied to render him without security and caution; and that he should be
continued a prisonerin Vanes, with as much courtesy as formerly. Now being it
was fallen into those strict and peremptory terms, and within the contumacie of
such lawless persons, where he could not use power, he yet faithfully
protested no suite from the French King, or any other, should draw him from his
former promise: All which, he religiously performed, whilst King Edward lived,
the space of twelve years (after Phillip de Comines) in which circle of time,
it may with admiration be observed, through what changes and interchanges of
hazards, dangers, and difficulties, he was preserved. Soon after King Edwards
decease, King Richard renewed and continued the Treaty by Sir Thomas Hutton of
K. R. renews su^t to the D. of B. for the Earl of Richmond. E. 4. Fulmen
^elli, ut Seleac. Rex inde (...) i. fulmen dictus.
Yorkshire, receiving the same satisfaction in Answer, but was failed in the
performance, and so dishonourably, that it then appeared, the Duke had kept in
with Edward, more for fear, then for love or honor (the name of Edward, and
the Earl of March, being (indeed) accounted terrible, where his victorious
sword was drawn) which breach of the Dukes was not left unpunished (at least
as that age then guessed) by a divine revenge; for having married Margaret,
Daughter claud. Paradin
and Co-heire of Francis de Mountford, Duke of Britain, she dying without
issue, he married Margaret, Daughter of Gaston de Foix, King of Navarr, by whom
he had one only daughter Anne, married to the French King, Charles 8. Thus Duke
Francis dyed without issue male, the Duchy being swallowed up, and drowned in
the Lillies or Crapands of France, and with his Family of Britain
irrecoverably lost and absorpted.

Thus much for the jealousy and fears of those two Kings, now to the
progress of ou^ Story, where the Barons and Commons with one general dislike,
and an universal negative voice, refused the sons of King Edward, not for
any ill will or malice, but for their disabilities and incapacities; the
opinions of those times too, held them not legitimate, and the Queen Elizabeth
Gray, or Woodvill, no lawful Wife, nor yet a Woman worthy to be the Kings
Wife, by reason of her extreme unequal quality. For these and other causes,
the Barons and Prelates unanimously cast their Election upon the Protector, as
the most worthiest, and nearest, by the experience of his own deservings, and
the strength of his Alliance, importuning the Duke of Buckingham to become
their Speaker, who accompanied B. Mort. Sir Th Moore, Hollingshed, Graston,
Stow, Hall, Virgill, etc. Parliament.
with many of the chief Lords,, and other grave and learned persons, having
Audience granted in the great Chamber at Baynards Castle (then Yorke-house)
thus addressed him to the Lord Protector.

SIR, May it please your Grace to be informed, that after much The Duke of
Buck. to the L. Protector in the behalf of the 3 Estates.
grave Consultation amongst the Noble Barons, and other worthy persons of this
Realm, it stands concluded and resolved, that the sons of King Edward shall
not reign; for who is not sensible, how miserable a fortune, and dangerous
estate that Kingdom must be in, where a child is King, according to the Wise
man, Vaetibi terra cujus Rex est Puer. But here, Sir, there is exception of
further consequence against them, That they were not borne in lawful Marriage,
the King The common published stories have Eliz. Lucy, but that is false.
having than another Wife living, Dame Elizabeth Butler. Besides, the great
dishonor and reproach he received by disparaging his Royal blood, with a
woman so far unmeet for his bed. These Considerations have resolutely turned
all their eyes, and Election toward your Grace, as only worthy of it, by your
singular virtues, and that interest in the Crowns of England and of France,
with the Rights and Titles, by the high Authority of Parliament, entailed to
the Royal blood, and issue of Richard Duke of York, whose lawful begotten
Son and heir you are; which by a just course of inheritance, and the Common
Laws of this Land, is divolv'd and come to you. And unwilling that any
inferior Blood, should have the Dominion of this Land, are fully determined to
make your Grace King; to which, with all willingness and alacrity, the Lords
and people of the Northern parts concur. And the Mayor, Aldermen, and
Commons of this City of London, have all allowed, and gladly embraced this
general Choice of your Grace: and are come hither to beseech you to accept
their just Election, of which they have chosen me their unworthy Advocate and
Speaker. I must therefore again crave leave in the behalf of all, to desire
your Grace will be pleased, in your noble and gracious zeal to the good of
this Realm, to cast your eyes upon the growing distresses and decay of our
Estate, and to set your happy hand to the redress thereof; for which, we can
conceive no abler remedy, then by your undertaking the Crown and Government,
which we doubt not shall accrue to the laud of God,, the profit of this Land,
and your Graces happiness.

This speech of the Duke is recorded by Doctor Morton, Sir Thomas Moore, and
other Chronicles and Historians, to which the Protector gave this reply:

MY most noble Lords, and my most loving friends, and dear The Answer of the
Lord Protector to the 3 Estates.
Countrymen, Albeit I must confess, your request most respective and
favorable, and the points and necessities alleged and urged, true and
certain; yet for the entire love and reverend respect I owe to my Brother
deceased, and to his Children, my Princely Couzens, you must give me leave,
more to regard mine honor and fame in other Realms; for where the truth and
certain proceedings herein are not known, it may be thought an ambition in me
to seek what you voluntarily proffer, which would charge so deep a reproach
and stain upon my honor and sincerity, that I would not bear for the worlds
Diadem, Besides, you must not think me ignorant (for I have well observed it)
there is more difficulty in the Government of a Kingdom, then pleasure;
especially to that Prince, who would use his Authority and Office as he ought.
I must therefore desire, that this (and my unfeigned Protestations) may assure
you, the Crown was never my aim, nor suits my desire with yours* in this; yet
I shall think my self much beholding unto you all, in this Election of me,
and that hearty love I find you bear me, and here protest, that for your sakes
it shall be all one, whether I be your King or no; for I will serve my Nephew
faithfully and carefully, with my best counsels and endeavors, to defend and
preserve him and this Kingdom; nor shall there want readiness in me, to
attempt the recovery of that hereditary right in France, which belongs to the
Kings of England, though of late negligently and unhappily lost. There the
Protector became silent, and thought it not safe in his discretion, or policy,
to open all the disgusts he had of the Sovereignty, for that would have been
matter of Exprobation of the Barons, and touched too near the quick, though he
had well observed, by sundry experiences of the leading times, and modern too,
the inconstant ebbing and flowing of their dispositions, how variable and apt
they were, to take up any occasion of change pursuing their Kings (if once
stirred) so implacably, that many times they never left without death or
deposing. Examples he had in the Reigns of King Edward his Brother, and Henry
the sixth; not long before that in the time of Richard the second, and his
Grandfather Edward the second; more anciently the extreme troubles and
distress of King John, and Henry the third, all by the Barons, being dreadful
warnings and insolent monuments of their haughtiness and Levitie; and this was
Altamente repostum with the wise Prince.

But the Duke of Buckingham, thinking the Protector set too slight a
consideration upon so great a Concernment, and the affection tendered by
himself and the Nobility (and over hearing something, he privately spoke to
the Lord Mayor and Recorder, tending to his mislike) for an Epilogue or close
to his former Oration, he thus freely adds.

SIR, I must now, by the Privilege of this Employment, and in The bold and
round conclusion of the D. of Buck.
the behalf of those and my Country, add so much freedom unto my duty, as
to tell your Grace, It is immoveably resolved by the Barons and people, that
the Children of King Edward shall not Reign over them. Your Grace has heard
some causes* nor need I intimate, how these Estates have entered and proceeded
so offensively to other men, and so dangerously to themselves, as is now too
late to recall or retire. And therefore, they have fixed this Election upon you,
whom they think mostable and careful for their safety. But, if neither the
general good, the earnest Petitions of the Nobility and Commonalty, can move
you, we most humbly desire your Answer, and leave to Elect some other that may
be worthy of the Imperial Charge; in which, (we hope) we shall not incur
your displeasure, considering the desperate necessity of our welfare and
Kingdom, urges it. And this is our last Suit and Petition to your Grace.

The Protector touched by this round and braving farewell, which made him very
sensible: For (as Sir Thomas Moore disertly confesses) the Protector was so
much moved with these words, that otherwise of likelihood he would never have
inclined to their Suit: And says, That when he saw there was no remedy, but he
must either at that instant take the Crown, or both he and his heirs
irrecoverably let it pass to another; paradventure, one that might prove an
Enemy to him and his, especially if Richmont stepped in; betwixt whom, and this
Prince, the hatred was equally extreme: Therefore, it behoved the Protector to
Collect himself; and fixing his Consideration upon the effect of that
necessity they last urged, gave this Reply:

MY most Noble good Lords, and most loving and faithful friends, The
Protectors Reply to the Dukes last Suit.
the better sense of your loves and most eminent inconveniences insinuated by
your Noble Speaker, has made me more serious to apprehend the benefit of your
proffer and Election. And I must confess, in the meditation thereof, I find an
alteration in my self, not without some distraction, when I consider all the
Realm, so bent against the Sons of King Edward. And therefore being
certain, there is no man to whom the Crown by just Title can be so due as to
our self, the rightful Son and Heir of our most dear and Princely Father,
Richard Duke of York; to which Title of blood and nature, your favors have
joined this of Election, wherein we hold our self to be most strong and safe*
And having the lawful power of both, why should I endure my professed Enemy to
^surpemy right, and become a Vassal to my envious Subject? The necessity of
these causes (as admitting no other remedy) urges me to accept your offer, and
according to your request, and our own right, we here assume the Regal
Praeheminence of the two Kingdoms; England and France, from this day forward,
by us and our heirs, to Govern and defend the one, and by Gods grace, and your
good aids to recover and establish the other, to the Ancient Allegiance of
England; desiring of God to live no longer then we intend and endeavor the
advancement and flourishing Estate of this Kingdom; at which they all cried,
God save King Richard: And thus he became King. But yet his Detractors stick
not to slander and accuse all that was said or done in these proceedings of
State for mere dissimulation; by which justice they may as well censure (At si^
Reverentia dictum) all the Barons, worthy and grave Commons, which had their
Votes therein* which would fall a most impudent and intolerable Scandal upon
all the High Court of Parliament; for in short time after, all that was
alleged and acted in that Treaty and Colloquy was approved, and ratified by
the Court of Parliament, so that their Cavills only discover an extreme
malice and envy. For it was not possible, therefore not credible, he could upon
such an instant (as it were) by any practice, attain to that power and credit,
with all the Barons, Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons, to procure and
persuade them from the Sons of King Edward, so unanimously to become his
Subjects, and put the Crown upon his head with such Solemnity and public
Ceremonies. Whilst those matters had their current, the Northern Gentlemen and
his Southern Friends joined in a Bill Supplicatory to the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal, earnestly expressing their desires for the Election of the Lord
Protector, with the former causes urged; Also, that the blood of the young
Earl of Warwick was attainted, and his Title confiscate by Parliament. This
Bill was delivered to the Lords, Assembled in the great hall at Westminster,
the Lord Protector sitting in the Chair of Marble amongst them, upon the 26 of
June, some six or seven days after he was Proclaimed; the tenor of the Bill
was thus written in the Chronicle of the Abbey of Croyland: Lib. Abb. Croyl
PRotector eodem die, quo Regimen sub titulo regii nominis sibi vendicarit
(viz) 26o die Iunii, Anno Dom. 1483. se apud Magnam Aulam Westmonasterii in
Cathedram Marmoream Immisit and tum mox omnibus proceribus tam Laicis quam
Ecclesiasticis and Caeteris assidentibus, astantibus etc. ostendebatur rotulus
quidam, in quo per modum supplicationis in nomine procerum and populi Borealis
exhibita sunt, Primum, quod silii Regis Edwardi erant Bastardi, supponendo,
illum praecontraxisse matrimonium cum quadam Domina Elianora Boteler, antequam
Reginam Elizabetham duxisset in uxorem: deinde quod sanguis alterius Fratris
(Georgii Scil: Clarensi^ ducis) fuisset Attinctus. Ita quod nullus certus
incorruptus sanguis Linealis ex part Richardi Ducis Eboraci poterat inveniri,
nisi in persona Richardi Protectoris, Ducis Glocestriae, and jam eidem Duci
suplicabant, ut jus suum in Regno Angliae sibi assumeret and Coronam acciperet.



But the Barons were all accorded before this Bill came, both sides moving with
an equal and contented forwardness; And in July next following 1483. was
Crowned and received, with as general Magnificence and Acclamations, as any
King in England many years before. For as a grave man writes, (Fuit
dignissimus regno etc. non Cambden.
inter malos sed bonos principes Commemorandus; That he was most worthy to
Reign, and to be numbered amongst the good, not bad Princes. The Queen his
Wife was Crowned with him, and with no less State and Greatness; Accompanied
him from the Tower to Westminster, having in their Train, (besides the
Nobility of the South parts) four thousand Gentlemen of the North. Upon the
19. of June 1483. in the 25. year of Lewis the French King, he was named King
of England, the morrow Proclaimed, and rode with great Solemnity from London
to Westminster, where in the seat Royal, he gave the Judges of the Land a
strickt and religious charge for the just executing of the Laws; then departed
toward the Abbey, being met at the Church door with Procession, and the
Scepter of King Edward delivered to him by the Abbot; so Ascended to Saint
Edwards Shrine, where he offered; the Monks in the mean time singing Te Deum:
From thence he returned to the Palace, where he lodged until his Coronation.

Upon the fourth of July he went to the Tower by water with the Queen his
Wife, and the next day, Created Edward his only Son, (about ten years old)
Prince of Wales: He Invested Sir John Howard Monstrolet. Co^ine^. Anglici
scriptoret.
(who was made Lord Howard, and Knight of the Garter, 17. Edward 4.) in the
Dukedom of Norffolke, in a favorable admission of the right of the Lady
Margaret his Mother, Daughter of Sir Thomas Mowbray, Duke of Norffolke, and an
heir general of the Style of the D. of Norff. In rotuli^ in domo convers.
Mowbrayes, Dukes of Norffolke, and Earls of Surrey, descended from the Lord
Tho. Plantagenet of Brotherton, a younger Son of King Edward the first, and
Earl of Norffolke. This King also made him Marshall and Admiral of England;
he was as rightfully Lord Mowbray, Lord Segrave, Lord Bruce, as Lord Howard, as
I have seen him Styled by Royal Warrant, in a Commission for Treaty of Truce
with Scotland.

His eldest Son, Sir Thomas Howard, was at the same time Created Earl of
Surrey, and made Knight of the Garter; Henry Stafford, Duke of Buckingham, was
made Constable of England for term of life, but he claimed the Office by
inheritance.

Sir Thomas Moore writes, That Sir Thomas Howard Executed the Office of
Constable that day; William Lord Berkley was Created Earl of Nottingham,
Francis Lovel Viscount Lovel, and Chamberlain to the King; the Lord Stanley
restored to liberty and made Steward of the Household, Thomas Rotheram
Chancellor and Archbishop of Canterbury, having been committed for
delivering the Great Seal to the Queen Widow, received to grace, and many
Knights Addubbed of the old Order, and some of the new, or habit of the Bath,
whose names I have set down, to show what regard was had of their Family, and
in those times accused of so much Malignity.

Sir Edward De-la-Poole, Son to the Duke of Norfolk. George Gray. Son to
the Earl of Kent. William Souch, Son to the Lord Souch. Henry Nevil, Son
to the Lord Abergaveny, Christopher Willowby. Henry Bainton. Thomas Bullen.
William Say. William Enderby. Thomas of Vernon. William Barkley. Thomas
Arundel. Gervoise of Clifton. Edmond Beddingfield. Tho. Leukenor. John Brown.
William Berkley. i. Another Berkley.
The fifth day of July he rode from the Tower through the City in Pomp, with
his Son the Prince of Wales, three Dukes, and nine Earls, twenty two
Viscounts and simple Barons, eighty Knights, Esquires and Gentlemen, not to be
numbered, besides great Officers of the Crown which had special service to
do. But the Duke of Buckingham carried the Splendor of that days Bravery,
his habit and Caparisons of blew Velvet, imbroidered with golden Naves of Carts
burning, the trappings supported by Footmen habited costly and suitable. On the
morrow, being the sixth of July, all the Prelates Miter'd in their
Pontificalibus, received him at Westminster Hall toward the Chapel; the
Bishop of Rochester bare the Cross before him, the Cardinal and the Earl of
Huntington followed with a pair of guilt Spurs, and the Earl of Bedford with
Saint Edwards Staff for a Relic. After the Precession, the Earl of
Northumberland bears a poyntlesse Sword naked, the Lord Signifying mercy.
Stanley, the Mace of the Constableship (but waited not for Constable) the
Earl of Kent bare the second Sword naked with a point, Signifying Justice to
the Temporalty. Justice to the Clergy, Peace. Monarchy.
upon the right hand of the King, the Viscount Lovel another Sword on the Kings
left hand with a point. Next came the Duke of Suffolk with the Scepter, the
Earl of Lincoln with the Ball and Cross, then the Earl of Surry with the
Sword of State in a rich Scabbard, in place of the Constable of England, the
Duke of Norfolk on his right hand with the Crown: After him immediately, the
King in a SurCoat and Robe of Purple, the Canopy borne by the Barons of the
five Ports, the King between the Bishop of Bath and Durham, the Duke of
Buckingham bearing up his Train, and served with a white Staff for Seneshall,
or High Steward of England.

In the Front of the Queens Train, the Earl of Huntington bare the Scepter,
Viscount List the Rod with the Dove, the Earl of Wiltshire her Crown, and
next to him followed the Queen her self (in Robes like the King) between two
Bishops, the Canopy borne by Barons of the Ports, upon her head a Coronet set
with precious Stones, the Lady Margaret Somerset, Countess of Richmond,
carried up her Train, followed by the Duchess of Suffolk, with many
Countesses, Baronesses, and other Ladies. In this manner the whole Procession
passed through the Palace, and entered the West door of the Abbey, the King and
Queen taking their seats of State, stayed until diverse holy Hymns were sung,
then ascended to the high Altar shifting their Robes, and putting on other open
and voyded in sundry places for their Anointing; which done, they took other
Robes of Cloth of Gold, so teturned to their seats, where the Cardinal of
Canterbury and the other Bishops, Crowned them, the Prelate putting the Scepter
in the left hand of the King, the Ball and Cross in his right, and the Queens
Scepter in her right hand, and the Rod with the Dove in her left; on each hand
of the King stood a Duke, before him the Earl of Surrey, with the Sword as
aforesaid; on each hand of the Queen stood a Bishop, by them a Lady kneeling,
the Cardinal said Mass and gave the Pax; then the King and Queen descending
were both hous^ed with one host parted between them at the high Altar: This
done, they offered at Saint Edwards Shrine, where the King laid down Saint
Edwards Crown and put on another, so returned to Westminster-Hal in the same
State they came, there dispersed, and retired themselves for a season. In which
interim, came the Duke of Norfolk, Marshall of England, mounted upon a brave
Horse, trapped with Cloth of Gold down to the ground, to submove the press of
people and void the Hall. About four of the clock the King and Queen sat to
Dinner, the King at the middle Table of the Hall, and the Queen on his left
hand; on each side a Countess attending her, holding a Cloth of Plaisance (or
rather of Essuyance) for her Cup: On the Kings right hand sat the Archbishop
of Canterbury, and all the Ladies were placed on one side of a long Table in
the middle of the hall against them, at another Table, the Lord Chancellor,
and all the Nobles; at a Table next to the Cup-board, the Lord Mayor of London
and the Aldermen.

Behind the Barons of the Kingdom sat the Barons of the Ports; there were
other Tables for persons of quality. After all were seated, came the Lord
Marshall again, the Earl of Surrey Constable (Pro illa vice tantum) the Lord
Stanley Lord Steward, Sir William Hopton Treasurer of the Household, and Sir
Thomas Piercy Controler, they served the Kings board with one dish of Gold and
another of Silver. The Queen was served all in guilt Vessels, and the
Cardinal Archbishop in Silver Dishes.

As soon as the second course was served in, Sir Robert Dimock the Kings
Champion makes Proclamation, That whosoever would say, King Richard the third
was not lawfully King, he would fight with him at all gutterance, and for gage
thereof threw down his Gauntler, then all the people cried, King Richard, God
save King Richard; And this he acted in three several parts of the Hall, then
an Officer of the Cellar brought him a gilded Bowl with Wine which he drank,
and carries the Cup away as his ancient Fee. After that, the Heralds cried
Largess thrice, and returned to the Scaffold. Lastly came the Mayor of London
with the Sheriffs, with a Voyder, serving the King and Queen with sweet Wines,
who had each of them a covered Cup of Gold for reward: By which time, the day
began to give way to the night, the King and Queen departing to their Lodgings.

And this is a brief and true Relation of his Coronation, testified Moore.
Graston. Polidore. Hall. Croyland. Hollingshed. Stow, etc.
by all the best Writers and Chroniclers of our Stories, public and allowed,
which may confute the boldness of that slander that says, he was not
rightfully, and Authentically Crowned, but obscurely and indirectly crept in at
the Window. But all times have Detractors, and all Courts their Parasits, and
many that have admired Princes to their graves, even there have turned from
them, with ingratitude and murmur. Soon after this the King dismissed, and
sent home all the Lords, Spiritual and Temporal, with a straight charge and
direction to them, the Judges of Oyer and Terminer, with all other Magistrates
and Officers in general and particular, for the Equitable and just Government
of their Jurisdictions and Circuits* And it is observed, those times were under
as happy an expectation of Law and Justice, as those, either before or after
more flattered; which John Hide (a Learned man, and Doctor of Physic) implies
in a Manuscript Poesy of his. -- Solio juris rectique Minister,
Ille sedens alto, tali sermon profatur;
Moses concilio soceri persuasus Iethro,
Solus quod Populi nequijt componere lites,
Constituit populi praefectos atque tribunos;
Sic cum me praecelsa premant fastigia Regni,
Ardua magnarum teneatis muner a rerum;
Et primum, a vobis pravos secludite motus
AEquis Iustitiae trutinis appendite causas;
Ob paupertatem miseros ne spernite cives,
Nec vota in cassum fundat pupillus in auras,
Denique largitio, ne vos Corrumpat iniqua, etc.


All things thus in a happy presage and good order, the King with the Queen
departed from London, and makes Windsor the first gift in his Progress for
some few days: From thence to his Manor of Woodstock, then to the Universitie
of Oxford, where the Muses Crowned their brows with fragrant Wreathes for his
entertainment. Next he visited the circular City of Gloucester, and gave the
Citizens, (for the love and loyalty they expressed, in holding the Castle and
Town so constantly against Queen Margaret and the forces of Henry the sixth,
for him and his Brother the King) large Privileges and Immunities.

And here the Duke of Buckingham takes his leave for Brecknock, constantly
disposed and affected in all outward appearance. The King making small stay any
where, (save at Coventry) until he came to the goodly and ancient City of
York, the scope and goal of his Progress, which received him with all honor
and Festivitie, and was there the second time Crowned by Dr. Rotheram
Archbishop of that Sea, in the Cathedral Church, and his Son invested in
the Principality of Wales, as the Prior of Croyland reports; Eodem die quo
Richardus Coronatus est Rex in Ecclesia Metropolitana Eboracensi, mox filium
Edwardum in Principatum Walliae eum insigntis virgae aureae etc. evexit and
Pomposa and sumptuosa festa and convivia ibi fecit.

And indeed, it was a day of great state; for (as Polidore says) There was
then three Princes in York wearing Crowns, the King, Queen, and Prince; In
acclamation whereof, there was Stage Plays, Turneaments, and other Triumphall
Sports, as Sir Thomas Moore relates. At this time the King Knighted Richard of
Gloucester Chron. M. S. in Quar. apud. D. To. Co^ton, and Rob. Fabian. Rich. the
Bastard of the D. o^ Gloc. Captain of Calice.
his base son, who was after Captain of Calice, and many Gentlemen of those
parts. But (albeit this was an intermission as it were of all busy and serious
agitations) yet the King, still where he travall'd had a just regard to the
Administration and Execution of Justice and the more facinerous Malefactors:
And surely these respective inclinations of his had their solemn affections and
desires Naturalized in him, witnessed by the scope and integrity of those just
Laws which after followed.

The Progress thus spent, he returns to London; and having consulted some
matters of State, declares his first resolution for the Tribute detained by
France, which he had formerly by a friendly Message demanded, but now sends
stout menaces and threats for it. The French would not have it called a Tribute,
but a Pension, as Philip de Comines insinuates, though it had been raised and
paid to King Edward the fourth, in lieu of the Duchy and Countries of
Aquitaine, Normandy, Poictou, and Maine, etc. whereof the the French had
deseis'd the Crown of England, which King Edward the fourth forced Lewis to
acknowledge, and to Covenant and agree, That he, his heirs and Successors,
should pay unto the Crown of England, the sum of fifty thousand Crowns,
with caution and security to be paid in the City of London, or after Iean
Tillet and John Maierus, seventy five thousand Crowns to be paid into the
Tower; with which the French King also granted, in the name of Annual Pension,
sixteen John Maierus. Iean Tillet. d^ Tillet says, That that tribute or
Pension was 75000 crowns, or, Escu's and chacun Escu vallant. trois souls.
thousand pounds to some Noblemen and others of special credit with the King:
As to Sir Thomas Gray, Marquess of Dorset, William Lord Hastings, Chamberlain
to the King, Doctor Thomas Rothram, Bishop of Lincoln, and Lord Chancellor of
England; John Lord Howard, Sir John Cheyney, Master of the Horse; Sir Thomas
Mountgomery, Master Challoner, and to the Master of the Rowles; The chiefest of
these had two thousand Crowns apiece per annum. Besides which Pensions, he
gave rich Presents, and sent rewards to such Lords as stood most for this
accord. Eugueraunt de Moustrolet avoucheth, that the Lord Howard, and the
Master of the Horse, were the chiefest of the mediators in it; his reason is,
that they were the men most in favor with King Edward. Iean Tillet, with
Philip de Comines, tells us, the Lord Howard in less then two years had the
value of twenty four thousand Crowns in Plate, Coin and Jewels, over and
above his Annual Pension; the Lord Hastings at one time to the value of two
thousand marks in Plate, besides his Pension. And if their own Stories speak
truth, Richard de Nevil, the great Earl of Warwick, had of the Kings of France
much more then any other English Nobleman, which the Chronicle of Britain
seconds. And doubtless, King Richard had still compelled him to continue it,
had not eruptions of State and tumultuary practices fatally deterred his Sword:
For as Kings have vaster limits, they have higher bounds then others. If our
vulgar paths be rugged, theirs are slippery, and all their mighty resolutions
and ambitions have their fate and circle, hither they must, and no further; yet
as envious as fortune showed her self, he brought King Lewis to terms of
fair promises and mediation for time of payment, as Comines obscurely implies.

This year the King kept a very magnificent Christmas at Westminister, The Q.
Mother and King Rich. reconciled.
and was reconciled to the Queen Dowager, who left Sanctuary, and to
congratulate the Kings favor, sent her five daughters to Court, where they
were received with all Princely kindness.

On the three and twentieth day of January, in the first year of his Reign,
he summoned a Parliament to be holden at Westminster, i^ which (after the
enacting of many good Laws) the marriages o^ The Parliament of R. 3.
King Edward were debated, that with the Lady Gray adjudged unlawful, and her
children illegitimate, there being proof of a former Contract and Marriage
with the Lady Elianor Talbot, daughter of the old Earl of Shrewsbury, and
Relict of the Lord Butler of Sudely then and long after living, and all that
had been inferred by the Duke of Buckingham, or contained in the Bill
supplicatory, demonstrated, was again consulted, and judgment given against
that Marriage, and incapacity of the Children also, of the Earl of Warwick
and his sister, the Lady Elizabeth Plantagenet, all decreed and confirmed by
Act of Parliament; so that here to tax so general an Assent, were to say
there was not one honest nor just man in that High Court, and what greater
scandal to the whole Kingdom?

There was likewise notice taken of the Earl of Richmonds pretense to the
Crown, by a Title derived from the House of Lancaster, who was at that time in
France, laboring to engage the King and the Duke of Britain in the quarrel.
Oh the infinite windings, and perplexed sleeps we labor through, to get that
we must bid goodnight to to morrow; And yet the true and rightful Lancaster had
no finger in it, for this Earl was not then granted to be of the House of
Lancaster, until the Pope by his Bull had given him that style, and himself
(after he was King) by his Prerogative assumed it. In this Parliament he was
attainted of High Treason, and with him John Earl of Oxford, Thomas Marquess
of Dorset, Jasper Earl of Pembroke, The friends and confederates of the E* of
Rich.
Lionell Bishop of Salisbury, Pierce Bishop of Exceter, the Lady Margaret
Countess of Richmond, Thomas Morton Bishop of Ely, Thomas Naudick by the style
of Thomas Naudick of Cambridge Conjurer, William Knevet of Buckingham smeared
with the same pitch, George Brown of Beechworth, Thomas Lukenor of Tratton,
John Cuilford, John Fogg, Edward Poinings, Thomas Fieries of Cherstmonceur,
Nicholas Gainsford, William Clifford, John Darrell, with others of Kent and the
West Country. There was further enacted for the approbation and confirming the
true and lawful Title of King Richard, this clause or sentence.

It is declared, pronounced, decreed, confirmed and established by the
Authority of this present Parliament, that King Richard the third is the true
and undoubted King of this Realm, as well by right of Consanguinitie and
Heritage, as by lawful Election and Coronation, etc. And in a place of the
Roll of this Parliament, there are The sons of K. E. living in Jan and Febr*
after the death of their Father.
Arguments to be gathered, that the two sons of King Edward were living in
the time of this Parliament, which was at the least nine months after the
death of their Father, and six months after King Richard; which will import
thus much, That if King Richard then, lawfully and quietly possessed of the
Crown, suffered them to live so long, there is no reason why, he should after
make them away, for their lives could not rectify their Blood, or Titles, nor
their deaths advantage him, neither can Bastards be dangerous, or prejudicial
to the true and titular Lord, or lawful proprietary, be he Prince or Subject;
Witness Foreign Countries, and England it self, which holds Bastards
incapable of Heritage, Honor or Offices: In the Month of February, toward the
end of this Parliament, the King in his providence to establish the Regal
fortune and Succession in the Prince his Son, and to fasten the affection of
the Nobility and People unto him with the Crown, procures them to meet him in
the Palace at Westminster, and there ( Interiori Caenaculo, as mine Author
says) tendered by the Duke of Norfolk unto them, an Oath of Fealty and
Allegiance in writing, to be taken to the Prince of Wales; which they took and
subscribed most willingly; the occasion of this, was his jealousy of that new
League struck up between the Earl of Richmond and the Duke of Buckingham, who
was now discovered more apparently, and the rest of the engagement: To oppose
and suppress them therefore, and stifle the Confederacy before it should grow
more threatening; The King makes a Commission by Letters Patents, in the name of
the Vice Constable of England, unto Sir Ralph Vice Constable of England.
Ashton, A Copy whereof (the President being unusual, and the Office great) I
have Transcribed verbatim from the Records in the Chapel of the Convertits.
Vice Constabulario Angliae Constituto.
REX dilecto and fideli suo, Rudolpho Ashton militi, salutem. Patents de anno 1
Rich 3. part. 1. me^. 2.
Sciatis, quod nos defidelitate, circumspectione, and probitate, vestra before
confidentes, assignavimus deputavimus and ordinavimus vos hac vice
Constabularium nostrum Angliae, ac Commi^sionarium nostrum, dantes and
concedentes vobis tenore presentium potestatem and authoritatem generalem, and
mandatum speciale, ad audiendum and examinandum ac procedendum, contra
quascunque personas de crimine laesae nostrae regi^ majestatis suspectas and
culpabiles tam per viam examinationis testium quam aliter prout vobis melius
visum fuerit ex officio vestro; nec non in causis illis judicialiter and
sententialiter juxta casus exigentiam and delinquentium demerita omni strepitu
and futura Iudicij appella^ione quacunque remota, quandocunque vobis videbitur
procedendum, judicandum et finali executione de ma^dandum cum omnibus etiam
clausulis, verbis, et terminis specialibu^ ad executionem istius mandati et
authoritatis nostrae de jure vel consuetudine requisitis, quae etiam omnia hic
expressa habemus, assumpto vobiscum aliquo tabellione fide digno, qui singula
conscribat una cum alijs quae in praemissis vel circa ^a necessaria videbuntur
seu qualitercunque requisita; mandantes and firmiter vobis injungentes, quod
alijs quibuscunque praetermissis circa praedicta quoties and quando opus fuerit
intendatis, cause as que antedictas audiatis, examinetis, and in eisdem
proced^tis ac eas judicetis and finali executione ut praefertur demandetis.
Damus etiam omnibus and singulis quorum interest in hac part tenore
praesentium firmiter in mandatis, quod vobis in pr^missis faciendis pareant,
assistant and auxilientur in omnibus diligenter, in cujus, etc. Test Rege apud
Covent. 24. die Octobris, Anno regni primo; per ipsum Regem oretenus.



What success this Commission, and new Office had, I find not reported, but it
might come too late, or the new Officer forget what he was to execute, for the
faction lost none they could corrupt or win; yet surely, the institution of
it was very politic and important, as a plain Image and pourtraict, of the
Office and Authority of the great or High-Constable of England, which in the
execution of a wise and valiant person, is of a high and great use.

Having made mention of these Offices, it shall not be a Parergue, Other
Officers of King Richard 3.
between these Acts, to interadde the rest of this Kings Officers, both Chief
and others; at the least such as were of Honor or Dignity: I have before named
the High-Constable, the great Marshall, high Admiral, Lord Chamberlain, the
rest were Sir John Wood the Elder, L. Treasurer the first year, and Sir John
Touchet, Lord A^dley during the rest of his Reign, Doctor Russell Bishop of
Lincoln had the great Seal, Thomas Barrow was Master of the Rowles, (which
place Henry the seventh continued to him, and made him a Privy Counselor)
John Kendall was principal Secretary, Sir William Hopton Treasurer of the
Household, Sir Thomas Peircy Controler, after him Sir John Buck, John Gunthorpe
Keeper of the Privy Seal, Sir William Hussy Chief Justice, Thomas Tremaine
and Roger Townsend the Kings Sergeants, Morgan Kidwell Attorney General,
Nicholas Fitz-William Recorder of London.

For matters of Treaty, betwixt this King and Foreign Princes, I have seen a
memorial of one, for intercourse and commerce, between Treaties for League and
commerce with Flanders, etc. In Thesauro Scaeccarij 1 R. 3.
him and Philip Duke of Burgundy, and the Estates of Flanders, who in the
Record are called Membra Flandriae: These Princes and States had each of them
their Commissioners to treat and determine the Affairs, which I find they
dispatch^ with approbation of the Princes their Masters.

There was also a Commission about these times, to hear and redress In Rowles
A^. 1 R. 3.
the complaints made to the King, by the Subjects of the King of France and of
Denmark, which was well expedited.

Anno Regni 2. That Treaty of Peace and League with Scotland, An. Dom. 1484.
(began before) was continued, and finished by Commissioners sent from James
the fourth King of Scotland, and by other Commissioners delegate for the King
of England; those for Scotland, were Coli: Earl E^gile in Record.
of Argile, Chancellor of Scotland, N. Bishop of Aberdene, the Lord Lisle, the
Lord Dromonde of Stobhall, Master Archibald Quhitlaw, Archdeacon of Lodion,
and Secretary to the King, Lion King at Arms and Duncan of Dundas; they came to
Nottingham in September Anno Domini 1484, and were honorably received in the
great Chamber of the Castle, the King sitting under his Royal Cloth of State;
Master Archibald Quhitlaw stepping before the rest, addressed a very Eloquent
Oration unto him in Latin, which reflected upon the praise of Martial men and
Art Military, including much to the honor and praise of King Richard. This
Treaty aimed partly at a Truce and Peace, partly at a Marriage, between James
the Prince of Scotland and the Lady Anne, Daughter of John de la Poole, Duke of
Suffolk, and Neice to King Richard.

Commissioners for the King of England, were John Bishop of Lincoln, Richard
Bishop of Asaph* John Duke of Norfolk, Henry Earl of Northumberland, Master
John Gunthorpe custos privati sigilli, Sir Thomas Stanley, Lord Stanley, Sir N.
Lord Strange, Sir N. Lord Powis, Sir Henry Lord Fitz*hugh, Sir Humphry Lord
Dacres, Master Thomas Barrow Master of the Rowles, Sir Richard Ratcliff,
William Catesby, and Richard Salkeld: The other for the Treaty of Alliance and
Marriage, were Thomas Archbishop of York, John Bishop of Lincoln, John
Bishop of Worcester, John Duke of Norfolk, William Earl of Nottingham, John
Sutton Lord Dudley, N. Lord Scroope of Upsall, Sir William Hussy, Chief
Justice of the Kings Bench; Sir Richard Ratcliffe, and William Catesby: But the
success of that, and many other good intendments, were interposed by the
inconstancy and contraste of the times. The Lady Anne de la Poole, upon the The
Lady Anne de la Poole a Nun.
the breach thereof, (resolving to accept no other motion) forthwith took a
religious habit in the Monastery of Sion.

There was another Treaty of Peace and Truce in this second Treaty with the
Duke of Britain.
year, between him and the Duke of Britain, or at the least given out for
peace, yet was indeed but a part and pretext of the Treaty: for the maine
negotiations on the Kings side, was, how to get the Earl of Richmond out of
his custody into his own, or be as well secured of him there as his Brother
King Edward was: And for this Treaty, the chief Negotiators, were the Bishop
of Lincoln and Sir Thomas Hutton for the King, the Bishop of Leon and others
for Ib. in Scaccaer.
the Duke. The Treaty began Anno Domini 1484. and was finished and ratified in
the year following, but the Duke violated his part immediately by giving aid
to the Kings Enemies.

In the same year there were Letters made (which are yet extant in the
Treasury of the Exchequor) that moved a Peace and Truce beweene King Richard,
and Charles the eighth King of France; Treaty with the King of France.
wherein it must be understood, the tribute before mentioned was Articled.

Also in this year, and the year before, there was a private Treaty, which
we must not pass by, for the Marriage of the Lady Elizabeth with King Richard
himself: what the success of it was, and Treaty of marriage of King Rich.
with the Lady Eliz.
how far it proceeded, will more aptly present it self in another place.

We are now to take notice of the Duke of Buckinghams revolt, Revolt of the D.
of Buck.
for this was the preparative and fourrier of the rest: And to give it the more
taking feature and specious pretense, it must be given out* That the cause was
the Reformation of an ill Government and Tyranny, under which species, (for
Treason is ever fairly palliated, and seldom wants the form of some plea,
though at the Bar) they must take up Arms against the King. And here (as
some Rivers derived from the Sea, cannot suddenly loose their taste of
saltness) they discovered their ancient taint and inconstancy which the Prince
wisely suspected from the first. For the Duke of Buckingham (how affably The
Duke of Buckingham first rises in Rebellion. The quarrel of the Duke of Buck.
against the King.
soever he trimmed his countenance) it should seem departed malcontent from
Court, yet made not that general public pretended cause of the Kings Crimes
all his quarrel, but challenged him by some private grudges, as denying to
give or restore to him the Earldom of Hereford, and Constableship of England,
(for they went together a long time) which he alleged belonged to the Partage
that fell to his great Grandmother the Lady Anne, Daughter and Heir of Thomas
Plantagenet, alias Woodstock, created by King Richard the second Duke of
Gloucester, and Earl of Buckingham, and of his Wife Elianor, daughter and
co-heire of Humphry de Bohun Earl of Hereford, and Constable of England: Which
claim, had he considerately looked upon, could not rightly revolve to him, but
The Title of the Earldome of Hereford, and of the Constableship of England.
rather was for the Kings part; For Humphry de Bohun, Earl of Hereford, of
Essex and Northampton, Lord of Brecknock, and Constable of England (in the time
of King Edward the third, and the last Earl of the Family of the Bohuns) had
by the Lady Jane his Wife, Daughter of Richard Fitz-Allan Earl of Arundel, two
Daughters and Heirs, Elianor and Mary: Elianor was Married to the same Thomas
Plantagenet, alias de Woodstock, youngest Son of King Edward the third, Duke
of Gloucester and Earl of Buckingham: Mary the second Daughter was Married to
Henry Plantagenet Duke of Lancaster, and after King of England by the name of
Henry the fourth, and the Earldom of Hereford fell to his Wife: In favor
whereof, he was Created Duke of Hereford by King Richard the second, and the
Earldom (now a Duchy) and the rights thereof, remained in the King, and in
the Kings Heirs and Successors until the death of King Henry the sixth, who
dyed without Issue, and then all the Estate of Lancaster (especially that of
the Royal Family of Lancaster) escheated to King Edward the fourth, and from
him it came to King Richard, as Heir to his Brother and all his Ancestors. But
the Duke of Buckingham pretended Title to that Earldom by his said
Grandmother Anne, who was one of the Daughters and Heirs of the aforesaid Lady
Elianor (Wife of Thomas de Woodstock Duke of Gloucester) and the Wife of Edmond
Stafford Earl of Stafford, and Grandfather to this Henry Duke of Buckingham,
who the rather presumed to make this Claim, because the Issue of the other
Sister Mary, being extinct, he took himself also to be her Heir.

But King Richard relishing something in this, near the disposition and
inclination of Bullingbrooke, answered, That the Earldom of Hereford was of
the inheritance of Henry the fourth, who was also King of England (though by
tort and usurpation) and will you my Lord of Buckingham Claim to be Heir of
Henry the fourth? You may then also happily Assume his spirits, and lay Claim
to the Crown by the same Titles.

This was as bitter as short, and doubly ill taken: First, because it came with
a Repulse: Next, because it seemed to proceed from a suspicion, and as a tax of
his Loyalty, and begets another pretense of exception in the Dukes bosom,
which he called a breach of promise in the King, for not joining the Prince his
Son in Marriage with the Lady Anne Stafford his Daughter; but all those
Colors were but to give complexion to the face of his defection, the true
cause was well devined and found out by the King, his Ambition and aim to be
Sovereign, raised by an overweening of that Royal Blood he supposed to be in
his descent from the said Thomas de Woodstock, etc. Son of a King; and yet he
was not resolutely determined to make his Claim to the Crown this way, nor to
attempt the Kingdom by Arms, until those embers which (as it were) lay but
lukewarm in his thoughts, were quickened and revived by the animation of
Doctor Morton Bishop of Ely then a Privy Counselor though he stood in some
umbrage and disgrace in the Court with the King, for his practices against him,
and was at this time in the custody of the Duke of Buckingham as a Prisoner;
more expressly, for that being a Privy Counselor, he had given secret
advertisement to the Earl of Richmond of what passed in the secret Counsels
of the King; To this advantage, he applies that which he had wittily drawn
from the Dukes discontent and passionate discourses at times passed. By which,
perceiving the glance of his Ambition, and that derived from the great opinion
of his Royal Blood, he pregnantly tickles and feeds that humor, until he had
soothed him past his own strength or retyrement; for his secret drift was, to
apt and prepare the Duke to a Rebellion at any hand, though not to set his own
Title on foot, yet lays open the advantage of the present times to it,
proposing flat usurpation and tyranny against the King Regnant, and the strong
likelihood of his Deposing. This lifts the Duke something higher in his own
opinion. But coming to a pause, (and perceiving Richmond was the man they had
aimed at for this great blow (who had conditioned by Oath to marry the Lady
Elizabeth, (for the Countess of Richmond, had by the means of Doctor Lewis,
conciliated the Sir Tho. Moor.
friendship of the Queen Mother to that Alliance, and to draw as many of the
House of York into the Action as were at her Devotion) that many Potent Lords
and some Foreign Princes had promised their ayds) he began to retreat, and
conceive he had taken the wrong path to his journyes end, for his Title and
Claim must be nothing, if those of York and Lancaster were united: And that
the Earl (who stood between him and his Aims) was not only resolute to
attempt, but strongly aided for it, himself not able upon such an instant to
raise a power able to encounter, much less give check unto his violent
Ambition, therefore concludes all against himself, and that it would fall out
farte better to side with the times; a consideration which doubtless would
highly stir a spirit where so much greatness of opinion and ambition was.
And the Doctor discerning this disgust, and that he was startled in his hope
and resolusion, to recover him an entire man, and not let him stand by, an idle
spectator in so meritorious an action, he opens a private way of honor and
satisfaction, suggesting him the first and greatest man, the Kingdom was to
know next the King: And finding his particular distasts to King Richard, of
quickest sense and argument to him, he freshly urges (and as it were)
refricates each particle, to the greatness of his spirit and discontent; the
Duke replies not much at that time, but busy in his thoughts leaves him, and
presently fashions a visit to the Countess of Richmond, (a Lady of a politic
and contriving bosom) to know the credit of his intelligence, which she
insinuates This Margaret Countess of Richmond, was Daughter and Heir to John
Beaufort Duke of Somerset, and Margaret de Beaufort, Mother of the D. of Buck.
was Daughter of Edmond D. of Somerset; and thus were the E. of Rich. and the D.
of Buck. a Kin. Rob. Glov. in catal. etc. The Conspirators with the D. of Buck.
for the E. of Rich.
with arguments so full of circumstance and honor, besides her Sons indearment
to him, their hearnesse of blood, affirming the Dukes Mother a Somerset, the
reciprocal affinity between her Father and his, and then the bravery and
Religion in the Cause, that the Duke now forsakes himself, and fully gives up
his resolution and promise to her; thus prepared, he finds out the Lord
Stanley, the Marquess of Dorset, Edward Courtney Earl of Devonshire, and his
Brother the Bishop of Exeter, Sir John Bowrchier, Sir John Wells, Robert
Willowby, Edward Woodvill, Thomas Arundel, who had severally raised forces, and
intended their Rendezvous near Gloucester, so to march for Dorsetshire, there
to receive the Earl and the Duke, with his Welchmen: But the King was early in
his preparation, to prevent them before they could unite, or the Earl of
Richmond arrive there, else they had fastened a most dangerous Blow upon him.
And at this full stop, in these progresses (me thinks) we may observe, how
uncertainely, in our strongest valuations, we are our own; and that our
greatest Confidences, and humane Policies, are but heavy weights hung at
trembling Wyers, while our expectations are apt to be flattered, and out-goe
themselves, but are overtaken in their Success, and Fates, as was this great
Man's; for their Forces neither met by Sea nor Land, the English being scattered
by a sudden and huge inundation that so dangerously over-flowed all passages,
they could not join nor pass the River Severne, while the suddenness and
strangeness of it stroke the Soldiers with such alteration, that most part of
them forsook the Duke and left him to The overthrow of the Duke of Buckingham.
himself: The Earl of Richmond was as unfortunately met at Sea by a great
tempest, upon the coasts of England.

The King took the advantage this accident offered, and pursued the Polidore
lib. 25
Duke, not only with a galloping Army, but with Edicts and Proscriptions, that
promised a thousand pounds in money (whereunto some Writers King Richard sharply
reprehended Banister for betraying his Master, which argued a noble mind.
add, so much Lands as was worth one hundred pounds per annum) to any that
should bring in the Duke, who was betrayed and brought to the King then at
Salisbury, by Humphry Banister,) an eternal brand) having lived by this man's
service, and now thought treacherously to subsist by his Ruin. The Duke being
examined, freely confessed all, and for it lost his head in the field according
to Marshall The D. execucuted by Marshall Law.
Law used by Armies, in November An. Dom. 1484. An. 2 Rich. 3.

And here, if we view him in the figure of his Ambition or Fate, we shall
find Doctor Morton his Caput Argoll, or the malignant Planet of his fortune;
who, as Sir Thomas Moore confesses and affirms, by his Politic Drifts and
Pride, advanced himself, and brought the Duke to this ruin. The rest fled,
some into Sanctuaries, others into Britain to the Earl of Richmond, and some
into Flanders, all their Plots being now how to be safe.

And thus far King Richard, in the Voyage of his Affairs had a promising
Gale; we will therefore here cast Anchor a while, and claspe up this first
Book, with the Relation of his better Fortunes.

Explicit Lib. I.
THE SECOND BOOK OF THE HISTORY OF KING RICHARD THE THIRD.
The Argument of the Second Book.
THe Earl of Richmond practices with Foreign Princes, and with the English
Nobles for assistance and Forces to make his first and second invasions of
England, He came first to Poole with ill success, secondly to Milford cum
bonis avibus.

What Bastards are, and whereof they are capable, who be of the House of
Lancaster, how Lancaster and Beaufort or Sommerset differ.

Bastards of Kings must not take the Sirnames of the King or Kingdom.

The honorable privilege of the name of Plantagenet.

Prince Edward, and Queen Anne, John de la Poole proclaimed Heir of the
Kingdom by Richard the Third.

Bastards of John Duke of Lancaster made legitimate, and capable of Offices,
Honor, and of Heritage by Richard 2, and the Parliament.

What the Legitimation of the Pope is.

Arms and Names of Princes Bastards.

The Nobility of King Henry 7th. He affied not much in the Titles of York and
Lancaster.

The Pope gives to him the Title, de jure belli, and de domo Lancastriae.

The greatness of the Title of York, of Counsel, and Connsellours.

The Prerogative of the King in Judgments and Controversies.

The Earl of Richmond landeth at Milford Haven; His entertainment there, and
in Wales; His aptness for diverse wives; he marches to Bosworth; King Richard
and he sight, Richard is overcome and slain, also the Duke of Norfolk by the
Earl of Oxford ( ut Creditur.) The Earl of Richmond is straight Crowned King
in the field; The fatal Error of King Richard; Kings loved Combat; The
Titles of King Henry 7th. Kings go not now to war^; Cruelties committed upon
the body of King Richard; He was attainted of Treason, though against the Laws
of Nature, and of Royal Majesty, with many of his followers and servants; The
Earl of Surrey how released out of prison, his Geneology from Hewardus walter
de Buck, and his Progeny.

The Second Book.
WE left King Richard the Third in the growth of a flourishing and promising
Estate, and his fate now, in the rise of a peaceful and prosperous Reign, of
a calm and hopeful presage; But Fortune that lends her smiles as Exactors do
money, to undo the Debtor, soon called for the Principal and Interest from this
Prince, to whom she was merely Novercall, and he might well call her with the
expert Heroes in Euripides fortuna diurna, i. e. fortune of a days life, Eurip.
in he^a.
for in her best mood, she is most slippery in her favors, and redious Valor.
Max. l. 7
in her mischiefs, as was aptly considered by a grave man: Fortuna adversas
res cupido animo inducit, secundas parco; she is a mother but a little while, a
stepdame a long time, and for ever to some; here then, we are aggressing into
the turbulent and luctuall times, which were toward the end and period of his
Life and Reign; the formal and final causes, happening from the invasions
attempted by the Earl of Richmond; I will begin the Second Book there, and
may say invasions, because he twice invaded the Kingdom, though by error or
ignorance of our Vulgar Historians, they are confounded and made one, which
corruptly maimes the Story, and conceales and pretermits some very remarkable
agitations: particularly, the true cause of the Duke of Buckinghams ill
success and defeat, is misunderstood, or not at all known. To come to it
therefore more certainly, we must take notice of the first preparation by the
Earl of Richmond, who was resolved to advance his claim that way, and
unbosomes himself to the Duke of Britain, his possibility and advantage by
friends, if he could raise but sufficient strength to set him safely in
England. The Duke gives him all good wishes to his undertaking, but opposes
(against all Arguments of drawing him in) first, his Amity and League with
England, which in honor and justice he was not to violate: Then his wants by
the long Civil and cruel Wars, with his Barons, that had so exhausted his
Coffers, as durst he dispense with the former cause, yet that might render him
excused, being unable to furnish him, at least in so short a time as his
expedition required; beyond which answer, for the present, the Earl thought
not fit to press him: But having a prompt and strong affiance in his good
fortune, makes up to some of the Dukes most honorable and powerful Friends,
to lay siege that way to him by private advantages, for by his ingenious
demeanor, he had won the inclinations of many great ones, being Master of a
pleasant acute wit, which was well supplied in him by the strain of all
Courtly Acts; to those he had the help of the French Tongue, which he spoke
excellently well, and (to give all the more plausible access and influence)
he was (as Philip de Comines, who knew him, testifies) a very complete and
well featured Gentleman which makes the rule certain, and well animating
Gratior est pulchro veniens e corpore virtus.
Virgill.
The beauties of the mind more gracious are,
When as the bodies features are more fair.


In the number of those eminent persons he had gained during his fair
imprisonment: more fortunately he had applied himself unto the Lady Margaret,
Duchess of Britain, Daughter of Gaston de Foix, (a great man in the
Western parts of France, whose Ancestors were well affected to the English)
and Madam de Bevier; the Duchess, John Froisard Paradin. Hist. de Brit. The
Duke had by this Lady his daughter and heir Anne, who brought the Duchy of
Britain to France.
so far countenanced him in his design, that she became an earnest suitor
unto the Duke her husband, and prevailed both for his liberty and aid; for
caution and pledge herein, he was only to kneel at the High Altar, before the
blessed Sacrament, in the Cathedral Church of Saint Vannes, there to make his
religious Vow, justly and truly to observe what restitution he privately had
promised to the Duke and Duchess; which protestation made, he had three Ships
well rigged and furnished with Men, Arms, and Victuals, as my Author relates.
Hist. de Brit.


Au Conte de Richmond furent aux despens du duo trois grosses Navires de
Brittannia, charges de gens de Arms, etc. and qui se misent in mer.

But, by the favor of this British Writer, the Earl staid many days at
Saint Malo, to receive and send intelligence, and made it the beginning of
October 1484, before he came to Saint Poole in Dorset, where he lay some time
at Anchor, to send his Boats a shore as Explorers or Spies, for discovery of
the Coasts, where the Kings Army, or his friends lay, who returned without any
particular satisfaction, but that there was many Armed men about the Country.
The Earl (who in all things was circumspect, and cautiously rimerous) resolved
immediately to loose from thence; but the night following, a terrible tempest
constrained them with all have to weigh Anchor, and make into the Maine, the
Storm and darkness of the night severing and dispersing their Ships, some to
the Coasts of Britain, but the Earl himself to the Coasts of Normandy. And
this was the success of his first invasion, which, though it bore an
inauspicate face, it proved of a friendly event: For had he landed about Poole,
or but stayed till the Kings Ships had come in, that lay waiting not far off,
he had been a lost man every way, the King being not only active to meet their
contrivements, but had some advantage upon them, by the close intelligence of a
friend, and knew that the Forces of the Duke of Buckingham, with the Earl of
Devon, and others, were to meet near Gloucester, and march in their full and
united strength, toward the Seacoasts of Dorset, there to receive the Earl:
But the King encountered with the Duke of Buckinghams Army, beat him, and cut
off his head, before any of the rest could come at him daily putting the
ordinary bands of these West Countries in a ready posture for guard of their
Coasts; and that if the Earl of Richmond, or any of his French Forces came a
shore, they were to be entertained courteously by them pretending themselves of
the Duke of Buckinghams Army, who had routed the Kings Party, and were sent
thither to receive and conduct the Earl with his men to London. This was the
projected end: But it is of remarkable note, to look into the various paths of
this Earls fortune, and how they brought him to his journies end, when they
appeared most doubtful and threatening, not only gave him advantage by the good
success of his Enterprises, but made the most adverse accidents serve as
prosperous unto them; for was it not happy the storm at Poole drove him from
the Coasts of England, and no less fortunate, that the Duke of Buckingham was
defeated, whereas, had the Duke atcheived that day, the Earl of Richmond not
being there, (who was to be present in person, and General of the field) we
may with reason conjecture his Emulation and Policy, would have accumulated the
honor and fortune of the Conquest to his own pretended Title: such Spirits
like the Sea, where they intrude or win, making their advantage their right,
and not easily surrender, so much is the engagements of Ambition, too strong
for all ties of faith and right.

The example is observable in the Earl of Richmond himself; who although he
knew the Children of the Duke of Clarence and others, had better right to the
Crown, yet once possessed, would not resign, no not to his own Son, whilst
he could hold it; nor did he want his Presidents, as all men know, who know any
thing. And to take all Relations in our way, that may be level with our Story;
betwixt this and his second Invasion, some other passages offer themselves, as
an interim, and not impertinent to supply the Readers observation.

Amongst other, the Death of the Kings dear and only Son (at least
Legitimate) who dyed in the Castle of Middleham in Yorkshire, The death of
Edw. Prince of Wales, Son of Rich. 3. Chron. Croyland.
in the Month of April, Anno Dom. 1484 which news gave such a passionate
Charge upon the Nature and Affections of the King and Queen (being then in the
Castle of Nottingham) that as mine Author says, Subitis doloribus insanire
videbantur. Ibidem.


Yet the King, being a man of an equal moderation to his courage, puts it into
the Scale of his other worldly encounters, and as it was said of Julius Caesar,
that he soon passed the death of his only daughter Iulia (most precious in his
affection) Et tam facile dolorem hunc, Seneca.
quam omnia vicit; So King Richard tempered his grief and business so
together, that the one made him not unsensible, nor the other negligent; but as
the Prior of Croyland tells, did all things gravely and discreetly as before.

Rex Richardus nihilominus tamen suam partem defensione vacaverit. although the
Queen could not hold so proportioned a temper over her grief, the tenderness
of her Sex, letting it break upon her in a more passionate manner, and with
such an Impression, that it became her sickness past recovery, languishing in
weakness and extremity of sorrow, until she seemed rather to overtake death,
than death her; which was not long after the Princes, and added not a little to
the Kings sufferings and sorrows, (though traducing Spirits have charged him
with shortning her life by poison, or some other practice, which are
prestigious and black Comments, falsely placed in the Margent of his Story, and
may mere nearely touch the credit of the Authors than his, if we judiciously
take a view of him and his Actions; and look upon the indulgent and active
care for his Country, which he gave a constant and sincere expression of,
instantly after his Sons John Earl of Lincoln, and after Duke of Suffolk
proclaimed Heir Apparent.
death, when by the deliberation and consent of the Barons, he was industrious
to think of a Successor, and to nominate such an one whose blood and worth
might make him equally Heir to the Crown and the peoples affection, (with the
highest approbation of the Kingdom) and none more near to either, then Sir
John de la Poole Earl of Lincoln, Son and Heir of John de la Poole Duke of
Suffolk, and of the Lady Elizabeth Plantagenet, Duchess of Suffolk, the
Sister and Heir of this King Richard, who was declared and proclaimed Heir
apparent to the Kingdom. This was a Contrecarre to the Faction of Richmond,
and (indeed) what greater affront could thwart them, if those of the House of
Lancaster or Beaufort, were next Heir to the Crown, (as the pretenders
affirmed for the Earl of Richmond) who would likewise have him to be Caput
gentis Lancastriae, and Princeps familiae, though they could scarcely prove him
(not without question I am sure) Membrum illius familiae, until he came to be
King, for it was a question in those times, and much disputed, whether the
Beauforts or Sommersets were of the House of Lancaster, or no: most true it is,
the Children of the House of Lancaster being lawfully borne, and after Henry
Plantagenet Duke of Lancaster, had Conquered and deposed Richard the Second,
were to be held Princes of the Blood Royal, and capable of the Crown in their
natural and due Order. But those of Beaufort or Sommerset, were as the Vulgar
has it, filij populi, or as the Imperial Juris-consults say, liberi vulgo
quesiti, who by the old Greeks were termed (...), i. e. sine Patre, the Doctors
of the Spiritual Law, drawing the Originem of such children, ab illicito and
damnato John Sarisburiensis Ep. 85.
coitu, of the polluted adulterous bed (and so those Beauforts, three males and
one female, begotten by John of Gaunt (as he believed) according to the Laws
were to be reputed, the children of Sir Otho Swinford, begotten upon Katherine
his Wife in his life time, who was daughter of Sir Payen Rovet a Frenchman,
dwelling in Beauforts, and was Guyen Herald to the Duke of Lancaster. His
Duchess Dona Constantia, (a most noble and virtuous Lady, daughter of Don
Pedro King of Castile) was living also in the time he kept this Katherine, and
had those Beauforts, who were Sir-named so from the place of their birth, a
Town of his own in Aniow. But to note transitu, how obnoxious this Duke made
his frailties, that (thinking to put a smoother face upon his sin) gave it but
the same blush, by making this Katherine Swinford his Duchess, against the
liking of the King and all his noble friends, and direct Tenor of the common
Laws, which pronounce Sir Tha. Walsin. in Rich. 2.
marriages between such as have lived in Aldutery unlawful: Nay, to make him
the more marvel and smiling discourse of the Court, the glass of his age was
turned to his last year when he sacrifie'd these scatterd embers of his
desires and passion. But he obtained those children to be legitimated: First,
by the Pope Vrbanus the sixth; next by the Charter of King Richard the second,
and had both these indulgences afterward enlarged and confirmed by Parliament.
Yet neither Parl. ann. 20. Rich. 2.
these four legitimate children, nec qui nascebantur ab illis, were permitted
to the Princely familiar Title of Lancaster, so long as that ^ame flourished,
much less of Plantagenet, for that was the peculiar Surname in chief of the
Kings of England, and Princes of the blood Royal, since the time of the second
Henry, Son of the Empress Matilda, the first founder of that name in the
Royal Family of England. Of which honor were partakers, the Princely Family
of Wales, of Brotherton, of York, of Lancaster, of Clarence, of Woodstock, of
Gloucester, etc. And there are yet some Noblemen in Portugal, who descended
from John Duke of Lancaster, and are called and written de Lancastro, others of
the like Origin Don Duart de Lancastro a Noble Genesis of Portugal, averred
himself descended from the D. of ^^^. Valodolid.
and Title may do as much. Neither would King Henry the fourth, Henry the
fifth, nor King Henry the sixth, all Kings of the Lancastrian race endure to let
the Lineage of Beaufort (though they respected them as kinsmen, and advanced
them to many honors) Assume the the Surname of Lancaster, holding it an
Arrogation and Usurpation of Royalty and Royal Rights, wherein they followed
their Ancestors, who devised other names for their base children: As Fitz. Roy,
The peculiar Sir-names of the Bastards of the an^^ in Kings of England
Oxenford, Fitz-Herbert, Clarendon, Fitz-Henry Longuespee Cornwall; and so they
continued the name of Beaufort and Somersets until the Earl of Richmond came,
and this was in imitation of the Kings of France as I conce^ve. For within the
reach of my observation, since the time of Hugh C^^^t they never vouchsafed any
of their base sons to be capable of the Crown of France, or to have the Adven
(as they call it) nor the Surname of France; but the illegitimate daughters
may take the Surname France, or de France; because they can make no claim to
the Crown by a pretended permission of the Sa lik-law, which John de Tillet
witnesses.

La troisiesme lignee a du tout rejecte, les Bastards non seulement de la
Coronne mais aussi de l'aduen, et Surnom de France, qui Concession est permis
Arms of Bastards of the Kings of England.
aux Bastards de roy' etc.

And as the Bastards of the Kings of England had other names, so they took
differenced Arms; or elsewere permitted to bear their mothers (if of any
Family.) If tolerated to bear the arms of England; then they were diversified
in a Checking, Debasing and Rebating manner, with Bastons, Bends, Sinister
Bars, Bordutes, Marks of Baseness, Obscurity and Noveltie, which any new
Gentleman might bear, such as the Learned call filios terrae and novos
homines; and we vulgarly, upstarts. But to object against the use of this in
England, the example of Hamelin is brought in; and to credit it, his Arms
forged by some weak and negligent Heralds, who call him Hamelin Plantagenet,
when the truth is, this Hamelin (base son of Ieoffry Plantagenet, Earl of
Aniow) was simply called Hamelin, and his son William took the Surname of
his Mother Dame Isabel de Warren, daughter and heir of William de Warren Earl
of Surrey, which their Posteri continued; as Ioannes de Warrena the first, and
Ioannes de Warrena the second, both Earls of Surrey; and Isabella de Warren,
and Elianor de Warren etc. mentionedin the Charters and Records, but never
Plantagenet, which is acknowledged by our best Heralds and Antiquaries; Master
William Campden has these words: Isabella filla Camd. in Surr.
sola Gulielmi de Warrena Comitis Surreiae Hamelinum Nothum Galfredi
Plantageneti etc. titulo Comitis Surreiae maritum exornavit. Hamelinus
Gulielmum Surreiae Comitem genuit, cujus posteri a Scito Warrenoru^ nomine
eundem titulum gesserunt. And that the base son of King Edward the fourth,
was commonly called Arthur Plantagenet proves nothing neither, well considered:
For in the times when this Arthur lived, the name of Plantagenet, being only
left in the house of York (the Lancasterian Plantagenet being more
extinguished) had not the former honor and reputation, but was darkened and
setting, rather drawing a contempt and hate to them that bare it, the White
Rose daily fading and withering; and so malignant was their Planet then, that,
as a Learned Gentleman has further observed, It was not safe The. Gainsford.
in that time to be a Plantagenet; therefore the permission of those times can
be no warrant for the objections, nor the ignorance of the Poetical Heralds,
who have strained this fable of Hamelin. Yet farther, not only giving him and
his Posteri a false Surname, but assigned him by the like Fabulous Art, a
shield of familiar Ensigns, the Arms of France bordered with an Orle of
Normandy or Guyen: which he, nor yet any of the Antique Lineage of Aniow, or
their Progeny ever bare, or could by just Title bear, either simply, or
compounded, or the Progenitors of our English Kings the Lillies of Gold in an
azure field, until King Edward claimed the Crown of France, and assumed them
in the right of Queen Isabel de Valoys his Mother, who was the first that bare
them quarterly with the Arms of England.

But the Arms of the ancient Earls of Aniow were a Scarboucle, Scarboucle,
falsely called Carbuncle.
(that is, a Golden Bucle of a military Scarffe or Belt, set with precious
Stones) not a Carbuncle or more precious Ruby, for the term is erroneous and
absurd, if considered: The Princes of Aniow bare this Scarboucle in a shield
party per Chief, Argent and Gueules; and the Heirs of this Hamelin (who took
the Surname of Warren) bare also the Arms of the house of Warren in their
Shields and Caparisons, but bare the Scarboucle of Aniow for their Crest, as
they were descended out of that House, as I have seen upon a Seal of Ioannes
de Warrena Earl of Surrey, at a Charter, dated 20. E. 3. An. Dom. 1346. apud
Dom. Rob. Cotton, which has given me occasion to speak thus much to cure the
Blemish that mistake has thrust into History, such absurdities having their
infection, and passing by an Age or two upon the easy and common judgments,
after grow up for tall and undeniable truths: For some merely reading the
complexion of things, as they do men by their outsides, or as boys Poetry,
with a tickled faith; through such wide ears and observations, crept in that
Parasitisme on the one side, and Pride and Usurpation on the other side, that
made the house of Lancaster and the Beauforts, Difference between the house of
Lancaster and Somerset.
alias Somersets, all one; which (whilst the house of York flourished) was held
to differ as much as Royal and Feudall, Sovereignty and Suzeraignty; for their
modesty at first was very well pleased with that of Beaufort, and it seemed
honorable enough until the children of John de Beaufort, the eldest Brother
(being Earl of Somerset) assumed the name of their Fathers greatest honor and
Earldom for their Surname, and the rest following, quite left the name of
Beaufort, and made the other Hereditary. From this, John de Beaufort Earl of
Somerset, and Marquess of Dorset, descended Henry Duke of Somerset, Father
natural to Charles Somerset, created Earl The Earls of Worcester, from whom.
of Worcester by King Henry the eight. And it is worth the noting that this
Duke Henry left the Faction of Lancaster to follow Edward the fourth. The first
Beauforts legitimated by the Pope, and Richard the second have no other
Sir-names, but Beaufort in either of the instruments Apostolical, nor any
words to give or emure them to any capacity of Royal Title, or state of
Sovereignty in the Crown, only purged them by the Popes spiritual power from
the foulness of Bastardy, allowing them as children legitimate and lawfully
born, but gives them no other title then Ioanna de Beaufort miles, Henricus de
Beaufort Clericus, Thomas de Beaufort Domicellus, Ioannus de Beaufort
Domicella, and more the Pope cannot do. As the Doctors of Sorbone, and some of
the best Canonists hold, who peremprorily affirm, That the Pope cannot make
Bastards capable to inherit the Hereditary Lands of their Father; neither can
give them power to Constitute Successors or Heirs, or hold Offices,
Dignities, or Titles, without the Princes special dispensation, to which the
Civil and Imperial Laws agree, and is Authentic in England, as a The civil
and imperial Law against Bastards. Sir Edw. Cook.
Learned and eminent Judge reports, though others think it of too severe a
nature, and moderately agreeable to reason and Law (the Law much observing
reason) That Bastards being honest and worthy men (the rather if they be avowed
by their Fathers) may be admitted to Honors, Dignities, Titles, Feuds, and
other Ornaments of rewards and virtue. Of this indulgence and connivence, we
have examples Doctor Stephen Gardener. Sir Tho. Eger. Chancellors of England.
in England by two worthy and deserving men (flourishing in this Age) who,
though Bastards held the greatest Offices in England. So Richard the second, in
his Charter for the legitimation of the Beauforts, would have men of desert
(and avowed by their Fathers) capable of Advancement and Honors. The Tenor of
which Charter and Confirmation of it by Parliament I shall exhibit, as it is
taken out of the Archives and Tower Records, opening the way by a short
advertisement, That in this Act of Parliament, there is an Induction to the
Charter, made by Doctor Edmond Stafford, Brother to the Earl of Stafford, and
Bishop of Exeter, Lord Chancellor of England in the twentieth year of Richard
the second; which intimates, that Pope Vrbanus the sixth, at the earnest
request of the King, vouchsafed to legitimate these Beauforts, the base sons
and the daughter of the Duke of Guyen and Lancaster: That the King also, having
power to legitimate and enable Bastards in the same kind, and in as ample
manner as the Emperor has or had, for so he pressed and avowed in the Act,
was pleased at the humble request and suit of the Duke their Father, to make
them not only legitimate, but also capable of Lands, Heritages, Titles,
Honors, Offices, Dignities, etc. And that the King for the more authority
thereof, craved the allowance and favorable assent of the Barons in Parliament,
which was granted: The Charter runs thus. Charta Legitimationis Spuriorum
Ioannis Ducis Lancastriae.
RIchardus dei gratia Rex, Angliae, Franciae, Dominus, Hiberniae, charissimis
Consanguineis nostris, Nohilibus viris Ioanni de Beaufort Militi, Henrico de B.
Clerico, Thomae de Beaufort Domicello and Nobili mulieri Ioannae Beaufort
domicellae praeclarissimi patrui nostri Nobilis viri Ioannis Ducis Aquitaniae
and Lancastriae Germanis natis and liegis nostris salutem.

Nos pro honor and meritis etc. Avunculi nostri, Proprio arbitratu and
meritorum suorum intuitu vos, quia magno probitatis ingenio, ac vitae ac morum
Honestate fulgetis, and ex regali estis prosapia propagati etc. hinc est quod
Ioannis etc. avunculi nostri genitoris vestri precibus inclinati vobis (cum (ut
asseritur) defectum natalium patimini) hujusmodi defectum and ejusdem
qualitates quascunque abolere praesentes, vos haberi volumus, pro
sufficientibus, ad quoscunque honores, dignitatis praeeminentias, status,
gradus, and officia, publica, and privata, tam perpetua quam temporalia, atque
Iudicialia and Nobilia, quibuscunque nominibus nuncupentur, etiam si, Ducatus,
Principatus, Comitatus, Baroniae vel alia feuda fuerint, etiamsi mediate vel
immediate, a nobis dependeant seu teneantur praefici, praemoveri, eligi, assumi
and admitti, illaque recipere pro inde libere ac licite valeatis, ac side
legitimo thoro nati existeritis, quibuscunque Statutis, seu Consuetudinibus
regni nostri Angliae in contrarium editis seu observatis quae hic habemus pro
totaliter expressis, nequa. quam obstantibus, de plenitudine nostrae regalis
potestatis and de assenssu Parliamenti nostri tenore praesentium dispensamus,
vosque and quemlibet vestrum natalibus restituimus and Legitimanus, Die Feb.
Anno regni 20. R. 2.



Here we find large Graces, Honors, and Privileges, conferred upon those
Beauforts; for the King calls them Consanguineos sous, and not only confirms
their Legitimation, but makes them (by the help of the Parliament) capable of
Baronies, Earledomes, Dukedomes, and Principalities, enableth them for all
Offices public and private, temporary and perpetual, to take hold of and
enjoy all Feuds, as well noble as other, all Lands and Signiories Hereditary,
as lawfully, firmly and rightfully, as if they had been borne in lawful
matrimony, but yet conferres no Royal Title nor interest in the Crown, at the
least, to the observation of those who allow not the claim of the Beauforts
and Somersets, and say, that to reach that, there must be words of a higher
intent, words of Empire, Majesty, and Soveraigntie, such as Regni summa
potestas; Corona; Sceptrum, Diadema, Purpura, Majestas, and the like: Neither
of these, nor any importing their extent, being in this grant, so no Title to
the Crown nor Soveraigntie could pass to them.

To which the other side replies, That there is a word in the Charter that
comprehends Empire, Reign, and Soveraigntie, that is, Principatus, Princeps.
Principatus; whereof the King and Parliament make the Beauforts capable,
Principatus being the State of Princeps, a Title of the most absolute
Sovereign Power; for the Roman Emperors in their greatest height, were called
Principes, therefore Princeps is thus defined; Princeps est penes quem summa
Reip. potestas est, and qui primus omnium dominatur; And Principatus, and
Dominatus are used, as Synonomies. But it is conceived an error now, to take
Principatus for Regnum, O^ Supremus Dominatus, being the word Principatus long
before, and in the age of Richard the second, also ever since, has been
restrained to the Estate of Primogenitus and Heir apparent, not only of
Kings, but also of Dukes and Marquesses, as well Feudall as Sovereign. And the
next King Henry the fourth, a wise, discreet, and wary Prince, though he was
much inclined to those Beauforts (as being his natural Brethren by the
Paternall side, and willing to advance them all he could) yet he discovered
clearly enough by that certain Charter in which he entailed the Crown
successively to his The Charter* of H. 4 for entayling the Crown.
sour Sons, and to the Heirs of their bodies, that he reputed not the
Beauforts to be Lancastrians, or near the Crown. Neither is there the least
clause or mention to leave any remainder therein to them: First, he intaild the
Crown to his eldest son Henry Prince of Wales, after him to the Heirs of
his body; If they fail, then to Thomas of Lancaster his second son, and to
the Heirs of his body, so to his third son John of Lancaster, and to the
Heirs of his body. Lastly, to the fourth son Humphrey, and to the Heirs of
his body for still, and for every estate: the words are, Post ipsum successive
Heredibus suis de ipsius Corpore legitime procreandis, which is all, and
implicatively an express exclusion of the Beauforts. This Charter This Charter
I saw in the hands of Sir Rob. Cotton, and from it took these Summary notes.
The Noblenes and Family of H. E. of Rich.
was confirmed by Act of Parliament holden at Westminster the two and twentieth
day of December, in the eight year of Henry the fourth, and sealed with his
own Signet. Upon the Dexter side of that, hung the seals of sundry Lords
Spiritual; on the left side, the seals of the Lords Temporal witnesses. And
albeit, the Earl of Richmond could not so well and rightly bear the name of
Beaufort or Somerset, being a Teador by his Father, and so to be Sir-named, or
of some other Welch-name (if there were any in his Family) by his Mother he was
descended from the Beauforts; for the Lady Glover. 1413.
Margaret, Countess of Richmond, was daughter and heir to Sir John de
Beaufort Duke of Somerset, and Grandchild to John of Gaunt by Katherine the
wife of Otho de Swinford, which John de Beaufort was created Duke of Somerset
by Henry the fifth, his Wife was the daughter, and at length the heir of Sir
John Beauchamp of Blet so Poli l. lib. 25. So King R. 2. called John of Gaunt
Avunculum nostrum, Rec. in Tower; But that was the fault of the barbarous
Latin Clerks, not knowing the difference between patruos and avunculos.
and the widow of Sir Oliver Saint-Iohn when he married her: But the Earl of
Richmond, by his Grandmother Katherine Queen of England, was descended from
the Kings of France, and I have seen him in a Pedigrce (drawn after he was
King) derived from the ancient Kings and Princes of Britain. Polidore says,
he was Ex fratre Nepos to King Henry the sixth, who called him Nephew, and he the
King, Avunculum nostrum (our Uncle) instead of Patruum, as it is in the Records
of Parliament, Ann. 1. of Henry the seventh, but not his Nephew, as we
erroneously now take it, that is his German younger Brothers Son, for then he
had been a true Masculine Issue of the house of Lancaster and Royal blood of
England.

But he was Nephew to him by his Brother Uterine, Edmond Teudor Earl of
Richmond, the son of Owen Teudor or Meridock, and of Queen Katherine,
daughter of Charles the sixth King of France, and widow of Henry the fifth King
of England, which the French well knew, and gave him the better esteem for it,
but those Honors were obscure Additions to him that must not go less then
for a Prince of the house of Lancaster, and so of England, which passed with
such vulgar credit in France, that Du Tillet mistook John Duke In his Book Le
Recuerl. des Ranges, etc. Part 2.
of Somerset, Father of Margaret Countess of Richmond, for the true and
lawful Son of John de Gaunt, etc. by his first Wife Blanch Plantagenet,
Daughter and Heir of the Earl and Earldom of Lancaster. Philip de Comines
Lord of Argent, had better intelligence of his Pedigree and Title which he
gives us thus.

Iln' avoit croix, ny pile, ne null droit (Come je croy) a la Coronne
d'Angleterre: And this expresses, he had no great opinion of either, though he
were then King when this was writ. But let us suppose him lawfully from that
Duke of Lancaster, his claim must stand excluded whilst the house of York
survived, for Richard Plantagenet, Duke of York, and King of England designat,
by Act of Parliament holden 39 year of King Henry the sixth, to whom these
Titles of Prince of Wales, Duke of Cornwall, Earl of Chester, and Protector of
England, were given by the three Estates in that Parliament, descended from the
Daughter and Heir of the second Son of King Edward the third. (For as
before, so still I leave the Infant Philip Plant. Lyonel Plant. D. of Clarence
William of Hatfield without the Catalogue) and King Henry the fourth and his
Progeny, descended from the third Son; and King Henry the sixth; being the
best of the house of Lancaster then living, did acknowledge in that Parliament,
the Title of Richard Duke of York, the only lawful and just Title, so
consequently next and better then that of Lancaster or any other; and before
any Beaufort or their Heirs, the Issue of the two daughters of John Duke of
Lancaster, Philip and Katherine (married to the King of Portugal and Castile)
were to be preferred if Foreign Titles be not excluded by Parliament. But the
Earl of Richmond, measuring his own height, by the advantage of a tumultuary
and indisposed time, and finding his Lancastrian pretense, began to have a
popular retinew, he was now incompatible of any others precedence and
propinquity for those great ones that led him by the hand unto the Action, laid
the line by their own corrupted hopes and fears of the success, therefore
would not let the fortune of their expectation faint in him. Bishop Morton
steered much in the course of their Affairs, and was a great Oracle to the
Earl, who was noted too partial and credulous, especially where he believed
the persons of any honesty, virtue, or learning, for which his fame yet bears
some stains of Morton, Dudley, Empson, Bray, Vrswike, Knevett, etc. for there
be two extremes observed in the Counsels of Princes, one when the Prince is
subject to follow the counsels of evil men; the other, when the Prince is too
opinionated to consult with Counsel, such an one as was Charles, the hardy
Duke of Burgundy, so opinionated and overweening of his own wisdom and
judgment, that he under-thought all men's else, which wide conceit of his has
left this Monument.

Carolus pugnax altorum consilia and rations (ne dicam) sequi uix audire Pe.
Henterus. Ioh. Megerus.
volebat, ignominiae loco habens ab alijs discere, and judicavit, se proprio
cerebro omnia concilia habere recondita.

And to give us yet further character of Bishop Morton, Sir Thomas Moore
(sometimes his Master) tells us, his best inclinations were swaid to the
dangerous positions and rules of policy, and Doctor John Hird in his
metricall History of England, brings him in an Ambodexter and observer of
fortune, one while yorkeizing another while Lancastrizing, thus delivering
himself: Si Fortuna meis fauisset partibus olim,
Et gnato Henrici sexti diadema dedisset,
Edwardi nunquam venissem regis in aulam,
Sed quia supremo stetit haec sententia Regi,
Henrico auferre, ac Edwardo reddere sceptrum,
Tanta mea nunquam lusit dementia mentem,
Vt sequerer parts regis victi atque sepulti.
Adversus vivum, etc.


Which may be thought well said by a mere Politician, But from a friend it
wants something of a Christian, for true friendship and piety will own us in
the blackest adversity and silence of the grave, as the divine Ariosto has
something near observed in this elegant Stanza. Nessum puo super du chi sia
amato Ariost. cant. 19.

Quando felice in sula ^rota si ede;
Pere ch' haiveri, and ifiniti amici alato,
Chi mostran tuti, una medessima feed,
Se poi si cangia in tristo il he'sto stato,
Volta laturba adulatrice il piede,
Et quel di cu or' ama riman' forte,
Et ama il suo amico doppola morte.
No man whilst he was happy ever knew
Assuredly of whom he was beloved,
For then he has both feigned friends and true,
Whose faith seems both alike till they be proved,
But he is left of all the flattering Crew
When from his happy state he is removed,
But he who loves in heart, remains still one,
And loves his friend when he is dead and gone:


Doctor Mortons aims were drawn from other rules which with good Alacrity,
made him Archbishop, and Lord Chancellor of England, and put him the next list
into a Cardinallship, and then he stood on tiptoes by the King, according to
the Roman Marshalling of states for in the Popes list of ranges and presence,
his holiness is the first, then the Emperor, next a Cardinal, then a King*
and in this* Sir Tho. Moore notes the extremity of his pride, to abuse his
wisdom and piety, which otherwise might have kept him and his memory unfullyed
in these preferments, so much our vices impostumate our fames, hypocrisy
leaving the scarre but of a deformed cure upon it at best.

But Doctor Goodwin Bishop of Hereford, presents him nearer (as Fra. Goodwin in
Catalogo Episcoporu^.
it were) in his Domesticke nature, and reports when Doctor Morton was
Archbishop of Canterbury, he exacted and exrorted a far greater Sum of money
from the Clergy of his Diocese then was ever before, and for his private
Commodity (which he covetously sought) brought certain Leames or bigger
Ditches to his own grounds about Wisbitch, from the River Nine, which was
before navigable, and of much public use, but has since served for little or
none. And John Stow says he was the stirrerup of those great and grieveous
taxes John Stow.
which raised the people to Arms and Rebellion: These notes of his natural
dispositions stuck like wennes upon the face of his Religion, and from that
mind, where by affections justle Religion and conscience out, how hazardous may
the Power and Counsel of such be* to the inclinations of a wise Prince: but
this Prelate made his so Canonical, and fitted them to the times, and his Mr
temper, that they deceived not his expectation, but brought him home to his
ends, and to the favor of aprovident and wise Prince; that he was so, the world
must justly avow, and in all his actions, we may see-him, of a safe and
contracted wisdom, governed by a most cautelous spirit, as great a husband of
those virtues he had, as of his Glory, not too modest, (if I be not much
mistaken) to hear of either; of both which he has left us pious tastes. But
the most surviving addition of memory, is that great example of Majesty, and
her Sex, Queen Elizabeth, who was said to be like Qu. Elizabeth.
this King her Grandfather, as well in composition of qualities, as favor, and
lineaments, that she was his lively and perfect Image; and to use an even hand
in the extention of himself and his power, it must not be denied, (how far off
soever he was at first) after the Crown yielded to him, he was the true
proprietary of all the Rights and Titles which carried it, or had dependency
thereon; and to colleague all in a full and perfect strength, the Title of
York was confirmed to him by marriage of Elizabeth Plantagenet Eldest Daughter
of Edward 4, Prince or head of that Family, to whom the Title of Lancaster
instantly escheated as he was King, which before was in controversy, or in
nubibus, or Abeyance (as our Lawyers say) for no man being a Subject, how
Capital and chief a Judge, or of what judicatory power soever, could give a
definitive Sentence, in any ambiguous cause or Act of the King: but the King
himself which is an ancient and Authentic paragraph in the Laws of England,
as learned Judge Bracton affirms.

De Chartis Regijs, and de factis regum non possunt Iusticiarij disputare,
^ra^. li. 2. Cap. 16.
nec si disputatio oriatur, possunt eam interpretari, sed in dubijs and
obscuri^, and ubi aliqua dictio contineat duos intellectus, domini Regis erit
expectand^ interpretatio and voluntas, etc.

The reason is given in the Books of the Civil and Imperial Laws
peremptorily, quia de principali Iudicio non est disputandum. So that
Controversy, whether the Beauforts or Sommersets were of the House of
Lancaster, and capable of the Crown or no, could not be determined until
there came a competent Judge, a King, and King of England, who by that virtue
and power decreed to himself, the Title of Lancaster, with all the Royal
Apurtenances confirmed by the Pope, as proper to him, and then the Writers both
English and French, had some color to say he was de la ligne de Lancastre, and
caput gentis regalis and Princeps familiae Lancastriensis.

But the Chancellor Morton, by a more happy and plausible insinuation, termed
the Marriage an union of York and Lancaster, and not improperly, nor without a
very favorable acceptance to the King (at least in the beginning of his
Reign,) though after (as may be observed,) he thought those attributions, but
small wyers to hold the weight and consequence of his Crown, nay, so slender
was his Affiance, (or rather none at all) in his Titles of York and Lancaster,
King H. 7. only affected the Title de jure Belli.
much less of Sommerset, that he seemed tacitly to wave and quit them, and
stuck to that of his Sword and Conquest; For the more public vote and
knowledge whereof, there was at his Coronation, Proclamations made with these
Titles, Henricus Rex Angliae jure divino, jure humano, and jure Belli, etc.
which the Barons could not fancy, no^ condescend to, thought the King
peremptorily avowed and maintained he might justly assume and bear it, having
as a Conqueror entered the Land, fought for the Crown, and won it; they
answer as peremptorily, that he was beholding to them, both for his Landing and
Victory, and by their permission had that fair and prosperous foo^ing upon
their Coasts, not by any stroke of his French, which were not so many as the
least Legion of the Romans, and had found but bloody entertainment by the
valiant English, if ever they had landed, besides the instigation of a mortal
hatred against the Invader, never to be extinguished, but with an utter
expulsion and destruction, which they humbly prayed might be worthy of his
consideration, and not to take from his loving people the just due of their
Affections, by ascribing so much of his victory to the French, or his Welsh
Sword, Since, they voluntarily opened their Arms and Country, to receive him
and put the Crown upon his head, that this was their free and voluntary Act
they hoped he could not forget: and if so, why would he make such an
Achievement, a Conquest, or a purchase of the Sword, terms of a most harsh
and disonant sound to the English, who reputed them as Barbarous and
Tyrannical, their ends and events to enslave them, their Goods and Fortunes,
under a Licentious power that might Act Sene^.
and will any thing: Quicquid Victor audet, aut Victus timet? The examples of
the conquering Goths and Vandalls, Longobards, in Italy and Spain, Saxons and
Normans in England; and lately the Spaniards in America, with many other cruel
Lords estated only by their unjust Arms and Swords, being fresh and bleeding
instances, that when but mentioned, stir up thoughts of horror and
detestation of the Swords Title. But the more they opposed it, the more he is
constant to have it assented by the Pope with his Title of Lancaster, which he
thought would be a stronger bridle to check all murmurs, but yet endeavored it
not directly and disertly, but under a close and borrowed praetext, the
outside of his Embassage being only to obtain a dispensation and pardon for
his marriage, praetending a fear of Incest, his Wife being his Kins-woman; Et
quarto Co^sanguinitatis An. Dom. 1 486.
and forsan affiinitatis gradu, which Pope Innocentius the eight granted the
first year of his reign, and afterward (upon what occasion I cannot say) he
renewed the same suit to Pope Alexander An. Dom. 1490.
the sixth, who confirmed and ratified the pardon and dispensation made by his
Predecessors in the fourth year of this Kings Reign,

But it is observable that the Pope herein takes not upon him to confer or
give any new Titles; neither did the King publicly solicit the Pope to
confirm these two Titles, his Ambassador had that particular in his private
instructions: So that by this, the Pope seems only to make a rehearsal of
those Titles as due and proper to him before, I have seen this Bull in the
Cabinet of Sir Rob. Cotton.
and the Titles de jure Belli, and de jure Lancastriae, seemed not as any
matters or subject of the Bull, but rather some desire the Pope had, to
express a love and honor to the King, and that he was pleased, Ex proprio and
mero motu and certa scientia sua, to make such honorable memorial of all the
Majesticall Titles in the Kings right, as the more stately embroideries to his
glorious Letters of Apostolical indulgence, for the dispensation of the said
marriage conveyed, and in these words:

Hic Rex Angliae, de domo Lancastriae originem trahens, ac qui notorio The
Popes Charter* for the Title of Lancast. E^ de jure Belli, etc. for the
dispensing with the Kings incestuous marriage.
jure, and indubitato proximo successionis titulo and Praelatorum and procerum
Angliae Electione and concessione etc. Etiam de jure Belli est Rex Angliae.

After, for the more clear reparing and curing all flawes and defects of
Titles, the Pope adds this gracious clause; Supplemusque omnes, and singulos
defectus, tam juris, quam facti, si qui intervenerint in regno dicto.

And then in the end, not in the front, this Bull is entitled, Pagina
confirmationis nostrae, approbationis, pronunciationis, constitutionis,
declarationis, suppletionis, monitionis, requisitionis, prohibitionis,
Benedictionis, inhibitionis, and excommunicationis, and Anathematizationis in
quos^unque, qui p^esumpserint, infringere, vel ausu temeritatis, contravenire
his literis Apostolicis.

For all this must be held, and thought to be done Autoritate Apostolica, i. by
the Authority of the Apostles, Saint Peter and Saint Paul.

And thus the King received of the Pope the two Titles, De Domo Lancastriae,
and De Iure Belli, without any seeking or solicitation (as we are led to
credit) for there appears not any express suit or motion by the King to that
purpose, though by circumstances and probability it was preferred under hand,
for the other things were but of slight request and no necessity, nor
obnoxious to any danger; when those two Titles were the present marks, his
aim was strongly and mainly directed to. Though I must confess, after a
while, he was a lightly satisfied in these (notwithstanding the Popes thunder
and lightning, added to them,) as in the Titles of York and Lancaster, which
he discovered, and not obscurely, when he moved the Estates in his first
Parliament, to grant an Estate Hereditary and entailed of the Crown and
Kingdom, with all the Appurtenances, to the Heirs of his body: beyond this he
could not require much, nor they give, which was unanimously condiscended unto,
as a gift of a new Title confirmed by their Act; the Copy whereof I have
transcribed (where I come to rehearse the Titles of our Sovereign Lord the
King that now is.) Nor is the Devination of this piece so dark, but that the
cause may be guessed at, why he held himself not safe in the Titles of York
and Lanacster, of Beaufort and Somerset already touched at, but may fall more
seasonably elsewhere into our Stories, without confounding it with
Historologies, and presenting matters out of their time and place; my purpose
only being, to take so much light from the Story of Henry the seventh as shall
but properly conduce to the true shadowing and proportioning of King Richards,
being necessarily enforced to inculcate such matters as may seem of no present
conclusion; yet loosing their observation, we shall want the knowledge of many
things much pertinent to the credit and honor of King Richard and his Actions:
To which, according to the Order and Affairs of time, I am now to come again.

And here, upon our account, we shall find it near upon ten months since
the Duke of Buckingham was suppressed, and the Earl The second invasion of the
E. of Rich.
of Richmond driven from Poole with the storm, who was now again very busy
raising fresh preparations in France, and King Richard upon the intelligence,
as stickling to Levy Soldiers, and reinforce all his Havens and Frontier
places. But the Earl of Richmond found it not so easy a matter now as at
first, to draw a party and concurrence from France, having sped so ill in his
former undertakings, which indeed struck a great discouragement in the
expectation of all his Favorers, and made his welcome the colder to the Duke
of Britain; the rather also, because he had been with the French King before
he came to him, which was taken but ill, although the Earl could not otherwise
do, being forced upon the Coasts of Normandy; And coming into the Road at
Deipe landed, to refresh himself and company: From thence he intended to Roan,
which being so near Paris, engaged him thither to the King, being (as Philip
de Comines says, followed in a very honorable Port by 500 Englishmen) In his
stay there (to show us how much interest a provident and active spirit has in
fortune) he so heightened and sweetened his behavior to the Court, as
conciliated the favor and respect of the Greatest and Noblest Persons to him.
But most happily, the fair opinion and esteem of the Princely Lady Anne de
France, eldest Sister to King Charles the eight, who had such an influence upon
him in his minority, that she out-pitched Lewis Duke of Orleance, chief
Prince of the Blood. In envy or mis-like whereof, he took Arms, and raised a
Civil War in France (as John Tillet and others write) she was wife to Pierce
de Bourbon Lord of Beaujen, after Duke de Bourbon, but Beaujen being his most
stately and honorable Signiory, he was called Moun^ieur de Beaujen; and this
Lady had so flexible an inclination to the Earl of Richmonds Cause, that she
importuned the King to aid him with a good sum of money and 3000 men, but
odd fellows. For Philip de Comines says, they were trois mill Comines page
536.
hommes les plus meschants que lux peut trouver, no better then Rogues and
Trewans, men of base quality and as low courage. Whilst these were Levying,
the Earl (thriftie of all opportunities, and as diligent to add what
advantage of time and aid he could) visits the Duke of Britain to the same
purpose. The Duke propounds it to his Council, which Peter Landois, his
Treasurer and chief Counselor objects against, with this reason, That if the
Enterpize succeeded well, yet the event must fall out unhappily and ill to him,
the Earl having now interested himself to the favor and assistance of Charles
King of France: And this would be the first link of so strong an engagement,
that the Earl and his Confederacy must be lost to Britain when he came to be
King, being respectively tied to lend the King of France aid against them, if
any cause should happen, which the King of France had a prepared stomach for,
and had not been nice to seek any provocation that might countenance a
Quarrel against the Duchy of Britain, which was beyond his spanne, so long
as they continued in League with England; that being untwisted, and France and
England Contracted, how easy was it for the French to envade and swallow up
both him and his Dukedom. To make the present advantage (therefore) as
profitable, as safe, his advice was to stay the Earl; the Duke knowing his
Coffers at that time very lanke, and that the King of England would offer well
for him, approved the Counsel, and resolved to be led by Landois (whose
respects (notwithstanding) were very affectionate to the Earl) But whether by
the secret caution of some friends, or suggested to him by his better genius,
Sure it is by some unknown means he had knowledge of it; and yet this was
determined but at night, and designed for the morning; But before midnight, or
the knowledge of their flight, he and twelve Gentlemen his followers, had left
Vannes, and recovered Aniow (under the French Kings protection) from thence to
the French Court again, the King being still very pliable and constant to his
promise concerning those French forces under his own charge. The next thing he
works at, is how to enlarge the Earl of Oxford out of the Castle of Hammes,
committed thither by Edward the fourth (and in this he uses, or rather followed
indeed) the contrivement of Doctor Morton, who held good quarter with the Earl
of Oxford, and by his frequent visits had a familiar and easy door opened,
which the Earl readily took the opportunity of, least it might be shut again
by some miscarriage, for Richmond thought or found the constitution of his
Design not a little strengthened by the Earl of Oxfords co^federacy: nor did
he mistake himself in his account, when he set him down of special use,
knowing him a man of an eminent power; wisely and valiantly tempered: And to
give him the stronger presumptions and confidence) one that most mortally hated
Edward the fourth, and all the house of York: To begin therefore an
Obligation, the Earl of Richmond makes a Complementall journey to Hammes,
where the Earl of Oxford was then, under the charge of Sir James Blound; He
finds all honorable and respective entertainment with fit liberty, and
occasion to propound himself unto the Earl, who had been partly prepared by
Doctor Morton, and therefore met him the nearest way, engaging himself solely
to the premises, and (by virtue of an indefatigable confidence) sets upon his
Keeper, winnes him to the Faction, and to Paris with them. By which time, all
preparations were in readiness; and whilst they make this stay in the French
Court, the Earl of Richmond receives a fair excuse and protestation from the
Duke of Britain, with offer of Auxiliary Forces: This supply came very
acceptably, and however he resented the Dukes late purpose upon him, his
wisdom told him, he must now convert his anger into thanks, which he returns
with a reciprocal Protestation and Order, to send the Troops to Harflew where
his Shipping lay, and was the Rendezvous for his Soldiers.

In the end of July 1485. he took leave of the King and his most Noble Cousin
Madam de Beaujen, departing for the ^ort of Harflew in Normandy, where he met
with two thousand Britains from the Duke honorably accommodated. But by the
way he made some stay at Roven, and had news which much distempered him, That
the Lady Elizabeth was forthwith to be married to King Richard, this quickened
his have for England, presuming, his landing would forbid the Banes, otherwise
he might sit down with folded hands, for upon this marriage insisted the maine
hope and consequence of his Fortune; without her, all his great praetexts would
faint, yet seemed to hear it, as a thing that could not concern him so much,
having so present and provident a wit, that in any chance he wanted not
Council and determination in himself for all Fortunes; instantly resolving,
to apply his suit to her Sister the Lady Cecily: but ere he could perfectly
fashion these intents, they were also counterchecked, by the next packet, which
assured him the Lady Cecily was lately married: neither did that (after some
Collection) seem much to discompose him, but quickly, varying his disposition
to his fortune, he would now fix himself upon some choice in Britain,
Amongst his nobler friends (for the most part Welsh-men) and treates about a
Daughter of Sir William Herberts, a Gentleman of a Noble Alliance and
principal power in the South part of Wales: who had married the Eldest
Daughter not long before to the Earl of Northumberland, to whom the Earl of
Pembrooke (by a new created friendship betwixt them) imbosomes the whole
design, and presses his Comprobation in it; for by this means it was
presumed, the greatest part of Wales would fall under their Command: which had
been no small addition to a Banished man's fortune. Whilst those things were in
their mould, Doctor Morton gave him such assurance (by Letters) of the
Countries readiness to receive him, that it was thought best to take the
advantage of landing there, and in the Month of July, they loose from Harfleu,
and safely arived at Milford Haven in Pembrookeshire, his native Country: after
some refreshing, he Marches to a Town called Haverford West, and was entering
amongst his British kindred, who welcomed him as a Prince, descended from
their ancient Princes of Wales, (the Country generally very Noble and loving to
their friends); whilst he continued amongst them, Sir Rice ap Thomas, Sir
Walter Herbert, Sir John Savage, Sir Gilbert Talbot (who drew his young Nephew
the Earl of Salop into this Action with him) and diverse others of all
qualities, brought, or sent their Forces; his Army thus strong and united, he
passes the Severne, and Marches to Lichfield, purposing to hold on to London,
if the King had not interposed it, who though he lay at Nottingham when the
Earl landed, and while he marched through Wales, had constant Spies upon him.
But as no Policy, or Law can secure their faith, that think they may dispense
with it, so all Benefits are too narrow, where Ambition and Ingratitude urges
merit; and to show there is not much of our Fate in our own providence, when
this King thought the Nobility most firmly cimented to his side, and was to put
himself upon their constancy, they make a present and general defluxion to the
other; But he had heightened and contracted his Resolution and judgment, to the
greatness of his Cause, and was not now to be outbid by Chance, or danger: The
next day (which was Sunday about Evening) Leicest. inquit, Rex Richardu^, cu^
maxima Pompa portan^ d^adema, in capi^e. Chron. Croy.
passing through Leicester in open Pomp, the Crown Royal on his head, with
him John Duke of Norfolk, Marshall of England, the Earl of Surrey, the Earl
of Westmorland, the Viscount Lovell, and other of the Nobility and Gentry at
Redmore Heath, the Armies came to an Interview, and put themselves in Array;
the next morning early, there was some conference held in the Kings Tent, by
those Peers, and others of principal trust, who gave him particular
information of all those, secretly revolted; and it much amazed him: the Earl
of Northumberland was one, to whom he had ever been most constant and forward
in his respects and favors; therefore, where he had conferred so much, he
suspected little. But no Obligations are Religious, if not held so: and
although in the conflict he stood but as neutrall, yet the suddenness and
example of it, drew many from the King, even at the instant, when he was ready
to Arm himself, yet this was not of so great and sensible amazement unto him,
as the Lord Stanleys defection, who in pledge of his faith, had left his Son
George Stanley, whilst his wife (the Earls mother) had made her subtle
persuasions of stronger tie, and subinduced him to the Lancastrian sice, which
he aided with 26000, men, if Phillip de Commines be not mistaken: for our
stories have but five thousand. But it was a very great defection, and made the
Earls Army far stronger, so that the chiefest point of Consultation now, was
how to preserve him by flight, and the recovery of some strong hold, until the
tempest had scattered, or spent its violence, which they conceived covld not be
long, if the Camp brake up, and once dissolved. But no Argument could fasten
on him, though the benefit of a swift Horse was offered at his Tent door, nor
the fatality and portent of Prodigies, related by his friends, as presaging
some inevitable Calamity, and that Prophetical Prediction. Jack of Norfolk be
not too bold,
For Dickon thy Master is bought and sold.


These things aggravated, the weakness of his Army objected, Counsels,
Persuasions, Terrors, Prodigies, Prophesies, could not make him hear, so
fatally resolute he stood in the jealousy and reputation of his Honor and
Valor, peremp^orily protesting he would rather adventure Life, Crown, and
Fortunes, than his honor to a cowardly and sinister construction; this might
taste of a despera^e will, if he had not afterward given an apodixis in the
battle, upon what plat-forme he had projected and raised that hope, which as
^t had much of danger in it, so of an inconcusse and great resolution, and
might have brought the odds of that day to an even bet; for knowing the Earl
to be thirsty and Appetent after Glory and Renown, but of an unpractised skill
in War, and as inferior in courage to him, he had projected (in manner of
Stratagem) so soon as the Armies approached ready for the Charge, to advance
himself before his Troops, and give the Earl, being General of his Forces,
the signal of a Combat. And to provoke and single him with a more glorious
invitation, he wore the Crown Royal upon his head, the fairest mark for
Valor and Ambition; Polidore says he wore it, thinking that day should either
be the last of his life, or the first of a better, Why K. Rich. wore the Crown
at Bosworth.
which may as well be a reason of his wearing it three days before at
Leicester, when he rode from thence to Bosworth. But doubtless, by it he
intended chiefly, that the people might see and know him to be their King: and
those that stood Armed against him, looking upon that Imperial evidence, where
their own hands and voices had set it, should by the awe and Sovereignty of it,
consider how lately they had avowed him their Lawful King, and by what Pledges
of their Faith and Allegeances, they stood solemnly bound to defend him and his
Title in it, against all other: what ever was his mystery, it rendered him a
valiant and confident Master of his Right; and in the constancy of hope and
resolution, he gives order for the Battle: The Armies confronted, and whilst
the Alarm, and every blow, began to be hot and furious, forth breaks King
Richard toward the Earl, wafting him by a signal, who seemed readily to
accept it, and pricking his Horse forward came on very gallantly, as if but one
Genius had prompted their Spirits, and Ambition: for a good Author testifies
that Comes Richmondiae Chron. Croy.
direct super Regem Ricardum, etc. But his cariere soon faltred, and Mars
became Retrograde, it being but a nimble train, to draw the King on to some
disadvantages, or else he liked not his furious approach, for suddenly he makes
a halt, and with as much credit as he could (and no harm) recovered the
Vanguard of his Army, whither Richard pursued him, with so much speed and
fierceness, that he forced him to his Standard: And now, high in blood and
anger (to see his Valor deluded by such a politic Bravery) with his Sword
makes way, and with his own hand slew Sir Charles Brandon Standerd-Bearer, S.
Will. Brandon Father to Charles Brandon, afterward Duke of Suff.
thinking to have made the next blow as fatal to the Earl, but the confluence
of Soldiers interjecting, rescued him, Sir John Cheney being one of the
foremost, whom the King stroke from his Horse to the Earth; But Charged and
environed, with multitudes (that like a storm came on him) Valiant Richard
falls, the Sacrifice of that day, under their cruel Swords, so rabious in
their execution, as if his body must suffer more, because they could not kill
his better part, mangling and wounding his dead Corpse, whilst it lies drentcht
in gore. Et Lupus, and turpes instant morientibus ursi, Ovid. tr^st. l. 2.
E^eg. 5.

Et quaecunque minor nobilitate fera est.


As Currs in their kenells will bite and tear the skin of those beasts which
in the fields they durst not bark at: Occidit in bello miseranda caede
Richardus, Dr John Hird. in Hist. Angl.

Crinibus attractus, dum ferro saeviat hostis.


And after all (to complete their barbarism) threw his body behind one upon a
Jade, and so conveyed it to Leicester. A story to be thought incredible, at
least to charitable and modest ears, and highly upbraided by the happier and
Christian fame of William the Conqueror, who severely punished a Soldier, but
for hacking the thigh of King Harold after he was dead, though an Usurper and
his perfidious enemy; with all nobleness causing the body to be delivered to
his Mother for an honorable interment, which was solemnly Matthew Paris Henry
^untington.
celebrated in his own Abbey at Waltham.

The Battle thus fought and won, the Victor was Crowned in the field, with that
Crown K. Rich. wore, which the L. Stanley put upon his Henry of Richmond
Crowned in the Field.
head, and salutes him King, by the style of Hen. 7. K. of England, etc. And
Henry Earl of Richmond, Son of Edmund ap Meredith ap Teudor (alias of Hadham)
Earl of Richmond, and of Margaret Daughter and Hei^e of John Beaufort Duke of
Sommerset, attained to the Crown, and had the easier ascent by the oversight
and remissness of Richard, in that Catastrophe of his Reign, who gave too much
opportunity and scope to the actings of his Enemies, when they were under his
power, and arm. And in the Fortune of his judgment (at the closing Scene) that
did not better presuppose his Enemy too prudent, and reserved to trust the
advantage he had, upon so sharp and single an hazard; But Richard believing
he had the odds in courage and monomachie of him, which probably might make him
Master of the Combat, and so of the Field, (the strait being so desperate
too) resolved rather to trust to the Fate of his own Valor, then the chance
of an uncertain escape; a resolution not so rash and overweening, as
commendable, if we look upon the very aims and necessity of it, neither is it
new or improper for Princes to demand the trial of camp fight, or single
Combat, personaly in their Armies, and to the Generals in their absence;
William the Conqueror challenged King Harold; Before that, a Combat was
fought between Edmund Ironside, and Canute the Danish King, for the whole
Kingdom of England; our Richard the first, and Edward the first, in Palestine
proffered the like to some of the Pagan Princes; so did Edward the third, Henry
the fifth, with the Kings of France.

In the last Age, the valiant Prince, Ia^es the fifth of Scotland, in Person
challenged Thomas Lord Howard Duke of Norfolk, General The Challeng of the 5
King of Scots to The. Duke of Norfolk.
for the King of England, who accepted it, But the King into his Demands, would
have the Country or Lands then in Controversy, to be made Brabium victoris,
which was without the Generals power to engage, being the Inheritance of the
King his Master, but proffers better Lands of his own upon the Combat, which
was not accepted, so that concluded nothing.

The better end of these Challenges and Combats, being at first, levelled from
Mercy, and Piety, for by this single adventure, the Innocent blood of Armies
was (more then stanched) preserved* Foreign Stories brings this home to us,
and highly Characters their Kings and Generals in the like examples, which
this Age draws a Curtain before, as not fit for imitation, making too
desperate a wound in a settled State and Succession; the (first who rendered that
or some more Politic reason) for Princes not to adventure themselves, was Phi.
the 2 K. of Spain, (as a late writer ascribes) but is mistaken: For the more
ancient Histories of Syria and Persia, mentions some Kings that refrained from
Wars long before; as Herodotus, Diodorus, Princes go not to Camp.
Trogus Pompeius tells us: But let us take measure from that, Times, Wisdom,
Valor, Policy, etc. to this, and we shall find them but tottering foundations
of States which cannot uphold themselves, or obvert the least Decree of God
when he intends to scourge or alter kingdoms; for where such vicissitudes are
destined, the Counsels and faculties of men must be darkened, and there will
fall out all concurrences and advantages to further that purpose* So in the
extirpation and transferring of Families, the Potter in Jeremy, breaking one
Jarre to make another, whose fatal commutations should extimulate the piety
of our natures, and make us modest censurers of their events: For as we see
things but through a Cloud, whilst we measure them by accidents, so we
intrude on Gods providence, judging men's actions in their success, while we
over-act our own. Of such a composition was the ill-wishers of King Richard,
who forgot him not in his grave, but endeavored to be equally cruel Cruelties
done to the body of King Richard. Noble persons attainted by Parliament.
to his memory: And in November following a Parliament was holden, in which he
was attainted of High Treason; a strain very high to make him guilty of that,
being a King, he could not commit. By the same figure may others, who were
styled chief ayders and assistants of King Richard in the Battle of
Bosworth, as Sir John Howard Duke of Norfolk, etc. though some would have him
retired from the Court all King Richards reign. But Sir Thomas Moore affirms,
Sir Tho. Moor.
He was constantly with him and near his Counsels, Sir Thomas Howard Earl of
Surrey, Son and heir apparent to the Duke; Francis Lovel, Viscount Lovel,
Sir Walter Devereux, Lord Ferrers of Chartley, Sir John de la S^uch, Sir Robert
Harrington, Richard Charleton, Richard Ratcliffe, William Berkley, William
Catesby, Thomas Broughton, John Buck, Humphrey Stafford, Robert Midleton,
Robert Brokenbury, John Kendall, Secretary to the King; Walter Hopton, Ieoffry
Saint-German, Roger Wake, Thomas Billington, William Sapcoate, William
Brampton, all Knights, and some Heralds at Arms, with diverse other; an Act of
Parliament being made, to disable and forejudge Parliament ann. 1. H. 7.
them of all manner of Honor, State, Dignity; Also to ^orfeit all Manors,
Castles, Lordships, Hundreds, Franchises, L^berties, Advowsons, Privileges,
Nominations, Presentations, Tenements, Rents, Suits, Reversions, Portions,
Annuities, Pensions, Rights, Hereditaments, Goods, Chattells, and Debts. These
be the words of the Act, and if jus, then jus summum in all extremity.

Those of note that were taken, lost their heads at Leicester two days after,
being Saint Bartholmews day, and had a glimpse like that* Bartholmew in France
in our time; all such slaughters from thence called Bartelmies, and
Bartelemies, simply in a perpetual Stigma of that Butchery.

It is suggested, the Duke of Norfolk was slain in the Battle The Duke of
Norfolk slain by the Earl of Oxenford.
by the Earl of Oxford, and the Story of Croyland seems to say as much;
Comes Oxoniae valentissimus miles in eam alam ubi Dux Norfolciae constitutus
erat in agro (de Redmore) tum Gallicorum tum Anglicorum militum Comitatu
stipatus tetendit, etc.

Amongst those that escaped the sad destiny of that day, was the The Earl of
Surrey escapes at Bosworth.
Earl of Surrey, Sir Thomas Howard, Viscount Lovel, Sir Thomas Stafford, and
his Brother N. Stafford, with many other Nobles and Gentlemen that got into
Foreign Countries and Sanctuaries, obscuring themselves till the storm and
smart of that days memory were past. But some would maintain Thomas Earl of
Surrey to be one of them that submitted to the new King at Bosworth immediately
after the overthrow which must not be believed, if we understand the
composition of those times and affairs: for certain it is, the Earl Richmond
had peremptorily proscribed all those he had cause to fear or hate, whose
names are partly in the Rowles, kept in the Chapel of the Convertites in
Chancery Lane, and partly omitted by the Scribes.

Now the Earl of Surrey, of all the rest, was so terrible and distastefull to
him, there could be no excuse left for his life. And therefore let no man
think he was taken or submitted, but took a^ happier season some months
after. The Relation and truth is (by the warrant of one that well knew him, and
the inter-passage of his Fortune) the Earl opportunely left the Field, but so
wounded, that faintness and night constrained him to the house of a Gentleman
not far from Nottingham, and one that bare a faithful respect to the Earl
and his Family until he was well recovered. In the mean time, that terrible
Parliament held in the next November was concluded, and the Kings desires
reasonably well appeased, in seeing the execution of his new Laws past upon
some of them. After which, (some small distance of time) followed a gracious
pardon to all the offenders in that Cause, which proffered mercy, this Earl
laid hold on, hoping to restore himself (by his submission) his offense,
considered, being but an Act of Loyalty to his Master. But this confidence
sent him to the Tower, for though the violence of the storm appeared well
calmed, yet the King retained some heavings of it in his thoughts: And this
Imprisonment continued from his first year of reign unto the fourth; and
toward the beginning of that, being in the Tower with the Queen Elizabeth (to
whom he was shortly after to be married) he took occasion to call for the
Earl, (bearing still a gust of the same tempest in his brow) and challenged
him upon the old quarrel, his service to the late Usurper and Tyrant, (as he
usually termed King Richard) the Earl humbly moved his pardon, and more
favorable consideration to the nature of his offense, which thousands more
conceived to be but a due effect of their Liege duties, and Allegiance to a
Prince so lawfully, and with all general sufferance Crowned, whose Title he
held himself bound to defend by the law of God and Nations, and would dye in
defense of him and that Crown, though he should find it upon a Stake: The King
left him with a stern and ruffling reply, but in cold blood better
acknowledged his integrity, and thought he would come of no less value to
him, having the advantage to merit him by his pardon, which soon after he
granted him; nor did the Earl loose ought Scots (...) thrown by the E. of
Surrey.
of that opinion: Shortly after, being made of the Privy Council, then
Lieutenant or Governor of the North, and General against the Scots, whom he
overthrew; as fatal was he to them at Flodden field, where he took their King
in the time of Henry the eight, who made him High Marshall and Treasurer of
England, and restored him to his Fathers Dukedom, the Inheritance of his Grand
mother Mowbray, being a man of such a happy direction in his carriage and
wisdom, that all his Actions came home with prosperous success, and
accumulated what was sometime spoken of his great Ancestour Hewardus, of whom
it was questioned, Vtrum faelioior an fortior esset, Iugulsus.
so Fortunate and Honorable has that house been in the Service to this
State; and in the infinite Alliance and Cognation, it holds with the most
Ancient Families, the Extractions and propagations from Mowbray, Warren, Bruce,
Dalbery, Marshall, Segrave, Plantagenet, Brotherton, Bigot, Fitz-Alan,
Matraver, Buckingham, Oxford, and Dacres: The Father of which Haward, was
Leofrick Lord of Burn, and the adjacent Country in Lincolneshire; his Mother
was the Lady Edina, descended from the great Ostac, a Duke amongst the
Easterlings in King Edgars time: In whose Family, I also find a Noble Lib.
Eliensis.
Kins-man of his called Haward (to note obiter) This Haward was of a Noble and
Magnificent note, a goodly Personage, answered with an equal Strength and
Valor; Et nimium Bellicosus, much, or too much devoted to Mars. He served in
the Wars of Northumberland, Cornwall and Ireland; and after in the lower
Germany, where he made up much of his Fame, and married a fair Lady called
Turfrida, the Daughter of a Noble man in Flanders, where he continued until
the death of his Father called him home. About which time, William Duke of
Normandy made his Conquest of this Kingdom, and had gratified Johannes Talbois
the French Count, now Earl of Holland, with Leoffricks Country of Holland,
in the Marshand; and the Count very rudely had expuls'd the Lady his Mother,
out of her Possessions and Dower. Hawardus set upon him with such forces as he
could speedily raise, took, and held him prisoner, in despite of the
Conqueror, until he redeemed himself, and accounted for what he had done
with a large sum of money. This drew those of the Nobility to the protection
of his sword, which the Conqueror had chased out of their Country, who had
fortified themselves in the Isle of Ely, and made Hawardus their General,
where he built a Castle that a long time after had his name. But the Normans
took that advantage to infest his Country, and put him again to the recovery
of it, which he so fortunately settled, that the Conqueror was contented to
make him his, and hold him in good favor whilst he lived. He was buried in the
Abbey of Croyland; Concerning his Issue by the the Lady Turfrida, there is
mention only of a Daughter named Tarfrida, married to Hugo Enerm^a, Lord of
Deeping: But circumstance will persuade us, he had other Issue, if we consider
him in the likelihood of his strength and ability, and that diverse continued
of his Surname in that Country along time after him, which makes it probable,
he had a natural Son, (at least, bearing his own name of Heward) that next to
him was the Original Ancestor of this house of Howards. And let it not be
thought any disparagement, for a Noble Family to be raised from a The honor of
Bastards.
natural Issue; for many Princely Families have been derived and propagated
from natural Sons, as was Eneas, Romulus, the Founders Homer. Livy.
of the Roman Families; so was Theseus and Themistocles, as Plutarch writes;
others say as much of Hercules, etc.

The King of Spain descended from Henry de Trastamara, base son of Alphonsus
the Justicer, King of Castile. And who does not honor the Princely Race of
William the Conqueror, Bastard son to the Duke of Normandy? where was a more
Heroical man then Robert Earl of Gloucester, base son of King Henry the
first? The Earls of Warren descended from Hamelin, a base son of Geoffry
Plantagenet, Earl of Aniow: The Noble Herberts are also said, to come from a
base son of Henry the first.

And the Duke and Earls of Somerset (which followed the Red Rose) were the
Offspring of the Beauforts, natural sons of John de Gaunt.

For a further conjecture, why these Howards must be descended from Hewardus or
Herewardus (for so some Writers call him; but ( Iugulfus, who best knew him,
constantly calls him Hewardus) both names may signify in the Saxon or old
Dutch, a chief Captain of an Army, whom the Romans called Imperator.) And
that the Titles and names of great Offices have given Sir-manes to many Noble
Families, we have examples in plenty; Particularly the Visconti of Millan,
the Chamberlaines of Normandy, the Stewards of Scotland, the Butlers of
Ireland, and diverse others, who had their Sir-names from the Offices of their
Ancestors and Fathers; and the same presumption or argument may be for taking
the Surname of Howard, and the Origin of their Family from Hewardus, the
Howards from the time of Heward, dwelling in these Countries of Holland and
Marshland* and were Lords of some Lands belonging to him, until by their
matches, with the Daughters and Heirs of Fitton, Tendering, Mowbray, Tillney,
etc. they became possessed in Norfolk, suffolk, and Berkeshire, and were
Lords sometime of Sunning-hill near Windsor, and bore the Surname ever since
(or with small interruption) the old Surname written Heward, or Hereward in
Charters and Records, and Howard in Stories. But descend we through the
succession of those times to William Haward, Chief Justice in the Reign of
Edward the first, Grandfather to Sir John Howard, Admiral of the North Fleet,
in the Navall Wars of Edward the third; his Son Sir Robert Howard married
the Daughter of the Lord Scales, and Sir John Howard (who lived in the time of
Henry the fourth, and dyed Anno 16. Henry the sixth) had two Wives, Margaret
Daughter and Heir of Sir John Plais Knight, by whom he had Eliza: an only
Daughter, married to John de Vere Earl of Oxford, who brought him a goodly
part of the Howards Lands: Her Heirs were married to Latimer and Winckfield,
very fruitful Families. His second Wife was the Daughter and heir of Sir
William Tendering of Stoke-Nayland in Suffolk, by whom he had Sir Robert
Howard his eldest Son, who married Margaret Mowbray, Daughter of a Cadet of
the house of Lancaster, who became Co-heire with her Sister the Lady Berkely,
Wife to Thomas Mowbray Duke of Norfolk, dead in Venice, and left his Son
Henry Haward heir to Haward and Mowbray; and John Howard, the son of John
Howard, was created Earl of Norfolk by King Richard the third, in the right
of his Mother Mowbray, he married the Daughter of the Lord Moulines, and by her
had Thomas Howard, the first Howard Earl of Surrey; this is he who survived
the danger of Bosworth Field, and became afterward Duke of Norfolk, from whom
all the Howards now living are descended, whose Family has been so fruitful
to furnish this Kingdom with four Dukes, many Earls, Viscounts, and Barons,
three high Treasurers, six high or great Marshalls, ten high Admiralls, with
some honorable Custos of the Privy Seal, and sundry Chamberlaines of the
Kings house; and one lately lived who had borne the Offices of high Constable,
Sir Charles Howard.
Lord Lieutenant, Lord high Steward, Marshall and Admiral of England, Lord
Chief Justice in Oyer of the better part of this Kingdom, and Chamberlain of
the Royal house, a man honorable in his deportments, and fortunate in his
undertakings; as at the great Marine Battles against all the Navall powers of
Spain, the Pope, and Princes of Italy, Anno Domini 1588. and in the siege of
Gadys, Anno Domini 1596.

And this is the Grandchild of that Thomas Lord Howard, who for his better
distinction and perpetual honor is styled Triumphator Camden in Octad.
Scotorum.

I have strayed into this digression, as a grateful tender of an
acknowledgement I owe to that Illustrious Family, for their Noble Patronage and
Favor to my Ancestors, especially to that unfortunate Bucke and his Children,
who withered with the White Rose, (bearing an Ancient and Hereditary love to
the House of York, and stood in good Credit and Favor with the King his
Master) no^ let this remembrance of him, and his obscured Family, seem
ostentation or vainglory, whilst I say no more then what other Historios
dictate, which give him an able Character. Master Camden Clarentius Camd^n Octa.
(in his Immortal Brittannia,) deriveth this Sir John Bucke, from Sir Walter
de Bucke of Brabant, and Flanders, who had that Surname of great Antiquity
from the Castle de Bucke in Lis^e, a City and Frontire Town in Flanders, where
the Ancient Earls were accustomed much to reside, the ruins of this Castle
remained in the late time of Lodwicke Guicciardine, who says, he saw the
Carcass Lodow. Guicci. du Paes. Baess. The Ancientry of Buck.
thereof: And this Walter Bucke was a Cadet of the House of Flanders, employed
and sent by the Prince (then Duke of Brabant, and Earl of Flanders) to King
John, with Auxiliary Troops: Roger Wondover says, Walter Bucke, Gerardde
Scottigni, and Godescalius, venerunt M. Paris. M. Westminst. Redulphus de
C^geshall. Tho. Walsing.
in Angliam cum tribus legionibus Flandrensium and Bra^antianoru^ militum, etc.
and he did the King excellent service here (as many of our Historians report,
for which the King bountifully rewarded him with Lands in Yorkshire, and
Northampton shire: And in Yorkshire (where he made his Seat) he found an
Ancient Family of the Surname of Bucke of Bucton, in the Wapentake of Bucrosse,
where that Family had anciently been, (for the name is a Saxon or Dutch word,
and signifies a Beech Tree, or Beech Wood) here Walter contracted alliance,
and Married Ralph de Bucke his Eldest Son, to the Daughter and Heir of
G^celinus de Bucke, Grandchild to Radolphus de Bucke, who was a part Founder
and Bene^actour, to the Abbey of Bredlington, (as is mentioned in the Charter
of Henry the first, made for the foundation of that Monastery) and from this
Walter, descended John Bucke Knight, who married a Strelley, and was so
constant in his Affection, that (although she dyed in his best Age) he made a
Religious Vow, and became a Knight of the Rhodes, his Arms are yet to be seen
in the Ruins of the Hospital of Saint John's nea^e Smithfield, and in the
Church of Alhallows at the upper end of Lumbard Street, which was repaired and
enlarged with the Stones brought from that demolished Caenoby: he lived, sub
rege Edvardo filio Regis Henrici: as I have seen by the date of his deed in
Herthil^, Anno 1 Ed. 1. and Anno 22. Ed. 1.

From this Knight of the Rhodes descended Sir John Bucke, who for his too much
forwardness in charging a Fleet of Spaniards (without the leave of the Earl
of Arundell Lord Admiral) was committed to the Tower, (testified by the
Records there) Anno 13. Richard the second, Lawrence Buck his Son, followed
Edward Plantagenet Duke of York, and was at the Battle of Agin Court with him,
when he was slain: John Bucke Knight, the Son of this Laurence, married a
Daughter and Heir of the House of Staveley, out of which are descended the
Barons Parres of Kendall and Rosse, Queen Katherine (the last wife of King
Henry the eighth) the Lord Parre Marquess of Northampton, and the Herberts
Earls of Pembrooke and Montgomery.

These Bucks residing for the most part at West-Stanton, and Herthill in
Yorkshire, and matched into the Families of Strelley or Stirely of Woodhall,
Thorpe, Tilney, (then of Lincolnshire) and Savill, by which we have much Noble
kindred; Sir John Bucke for his service to the House of York, especially at
Bosworth, lost his head at Leicester, he married the Daughter of Henry Savill,
by whom he had Robert Bucke and other Children, who were brought into the
Southern parts by Thomas Duke of Norfolk, where they have remained ever
since; for the Children (being Orphans) were left in miserable estate by the
Attainder of their Father; But the Duke bestowed two Daughters in marriage, one
with the Heir of Buck, The other, with the Heir of Fitz-Lewis, very Ancient
Families, from which Matches diverse honorable and Noble Persons are descended.
The Sons were, one a Soldier, the other, a Courtier, the third, a Priest;
afterward the Duke bestowed Robert Bucke, the Eldest Son at Melford Hall in
Suffolk, and married him into the Families of Higham and Cotton, as also did
the Blounds of Elwaston, the Talbots of Grafton, from whom the Barons of
Monioy, and the late Earls of Shrewsbury descended; one of the Daughters of
this Bucke Married to Frederick Tilney of Shelley Hall in Suffolk, his
nearest Kinsman by the Duchess his Mothers side) But some perhaps, must call
this my vanity, I shall but answer them, that I think my self bound (by all
the blood and memory I claim from them,) to pay them my best Relations and
endeavors, acknowledging with the great Consulare Philosopher, Parents
charissimos habere debemus, quod ab ijs vita, patrimontum, libertas, Civit as
tradita est. And I should think there is none, who has an interest in the
quality of Gentile, or Noble, (for all is one) but looks back (which some
delight) to their first Commemoration; and finds a strong engagement due to the
Virtues and worth of their first Fathers, for that express charge, to honor
Father and Mother, is, not to be understood, only of our Parents superstits,
and living here with us, but our forefathers: that is, beyond our great
Grandfather, for we have no proper word for them above that degree (but
Antecessours, vulgo Ancestors) whom the Romans called Majores, and
comprehends all our Progenitors departed sooner or later) for the word Pater
and Matter, as also, Parens and Parents, extend very largely, and reach up to
the highest Ancestors. The Ancient Roman Jurisconsults, deliver in their Law
for an Axiom, that Appellatione Parentum omnes in infinitum majores utriusque
sexus significantur; and the word Parents yet spreads further, comprehending
all Kinsfolks, and Cosins, of our Blood and Lineage, being used in that sense,
by AElius Lampridius, by Julius Capitolinus, and other the best Writers in the
times of the declined Empire, as Isaac Causabonus has well observed in his
Annotations.

The Italians, Spanish, and French (whose Language is for the most part Romanzi
(mongrell Latin)* and broken and corrupted Roman Language (use Parenti,
Parents and Parents for all their Kinsfolks and Gentilitious Cosins.

We Englishmen (being more precise) follow the Ancient and Classique Latin
Writers, holding Parent strictly to the simple signification of Pater, and
Matter, the present and immediate Parents* But the using of the word Parents,
as those Imperial Historians use it; serves better for our purpose here: And
I could (most willingly) imitate the Pious Gentlemen of Italy, Spain^, and
France, in their Religious and Charitable endeavors, to advance the happiness
of their Parents defunct, if those desires could besteed them, But where I
should crave pardon, I become more guilty and extravogant, it is time therefore
to know good manners, and return home to our proper task, which will be, to
refell the gross and black Calumnies, thrown unjustly upon the Memory and
Person of King RICHARD, And falls within the Circle of the next Book.

Explicit Liber Secundus.
THE THIRD BOOK OF KING RICHARD THE THIRD.
The Contents of this Book.
THe Defamations of King Richard examined and answered. Doctor Morton and Sir
Thomas Moore malevolent to the House of York, Their frivolous exceptions
against his gestures, looks, teeth, shape and birth, hie virtues depraved. The
death of King Henry the sixth and his Son Edward Prince of Wales. The Actors
therein. The offense of killing an anointed King. Valiant men hate treacheries
and bloody acts. King Richard not deformed. The Slanders of Clarence translated
to King Richard. The Cause of Clarences execution. How the Sons of King
Edward came by their deaths. King Richard Exculpable thereof. The story of
Perkin VVarbeck compared with Don Sebastian, King of Portugal, who are
Biothanati. Counterfeit Prince detected, young Prince marvellously preserved.
Many testimonies for the assertion that Perkin VVarbeck was Richard Duke of
York; his honorable entertainment with foreign Princes vox populi. Reasons
why it is not credible King Richard made away his two Nephews; the force of
Confession. The evil of Torture, the guilt of attempting to escape out of
prison, what an escape is. The Earl of Oxford severe against Perkin, and his
end. The base Son of King Richard the third secretly made away. The Son of
the Duke of Clarence put to death. The power of furies, Demones and Genii.
Apollonii Majestas.
Quid tibi non vis alteri ne feceris.
THE THIRD BOOK OF KING RICHARD THE THIRD.
THere is no story, that shows the planetary affections and malice of the
vulgar more truly then King Richards: and what a tickle game Kings have to play
with them; though his successor Henry the seventh played his providently enough
(with help of the standers by) yet even those times (which had promised the
happiest example of a State, and best of a King) both groaned and complained;
but had not the sting and infection of King Richards adversaries who did not
only as the proverb Erasmus in Chiliad.
says, cum larvis luctare, contend with his immortal parts, but raked his
dust, to find and aggravate exceptions in his grave; Terentius in Adelph.
having learnt their piety from the Comicall Parasite, obsequium a^nicos, verit
as odium parit, and finding it as well guerdonable as grateful, to publish
their Libels and scandalous Pamphlets, (a piece of policy and service too) to
the times, (and an offense to resent any thing good of him) they gave their
pens more g^ll and freedom, having a copy set by Doctor Morton, who h^ad taken
his revenge that way, and written a This Book was lately in the hands of Mr.
Roper, of Eltham, as Sir Edward Hoby who saw it told me.
Book in latin, against King Richard, which came afterward to the hands of
Mr. Moore (sometime his servant) so that here the saying of Darius, (which
after became a proverb) has place Herodotus.


Hoc Caleeamentum consuit Histiaeus, induit, autem Aristagoras, Doctor Morton
(acting the part of Histiaeus) made the Book, and Master Moore like
Aristagoras set it forth, amplifying and glossing it, with a purpose to have
writ the full story of Richard the third (as he intimates in the title of his
Book;) but it should seem he found the work so melancholy and uncharitable,
as dul^d his disposition to it; for he began it, 1513. when he was
Under-sheriffe, or Clerk to one of the Sheriffs of London, and had the
intermission of twenty two years (which time he took up in studies, more
natural to his inclination, as law and poetry, He wrote many Poems and
Epigrams, sundry petty Comedies, and Ent^rludes, often times personating, with
the Act ors, as his so ving and familiar friend ^* rasmus reports.
for in them lay his greatest fancy) to finish it, before he died, (which was
in, 1535. but did not, yet lift himself so happily into the opinion of men,
that his commendations had more fortune then observation:) and past him under
the attributes of learning and religion; though in both he came short of what
was ascribed to him; for if he understood the Latin and Greek, (then held
great learning) yet was he so far under the desert of an excellent Scholar,
as the learned censured him a man of slender reading, and Germanus Brixius,
Irruditus, i. unlearned; Brixius Antimore.
for the sanctity of his life, John Baleus who took not up his knowledge of
him an age off, (as some of his admirers,) but from the original, thus gives
us his draught. Joan. Baleus de scriptoribu^ Brit. ^ent. ^8 cap. 69.


Hoc nos probe novimus qui eramus eidem Thomae Moro vi^iniores, quod
pontisicum, and pharisaeorum crudelitati ex avaritia subservi^ns omni tyra^ng
truculentior ferociebat, imo insaniebat in eos qui aut Papae primatum, aut
purgatorium, aut mortuorum invo^^tiones, aut imaginum cultus aut simile quiddam
oliabolicarum imposturarum negabant, a vivisi^a* Dei veritate ita edocti.
Consentire hic Harpagus noluit ut Rex Christianus in suo Regno primus esset,
nec quod ei liceret cum Davide, Salomone, Iosaphato, Ezechia, and Iosia
s^cerdotes, and Levitas reject^ Romanensium Nembrodorum tyrannide in proprio
ordinare dominio etc.

Adding the attribute of tenebri^, of veritatis evangelicae perversissimus
os^r, of obstina^us ^alophanta, of impudens Christi adversarius; Richard
Grafton says he died mocking and scoffing as he lived.
and says of his end that decollatus suit in Turre Londin^nsi sexto die Iulij
Anno Dom. 1535. Capite ad magnum Londini pontem (ut proditoribus fieri s^let)
s^ipiti imposito, and nihilominus a Papistis pronovo Martyr colitur.

Thus he became a Martyr and a Saint; but we shall find other cause of his
condemnation by his own testimony; for when he stood at the Bar arraigned,
some exceptions having been urged against him, for seeming to uphold and
maintain the Popes supremacy in England, his reply was, he could not see
quomodo laicus vel secularis homo possit vel debeat esse caput status
spiritualis aut ecclesiastici; yet insinuated, that this opinion was taken hold
off but for a pretext to supplant him; the greatest cause of the Kings
displeasure being for his withstanding the divorce, between him and Katharine
of Castile his wife, and his second marriage with the Lady Anne Bullen
Marquesset of Pembrooke: And his own words (spoken to the Judges, as they were
set down by his dear friend, George Courinus, in Courinus.
a short discourse upon his death) are, non me pudet quamobrem a vobis
condemnatus sum (videlicet) ob id, quod nunquam voluerim assentiri in negotium
novi matrimonij Regis, which uttered, after sentence of condemnation, (when no
evasion or subter^ugies would avail) must proceed surely from his conscience;
and before this, he wrote a letter to Mr. Secretary Cromwell; (which I have
seen) wherein he protested, he was not against the King, either for his second
marriage, or for the Churches supremacy: But wishes him good success in those
affairs, etc. which renders him, (well looked upon) not so stout a Champion
for the Pope, as many of his partial friends and Romanists In scrinijs div.
To: Cotton.
supposed; neither so sound in his Religion; for I have seen amongst the
multitude of writings, concerning the conference about the alteration of
Religion, and suppressing of Churches and Religious houses, that his connivance
and consent was in it; nor could he excuse it, with all his policy and wisdom,
neither had the King ever attempted it, had not the Pope and his Agents opposed
that second marriage, an error and insolency Rome has ever since repented. But
it proved a happy blow of Justice to this Kingdom, cutting of him and his
authority, which else had hazarded the best Queen that ever was, the sacred
and eternally honored Elizabeth, to whose growing glory and virtue Master
Moore became an early and cruel adversary, even before she was in rerum
natura. To know him further, let me refer you to the Ecclesiastical History
of Master John Fox, in the reign of Henry the eight, who describes him
graphically; for his historical fragment, it shows what great pains he took
to item the faults and sad fortunes of King Richard the third; and how
industrious he was to be a time observer, it being the most plausible theme
his poetical strain could fall on in those times,, and could not want
acceptance nor credit, well knowing in what fame he stood, and that the weaker
Analysts and Chroniclers, (of mean learning and less judgment) would boldly
take it upon trust from his pen; who tanquam ignotum and servum pecus, have
followed him step by step without consideration, or just examination of their
occurrents and consequents. And the reputation of him and Doctor Morton (being
both Lord Chancellours of England) might easily mislead men part blind, who
have dealt with King Richard, as some trivial clawing Pamphleters, and
Historical parasites, with the magnificent Prelate, Thomas Wolsey Cardinal
and Archbishop o York, A man of very excellent ingredients and without Peer
in his time; yet his values had the sting of much detraction, and the worth of
his many glorious good works interpreted for vices and excesses; to such it
must be said, quod ab ipso Terent. Phorm.
allatum est, id sibi relatum esse putant. And if their injustice suffer under
the same lash, they must know this doom has Iliad. 20.
the credit of an Oracle, quale verbum dixisti tale etiam audies.

But so much gall and envy is thrown upon King Richards story, as cannot
possibly fall into the style of an ingenuous and charitable pen; all his virtue
is by a malicious Alchymy subtracted into crimes, and where they necessarily
fall into mention, either scornefully transmitted or perverted, with injurious
constructions, not allowing him the resemblance of goodness or merit: If his
disposition be affable and courteous, (as generally it was, which their own
relations cannot deny) then he insinuates and dives into the peoples hearts, so
where he expresses the bounty and magnificence of his mind; it is a subtle
trick to purchase friendship; let him conceal the knowledge The virtues of
King Richard maliciously censured.
of his jujuries, and his patience is deep hypocrisy; for his mercy and
clemency extended to the highest offenders, (as to Fogge the Attorney, who had
made a Libell against him, besides the counterfeiting of his hand and seal)
they were but palliated, and his friendship merely a Court brow. They have yet
a more captious and subtle calumny, reproaching the casting of his eyes,
motions of his fingers, manner of his gesture, and his other natural actions.

I confess with Cicero that status, incessus, sessio, occubatio, vultus,
Cicero de Ossic. lib. 1^
oculi, mannum motio, have a certain kind of decorum; but he makes it not a
vice to err in any of them, nor that any error committed in them was a vice;
although in him it must be so defined by the Laws of Utopia: nay, they will
dissect his very sleeps, to find prodigious dreams and bug-beares,
(accidents frequent to themselves) which they dress in all the fright and
horror fiction and the stage can add, who would have sung Peans to his glory,
had his sword brought victory from Bosworth field: but now, their envy is borne
with him, from his mothers womb, and delivers him into the world with a
strange prodigy of Teeth; although (I am persuaded) neither Doctor Morton, nor
Sir Thomas Moore ever spoke with the Duchess his Mother, or her Midwife about
the matter.

But if true; it imports no reason why those early and natalatious teeth
should presage such horror and guilt to his birth; when we shall remember
those many Noble and worthy men, who have had the like, (without any imputation
of crime) as Pliny, Livy, valel. Maximus, Plutarch.
Marcus Curious surnamed thereupon Dentatus, Cu. Papiene, King of the Epirots (a
Prince much renowned for his victories and virtues) Monodas Son of Prusias
King of Bithynia, borne with an entire semicircular bone in their mouths,
instead of Teeth; then they aggravate the pangs of the Duchess in her
travail with him: which had not been This Duchess of York died about the 1^
of King Hen. 7. at Berkhamsted and was buried at Totheringam, John Stow. Seneca.
sufferable without death, if so extreme and intolerable, as they would have
them thought for, Quod ferri potest leve est; quod non, breve est.


But she overcame them and lived almost fifty years after; others have died in
that Bed, yet the children not made guilty of murder; Iulia the daughter of
Julius Caesar, Wife to great Pompey, Iuliola the dear daughter of Marcus
Cicero, Wife of Dolabella, and Iunia Claudilla the Empress, and Wife of
Caligula, died all of the difficulties and extremity of their childebearing; so
did Queen Elizabeth Wife of King Henry the seventh; and since the Mother of
that most towardly and hopeful Prince Edward the sixth in travail of his
birth; with many thousands more, whose deaths (much less their pains) were
never imputed to their children.

The next objection is somewhat of more regard, (but as far without the
certainty of a proof) which is the pretended deformity of his body,
controverted by many; some peremtorily King Richard not deformed.
asserted he was not deformed, of which opinion was John Stow, a man
indifferently inquisitive (as in all their other affairs) after the verbal
relations and persons of Princes, and curious in his description of their
features and lineaments, who in all his inquiry could find no such note of
deformity in this King: but has acknowledged viva voce, that he had spoken
with some ancient men, who from their own sight and knowledge affirmed he was
of bodily shape comely enough, only of low stature, which is all the deformity
they proportion so monstrously; neither did John Rouce who knew him and writ
much in his description, observe any other: and Archienbald Qhuitlaw,
Ambassador unto this King from Scotland, in his Oration says, he had corpus
exiguum; not otherwise; so (to my conceit) Philip de Comines and the Prior de
Croyland (who had seen and known this Prince) seem to clear him
implicatively; for in all their discourses of him they never directly nor
indirectly, covertly or apertly, insinuate this deformity which (I suppose)
they would not have passed; And by his sundry Pictures which I have seen, there
was no such disproportion in his person or lineaments, but all decently
compacted to his stature; his face of a warlike aspect, (which Sir Thomas Moore
calls a crabled visage) of Rot. in an. 2 R. 2.
all the children being said to be most like his Father in favor and
composition of shape, who though not tall was of an even and well disposed
structure.

And Sir Thomas Moore himself, does not certainly affirm Sir Thomas Moor
apud Harli^gton.
the deformity, but rather seems to take it as a malicious report; for says
he, King Richard was deformed as the fame ran by those that hated him;
habemus reu^ consitentem, and surely, it had been a strange kind of confidence
and reason in Doctor Shaw, to disclaim a thing which must be so Doctor Shaw.
palpable, openly in the Pulpit at Saint Paul's Cross, whilst the Protector was
present, before many hundreds of people, (who had seen and known him before)
and might then better view and note him; In these words, the Lord Protector is
a very noble Prince, the special pattern of Knightly prowess, as well in all
Princely behavior as in the lineaments of his body and in the favor of his
visage, representing the very face of the Noble Duke his Father; this is the
Fathers own figure, this is his own countenance, the very sure and undoubted
Image and express likeness of that Noble Duke.

Now, what can malice extract out of this, to upbraid or stigmatize Socrates.
AE^opus. Epictetus. Gal^a a great and excellent Captain of the Romans, all of
deformed stature.
his honor; if men of blemished persons may contain a wise, valiant, learned,
liberal and religious soul, and be in every part most absolute, exampled to
us in many famous men; and at our home (as well in this present age, as in the
more ancient) we have had men of a harsh fabric, most nobly furnished in the
composures of their minds.

But because these cavils could not fetch blood from him, they will make him
guilty of other men, and first of King Henry the sixth, whose murder they say
(and very favorably) his Brother Edward contrived, but wrought him to act it;
an accusation of very harsh credit, that either King Edward, so truly noble and
valiant a Prince, should put a Prince and his own Brother, upon so horrid a
thing, or he endure to hear it: Sir Thomas Moore holds King Edward would not
engage his Brother in so butcherly an office, there being many reasons that he
durst not, neither do his adversaries charge him directly by any credible
Author of that time, or discover by whom this murder was; only the Prior of
Croyland makes it somewhat suspicious.

Hoc tempore inventum est corpus regis Henrici sexti exanime Chron. Croyland.
in turre Londinarium. Par^at Deus, and spatium poenitentiae ei donet qui^unque
sacrilegas manus in Christum Domini ausus immittere, unde and agens tyranni and
patiens gloriosi martyris titulum mereantur.

Tyrannus in the proper construction, being Rex, for whosoever is Rex is
Tyrannus, according to the ancient signification* for amongst the Greeks (...)
was used for a King simply, good or bad, and this (some hold) makes against
King Edward; Richard being Duke of Gloucester then, yet so doubtfully as may be
refelled by good authority; for it is the opinion of very grave men, Henry the
sixth was not murdered, but died of natural sickness, and extreme infirmity
of body.

Rex Henricus sextus, ab annis jam multis ex accidente sibi aegritu^ine Idem
Croyland.
qua^dam animi incurreret infirmitatem, and sic aeger corpore and impos mentis
permansit diutius; this considered with the aggravation of his grief and
sorrow, in the loss of his Crown and liberty (being then a prisoner) the
overthrow of all his friends and forces in the Battle of Teuxbury, but (above
all) the death of his Son the Prince, might master a stronger heart and
constitution then his, in a shorter time; which opinion is received and
alleged by a learned and discreet Gentleman.

The occasion of the murder of King Henry the sixth, has Anonymu^. M. S.
no other proof but the malicious affirmation of one man; for many other men
more truly did suppose that he died of mere grief and melancholy, when he
heard the overthrow of his cause and friends, with the slaughter of the Prince
his Son: And Johannes Majerus says it was reported, King Henry the Rex Hen.
6. in custodia ut alij referunt, glad^o, and alij me^ore, deperijt. Joan
Majerus, Annall Flandr. lib. 17. The slaughter of the Prince sonn^ of H. 6.
sixth died of grief and thought. Concerning the slaughter of the Prince his
only Son, it is noted to be casual, and made sudden by his own
insolence, not out of any pretended malice, or premeditated treachery, and so
it cannot be called wilful murder; for the King demanding him why he invaded
his Kingdom, his reply was, he might, and ought to do it, in defense and
preservation of the right, which the King his Father and his heirs had in the
Crown, and maintained this lofty answer so peremtorily and boldly, the King in
rage struck him with his fist, (as some say armed with a Gantlet) and
instantly the Noblemen attending, as George Polidor. Virgil. lib. 24.
Duke of Clarence, Marquess Dorset, the Lord Hastings and others, drew their
swords upon the Prince and killed him; which they would make the particular
fact of Duke Richard. Chron in quarto M. S. apud Dom. Regis. Rob. Cotton.


But to the contrary, I have seen in a faithful Manuscript Chronicle of those
times, that the Duke of Gloucester only of all the great persons, stood still
and drew not his sword; the reasons to credit this are, first it might be in
his mere sense of honor, seeing so many drawn upon him, there was no need of
his, or in his respects to the Princes Wife, who (as Johannes Majerus says)
was in the room and near akinne Anna. uxo^ Ed. filij reg. H. 6. capta est cum
marito. Joan. Majerus in Annal Fland. l. 17.
to the Duchess of York his Mother, and to whom the Duke was also very
affectionate, (though secretly (which he soon after demonstrated in marrying
her; nay, this Duke bore such a sense of noble actions in his bosom, that
mislikeing the obscure and mean burial of Henry the sixth, this Princes
Father, he caused his corpse to be taken from Chertsey, and to be Honorably
conveyed to the Royal and stately Chapel of Windsor, ordained for Kings.

And Sir Thomas Moore says further, he was suspected to have the contriving
part in the Duke of Clarence his Brothers death, Richard not guilty of the Duke
of Clarence.
yet confesses it was commonly said Richard opposed himself against the
unnatural proceedings of the King, both privately and publicly; and the
truth is, it was the Kings own immovable and inexplorable doom who thought
it justly and necessarily his due; for Clarence stood guilty of many treasons
and great ones, and by his ingratidude had so forfe^ted himself to the Kings
displeasure, that no friend durst move in his behalf; this the King did
afterward acknowledge with some discontent, when his wrath had cooled, as we
may guess in this expression of his: O infaelicem ^ratrem, pro cujus salute
ne^o Polidor. Virgil.
homo rogavit; yet Polidor Virgil does not rightly understand here as I
conjecture by the sequel; but let us interpret that a little, and take up
another accusation which puts into the way.

That Richard Duke of Gloucester should scandal the birth of the King his
Brother with basterdy, and allege it for a special matter in Doctor Shawes
Sermon, that he should fame King Edward the fourth a bastard, and that the
Duchess his Mother had wanton familiarity with a certain Gentleman; this he
might erroneously scatter in the Pulpit, and take it up*on ^rrour of Dr. Shaw.
the like intelligence, by which (in the same Sermon) he called her (to whom
King Edward was betrothed before his marriage with the Lady Gray) Elizabeth
Lucy, whose name was for a certain Ellenor Butler, alias Talbot, so called by
King Richard, That the Duke of Gloucester raised not the slander against the
Duchess his Mother, nor of his Brothers basterdy.
and written in the Records.

This drift had been too gross for King Richard, to lay an imputation of
whoredom upon his own Mother, (a virtuous and honorable Lady) being it cast
also a shame and basterdy upon himself; for if she offended in one, she might
as likely offend in another, and in the rest.

And to quit him of it, Sir Thomas Moore, Richard Graf^on, Mr. Hall, say that
King Richard was much displeased with the Doctor, when he heard the relation,
which the Duke of Buckingham also affirmed in his speech to the Lord Mayor of
London. That Doctor Shaw had incurred the great displeasure of the Protector
for speaking so dishonourably of the Duchess his Mother.

That he was able of his own knowledge to say, he had done wrong to the
Protector therein, who was ever known to bear a reverend and filial love
unto her: and to cut of all farther doubt and question, it was proved and is
testified upon records that George Duke of Clarence only raised this slander
in an extreme hatred to the King his Brother, many jarres falling between
them) by which the King had a just cause to take notice of his malice.

Visus est dux Clarentiae magis, ac magis a regis praesentia desu^trahere, in
consilio vix verbum proferre, neque libenter bibere aut manducare in domo
Regis.

When Richard even in that calamitous time Henry the sixth had overthrown King
Edward in a battle, Anno. 10. Edward. 4.
recovered the Kingdom, and proclaimed Edward an usurper; so faithful was his
Brother, that Lib. M. S. in quarto. apud Dom. Rob. Cotton.
he was proclaimed traitor for him; and Chronicle, Croyland.
when Queen Margaret besiedged the City of Gloucester with the Kings power,
the Citizens stood at defiance with her Army, and told her it was the Duke of
Gloucester his Town, who was with the King, and for the King, and for him they
would hold it; his Loyalty bearing a most constant expression in this motto
Loyalty binds men.
Loualto melie; which I have seen written by his own hand and subscribed
Richard Gloucester. The other was as constantly undermining at him, after
confederate with the Earl of Warwick his Father Allie, who Father allie. Quod
vulgo and corrupt Father in law dicitur.
had turned faith from the King, and went into France, soliciting for force
against England; which they brought in, fought with the King and overthrew him,
and so fiercely pursuing the victory, that the King was forced to fly out of
the Land: Clarence not so satisfied, (unless he might utterly supplant him)
studied that slander of basterdy, to bring in himself an heir to the Crown,
which was proved and given in express evidence against him, at his trial and
attainder by Parliament, amongst sundry other articles of high Treason.

Videlicet That the said Duke of Clarence had falsely and untruly In Parliament,
anno. 17. Ed. 4. Iu. Stow. vidit and legit.
published King Edward a bastard and not legitimate to Reign, that himself
therefore was true Heir of the Kingdom, the Royalty and Crown belonging unto
him, and to his* Heirs; these be the very words of the Record, and enough to
tell us who was the Author of that slander, and what important cause the King
had to quit himself of Clarens: a bitter proof of the old Proverb, fratrum
inter se irae acerbissimae Erasmus C^iliad.
sunt; and all the favor Clarence could at his end obtain, was to choose it,
(as John de Serres reports it) so that it was Joan de Se^res. Invent.
not the Duke of Gloucester, but the Kings implacable displeasure for his
malice and treasons that cut him off, who could not think himself secure
whilst he lived: Witness Polidor Virgil, Edvardus Rex post mortem fratris se a
cunctis timeri animadvertit, and ipse jam timebat neminem.

Next for the murder of the two sons of King Edward Who made away the sons
of King Edward the fourth.
the fourth, Edward the fifth King in hope, and Richard of Shrewsbury Duke of
York and Norfolk his younger Brother, they allege it in this manner.

That King Richard, being desirous to rid those two Princes his Nephews out of
the world; employed his trusty servant John Green to Sir Robert Brackenbury
Lieutenant Constable of the Tower, about the executing of this murder; and by
reason that plot took no effect, (Sir Robert not liking it) The Protector
suborned four desperate Villains, John Dighton, Miles Forest, James Tyrrell,
and William Slater to undertake it, who, (as they further allege) smothered
them in their beds, which done, they made a deep hole in the ground, at the
foot of the stairs of their lodging, and their buried them, hiding the place
under an heap of stones, (not after the ancient manner of tumulus testis;)
others vary from this, and say confidently, the young Princes were imbarqued in
a Ship at Tower wharfe, and conveyed from thence to Sea, so cast into the
Black deeps; others aver they were not drowned, but set safe on shore beyond
Seas. And thus their stories and relations are scattered in various forms,
their accusations differing in very many and material points* which shakes the
credit of their suggestion, and makes it both fabulous and uncertain, one
giving the lie to the other, their malice having too much Tongue for their
memories, and is worth the noting how opposite (and as it were) ex Diametro
repugnant they are. Poodir, Virgill. l. 2. 6.


In vulgus fama valuitfilios Edwardi Regis aliquo terrarum parte^migrasse,
atque ita supestites esse.

Thus Pollidor, with which Dr. Morton and Sir Thomas Moore agree in one place:
The man (say they) commonly called Dr. Morton, Sir Tho. Moore.
Perkin Warbeck was as well with the Princes, as with the people, English and
foreign, held to be the younger Son of Edward the fourth, and that the deaths
of the young King Edward and of Richard his brother, had come so far in
question, as some are yet in doubt whether they were destroyed or no, in the
days of King Richard; By which it appears they were thought to be living
after his death. And as the act of their death is thus uncertainly disputed, so
is the manner of it controverted.

For, Sir Thomas Moore affirms (as before reported) they were smothered in
their beds with Pillowes; but Pollidor says peremptorily it was never known of
what kind of death they dyed.

Another Author and more ancient agrees with them.

Vulgatum est Regis Edwardi pueros concessisse in sata, sed qu^ Prior Croy.
land.
genere interitus ignoratur; one reason of this may be that they who held
Perkin Warbeck and Richard Duke of York to be all one, give another account of
his death, whereas if it had been certain these four before named for
Assasines had murdered them, then the place, time and manner had been easily
known upon their strict examination, they living freely and securely, (and
without question) long after this murde^ was said to be done; Therefore there
can be no excuse for this neglect of Examination, much less for the suffering
such to go unpunished, and at liberty, which me thinks makes much for the
clearing of King Richard.

As for the burying of their bodies in the Tower, if that be brought in
question, certes, the affirmative will be much more hard to prove then the
negative.

For true it is* there was much diligent search made for their bodies in the
Tower: all places opened and dug, that was supposed: but not found; Then it
was given out a certain Priest took up their bodies and buried them in
another secret place nto to be found; hereunto (but with better decorum for the
more credit of this assertion) they might have added it was done sub sigillo
confessionis, which may not be revealed.

Sir Thomas Moore seeing the absurdities and contrarieties of these opinions,
(as a man puzeled and distracted with the variety and uncertainty thereof)
concludes their bodies were Moore, Hallingshed Graston, Hall, Stow.
bestowed God wot where, and that it could never come to light what became of
them; Hall, Hallingshed, Grafton and the rest, confess, the very truth hereof
was never known; And (if there be a stricter inquiry into the mystery) we
shall discover, that they were neither buried in the Tower nor swallowed in the
Sea; for the testimony and Relation of sundry grave, and discre^te persons (and
such as knew the young Duke of York) will resolve us how he was preserved and
secretly conveyed into a foraigne Country; also alive many years after the time
of this imaginary murder; to which may be added strong authorities having laid
down some conjectures that may answer the iniquiry after the other. And first
whereas it is said the Lord Protector before his Coronation procured this
murder: To refell and contradict that, there be certain proofs that the
Princes were both living in the month of February following the death of their
Father, which was ten months after; for King Edward dyed in April before, and
this is plain in the Records of the Parliament of Anno 1. Rich. 3. where there
is mention made of this Prince, as then living; and Sir Thomas Moore confesses
that they were living long after that time before said; But I conjecture Edward
the Eldest brother lived not long after, but died of sickness and infirmity,
being of a weak and sickly disposition, as also was his Brother, which the
Queen their Mother intimated in her speech to the Cardinal Boursier; and the
weak constitutions and short lives of their sisters may be a natural proof
to infer it probable enough this Prince dyed in the Tower; which some men of
these times are the rather brought to think, certain bones like to the bones
of a Child being found lately in a high desolate Turret, supposed to be the
bones of one of these Princes; others are of opinion it was the ^a^r^asse* of
an Apekept in the Tower, that in his old age had happened into that place to
die in, and having clamber'd up thither, according to the light and idle manner
of those wanton Animals, after when he would have gone down, seeing the way to
be steep and the precipice so terrible, durst not adventure to descend, but
for fear stayed and starved himself, and although he might be soon mist,
and long sought for, yet was not easily to be found, that Turret being reckoned
a vast and damned place for the hight, and hard access, no body in many years
looking into it.

But it is of no great consequence to our purpose, whether it were the Carcass
of a Child or of an Ape, or whether this young Prince dyed in the Tower, or no:
for wheresoever he dyed, why should it not be as probable he dyed of a
natural sickness and infirmity, as for his young Cozen german the son and
heir of King Richard? many reasons conducing why the qualities and kind of
their death might be the same, and near one time, being even parallels almost,
and in their humane constitutions and corporal habitude sympathizing, of one
Lineage and Family, of one blood and age, of the same quality and fortune,
therefore not unlikely of the same Studies, Affections, Passions;
Distemperatures, so consequently subject to the same infirmities, to which may
be added equal and common constellations, the same compatient and commorient
fates and times, and then there is reason and natural cause they might both
die of like Diseases and infirmity, and were not (...), taken away by violence,
secret, or overt: for it may with as much Argument be suspected the son of King
Richard, (being in the like danger of secret violence for the same cause as his
Cozen was) might suffer so.

But to open the circumstance a little nearer: what danger could the lives of
those two Princes be to Richard? who was accepted King by a just title, and his
Nephews declared illegitimate, by the high Court of Parliament, and whilst
they were reputed such by so great and general a conclusion, why should he be
less secure of them, then Hen. 2. was of Robert E. of Gloucester, base son to
Hen. 1.? or Richard the first of his base Brother Geoffrey Plantagenet? So
although John of Gaunt left base sons, aspiring enough, yet they were of no
danger to the Lancastrian Kings* neither did Henry 7. or Henry 8. stand in any
jealousy of Arthur Plantagenet: and surely Richard the third was as valiant,
wise and consident, as any of his predecessors, and had as little cause to
dread his Nephews, as they stood adjudged, or be more cruel and bloody;
neither has my reading found any Bastards of France or Spain, who have
aspired so publicly, only except Don Eurique E. of Trastamara* who was drawn
into that action by the violent rages of the people, and by the persuasions of
the revolted states of Castile, to put down a monster of Sovereignty the
hateful tyrant, Don Pedro and Cruel. But being Sir Thomas Moore and our best
Chroniclers make it doubtful, whether these two Princes were so lost in King
Richards time, or no, and infer that one of them was thought to be living many
years after his death; that might be enough to acquit him; which opinion I like
the better, because it mentions the survivance but of one of them.

Neither do our most credible stories mention the transportation of more then
one, into Flanders, nor had they reason; it will be sufficient, if one of them
survived him, more, or less time; we will follow therefore the examination of
his story, under the opinion of those times, and the attestation of grave and
credible men, because it will be more conspicuous in the true and simple
narration of this one Brother; every story being fraught with reports
concerning him, and few or none of his brother finding no mention of the Elder
Bothers being in Flanders; but of the youngers much, and of his other
adventures: The prudent and honorable care of sending away this younger
Brother, by some is ascribed to Sr. Robert Brakenbury, by others to the Queen
his Mother, and it may well be the projection of them both, though no doubt
there was the advice and assent of other well affected friends. And it is the
more credible, the Queen wrought in it; for the story of Sr. Thomas Moore says
she was before suspected to have had such a purpose, which was objected to her
by some of the Lords; and the Cardinal Boursier told her the maine Reason
which made the Protector and Nobles so urgeing to have him sent to his Brother
(being then in the Tower) was a suspicion and fear they had she would convey
Him forth of the Realm.

So then, it may be clearly supposed: he was sent into a foreign Country, and
that Flanders (as all our stories testify) there commended to a liberal
education, under the curature of a worthy Gentleman in Warbeck, a Town in
Flanders, but kept very privately all the life time of his Uncle, his Friends
not daring to make him of the council. After his death, knowing Henry Richmond
a cruel enemy to the house of York, for his better safety was committed to
the care of Charles of Burgundy, and his Duchess the Lady Margaret Aunt to
the Prince, as formerly the Duchess of York upon a like cause of fear and
jealousy had sent thither her two younger sons George and Richard.

The Duchess being very tender to let this young Duke have all Princely and
virtuous education in Tornay in Antwerp and after in the Court of the Duke of
Burgundy, as he had bin in Warbeck, etc. And with the greater circumspection,
because the Duchess of Burgundy had as jealous an opinion of Henry the
Seventh, as the Queen Widow had of Richard 3. Therefore, as yet, it was
advised to conceal his Name and Quality: being not come to the growth nor age
to have experience in his own affairs, much less to undertake an attempt so
consequent and mighty as the recovery of a Kingdom: neither were the times and
opportunity yet ripe, or propitious to fashion such an alteration, as was
projected and must be produced, though there was pregnant hope of an induction
to a change of Government stirred by the Kings coveteousnesse, and some acts of
Tyrany, Greivance and Rebellions in the North and West parts; not long after
(which lent a seasonable hand to these designs) great unkindnesse fell out
betwixt Charles the French King, and Henry the 7. who so far provoked the
French, that he besieged Bulloigne, with a great army by land and Sea, the
quarrel was of good advancement to the Duchess of Burgondy's Plot, and
brought the Duke of York better acquainted with foreign Princes and their
Courts; who was sent into France, into Portugal, and other places where he was
received and entertained like a Prince.

In which time such of the English Nobility as were interessed in the secret,
and knew where this Prince resided, found some opportunity to give him
assistance, and sent Sr. Robert Clifford and Sr. William Barley into Flanders,
to give him a visit and intelligence of what noble friends he had ready to
serve him: though their more particular errant was, to take a strict observance
of him, and such private marks as he had bin known by from his Cradle: there
had been some counterfeits, encouraged to take upon them the persons of Edward
E. of Warwick, and Richard Duke of York; But here, the certainty of their
knowledge found him they looked for, by his Face, Countenance, Lineaments and
all tokens familiarly and privately known to them; observing his behavior,
naturalized and heightened with a Princely grace, and in his discourse able to
give them a ready account of many passages he had heard or seen whilst he was
in England; with such things as had been done and discourst very privately,
speaking English very perfectly, and better then the Dutch, or Wallonish: by
which Sr. Kobert Clifford and the rest, found themselves so well satisfied, and
were so confirmed, That they wrote to the Lord Fitzwater, to Sir Simon Mountford
and others (who had a good opinion toward him;) the full account of what they
had observed ex certa scientia, and supra visum corporis. About this time (to
intermix the Scene with more variety, and fill the Stage) some principal
persons, well affecting the E. of Warwick, and hoping to get him forth of the
Tower in purpose to make him King) had enticed a handsome young fellow, one
Lambert Simonell of Lancashire, bred in the University of Oxford to become his
counterfeit, and so instructed him in the royal Genealogy, that he was able
to say as he was taught; maintained and abetted, chiefly, by the Viscount
Lovell, the E. of Lincoln, Sir Thomas Broughton, and Sir Simon Priest, etc.
who being presented to the Duke and Duchess of Burgondy and by them honorably
entertained, drew to him in Flanders one Martin Swartz (a Captain of a very
eminent fame) and some forces, with which he made over into Ireland where they
received him as Edward Earl of Warwick, as he was of many here at home: and
when the deceit was discovered, the excuse was, those Lords but used this
counterfeit of the Earl for a Color, whilst they could get him out of the
Tower to make him King. But the veil is easily taken from the face of such
impostors, examples giving us light in many; for though some men may, all
cannot be deceived: so Speudo-Agrippa in the time Dion, Tacitus, S^eionius.
Counterfeit Princes.
of Tiberius was soon found to be Clemens the servant of Agrippa, though very
like to him, and Puesdo-Nero in Otho's time, who took upon him to be Nero
revived, was quickly unmasked.

Valerius Paterculus tells of a certain ambitious counterfeit in Macedonia,
who called himself Philip, and would be reputed the next heir of the Crown,
but was discovered and nicknamed Pesudo-Philippus; Also in the Its written by
some of the old Historians that King Harold was not shine at the Battle of
Hastings, by the Conqueror; but that he survived and went to Jerusalem, etc.
But it not imports whether He were the true Harold, or Pseudo Harold, because
he never came to claim any thing in England.
Reign of Commodus one pretended to be Sextus Claudianus, the son of Maximus;
with many such that are obvious in old stories; and many of the like stamp
have been here convicted in England; which bred the greater jealousy of this
Richard, when he came first to be heard of, Though those jealosies proceeded
not from the detection of any fraud in him, but of the late imposture of the
said Lambert the Shooemakers son, and the abuse of the Complotters; for the
Kingdom having been abused with those Pseudo-Clarences, had reason to be
doubtful of every unknown person, which assumed the name of greatness; in
regard whereof, many shrunk in their opinions from this Perkin, or Richard;
many others suspecting their belief, were very curious to inform themselves
who the further they inquired, were the more confirmed, that he was no other
but the second son of Edward the Fourth, against whom those of the harder
credulity objected it as an impossibility, that this young Duke could be
conveyed out of the Tower, so long, and so concealed; which the wiser sort
could easily answer by many ancient examples, which give us diverse Relations of
Noble Children preserved more admirably: and this young Duke himself, in his
own behalf, when such objections were made against him, did allege to James
King of Scotland the History of Ioah mentioned in the Book of the Kings, and
that most special one of Moses: which the Duchess his Aunt Sister German to
his Father, was strongly confirmed in, giving him all answerable and honorable
accommodation: so did the chief Nobility of those parts, and as an heir of
the house of York, there was rendered him the Title of La*Rose-Blanch, the
proper and ancient devise of the house of York; with all, a gallant Guard of
Soldiers was allowed him for attendance, and much was he favored by the
Archduke Maximilian King of the Romans, by Philip his Son Duke of Burgondy,
Charles the French King, the King of Portugal and Scotland, by the chiefest of
Ireland and many Personages in England, who at extreme peril and hazard
avowed him to be the second son of Edward the fourth.

The Princes aforementioned readily supplying him with Coin and assistance,
toward his atcheivements. King Henry actively apprehends what it threatened,
and bestirs himself to take of their inclinations, dispatching Doctor William
Warkam (after Archbishop of Canterbury) with Sr. The practice of Hen. 7. with
the Duke of Burgondy.
Edward Poynings a grave and worthy Knight, to under-rare his credit with those
Princes; and such strong persuasions were used That Philip Duke of Burgondy
(for his Father Maximilian was before returned into Austria) utterly declines
himself and his subjects from his first engagement, but excepted the Widow
Duchess of Burgondy, over whom he had no power of command, because she had
all justice and Jurisdiction in those large signories whereof her dowry was
composed.

And thus Richard was supplanted here; what hope of aid he had, or did expect
by his voyage into Portugal, I cannot say, though his entertainment there was
honorable: but by reason of the distance of the Country ^it may be thought he
was to build little upon any from thence; his chief con^idence and refuge
being in England and Ireland, where he had a good party, and sailed with a
pretty Fleet into Ireland; there he was welcomed, and received as the The
means used by Hen. 7. to prevent the practices of Perkin in Ireland.
the second Son of King Edward; some of the Geraldins and other great Lords
in Ireland, purposing to make him their King; To overtake him betimes there
too, Doctor Henry Deane, Abbot of Lanthory (a very wise able man) was sent and
made Chancellor of Ireland; with him went the said Sr. Edward Poynings, who so
actively bestirred themselves that in short time they drew the Irish from
Perkin, so that now he must return home, but by the way was encouraged, to
apply himself to James King of Scotland, whither forthwith he directs his
hopes, and found his entertainment answerable to them: the King receiving him
very Nobly by his title of Duke of York, calls him Cozen, with promises to give
him strong* footing in England, and (in This Lady was so rarely fair and
lovely that King H. 7 wondered at her beauty, and was inamored of her sending
her to London to be safely kept till his return out of the West Countries,
where he theu was and first saw her.
earnest of his better intents) bestowed in Marriage upon him, the most Noble
and fair Lady Katharine Gordon his near kinswoman, Daughter of Alexander
Earl of Huntly: This came home very sharply to King Henry, who knew King
James to be a Prince so Wise, and Valiant, that no easy delusion could abuse
him.

And true it is, King James was very precise in his consideration of this young
Duke: but very clearly confirmed before he would acknowledge him. King Henry
is very Studious how to thwa^t the event of this scene, and unfasten the King:
but casts his con^idence again, upon the fortune of his judgment, and sends
many Protestations with rich promises, to King James for Perkin (for now we
shall so call him with the times) which took small effect at first; but King
Henry (being a man pregnant to find any advantage, and one whose providence
would not let it die) remembers the stong affinity and friendship betwixt King
James and Ferdinando King of The practice of H. 7. to the King of Scots, and of
Castile ^o get or supplant Perkins.
Castile, (one of the most Noble Princes then living.) At that time too, it
happened so happily, there was a Treaty and intelligence betwixt Henry the
Seventh and Ferdinando, for proposition of a Marriage of Arthur the Prince of
Wales, and Katharine Daughter of King Ferdinando: this occasion no sooner
offered it self to his consideration, but a Post was dispatched to Castile,
with Letters and Instructions to give the King to know what had passed between
him and King James of Scotland, urging him to use the Power and Credit he had
with him, for the delivery of Perkin to himself: which Ferdinando undertook;
and Don Pedro, Aylau.
sends Don Pedro Ayala (not one Peter Hialas, or Peter Hayles) as our vulgar
stories have (a wise and learned man and of a very Noble house) who so ably
used his Brain in this employment, that King James passed to him his promise,
to dismiss Perkin to his own fortunes; But would by no means deliver him to
the King.

Thus Perkin was again supplanted Virtute vel dolo, and of necessity driven
into Ireland, where he was formerly received and entertained; whilst they were
agitating their first Plot of settling him King, Charles the French King sends
to him Lois de Laques and Estiene Friant, to offer him Hall in H. 7.
his friendship and aid; with this good news Perkin hasted into France, where
he found his welcome very honorable, as befitting a Prince, a Guard appointed
to attend him, of which Monsieur Congre-Salle was Captain; before this King
Henry had threatened France with an Army, but now upon a better view and
deliberation, foreseeing what this had in it, He propounds very fair
Conditions for a Peace with the French King, which the French King was as
willing to intertaine, and so it was concluded; Perkin after this began to
think the King shortened his respects, and looked upon him (as it were) but
imagine lusca, with half a Countenance, and fearing there might be some
capitulation in this new League, that might concern his liberty, privately
quits Paris, returning to his Aunt of Burgondy. Although Perkin was thus
shortened in his foreign expectations, he had those both in England and
Ireland, that much favored him and his cause, making another voyage into
Ireland, but returned with his first comfort; for though they stood constantly
affected and were willing, the Kings Officers curbed them so, they could not
stir.

From Ireland he sailed into England, landing at Bodmin in Cornwall, the
Cornish and Western men thereabouts receiving him very gladly, proclayming him
King of England and of France, etc, by the Title of Richard the Fourth (as He
had been proclaimed before in the North parts of England, by the Council and
Countenance of the King of Scots.) Out of Cornwall He marches into Devonshire
to Exeter, to which He laid Siege, having then about five thousand men in his
Army; but the Kings being at hand and far stronger, He was forced to rise
from the siege, upon which those few friends He had left (finding His want,
and the King with greater strength approaching) forsook him to provide for
themselves: thus abandoned, no way before him but flight, and being well
mounted, with a train of some forty or fifty resolute Gentlemen, recovers the
Abbey of Beanely in Hampshire, where He took Sanctuary, from which the Kings
party who persued Him would violently have surprised Him;

Which the Abbot and Religious persons would not endure as a thing too foul
against their Privilege. The King after sends to him profers of favors and
mercy, Perkins Entertainment in the Court.
with promises of such Honor and Condition as drew Him to the Court, where the
King looked upon him with a very Gracious and Bountiful usage as a Noble
person; But his prompting Jealousies and Fears soon east a dullness over this
first favors and promises; Then a Guard must be set upon Perkin and his
usual freedom restrained; these were harsh presages (He thought) which so
justly moved His suspicion and discontent that he thought Sanctuary again
must be his best safety, and passing by the Monastery of Shrene, he suddenly
slips into it from his Guard, whither the King sends unto him with persuasions
of the first Courtly and Honorable tincture; But Perkin that had discerned the
Hook, was not easily to be tempted with the bait this second time.

Then the King dealt with the Prior for him, who would not yield him, but upon
faithful promise from the King to use him with all favor and grace, which was
protested, although Perkin no sooner came into his power again but he was
sent to the Tower, where his imprisonment was made so hard and rude, that it
much dejected and troubled him, oftentimes in private and with peircing
groans, having been heard to wish himself borne the Son of any Pesant. And
indeed, every one could tell he fared the worse for his Name, it being an
observation of those times that there was three men most feared of the King.

Edward Plantagenet Earl of Warwick, Perkin, alias Richard Plantagenet, and
Edmond de la Poole Son of King Edwards Sister, all of the Family of York,
but most of all Perkin, being of a more active spirit, so more sensible of his
wrongs then the other; and cost the King more Consultation and Treasure in the
working him into his hands; Therefore answerably aggravated his miseries and
disgraces which now began to exceed; for he was not only sharply
restrained in the Tower, but the fame was the Question or Ra^k.
Gehenne was given Him: sometimes he was taken forth, and carried in most
ignominious manner abroad, to be set in the Pillory, otherwhile in the
Stocks; after all these bitter and cruel punishments (to pull down his
stomach) there was sent some unto Him of purpose to persuade his submission to
the Kings mercy, and by renowncing His Blood, Birth, and Title, to confess
himself no other but Perkin Warberk the Son of a base Flemming* which He
scorning and denying, His sufferings were made more rigorous, and He lodged
poorly and basely, as meanly fed, worse cladde, until at length by
Torments and Extremities, He was forced to say any thing, and content to unsay
what they would have Him, to accuse Himself by a forced Recantation of his
Family* Name, and Royal Parentage; this must be compelled too under His hand,
then to be brought by the Officers unto the most public places of London and
Westminster, to suffer as before related, and with a loud voice to read the
same, which might pass at present with the multitude The force and mischief
of Torture.
for current, who knew not how it was forcd from Him, nor had judgment enough
to know and consider that Racks and Tortures have made very able men accuse
themselves and others unjustly: Seneca tells of a man who being suspected of
Theft was enforced by torture to confess the theft and his fellow Thieves; but
having none, he accused the good and just Cato, to avoid the torture; nay
(which is a thing of more horror) it makes men by false Oaths to blaspheme
God; Therefore Saint Augustine inveigheth sharply against the cruel use of it,
and amongst many other sins, which he finds in it, this is one, Tortus si
diutius nolet sustinere Tormenta, quod non August. in Civitate Dei.
commisit, se commisisse dicit.

The tortured gladly doing this the sooner to exchange those torments with
death as the far less pain.

And therefore this young Man may be excusable in what he did against
himself, his youth being ignorant of these high points of Honor, and could
not yet be confirmed in any brave and firm resolution, nor happily in
Religion, and the worse also by the reason of his long imprisonment and heavy
trouble, having no Council to strengthen him, nor so much as in Charity to
comfort Him, but left a miserable desperate forlorn Man, and feared to be so
for ever, and at the best. And if learned grave Men, Men of grace, having large
Talents of Spirit and Science, for fear of such punishments have denied some
chief points of Christian* Faith, yet have been excused for the torture sake,
(of which we have testimony in the Ecclesiastical Stories) what may a tender
and unexperienced youth do? For which just causes the best Doctors of the
Civil Law, and also of Theology condemn and aborre the use of Torture, as
having a further mischief in it, and is Arcanum Gehennae a secret of Torture
or of The French ^all torture la Gehenne.
Hell.

For when the Prisoners body by exteame toment is brought into any mortal
State, or symptom of death, or made incurable and deadly, then to avoyde the
imputation of Murder, the prisoner by a short and private process is condemned
of some capital crime, and presently executed, whilst there is yet some life
in him; And to that censure Perkin at last came; for nothing could serve but
his blood, his confession being only extorted from him to persuade the People
he was an impostor, and because they could not lay hold of his Life by the
Course of Law or Justice (being not attainted nor condemned of any capital
crime.) This scraple being a little considered, there was found out a way to
remove that, and matter enough to make him guilty of a capital offense, for
which purpose it was devised there should a practice of escape be offered him;
and because the case of Edward Plantagenet, Earl of VVarrwicke, was like unto
his, and as well wished, being not attainted of any crime, he also must desire
to escape, that devise being the only matter of guilt, or capital crime,
which was wanting, and might be (as it were) created for them the more
colorably to effect their executions; there not wanting instruments for that
purpose to betray their innocent considence, whose inprisonment had layne so
heavily and cruelly upon them, that they were easily persuaded to catch at any
hope of liberty.

Some say the Earl of Warwick at his arraignment was charged with persuading
the other to make this escape, but sure it is they both gladly hearkened to the
motion of it; And were (soon after) accused as guilty of practice and
Conspiracy, to escape out of the Tower, so for the same arraigned and condemned
to die: though great difference was put in their process, and execution; York
and Warwick, paralels.
for the Earl of Warwick was tried by his noble Peers, and had the supplice
of a Noble man, in an honorable place, the Tower of London: Perkin alias
Richard, by a Common Jury, who are men (many times) of little honesty, and to
suffer at the common and infamous place, Tyburne, by the name of Perkin
Warbecke, to confirm the People He was what they condemned him for; For this
Nickname was supposed to have utterly disnobled Him, and (as it were) divested
Him of all his Noble Blood and Titles, the condition of an impostor serving
best for a cloak against that purple shower, which was at the fall and cruel
usage of this miserable Prince.

It may be thought, the Earl of Warwick had as shamefully suffered, if the
Wit and Malice of the Cardinal could have reached to have made him a
counterfeit; But all men knew He was not only a true and certain* Prince,
but free from all practice, yet He was restrained of his liberty, and a
prisoner the most part of Hislife; from the time of his Fathers attainder
until He Suffered; this was after they had survived King Richard their Uncle
about fifteen years.

Now for their Offense, the learned Judges will Of escape.
tell us of what Nature and Quality, it is called in Law.

Some holding an escape to be but an error, a natural The French word
escape, is to seek to be free, and the French men transl^^e escape in to the
Latin Salvus.
dislike of bondage, or a forfeit of simplicity, proceeding from a natural and
very tolerable desire of liberty, which opinion is contingent to right; And the
cause of these two Princes may also be the better received, if it be well
considered, that this Plot of their escape* was not projected by themselves,
but cunningly Escape what.
propounded to them by proper instruments (being young and unexperienced) to
entangle* them in some capital offense, and so of Death, of which kind of
offenses they stood clear before, not once accused, having never been
indicted, or attained of any thing Capital. Therefore now their innocence must
be made guilty; And in this I say no more then all our H^storians, or others
say, who agree in one opinion that The KING could not take away the lives of
Perkin Warbecke and this Earl of Warwick, until this practice of their
escape was laid to them, and they made guilty thereof. Therefore they were not
Traitors before, neither was Perkin now to be thought a Counterfeit, but a
Prince of the Blood, clayming the Crown; for otherwise, He was Perkin of
Flanders, a base fellow and a most culpable and notorious Traitor: then what
need they look further for a Crime to put him to Death?

And if He were not a Traitor, surely it was a Tyranny to make of an Innocent
and guiltless Man a guilty Folon, and by Trains, and Acts, to forge an
offense out of nothing.

For doubtless an Innocent and a true man may seek freedom, and purpose an
act of escape, also commit in, and yet be still an honest Man, and a faithful
good subject; for nature and reason teaches and allows all men to eschew
injuries and oppression.

Besides this Practice of those young men, to escape, was found (as Pollidor
well observes) Crimen Alienum, and not Crimen proprium: then how much greater
was the wrong, to take away their lives.

But however it may be laid upon them, it was nothing but a desire of liberty
out of durance, in which they were kept for a small, or no offense.

The Civil law holds suspicion of flight or escape, to be no crime.
Suspicio fugae quia, non solet detrimentum, reipublice ad far, non censetur
crimen; so ulpian. And by the Laws of England, if a Prisoner do escape, who
is not imprisoned for Treason, Just: Stanford, in pleas de la Corone. lib. 1.
cap. 26, 27.
or felony, but some lesser fault of trespass according to the old Law of
England.

Escapae non adjudicabitur versus eum, qui Commissus est prisonae, pro
transgressione. Escape shall not be adjudged for Felony, or other crime, in
one who is committed for trespass.

For the offense of the escape is made in the common Law, to be of the same
nature and guilt with the crime whereof the Prisoner is attainted; And
certainly neither the Earl of Warwick, nor Richard alias Perkin were
attainted of Treason or Felony, etc. before.

But to close this dispute and tragedy, not long after some of the Instruments
which betrayed them into this, as Walter Blunt, Thomas Astwood, servants to the
Lieutenant of the Tower, finished at Tiburn because they should tell no tales.

And to this succinct relation, there can be no better testimony then the hands
of those witnesses, who have sealed their confession and knowledge with their
bloods.

Men of all conditions and estates, all maintaining at the last gasp, that
Perkin was the true Duke of York, whose Affirmations I will produce, give me
but leave by the way, to answer one Objection or Cavil brought against this
Duke called in scorn, Perkin Warbecke. A new Writer affirming him to be an
Impostor, Whether Don Sebastian of Portugal were a Counterfeit or not.
whose learning may be as much mistaken in this, as other things, though he
laid a great pretense to knowledge, especially in the History of England and
other Countries: indeed his judgment and reading are much expressed alike, in
his Pamphlet which he calls the History of Perkin Warbecke, wherein he forfeits
all his skill, to make him a parallel in advers fortunes, and supposed base
quality, to the unhappy Don Sebastian late King of Portugal, who he also
protests an Impostore. And to arrive at this huge knowledge, (he would have us
think) he took much pains in the sifting of Authors (and indeed I think he
did sift them) concerning his ignorance in the case of Don Sebastian (if he be
not too wise to have it informed) I will urge some reasons on Don Sebastians
side, who was King of Portugal: and invading the Kingdom of Barbary, Anno Dom.
1584. was overthrown in a fierce and bloody Battle in the fields of Alcazer, by
the King of Morucco, where it was thought he was slain, but escaped and fled
secretly, traver sti^e or disguised: travailing in that manner through many
parts of Africa and Asia some 30. years, in which time and travail he
suffered much, lived in Captivity and misery, but at last got away into Europe
with purpose to have got into Portugal (if possible) to repossesse the
Kingdom.

In this return he came to Venice, there discovered himself, and desires aid
of the Venetian States: they entertained him as a Prince distressed, gave him
good words, but durst not lend him Assistance, fearing the King of Spain; Yet
the chief Senators, and many of the wisest of the Sigmory, made no doubt of
him.

Among them Signieur Lorenzo Iustiniano of the Senators Order, (a man of wise
and great abilities) was appointed by the States, a Commissioner (with others)
to hear and examine this cause of Don Sebastian, in which they took much
pains. And this Signieur Lorenzo (being lieger Ambassador in England)
affirmed and 162.
protested solemnly, he and all the other Commissioners were clear and very
confident he was Don Sebastian King of Portugal, notwithstanding Hi^ legatus
haec Domino Baroni Darcey retulit.
they durst not give him aid, but councelled him for France, where the King
favored right, without fear of another displeasure. But taking Florence in
his way, in the habit of a Friar, he was observed and discovered by some spies
which the Grand Duke of Tuscany had set upon him from Venice: who to in sinuate
with the King of Spain, Philip the second, and for some other commodious
considerations, delivered Sebastian to the Governor of Orbattelli (a Spanish
Port in Tuscany) from thence sent him by Sea to the Count De le Mos, Viceroy
of Naples, who conveyed him into Spain: there for a while his entertainment
was no better then in the Galleys: what other welcome he had I know not; but
the fame went certainly he was secretly made away after Philip the third was
King. The said Viceroy of Naples confessed in secret to a friend of his, he
verily believed his prisoner was the true Sebastian King of Portugal, and was
induced to be of that opinion, by the strong Testimonies, and many strange and
peculiar marks, which some Honorable Portugesses did know him by, all found
about the body of this Sebastian. And the French King, Henry the 4th it should
seem, was persuaded no less: for when the news was told him the Duke of
Florence had sent this Sebastian to the King of Spain, he told the Queen what
an ill deed her Uncle had done in these words; Nostre Uncle a faict un act
fort indigne de sa Person.

Doctor Stephen de Sampugo, in a letter to Joseph Texere, Counselor and
Almoner to the most Christian King, writes thus. The King Don Sebastian is here
in Vonice, etc. So soon as he arrived here (where he hoped to find support)
the Ambassador of Castile persecuted him very cruelly, persuading the Signeury
that he was a Calabrois, etc. I swear to your Father-hood by the Passion of
Jesus Christ, this man is truly the King Don Sebastian, he has all the marks
on his body, without failing in any one as he had in his infancy, only the
wounds excepted which he received in that Battle at Affricke, he gives the
reason of his life, and account of all his passages, etc. He is known and
re-known by the Conciergres, by the Judges, by the greater part of the Senate,
and by his own Confessor, etc. and a great deal more of him upon knowledge he
justifies: as much witnesses Ion de Castro, Son to Don de Alvaro de Castro,
one of the four Governors that ruled the Kingdom Conjunctly with the King Don
Sebastian, who in his letter the same man says thus. The King Don Sebastian
(whom the enemies call a Calabrois) is the very same which is detained here, as
certainly as you are Friar Joseph, and my self Don Ion. He departed alive from
the battle, but very sore wounded: God having so delivered him with some
other of his company, amongst whom was the Duke Anegro, etc. as for the
Exterior marks of his body he wants not one of them, he is wounded on the brow
of the right eye and on the head, as many witnessed when they saw him in the
Afric Battle. His handwriting is still the same, observing the very same
method, as is very well remembered by diverse.

There might much more be instanced in the behalf of this Sebastian, but this
may serve for better intelligence, to which I may add, that men experienced in
the Affairs and policy of State, know it a rare thing to find in any History
the examples of a Prince being seized and possessed of any Signiory or
Principality (how unlawful soever) who has resigned them or any part to the
true heirs. Have we not instances at home, where the Son has taken the
Kingdom from the Father, and would not let it go again, but rather
endeavored to have his Fathers fate? Much after Edward 2. and Edward 3.
that manner when Henry Duke of Lancaster had got the Kingdom, he held it and
would not resign to the right Heyr Richard the second, nor after his death to
the Earl of March, though these were no Impostors; neither was Edward Earl of
Warwick: yet King Henry would not let his hold go: and the Cardinal
Favorite, finding he could not compass his aims one way, contrived it
another. By the Machivilian advice he gave to Ferdinand King of Castile, not to
conclude the treaty of the Marriage between Prince Arthur and his Daughter
Katherine until this Earl and Perkin were disposed of, which Ferdinando
followed and urged the King, pretending it the security of his Estate and Issue.

In brief, it is not possible to persuade a private man, though wrongfully
possessed to acknowledge the true proprietary has a better title then he.

How unjustly have the Kings of Spain detained sundry Signeuries and
Principalities from the lawful Heirs: yet if the wrong done by such another
disseising Lord, be put to this former Usurper, Malafide (as the Imperial
Iurisconsults will term him) his sentence will be, such a Rapinous Prince does
wrong.

But let us now take a more particular view of those witnesses who stood for
Perkin. And having formerly mentioned Sir Robert Clifford, a Knight of the
Noble Family of the Barons Cliffords, I will proceed with that which may be the
more remarkable in him, because he was of a Family that long hated the House
of York, Moor, Hollinsh. Stow, Gainssord.
from the Battle of Wakefield, when and where they resolved an enmity so
deadly, as was not to be reconciled or satisfied whilst one of them remained;
yet became followers again of the White Rose family; and this Sir Robert
Clifford served King Edward very near, and in good credit, so could not but
have an assured knowledge of the Kings Sons, and was therefore the more
particularly sent to certify his knowledge, who certainly affirmed him to be
the younger son of Edward 4. and confirmed many with him, such as had
likewise served King Edward, and had been acquainted with the Prince his
conveying beyond Sea, though much was done to alter Sir Roberts opinion: the
Lord Fitz-Walter was of the same belief, and avowed Perkin the true Duke of
York, Moor, Hollinsh. Stow, Grafton, Gainsford, Hal.
most constantly unto death; as resolute was Sir William Stanley, though he
were Lord Chamberlain to Henry the seventh, and in great favor; with Sir
George Nevill Brother to the Earl of Westmorland, Sir Simon Mountford, Sir
William Daubeny, father to the Lord Daubeny, Sir Thomas Thwaits, Sir Robert
Ratcliffe of the house Idem Author.
of the Baron FitzWalter, Sir John Tailor, Sir Thomas Chaloner, Thomas Bagnall
with many other Gentlemen of quality, all maintaining him to be the Duke of
York, son of Edward the fourth, and sundry of the Clergy who had been
Chaplains to the King his Father, or otherwise occasioned to attend the Court,
as Doctor Rochford, Doctor Poynes, Doctor Sutton, Doctor Worsley Deane of St.
Paul's, Doctor Leyborn, Doctor Lesly, with many other learned Professors of
Divinity, who would not endure to hear him called Perkin. He was the Noble
^rogenitor of the Earls of York.
The Lord FitzWater, Sir William Stanley, Sir Simon Mountford, Sir Robert
Ratcliffe, Sir William Daubeny (as martyrs of state) confirmed their
Testimonies with their bloods. So did the Kings Serjant Ferrier, who left the
Kings service, and applied himself to Perkin, for which he was executed as a
Traitor; and one Edwards who had served this Duke Richard, was cut in pieces
for the same cause, also Corbet, Sir Quinton Betts, and Gage, Gentlemen of good
worth, with 200. more at least, put to death in sundry Cities and Towns,
particularly in Kent, Essex, Suffolk, Norfolk, and about London for their
confidence and opinions in this Prince.

There were some great men (though they made noe profession of their knowledge
of him,) could whisper it one to another Hollinshed, Grafton, Hall, Stow.
which in general words, is confessed by all our better writers; who say, that
as well the Noblemen, as others, held the said Perkin to be the younger Son
of King Edward the Fourth.

And Sir Thomas Moore after Doctor Morton, thus writes, John Morton. Thomas
Moor. Grafton.
The man commonly called Perkin Warbeck, was as well with the Prince, as with
the people, held to be the younger Son of King Edward the Fourth.

Richard Grafton affirms the same, in Flanders (says he) and most of all
here in England, it was received for an undoubted truth, not only of the
people but of the Nobles, that Perkin was the Son of King Edward the Fourth.
And they all swore and affirmed Mr. William Cambden.
this to be true; The learned and famous Mr. Cambden averreth, there were many
wise, grave and persons of good intelli gence, (who lived in that time and
near it) That affirmed considently this Perkin was second Son to King
Edward, then both the Brothers were not made a way by King Richard, and sarely
it was little reason, or policy, to cut off the one and spare the other,
neither indeed was there ever any proofs made, by Testimony, Argument, or
Presumption, nor by Reason, Honor, or Policy, that this crime could be his,
though many to the contrary; for he not only preserved his Nephew the young
Earl of Warwick, but in his confidence (a special note of his magnanimity)
gave him liberty, pleasure, and the command of a Statly house of his own.

Now if he had been so Ambitious and bloody, he would have provided otherwise
for him, knowing his Title was to take place, if his blood had not been
attainted in his Father; in regard whereof King Richard when his own Son was
dead, caused his Nephew John de la Poole, Eldest Son of the Duke of Suffolk,
and Some think he dyed unnaturally.
of the Duchess his sister, (then the next lawful heir to the Crown) to be
proclaimed heir apparent, an Argument of respect to his kindred and next title
to the Crown, in whomsoever it was; which other men regarded not so much as
the unhappy Sequel showed: (and there was an impious necessity in that) for
whilst the Prince of York survived, (Especially the males) no other titular
Lord, or pretender could be King by his own right, or by color of right, nor
by any other means: unless he had married a daughter, and the Eldest Daughter
of King Edward the Fourth.

And although the deaths and manner of taking away these Princes (the Sons
of King Edward) is held by our writers uncertain and obscure, It is manifest
(at least for the general manner of their death) to be either by the Public
sword, that is the sword of Public sword. Private sword.
Justice, or of Battle as were King Richard, the Children of the Duke of
Clarence and the Duke of Suffolk, etc* or by the private The arts of treachery.
sword, that is, by secret and close slights, treachery (which the Romans
called Insidiae, dolus, by Smothering, Strangling, Poison, Sorcery, etc. And
that the sword was used against the family of York, there is more then
conjecture, both by Testimonies of writers, and records* King Edward himself,
(as Credible Authors report) dyed of poison. In the Parliament Anno. 1.
Richardi tertij there was a^cused and attainted of sorcerie and such other
devilish practices. Doctor Lewis, Doctor Morton, William Knevitt, of Buckin
gham, the Countess of Richmont, Thomas Nandick, of Cambridge Conjurer, with
others; There was also an Earl accused of the same hellish Art, and an old
Manuscript Book, which I have seen, says, that Doctor Morton and a certain
Countess, contriveing the death of King Edward and others, resolved it by
poison.

Which are conjectures and proofs more positive and strong against them, then
any, they have against King Richard* but it was a great neglect in their
malice, making King Richard so politic and treacherous as they did, not to
charge him also with these Princes Sisters, For it could not serve his turn,
to rid away the Reasons why King Richard should not destroy his Nephews.
Brothers, and not them; who were capable of the Crown and had their turn
royal, before any Collateral males. Then he had, the children of his elder
Brother, George Duke of Clarence, Edward Plantagent Earl of Warwick, and the
Lady Margaret his sister, after countess of Salisbury to make away; for they
without their Fathers corruption of blood (which might easily have been salved
by Parliament, the Lords and Commons affecting them) had a Priority of blood
and precedence of Title before the Protector.

I would ask the reason too why King Richard might not endure his Nephews
(being by Parliament held and adjudged illegitimate) as well as the Kings Henry
7. and Henry the eight, endured Arthur Plantagenet, the Bastard of the same
King Edward their natales and cases being alike, or why Sir Thomas Moore and
Doctor Morton should in one place, say it was held in doubt, when or how they
were made away, and in another place, to averr that Tiroll and Dighton being
examined, confessed plainly, the murder of them and all the manner of it.

These be contraries which with a great disadvantage, draws their allegation
into another argument, Bicorne, or Crocodilites; For in revealing the
confession of these men, it is implicatively granted, their fault was not then
to be punished, and so it appears no fault: or not worth the consideration,
the confession of a man being the greatest evidence, can be produced against
him. Then in regard the confession of those was such as might not be opened,
nor the crime called in question (as the same Authors acknowledge) it was but a
fained confession, and they had done better not to have mentioned such a thing,
which begot but a jealousy in the falsitie thereof, or privity of some great
ones in it; Other great ^ones p^ivy to the deaths of those Princes, especially
of King ^^^^^^ds Sons.
and a just imputation of injustice upon the Magistracy. For if Digh^on,
Tirroll, Forest and Slater, confess the murder in Act and manner, King
Richard being dead (who was said to subborne and protect them) necessarily and
in due course of justice, (especially in the Act of so high a nature, and
notice as this was) The punishment should have been expected with all
extremity.

But being for some unknown causes deferred, and after a while quite omitted
and pardoned, it may be thought such strange Clemency and impunitie proceeded
from a singular high indulgence, or else, those examinations and confessions,
werebut Buzes and quaint devises, to amaze the people, and entertain them with
expectation of a justice, to be done in some more convenient time (which was
never.) This was after the death of King Richard. All that was done before, was
to make him the Author of that horrible crime and no body else; For Dighton
and the rest were in security and liberty, yet it stood in good steed with the
Lancastrians, to draw the peoples hate upon King Richard, not unlike that story
of great Alexander, and a noble man in his Court, who stood so high in the
favor of his Nobles and people, that the King grew jealous, and fearful of
his Popularity, studying how he might decline it and him to contempt, but could
find no color or apt occasion, because he was so strongly fixed in the
peoples likeing and was a man of so great a desert, that noe crime could be
charged upon him. The King unbosoming himself to the council and care of a
friend one Medius (of his Country, as I think) had this advise.

Sir (quoth he) let not this man's greatness trouble you, cause him to be
accused of some heinous crime, (though falsely) and we will find means to
make him guilty, so formally and firmly, that the brand of it shall stick up
on him ever, which he delivered in these terms, though diverse, yet the same in
effect. Medeatur licet vulueri, qui morsus, aut dilaniatus est, remanebit tamen
Cicatrix. And it is truly approved by an Ancient Christian Poet, thus, Paulum
distare videntur, Ausonius.

Suspecti vereque rei.
The guilty and suspected Innocent,
In man's opinion are little different.


For there is no more dangerous or fatal destiny to greatenesse, then to be
entangled in the multitudes contempt, Odium et Contempt us, being the two
evils that overthrow Kings, and Kingdoms, the one, that is, Contempt,
proceeding from the vanity and obstinacy of the Prince, the other from the
peoples opinion of him and his vices, And then he must neither reign, nor live
any longer: Ennius said with Cicero, quem oderunt perijsse expetunt: Ennius
apud Ci ceronem offic. lib. 2.
And so all that was practiced upon the fortune, fame, and person of King
Richard was by this rule (though in the judgment and equity of the most knowing
in those times) their cunning translatio Criminis could take noe hold of him,
neither appears it probable, that the Earl of Richmond himself (when he had
got all justice and power in his hand) did hold King Richard guilty of the
murder, and Subornation of those fellows: nor them the Assasines; for
doubtless then, being so wise and religious a Prince, he would have done all
right to the laws divine and humane, And that I believe in the extremest and
publick'st way of punishment, to make it more satisfactory; and terrible to the
people and times: but they freely inioyed their liberty with security Sir Tho.
Moor. Edward Hall. Ralph H^llinshead. John Stow, etc.
to natural deaths without any question or apprehension, Tirrell excepted, who
suffered for treason not long after committed by him, against King Henry
himself. Neither was John Green (named a party in this murder) ever called in
question, nor do the Historians of those times (though mere temporizers)
charge him with this practice against his Nephews, until after his Coronation
(some say they survived King Richard) and giveing this respi^e of time, there
was no cause, why after that, he should make them away being then secure in his
Throne and Title, and they long before pronounced incapable; First by the
ecclesiastical Judges, then by the Barons and Parliament: and where was the
cause of fear? but if King Richard had been of that bloody constitution, the
man whose life could be most prejudicial unto him, was the Earl of Warwick
lawful Son of George Plant agenet Duke of Clarence, Elder Brother to King
Richard: now there was a necessity for the Lancastrian faction (if they must
have a King of that family) to take those Princes away, not to leave King
Richard or his Son, nor yet any legitimate issue of Lancaster, for all those
were before any of the house of Beauforts in the true order of Succession, and
stood in their way, so did the Progeny of Brotherton, of Woodstocke, of both
the Clarencies, Gloucester, etc. Though they feared few, or none of those
Titulare Lords being modest men, not affecting Sovereignty, but content with
their own private fate and feudall estate, when all was one with the
Lancastrians, who were so vehement in their royal approaches, that besides
King Edward the Fourth and his two Sons, King Richard and his Son, the Prince
of Wales, there was afterward (and as occasion served) The Earl of Warwick
and Duke of Suffolk and others, both male and female, of that princly family,
laid in their cold vrnes, and it must be so, else, there could be no place for
the Beauforts and Somersets, their turns being last (the Kings of Portugal,
of Castile, and other being before them, if not excluded by Act of Parliament.)

In this Tragedy there was a Scene acted by John de Vere Earl of Oxenford,
which may be worthy of our observation for example The Earl of Oxen persecutor
of Perkin.
sake, and makes not against the cause of Perkin.

This Earl of Oxenford much affected and devoted to King Henry the Seventh,
was a great enemy to this Richard (Alias Perkin) and I think the only enemy
he had of the great Nobility, how this dislike grew I cannot say, whether out
of ignorance, or incredulity, or out of malice, hateing King Edward, and all
that had a near relation to that family, or else to applyhimselfe to the
honor of the King, but he and the Cardinal are said to be the ch^ife vrgers
of Perkins dispatch and he being high constable pronounced the sentence
against the young Earl of Warwick; (which much distasted the Country) and
never to Heveningham Castle, (that was his chiefest Seat) there lived in the
woods an old Hermit (a very devoute and holy man as the fame of those times
admit him) who seemed much troubled to hear this news, for the love he bare
to the ancient and Noble family of Oxenford, of much anguish of Spirit, saying,
the Earl and his house would repent, and rue that guilty and bloody pursuit
of the innocent Princes, for the event of which prophesy this has bine
observed.

Not long after the Earl was arrested for an offense so small, that no man
(considering his merit and credit with the King) could have thought it worth
the question, for which he was fined at thirty thousand pounds (in those days
a kingly sum,) This Earl John, died Anno. 4. H. 8. 1512 Domin^s de Arundell
viva vo^e
after this he lived many years in great discontent: and dyed without issue,
or any child lawfully begotten by him, and in much shorter time then his life
time, that great and I may call it a stately Erledome, for the Earl of
Oxenford, when he came to the possession of it, was offered by some 12000
pounds per Annum. and leave to his occupation all Man nors, Houses Castles,
Parks, Woods, Forests, and all the Demesne lands thereto belonging, which might
be more worth by yearly value then many Erldoms in this age.
stately Earldome of Oxenford, with the opulent and Princly patrimony, was
utterly dissipated, and como sal in agna (as the Spaniard says in the refran)
yet this Earl was a very wise, magnificent, learned, and religious man in the
estimation of all that knew him, and one more like to raise, and acquire a new
Erledome. The Mathematicians that calculated, the Nativitie of this Earl
Edward, told the Earl his Father, that the Earldom would fall in his Sons
time.
But it thus fell and was wasted, the Castles and Manors dilapidated, the
Chapel wherein this John de Vere and all his Ancestors lay intombed with
their monuments quite defaced to the ground, their bones left under the open
Air in the feilds, and all this within less then threescore years after the
death of the said Earl John; about the same time these unhappie Gentlemen
suffered, there was a base Bastards of King Richard. Grafton and Chron. M. S.
in quarto apud Dn. Rob. Cotton.
sone of King Richard the Third made away, having been kept long before in
Prison. The occasion as it seems was the attempt of certain Irishmen of the
West, and South parts, who would have got him into their power and made him
their chief, being strongly affected to any of the house of York were they
legitimate, or natural, for Richard Duke of Yorkes sake sometimes their
viceroy, and thus much in breife of that.

Why the pub lique justice deferred the death of the Princes.
Now to resolve a question, why the King deferred so long the death and
execution of the Earl of Warwick and Perkin, and took so much deliberation
after he had resolved it, one reason and the chiefest brought by some, is, That
in regard Perkin was an Alien, and in the allegiance of a Foreign Prince,
therefore he could not be condemned, nor executed for felony, nor treason by
our laws: which is a ridiculous evasion, for we have frequent examples in our
stories, that the natural subjects of France, of Scotland, Spain, Portugal,
Germany, and Italy, have had judgment and execution by our laws, for felony
and treason, as Peter de Gaveston a French man, Sir Andrew Harcley a Scot, and
lately Dr. Lopez a Portugal, therefore apparently that was not the cause the
King so doubtfully, and (as it were) timerously deferred their Arraignments and
Executions. The Heathens perhaps would have defined it some inward awe or
concealed scruple, such as they called Eumenides, and Eurinnies, and believed
haunted those men that had purposed or acted a wickedness: upon which the Poet
D^mones G^nij.
said well: -- Patiturque unos men's saucia Manes.
And assigned to every man his protecting Spirit, whom the Greeks called
Doemones, the Latins Genios, concluding, that when the Genius of him against
whom the mischief aims, is stronger and more active then his who is to act
it, there the Plot hardly takes effect.

For example, produce the mortal enmity between Octavianus Pluta^^^ in Anton.
Caesar, and M. Antonius, in which Anthony could never prevail by any Attempt:
who consulting with his Soothsayers, they give the reason to beethe power of
Octavians Genius above his. It is reported the great Philosopher Appollonius
had Philostrat in vita Appollon.
such a secret protection, and so strong, that the Emperor Domitian had no
power over his life, though he studied means to take it, Suidas adding that
this Philosopher in confidence of his Genius when he left the Emperor, added
this verse, (...).


Me non occides quia fataliter protectus sum: which is that Flamius Vopiscus
calls Majestatem Apollonij (as I guess) and with Vopiscus in Aureliano.
it the Profestors of Christian Religion agree in the effects, not in the
causes, for those whom the Heathen call (...) Daemones, etc. Genios, the
Christian Theologues call Angels or Spirits, Angels good and bad.
whereof they hold good and bad.

But to return to the matters further Allegate and Probate. The industrious
Antiquary Master John Stow, being required to deliver his opinion concerning
the proofs of this murder, affirmed it was never proved by any credible
evidence, no not by probable suspicions, or so much as by the Knights of the
Post, that King Richard was guilty of it. And Sir Thomas Moore (being puzelled
with his Equivocations) says, that it could never come to light what became of
the bodies of these two Princes. Grafton, Hall, and Hollinshead agreeing in the
same report, that the truth hereof was utterly unknown. Then where is their
far seeing knowledge, that will have them transported into Foreign
Countries, or drowned, or their giganticke proofs, that say peremptorily,
they were both murdered and buried in the Tower by those four named before:
if so, we need go no further for the truth. But these are splenitick reaches,
and the Parachronisme is too groste as the Comaedian said, Quod dictum,
indictum est, Terentius in Phormio.

Quod modo ratum, irritum est.


Besides, if Perkin were not the second Son of King Edward, he must be
nothing, for the Flemish, French, and Wallons acknowledged no such Noble young
man to be borne in Warbecke, or in Tourney, but make honorable mention of a
young Son of the King of England, who was brought to the Duchess of
Burgundy his Aunt, being then in Flanders, and how he was in France and in
other Kingdoms. And surely so many Noble and discreet English, if they had not
known him to be the same, by most certain tokens, and evidence, would not so
confidently have laid down their lives to confirm their knowledge of him, or
hazarded their judgments and honors upon an Imposture, or vanity, especially
those who had places of Quality and Eminency near the King then living, and
were in favor at Court. Therefore I would be resolved from our Anti-Richards,
what aim those Noblemen could have, in averring him the Son of Edward the
Fourth by the hazard of their lives and Estates (if the KING pleased) and how
could they expect less; for though they were enough to justify it a truth,
they were too few to maintain it against him, there could be no aim or hope
to super-induce young Richard to be King: but merely I am persuaded in point of
truth and honor, as they thought themselves bound to do, they freely tendered
their lives to make good what their Conscience and knowledge witnessed, for it
would be an Imposture of a miraculous Deception, so many worthy and wise
persons both of the Nobility and Clergy, some of them having served the King
his Father and himself, that they all in their particular and general
intelligence and understandings, should be mistaken and cheated. I say it was a
strange delusion if it could be so: but indeed those that would have it, so
leave it in question, and know not well what to make of their own relations, or
how to resolve his History, and if we mark Sir Francis Bacon in the life of
Henry the Seventh (though his speculation be tender, and as favorable as he
can that way) touching the History of this young Duke, he gently slides from
it;

Explicit liber tertius.
THE FOVRTH BOOK OF THE HISTORY OF KING RICHARD the Third.
The Contents.
UPon what occasion the sentence of Bastardy was given upon the Children of
King Edward the 4th and why. The sundry Loves, Wooings, Contracts and Marriages
of King Edward the Fourth. His diverse Concubines, His device of the Fetterlock,
and the Faulcon. His wooing the Lady Elianor Talbott alias Butler, the Lady
Bona of Savoy, and the Lady Elizabeth Gray widow, and his marriage with her.
His former Marriage or Contract with the said Elianor, her wrongs and her
death. Kings must not marry the daughters of their Vassalls, nor other without
the consent of their Barons, Doctor Stillington Bishop of Bath Imprisoned for
speaking of King Edwards Marriage with the Lady Elianor Talbott, Spuria
vitulamina. How King Edward might have salved those Errors and prevented all
the mischiefs following them. The Children of King Edward the Fourth declared
and adjudged illegitimate. King Edwards death suspected by poison; the
mortality of the Plantagenets. The Authority of Parliament; Parliaments how so
called and derived; Parliaments against Parliaments. The first Parliament of
King Henry the seventh; what Treason is; whether Sovereign Princes may be said
to commit Treason against their Subjects; The treaty of Marriage between K.
Richard the third, and the Lady Elizabeth Plantagenet* and cheifely sought by
her self and the Queen her Mother; The entertainment of the Lady Elizabeth
at the Court; the first Libell of Divorse; the scruples of the Lady Elizabeth;
King Richard never meant to marry her. The marriages of Neeces allowed by the
Pope, and usual; the true cause of Sir Thomas Moors Condemnation and
execution.
The FOVRTH BOOK OF King Richard The Third.
THe Title King Richard the Third had to the Crown, ac^rued to him by the
illegitimacie of the Children of King Edward the Fourth, and the Attainder of
the Duke of Clarence, with the Corruption of his Blood, and forfeiture of the
Title in him and in his Heirs, of which there was no question: but of the
forfeiture and disheritage of the sons of Edward the Fourth there has been
much. The true cause has not nor cannot be well known, without the Narration
of King Edward's sundry Loves and Wooings, specially his Contracts and
Marriages.

I shall not need to intimate how amorous and wanton this How extreme his
desires' were, you may see in the Speech of the Duke of Buckingham, set down by
Sir Thomas Moor.
King was, his many Mistrisses or Amasia's he kept, in several private places;
whereof the most famous was Katharine de Clarington, Elizabeth Wiatt alias
Lucy, Jane Shore, the Lady Elianor Talbot. And it is worth the remembering (in
the Concourse of such matters as these) there was another fair Creature so dear
unto him, that his too much Affection begat Suspicion; of which he gave her a
kind expression, by a quaint device sent unto her in a rich Jewel, fashioned
much after the manner of the trivial Hierogliffs used in France, and called
Rebus de Picardy. The device was, A Faulcon encompassed with a Fetter-lock: The
Mott, Au Faulcon Serrure. The Caution lying in the ambiguity and double sense
of Faulcon: which being whole and proper, signifies a Hawk; but divided, has
an obscene signification, and so Faulcon becomes an aequivoque.

The King afterward was so affected with this device, that he would have it
carved and painted, in many of his Royal works yet to be seen at Fotheringhay
and elsewhere.

Yet although the Kings Jealousy was thus particular to her, his Affection was
as general to others; being a frank Ga^ester, and he that would cast at all,
fairly set. Above all, for a time he was much speld with Elianor Talbot,
daughter of John Talbot Earl of Shrewsbury (called in the Act of Parliament 1
Rich. 3, The old Earl of Shrewsbury) her mother was the Lady Katherine
Stafford, daughter of Humphrey Stafford Duke of Buckingham, and she the widow
of Thomas Lord Butler Baron of Sudesley. Her beauty and sweetness of
disposition drew his desire so vehemently, and with such respect, that he was
suddenly Contracted, and after Married by Doctor Thomas Stillington Bishop of
Bath, Philip de Comines, in Lud. 11. cap. 112. and 122.
Councellor of State (one much favored by the King, and often employed by him
in great Affairs.) This is witnessed by our English Writers, and veritable
Philip de Comines, in these words: Le Evesque de Bath (lequel avoit este
Conseillier du Roy Edward) disoit que le dit Roy avoit promis foy de Marriage a
une Dame de Angleterre, and qu'il avoit nomme, and que le Roy avoit fait la
promise enter les mains dudict Euesque, and dit aussi c'est Euesque, qu'il
avoit apres espouse, and n'y avoit que luy and ceux deux.

In English thus:

The Bishop of Bath, a Privy Councellor of King Edward, said, That the King
had plighted his faith to marry a Lady of England, whom the Bishop named the
Lady Elianor Talbot; and that this Contract was made in the hands of the
Bishop, who said that afterward he married them, no persons being present but
they twain and he, the King charging him strictly not to reveal it. Which
Contract and Marriage are related in the Act of Parliament aforesaid, where it
is disertly called a former Marriage, and the King had a child by her. But
where desires are unlawful, they will be unlimited. We are ever young enough to
sin; never old enough to repent: never constant, never satisfied in our nearest
desires. Though to morrow show us the sting of to day, the third shall betray
us again; and we are taken (like children in a shop of trinkets) by the eye,
liking all things, from one to another, until pleasure dull pleasure, and we
grow weary of them. As in the dotages of this King, who had now received others
into the bosom of his fancy; especially the fame (which was then in every
Courtiers ear and mouth) of an excellent Lady in the Court of France, with the
Queen Chareltts, wife of King Lewis 11, and sister to this Lady whose name was
Bona the daughter of Lewis Duke of Savoy. And so suddenly and strongly had he
taken fire and apprehension of her report (the bent of his affection being
merely wanton to every new object, thinking Love a cold Composition, without
the privilege of Variety) that he straight falls into terms of engagement and
capitulation of Marriage; to which purpose the great and renowned Richard Nevil
The great Earl of Warwick.
Earl of Warwick and Salisbury, and Captain of Calais (then in the esteem of
his best and most trusty friend) had a Commission of Treaty, and with all speed
was sent Ambassador into France; who, with all honor and magnificence to his
wish effects it; with the more noble and easy dispatch, the Earl of Warwick
being a man eminent through all the parts of Europe, for his Valor, Wisdom,
and Heroical virtues. Expecting a The Lady Bo na was afterward married to John
Galeazo Sforza, Duke of Millain el Ruese^r.
welcome at his return, answerable to the period of his employment, but finds
an alteration not only of the Kings affection, but of his countenance: for in
the interim he had (in an instant or particle of time as it were) wooed and
wedded the Lady Elizabeth Gray, Relict of Sir John Gray, daughter of Sir
Richard Woodville, and of Iaquetta, sometime Duchess of Bedford and daughter
of the Earl of St. Poole. Her husband was one Gray a Knight of Grooby, who
became a very vehement Lancastrian, revolting from the House of York, and
therefore the more hateful to those of that Family, and the well-wishers
thereof (so to the Earl of Warwick.) He was slain at the Battle of St Albans:
Of whom, and of this Lady his wife, as of this Marriage, Philip de Comines
relates something, which I shall leave to the interpretation of the better
knowing, and desire not to understand it in the words: Or de puis le dict Roy
Eduart espouse la fille d'un Ch^vallier de Angleterre femme veufue, qui avoit
deux filz and aussi per Amorrettes.

But neither the despised state of widowhood, nor the meannesse of her quality
and condition, the earnest disswasion of the Duchess his mother and best
friends, could make him withdraw his affection, so deeply and obstinately he
was surprised with her beauty: yet if he could have enjoyed his longings
otherwise, he ha^ not married her. But she was of so pregnant and reserved a
wit, (seconded by the caution and counsel of the Duchess her mother) that his
highest temptations and sweetest batteries could not win upon her; protesting
never to yield to any dishonorable parley or unchaste motion, although it might
warrant the safe^y of her life; and humbly implored his Grace not to think her
so exorbitantly and vainly ambitious, to wish her self a Queen, or to have the
hope and presumption to be any thing higher then what she was, His poor and
humble vassal: nor was she of so low and lost a mind, as to violate her
Chastity, or be a Concubine to the greatest King.

When the King perceived there was no other remedy but that he must shift his
sail to that scantling of wind, he complies with her, and protests it was his
desire and ^uit to marry her, notwithstanding her inequality: for in his
esteem, her love, her beauty, and her virtue, made her Fortunes and Dowry
great, and high enough for any King. Nor did he defer it any longer then there
was necessity; but marry her he did, and with such dispatch, that he stayed not
for the advice of any, either Councellor, Kinsman, or other whatsoever.

Nay, his speed admitted not the approved Ceremony of the Banes asking. And
such was the want of Reverend Bishops then, that he was fain to take an
ordinary Priest to marry them, in a Chamber too, in stead of a Church, and that
in a Lodge or Foresthouse; no body being present but the Duchess, and some
few This Marriage was in the Forest of Whichwood.
of her company. So where he first saw her (and by chance) there at the next
interview he married her; an act of as high exception as improvidence. For his
Barony thought it a most unworthy and unequal Match, distasting it the more, as
done without their consent, which they as^ever'd the King ought to have by
their ancient privileges: and were the more exasperated, considering the great
inequality between her condition and the Imperial Majesty of England, being
the Relict but of a poor Knight, his mortal enemy too* Above all, the Earl of
Warwick took it for an high indignity and scandal to his Honor, which stood so
far engaged in France to the Lady Bona and her Princely friends; knowing the
French would be as sensible of the scorn, besides the great charge he had been
at, to manage the employment. In the heat of these disgraces (for transcendent
spirits have their answerable passions; and it is as dangerous to stand in
their way, as in the reaches of an angry Tide) he forsook the King, and soon
after takes up Arms against him; an Induction to those succeeding evils which
pursued that inconsiderate Marriage: of which the judicious Polidor (lib. 24.)
makes this Censure.

^ex Edwardus mutato Concilio de ducenda in uxorem Bona, L'indignete de ce
Marriage du Roy Edw. avec un simple gentile femme, displaisant au Conte
Warwick, and aux principaux Seigneurs de Angleterre, and offensa tellement le
Roy Lewis 11. qu'ils font confederacon, contre le Roy Eduatt, etc. Jean de
Tillet, Part 2.
filia Ducis Sabaudiae, Elizabetham viduam Johannis Gray Militis, in
Matrimonium duxit; and de eo Matrimonio ob mulieris humilita tem non modo
necessarios Principes, verum etiam Richardum Woodvillum Patrem mulieris celat:
qua causa cognita cuncti protivus mirari, Principes fremere, Passimque voces
emittere indignationis, and Regem non ex sua dignitate fecisse, easque nuptias
se crimini dare and dedecori assignare, quod caeco amore non ratione duct us
esset* sed inde initium profectum est simultatis ortae inter Regem Edwardum and
Richardum Comitem Warwici, etc.

But if you will not give credit to him, you shall hear an English Prelate
living in those times.

Edwardus Rex fret us propria electione cujusdam Militis relictam nomine
Elizabeth, inconsultis Regni proceribus clandestino sibi destinavit Matrimonio;
postea ipsam in reginam Coronari fecit: quod quidem Regni optimates aegre
tulerunt, quia de tam mediocri stirpe foeminam procreatam ad Regni Consortium
secum praepropere sublimaret.

Thus this amorous King lost his honor, with many of his best and great
friends: yet escaped well, that he had no more real and present feeling of the
error; being the first King of England that ever mingled his Royal Blood and
Majesty in the Alliance of so private and mean a family.

The Story of Arragon mentions a King deposed for marrying the daughter of his
subject. And King Edward was somewhat ^^er it: for soon after, he was expulsed
his Kingdom. But being a man that kept an industrious and invincible Courage
above his troubles, he happily recovered that loss, never his honor and
friends, which he might have preserved, and prevented all those ^alamities that
overtook him in his issue, by the advice of the Duchess his mother, who upon
the secret advertisement of his love to this Lady Gray, used all the
persuasions and authority of a mother, to return him to the Lady Elianor Talbot
his forme^ love and wife (at least his contracted) to finish and consummate
what he was bound to, by public Solemnity of Marriage; and pressed it with such
ingenious engagements, that for the Arguments sake, I have transcribed the
passage out of Sir Thomas Moor and the rest of our English Writers. Thus she
disswades him. MY Liege Lord, and my dear Son, It is very commonly reported The
Speech of the Duchess of York, to King Edw. 4.
you are purposed to marry the Lady Gray, a widow, and a mean Gentlewoman;
which you cannot but conceive will redound to your disparagement and dishonor;
all the wise, great and noblest persons of your Kingdom, thinking it far more
to the advantage of your Honor, profit and Safety, to seek the Alliance of a
Noble Progeny, and rather in a foreign Country then your own, as well in
regard thereupon may depend great strength to your Estate, and great
possibility to enlarge your possessions by such Affinity. Also (if well
considered) you may not safely marry any other then the Lady Bona, the Earl of
Warwick having proceeded so far in the Current of that Match already, that it
is likely he will not sit down contented, if his troublesome and costly
negotiation should be so slightly blown off and frustrat^d.

Besides (Sir) consider it is not Princely for a King to marry his own Subject,
(at least no great and important occasion leading him thereunto, nor
possessions or other commodity depending thereupon) but will be less tolerable
to all opinion, then if a rich man should marry his maid, only for a little
wanton dotage upon her person; in which kind of Marriages, many men commend
more the maids fortune, then the masters discretion. Yet there must needs be
more honesty in such a Marriage, then can be honor in this which you affect:
for the difference is not so great betwixt a rich Merchant and his servant, as
you must think between the King and the widow Gray; in whose person (albeit
there be nothing to be mistiked) there is nothing so excellent, but it may be
found in diverse other women, much more noble and many ways exceeding her, and
more comparatively to your Estate (those also Virgins, who must be thought of a
much more honorable estimation then widows;) wherefore the Widowhood only of
Elizabeth Gray (though in all other things she were convenient for you) were
enough to restrain you, being a King, and so great a King.

And it must needs stick as a foul disparagement to the sacred Majesty of a
Prince (who ought as nearly to approach the Priesthood in Pureness and
Cleanness, as he does in Dignity (to be defiled with Bigamy, in his first
Marriage.



Thus far the King could with attention hear the Duchess: But being extremly
far gone in love, or rather in the hot passion of Love, he was resolute to
marry her; and partly in earnest, and partly in play (as one that well wist he
was out of the check of a mother) yet reverently thus replied. MADAM,
ALthough Marriage, being a Spiritual thing, ought rather to be The Answer of
King E. 4. to the Duchess of York his mother.
made according to the Will and Ordinance of Almighty God, where he by his
grace inclines, either parties to love mutually and virtuously (as I hope and
trust he does work in ours) and not for the regard of any temporal advantage:
yet nevertheless this Marriage (as it seems to me, being considered even
after the worlds account) is not unprofitable, nor without fruits: for I reckon
not the Alliance and Amity of any earthly Nation or foreign Prince so
necessary for me, as the friendship and love of mine own Subjects; who, as I
hope, will be the more induced to love me, and acknowledge mine to them, seeing
I disdain not to marry one of my own Land. When (if a foreign Alliance were
thought so requisite) I could find the means of that much better by other of
my kin (where all those parties would be content) but to marry myself to one
whom I should (peradventure) never love, and for the possibility of more
possessions, lose the fruit and pleasure of this which I have already: For
small pleasure takes a man of all he has, or can have, if he be wived against
his appetite.

And I doubt not but there be (as you say, Madam) other women in every point
comparable to the Lady Gray; therefore I let not other men to wed them, no
more then have they reason to mistike where it likes me.

Nor doubt I my Cousin of Warwick's love can be so slightly settled to me, as to
grudge at that which I affect; nor so unreasonable, to look that in my choice
of a wife I should rather be ruled by his eye then mine own, that were to make
me a Ward, and bind me to marry by the appointment of a Guardian; with which
servile and hard condition I would not be King.

As for the possibility you urge of more inheritance by new Affinity in strange
Lands, that is not always certain; but contrariwise, it is oftentimes the
occasion of more trouble then profit. Besides, we have already a Title and
Seisine so good and great, as may suffice to be gotten, and so to be kept, by
one man, and in one man's days.

For your Objection that the Lady Gray has been a wife, and is now a widow,
and has already Children: Why (by Gods blessed Lady) I that am a Bachelor
have some Children too; and so, for our better comfort, there is proof that
neither of us are like to be barren. And I trust in God (Madam) you shall live
to see her bring forth a young Prince, and your pretty Son, that shall be a joy
and pleasure to you.

For the Bigamy objected; let the Bishop lay it hardly in my way, when I come
to take Orders of Priesthood: for I confess, I understand Bigamy is forbidden
to a Priest, but I never wist it yet forbidden to a Prince: Therefore I pray
you, good Madam, trouble yourself and me no further in this matter.




Then she urged his Contract with the Lady Elizabeth Lucie, and his having had
a child by her, (as she said;) and thought her self bound in conscience to
charge him with. Master Moor, Grafton, Stow and the rest, say, the King utterly
denied that Contract, and protested it a slander; which well and justly he
might do, and these Authors may retract what they have written.

For the truth is, he was never contracted to her, though he loved her well,
being of an affable and witty temper; nor did she ever allege the King was
betrothed to her, but that he had entangled her by sweet and tempting language;
And who knows not Credula res amor est? But true it is, he had a child by
her, which was the Bastard Arthur, called commonly (but unduly) Arthur
Plantagenet, afterward made Viscount Lisle, by H. 8.

In this Relation, the Historians have much and foully erred, not only
corrupting the story, but have injured the Duchess of York in her judgment
and knowledge of these matters, and the tenor of her former Speech, making her
to charge the King as contracted to this Elizabeth Lucy (of birth and quality
much meaner then the Lady Gray, whom she conceived so basely of; for Elizabeth
Lucy Elizabeth Lucy.
was the daughter of one Wyat of Southampton, a mean Gentleman (if he were one)
and the wife of one Lucy, as mean a man as Wyat. True it is, the King kept her
as his Concubine, and she was one of those most famous three who had peculiar
Epithets, being called his Witty Leman.) For that they would have her say, the
King was never betrothed to her, it imports nothing, and therefore I conceive
it was never extracted from her. But truly to salve the story, and error of
these Writers, we must know, That Lady to whom the King was first betrothed and
married, was Elinor Talbot, daughter of a great Peer of this Realm, of a most
noble and illustrious Family, the Earl of Shrewsbury, who is also called in
authentic Writings the Lady Butler, because she was then the widow of the Lord
Butler (a Lady of a very eminent beauty, and answerable virtue) to whom the
King was contracted, married, and had a child hy her. This is that Lady (not
Elizabeth Lucy) the Queen spoke of to her son; and (to note Obiter) the Kings
breach with this Lady, was a cause the subtle widow would not listen unto him
before Marriage, having learned, Credulitas damno solet esse puellae. This
Marriage cast the Lady Elianor Ovid.
Butler into so perplexed a Melancholy, that she spent her self in a solitary
life ever after: and how she died, is not certainly known; but out of doubt
kindness was not the cause, he having a heart for every new face, and was so
become exceedingly fancied to his new wife the Lady Gray, no Court or pleasure
now, but where she is. In this continuance of his amorous Indulgence (which was
many years, and rendered a fruitful issue to him) no question that party of her
kindred made their best advantage from it. Yet the remembrance of that
Pre-contract after a time, moved him by such sensible apprehensions, he could
not brook to have it mentioned, which was the cause of his displeasure against
his ancient Chaplain Doctor Stillington of Bath, because he did what his
conscience urged, to God and the Kingdom, in discovering the Marriage,
occasioned by the Ladies sudden indisposition and pressing sorrow; who not able
to contain her self, had opened it to a Lady her sister, or (as some say) to
her mother the Countess of Shrewsbury; she to the Earl her husband; he
consults it with his noblest kinsfolks and friends, as it was a general scandal
to them all: they, to inform themselves the better, had conference with Dr.
Stillington, who affirmed the Contract and Marriage: with whom they advise,
that as he was a Bishop and a Privy Councellor, it behoved him to prepare it
to the Kings consideration, for some redress and satisfaction. But the Bishop
(though willing) durst not deal with the King in that manner; rather wished they
would apply it to the Duke of Gloucester, as the man most inward with the King;
whereof Philip de Comines thus Philip de Comines.
writes. Cestuy Euesque d'Bath, mit en avaunt ace Dux de Gloucester, que le dit
Roy Edouart estoit fort amoreux, d'un Dame, d'Angleterre, and luy promise de
l'espouser pour veu qu'il couchat avec illa, else s'y consentit: and dit ceste
Euesque, qu'il les avoit Espouses, and n'y avoit que luy and eux deux.

The Duke of Gloucester, as they desired, pressed it to the King, who became more
incensed against the Bishop, saying he had not only betrayed his trust, but his
children; and upon that heat puts him from the Council Table, under a strict
imprisonment for a long time, which at length he redeemed himself from, by a
heavy fine, as is testified by Doctor Goodwin Bishop of Hereford, in his
Catalogus 1620
Episcoporum, who writes thus: Philip de Comines, le Roy Edw. de suppose
l'Evesque, and le tient in prison, and le Ranson d'un bon sum d'Argent. Which
was taken for a piece of more passion then justice; the Bishop not deserving so
to suffer in this case, where his conscience might very well excuse what he did.

Not long after, King Edward died; of what disease, it is doubtfully How King
Edward died.
suggested: Some thought, of an Apoplexy, or dead Palsy. Polidor Virgil says,
of a disease utterly unknown to all the Physicians; which leaves it to a
further construction. The Author of Lib. 4. in Hist. de Britaigne.
the History of Britain delivers plainly, that King Edward was killed by poison
(as the common report in France went.)

Aucuns disopent que le Roy de Angleterre Edovart, avoit este Empoisonne au
mois d'Aurill en l'an. 1463. And Euguerrant de Moustrolet writes, that some
said he died of an Apoplexy: others, he was poisoned in Wine of Creu, which
King Lewis the eleventh Moustrolet, part 3. de ce Chron.
sent to him. Philip de Comines (to that purpose) says, Aucuns disent que le
Roy Eduart, mourut d'un Catarhe. That is, Some say that King Edward died of a
Catarhe: for that is their phrase in France, when a great man is made away by
Poison. Of such a venomous Catarhe died the young King Edward the Sixth. But by
whose hand King Edward the fourth had his death, it is not said. Certain it is,
he was generally beloved of all his Subjects, except those of the Lancastrian
faction. As soon as he was dead, the silence brake into a general muttering
against his Marriage; then into loud and public in veighing against it. All
tongues were at liberty, and Pardons were hoped for all offenses; the general
and common opinion being quite against it, and the Children. And Doctor Morton
affirmed, The Duke of Buckingham, with other Doctor Morton. Sir Tho. Moore,
Grafton, Hollinshead, Stow.
noble Lords, saw and read certain authentic Instruments made and signed by
learned Doctors, Proctors, and Notaries, with the Depositions of sundy credible
persons, importing and testifying the Children of Edward the fourth were
Bastards: with which opinion the City of London was also possessed; and Doctor
Shaw, Friar Pinke, and other Preachers in the Pulpits declared them Spuria
vitulamina. To this consented all the people of the North parts in their
Supplicatory Scroll before mentioned; which the Court of Parliament adjudged
and decreed to be so. A fault of Improvidence in their Father, who might How
King Edward might have prevented all afterquestions.
have prevented all quarrels and questions about that and future claims,
repaired all flaws and defects of Titles; also have taken away the error and
inconveniency of the post-Contract, or later Marriage, that gave the imputation
of Bastards to his Children; and so have avoided all the ensuing mischiefs and
calamities. If first he had procured a Divorce of the former Contract with the
Lady Elianor, from the Pope, who was then held to have all power both of heaven
and earth.

Or if after the second Marriage (and while he flourished, which was by the
space of Fourteen years) he had either by a due consideration, or counsel of
his best friends, wrought the Popes Pardon for breach of the Pre-contract with
the Lady Elianor; then, his Apostolical Bull of Dispensation, for his
Post-Contract, or Matrimony superinducted (as they call it) which might easily
have been obtained at Rome, for money. And after that, to have summoned a
Parliament, requiring the three Estates to have ratified and confirmed these
Bulls, for the approbation of the said Marriage with the Lady Gray, and the
Legitimation of his Children, and made them lawful by Act of Parliament
(according to the Popes Indulgence (which was then a sacred and most inviolable
thing.) Lastly, to have Declared, Pronounced and Decreed in Parliament, That
the said Children of the King, being so made legitimate, were also capable of
all Honors, Dignities, Estates Public and Private, of which the King stood
seized, or which were any ways appertaining and proper to the Kingdom of
England, and of France. I say, If he had done this, he had composed all
defects, and prevented all succeeding dangers of Claims and Practices, which
might have been done with small or no trouble. A course by another afterward
opportunely thought on.

And surely (it may be conjectured) if this King had not been too secure, and
lost in his sensualities, he would by the like Parliamentary power have
rectified those errors, these great, high, and difficult works, being (indeed)
proper to Parliaments, and pregnant and strong proofs of their great and
transcendent power, The Authority of Parliament.
holding in themselves a just desert and claim of such power and authority (if
assembled and held as they ought) being a General Assembly and Convocation of
the most wise, honorable, just, and religious persons of the Kingdom.
Therefore the word Parliament (says one) is compounded of Parium and lamentmm,
Parliament, how so called and derived.
because (as he thinks) the Peers of the Country did at these Meetings
complain each to other of the enormities of their Country. But the better
opinion is, That Parliament is simply from the French word parler (and that
from the Greek (...), both signifying to speak) and so by adding the
termination, meant (which is common in the French Tongue, as well to many Nouns
as Adverbs) do make up Parliament; meaning thereby an Assembly of men called
together to speak or confer, etc.

And it may not unfitly be called Parliament, for that each man should parler,
lament, speak his mind. But Laurence Valla Lawrence Valla.
misliketh that Etymology.

It may be ghessed the word Parliament (being transported out of France) began
shortly after the Norman Conquest. One of the first authentical reports of that
name, is found in the Statute 3 E. 1. commonly called Westminster Parliament;
that Assembly being said to be Primier general apres Coronament^le Roy. But
that is not the first word: for in the Statutes called Articuli Cleri,
published 9 E. 2, these words are read: Temporibus progenitorum nostrorum
quondam Regum Angliae Parliamentis suis, etc. Which words Progenitorum and
quondam, must needs reach higher then E. 1. that was but father to him that
spoke it.

But at what time soever after the Conquest this Court began to be called a
Parliament, the same was before known to the Saxons or Englishmen, by the word
Sinoth, and Micell Sinoth, of the Greek (...), now appropriated to
Ecclesiastical meetings only; and sometimes by these terms, Micell, Gemote,
Witengemott, and Calca Witengemott; that is, the meeting of wisemen, or of all
the wisemen: for witona signifies wisemen, Calca, all, and Gemott, a meeting:
of which last words the names Shire-motts, Eolmotts, and Halymotts; that is,
the meeting or assembling of the men of a Shire, of a Town, and of the Tenants
of a Hall or Manor, had their beginning also.

Now as Sinoth is more used in the Parliaments themselves; so Gemott is more
familiar to the Historians.

And this Parliament of Anno 1 Rich. 3. could be of no less power and virtue;
witness the many and good Laws made in it, (albeit the second Marriage of King
Edward was adjudged unlawful, and the Acts of that Parliament for the most part
repealed and abrogated afterward) yet the evidence is clear enough, that the
Judges and Lawmakers of that Parliament, were wise and religious men, and
their Laws upright and just.

Therefore whatsoever was adjudged by them, was to be received and held as
authentic and inviolable (how roughly soever it was afterward handled.) And in
this case of the disabling of King Edwards sons, there is least reason to
suspect them, the cause being so new, so plain, and notoriously known, that no
man could be ignorant therein: Therefore to have given any other Judgment, but
according to the truth of evidence, and certainty of knowledge, it might justly
have been censured an act of error and ignorance, or partiality and injustice.

For it was not the opinion of a few, nor raised out of a weak judgment and
perverted knowledge; but a strong and general evidence, by the ablest and best
knowing.

If it be objected, The case was obscure and doubtful: That cannot be; for the
Estates had all substantial and ready means to inform themselves of the truth,
and every circumstance whereby they might be fully satisfied and cleared in all
the niceties and doubts: for all the witnesses and dealers in that cause, and
such persons as were acquainted with it, were then living; and they must and
would have truly and certainly informed the Court of Parliament: For the
special and reverend care of this Court is, The advancing of Justice and Right.
Therefore all Subjects (by nature or grace) are bound in their Allegiance, to
give pious and religious credit to Parliaments, and to believe in their
Authority and Power, as the former times did in Oracles. We must also
confidently hold the high and transcendent quality and virtue of that Court, to
have all power and authority: And no question to repeal a good and just Law
made in Parliament, is a wrong and scandal to that General Council, and to the
universal wisdom, providence, justice and piety of the Kingdom.

In the Parliament 1 H. 7. there is an Act, attainting the King R. 3. of high
Treason, for bearing Arms against the Earl of Richmond, entitled The Sovereign
Lord (this was at his proceeding from Milford-haven into Leicester:) But when
he came to fight the Battle, he was then no King, nor Sovereign, but a Chief of
such as made head against their Sovereign. In which Paragraph there appears
three gross faults.

First, Certain it is, Richard during his Reign was a Sovereign, therefore no
Subject.

Next, there was no enemy in the field who was then a Sovereign, but all liege
Subjects to the Crown.

And Richard being the King and Sovereign, could not be adjudged a Traitor, nor
lawfully attainted of High Treason. Then let it be considered whether a person
of sacred Majesty (that is, an Anointed Sovereign) may commit the Crime of
Treason. Also in this Parliament, all the Barons, Knights and Gentlemen that
bore Arms in the field for the King, were attainted of Treason, their goods and
lands confiscate: and one Thomas Nan dick^ (a Necromancer and Sorcerer, who
with others had been condemned to die, for using that hellish Art) was in this
Parliament pardoned the horrible things he had committed. And it seemed he had
not then left his black trade: for he has in that Act of Parliament still the
style of Conjurer: viz.

Thomas Nandick of Cambridge, Conjurer: which had been a fitter style for his
Gibbet then his Pardon; although he had not by his Sorcery or Enchantment hurt
or destroyed any humane, yet for his renouncing and abjuration of Almighty God:
for it is the opinion of a learned and religious Doctor:

Magos and Incantores (says he) hominum genus indignum, quod vel ob solam Dei,
O. M. abjurationem capitali suplicio afficiatur.

Other such things there be in that Parliament, which detract it in the opinion
of some; those of the best and wisest repute.

Now let us come to examine that Treaty the King had about The Treaty of
Marriage between K. R. 3. and his Niece the Lady Elizabeth Plantagenet.
marrying the Lady Plantagenet; which is censured to be a thing not only
detestable, but much more cruel and abominable to be put in agitation.

Item, That all men, and the Maid her self most of all* detested this unlawful
Copulation. Item, That he made away the Queen his wife, to make way for this
Marriage; and that he propounded not the Treaty of Marriage, until the Queen
his wife was dead.
That there was such a motion for the marriage of this Lady to the King, is
true; and (which is more, and most certain) it was entertained, and well liked
by the King and his friends, a good while; also by the Lady Elizabeth, and by
the Queen her mother; who received it with so much content and liking, that
presently she sent into France for her son the Marquess of Dorset, that was
there with the Earl of Richmond, earnestly soliciting him to renounce the
Faction, and return home to the Kings favor and advancement, which she assured
him: and sends the Lady Elizabeth to attend the Queen at Court, or to place her
more in the eye, so in the heart of the King. The Christmas following (which
was kept in Westminster Hall) for the better color of sending her eldest
daughter, she sends her other four thither, who were received with all
honorable courtesy by the King and Queen Regent; especially the Lady
Elizabeth was ranked most Chronicle Croyland.
familiarly in the Queens favor, and with as little distinction as Sisters.
But society, nor all the Pomp and Festivity of those times, could cure that sad
wound and languor in the Queens breast, which the death of her only son had
left. The address of those Ladies to Court (albeit the feigned wooing of the
King was in a politic and close way) gave cause of suspicion to the Earl of
Richmonds intelligencing friends, that the King had a purpose to marry the Lady
Elizabeth; which must prevent the Earl both of his hope to her, and to the
Crown by her Title: a clause that made them mutter very broadly against it (for
indeed, what more concerned them?) therefore the King treats it more privately
and coldly; but the Queen-widow and the Lady stood constant in their desires
and expectation; only the Objection was, The King had a wife; as though he
could not marry another whilst she lived; not remembering how usual it was, not
only for Kings, but private men to put away one wife and marry another, for
venial crimes, as well as Adultery and Treason.

The Romans might repudiate their wives, for conversing with men that were not
of their l^inred, and for going to see Plays and Cirque Spectacles (their
husbands not being with them) or if the wife were unquiet or cursed of her
tongue, etc. Henry the Eighth put away Queen Katharine of Castile, and Queen
Anne of Cleve; the one, because she was too old and cold for pleasure; the
other, because she was not fruitful or wanton enough. Sometimes men have put
away their wives for being Sluts, for having unsavory breaths, or some
infectious disease, without a necessity of taking away their lives; and it was
lawful for either of them to marry when they would.

Pope Clement the Seventh so ratified the Divorce of King Henry the Eighth
against Katherine of Castile, as he defied all Laws (Divine and Humane) that
should contradict and impugn his Power and Dispensation, in these words:

Non obstante Iure Divino nec Humano, nec quibuscunque Constitutionibus Bulla
Papae Clementis 5. apud D. To. Cotton.
repugnantibus, aut in contrarium Edictis.

There was a formal Bill or Libel of Separation prescribed by Moses, with the
manner of Divorces and Repudiations, in this tenor, as Andreas Osiander (who
translated it out of Hebrew Osiander in Annotation. in 4 Evang. Harmon. Evang.
into Latin) affirms: which for the rarity I have here transcribed. Die
tertia Hebdomadis, 29 die mensis Octobris, Anno ab orb condito, 4349.
EGo Ioachim cognominatus N. filius Nathanis, qui consisto hodie in urbe N. in
Regno N. Te. N. uxorem meam, cognominatam N. filiam N. quae fuisti uxor mea
ante hac nunc demisi, and liberavi, and repudiavi te tibi, ut sis tui juris and
domina animae tuae, and ad abeundum, ut ducaris abs quolibet viro, quem
volueris, and ne vir quisquam prohibeat, quo minus sis in manu tua, ito hoc die
and in aeternum. Et ecce, permissa es unicuique viro, and hic esto tibi a me
datus Libellus repudii, and Epistola dimissoria, and Instrumentum libertatis
juxta Legem Mosis and Israelis.



But the Answer which was made in the name of the King to the Lady Elizabeth
concerning his Queen, was, That she could be no impediment of long continuance,
being a very weak woman in a Consumption, and past hopes of recovery; her
Physicians giving their opinions, she could not live past the middle of
February next following: nor ghessed they much amiss; for the died in the next
month, March. When the midst and last of February was past, the Lady Elizabeth
being more impatient and jealous of the success then every one knew or
conceived, writes The credit of the Duke of Norfolk with King Richard, and with
the lady Elizabeth; and her Letter to him.
a Letter to the Duke of Norfolk, intimating first, that he was the man in whom
she most affied, in respect of that love her Father had ever bore him, etc.
Then she congratulates his many courtesies, in continuance of which, she
desires him to be a mediator for her to the King, in the behalf of the Marriage
propounded between them, who, as she wrote, was her only joy and maker in this
world, and that she was his in heart and thought: withal insinuating, that the
better part of February was past, and that she feared the Queen would never die.

All these be her own words, written with her own hand; and this is the sum of
her Letter, which remains in the Autograph, or Original Draft, under her own
hand, in the magnificent Cabinet of Thomas Earl of Arundel and Surrey: by which
it may be observed, that this young Lady was ignorant that a man having a The
Cabinet of the Earl of Arundel, now Earl of Surrey too.
wife living, might marry another, and suffer her to live. But the truth is,
the King had no real intent to make her his wife, from the beginning; only in
policy entertained this Treaty, as it appeared afterward, when his Queen was
dead, and he had all fit accesses without any impediment to marry her, yet did
not; professing he wooed her not to that end, but for some other causes; and
made Protestation (in the great Hall at Saint Jones near Smithfield, before all
the Knights of Malta, and a great Assembly of Noblemen; the Lord Mayor,
Aldermen, and many Citizens being present) that he had no purpose nor intent to
marry the Lady Elizabeth: avowing, Quodeares (viz.) Voluntas contrahendi
Chronicle of Croyland.
Matrimonium: cum Consanguinea Germana sua nunquam ^i venerat in mentem: for so
it is testified by the Prior of Croyland. Yet it may not be denied, he
pretended love to her, and a proffer of Marriage; which he projected in policy,
to divert her affection from Richmond (whose party the King apprehended
privately wrought that way; of which the said Author thus says, Non Chronicle
of Croyland.
aliter videbat Richardus Rex regnum sibi confirmari, neque spem competitoris
sui aufferri posse, nisi in Matrimonio, cum dicta Elizabeth, contrahendo vel
simulando. And it is most likely the King had no other aim but merely of
Prevention: neither was there any cause (had he been so wicked) to do it by
blood, nor any The Queen died 11 March, 1484.
just reason to frame so hard an argument against him, being always so
affectionately inclined to his wife, that he was rather thought uxorious then
otherwise; which appeared unfeignedly at her death, in the expression of sorrow
and magnificent Exequies for her. Non eum immorte honor quam Reginam dicunt,
as Prior of Croyland.
the Prior of Croyland testifies. Let us look therefore with clearer
consideration upon the motion or pretense of this Marriage: to call it
detestable and cruel, is ignorant and malicious (though she were so near of kin
to him) for Marriages between Uncles and Neeces, have been very frequent and
allowed in other Countries by the Church. In our time, the daughter and heir of
Duke Infantasgo in Spain, was married to his brother Don Alde Mendoza: and more
lately, the Earl of Miranda married his brothers daughter.

In the House of Austria, Marriages in this kind have been very usual, and
thought lawful, the Pope dispensing with them: for they say in Spain, Que el
padre santo quiere Dios loquire: Therefore how could it be so highly unlawful
in King Richard? Or if his intents had been so forward, where was the Bar, when
his wife was dead, and he absolute, unless the Ladies averseness? But that
suggestion is answered by her own Letter, and other testimonies. So the Account
will be (if rightly summed by what has been produced) that he had never any
serious determination of Marriage; only took the advantage of his gain, by
looking into her hand; then no cause to make away his Queen; which his accusers
themselves directly and peremptorily charge him not with; Sir Tho. Moor.
Hollinshead.
but doubtfully say, The Queen (however it fortuned) departed out of this life
the 16 of March, in the Lent season. But although he had the commendations of a
loving and indulgent husband, I say not he lived always continently; for I
find he had some bastards, two of them I have mentioned: yet peradventure he
might have them before his Marriage, and then the fault was less. So then, let
them that affect not blind and traditory opinion, more then justice and
reason, but equally examine his slanders, they shall find, Malice and
ignorance have been the Kings greatest accusers, which can only lay Suspicion
to his charge: and Suspitio est opinio mali ex* levibus signis. B. Th. Aquinas.
Suspitio est actus per quem in dubitationem trahimur.
Suspicion in Law is no more guilt then Imagination: for, though Suspicion many
times lay a great blame upon a man (men holding him to be guilty whom men
suspect to be so, though injuriously) yet the Law holds it not a Crime, because
Suspicion many times supposes those to be culpable which are not: for an
Instrument may as easily be condemned, as a Malefactor, being an evil grown
from the error of men. Wherefore Suspicion of it self brings no sentence by
Law Natural or Moral, Civil or Divine, according to that of the old
Minographus, Suspitio grave est hominibus malum. And the Divine Chrysostom
says, A good man hardly suspecteth another to be evil; but an evil man
scarcely supposes any to be good; far from the counsel of this Epigram.
Culparem quoquam, quae non sunt nota malignum est;
Presertim si quam cognita sint bona sunt.
Non pateant faciles duris rumoribus aures
Quae nescire juvat, credere non libeat.
Linquantur secreta Deo, qui quicquid opertum est
Inspicit, and nullis indiget indicibus.
Accuse no man of faults to thee unknown,
And much less him from whom good fruits have grown:
Lend not thine ears to scandalous reports;
Believe not that, which known, naught thee imports.
Leave secret things to God, who knows all hearts,
And has no need of the Promoters arts. Meos tam suspicione quam crimine
judico carere oportere. Suet. in vita J. Gaes.



But as Julius Caesar (who had many excellent Observations) was wont to say,
Vir bonus tam suspicione quam crimine carere oportet: That a good man must be
as well without suspicion as crime. Yet none so innocent, but may fall under
the lash of the malicious; for such, like the Polypus, will take any color, or
make any tincture of a Crime, to serve their ends. Of such a virtue is the
never-understanding Vulgar, that like Kytes and Daws can digest naught but
stench and filth; their Ignorance being their Faith, and that drawn from loose
Pamphlets, and the vomits of mercinary and mimick pens; to which, and their
uncurable fits, I leave them.

Explicit Liber quartus.
THE FIFTH BOOK OF THE HISTORY OF KING RICHARD the Third.
The Contents.
WHat a Tyrant is, and how a Tyrant and King Richard differ. The destruction of
the Plantagenets. The daughters of King Edward the Fourth, how bestowed. The
death of the Queen their Mother. The Virtues of King Richard the Third. The
Elogie of the three Brothers, King Edward the Fourth, George and Richard. The
Magnificent, Public and Charitable Buildings of King Richard the third. His
good Laws, and other good works. That to die in the Wars, is no Dishonor, but
an Honor. Arts Regiae Crimen regale. His Comparison with other Kings
accounted good. King James his gracious demeanor to his Cousins. A Character
and Elogie of King Richard the third. The title of the Norman Race and of York
defended. The sundry titles of King James. The Wedding King of England. Lapis
Regno fatalis. King Richards Sepulcher and Epitaph. The Authors Scope;
Peroratio and Votum.
THE FIFTH BOOK OF King Richard The Third.
WE will next endeavor to understand that Vocable, What a Tyrant is.
or term Tyrannus (that is, a Tyrant, or an evil King) cast upon King Richard;
which indeed comprehends all scandals and impieties whatsoever.

Tyrannus est qui suis propriis Commodis studet, Aristot. in Ethic. idem.
and publicis adversatur. And, Tyrannus est qui dominatu crudeliter abutitur.

A Tyrant is by another wise man compared to a Dragon, who becomes not a
Dragon, until he has devoured many Serpents: of which Conceit this Epigram was
wittily framed. Post plures Coluber Serpents Dracosit esos,
Gust at a humana carne fit homo Lupus.
The Dragon which does many Serpents eat,
Becomes a Dragon of huge shape and strength,
And so the man which makes his flesh man's meat,
Transformed is unto a Wolf at length.


Another Philopher differs not much from these, who says, Bias apud Plut.
Libell. de adulat. c. 37.
that of all tame beasts, the flatterer is most pernicious; and of all wild,
the Tyrant, who forbeareth not for any respect of good or ill, but studies
Oppressions, Wrongs, Exactions, Robberies, Sacriledges, Bloodshed, Murder,
Adultery, Incest, Rape, Riot, Gluttony, Luxuriousness, Prodigality, and all
manner of Excesses: These be his arts of reigning, and these be his virtues.
Invident Tyranni claris fortesque trucidant.
Lucan.


Another says, Tyrannus miserum vetat perire, foelicem jubet.
Seneca. H^r^ules. F^^^^^. Demosthines.


So it was truly said by the famous Orator of Athens: Liberalitas Tyranni
nihil aliud est quam translatio pecun^arum a justis Dominis, ad alienos idque
indignos.

His thirst and covetousness, for his largitious riots and lusts, are so
inordinate, that nothing can quench it. Non Tartessiaris illum satiaret arenis
Claudian in R^ss.

Tempestas pretiosa Tagi, non stagna rubentis,
Aurea Pactoli, totumque exhauserit Hermum,
Arde bit majore siti, etc. Iuvenal Satyr 4.

Quicquid conspicuum pulchrumque ex Equore toto,
Res sisci est, etc.


These may serve for the notions of a Tyrant: to any of which Impieties, our
King Richard was very little or not at all obnoxious.

For first, Whereas a Tyrant imposes many grievous Taxes Parliam An. 1 Rich. 3.
and Oppressions upon his Subjects, he took away such grievances, and
particularly by Act of Parliament, a hateful Tax (though disguised with the
name of a Benevolence) forbearing to impose The Duke of ^uckingham said, that
the name of Benevolence, as it was taken in the time of K. Edw. 4, signified,
that every man should pay not what he of his own good will list, but what the
King of his good will list ^o take. Duke Buck apud T^o^am Moor.
any upon the people.

Then, A Tyrant does not only rapine his Subjects, but spoils and robs
Churches and Churchmen. But King Richard did many good things both for the
public good, advancing Gods service, and maintenance of his Ministers and
Churchmen.

Tyrannum pium esse non est facile (as Sophocles well observed.) And the Oracle
pronounced, Portae foelicitatis ad Tyrannidem clausae. Tyrants be cruel and
bloody: but this King, by the testimony of his enemies, was very merciful and
mild; who confess he was of himself gentle, and assably disposed. These be
their own words.

Therefore, where tyrannical acts be objected against him, they must be
conceived done by other men, or by their practice, or else before he was King;
and what he did then, was not, nor could be properly called Tyranny.

Amongst those they impute to him when he was King, which are called Tyrannies,
the beheading Henry Stafford Duke of Buckingham was the chiefest: yet that act,
the cause and just motives of it being well perused, cannot be censured
Tyranny; rather, due and necessary Justice: for if the King had not put down
the Duke, the Duke would have put down the King.

Then it is objected, He bare a tyrannical hand over his nephew Edward Earl of
Warwick. True it is, he sent him to Shery-Hutton, a goodly and pleasant house
of his own, in Yorkshire, where he had liberty, large diet, all pleasure and
safety; and if that were imprisonment, it was a prison Curtoise (as John
Froisard says) yet this must not be less then Tyranny, according to the style
of Sir Thomas Moore. When King Henry the Seventh, as soon as he had got the
Crown, sent this young Prince to the Tower, afterward cut off his head; yet
that was no Tyranny, after Sir Thomas Moore. But our King James (of ever happy
memory) Comes Arund. vi. voce.
has thought it an act of so much detestation, that particularly he protested
against it, and showed another temper of Justice and Power in his Royal
Clemency, to certain Noble persons King James.
in one of his Kingdoms, who being Regal Titulars, and pretending title to the
Crown there (as descended from some King of that Country) his gracious and
pious inclination was so far from seeking their ruin (or so much as the
restraining them) that he suffered their liberty, with possession of what they
had.

Then they call the punishment of Jane Shore a Tyranny: A Jane Shore.
common and notorious Adulteress (as the Duke of Buckingham, who knew her very
well, censured her) which she deserved so justly, that it was rather
favorable, then severe or tyrannous.

Next, the death of William Collingborn is made one of his Anonimus Iuris
peritus in Apologia K. R. 3.
Tyrannies; who (as some trivial Romancers say) was hanged for making a
Satirical Rhyme; when the truth is, he had committed Treason, and was arraigned
and condemned of High Treason, as may be yet seen in the Record; and then it
was Justice, and not Tyranny.

Another proof against their gross Paralogisms, take from this observation
made by Demosthenes: Tyrannus res est inimica Civibus, legibus contraria. But
King Richard was ever* indulgent to his people, careful to have the Laws duly
observed; his making so many good ones, being an evident argument of his love
to Law and Justice. It is further observed, that Tyrants contemn good counsel,
are opinionated of their own wisedoms, and obstinate to determine all matters
by themselves.

These Plaintiffs being called by the Greeks (...), that is, Axiom. polit. cap.
219.
self-Councellors, who say they are natura plerumque occulti and insidiosi, and
Art, and Astu, ea Tagere, and dissimulare conantur, quae agunt, non
communicantes quicquid de suis Conciliis, aut rebus cum aliis, nec ab aliis
Concilium petentes, neque admittentes, sed tantum Sententia Arabica.
sua Concilia sequuntur.

Also Erasmus has this Axiom: Nullo Concilio quicquam magnae rei aggredi,
tyrannicum est.

But King Richard nor did nor would do any thing of importance, without
consultation with the wisest and noblest. And if in any matters he had
delivered his judgment, yet his manner (as his detractors confess) was, to
say in the end and conclusion, My Lords, this is my mind; if any of you know
what may else be better, I shall be ready to change it: for I am not wedded to
my own will. Thus Sir Thomas Moor.

Eastly, Largition and excessive expenses, are thought vices proper to Tyrants;
the rather, because the Roman Tyrants, for Caligula spent 230 millions of
Crowns in less then a year. Nero said that there was no use of money but for
^iots and prodigal expenses.
their extreme excesses, were called Monstra and prodigia, and lues Imperii,
pes^es reipublicae, etc. As Caligula, Nero, Vitellius, Domitian, Commodus,
Heliogabolus, Caracalla, etc.

King Kichard was ever held to be frugal, with the preservation of his honor;
nor can they tax him with Palliardise, Luxury, Epicurism, nor Gluttony, vices
following many Tyrants; but moderate and temperate in all his actions and
appetites; which is confessed, and therefore needs no further proof. Indeed
it had been advantage and safety to him, in the event, if he had been a Tyrant
a while; for then he might have preserved his life and kingdom, and given a
timely check to the practice of Bishop Morton, the Marquess Dorset, Earl of
Devon, and his King Richard in this was like Julius Caesar, who knowing by
certain intelligence the conspiracy and conspirators against his life, also the
time and place of execution, yet he seemed to slight and not regard it. King
Richards virtues.
brother the Bishop, the Lord Talbot, the Lord Stanley, and his brother Sir
William Stanley, with the Countess of Richmond his wife, and the rest. But his
remissness and patience bred his ruin, not his tyranny; that had been his
protection.

And now the black curtain of malice and detraction is drawn, let us see this
King in his proper Royalty and virtues casting up the general and particular
notions of A good King and happy Government; then peruse what was wanting in
him.

First then, There is necessarily required proper to Empire, Wisdom, Justice,
Fortitude, Beauty, Magnificence, Temperance, and Piety.

That he had Wisdom and Prudence, need no other witness, then his wise and
provident managing both of his own private affairs, and Government of the
Public. Also in the Military actions, in which he was tried, both as a
Subject, and a King; his adversaries can allow him to be a wise, prudent,
politic and heroical Justice Shelly commends the Laws of K. R. 3. to Card*
Wolsey. Vide Ioh. Stow in H. 8. page 882. Chronic. M. S. in quarto, apud D.
Rob. Cotton.
Prince; his Wisdom appearing, with his Justice, very clearly in the good Laws
he made; acknowledged and honorably predicated by our Reverend and most
learned Professors of the Laws.

For his further knowledge and love of Justice, there can be no fairer
argument, then his desire and custom to sit in Courts of Justice, hearing and
distributing Justice indifferently to all men.

And when he made his Progress into Yorkshire, being informed there of some
extortioners and foul offenders, who were apprehended, not tried, he caused the
Law to take the just current, giving strict charge and commandment to all
Officers of Justice, for just administration to all men, without partiality or
private respects.

The Fortitude and Magnanimity of this Prince (though of low stature) were so
great and famous, as they need no Trumpet or Praecony, being bred from his
youth in Martial actions: and the Battles of Barnet, Exham, Doncaster, the
second of St Albans, and of Tewksbury, will give him the reputation of a
Soldier and Captain.

Being made General of the Kings Armies into Scotland, he prevailed happily in
his Expedition, and particularly recovered that famous and strong Hold of
Berwick, which King Henry the Sixth had so weakly let go.

And in this you shall hear the Elogie of one that was loath to speak much in
his favor, yet occasion forced him to speak his Sir Tho. Moor. Doctor Morton.
knowledge, though coldly and sparingly. King Richard was no ill Captain in the
War: he had sundry Victories, and sometimes Overthrows; but never by his own
default, for want of hardiness or politic order. Whereunto he adds
concerning his Bounty; Free was he called of dispense, and liberal somewhat
above his power. To which I will add one Elogie more, above all for Credit and
Authority, recorded in an Act of Parliament, and addressed to him in the name
of the whole high Court of Parliament, in these words. We consider your great
Wit, Prudence, Justice, and Courage; Parl^anno R. 3.
and we know by experience the memorable and laudable acts done by you in
several Battles for the salvation and defense of this Realm.

Here follows another general and memorable testimony of him, and of more
regard and honor, because it is averred by one that knew him from his youth,
the Duke of Buckingham, who (after Richard was made King, and this Duke became
ill affected) acknowledged to Bishop Morton in private speeches between Morton.
Moor apud Stow, p. 774.
them, That he thought King Richard, from his first knowledge even to that
time, a man clean without dissimulation, tractable, and without injury; and
that for these respects, he was very desirous to advance him, and labored
earnestly to make him Protector. Therefore whatsoever the Duke said after, in
reproach of the King, it may justly be thought to proceed from spleen and
malice.

There is to this the commendation of his Eloquence and pleasing speech; which
though no Regal virtue, yet it is an ornament Eloquentia Principibus maxim est
ornamento. Cic. de finibus, l. 4.
to the greatest Princes, and commendable. The Prior of Croyland repeating the
dispute of a Controversy between the two brothers, George Duke of Clarence,
and this Richard of Gloucester, at the Councel-Table, before the King their
brother, sitting in his Chair of State, relates it thus:

Post suscitatas, inter Duces fratres, discordias, tot utrinque rations
acutissimae allegatae sunt in presentia Regis (sedentis pro Tribunali in Camera
Concilii) quod omnes circumstantes, etiam periti Legum eam orationis
abundantiam ipsis principibus in suis propriis causis adesse mirabantur, etc.
Then speaking of the excellent wits, extraordinary knowledge and gifts of these
three brothers, makes The praise of the three princely brothers.
this honorable Praecony: Hitres Germani, Rex, and duo Duces, tam excellenti
ingenio valebant, ut si discordare non voluissent suniculus ille triplex
difficilime rumperetur.

Let us look upon his charitable, religious and magnificent The good works of
King Richard. John Stow, Annal.
works.

He founded a Collegiate Church of Priests in Middleham in Yorkshire; another
College of Priests in London in Towerstreet, near to the Church called Our
Lady Berking. He built a Church or Chapel in Towton in Gloucester-shire; a
Monument of his thankfulness to Almighty God, for the happy and great Victory
his brother had upon the partisans of the family of Lancaster, and the sons of
Henry the Sixth, who before slew Richard Duke of York, King designate, and
father of these two Kings.

He founded a College in York, convenient for the entertainment Polidor, lib.
^5.
of an hundred Priests.

He disforrested a great part of the Forest of Wich-wood, and Richard loved
not Wichwood for his brothers unhappie Marriage.
other vast Woods between Woodstock and Bristow, for the good and benefit of
the people of Oxfordshire and the places adjacent.

He built the high stone Tower at Westminster (which at this day is a work of
good use.) And when he had repaired and fortified the Castle of Carlisle, he
founded and built the Castle of Penrith in Cumberland.

He manumissed many Bondmen.

For the better encouragement of the Easterling-hanses (their In Rot. in domo
Conversorum, A^. 1 R. 3.
Trade being beneficial and profitable to this Kingdom) he granted them some
good Privileges, as Polidor writes.

He also first founded the College and Society of Heralds, and Charles the
Great instituted the College and Society of Armorists, calling them Heralds of
Ehr and Halten, (Dutch or Franchish words) and not of Heroes.
made them a Corporation: and (as the words in the Charter are) he ordained it,
Vt sint in perpetuum Corpus Corporatum in re and nomine, habeant successionem
perpetuam, etc. (A taste of his love to Honor, and his Noble care for the
conservation of Nobility, Chevalry and Gentry.) Which Corporation, this King
established by his Royal Charter; and placed the Heralds in an ancient fair
house, which was called Yorkime, sometimes; after commonly Cole-harbour,
situate upon the Thames: ordaining Four Kings at Arms, by the names and Titles
of John Writh, Garter; Thomas Holme, Clarentius; John Moore, Norway; and
Richard Champney, Gloucester.

For Wales, I have seen the Charter wherewith the King created first Richard
Champney Esquire, King at Arms, by the Title and name of Gloucester, dated Anno
1 R. 3. at Westminster, in the month of March, when the Charter of the
Foundation was granted.

He further established, That these four Kings at Arms, and the rest of the
Heralds, who are in the Charter called Heraldi and Prosecutores sive
Pursevandi, should lodge, live and common together, in that house, where the
Rolls, Monuments and Writings (appertaining to the Office and Art of Heraldry
and Armory) should be kept; giving also Lands and Tenements for the perpetual
maintaining of a Chaplain or Chantry Priest, to say and sing Service every day,
and to pray for the King, Queen and Prince, and for their souls when they were
dead.

Lastly, he gave sundry good Privileges and Immunities to the said
Corporation: which Charter was kept continually in the Office until within
these few years; but now is in another place: the want of it imports nothing,
being the Duplicate is upon Record in the Archives, kept in the Convert-house,
now called the Rolls. It was confirmed by the Parliament, and dated 20 die
Martii, anno regni primo, apud Westmonasterium, Baron: and underneath was
written, Per Breve de privato Sigillo, de datu predicto, autoritati Parliamenti.

He also built or repaired some part of the Tower of London toward the Thames:
in memory whereof, there be yet his arms impaled with those of the Queen his
wife, standing upon the Arch adjoining to the Sluce-gate.

He began many other good works, which his sudden fate prevented; as Polidor
thus witnesses.

Richardus Tertius multa opera publica and privata inchoavit, quae immatura
morte praereptus non perfecit. Which works and monuments of Piety show not the
acts of a Tyrant. Polidor Virgil, being neither Yorkist nor Lancastrian, speaks
much in commendation of his pious and charitable disposition; to which I refer
the Readers, and put it to their indifferent judgments, How many of those
called Good Kings, have exceeded him in their longer and prosperous time, being
in quiet possession too of their Crown and Kingdoms? Let me add for a
Corollary, what that of the worthy Prelate Archebald Quhitlaw (chief Secretary,
and a Privy Councellor of Scotland) in his Oration, when he was one of the
Commissioners for a conclusion of a Peace and Marriage between Prince James,
eldest son to the King of Scotland, and the Lady Anne, daughter to John de la
Pool: from whence I have collected these. Serenissime Princeps,
Una me res consolatur, and juvat, tua (scil.) in omni virtutis genere
celeberrimafama per omnem Orbis terrarum ambitum disseminata, tuae etiam*
innatae benignitatis clarissima praestansque humanitas, tua mansuetudo,
liberalitas, sides, summa justitia, incredibilis animi magnitudo, tua non
humana, sed pene divina sapientia, te non modo singulis facilem, verum vulgo
and popularibus affabilem Pacem and uxorem neptem. Regis petit.
praebes and quibus virtntibus altaque prudentia cuncta and pronunciata and
dicta in meliora commutas. Serenissimus Princeps Rex Scotorum, Dominus meus,
qui te alto amore prosequitur, te desiderat, tuam, Amicitiam and Affinitatem
affectat, supra captum cogitationis meae; si quid a me erratum erit, tuis and
divinis virtutibus, quibus Commercium cum Coelestibus numinibus and societatem
contraxeris, tribuendum putato.

Faciem tuam summo Imperio and Principatu dignam inspicit, quam Richardus suit
Statura parva.
moralis and Heroica virtus illustrat, de te dici praedicarique potest quod
Thebanorum Principi inclytissimo statui Poeta his verbis attribuit.

Nunquam tantum animum natura minori corpore, nec tantas visa est includere
vires. Major in exiguo regnabat corpore virtus. In te enim sunt rei militaris,
virtus, peritia, foelicitas, and autoritas, quae omnia in optimo exercitus
principe Cicero requirit.

In te (Serenissime Princeps) praeclari Regis and Imperatoris praecepta it a
concurrunt, ut nihil ad tuam Bellicam, aut domesticam virtutem cujusquam
oratoris verbis apponi possit.

Tu igitur (Serenissime Domine and Princeps) de ineunda inter te and nostrum
Principem charitate and amicitia, sic age, ut Angli and Scoti dilectionis
respectu nullum penitus discrimen habeatur, sed in unum amoris and
benevolentiae vinculum videantur esse connexi, sic numerabiles commoditates ex
tui, and nostri populi dilectione, dulci connubio, unione, Matrimonio, and
Affinitate consurgent. In freta dum fluvii current, dum montibus umbrae
Lustrabunt, connexa polus dum sidera pascet.
Dum juga montis aper, fluvios dum piscis amabit,
Dumque Thymo pascentur apes, dum rore cicadae,
Semper honos nomenque tuum, laudesque manebunt.




But what is this, or more, to malice and detraction, that haunt him to his
death; and after that, making the Catastrophe, or last Tragical act of his life
at Bosworth-field, an immediate stroke of the divine vengeance, for such
offenses as they please to particular from women or superstitious Clerks, whose
natures startle To be slain in War, is no evil or unhappie death.
at the noise of War and Martial trial, to whose fears and weakness, such
reasons would sound tolerable. But if Bishop Morton and Sir Thomas Moor
(although they were men of the long Robe) had considered with whom they
conversed, and where they most lived; how could they forget, That to die
valiantly in the field, for Country, life and friends, was always held a
glorious farewell to the world; or what infinite numbers of virtuous and most
noble Captains have fallen so by the Sword and fate of War.

Lampridius affirms, that all the best men have died violent Optimes quosque
violenta morte consumptos esse affirmat. Lam. Alexander.
deaths: and what higher Quarrel could call any Heroical spirit, then King
Richard's, fighting for a Crown, kingdom, and all his happy Fortunes here. God
has many times taken away Princes, and changed the Government of kingdoms for
the iniquities of the people; why then should not King Richard's fate be held
in a modest Scale, until we can better know or judge it? Nor can it be safe to
enquire, or peremptorily to determine further after Gods proceedings in such
cases. He that owes him no malice (things looked upon through judgment and
charity) may with more justice say he died valiantly, and in a just quarrel,
when many of his enemies fell by deaths more vile, and shameful Executions.

But he that has but a reasonable pittance of Humanity, will King Richard was
slain, Aug. 22. 1493. when he had reigned 2 years and 5 months, accounting his
Protectorship; and about the 37th year of his age. King Henry 1.
censure no man's life by the manner of his death: for many good and holy men
have suffered by violent deaths; though it be this Princes fortune to fall
under the ill affections of envious pens, more then many that committed more
public and proved crimes then he, which wanted much of his virtues and desert.

Examine him with Henry the First, the good Clerk, and learned Prince, but so
covetous and ambitious, that he could not be content to usurp in this Kingdom
the Right and Primogeniture of his elder brother, Robert Courthose; but by
force took the Dukedom of Normandy from him: and to make his injuries more
exact and monstrous, cast him into the Castle of Gloucester, there kept him in
cruel durance, and caused his eyes to be put out; so wearied him to most
miserable death.

King John, by the general voice, is charged with the murder of King John.
Arthur Plantagenet the son of his eldest brother, and so the next Prince in
right of blood to King Richard the First.

And it is written by good Authors, that Edward the Third was King Edw. 3.
not only privy and consenting to the deposing the King his father (a King
anointed) but also to his Massacre. And because Edward Plantagenet Earl of
Kent, Protector, and his Uncle, moved him to restore the Crown to his father
Edward the Second, he called him Traitor, and cut off his head at Westminster.

How King Henry the Fourth caused King Richard the Second King Hen. 4.
(the true and anointed King) to be cruelly butchered at Pomfret, is too
notorious: and this was Scelera sceleribus tueri.

King Edward the Fourth is accused of the murder and death of King Edw. 4.
Seneca de Clementia.
the King Saint Henry, and of Edward Prince of Wales his son. ( Ut supra.)

King Henry the Seventh (although amongst the best Kings in King Hen. 7.
his general character) is not thought guiltless of that Crimen sacrum vel
regale, in cutting off Edward Plantagenet Earl of Warwick, an innocent.

Edwardum, filium Ducis Clarenciae, puerum and infantem, in suam, Gul. Campden
in Britan. and Corn.
and suorum securitatem capite plexit.

And to secure his Estate, had more then learnt other smart rules of Policy.
That reach of State upon Philip of Austrich, Duke of Burgundy, King of Castile
and Arragon, is not the least memorable.

This Prince Philip was by cross Fortune put into the Kings Grafton.
Hollinshead.
hands: purposing out of Flanders to go into Spain, with the Queen his wife,
took shipping at Sluice, and passing by the coasts of England, was by a tempest
forced for his safety to put into the Port of Weymouth in Dorset-shire: the
Queen being ill, and distempered much with the storm, was compelled to make
some stay there.

Sir John Carew, and Sir Thomas Trenchard (principal men in those parts) gave
speedy intelligence of this to the King, who was glad of the accident, and
purposed to make good use of it, as speedily returning his command to give them
all honorable entertainment; but not suffer them to depart, until he had seen
and saluted them.

The Duke ignorant of this, as soon as the Queen and the rest had recovered and
refresht themselves, thought he was only to give those Knights thanks, and
take his leave; which they by way of courtesy and request interpose, in behalf
of the Kings vehement desire to salute him and the Queen: a motion the Duke
much pressed to be excused from, as the necessity of his journey stood: but the
entreaty was so imperious, he must stay, and alter his journey for Windsor, to
meet the King, who received him there in a magnificent manner; and at the
height of a Feast, propounds a suit to the Duke for Edmund de la Pool (then in
his Dominions) a pretender to the Crown of England, and not so soundly affected
to him: a suit of a harsh exposition, as the Duke apprehended it, and to the
blemish of his honor and piety, as he nobly urged: but no argument had virtue,
nor no virtue argument enough to excuse it; the King must have him, or the Duke
must stay. Cast upon this extreme (and foreseeing what disadvantages were upon
him, some honorable conditions granted, that he should neither lay punishment
nor death upon him) he gave his promise to send him, and the King strictly and
religiously bound himself to the exceptions.

The Duke accordingly sent this de la Pool into England; who upon his arrival
was delivered to the Tower; but his life not touched until the King lay a dying;
then he equivocated his Vow by a Mental Reservation, enjoining his son after
his death to cut off his head; which was done when he came to be King, and was
held some taint to them both; though the son held himself acquit and warranted
by the example of King Solomon, who was made the instrument of such another
subtle slaughter by his father David, that thought he kept himself by
equivocation: examples not to be imitated by any Christian Prince, being a sin;
and sins are to be avoided, not imitated.

The eldest brother of these de la Pools, John de la Pool, heir to the Duke of
Suffolk, and Head of this Family, was slain casually at the Battle of Stoke;
and is he who, as nearest kinsman to King Richard the Third, was proclaimed
heir apparent. The sister of these Princely de la Pools, the Lady Katherine,
was kept close prisoner in the Tower, until grief and sorrow bowed her to the
grave.

Nor is it much from our purpose to note, that the chief Plantagenets, Grafton.
namely, the children of King Edward the Fourth, had but cold influences then:
for the Lady Bridget was thrust into a Nunnery at Dartford, chiefly (as it was
thought) that she should live sterile, and die without issue. The Lady Cecily
was Polidor. lib. 4.
married to a base fellow, that so her issue might be ignoble and contemptible;
the wrong being the greater, in regard she was offered Matches to her quality;
the King of Scotland propounding Prince James unto her; and the French King
Lewis demanded her for the Dolphin Charles of France.

It was observed too, that this King was but an unkind and Although the Lady
Anne and the Lady Katherine were well married, that may not be alleged here;
for they were bestowed in the time of Rich. 3. the one to the Lord Haward,
after Duke of Norfolk, the other to the Earl of Devon. Robert Glover. Joel,
cap. 1.
severe husband to his Queen (indeed:) they had all but short lives; and our
Stories report he picked a quarrel with the Queen-Dowager-Mother, for an old
and venial error, because she delivered her son Richard to the Protector; for
which there was a Confiscation upon all her Goods, Chattels and Revenues, and
she confined to Bermondsey Abbey, where she lived not long, care and grief
untwisting the thread of her sad fate. And when death had seized him from all
the glories and policies of this world, his son succeeds; and then, Residuum
Locustae, Bruchus comedit; and residuum Bruchi comedit Rubigo: for, what
remained of the House of York, he gave the last blow to; and after the
dispatch of the aforesaid Edmund de la Pool, caused the Lady Margaret
Plantagenet Countess of Salisbury, then daughter and heir of George Duke of
Clarence, to be attainted of Treason by Act of Parliament, and condemned
unheard, being dragged to the Block barbarously by the hair of her head, though
above Threescore years in age, Anno 33 Henr. 8. Not long after, Sir Dominus
Ioh. Baro. Lumley, viva voce.
Henry Pool her eldest son was put to death, and her son Reynold Pool was
attainted of Treason with her (no man knowing what the Treason was) but got
suddenly out of the Kingdom into Italy, where he became much favored by the
Princes there, and by the Popes afterward made Cardinal, and highly renowned)
in those times) for his Learning, Piety and other noble merits. Richard Pool,
another son of the Countess of Salisbury, fled, and lived a banished man in
foreign Countries; yet at the height of a good reputation, until he was slain
at the Battle of Pavia.

These be sad pauses, which my Pen but touches at, to note the Partiality of
some on one side, and the malignity of some on the other side, who have made
King Richard the worst of all Princes; when other of our own, have had as great
an appetite of Empire, whose fames and sacred names we gratulate with honor.

Nor let my just and plain meaning be mistaken, which urges nothing in dislike
or exprobation that King Henry the Seventh had the Crown, whom our age must
acknowledge a wise, provident and religious Prince, The restorer of the ancient
Line of the British Kings to their Reign and Kingdom, Nephew of King Henry the
Sixth by his Grandmother Queen Katherine, widow of King Henry the Fifth, and
mother of King Henry the Sixth, and of his brother Uterine Edmund Teudor Earl
of Richmond, the father of this King Henry the Seventh; and so he was Nephew
also to Charles the Seventh King of France. I only conceive he took it by too
violent a hand, not staying tempus been placiti.

And here I may fitly take occasion to make up a Defect or Brack covertly
imputed to the Titles of the Normans, and Princes of York, by our vulgar
Historians and Chroniclers.

And first, we are to suppose, If there be, it grew by the error The sundry
great Titles of our King to the Crown of England.
of King Edwards Marriage, by which they hold that Title was weakened (at the
least blemished) but that could have no continuance, being made sound again as
soon as King Richard came to reign, and after cured and confirmed by the mighty
power of sundry Parliaments, by which it was made as strong and firm as ever;
besides the aid of the Dispensations Apostolical (in those times sacred and
authentic.) And without that (if need were) our King now reigning has other
Royal Rights* more then funiculusi Triplex; some more ancient, authentic and
just, therefore more secured, and of more prosperous hopes then that Norman
Title, which was a violent acquest of the Sword, and a purchase made by blood,
so consequently none of the best; which was well conceived by that great
Macedon, when he said, Alex. apud Curt^um, lib. 8.
Non est diuturna possessio in quam gladio inducimus. Neither would it avail in
this behalf to cite or avouch the Donation of this Kingdom, which the Confessor
is said to have made to William the Conqueror, being to no purpose, because
that gift or Legacy was disclaimed and disallowed by the Barons of this Land,
and found to be void.

Yet time now, and prescription, have also made that Title good: for
prescription has power to ratify and confirm the Titles both of Princes and
of private men.

But our King is the immediate and sole lawful Heir of King Egbert (who first
gave the name of England to this Land, and was absolute Lord of it) from him,
by the glorious Kings, Edgar, Edmund, Athelstan, Alfred, and many others, as
well Saxons and Angles, as Anglo-Saxons, the Right and Title of this Kingdom is
duly descended and devolved to Edmund Ironside King of England, who was father
to the most Noble Clyto, Edward Clyto, that is, A Prince of the blood.
surnamed Exul, whose fair daughter and heir (a religious Lady) the Princess
Margaret of England, was married to Malcom Canmoire King of Scotland; from
which ancient and happy Alliance, the King our Sovereign Lord is directly and
certainly descended, and is the true and only Heir to the Rights and Titles
which were without flaw; so the most ancient and famous Title, and Right of the
first Kings of Britain are in him, being the next Heir of our last British King
Henry Teudor, wose Genealogy I have seen derived from the antique Kings of
Britain, and from diverse other British Princes. And this Henry Teudor (or the
Seventh) to confirm all the Titles of this Kingdom unto his claim, by the
strongest and greatest authority, procured them decreed to him and to his issue
(so established in himself and his posterity for ever) by Act of Parliament, in
this manner and words. TO the Pleasure of Almighty God, and for the Anno 1. H.
7. in Parliament in November.
Wealth, and Prosperity, and Surety of this Realm of England, to the singular
Comfort of all the Subjects of the same, and for avoiding all Ambiguities and
Questions:

Be it Ordained, Established and Enacted by the Authority of this present
Parliament, That the Inheritance of the Crown of the Realm of England, and also
of France, with all the Pre-eminencies and Dignities Royal to the same
appertaining, and all Liegances to the King belonging beyond the Seas, with the
appurtenances thereunto in any wise due or appertaining, To be, rest, remain
and abide in the most Royal person of our Sovereign Lord King Henry the
Seventh, and in the Heirs of his body lawfully coming perpetually, with the
Grace of God, and so to endure, and in no other.



Which is also another Title to our King, Heir to Henry the Seventh.

And this Act was renewed and firmly established, for our Sovereign Lord King
James, Anno regni primo.

Yet King Henry the Seventh obtained of the Pope another Title, Iure Belli.

All which Titles and Rights (which ever were appertaining to this Kingdom, and
to the Empire of Britain) are coalesced and met in our Sovereign King; for he
has not only the claims of the ancient Kings of Britain, of the Saxons, and
Anglo-Saxons Kings, and of the Norman Race; but also the Titles and Rights of
the Royal Families of York, of Lancaster, and of Wales, etc.

And (no^ as the least, in reference with these) he has in possession also,
those singular and particular Monuments of Empire and Reign by some called Fata
Regni, and Instrumenta The wedding Ring of England.
and Monumenta Regno, and Imperio destinata.

One being the Ring of the accounted holy King Edward, the son of King
Etheldred, which was consecrated and extraordinarily Edwardus Elthelredus
d'Rivallis.
blessed by Saint John Baptist in Palestine, and sent back by the King (as old
Writers tell) which has been religiously kept in the Abbey of Westminster, and
is (as Tradition goes) the Ring which the Archbishop of Canterbury at the
Inauguration and Consecration of the Kings, puts upon their finger; called in
our Stories, The Wedding Ring of England.

The other Monument of the British Empire, is the Marblestone whereupon Jacob
laid his head, when he had those caelestial The fatal ^tone.
and mystical Visions mentioned in holy Writ; which stone was brought out of
Palestine into Ireland, and from thence carried into Scotland by King Keneth;
after translated to the City of Scone, and used for the Chair wherein the Kings
sat at their Coronation; brought out of Scotland by Edward the First into
England, as the best Historians of Scotland and England relate. Cathedram
Marmoream Regibus Scotorum fatalem (in qua insidentes Scotorum Reges Coronare
consueverant.) Hector, Boethius lib. 4. Et Geo. Buchan Gul. Cambden.


Rex Edwardus primus e Scona Londinum transtulit, and in Westmonasterio (ubi
hodie visitur) deposuit.



It is set or born in a Chair of Wood, and for a perpetual honor (upon a
Table hanging in the Chapel at Westminster) this is writ: -- Si quid habet
ueri vel Chronica cana, sidesve
Clauditu hac Cathedra, Nobilis ille lapis,
-- Ad caput, eximius Jacob quondam Patriarcha,
Quem posuit cernens numina mirifica;
Quem tulit a Scotis Edwardus primus, etc.


George Buchanus says, The people are seriously persuaded that in this stone
(which he calls Lapidem Marmoreum rudem) the state of the kingdom is
contained, and that fatum Regni is In hoc lapide fatum regni Scotiae
continetur. Geor. Buchan.
thus understood; viz. What King of Scotland soever is Lord of that Stone, and
Soveraignly possessed thereof, shall be King and reign in the Country where he
finds that stone: thus told in a prophetical Distich. Ni fallat fatum, Scotus
quocunque locatum
Inveniet lapidem, regnare tenetur ibidem.


Which Prophecy was accomplished in King James, when he Scotus primus Rex
Scotie, ut Anglus Gallus Hispannus etc. pro Rex Angliae Galliae Hispan. etc.
came first into England: for his Titles were not only funiculus triplex qui
difficile rumpitur; but also funiculus multiplex qui nunquam rumpitur. And may
those Titles for ever be established in his Loins, according to that of the
heavenly Messenger, Regnum perpetuum. and cujus non est finis. Amen.

Thus I have led you through the various Relations, and Tragical Interchanges of
this Princes Life, to his last act and place, where, after Revenge and Rage had
satiated their barbarous cruelties upon his dead body) they gave his Royal
earth a bed of earth, honorably, appointed by the Order of King Henry the
Seventh, in the chief Church of Leicester, called Saint Mary's, belonging to
the Order and Society of the Gray Friars; the King in short time after causing
a fair Tomb of mingled colored Marble, adorned with his Statue, to be erected
thereupon, to which some grateful pen had also destined an Epitaph, the Copy
whereof (never fixtto his stone) I have seen in a recorded Manuscript-Book
chained to a Table in a Chamber in the Guild Hall of London: which (the faults
and corruptions being amended) is thus represented, together with the Title
thereunto prefixed as I found it.

October. 9. 1646.
Imprimatur,

Na: Brent.

TO give you him in his equal Draught and Composition: He was of a mean or low
compact, but without disproportio^ and uneveness either in lineaments or parts
(as his several Pictures present him.) His aspect had most of the Soldier in
it; so his natural inclination (Complexions not uncertainely expounding our
Dispositions) but what wants of the Cour^-Planet, effeminate Censurers think
must needs be harsh and crabbed (and Envy will pick quarrels with an hair,
rather then want Subject.) The Judgment and Courage of his Sword-actions,
rendered him of a full Honor and Experience, which Fortune gratified with many
Victories; never any Overthrows through his own default, for lack of Valor Sir
Tho. Moor. Dake B^cking* in his speech to Mr. Morton.
or Policy. At Court, and in his general deportment, of an affable respect and
tractable cleernesse. In his dispense, of a magnificent liberal hand, somewhat
above his power (as Sir Tho. Moor sets down.) And surely the many Churches,
with other good works he founded, (more then any one former King did in so
short a time) must commend him charitable and religious, as the excellent Laws
he made, do his wisdom and strain of Government, which all men confess of the
best. So having (even from those his bitterest times) the esteem of a valiant,
wise, noble, charitable and religious Prince, why should ours deprave him so
much upon trust, and deny works their character and place?

EPITAPHIVM Regis Richardi tertii, Sepulti ad Leicestriam, jussu, and sumptibus
Sti Regis Henrici Septimi.
HIc ego, quem vario Tellus sub Marmore claudit,
Tertius a justa voce Richardus eram;
Tutor eram Patriae, Patrius pro jure Nepotis;
Dirupta, tenui regna Britanna, fide.
Sexaginta dies binis duntaxat ademptis Annos 2. and 51. dies.

AEtatesque, tulitunc mea Sceptra, duas.
Fortiter in Bello certans desertus ab Anglis,
Rex Henrice, tibi, septime, succubui
At sumptu, pius ipse, tuo, sic ossa dicaras,
Regem olimque facis Regis honor Coli.
Quatuor exceptis jam tantum, quinque bis annis Anno Dominie 1484.

Acta trecenta quidem, lustra salutis erant,
Antique Septembris undena luce Kalendas, Die 21. Aug.

Redideram rubrae jura petita Rosae.
At mea, quisquis eris, propter commissa precarem
Sit Minor ut precibus poena levata tuis.
Deo O. M. Trino and Uno, sit laus and gloria aeterna.
AMEN.
EPIGRAMMA In Richardos Angliae Reges, ex vet. lib. M. S. transcriptum.
TRes sunt Richardi quorum fortuna erat aequa,
In tribus aescariis sua cujus propria sors est,
Nam Concors horum finis sine posteritate
Corporis, atque rapax vitae modus, and violentus
Interitus fuerat; sed major gloria primi,
Praelia terrarum qui gesserat and redeuntem
Tela Balistarum feriunt apud extera regna.
Alter depositus regno, qui carcere Clausus,
Mensibus extiterat certis, fame velle perire
Elegit potius, quam famae probra videre.
Tertius exbausto statim amplo divitiarum
Edwardi cumulo, proscribens auxiliares
Henrici parts, post annos denique binos
Suscepti regni, Bello confectus eisdem
Mundanam vitam, tum perdidit atque Coronam:
Anno milleno; Centum quater octuageno,
Adjunctis quinque, and cum lux Sextilis adest
Vndena duplex, dentes apri stupuerunt,
Et vindex albae Rosa Rubra refloret in orb.
FINIS.
A Table of the Heads contained in this BOOK.
A.
AMbition and Covetuousnesse, the cause of unnatural fends, murders, and
infinite other mischiefs. Example, page 5. 12, 13, 14. 35, 36. 98, 99. 104.
141. etc. Ambassador of Scotland his speech to K. Richard 3. p. 139. 140.
Angel, Guardian. Genius. p. 106. Ann de la Poole, a Nun. 35. Anjou Fulke,
Earl of Anjou, son of Geofrey Grisegonnelle; p. 4. his purjury and murder of
his Nephew Drogo. ib. his pilgrimage to the holy Sepulcher, his penance. ib.
his great and famous posterity. p. 6, 7. Arms of France assumed by Ed. 3. p.
47. Arms of the ancient Earls of Anjou page 47. Arms of bastards
differenced, 46. Arrogation of royal rights, 45. Arts Imperij and rules of
policy in ancient times not warrantable, p. 14. Ancesters, or Antecestoures,
the duty and respect we owe unto their memories, p. 69. Ambitious minds easily
flattered, 35. a sower sweet, p. 30.
B.
BArrons of England their great privilege, 118. Bastards, what they are, 44.
cannot inherit, p. 45. not bear their fathers name or arms, 46. without
special indulgence, p. 48. Take the mothers name, 46. 47. The ancient custom
of England and France herein, ib. Great families descended from bastards. p.
66. may be capeable of offices and dignities, 48. Battle of Bosworth, 60. 61.
Baynard Castle London, formerly York house, p. 20. Beauforts, natural
children of John of Gaunt, so called from a town in Anjou, 45. not permitted
to the title of Lancas. ib. A charter of their legitimation, 48. 49.
Benevolence, the meaning of that word in Edw. 4. his time, 133. in Margin.
Barwick, recovered by the English. 10. Bucking* an ancient famly, 67. how
desended, etc. 68. of the name, ib. Buckingham, Henry Stafford D. of Buck. his
speech to the Lord protector, 20. 22. His revolt and rebellion, 34. his
pretended title to the Crown, 35. retires and sides with Richmond, 36, his
forces are scattered, himself betrayed and beheaded, 37. D. of Britain chose
Knight of the Garter, 18.
C.
CHarter of Henry 4. entailing the Crown to his 4. sons successively, 50.
Camp-fight, or single combats between Princes and Generals, and grounds of
it, 62. Catarhe, to dye of a Catarhe, what it means in France. 123. Censure
and censuring, 63. K. Charles our most Gracious and dear sovereign Lord; his
just, undoubted right, his many great and ancient titles to the Imperial
Crown of England, 144, 145, 146. Clarence, G. D. of Clarence, rebels against
his Brother Edward 4. is taken and beheaded, 82, 83. Clergy, pride of Popish
Clergy, 53. Comeliness of personage adds a grace to virtue, 42. Comes, or Count
two fold signification of it, 8. Constable-ship of England, joined to the
Earldom of Hereford, 34. Vice-Constable, a new and politic institution, 31.
A coppie of their Commission, ibid. Cole Harbor London, at first Heralds
Office, 138. Conqueror and Conquest, Licentious power of it, 54, 55. Titles by
conquest not safe nor lasting, 144. distasted of the people as tyranicall, 54.
Covetuonsness root of all evil, 5. etc. as in Ambition. Council and
Councellers, 51, 52. 55. 103 Counterfeit princes, many examples. p. 89.
Cowardice, Insolence over a conquered enemy a note of it, 61. Crown, little
pleasure in it, 21.
D.
DEath, the best men have dyed violent deaths, 140. To dye in battle a
glorious death, ibid. We must not a man's life, by the manner of his death,
141. Decree of God, not to be prevented, 63. Deformity of body, no blemish to
virtue, 80. Desires unlawful, always unsatiable, 5. 116. Detraction, v.
Slander. Dimock, Champion to K. Rich. 3. makes a challenge in defense of the
Kings title to the Crown, 27. Divorce of Wives, formerly usual upon slight
occasions, 127. Copy of a Bill of divorse in use among the Jews, 128. Dux and
Comes, Ducatus and Comitatus were formerly Synonomies. 4. Drogo, Young Earl of
Britain made away by his Uncle, 5.
E.
EDward 3. King of England his lineage, 4. thought privy and consenting to his
fathers deposition and ^assacre, 141. Edward Earl of March, obtaines the
Crown, 8. sends an army into Scotland to recover his tribute, 10. received
tribute of France, 29. much feared for his prowess, 19. His wantonness and
many loves, 115, 116. His witty Leman, 121. Had two wives at once, 116, 117.
Ill consequences of his last marriage, 118. His answer to his mother, 120.
Adjudged unlawful, and the children illegittimate. Parliam. Anno 1. Rich. 3.
p. 30. And refused by the Barons and Commons as incapeable of rule. 20. 22. His
daughters mean fortunes, 143. His death supposed by treachery, 11. by poison,
102. 123. Appointed his brother Ric. D. of Gloucester protector, 11 Edward 5.
conveyed with an honorable conduct from Ludlow to London 11. reports of his
death diverse, but uncertain, 83, 84. most probable that he died of sickness
and infirmity, 85. Edward, Prince of Wales son of Hen. 6. Murdered, 81. 141.
Edw. Prince of Wales son of R. 3. dyed to the great grief of the K. and Q* 44.
Elianor Talbott, alias Butler, married to Edw. fourth 116. her wrongs and
death, 122. Elizabeth Gray, her witty strengths against K. Edwards amorous
assaults, 117. Is marrid to him privately in a lodge, 118. Is confined to an
Abbey by Hen. 7. and dies of grief, 143. Elizabeth, daughter of Ed. 4. desired
by her letter to marry with Richard 3. 128. 129. Elianor Talbot, alias Butler,
married to E. 4. 116. her wrongs and death, 122. Escape what the offense is.
100.
F.
FAulcon Serrure, a French devise of obseen signification, 115. Faulconbridge a
famous Pyrate apprehended by a wile, 9. Flattery and Flatterers, 52. 133. 78.
Fortune inconstant, 41. Virtuous Master of her, 57. Fortitude, a notable
example in Rio. 3. 59. 60. 61. Friends and friendship, 52 best known in
adversity, Ib. French King pays a tribute of 75000. crowns to K. Edw. 4. and
rich pensions to diverse Noble men. 29.
G.
GAston de Foix K. of Navarr, 19. Gray, Woodvile, and others of the Reginists
executed at Pomfret for treachery, 13, Gloucester City rewarded by Rich. 3. for
their loyalty, 28. G^mot, what it is, 125. Genius or Angel Guardian, 106.
H.
HAstings his affection to Edw. 4. his children, 13. Is betrayed and executed
in the Tower, ibid. Henry 2. K. of England, his great descent and spacious
Empire, 4. his penance for Tho Beckets death, 5. Surnamed du Court Mantea, and
why, 4. Henry 4. King of England, caused his sovereign Rich. 2. anointed King
to be Murdered, 14. Entailes the Crown to his heirs, 50. Henry 6. K. of
England, not murdered by Rich. 3. but dyed a natural death of grief and
melancholy, 80, 81. Henry Te^dor Earl of Richm. borne in Pembrooke castle, 16.
His noble descent, 144, 145. by his mother, 50. by his Grandmother and Father,
Ib. His escape into France, 16. And there detained prisoner, 17, 18, 19. His
various and doubtful fortunes. Ib. and 43. 57. Is attainted of high Treason,
30. A description of his Person and qualities, 42, 58. 144. A wise, provident,
a religious Prince, 58. 144. Lays claim to the Crown of England, 17. Made
good by marriage, 53. And the Popes Bull, 55. And act of Parliament, 145. His
title de jure belli, or of conquest confirmed by the Pope, and distasted by the
Barons, 54, 55. Invades England with ill success, 43. His 2. invasion by aid
of the French, 56, 57. 59. Overthrowes K. R. 3. at Redmore heath, and is
crowned by the name of Henry 7th. 62. His vow at the high Altar in Vannes, 42.
Is very covetous, 88. too partial and credulous, 51. Unkind and severe to his
Wife, 143. And to the Wife and Children of Edw. 4. Ib. His pretense against the
Ea: of Warwick, 105. 141. And Perk. Warbeck alias Rich. Plantag. 95. His breach
of promise, 93. He feared 3. men specially, Ib. His reach upon the Duke of
Burgundy, 142. His charge to his son upon his deathbed, ib. Henry the first,
K. of England, surnamed Beauclerke, 16. Or the good Clerk. His ambition and
covetousness, 141. cruelty to his elder Brother, ib. Heralds, whence the name
derived, 138. a College of Heralds founded by R. 3. ibid. Herbertus,
Chamberlain to W. Rufus and Ancestor to the Herberts of Pemb. and Mountgom.
and founder of that name, 16. Historians, their great partiality, 134, 135.
143. The errors of vulgar Historians, 41. Howards, their great Nobility,
alliance and descent: from Hewardus or Herewardus; the story of him, 66.
signification of the name, ib. and of Hawardus, 67. Tho: Howard Barl of Surrey,
escapes Bosworth field, 64. A notable speech of his showing his integrity,
ibid. Is advanced by Henry 7. ib. Triumphator Scotorum, 67. Sir Charles Howard,
Lord Admiral in 88. His noble fame, 67.
I.
James the 4th King of Scotland, denies his tribute to England, 10. An army is
sent to recover it, ib. But a Truce concluded, ibid. James the 5th. of
Scotland, challenges Thomas Earl of Arundel in Camp fight. 62. James King of
Great Britain, his Noble elemency to some regal Titulars, 135. Jane Shore,
King Edw. 4. his Concubine, 115. 135. Jerusalem a barren soil, 6. Imperial
Ensigns of England, and their signification, 26. Ingratitude, ex. 59, 60. John,
King of England, charged with the murder of his Nephew, 141.
K.
KAtherin, wife of Sir Otho Swinford, Mother of the Beauforts, 44. Kings have
their bounds, 29. Their prerogatives in Judgments and Controversies, 54. Cannot
commit high Treason, 63. May not marry their Subjects, 119. A King deposed for
so doing, ib. Kings and kingdoms in Gods disposing, 63. changed by him and
why, 140. Two evils especially the overthrow of Kings and kingdoms, 103. To
kill an Anointed King a sacrilegious offense, p. 80. Knights and Lords created,
25.
L.
LAncaster and Beaufort how they differ, 30. 44. 47. Legitimation. What the
Popes legitimation is, and what the Princes, 47, 48. Liars need of good
memories, 84. Lancaster escheated to Edward 4. 35. 47. Don Duart de Lancastro,
45. Laws, good Laws made by R. 3.* Laws against Bastards, 48. Loyalty, a rare
example, 64.
M.
MArgaret Plantag. daughter of Geo. Duke of Clarence put to dearh, 143 Matilda
or Maud the Empress, daughter and heir of H. 1. 4. Anglor Dom. ibid. Malice,
malicious, 130. Height of malice, 75. Marble stone, or fatal stone, prophecy
of it, 146. Brought out of Scotland into England by Edward the 1. And placed at
Westminster, ib. The stone that Jacob laid his head upon, ib. Marriage not
lawful between those that have lived in adultery, 45. Between Uncles and
Nieces frequent in other Countries, 129. Monasteries suppressed with the true
cause of it, 77. Monuments of the British Empir^, 146 Sir Thomas Moore a great
enemy of R. 3. 76. Came short of the learning is ascribed to him, dyed
scoffing, ib. Lord Chancellor of Eng. 77. And a sworn vassal to the Pope, 76.
Morton Bishop of Ely a subtle man. 15. A great enemy of K. R. 3. ib. and 75,
76, 77. A temporizer, 52. His extreme pride and covetousness, 53. Lord
Chancellor of Eng. 77.
N.
NAmes taken from Offices, and other occasions, 5, 6, 66. Nandick, a conjurer.
Parl. 1. H. 7. Natural Father, natural sons and daughters, why so called! --
Natural daughters may take the surname of France, 46. Nobleness of nature,
Examp. 61. etc.
O.
OFficers of State, 25. 32. Oxford, John de Vene Earl of Ox. fevere against
nicknamed Perkin Warb: 105. he gave sentence of death against the innocent Earl
of Warwick, ib. Strange dissipation of a mighty estate, ib. Oppression: many
examples of it, 99. 141. and pastime, alibi.
P.
PArasites, the nature of them, p. 27. 78. Parliaments, their power and
authority, 124. From whence the word is derived, ib. A Court of great
antiquity, 125. Called by the Saxons Witengemot, the meeting of wise men, ibid.
The honor and obedience due unto them, 126. Parl. 1. R. 3. Many good Laws
enacted. Pater, matter, parents, or parents, words of larger signification,
among other Nations then among us, 69. Perkin Warbeck his story, 84. Confirmed
by many noble and learned men, 100, 101. Philip Duke of Burgundy, K. of
Castile, driven by a storm with his Qu: upon the coast of England, 141, 142.
His entertainment, ib. Plantaganest, or Plantagenet: original occasion of that
name, 4, 5. borne by the Earls of Anjou, ib. Grows into contempt, 46. Geoffery
Plantagenet Earl of Anjou a Courtly Prince, 4. Married Maud the Empress, ib.
Who was first founder of that name in England, 45. Poole, Edmund de la Poole
commanded to be put to death by H. 7. contrary to his promise, 142. Katherine
de la Poole dyed in prison, ib. Sir H. de la Pool put to death, ib. All of the
house of York. Reynold Poole after Cardinal, fled beyond Sea, ib. John de la
Pool Ea. of Lincoln, proclaimed heir apparent to the Crown of England, 44.
Popes, their power anciently very great, 124. Limited by Canonists, 47. Cannot
legitimate Bastards to inherit, ib. That belongs only to the Magistrate, 48.
Their intolerable pride, 53. Dispense with incestuous marriages, 55. Their
dispensations held sacred, 144. Popes Bull, 55. Their proud defiance to all
Laws divine and humane, 1^8. Prescription, power of it, 144. Prince, formerly a
title of Sovereign power, but now restrained, 49, 50. Prince of Wales, Son
to H. 6. barbarously murdered at Tewksbury, 81. Rich. 3. clear of it, ib.
Prophecy of a Hermit, concerning de Vere Earl of Oxford; the occasion and
event of it, 105. Providence, Divine providence works by conrtary means, 43.
Cannot be prevented, 63.
Q.
QUeen Mother, and Dowager of Ed. 4. reconciled to R. 3. 29. Confined to an
Abbey, and dies of grief, 143. Quithlaw, Commissioner for the K. of Scots, an
eloquent man, 33. 139, 140.
R.
Rack and torture, use of it condemned, 94, 95. and reasons, ib. Restitution
of ill-gotten goods, a hard and rare thing, 43. 99. Resolution a notable
example in Rich. 3. 59, 60. Riot, and riotous Princes, 139. Richard 3. King of
England, his great and Noble descent, page. 3. Time and place of his birth, p.
7. Brought up at Utricht in Holland, p. 8. Is Knighted, created Du: of Glost.
and marries the Princess Dowager of Wales, ibid. and 81. His wisdom, courage
and constancy to his brother, 9. makes a prosperous expedition into Scot. 10,
11 and is made protector, ib. His care of his Nephews, and duty to the young
K. in hope Edw. 5. ib. Is elected K. by the Lords and Commons in Parliam. 20.
22. Is crowned with his Queen, and anointed with great Magnificence, 24, 25,
26. Received at York in great honor and crowned the 2 time. ib. His title
conferred, 30. Is cleared from the death of his Nephews, 21, 22, 23. 31. 84,
85, 86. 101. 102, 103, 104, 106, 107. Of his brother Clarence 82. Of H. 6. and
Prince Edw. his son, 81 82 of his own wife, 107. 129. and from the slander
raised upon his mother and brother, 82, 83. Was no Tyrant, 78. his mildness,
his ruin, 61. 136 His great magnificence, wisdom, and justice, 8, 9. 12. 15.
27. 28. His many eminent virtues, 136, 137, 138. His pious works, 138, 139.
His virtues maliciously depraved, 78. The partiality of his accusers, 130. 135.
His defamations examined and answered, 75, 76, 77, 78, 79. His description and
commendation, 148. Was not deformed. His politic woing the L. Eliza. his
Niece, 126, 127. 129. His treaties with foreign princes, 32. 33. 34. His
noble valor at Bosworth field Wears the Crown Royal and why, 59. 60, 61.
Invites Rich. to a single combat. ib. Is slain and barbarously mangled, 62. Is
buried at Leicester under a fair Marble, 147. His Epitaph, 149. attainted of
high treason with his followers, 126. Is compared with other Kings of England.
141. Three Richards Kings of England compared, an Epigram upon them, 150.
Rowles, domus conversorum or house convertits, 139.
S.
SAnctuary, great privilege of i^, 19. 92, 93. Sebastian King of Portugal
escaped the battle of Alcazar, 97, 98. After long travel gets to Venice and is
known, ib. Is betrayed into the K. of Spains power, charged for a counterfeit,
and made away, 99. Slander and Slanderers, 77, 78. 103. Sotbriquets, nicknames
or sir-n^mes, examples, 5, 6. Somersets Earls of Worcester, from whom
descended, 47. Sorcery and witchcraft, diverse accused of, 102. Subjects, men
are Subjects to that Prin^ under whose protection they live, 105. Suspicion,
evil of it, 30. Note of an evil mind, ib. Honest mind nor suspicious, Ib.
T.
TAlbot. Elianor Talbot Widow of the Lord Butler, forsaken of Edward 4th. which
caused her death, 122. Teeth, many worthy men borne with teeth, 79. Traitor,
reward of Traitors, 37. 97: Treason and rebellion, their pretext, 34. Sovereign
Princes cannot commit Treason, 126. K. R. 3. attainted of Treason, but unduely,
ibid. Tyrant, what it signifies in the proper signification, 80. 133, 134.
Torture vid. Rack.
V.
Valor a notable example, 60, 61. Valiana minds hate treachery and bloody
acts, 81. Vanity and uncertainty of humane States, 36, 37. 59. Upstarts, 46.
W.
WAkefield battle, 7. War between England and Scotland, and the cause of it,
9, 10. 7. Warren, Earl of Surrey, 46. Warwick, Richard Nevil the great Earl of
Warwick, 117. Distasts K. Edw. 4. and takes up arms against him, 118. Edward
Earl of Warwick put to death, 96. Wedding King of England, 146. William
Conqueror his nobleness toward his dead enemy, 61. Woolsey the great
Cardinal, his just commendations, 78.
Y.
York. Edmond Plantagen. alias de Langley first Duke of York, 4. The Title of
that House to the Crown of England, 3. Richard Du: of York and Father of K. R.
3. designed King by H. 6. And the High Court of Parliament, 3. Crown entailed
to his Issue, 20. 51. Richard Duke of York, 2d son of Edw. 4. sent beyond sea,
and brought up privately at Warbecke in Planders, for fear of the faction of
Lancaster, 85, 87. Discovers himself, 88. Is acknowledged by the English
Nobility, ib. Favored of Foreign Princes, 90, 91. His various fortunes, 92.
Is proclaimed King, 92. Is taken and sent to the Tower, 93. His sufferings
there, 94. His offense forged, for which he is hanged at Tiburn, 95. Duchess
of York her speech to her Son King Edward 4. 119, 120. Cruelty showed to the
remainers of the House of York, 143. A final subversion of that house and
name, ibid.
An Explication of some dark words and Sentences.
SOtbriquets or Sobriquets; Nickenams, 4. Angeume, of or belonging to Anjou.
Natural son; i. a Bastard, also a natural Father. Rodomantade, p. 12. a brag
or bravado. Cloth of assuyance, 27. Towel or napkin that wait on the cup.
Contrast, withstanding or repugnance. Parergum, 32. Something added that is not
of the principal matter. Tort, 35. wrong, injury, and violence. Vmbrage or
Ombrage, 35. Suspicion, also disgrace. Disgust, 36. Distaste. Contrecar, 44. A
counter-strength, etc: Filij populi, 44. Bastards so called, being children of
common women, and in respect of the Father of uncertain Parentage. Ne Croix ny
Pile, 51. Neither cross nor pile, not one title or jot of right* etc.
Ambidexter, a Jack on both sides. Brother uterine, 51. (1) by the mothers side.
Abbayance. 53. In delay or dispute, such as Lawyers use, a term borrowed from
another creature. Apodixis, 60. Plain demonstration of a thing. Jnconcuss, that
cannot be shaken, undaunted. Bartlemies, 63. Meant of the great and general
massacre of above 100000. Protestants in France, chiefly in Paris, and the
Country adjoining on Saint Bartholmews Eve, Anno 72. whereupon St. Bartholmews
tears, Bartholomaeus flet, quia Gallicus occubat Atlas. Como sal in aqua, 105.
Is meant of sudden wasting. Monomachy, 62. When two sight single without
seconds. Cadet, 67. A younger brother. Guerdonable, worthy of reward, 75. Aneu,
45. An acknowledging, or taking for his own. Geus saus adneu, vagabonds, that
none will own so Bastards, are not admitted to their adneu (1) not
acknowledged by their Fathers. Rebus de Picardy, Devises and representations of
odd things by words and mottoes, which present one thing, and by deviding the
word, in pronunciation, signify another. Faulcon Serrure, An abscene French
device, and presents the use of Italian locks.
Authors quoted in this History.
AUgustine. Aristotle. Baleus. Boethius. Buchan. Cambden. Cicero. Cambrensis.
Claudian. Croyland. Pryor Comineus Cook Demosthines Dion. AEsopus. Euripides
Ennius Erasmus Epictetus Fabian Fuchius Froisard Grafton Glover Guinsford
Goodwin Du Hailon Hall Hollinshead Hyrd Dele-Hay Harding Hist. de Brit. Homer
Julius Capital Juvenall Justus Vulterius Lib. Manus^r. Apud D. Rob. Cotton.
Lampridius Lucan Maximus. Moore Monstrolet Newbrigensis Nyerus Ovid Osiander
Pliny Paradin Polidor virg. Plutarch Seneca Sarisburensis Stow Strabo Socrates
Stanford Suetonius De Serces Tacitus Terence Tillet Virgill Valla Walsingham
With many Parliament Roules and Records.

FINIS,

