A Prophetic Demonstration OF Many Remarkable Passages (Observed and Gathered
together) as they were FOUND IN A MANUSCRIPT ENTITLED, The Mystery of
Observable Predictions upon the Present State Of REYNELVS, and ROMULUS, OR, The
unridled Hyraglip of a She FOX Nurss'd by a She Wolf In a Style Answerable to
Miltons Heroic Verses on lost Paradise, Causes Discovering how Death first
contracted, Upon the Stage, stands where its part is Acted. The First Part of
Seasonable Cautions, etc. Now Published for public Benefit, Which being
Divided into Four CHAPTERS, Therein is Treated, the Matters Contained in the
following Table; having Relation (by the unridled Hyraglips,) To the Discovery
made of the Late POPISH PLOT.

LONDON, Printed by J. S. for R. B. in the Year, 1680.

A Table of the Contents.
CONCERNING I. All Changes come upon the Body of Nature, 2 ly. The Mystery of
the Golden Fleece 3 ly. The Enchanted Kingdom, and Dominion of the Draggon,
etc. 4 ly. The several Transformings of the Wolvish Nature.
Under some Weighty Considerations UPON. I. Eternity. 2 ly. The Creation of the
World. 3 ly. Paradise. 4 ly. What is most aptly and chiefly hince applyable,
unto the present State of New Rome.
She being built Nurssed up and maintained by the French Interest, in the same
manner, as Romulus (being Nurssed by a Wolf,) was the Builder of Old Rome.

The Preface, OR, EPISTLE TO THE READER,
READER,
FOrasmuch as the Ensuing Treatise, bareth an unusial style; it being a Comment
upon the Hyraglips of the Ancients, and those Poetical fixions, wherein has
been buried their knowledge of a Deaty; whom under diverse signeficant terms and
Charectors, do in effect confess the same things published, by that Holy and
worthy Prophet of GOD Moses: who it is believed did write our first four
Cannonical Books of Scriptures: [from Genises, to Joshua,] for this reason, we
give you to understand, first that by those many Names of the Power of God,
which is but one is lively displayed, the Virtue and Power of that One, upon
whom all Second Causes have their dependence.

And then because what is attributed to this one, who has variety of Names [to
make him so distinguishable, in his works] Secondly the use of those many
Names, are to let you understand; how by the variety of Opperations, in that
one Spirit, GOD did, has and will, effect the purpose of his decreed
resolutions, [to bring to pass all things, which by the Counsel of his will,
and wisdom, he Eternally Intended;] and therefore considering that the same
which those Poets, do call Ether, and Dies, Coelus, and Terra, Coelum, and
Vesta, etc. is intended by Moses, concerning the Generations of the Heavens,
and Earth, [wherein the Firmament and Day, were the two first separated
properties, of the work of GOD;] you by the same Rule, may trace a coherance
between the Writings of these the Poets, [or Prophets to the Gentiles] and
Moses, the Prophet of GOD, unto the Jews, [who then were accounted his only
People.]

Moreover Thirdly, concerning the Names of those Healthenish Gods and Godesses,
[Saturn, Jupiter, Neptune, Pluto, Juno, Venus, etc.] they being the Names of
certain Powers, properties and Virtues, of the Heavens, and Earth, attributed
unto Persons that in the Older Ages, of the world, might and did bare those
Names; as does also the Stars of that birth, [under which Each, has it
particular signification] you are to consult, that as by Saturn, TIME is
signified, so whatever is generated [in Time,] being the product of Saturn and
Ops, [signifying Natures Necessity of help in that work;] Occeanus also,
signifying the mighty deeps, or Abiss, upon which the darkness remained; while
the Earth was in its Chaos, [void of Form;] it does appear, that until the
Spirit of GOD, had breathed and did move, upon waters of the unformed world,
[in its first nothingness;] the Generations of Oceanus, which now are brought
forth of such Abiss, did nevertheless till the Spirit of Nature became separate
from its Heavens, [by the disjoyning of TIME from Eternity, lay hid in the
Chaos [of Terra.]

So that Fourthly, where any word or Term remains dubious; you are to proceed
unto that part, by which it is explained, and you will find such a coherence
in the whole, that shall give you to understand a prophetical Interpretation of
those Mistical Charactors, and Hyraglips of the Ancients, [under which
knowledge has been locked up from the more vulgar capacities] until this time,
come for every thing to be revealed and stand unsealed: the reason of which,
both why was locked up [in proverbical dark sayings and Sentences,] those
Mysteries now to be unridled; and also of the Time for its unsealing, every one
will come to read in themselves, [who are once come to find the key:] as also
why the Arms of Englands principality, are signified and represented by that
Noble Species, of a Lion [Rampant, Passant, Couchant, or Dormant;] and why by
the principality of France, is signified a Wolf, pawing on the Flower de Luce;
these with the Fox, Ape, Swan, Peacock, Goose, etc. being Heraglips that we
have seen: and of the reason of our application, have so much on our side, as
every one must be forced to confess unto the truth thereof, (that owns or
pretends to such reason;) unless while scrupeling whether or no Romulus was
nurss'd by a Wolf, they fall into a flat denial of New builded Rome, to be
nurssed and supported by the French power and Interest. But our endeavors are
Heartily for the Readers Benefit,

Who am Reader, in all Service of Love thine, Robert Bryan.

A PROLOGVE To the Ensuing TREATISE.
GODS Wisdom first found out away,
Foundations of all Worlds to Lay,
Upon a Cause more firmly fixed;
Then all the Seeds of Nature mixed,
In one Great Mass, the Chaos was,
Of matter unformed [by Natures Laws,]
Though we confess the Abiss was,
To every thing a Second Cause:
Of Form distinct to Natures Soul,
And every Orb, about does roll,
Of the Great Worlds Universe:
On whom GODS Power did Impress,
The Seal of Forms, that are distinct
Among themsels [as Causes linked,
Together in One Golden Chain,
Intelligable to remain.)
And this does draw about the whole,
Of all the parts, that have one Soul
Causing the End, with the beginning
To meet together [as one wining,
The Game and prize, at stake was laid,
In Natures womb, none can upbraid;]
Because Eternity did will,
A Cause Eternal to fulfill,
Those things which being brought about,
Are the Effects of what does sprout,
From Cause of Nature, in a Lump
In whom all Second Causes Jump;
According to purpose decreeing,
All Causes of Nature and being,
[As well unto the parts, as whole
Of matter and great worlds Soul.
CHAPTER, I.
Concerning all changes come or made upon and in the body of Nature, (subject
to the revolution of matter in time) under some weighty-Considerations upon
Eternity.

WHere what is past and flown, meets in that one
Whence causes present effects things to come,
Before and after are those parts of time,
Nature (in whom's pur forth the measuring Line)
By labor (in motion) strives to undermine;
Which to prevent Eternity contrived,
How all the Laws of Nature might be revived,
On a Foundation firmer then that of self;
(Which undermined, may be by Natures Elph:)
But Kingdom of self, thus undermined does cause,
Established (under the Draggons Jaws)
This new revive of Nature and her Laws. For
II.
Where Satan had made his Seat, those now do dwell,
Whom God will make witness against his hell;
(As nature renewed, unto her rights once lost:
Comes up adorned, with beauty of wisdoms cost:)
Thus Nature a subject was to a first cause,
Of being to the whole, and of those Laws,
Wherein the mind of God, (on her Impressed)
Had a commanding power to make all blessed?
Before was opened the Eternal Womb,
Of Seeds Eternal ( Eternally there Sown)
By an Eternal power thus Generating,
Causes of form (to all of Gods Creating.
III.
Before (we say) unsealed was that shut down
Under Eternal silence (without renown)
A hiden cause there was of all that is thence;
Awakened from Natures Womb, to compliance.
Which cause of form, was cause of births there strove,
According to a power each seed did move,
Where Lurked the cause why Man, from GOD was drove.
For matter of form, while closing with its cause,
Is subject unto natures willed form and laws.
Who like an Ass, is bended down between
Two burdens born, (while couchant she is seen;
Yiedling compliance, to all within the Scene.)
IV.
Unmanifest (as God) eternally,
That one (before and after all) was he;
Therefore what we Eternal Nature call,
Dwelling of God ( unmanifest the all)
Was the before and after cause adorned;
Willed manifest (in matter once unformed,)
Being to forms of Nature, from that cause
Of all in one Gold chain (so powerful draws;)
Where cause of self, as whole stands now divided,
Variety disclosing, the strif decided.
By Unity, in whom ( qualities distinct)
Are swallowed up in one the whole is linkt;
V.
But while shut up, were various opperations,
(In one Eternal Womb,) all seperations:
Of matter (willed by causes) did obey,
The seperating cause, without delay,
Thus causes in God (of Soul to Natures frame)
Was one creating cause, caused him supreme;
To be over those causes, had a dependence,
On will to separation, caused by attendance.
(Of Seeds unformed) occasion to Embrace,
They took (by opertunity to come in place,
Where births distinct, accordingly were formed,
From cause of self, as self now stands adorned.
VI.
From the Intelligable ( Ideas made separate)
Are causes of form (in Nature) uncreate,
In Nature, as seeds, Ideas thus were placed:
But Shaddowy (in matter) they form Embraced;
For in Gods mind was placed (in unity,)
Ideas of form that had Community,
With him the one of all, while uncreate
Was form to matter, he did separate;
According to causes distinguishable,
(Among themselves) from the Intelligable;
As such the Worlds Soul, that did admit
Variety of Seeds, so causing it.
VII.
But will of causes, Atracting forms distinct,
Was will unable, till quicknings there had linked,
(In one, that Golden Chain,) Nature complying
Caused will of one to be a cause denying,
Power otherways to causes, then they served
To magnify that cause, in whom reserved;
Was a reward of Justice, by equal measure,
Proportioning effects, to be the treasure,
Of will to all causes, made separate,
To serve that one, whose Power did Antidate;
All disobedience made by will Inthrawl'd,
Another Lord to serve, then truth Instawl'd:
VIII.
Thus changes in Nature had variety,
Of causes Subjecting unto vanity:
Not willingly (by God; who otherways
Subdued in hope our forms again to rise.
Throw all these changes, he suffering did will
Eternal Glory formed; that to fulfill,
Which our frail Natures wakened, by deaths sting
Unto his praise decreed about did bring;)
For he decreed effects to every cause,
Proportionable unto Natures Laws:
(As cause of whole, and consequent of parts,
Dependant upon one, whom causes thwarts.
IX.
Thus Thwart, as they are thwarted by decree,
(Of God that one; who holds Supremecy)
Did causes of hurt (by change) first operate,
Till God, had turned the course of Natures fate
Brought (through her changes) to a better State.
And hence all cause of various opperations,
Effects produces, as various in their Stations,
While we under the Moonlight walk of will,
Ordained to rule the changes; do fulfill
His purpose decreed, that then shall stand revealed,
(To be lights Fountain, when its Suns unsealed:)
Under whose righteous wings, Nations are healed.
X.
Mean time as Children of the day let us walk,
And not like Bats by Night, the Sun does bawk
Seeing a better State, God has ordained,
For those who by his Power have sin refrained,
And him does love, whom evil has restrained.
Changes must be, before our Resurrection
Completed is, to out live that Infection,
Which Death by 'ts sting, has made on Nature frail
While her comply did Misery Intail,
On us her Subjects, may the hurt bewayl:
But lets arise in Life, unchangable
And leave behind the form tangable.
XI.
For Act of causes, sinful comes of self
Where cause of Act, was willed by Natures Elph;
Who separated birth, is of that seed
Which sown in Natures Garden proved a weed;
For though to will, God being first did give
Which will of different seeds, came thence to live,
Yet will of self, no power had to Act,
Till change prevailed, to Natrulise wills Fact
Which self Intaild upon the will of Nature,
Not absolute, though free (in every Creature:)
Where causes of will, are linked all in one chain,
Draws after will Effects, caused to remain. And
XII.
Where change of mind, preceedent cause is made
Of change on bodies, to Glory (never shall fade,
Repentings are a needful change begun,
Till unto the unchangable, were come
Where united stands a body with that mind;
Which Glorified is, Glory to find.
Therefore though we in bodies vile, have dwelt
This change begun on Nature we have felt,
(As well as on our minds,) having a part
In the first Resurrection, where our heart,
With its affections, placed above are set,
On Heavenly things renewings does beget.
CHAP. II.
Concerning the Creation of the World, (in Nature) wherein stands represented,
the Mystery of the Golden Fleece, that was carried to Colchos.

WHen God the Word began first to Create,
The Earth being void of form was Nihils Seat,
While Darkness Oceanus over spread,
And on the face of Neptune Spirit sheed;
Which was a Power supreme, willed separation
Of light from darkness of his first Creation.
But while the Heavens and Earth, were thus Created
The Stage of Nothings form therein stated.
Fixation was required, while apt to fly
Was matter volatile, bove Natures Sky;
Gods Spirit therefore breathing on those waters,
Whose Face was the first beauty of all matters.
II.
A Firmament thus made, the Curtain was
Of Nature (forms) out-spread showing a cause,
Why unto Coelus and Terra; Ether and Dies
Parents were feigned under Natures Surprise,
As also how Nature surpised, (while Reigned,
The youngest Son of Coelus and Terra thus feigned?)
Both why and how (we say) became disjoined,
Such Coelus and Terra; from unity of mind,
And what were the three sorts of Children born,
Giants, Cyclopes and Tytans from Heaven torn;
(As Saturn the youngest race, of powers destructive
With crooked Since did cut off parts productive.)
III.
The cause (we say,) of all these things appears,
When once the Curtians drawn in Aethers Spears,
That he on dies formed, when separated
Was Light from Darkness, by what God Created;
To be the Heavens and Earth; (were void of form
While Oceanus covered as one unborn,)
Stood capable, of Heavens Impregnation,
On Vesta made the fruit of Gods Creation:)
For Vesta's praise, who thence received her light,
All then stood Clothed, with Coelums Nature bright,
Cause vayld the Temple was whence light appeared,
Made the outward Nature of all things be feared:
IV.
But till their Nature, by Earths heir was worn,
And outward pomp, was from Man's Heavens torn;
The outward Nature of all things did bare,
An Image formed in Gods own Heavenly Sphere,
Till Neptunes Brats (we say) were born, all stood
Capable of form from the Eternal good:
Good 'twas to him, thus to create them so,
While evil lurked (unformed) Men's mortal foe,
Proceeding whence took place the guilt of woe.
But his Decree hereby was brought about,
His Head to break that caused the reble rout,
Conspired by Death, whence all our evils sprout.
V.
'Twas Amphitrite, to whom stood first united,
Our powerful Neptune, (whom hell fiends thus spited,
Having contrived the way to frame desire,
Of Ewe to self (in kind and Sheeps first sire,
From Natures harmless dress and best Atire:)
Desire thus framed of One, in twains partake
The Tie in wedlock did fond Neptune brake:
For of Theophiness, Neptune soon grew fond
Who her in Ewe-skin clothed, Wolf to Abscond,
From near approach (because fear held the bond.)
While he her other Lovers had transformed,
Under the Wolf-like shape, they stood Adorned;
VI.
In Nature bliss and fortunes direct way,
All Laboring moved until thus went astray,
Subjects created one Lord to obey;
Before our Adam did his Nature stain,
To be this one, did Neptune strive amain,
And how to get the Fleece (did Gold remain.)
On fair Theophiness in such form of Ewe,
Who from such other Lovers amazed flew,
(That by Enchantment, Neptune Wolf-like formed
To fright his fair Theophiness, with shaps scorned;
In form of Ram (we say) Neptune begot,
The Golden Fleece, which of the Ram out shot;
VII.
Before the Ram of this his Fleece was shorn,
Or shape of Wolves, were thus brought under scorn,
On such the Ram, by whom was first begot,
The Golden Fleece of Neptune, (now lusts blot)
Phryxus to Colchos, Rod a journey hence,
Before the Golden Fleece, was carried thence,
To Colchos from this our Elesian shore,
The Ram carried our Gold to deck the whore;
When shorn and fleeced he came, (now does adore
The Beasts formed Image on a fleshly score,)
Because while wounded was one head of power,
Six others grew and spread, for man's devour.
VIII.
The Ram thus fleeced, as Phyxus then did Ride,
To carry Gold away over Neptunes tide:
Ceres dismayed was, to see transformed,
From Ram to Horse, (with crest and huffs adorned;
But yet prepared was there a Cave to hide,
Her from the shame and loss, that did betide
Her wandering fancy, after Proserpine
By Jupiter begot (in seeds of Time:)
Cause Jason entering in that open Cave,
Thence brought his Plutus out from Natures grave,
While Neptune on Ceres, venturing like attempt
From cause of shame, could not Ceres exempt.
IX.
For Daughter of Time, (in Saturn signified)
Was Ceres the Mother of Seed, that did abide
The loss of Proserpine (her Daughter) when,
She ranged in Natures field to gather in,
(To self) the Flowers thereof; until found ravished
Was she, by Pluto carried who time had lavished,
Amongst her Companions, (what Nature did then yield,
Wisdom, Beauty, and Wealth, to grace her Field,
While thus from her Companions (in her prime,
She Is snatched to hell, and there held a Rapine,)
To dwell Six Months with Pluto, as one famished,
Who thus from Venus, Juno, and Minerve, stood banished.
For what cause?
X.
Again to grace the World with Beauty new,
And show the Power of him, by whom then grew,
What she had gathered in, which did revive,
(Other Six Months,) upon the Earth to thrive;
A separated Seed of Natures Soil,
Made subject to bare the Fruit of Adams toil;
By fancy of his own that Love Imbrass'd;
Who his Theophiness was, on whom was placed,
That Virtue of his mind, in Nature graced;
Till Love turned Lust, was such a change in Man,
That Nature favored in the Cave of Pan,
Whence Ceres lighted Torches, (read who can.) -- What
XI.
Divided Species of the Draggon was,
Such Beast of prey the Wolf, that sets his paws,
Upon the Flower of Crowns, in Natures Sphere,
Where Subjects of that Crown, which Kings do ware,
Are Armed men Sprung up, in Natures soil,
Who against each other fight, for his prevail
Whose Teeth knocked out, by our Medeas hand,
Were Sown to make the World to understand,
How sleepy Death over powered the grim assays,
Against her was made (who Tract the Draggons ways,
Whom by no wit or Art, could then uphold
The Breach of tottering Walls (from fall foretold)
XII.
While Bulls with fiery Mouths, both huff'd and horned,
(With Ire of sparkling brass) Medea scorned,
Although they were a guard, to Apples fair
Which grew in Hespers Garden by such Air;
To grace his Orchard, with such Fruit of Time,
He holds in hell, for our Natures Rapine.
Thus was out charmed the Draggon of his prize,
When once the seed first sown again did rise,
Hurt to prevent of Natures open ties,
But how the Enemy did with mischief tange,
What thus became misplaced, to work such change,
If you will find out consult, in Natures range.
CHAP. III.
Concerning Paradise, and such the Draggon, Beast, and Whore under whose Power
and Dominion, (by their Enchantments,) put upon the same,) our Felecity (of
these Enjoyments; in a Life of Nature) has been lost, and the Golden Fleece
hence carried.

ONe was the Tree, (in midst of Garden placed,
Which also with the Tree of Life, was graced;
But senssed, though one; divided stood the form,
Of twain, who from that one, quickly was torn,
To reunite all causes of twins Born:
For (while thus one) the Fruit of both was senss'd;
And from that one, the Taster soon was fenss'd;
Where Glory of Paradise (in a better State,
Then that wherein Exsists, our love and hate,)
On wings of Angels fleed, to her new Seat.
Seeking redress for loss, she had sustained
By Death on Life, (where Adam first remained.
II.
Whence Death sprung up, in what was separated,
The twain of one (from whom Life thus retreated,
Toward the Center; wherein it was retained,
The Tree of Life, from lustful Eyes restrained.)
Cause thus the fence broke down, the Tree did yield
The Taster (pain for pleasure) in her field;
As Good and Evil, springing from that Tree;
Good Fruit did bare, but Evil unto we,
Did prove by Tasting, (as forbid to us,
Who disobeying fell under the curse:)
Of that which self procured (in Nature frayl,
Over whom the Enemy came, thus to prevail. For
III.
Watched over was the Tree, (such Fruit did bare
By the Old Serpent, and Enchanted were,
Both Fruit and Garden, where Pluto did feed,
His Queen of pleasure, who grasped flowers of Seed,
That Ravished was, by gathering such a prize,
Which coveted, now opens Natures Eyes,
To sense the Good and Evil of that Life,
Which she in hell must loose, to end the strife;
As he the Draggon (out charmed) his Art does loose,
By strength of Teeth to bite or to abuse,
The Power in Nature placed; which must arise
To Glory in such Draggons first surprise,
IV.
Dying to live, was then the way prepared,
Against the sting of Death, that all men feared.
While living to dye, Nature her course thus stear'd,
By Death to kill a Death, (in Life once cured,
All pangs on Life by Death easily endured.
Are unto those in whom Life's Crown Insur'd, But
How Nature from its Paradise, did sink
Into a lower station, where did link,
Causes together, of that Golden Chain;
Under whose drawing power does remain:
Subjects of her Dominions, now become
Vasels unto a Lord (for what was done,)
V.
How he the Draggon, thus came to prevail
Over Nature Subjects, and his sting Intaile,
On her posterity, by allowance took,
That Heavens suffering caused in her forsook;
By Angels of that Sphere, (their station kept,
Of Glory from Heaven revealed (where Adam sleept.)
The Mystery of which a secret was,
That Angels into prying became a cause;
Seals (while remaining on Gods Book) none can,
Unloose, until times come, that God in Man,
Has taught a World Misterys to understand;
Of whole to be fulfilled is now at hand.
VI.
In order unto which take Observation,
Of what befell the World in its first station,
Where Saturn (Angel of time) with his sharp Since,
Did separate what from Coelus, he did deprive
By Circumcise of parts, that Terra did catch;
When he by hand and Since, did thus dispatch
(Cause of Coelus's sufferings) to separate,
That which Blood of such wounds did Generate:
Forms of those Causes, from Coelus once disjoined
Their Mother Earth Imbrased, under like kind
Of a disjunction made twixt her and Coelus,
Against whom she did conspire, with Natures Bellows
What to do?
VII.
To blow up Natures Cole unto a fire,
Her Subjects could not quench, under the Ire
Of Instigated Saturn to unthrone,
His Father Coelus, when an Eunuch grown: For
From Heaven was then cast down, those monsterous shapes
Which were cut off by Saturn (as Coelu's escapes,
Until this time of Circumcision came;
Thereby made Circumventive to Coelus of blame,)
Whence Giants these sprung up Monstroufly formed,
With many Heads of beast, that was ten horned,
For unto Earth was cast, Members defiled,
No more to Generate in Heaven a Child,
VIII.
But then sufferings of Coelus from that cause,
Blood spilt and sown on Earth, against Natures Laws,
(Created vengance from the Throne of Power,
Retaliated on him who did devour,
(In cutting off those Members) his own race,
Whom when made vomit up did him displace,
From the usurped Seat, whence he disthron'd,
Of Members was deprived, and unbemoan'd
In his Exile, where none but Janus dared,
In Italy to harbor what was spared,
By Sword of Jove, (who Nourished was in Creet;)
And was confind where miseries do meet. How?
IX.
As into time was brought, hells hot desire,
Which did create Eternal flames of fire,
Those forms to destroy, which Nature gave
In Childhood to be nurss'd, toward their grave;
While open throat of Saturn down does swollow,
All principles to Blood, in whom did wallow,
Natures first birth, cast forth in open Field,
Vnswadled there, while none respect did yield,
Like to Celeus, (unto Saturns Daughter,)
Who took in Ceres, while she wandering after
Her Proserpine, whom ravished and led to hell,
From her was lost, (with Pluto constraind to dwell.) What?
X.
A Subject of Pluto, though in hell a Queen
She in Natures adorn, does sometimes seem;
While Plutus her Mothers Son by Jason hides,
The Gold that Ram, did carry over Neptunes tides,
Whom Horse begot (on Cerees;) did cause that shame;
She bares for Neptunes sake, where rests the blame
Of what she having let in, the first was lost
While second in Earth appeared hers, in third crossed
But Angel of Justice, Heavens did retain,
A thundering Jove (in Vesta did remain;)
Whom Saturn on Ops, did Generate to be,
Heavens restitution made of Liberty.
But do you Ask?
XI.
How from the fall of Lucifur did rise,
The Draggon unto Power for our surprise;
How Lucifur cast down, and under chain
Of Darkness there kept was so to remain,
Reserved unto the Judgment of a day,
By fire trys, what thus from God did stray?
And yet how loosed was such the Draggons power,
Who in all Ages labored to devour?
How he both loose and bound, at once could be
To serve Gods Justice, and himself go free;
How (while Christ in his suffering Saints did Reign,)
He vengeance could escape (from being slain?)
XII.
This all to Answer is a task too great,
For humane wit or Art (that may create,
More scruples then required it to explain;)
Because the Book thus sealed, must so remain.
Until the Time is come to stand revealed,
All Misterys (in Nature) to be unsealed: For
How bound [think ye] was he thus did prevail,
By such Viceroy [the Beast] over that Tail,
Made up of Heavens third part, that had been drawn
After the Draggon their head [on whom did fawn,
Slaves of his Dominion, Flattery did love,
From such his Tail, he after him did move.]
CHAP. IV.
Concerning the Kingdom, Power and Dominions of such the Draggon and Whore, in
and unto the Beast, delivered up [under several forms, he had Power to
transform himself into;] wherein by the appearance of the Wolf, [the Nurse of
Old Rome] is unridled a Prophetical Demonstration of a Mystery including, the
Power of France, [under the Kingly Dominion of a Wolf, pawing on the Flower
Deluce.]

NEptune with Triple Forck, thrust Triple Crown,
From Earth toward Natures Heavens, for her renown;
To whom by crook she drew its Glory down.
Who now grown whore, upon that Beast does ride,
That carried Phryxus over this Neptunes Tide;
Which Beast, (in the Lambs form) has Draggons voice:
And is the now grown Ram, of the whores choice,
That Life unto the Beast with wounded Head,
Recovered, by healing that once almost dead,
Unto which Beast the Draggon, gave up his power,
(With Seat and great Dominion to devour;
All those who were not sheltered in his Tower.
II.
And cause his wounded Head again was healed,
Unto and in his Image, Life stood revealed;
The Mystery of Power revived, [once was fast sealed.]
That he both Live and Spoke, did with a voice
Of a commanding power; with Natures choice,
Unto a shape, (with Monsterous Heads and horns;)
Wherein he worshipped was in several forms, For
With Seven Heads, (and horns Ten) came he,
On the Septentrion Angle where Waters be.
That fills the Sea, whence he came up to show
How out from thence being come, his power does grow,
Over those waters that do overflow.
III.
Those Waters many (whereon She does set,
Lady of pleasure, that does pain beget,)
Are Peoples, Tongues and Nations, over whom she rules,
(As Queen) who is that whore, the world befools:
On seven high Hills also, spread forth her Sat,
Did She who rides on him, whose horns shall hate,
That bloody City built on Mountains high,
Which plainly does the Beast, and Whore discry;
Who both when taken alive, with Draggon great
Are cast into the Lake fire uncreate,
Eternally prepared to be their fate,
That against God did presume (from such their sat,)
IV.
For while this Whore exalted was on him,
Whose frightfull and Monsterous form unto Men,
Fray'd first the Ewe Theophness, with Wolfs shape
(As things transformed, thus stood for her escape,
Who flying from the Wolf, while Ram prevailed,
Has on her shoulders, Eagles wings Entailed,
While thus (we say,) the Wolf Man was feared
He like a Wolf to Theophiness appeared:
Who now stands Clothed, the Ram that once was shorn
And is Enchanting Neptunes better form,
Whose Fleece again being grown, all men adore
The Rising Sun who once went down before.
V.
'Twas Romulus, that first began to build
The City called by's Name in Natures Field,
The Wolf that nurss'd him was Nature adorned,
In such a shape, that Neptune had transformed:
Lovers of Theophiness, as frightfull Beasts of prey,
They did appear the harmless Ewe to fray,
Which caused the flight (on Eagles wings) of she,
Our true Theophiness is, (Mother sets free;
Her seed and Children dear, from the Wolfs Ire
Who in his Stomach Nurss'd, brood of Hells fire,)
For what Romulus, thus built she Fox became,
Called Reynelus, thus Nurss'd (under Wolfs blame.) Of what?
VI.
Of nurssing him did build, a City great
Whom thus She Fox became, found in the cheat
Was (of her Mother Wolf; who sought advise,
From Reynelus, how they an Interprise,
Might bring about, to storm the Lions Den;
To whom Wolf Reynalds, sent (it to look in)
And view the State of Lion, how stood Guarded
The Palace of that Prince; and how warded,
Was Fort of Leo? and who there stood centry?
Or kept the Gates; through which he mak's his entry?
Fox taking leave of Wolf, his errand run
Having more craft then Wolf, (whose tale was done.)
VII.
And when to Lions Den come, in did peep
Who unto Wolf brought word, Lion did sleep,
Which did encourage Wolf to travel on,
Toward the Lions Fort, (as Fox had done;)
And thither coming without fear of danger,
Found Fox a liar, and no Forest Ranger:
For Wolf no sooner peeped in Lions Den,
But roused he stood to meet Wolf halfway in;
(While crafty Fox, fleed toward Henroost to hide,
Her self from danger, of the Wolfs betide,
Under whose paw, was left (Wolf who had nurss'd,
A City builder (she Fox became now curss'd,) So that
VIII.
Who plowed has with our Heifor may be bold,
That they this ridle, shall come to unfold;
Mean while consider, where the Wolf was left
And whether fleed the Fox Guilty of theft;
Who while to Goose does preach, on Goose does ride,
To whom she proves a grave, (the Goose does hide;
Therefore let Goose beware, while Fox does teach
Peacock a lesson ('against pride) he don't Impeach;
Goose for an Ape of France, and leave the Swan,
In his white plums to pride, read they that can
For now on Stage are brought, with their black feet,
Both Peacock, Swan, and Ape, whom Fox does greet, For what?
IX.
To hear a Sermon made, although the Text
She would not give, till Goose to her sat next,
Upon whose back she leapt, setting a stride
The prey she made (of Goose whom Fox does ride:)
For Hen-roost Fox was hunting, while she left
The Wolf to Lions paw, of power bereft,
(To help her self, thus fallen under paw,
Of Lion Rampant, keeps all Beasts in awe.) While
Necessity indeed of Justice was,
A Foster Mother, and a Second Cause,
(As Death awakend, Justice to Execute,
Made hungry grave, its power to prosecute.) What?
X.
Causes (in Nature) why thus has prevailed,
Death unto heirs, on whom it stands entailed, And
How needful 'twas, the Wolf should come they know,
Who are awakend 'against Deaths overthrow;
Till then the Wolf may paw, upon the flower,
(That is no meat with ease he can devour,
Whose stomach crav's to nourish deaths hungry power:
And feeds upon those bodies wherein Life,
Is cased remaining years, of Natures Strife,
Throw Death to live again Gods Loyal Wife.
11.
And thus her Sat, on whom the Change prevailed,
Over the Seed, to whom death stood entailed,
Is now seen Ram, by whom the wound was heald:
Of head on Monster Heaven has revealed
To be the form revived, for him to whom
The Draggon gave up his Seat, Power, and Throne;
So that you plainly now may see what rides,
And what unto the who such Beasts betides,
Him that has carried her who rules the form
On her begotten in a blustering storm:
(Carried once to Colchos in form of a Ram,
Phryxus that Rod over Neptunes Ocean.
12.
Through all transformings hitherto has appeared,
Unclothed the Wolf, that in a Ewe-skin feared
Self in a shape begot, by fire of Lust;
('Twixt twain) what is made a grave to hold the Just;
When crucified (by her, that was the Nurse
To Romulus the Sire of Natures curse:)
The form was held, (as Wolf then did afford
Her Nourishment of twain with one accord)
Who though she be thus inwardly a Wolf,
Yet stands in Sheeps-skin clad a greedy Gulf,
And swallowed in (by craft) beguiled minds
While bait was covered hurtful as flock finds.
13.
Now mark you well, the Cause of false Larums,
By Shepherds of that Flock, and sound of Drums,
Have cried the Wolf is come to Stupify,
The Ears so often deceived by their grossly,
Till come he did, and shall (though self secure,
They all are grown, who look not to Endure
Trials by fire, preparing for a day
Brings Sheep to sold again had went astray
When naked, such Wolf time will bewray
Who though a Wolf, he thus be inwardly
Yet in Sheeps-skin, is clad from their discry
By Sheepheards, are lead and left when dangers by
14.
But how the Wolf does come, if you will know,
(Considering thus his clothing her below)
Mark well, no time that is past can time prevent,
(Decreed to bring about the whole event)
Until is ripend Fruits by Fire tried
That its consuming flames cannot abide,
Though on the Flower de Luce this Wolf does paw,
In him Nurss'd up, (by her keeps Kings in Awe;
Contented are, their Subjects should be hers,
The time those horns have power that she confers,
Yea, and transfers from those shall disobey
To drink her Cup brimfull, the prize does sway.)
Errata.
REader, thou art desired with thy Pen to amend any litteral faults that have
escaped in Correcting, chiefly Hiraglip make Hyragliphick.

FINIS.

