A New-Years-Gift FOR THE Anti-Prerogative-Men: OR,

A Lawyers Opinion, in Defense of His Majesty's Power-Royal, of granting
Pardons, as he pleases.

Wherein is more particularly discussed the validity of the E. of D's Pardon,
by way of Letter to a Friend.

Seneca to the Emperor. Occidere contra Legem nemo potest, servare nemo
praeter te

Bracton. lib. 1. c. 8. de Corona. Rex potestatem habet jucondi de vita and
membris, vel tol. lendi vitam, vel concedendi.

LONDON, Printed, by H. H. for John Fish, near the Golden Tun in the Strand,
1682.

A New-Years-Gift FOR THE Anti-Prerogative-Men, etc.
SIR,
YOurs I have received, and read, wherein you are pleased to intimate to me,
that you are now very well satisfied in your mind, by reading over those
several Pieces I sent you, touching the Right, that my Lords, the Bishops claim
to judge in Capital Causes in Parliament, as likewise the unreasonableness of
excluding his Royal Highness, the Duke of York, from the Succession to the
Imperial Crown of England; But there is yet (say you) a third scruple remaining
on you; And that is about the validity of the E. of D's Pardon; wherefore you
are very desirous to know of me (seeing there is nothing hitherto purposely
written on that Subject) whether I think that same Pardon good; and in case I
do, you expect I should give you some Reasons why I do so.

I must tell you, that it is contrary to my humor to engage my self in such
kind of Controversies at any time, but more especially at this instant; you
have ever known me (like your self) a great Admirer of that Principle, we
commonly call self-preservation. However in obedience to your command, and to
satisfy that obligation, which lies on me (so far as I can) to vindicate
Truth, and the Father of our Country, in His Prerogative-Royal, I shall not
value the sleeping (as they say) in a whole Skin, but shall endeavor to say
something, which may not be impertinent, toward the Conviction of
Anti-Prerogative-Men, and your own satisfaction. And in order thereunto, I
think it convenient to show you,

1. What a Pardon is.

2. By whom, and in whose Name only, all Pardons are made.

3. What things his Majesty may, and what he may not pardon.

4. Who is Judge of the validity, and invalidity of a Pardon, when pleaded in
the House of Lords, or elsewhere.

And in the last place I shall give you my Sentiments in particular, concerning
the Pardon, granted to the E. of D. together with Solutions to some Objections
that have been made in Coffee-Houses.

A Pardon (says Sir Edward Coke) is a work of Mercy, whereby the King either
before Attiander, Sentence, or Conviction, or after, forgiveth any Crime,
Offense, Punishment, Execution, Right, Title, Debt, or Duty, Temporal, or
Ecclesiastical. Or,

A Pardon (say others) is the remitting, or forgiving, any offense committed,
contra dignitatem and Coronam Regis. Agreeable to that of Seneca, Venia est
poenae meritae remissio: So that Liberatio a poena, is the proper effect of a
Pardon, and it differs from a Dispensation thus; a Dispensation obtained, does
Jus dare and make the thing prohibited, lawful to be done by the Party who has
it; But a Pardon frees from the punishment due for a thing unlawfully done, yet
freedom from punishment is a consequent of a Dispensation, though not its
effect, as it is most ingeniously observed by the late Lord Chief Justice
Vaughan.

In the next place I am to consider whose Prerogative it is to grant Pardons.
This surely none can challenge but the King, in whom is vested the Sovereign
and Supreme Authority of the Nation; this I will make good by way of Syllogism.

He, in whom is vested the Sovereign and Supreme Authority of the Nation, has
power of Life and Death;

But in the King is vested the Sovereign and Supreme Authority of the Nation:
Ergo,

The King only has power of Life, and Death.

The Major Proposition I prove thus; Curtius; Et cum in regali solio residebi^,
vitae, necisque omnium Civium Dominus. Zouch's Elements part. 4. sect. 4. Ad
Majestatem spectat potestas vitae, ac n^cis, cum solus Princeps primario habet
Jus Gladii.
Jus Gladii, Power of Life and Death, is an essential, and inseparable
attribute of the Sovereign and Supreme Authority (for where there is not Jus
vitae and necis, there can be no Supreme Power,) Ergo he, in whom is vested the
Sovereign Power, has power of Life and Death.

As for the Minor Proposition, I presume no body (except a Popeling or a Whig,)
but will grant that our King is Supreme Governor of this Realm, and all other
his Dominions, seeing our Authentic Laws and Statutes do so expressly and so
often say it.

All (says Bracton) are under the King, Bracton. lib. 1. c. ^. number. 5.
and the King is under God only; He has no equal in his Realm (no
Co-ordination here) because then he could not Command all, for amongst Equals
there can be no Empire, Therefore much less are any his Superiors, or can
challenge greater Power, because then he would be under his Subjects; and
Inferiores pares esse non possunt potentioribus. Ipse autem Rex non debet esse
sub homine sed sub Deo.

Rex (says Mr. Cambden) supremam potestatem, and merum imperium apud nos habet,
nec in imperii clientela est, nec investituram ab alio quovis accipit, nec
praeter Deum, superiorem agnoscit. The King has Sovereign Power, and Absolute
Command among us, neither holds he his Empire in Vassalage, nor receives his
Investiture or Installing of another, nor yet acknowledges any Superior but
God alone.

By the Statutes of 24 H. 8. c. 12. 25 H. 8. c. 21. 1 Eliz. c. 1. and 1 Jac. c.
1. the Crown of this Kingdom is affirmed to be an Imperial Crown: and what an
Empire is, Sir Thomas Ridley will give you a clear Demonstration.

By the Empire (says that most Learned Civilian). P^rt. 2. cap^t. sect. 7. View
of the Civil and Ecclesiastical ^aw.
I understand not only the Empire of Rome, but also every several Kingdom,
which acknowledges no other Emperor than his own Sovereign; for howsoever
they differ in Name and Title, yet is the Office it self all one; for every one
is Gods immediate Vicar upon Earth, in their own Kingdoms, for Matters
appertaining to Justice.

But further, In our Oath of Supremacy we Swear, that the King is the only
Supreme Governor: Supreme, so none (not the Pope) above him: And only Supreme,
so none has any Coequal, Coordinate, Corrival power with his Sovereignty. But
it has been heretofore said by some Hunt-scrap Statists, That the Oath of
Supremacy is taken in opposition to the Pope, to exclude the Supremacy usurped
by that old Gentleman for many years. It Is truth they speak, but surely not all
the Truth; for there are two Points in it;

The one, that is Negative, whereby we profess, that not any Foreign State, or
Potentate, nor the Pope has this Power: The other Positive, by which the
Subject of this Power is specified. The Kings Highness is the only Supreme
Governor of this Realm, as in all Spiritual things and Causes, so likewise in
Temporal matters: Both Ecclesiastical and Civil Supremacy are in this Oath
asserted to be in the King. It was not thought sufficient to tell who was not
Supreme, but to declare also who was.

So that now (Sir) you may perceive that by our known Laws our King is Invested
with such a Supremacy as excludes both Pope and People, from having any Power,
Jurisdiction, or Authority over him; And if so, then certainly we may conclude
that he who has Vested in him the Sovereign Power, has also Vitae ac necis
Authoritatem, the sole power of Life and Death, to save or destroy, as well to
pardon as to punish Offenders.

Next come I to consider what Offenses the King (as Supreme Governor of this
Realm) can pardon or remit, and what he cannot as to Temporal matters.

In the first place I shall show you what things the King cannot pardon,
according to the Laws of England; as for example,

In an Appeal of Death, 11 R. 2. Chr. 17. 2 R. 3.8. Co. 3. Inst. f. 237.
Robbery, Rape, etc. the King cannot pardon the Defendant, for the Appeal is
the Suit of the Party, to have Revenge by Death; and whether the Defendant be
attainted by Judgment, etc. or by Outlawry, the Kings Pardon shall not
discharge the Defendant.

So in an Attaint by A. against the Party, 13 E. 4, 5. a. Co. 3. Inst. 237.
and the Petit Jury against the party to have Restitution; this the King cannot
pardon.

So the King cannot pardon Nuzances, Co. 3. Inst. 237. c. 20. 2 part Dewell. v.
Saunders. Davis Rep 75. a. b. Houghans Rep. Thomas v. Sorrel.
that are (not transient but) continuing, as a Nuzance in Via Regia, that still
continues and is not ended, until removed; and so of a Watercourse diverted,
or Bridge broken down, they cannot be pardoned, so as to acquit the
Nuzance-maker, for Committing them.

So a Mayor of a Town, Vanghans Rep. Edw. Thomas. v. Sorrel.
or other Tolltaker, who is penally bound to provide the Market-Measures, and
does not, cannot be pardoned by the King, because the fault still continues.

So if one be bound in a Recognizance to the King, 1 H. 7.10. 11 H. 7.12. Co.
3. Inst. 238.
to keep the Peace against another by name, and generally all other Subjects of
the King; In this Case before the peace be broken, the King cannot pardon or
release the Recognizance, although it be made only to him, because it is for
the benefit, and safety of his Subjects.

So after an Action popular be brought, 1 H. 7.3. a. Co. 3. Inst. 194, 195, 238.
Tam pro Domino Rege quam pro seipso, according to any statute, the King cannot
discharge the Informers part, because by bringing of the Action, the Party has
an Interest therein.

Come I now (Sir) to demonstrate what Offenses the King can pardon by the Law
of England.

If a Man Arrested for Felony, Co. 3. Inst. 2^7. Hobarts Reports Cuddington v.
Wilkins f. 82.
break Prison, he loses his Battle, but if the King pardon that breaking of
Prison, the Defendant shall be restored to the Battle, and the Counterplea
taken away.

So in diverse cases at the Suit of the Party, when the Defendant either by the
Common Law, or by any Statute (besides the restitution or damage of the Party,
Plaintiff) is thereby also to have exemplary punishment, the King may pardon
the same; as first, for instance at the Common Law.

In an Attaint by A, against the party and the Petit Jury; Co. 3. Inst. 237.
against the party to have restitution, this (as is said before) the King may
not pardon: Against the Petit Jury, by the Common Law, That they should lose
Liberam Legem, their Wives and Children cast out of their Houses; their Houses
wasted, their Trees prostrated, their Meadows ploughed up, their Goods and
Chattels seized, and their Bodies taken, This the King may pardon; because it
is a punishment, exemplary to deter others, and tends not to the restitution
or satisfaction of the Plaintiff.

Now to offer Instances upon Statute Law. The Defendant in an Appeal of Murder,
Co. lib. 5. f. 50. Buggins Case. Co. 3. Inst. 237. Hobarts Rep. f. 294. Seal
v. Williams.
upon Not Guilty pleaded, was found Guilty of Manslaughter: And it was
resolved by the Judges upon Conference betwixt them, That the Queen may pardon
the burning of the Hand, for that is no part of the Judgment at the Suit of the
Party Plaintiff in the Appeal, but it is a collateral, and exemplary punishment
inflicted by the Statute of 4 H. 7. c. 13.

So upon the Statute of Westminster. Co. 3. Inst. f. 171, 237.
2. c. 25. that gives two years Imprisonment, in a Ravishment of Ward, the
King may pardon the said corporal punishment of Imprisonment.

So upon the Statute of Westminster. c. 20. 15 Eliz. Dyer 323. 9 Eliz. Dyer 269. Co.
2. Inst. 200.
De Malefactoribus in parcis, the Damages concern the Plaintiff, and therefore
the Kings pardon cannot dispense with them; but the Ransom, the finding of
Surety, and the forjuring the Realm, are punishments exemplary, and concern the
King, and therefore he may pardon the same.

So there is a Clause in the Statute of 5 Eliz. c. 14. 15 Eliz. Dyer 322.
Taverners Case, Co. 3. Inst. 171.
That the Plaintiff shall not release nor discontinue the punishment, etc. but
only Costs and Damages: and yet it was resolved, that the Queen might pardon
the corporal punishment, that does trench to common example.

So before any Action popular brought, 1 H. 7.3. Co. 3. Inst. 194, 195, 238. 37
H. 6.4.
the King may discharge the whole, because the Informer cannot bring an Action
or Information originally for his part only, but must pursue the Statute.

So the breaking the Assize of Bread and Ale, the forestalling the Market,
Engrossing, Vaughans Reports, Edward Thomas v. Sorrel.
Regrating, or the like, which continue not, but are over as soon as done,
until done de novo may be pardoned by the King; so as the Offender shall not be
Impleaded for them, otherwise than by persons that have received particular
damage, which the King cannot remit.

To conclude; Vaughans Reports, Edward Thomas v. Sorrel.
Although the King cannot acquit Nuzance-Makers for committing Nuzances, yet
the Fine or punishment imposed for the doing them, may be pardoned by the King.

Thus (Sir) having given you a true extent and latitude of his Majesty's
pardoning Power, that is to say, what the King may, and what he cannot pardon,
relating to matters Temporal, I come to the next particular proposed in the
beginning, And that was to show, who ought to be Judge and Interpreter of
Pardons granted by the King, as to the validity or invalidity of them, when
pleaded in the high Court of Parliament.

That with the Sovereign Prince, resideth the prime and supreme Power of
interpreting of his own Laws, Rescripts and Grants, cannot be denied; for both
the Common and Civil Law Professors do affirm, Bracton lib. 2. c. 16. number. 3.
Fleta lib. 3. c. 14. number. 4. D. 28.6. 43. D. 50. 17.191. c. 1.14.12. 1.
Princeps conditor, and interpres Legum unicus.
That in doubtful and obscure points, the interpretation and will of the Prince
is to be expected, since it is his part to interpret, who made the Law or Grant.

Now our King as the supreme Legislator and interpreter, has communicated this
his Authority to some particular persons, for the interpreting and expounding
his Laws and Grants; And the reason why he has so delegated this power to them,
is rendered by Fortescue thus; You shall better (says he to H. 6.) execute
Judgment by others, than by your self; neither has it been seen that any King
of England has pronounced Judgment with his own mouth. The former part of
Fortescue's words are Orthodox, but the latter part are not so: If the famous
Antiquary, Mr. Seldom, may be credited; for he in his Notes ad cap. 8. of
Fortescue affirms, that Kings themselves often sat in Court, in the
King's Bench: and in the Rolls of Charters under King John, and the time near
him, often occur Grants that such or such English should not be Impleaded, or
put to Answer, nisi coram nobis, vel Capitali Justitia nostra, and to Normans,
nisi coram nobis, vel Capitali Seneschallo nostro. Here coram Capitali Justitia
is divided from coram Rege, That Kings have in former times personally sat in
the King's Bench. Vide Co. Litt. 7.1. b. Cambdens Britannia in Engl. f. 178. Sir
Henry Woottons Hist. of Christendom, f. 213. Co. 4. Inst. 73.
the last signifying before the Kings person; although now Pleas held in the
King's Bench before the Successor of the Capitalis Justitia, are entered coram
Rege: But e diverticulo in viam, we will return to the point proposed, and show
you who are the competent Judges of the validity or invalidity of a Pardon
pleaded in the house of Lords. In order thereto we must distinguish betwixt
matters moved in the upper House of Parliament, that concern the Customs and
Privileges thereof, and those matters that purely concern the common and
Statute Laws of the Realm.

The former must be determined adjudged and discussed by the course of
Parliament, Co. 4. Inst. f. 15. Co. lib. 13. f. 63.
and not by the Civil Law, nor yet by the Common Laws of this Realm, used in
more inferior Courts; which was so declared to be secundum Legem and
consuetudinem Parliamenti, concerning the Peers of the Realm, by the King, and
all the Lords Spiritual and Temporal; and the like pari ratione is for the
Commons, for any thing moved, or done in the House of Commons.

But on the other side, if any question arises merely upon the Common or
Statute Law, the Judges of England are to give their Opinions, when ever it be
demanded by the Lords, in their House; as for instance, if a Pardon be pleaded
by a Peer, or any other person there, and it is doubted whether it be good or
not in Law: Vide Sir Robert Filmers Patriarcha, where you may see, of what
Authority the Opinion of the Judges has been in Parliaments.
This Query (I humbly conceive) must be referred by the Lords to the Kings
Justices for their solution.

And as all the Judges, or the majority of them shall declare themselves, ( pro
or con) the Lords of Parliament, are wont usually to determine and give
sentence accordingly; But if the question be, whether the manner and
circumstances, that attend such a Pardon, be valid or not, by the Custom and
Law of Parliament, then the Lords of Parliament themselves, are solely to
decide the doubt, without any Reference to the Opinion of the Judges, for they
are not to intermeddle with any Matters of Parliament, Vide Cottons Collect. f.
651. 31 H. 6. number. 27.
and so have they in several Parliaments confessed.

This (Sir) may suffice as to the fourth particular by me propounded, and now I
hasten to the last point of all, and that is to consider of the E. of D's Case
in particular, but before I shall handle it, I must tell you this, That
wherever I have or shall mention Peers or Lords of Parliament, I intend as
well the Lords Spiritual as the Lords Temporal; for I am very well satisfied
now, (as I understand you are) that the Lords Spiritual have as much Right, in
virtue of their Temporal Baronies to sit in Capital Cases, as the Temporal
Lords can pretend to, and I am verily persuaded, that there was never any
Criminal Cause handled in Parliament, where the Lords Spiritual did not sit
either personally or by Proxy; And if not one of these ways, yet undoubtedly
they upon their withdrawing, ever entered their Protestation for the saving of
that same Right and Privilege. And so I now come to treat of the validity of
the E. of D's Pardon.

And I take this (Pardon me if I mistake) to be his Case.

The E. of D. is impeached before the Lords, E. of D's Case.
by the Commons of England, of High Treason, and of several other misdemeanors;
But before any further proceeding in proof of the Charge against him, His
Majesty dissolves that Parliament, and upon the dissolution thereof, the King
grants to the E. of D. a Pardon of all Treasons and Misdemeanors whatsoever;
And then His Majesty calls another Parliament, whereat the Commoners exhibit
new Articles of the same Treasons and Misdemeanors against the said Earl;
whereupon he pleads the said Pardon to this second Impeachment in the House of
Lords.

Now the Question will be, viz.

Whether his Majesty, by virtue of his Prerogative-Royal can pardon, in the
interval of two Parliaments those Crimes, whereof the E. of D. was impeached in
the former Parliament?

I humbly conceive, That his Majesty can by His Prerogative-Royal, grant such a
Pardon. I presume it will be admitted, that had this Pardon been purchased
before any Impeachment in Parliament, it had been good; But the granting of it,
after Articles exhibited in the House of Lords, makes the doubt, which I shall
endeavor thus to clear.

The Commons, it is true, as the general Inquisitors of the Realm, have
authority from the King, to examine any Crime, be it Treason, Felony,
Oppression, Bribery, Extortion, or the like, committed by a Lord of Parliament,
Spiritual or Temporal; and if they find by the Vote of the House, the Charge to
be true, they have power to transmit the same to the Lords, with the Witnesses
and Proof.

As for the Peers, they are the Supreme Court of Judicature in this Nation, not
only to judge whether matters presented to their Lordships by the Commoners, be
fit or requisite for the King to pass into Laws, but also of Writs of Error,
and of Matters of Fact, either not determinable in other Courts, yet in regard
of nicety or special. Matter, they cannot well discern or judge.

Moreover to these Lords of Parliament belongs a power (and that derived from
the Vide Cottons Tower Records.
Crown) of giving Judgments in Cases of Treason, of Impeachments for several
Crimes, of Slanders of Peers, of Breaches of Privileges, both upon Peers and
Commons, together with Capital Censures of Beheading, Hanging Drawing,
Quartering, Imprisonment, Banishment, Fine and Forfeiture both of Lands, Goods
and Offices inflicted on Offenders.

Now these two, The Lords and Commons, I mean, are convened by the Kings Writs,
to assist him with their Advice in difficult and weighty Matters, relating to
Church and State; And in so doing they ease their Sovereign Lord of much
Labor, but do not thereby deprive him of any one Tittle of Royal-Power. They
may (says the most glorious Royal Martyr) remember, that at best they sit in
Parliament as my Subjects, not my Superiors; called to be my Counselors not
Dictators: Their Summons extends to recommend their Advice, and not to command
my Duty.

You must know, that by calling a Parliament (which is but a Meeting of the
King and his Subjects, (and such they continue as well collectively as they
were before singly,) and a Meeting in its own nature dissolvable at pleasure)
the King is not grown less, or departed with any thing either by way of
Abdication or Communication of the sovereign Power that is vested in him, as
King of England. That were indeed to make more than one Sovereign in a Kingdom;
a thing altogether inconsistent with Supremacy and Monarchy: So that the
Sovereignty must be totally in the King, and where that is there must be Gladii
potestas, the power of Life and Death, a Right as well of pardoning as of
punishing Offenders. Like as diverse other things do solely belong to the King,
as Prerogatives incident to His Imperial Crown and Royal Dignity, whereof the
Subject has nothing to do, as the power of Calling, Holding, Proroguing and
Dissolving of Parliaments, of advancing to Honors, Offices and Commands, of
raising of Armies, of entering into Leagues and Treaties, of Founding
Corporations, Guilds and Fraternities, of coining of Money, of making Letters
of Denization, to whom and how many he will; Together with many other things
that appertain to His Majesty as special Flowers of His Crown.

The King of England (I must confess) may limit himself by Promise or Contract
in Parliament (as he has been pleased to restrain himself from the use of that
power, which makes new Laws and repeals old, without the consent of the Lords
and Commons in Parliament, as likewise from raising Money upon the Subject
without their consent) not to pardon the Offenses of such Persons as are before
Impeached in the High Court of Parliament, without the consent of his two
Houses, or the like: But then I must demand, that such a Grant be produced; let
it be made appear by an authentic Record, that the King of England has done
so; And when such a Record is shown, I shall be as ready to plead against the
validity of the E. of D's Pardon, as I do now for it; Till then I desire to be
excused. Besides, it is not enough to affirm, That there cannot be found any
President in the Parliament Rolls, wherein any Peer of the Realm has been
pardoned by the King, after an Impeachment has been transmitted to the Lords by
the Commons; but a President must be offered to prove, That a Pardon has been
adjudged void, where it has been pleaded by a Peer in a later, that was charged
with High Treason in a former Parliament.

But further yet (Sir) If the King can under his Great-Seal command all
Process, and proceedings in Criminal Causes to cease against one accused before
in Parliament, then sure, what should hinder, but the King may pardon such a
one? For a discharge of any further proceeding against such a one directed to
the Judges, and their Award thereon, That the Party accused shall go, sine die,
is equivalent to a Pardon under the Broad-Seal of England, now that there has
been such a kind of discharge, and thereon an Award given by the Judges in the
King's Bench to that purpose, I will make good by this Record following.

Steven Gravesend, Pasch. 4.7 E. 3. Coram Rege Rot. 53. Co. 3. Inst. 239.
Bishop of London, was accused in Parliament, for adherency to Edmond Earl of
Kent in his Treasons, where by Order of Parliament the matter was referred to
the King's Bench to be tried, where the Bishop pleaded Not-Guilty, and
afterward was discharged by the Kings Writ under the Great-Seal, directed to
the Judges of the King's Bench, to this effect.

Licet venerabilis Pater Stephanus, London Episcopus, per breve nostrum coram
nobis ad sectam nostram implacitetur de eo, quod ipsi Edmundo nuper Comiti
Kantiae adhaesisse debuerat: Quia tamen praedict. Episcopus de adhaesione,
praedict. omnino immunem reputamus; vobis mandamus, quod placito praedict.
coram nobis ulterius tenen. omnino supersedeatis.

Test meipso apud Westminster. 12 die Decembr. Anno Regni nostri 4.

The Award of the Court that is given thereupon, is very remarkable, viz.

Cujus brevis praetextu consideratum est, quod praedictus Episcopus eat inde
sine die, etc. Et ulterius non procedatur versus eum.

Sir Edward Coke upon this same Record comments thus;

This man, it may be, thought, that the taking of the Pardon should be an
employed Confession of the Fault, and therefore went a new way: but no man that
is wise, and well advised will refuse God and the Kings Pardon, how often
soever he may have it; for there is no man but offends God, and the King
almost every day, and the Pardon is the safest and surest way.

Out of this notable President, and the Comment of Sir Edward Coke thereon, we
may make these several Remarques.

First, That though Steven Gravesend was charged with High Treason before in
Parliament, yet the Judges of the King's Bench, upon the Kings Writ to them
directed under the Broad-Seal, did award, that the said Steven should go sine
die; Et ulterius non procedatur versus eum.

Secondly, That this same Award was given by the Judges, before any Sentence or
Judgment passed, either by themselves, or by the Lords in Parliament.

Thirdly, That if this manner of proceeding with Steven Gravesend had been
contrary to the Laws and Customs of Parliament, the Lords and Commons would no
doubt have disputed the Kings Prerogative in this Case; And I cannot learn out
of any Antiquary, or Historian, that this same Bishop of London was ever
questioned afterward in Parliament, or the King's Bench Judges for thus obeying
the Kings Writ.

Fourthly, That if this manner of proceeding in Gravesend's Case be valid in
Law (as it is, otherwise my Lord Coke would have told us so) then a Fortiori,
the Kings granting a Pardon to the E. of D. must be much more; For Coke says,
that a Pardon is the safest and surest way. So that we may conclude, That
either way is good, though that of a Pardon be the safest and surest. Is not a
Fine and Common Recovery the safest Conveyance for the passing of Lands. And
yet a Translation by Feoffment, by Bargain and Sale, etc. is a good Conveyance,
though not the safest and surest.

In a word, Sir Edward Coke does not at all intimate unto us, that either way
is illegal, but only gives the Bishop a Reprimende for his Impudence, in not
embracing the best expedient, when he had the choice of two.

Sir, If what I have said in defense of the E. of D's Pardon, give you any
satisfaction, I shall be glad; But now I think on it, my Papers will be the more
welcome, if I return you Solutions to those Objections that have been started
at Coffee-Houses,

The first Objection is, say you, a notable distinction, made betwixt Offenses
committed against the Crown, and Offenses perpetrated against the State or
Commonwealth; the former the King may pardon, but by no means the latter.

I answer, That this is a distinction without any diversity; For I affirm, that
whatsoever is done against the State or Commonwealth, is done against the
Crown, Et e contra. I am sure in all Monarchical Governments, the learned Sir
Henry Hobart in his Reports, tells us, That the King and the Commonwealth,
make but one; Hobarts Reports f. 342. Sheffields Case.
That the King is the Head of the Commonwealth, and the Reformation of all
general wrongs belongs to him; And, Cujus est condemnare, Idem, Cuddington v.
Wilkins.
punire, ejus est absolvere, ignoscere; Qui damnare potest (says the Civil-Law
Text) is absolvendi quoque potestatem habet. And therefore in all our
Indictments, it is said, That such a thing was done, Contra dignitatem and
Coronam Regis; But I never read, that such a thing was perpetrated Contra rem
publicam, or statum populi Anglicani, unless it were in the late Usurpation,
when this our glorious, ancient and hereditary Monarchy was turned into a
Democratick Slavery, under the Title of The Commonwealth of England. I shall
further add, to what I have already said, toward the utter confusion of this
distinction, viz.

That His Majesty can by virtue of His Royal-Power, either before Attainder,
Sentence or Conviction, or after, pardon all Crimes whatsoever, and remit all
punishments, exemplary, to deter others, and not tending to the satisfaction or
safety of particular Persons. In short; he can pardon all manner of Crimes,
that are transient, and not continuing before Sentence, or Conviction; And if
the E. of D. be guilty of such Offenses as are permanent and continuing, pray
let the Anti-Prerogative-Men name them, and in so doing they will very much
oblige the World. All this our Books of Law are ready to make good, as you have
read before in this Discourse.

But then it may be replied, That although the King can pardon any Crime (be it
Treason, Felony, Bribery, Perjury, Extortion or the like) before Attainder,
Sentence or Conviction, or after; yet if an Impeachment be once lodged in the
Lords House against any Person, that Person cannot be pardoned, until he be
convicted, and has received Sentence.

To this I rejoyn thus; It must be granted me, as I have said before, that if
the E. of D. had procured the Kings Pardon, before any Articles had been by the
Commoners exhibited against him, the Pardon had been good; And why it should
not be so afterward passes my comprehension; For the Impeachment in
Parliament does neither alter the nature of the Crimes, nor is the Kings Power
of pardoning any way lessened thereby; the Crimes are the same after an
Accusation in Parliament, as they were before, they are, nor greater, nor
lesser, Treason is Treason, Felony is Felony, and the like of other Offenses;
And as for the Regal-Authority in granting Pardons, it continues the same as
well after as before; the King of England being as free and absolute a Monarch,
in a Session of Parliament as out of it, which no able Jurist, I am confident,
will deny.

Thus much in answer to your first Objection.

Your other Objection is this, That the E. of D's Pardon is not valid in Law;
because it is but a Stamp-Patent by Creation, having not passed the Seals, as
Statute Law requires.

As to this Objection, I give you this Answer; There are but two Statutes (if I
mistake not) that prescribe a Course or Form, for passing things under the
Kings Seals.

The one of these same Statutes is the 13 R. 2. c. 1. how Charters of Pardon
ought to pass; wherein it is provided:

1. That in a Pardon for Murder, Treason, Rape, etc. The Offense committed,
shall be specified, and if there be not such a specification, the Charter must
be disallowed, I suppose, the E. of D's Pardon is not defective in this point.

2. That no Pardon of Treason or Felony shall pass without Warrant of the
Privy Seal, together with a Forfeiture of him, at whose Suit such a Pardon is
obtained. This latter clause is wholly Repealed, and annulled by the 16 R. 2.
c. 6. And therefore it affects not the E. of D's Pardon at all.

The other Statute is the 27 H. 8. c. 11. wherein is set down the course of
suing forth Grants under the Kings Sign Manual, etc. Now if this Statute does
extend to Charters of Pardon as it does to other Grants (which perhaps may be
so, because every Pardon is a Grant from the King yet neither of them (be it
Charters of Pardon, or other Grants) are declared ipso facto void; If the
course prescribed by this Act be not observed; But only it is said, That before
any Grant be passed under any of the Kings Seals; It shall be delivered unto
the Kings principal Secretary, or to one of the Clerks of the Signet, to be at
the said Office passed accordingly, together with a penalty inflicted on the
Clerk, that shall alter the course prescribed, and no more.

I will offer you an Instance; A Parson Marrys a Couple, that may lawfully
marry, without any Banes or License, and in a private House, and not according
to the Canonical Hour; This Parson, for acting contrary to the Canons of Holy
Church, is liable to a Suspension, etc. But yet the Marriage shall stand good
and firm in Law. For multa sunt, quae impediunt promovendum quae non dejiciunt
jam promotum: Fieri non debuit, sed factum voluit. So (say I) in the E. of D's
Case; If the Pardon (which is but a Stamp-Patent by Creation) had passed all
the Offices, or some or one of them, the Officer, or Officers had peradventure
been liable to a Parliamentary Reprimend, yet notwithstanding the E. of D's
Pardon is valid and good in Law, Contra omnes Gentes.

To be short, the Rule of Holy Scripture is, in the Case Matrimonial, Whom God
has joined together, let no Man put asunder; So in the Case of Pardons, what
his Majesty by His Prerogative-Royal has Knit together ( viz. His Mercy and
the E. of D's Life,) Let not the Lords and Commons endeavor to separate.
Sacrilegii instar est (says the Civil Law) divinis obviari benesiciis, That is
to say, Rescriptis Principum adversari.

And as I plead for the E. of D's Pardon, so I hope, my Plea will not prove a
Scandal to others; I am sure it will not, if they do but consult Seneca in his
Controversies;

Iniquum est (says he) Collapsis manum non porrigere: Commune hoc jus generis
humani est, nemo invidiosum jus postulat, quod alteri pro futurum est.

Thus (Sir) having given you freely my poor Sentiments, touching the E. of D's
Pardon, I shall close my Paper with the very same words that a late Author
uses; And they are these:

I take it for one of the greatest happinesses of our Government, That His
Majesty has an undoubted free Right of granting Pardons as he pleases: And for
argument of inconvenience, it may as well be urged against any Act of Mercy,
the King shows; Every Act thereof being as inconvenient to some as it is
merciful to others, And therefore has the King only been Judge in all Ages,
when and where he will dispense it, and the People would be in a miserable
condition if it were otherwise.

FINIS.
In the Title Page, in the Quotation of Braction, for (...), read judican^^.


