DWELLING WITH GOD, THE INTEREST and DUTY OF BELIEVERS. In Opposition To the
Complemental, Heartless, and Reserved Religion of the Hypocrite. Opened in
Eight Sermons. By JOHN BRYAN D. D. late Pastor in Coventry.

LONDON, Printed by T. M. for James Allestry, at the Sign of the Rose and Crown
in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1670.

To the Right Honorable ARTHUR Lord CHICHESTER Viscount CARRICKFERGUS, AND
Governor; Earl of Donegal: One of his Majesty's most honorable Privy Council
in the Kingdom of Ireland. And to the Right Honorable, and truly Religious
LATITIA Countess of Donegal.
Right Honorable, and my good Lord and Lady.
MAny and great are the obligations that lie upon me to your Honors, as upon
many other, so upon the account of my youngest Son Noah, many Years since
Minister in Stafford; since, for the space of more than Seven Years your
Chaplain; whom, while he lived in your Noble and Religious Family, you loved
dearly and prized highly, and whose Death you take heavily. So that all that my
self and my two surviving Sons can do in way of thankfulness, should we live
Methusalem's Days, will come short of what You have deserved of us. And
therefore we must and shall make it our Daily Prayer, while we are in the Land
of the living, to Him who is All-sufficient, to give to your Honors a full
reward. Mean time these poor low Meditations of mine upon the richest and
highest subject I most humbly present to your Honors, as a token of my
gratitude, beseeching your acceptance of it, (as that great Prince did of the
poor Man's handful of Water, who had no better thing at hand to offer)
beseeching God to bless it to You, and to all into whose Hands it shall come
for the furtherance of your and their spiritual and eternal good; and that he
will grant you according to the Riches of his Glory, that as you have been, and
still are very great Props and Encouragements to the profession and practice of
Piety, Loyalty, and Charity in that Kingdom where you now live, and were so in
this, while you lived here, so you may live long and long to promote both in
both, till you be translated into his everlasting rest.

Your Honors: most humble bounden Servant. John Bryan.

TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader,
IT is GOD Himself who is the substantial Object of Science and Religion.
Though we would not err with them, who too much dishonor and vilify
Creatures, lest we reflect dishonor on the Creator, and tempt Men to think
basely of the Author, as we do of the Work; yet we must say that compared with
Him, they are a very little thing, yea as nothing, yea less than nothing, and
vanity, Isa. 40. 15, 17. And what they are, they are in that dependence on him
and relation to him, without which they would be strictly nothing: Though the
old Philosophers did many of them think that so fair a Structure deserved to be
esteemed, as Corpus Deitatis; yet Christians are more wise and reverent than to
approve the more modest assertion of them, who call it Vestimentum numinis, or
Accidentia Divina: yet the notion of an Accident is thus far apt, to tell us
that all the Creature's being, is in its dependence on the Creator; and that it
is nothing but what it is in him: For of him, and through him, and to him are
all things, Rom? 11. 36. And in him we live, and move, and be, Act. 17. 28. To
think therefore or treat of any Creatures, abstractedly, leaving out the
knowledge of the Creator, is not properly to know, but to dote or err: He that
does annihilate them, or deny their very being, does not know it, nor cannot
teach it. Such fooleries are all the busiest and most learned enquiries of
those Formalists, who separate Philosophy from Theology, and think they have
done fairly when they have once confessed that God gave the World a being and
first motion: as if he had then left it to its self, or made it a separate
self-subsisting thing; or as if they might then proceed to treat of it, without
any further thoughts, or mention of that God who is more to it than a Soul; and
without whom it cannot be truly defined, no more than the beams without
mentioning the Sun, or the Accidents without the Substance.

And as the true Natural Philosopher does see GOD as all in all, in Physics;
so does the true Moralist in Ethics. Well may our Religious Science be called
Divinity, because GOD is in it, the beginning, the middle, and the end; the
life, the substance of it, and all in all. And as this is true of the Theory,
it is as true of the Practice: (For it is one and the same Religion or
Theology, which is essentially in the three constitutive faculties of Man, and
must be defined, as Scientia affectiva practica) It is a very apt and
instructing expression which is used. Heb. 4. 13. All things are naked, and
opened to the Eyes of him with whom we have to do. It is most intimately
pertinent to our Religion, to know GOD, as Him with whom we have to do, and to
know how much we have to do with him! to know that we have more to do with him,
than with all the Creatures in the World: Yea, that we have nothing to do with
any Creature, but as in him, and with him, and for him; and as that which is
less than an Accident of GOD; That we have nothing to do with Men or Angels,
high or low, rich or poor, animate or inanimate, no not our selves, as separate
from God, or from his presence, interest, and will; nor as coordinate (in
subsistence or intention) with him; but only as absolutely dependent on him,
and subordinate, and subservient to him: And that we have nothing to do in the
World, but his service, and the fulfilling of his will: And to know how Great,
and of what unspeakable importance, our Daily and Hourly business is, in which
we have to do with God. This will first fix us in the Positive part of our
Religion, which is properly called GODLINESS; And then it will most effectually
accomplish the Negative part; in calling off our minds from every Idol, and
killing our brutish and unchaste affections. While our hearts are seriously
taken up with GOD, the Creature will seem less to us comparatively, than a Fly
compared to a City, or an Atome to a Kingdom, or a Candle to the Sun.
Overvaluing, and overloving, and overdoing for the World, is a certain Sign of
our undervaluing, and underloving, and neglect of GOD. For if GOD have his due,
he will have all: And if he had all, the World, and all things in it would have
none; unless as it is sent to GOD by them.

And so excellent is this converse with GOD, that the nature of it may much
convince us, that GRACE and GLORY are but as the Seed and the Plant, as infancy
and manhood; and that Life Eternal is begun on Earth, Joh. 17. 3. One being but
the work of seeking love, and the other of fullenjoying-love; and both being
the Dwelling of the Soul in GOD, in several manners and degrees.

Do not wonder therefore, if the Reverend Author of this Treatise (my
deservedly-much valued and honored Friend, and long a laborious Servant of
Christ,) have chosen this Subject for his own delight, and for his Readers
benefit. For however perhaps the burning of the City, and the removal of many
Ministers from their settled habitations, might be some occasion of his choice;
yet the great reason, no doubt, was the Greatness and Necessity of this truth,
as suited to the greatest edification of Men's souls.

I foresee, that there are some that will say, that this running of Allegories
so far, does carry away the mind from the just conceptions of the thing, and
hinder, and delude the understanding, by drawing it into the bypath of
improper notions; and is the way of injudicious superficial Teachers. And I
confess it is so in several Cases: As 1. When metaphors are chosen needlessly,
instead of more plain significant terms. 2. And when they are chosen unaptly,
and are not fitted to the matter signified. 3. When they are insisted on too
far, to the exclusion of the proper notions, and tend indeed to seduce and
carry away the mind. 4. When they are run up so high, as to infer any false
conclusions, or to introduce any groundless confectaries or applications. But
if you consider of the Allegory insisted on in this Treatise, you will have
better thoughts and censures of it, upon these reasons following.

1. It is not about a created subject, where we have store of proper notions;
but about the Creator, and our communion with Him, where we must have improper
thoughts, and borrowed notions, or none at all: It is a controversy between
the Thomists and the Scotists, whether one syllable Ens be spoken Univocally of
GOD and of the Creatures? But that no other word is spoken Univocally of them,
they are agreed. And the Scotists do not without reason maintain, that
Analogical Attribution is not a third member, betwixt Univocal and Equivocal,
but is truly Equivocal, as Metaphors are. Talk not then against all Allegorical
expressions about God, till you would forbid Mortals to talk of God at all.

2. Note, that it is not so much the matter of our communion with GOD, as the
manner of it, which the Allegory is used to express. For the matter on our
part, I here tell you once for all, that it is not any Friar - like, fanatical,
notion, of deification by an indwelling in GOD, nor Andr. Os^anders conceit of
Essential Righteousness; nor the Platonists fancy of the Union of the Intellect
with the thing understood, which the Reverend Author does assert: But it is
only the communion of the Three Essential faculties of the Soul with GOD, the
Vital and Executive Power, the Intellect, and Will, partly receptively and
partly operatively, which is meant: And the Allegory of Dwelling signifies the
Permanency, Fixedness, Constancy, Familiarness, etc. Of these.

3. And consider how apt and significant it is: How fitly it expresses the
Habits of Grace, the Souls fidelity, the course of duty, the contents and
comforts of a Believer in his GOD, etc. as is here fully opened to you: And how
fitly it differenceth a Christian indeed, (who dwells habitually, and
devotedly in GOD) from all sorts of Hypocrites, who do but complement with him
as a stranger, or step aside out of their ordinary way, to speak now and then
with him, either in formality, or in their extremity; and cast an Eye toward
him sometimes on the by. And that it is not a barren notion, but most
practical, directing the thoughts of a Christian to a constant, spiritual, holy
life; yea, that it is a very Consolatory notion, speaking the beginning of
Heaven on Earth, and suited both to Grace and Glory, and apt to lead up our
Desires to the everlasting Mansions; which we have scarce a more familiar
conception of, than by Dwelling with GOD! And who would not be at Home, that
has such a Home prepared for him, when once He is prepared for it?

4. And lastly consider, that it is a Scripture metaphore; yea, frequently
there used: And what words of Scripture can seem more important to us, than 1
John 4. 16? GOD is Love; and he that dwells in Love, dwells in GOD, and GOD
in Him. And V. 15. Whosoever shall confess that Jesus is the Son of GOD, God
dwells in Him, and He in GOD. And V. 12. If we love one another, God dwells
in Us, and his Love is perfected in Us. 1 John 3. 24. He that keeps his
Commandments dwells in Him, and He in Him. 2 Cor. 6. 16. For ye are the
Temple of the living GOD; As GOD has said, I will dwell in them, and walk in
them, and I will be their GOD, and they shall be my People.

And there is another sort that I foresee will be offended, because the Author
has said so much against separation from the public Assemblies and Worship,
as now managed, seeing he is silenced for Nonconformity Himself.

To these I shall only say: 1. Why do they not wonder as much at the old
Non-conformists, Hildersham, Paget, Brightman, Bradshaw, Ball, with many more;
who said much more against separation long ago?

2. Consider that the Author is an ancient experienced Divine, who has lived
to see the fruits of all extremes; and in particular, what the Love-killing and
separating Spirit has done in these Kingdoms these Thirty Years; He has been
the Tutor and Father of more faithful Teachers in the Church, than many other
worthy Pastors, have been of converted serious Christians: And if the young
unexperienced censures, will but stay till they come to his age and experience,
and to half his Learning, Wisdom, and Grace, and till they have done God's
Church but the twentieth part of the service, that he has done, it is like they
will be themselves of the same mind that he is. But I could wish for their own
sakes, they would not do by him, as they do by Mr. Tombs, who having written a
Book against Separation, which none of them can confute with truth and reason,
they commonly and confidently affirm that he conformeth, and then cast by his
Book through prejudice; and few that I hear of, who most need it, do read it:
Though he is so far from Ministerial Conformity, that in the Epistle to that
Book he still declares his old opinion against Infant Baptism. Partiality is a
forfeiture of truth, and contemptuously shuts the Door against it. It will
suffer Men to receive no instruction* from those that differ from them: And
those that differ not can scarce instruct them, because their Opinions are but
the same, which they hold already. Alas, then what will become of the
understandings of this Generation? wherein there are so few, that are not in
one Faction or other, possessed with partiality and unreasonable prejudice
against the rest!

Reader, the way to escape this Soul-perverting Sin and misery, is, that which
this Treatise does instruct thee in; even to dwell continually with GOD, who is
the Original Life, and Light, and Love; and in whom all wise and holy Souls,
are united, and employed in delightful Harmony; And are no further divided,
discordant, contentious, uncharitable, than they depart from GOD! And to retire
more in mind, from this dark, perverse, confused World; which to the best is a
Wilderness, though the way to Rest; and to the Worldlings is a place of snares
and sin, a Babel, and a Bedlam Habitation, where the Prince of the Powers of
the Air, who rules in the Children of disobedience, is busily and
successfully fitting Souls, for a sadder state. Watch and pray, that thou may
be saved from this present evil World; but especially, and above all thine
Enemies, from thy Self! Happy is the Man whose Selfishness, Pride, and Lust, do
not subvert his Soul! and whose own Opinion, Will, and Way is not his Ruin!

I Rest, An unworthy Servant of Christ for his Church. Rich. Baxter.
Acton. June 4. 1669.
THE CONTENTS.
The Contents of the first Sermon. THe Doctrine is proved by the properties of
this Habitation, and the conveniences and privileges belonging to it: and the
proof in the Text explained. The Contents of the second Sermon.Two Questions
are Answered. 1. What it is to make the Lord our Habitation? Viz. To make
choice of him, to close with him, and to cleave unto him, as our resting place.
2. How we may know that we dwell in God? Viz. By 4. Characters of such
Inhabitants. Entrance upon Application in reference to 3. sorts of Men. 1. Such
as are, or may be sure they have not yet made the Lord their Habitation. 7.
sorts of these. Advice to them, and instruction how to make the Lord their
Habitation. 7. means, in order to this end. The Contents of the third
Sermon.Addition of another means. viz. to dwell in God, to this end get an
honest and good heart: what such a heart is. What power there is in natural
Men, with Exhortation to exert it. 2. Such whose Habitation the Lord is sure
enough, but they have no sensible comfortable assurance that he is so; what the
Reasons are of their doubts, and fears, and how to repel them. The Contents of
the fourth Sermon.3. Such as have sensible comfortable assurance, that the Lord
is their Habitation. Exhortation to prize this blessing; to hold fast, and
increase their assurance, and how. 1. Generally to walk worthy of the Lord. 2.
Particular Duties, in reference to things and Persons. 1. To things, Viz.
Earthly Habitations. 1. What their duty is that have no Habitation of their
own. 2. What theirs that have Houses of their own, but may not live in them. 3.
What theirs that have convenient Dwellings, and competent means to live upon.
4. What theirs that have stately Houses, and abundance of all Earthly things.
5. What theirs that have had their Houses burnt, and are rebuilding, or
finished: a Word of Caution to all these. The Contents of the fifth
Sermon.Second sort of spiritual Duties. viz. In reference to Persons. 1. The
principal efficient causes of their happiness. The Three Sacred Persons of the
Deity, and the Instrumental Causes. 2. In reference to such Persons as are yet
without God in the World, and how to draw them in. The Contents of the sixth
Sermon.Duties in reference. 1. To visible Chuches (God's Habitations) false
(Popish) to separate from them; but (Protestant) not to separate. 2. To
Fellow Members of the same Family. Live in unity with them, though differing in
judgment. The Contents of the seventh Sermon. Other Duties upon the account of
the properties of this House. Some of the Laws, and Ordinances of this House.
The General Laws partly natural, partly supernatural.

The Law of Faith: How to manage Faith so, as to maintain Life.

The Contents of the eighth Sermon.How faith maintains life against all
Instruments of death. Nine acts of faith to free the Heart from all
discouragement and disquiet: some other Laws of the House concerning watching,
rejoicing, praying, thanksgiving, readiness to remove out of lower into higher
rooms.
By reason of the Author's absence, these Errors have escapt the Press, with
several false pointings, which the courteous Reader is desired to amend.
PAge 4. Line 8. after hereafter add to make use. p. 5. l. 20 r. heights, or
high places* p. 8. l. 24. r. pent. p. 11. l. 16. r. theirs. p. 13. l. 11. your
r. their. l. 14. such r. which. p. 16. l. 10. r. goods. p 25. l. 7. r.
effected. l. 22. rejoice r. noise. p. 35. l. 18. r. felt. l. 23. r. persisted.
p 42. l. 5. twines. r. turns. p. 44. l. 19. for will, r. glory. p. 50. l. 21.
r. sensualists. p. 52. l. 9. r. this. p. 61. l. 12. r. both th^se themselves.
p. 78. l. 9. r. was. p 79. l 7. r. against them. p 82. l 24. each, r. which. p
83. 18* leave out that to him p 86. l 15. a place, r. a feast. p 87. l 12. his,
r. this. p 96. acquisition, r this of. p 97. l 23. r. whence. p 101. l 4. r.
any real rest. p 102. l 7. r sought. p 103. l 12. r. nor in the latter. p 105 l
6. first r. true. p 106. l 4. her r* his. p 107. l 21 r. prelation. p 108. l
14. natural r. mutual. p 110. l 16. this r. that: p 116. l 5* leave our once. p
117. l 21. is, r. as. p 118. l 14. belike, r. because life. p 120 l* 11. fixed,
r. first. p 125 l 26. persons, r. profess. p 129. l 6 after Religion add, with
piety and reason. p 132 l 21. r. Against whom. p 141. l 7. r. do you likewise.
p 142. l 3. your, r. their. l 7. have, r know. p 145. l 4* these, r. your
selves. l 8. these, r. your selves. p 148. l 12* turns to, r. works for. p
165, l 3. r. pace. l 4, r. when there is solid and true Grace in it. l 16, r.
generally* p 170, l 26. esteemed, r* showed. p 175, l 6, so, r. to. p 178, l
17, the, r your. p 180, l 8, alone, r. a one. p 207, l 19, exquisite, r.
extinct. p 208, l 3, r. handsel. p 210, l 18, r. premises* p 218, l 3, r. to
praise God. p 256, l 4, leave out Only* p 265, l 18. Even* r. Ezekiel. p 287. l
6, after Church, r. is of the former sort for as. l 8, after Invention add, So
2dly, in it is wanting truth of Doctrine; Fundamental Errors, Doctrines of
Devils in very great number are obstinately maintained there. l 23, after so,
r* it being without true preaching but a Seal. p 297, l 18, r. the Church of
England. p ^80, l 12, truth, r. touch. p 386, l 8, r. prove. p 388, l 15, r.
emptying: p 391, l 7, a desiring, r, an adhering: p 393, l 8, which, r* such: p
397, l 3, scarce, r, secure. p 412, l 10, r. a dedication.

THE FIRST SERMON.
Psalm. 91. 9, 10. Because thou have made the Lord which is my refuge, even the
most High, thy Habitation, there shall no evil befall thee, neither shall any
Plague come nigh thy dwelling.
IT is as natural for all Men to desire happiness, as it is For the sparks to
fly upwards: To make them happy, there is required an absence of all
oppressing evils, and a concurrence of all things necessary, convenient, and
decent: Among and above many other things an habitation or resting place for
their bodies is needful to their outward happiness, without which they cannot
but be miserable, whatever other good things they may enjoy. Herein our blessed
Savior seems to prefer the felicity of Foxes and Fowls before his own. The
Foxes have Holes, and the Birds of the Air Mat. 8. 20.
have Nests, but the Son of Man has not where to lay his head. The better
House any Man has, the more happy he is (in that:) He that has the best is
happiest. Now that House is best that is higher, stronger, larger, more
lightsome, warm, and better furnished with provisions, and all desirable
accommodations, than any other; That is not subject to any casualties, and
which secures its Inhabitants from all manner of evil present and future: And
withal, is a resting place for their Souls. They that have such an habitation
cannot but be acknowledged by all the World, to be the only happy People in the
World. If the Question be, where such an habitation can be found? Where such a
People? And by what means they become thus superlatively happy? This Text
resolves it. The habitation is the Lord, who was David's refuge, even the most
High; Find him, and this habitation is found. The People are such, as he to
whom David directs his Speech, whom the Lord himself describes and ownes a
little after. He has set his love P. 14.
upon me, he has known my Name. The means whereby this People come to be
possessed of this happiness, it is by their own making. Because thou have made
the Lord, etc.

Who the Lord is, it is well known, even Israel's God, the same whom we
Christians own and worship: One in Essence; Three in Subsistence, the Father,
the Son, the Holy Ghost. What, and what a One he is, his Name Jehovah in part
imports, an Absolute, Simple, Infinite, Independent and Immutable Being. That
he is a real habitation, appears by all those places of Scripture, where Men
are said to Dwell in God, (whereof we shall have occasion hereafter) He that
dwells Psalm. 91. 1.
in the secret place of the most High, shall lodge under the shadow of the
Almighty. He that keeps his Commandments dwells in him. 1 John 3. 24.
Hereby we know that we dwell in him, because he has given us of his Spirit.
Whosoever shall confess 4. 13. 15, 16.
that Jesus is the Son of God, he dwells in God. He that dwells in Love,
dwells in God. That he is such an Habitation, as has been formerly
mentioned, and consequently the best, as far surpassing all others, even the
choicest under Heaven, as the stateliest Palace in the World, does the poorest
Cottage, or Heaven Earth, and infinitely more, is now to be proved. And hereby
the Conclusion asserted will be evinced to be a truth. That all, and only they
are the most, yea the only, happy People upon Earth, whose Habitation the Lord
Jehovah is.

1. Begin we with the Properties of this House. The first whereof is Height,
(expressed in the Text.) The Situation of it is exceeding high. The
Babel-builders designed to erect a Tower, whose Genesis 11. 4.
top might reach unto Heaven. This is far above it. They that are in it are out
of danger, of any deluge, beyond the reach of Men, or Devils. Psalm. 144. 2.
David calls God his high Tower. And he that can, as David could, prove God
to be his Habitation, Esa. 33. 15, 16.
is said to dwell in height.

2. It is also a non-such for strength. Hear that holy Man of God thankfully
acknowledging what God had been for him in times past. Thou have been a shelter
for me, Psalm. 61. 3. 71. 7.
and a strong Tower from the Enemy. And what he was at present. Thou art my
strong refuge. And he not only prays, that God would still be his strong
habitation, whereunto he might continually resort, his strong Rock for an house
of defense to save him; But frequently declares his confidence, that as God
was, so he would ever be as he wished; and how often does he call him his
strength? His Son tells us, he is the same to every one that is as he was. The
Prove. 15. 10.
Name of the Lord is a strong Tower, the Righteous runs to it, and is safe.
And the Prophet Esaias praises God for this. Thou have Esa. 25. 4.
been a strength to the Poor, a strength to the needy, in his distress, a
refuge from the storm, a shadow from the heat, when the blast of the terrible
ones is as a storm against the Wall. The greatest Canon-bullets shot against
the Walls of this House, make no more Impression, do no more execution than
Paper-pellets shot against a Wall of Brass or Marble.

3. It is a House exceeding large; this is accounted a great commodity, of a
House to have Rooms Jer. 22. 14.
enough, and Room enough. Solomon intimates as much, when he says, it is better
to dwell in a Corner of Prove. 21. 9.
the House top, than with a brawling Woman in a wide House. To have any thing
we use too narrow, or too straight, is very troublesome. The Bed is shorter
than that Esa. 28. 20,
a Man can stretch himself on it, and the Covering narrower than that he can
wrap himself in it. In God there is Room more than enough, both for the
understanding and affections of Man to expatiate themselves in. Can thou by
searching find out God? Can Job 11. 7, 8, 9.
thou by searching find out the Almighty to perfection? It Is as high as
Heaven, What can thou do? deeper than Hell, What can thou know? the measure
thereof is longer than the Earth, and broader than the Sea. His Commandments
are exceeding broad. How much more are his Attributes, Psalm. 119. 69.
Absolute, and Relative, proper and figurative. God bid Abraham Genesis 13. 17.
to walk through the Land of Canaan, (which is called a good Land, and a large,
(good, because Exodus 3. 8.
large) in the length of it, and in the breadth of it. And he bids every Child
of Abraham (to whom he gives himself for a possession) as he gave that Land to
Abraham) to walk within, and pass through all his Divine Properties, going out*
of one Room into another, as 2 Pet. 1. 4.
also his great and precious promises: Nor shall they have cause to complain of
straitness, as the Churches Children do in their Mothers ears. -- The place is
too Esa. 49. 20.
strait for me, give place to me that I may dwell. To whom we may conceive her
giving them this Answer; Children, though your bodies may be present in your
Earthly dwellings, the faculties of your souls have space enough, abundantly
more than your faculties can conceive in God, who says to every Saint of his
dwelling in him, apt to make the like complaint, as Paul to the Corinthians, Ye
are 2 Cor. 6. 12.
not straightened in us, but you are straightened in your own Bowels.

4. It is a House no less lightsome than large. God is light, and in 1 John 1.
5.
him is no darkness at all, in this Psalm. 36. 9.
light we shall see Light. The Lord will be unto thee an everlasting Light.
When there was a thick darkness in all the Land of Egypt, Esaias 60. 19.
The Israelites had Light in their dwellings. All that are Israelites indeed,
have light in God their Exodus 10. 22, 23.
dwelling place. When all others in the World sit in darkness, and the shadow
of Death. And they do contemplate the light of his Mercy, Truth, and Power.
With 2 Cor. 3. 18.
open Face beholding his Glory by which they are transformed more and more into
his Image. Sometimes indeed they are compelled to sit in darkness of dangers
and distresses, inward and outward. Who is among you that fears the Esa. 50.
10.
Lord, that obeys the voice of his Servant, that walks in darkness, and
has no light? He has led Lam. 3. 2.
me, and brought me into darkness, but not into light. But even in this
darkness they are not altogether without light, they have the light of God's
Word. They Word Psalm. 119. 105.
is a Lamp unto my Feet, and a light unto my Path. And in his Word they have
the light of his promises, that he will bring them out of that darkness
whereinto he brought them, and turn their grief and afflictions into joy. For
Psalm. 18. 28.
thou will light my Candel, the Lord my God will enlighten my darkness. Yea,
even when, and all the Mic. 7. 8.
while, I sit in darkness, the Lord shall be a Light unto me. God is a Sun, ten
thousand times more Psalm. 84. 11.
full of Light than this material Sun; and it is impossible that he that dwells
in the Sun should want Light.

5. It is a warm House, Light has heat in it emiently (as the Peripateticks
say) yea, it is both warm and cool: A Summer and a Winter House both, (great
Men were wont to have several Mansions for these two several Seasons of the
Year.) This House is as some choice Rooms in some great Houses, are warm in
Winter, and cool in Summer. Many there are that dwell in God, who have more
Winters than one, every Year* scarce one Summers day in many Years. Psalm. 88.
15.
I am afflicted, and ready to die from my Youth up. Yet in the sharpest weather
this House of yours keep their hearts warm. So that the Spouse said, I sleep,
but my Heart waketh. They can say with Paul, Cant. 5. 2.
As sorrowful, yet always rejoicing. I am filled with comfort, I am exceeding 2
Cor. 6. 10.
joyful in all our tribulations: Being justified by faith, we 7. 14.
have peace with God, and rejoice in hope of the glory of God; and not only so,
but we glory in tribulations also, -- Because the Love of God is shed abroad in
our Hearts, Romans 5. 1, 6.
by the Holy Ghost, which is given unto us. Although the Fig Tree shall not
blossom, neither shall fruit be in the Vines, the labor of the Olive shall
fail, and the Fields shall yield no increase, the Flock shall be cut off from
the Fold, and there shall be no Herd in the Stalls, yet I will rejoice in the
Lord, I will joy in the God of my Salvation. If it be objected, that this is
not always true, that they who dwell in God are always thus joyful; nay, many
times their hearts have not the least sense of comfort; yet in such a case,
they have a warmth and heat that is far better, and includes abundance of
comfort in it, and in due season will flame forth, namely that of love, and
that both of desire and complacency. Set me as a Seal upon thine arm, for love
is strong as death; The Coals thereof are coals of fire, which has a most
vehement flame; many Waters cannot quench love, neither can the floods drown
it. This warmth their hearts never want, though sometimes the sense of the
second motion of it, may seem to them as dull, as that of their joy: Nor is
there any time wherein they cannot say with David, My Heart was hot within
Psalm. 39. 9.
me. Yea, discouragements from the World are so far from cooling your love to
God, that they make it hotter as Water cast upon Lime; so Michol's scoffs were
to David's Zeal; such is a flame issuing from the fire of Love. If this be to
be vile, I will yet be more vile than 2 Samuel 6. 22.
thus.

Others of God's People have many Summer Days; yea, almost all their Days all
the Year long, for many Years together, are such. Job had such a long Summer,
all which time, God's Candle shined Job 29. 3.
upon his head: The secret of God was upon his Tabernacle. His most wise
Conduct governed his House, provided plentifully for it. He 4^*
washed his steps with Butter, and 6.
the Rock poured him out Rivers of Oil. Hyperbolical terms. As if he had said,
I enjoyed all my goods and pleasures, according to mine own desire. When the
Ear heard him, then it blessed him; and when the Eye saw him, it gave witness
unto him. He sat chief, and dwelt as a King in the Army. Was both beloved and
feared, yet in all these hot Sunshine Days of prosperity, this House of his
kept his heart cool toward the things of the World: He lived in continual fear
of loosing them. I feared (says he) a fear, and it came upon Job 3. 25, 26.
me. I never all this while gave my self over to carnal security, I always
affrighted my heart with the apprehension of the Accidents of this life, and
contained my self in fear and humility toward God: and within the bounds of
modesty toward men. Hear him making a solemn protestation how cool his heart
was kept from evil concupiscence, and cursed love to Women. I set a watch
(says he) at Job 31 1.
the entrance of my senses, made a Covenant with mine Eyes. That my Soul might
not by them receive any vicious enticements to uncleanness. Or if my senses had
been at any time, allured by any object of sin, yet my heart, which is the seat
of God's Spirit, has opposed them: It never walked 7.
after mine Eyes. And as for temporal good: Though I had exceeding 25.
great store of them, and all justly gotten, yet was I free from rejoicing
carnally, or setting 24.
my whole delight in them; nor did I put any confidence at all in them. Thus
loose was this holy Man's Soul kept, from the things of the World. The lusts of
the flesh, the lusts of the eye, and the pride of life. And so was the Soul of
Moses, who living by faith in God, had his affections so cooled Heb 11. 25, 26,
27.
to the pleasures of Egypt, that with ease he forsook them all, and with joy
joined himself to the Ignominious condition of his brethren.

6. No House is so full of goods as this is, none so stored with all things,
both for necessity and delight. Houses that are high, and strong, and large,
and lightsome, and warm, if they want provision of good, and furniture, are far
from being accounted good Houses. These only, where there is a fullness of
Household stuff, plenty of meat, and drink, and clothes, and Silver, and Gold,
and Armor for defense and offense, have the denomination given them, by the
generality of People, and are only cried up: empty ones have no bodies good
word. Take notice of some passages of Scripture to this purpose, from the
mouths both of Profane and Divine Penmen; yea, of Divinity it self. How Luke
15. 17.
many hired Servants in my Fathers House have Bread enough, and to spare. We
shall find all Pro. 1. 13.
precious substance, we shall fill our Houses with spoil. If Balak would Numb.
22. 18.
give me his House full of Silver and Gold. Through wisdom is a Pro. 24. 3, 4.
House builded, and by knowledge shall the Chambers be filled with all
precious, and pleasant riches. Thou shall save Goats milk enough 27. 27.
for thy food, for the food of thy* Household, and for the food of thy Maidens.
Thy Barnes shall be filled 3. 10.
with plenty, and thy Presses shall burst out with new Wine: Wealth and Riches
shall be in his Psalm. 112. 3.
House. They possessed Houses full of all good, the Floors shall be full 9. 25.
of Wheat, and the Fats shall overflow Joel 2. 24.
with Corn and Oil.

Some very good People, who had House-room enough, have had therein next to
nothing. The Widow 1 King 17. 13.
of Zarephath going into her House, to fetch the Prophet Elijah a little Water,
in a Vessel which he begged of her to drink, makes this answer to him, craving
that she would also bring him a morsel of Bread in her Hand. As the Lord thy
God lives, I have not a Cake, but a handful of Meal in a Barrel, and a little
Oil in a Cruse; this was all her store. Such an answer gave a certain Woman, of
the Wives of the Sons of the Prophets, unto Elisha. Tell me (said he) What have
thou in the 2 King. 4. 1, 2.
House? Thy Handmaid (said she) has not any thing in the House, save a Pot of
Oil.

In this House which we have in hand, there is not only No want of any thing
which is on the Earth (the good report given of Laish by the five Searchers.)
But here is Judge. 18. 10.
also all the good things that Heaven it self is able to afford: Witness him
that was caught up thither, and saw what was in those Mansions; Blessing God
for blessing 2 Cor. 12. 2.
him, and all his Fellow Members of this blessed Family, withal spiritual
blessings in Heavenly 1 Ephesians. 1. 3.
places in Christ.

Begin we with Provisions of food. They to whom it is given to dwell in God,
shall be sure not to want either Corporal or Spiritual sustenance, but enjoy
both in abundance. 1. For their bodies, this is one of the encouragements given
to the Saints of God, to fear and seek him. O fear the Lord, Psalm. 34. 9, 10.
O ye his Saints, for there is no want to them that fear him. The young Lions
do lack and suffer hunger, but they that seek the Lord shall not want any good
thing, in the Day of Famine they shall be satisfied. The righteous eats to
the 37. 19.
satisfying of his Soul; but the belly of the wicked shall want. They shall
always have Bread and Water enough: As those hundred Prophets had in that time
of great dearth, (whom Obediah fed by fifty in a Cave) Bread shall be given 1
King. 18. 4.
them, their Waters shall be sure. Likened unto Men that dwell in an
unpregnable Fort: well provided Esa. 33. 16.
with Victuals to hold out a Siege. And there Bread and Water is sure, as is
not elsewhere to be found. For there is a blessing in both, which are also of
the choicest, and God himself feeds them therewith. I should have fed them
(says the Lord to his professing People, had they hearkened unto me, to come
and live in him, but they would not) with the finest Psalm. 81. 16.
of the Wheat, and with Honey out of the Rock should I have satisfied them. No
courser Bread than wheaten does every hind, or Servant of this House eat. That
which is materially pulse, beans, pease, (which some of them are fain
sometimes to feed upon) is virtually the fat of wheat. So it was to Daniel, and
his three Companions, whose countenances appeared fairer Dan. 1. 8*17.
and fatter in flesh, than all the Children which did eat the portion of the
Kings meat. Nor can they Deuteronomy. 8. 9.
be scanted. He whose the Earth is, and the fullness thereof, having said, Thou
shall eat thy Bread without scarceness. I will abundantly bless her Provision,
I will satisfy her Poor with Bread. In case they have but an handful of Meal:
He 1 King. 17. 15. 19. 8.
can make it suffice them and theirs many Days; yea, enable them to go in the
strength of one Cake baken on the Coals forty Days; yea, to make five Loaves
feed no Mat 14. 15 22.
fewer than five thousand Men, besides Women and Children; nor shall there want
a concurence of his will with his power, if need be. Though Miracles are said
to be Mat. 6. 1.
ceased, every one of the House shall have their Daily bread, according Pro.
30. 8.
as they are taught to pray. And as Agar prayed in faith, nothing doubting: nor
were ever any of them in David's observation, Psalm. 37. 25.
put to the Trade of begging their bread. Though some of them have in all Ages
been constrained Exodus 25. 29.
to live of Alms for exercise and trial, which is a noble way of living. And
so the Waters given them to drink, they are not like these of Marah and
Jericho, bitter 2 King. 2. 19, 21.
and naught, but sweet and wholesome. If they be otherwise naturally, they are
by a Tree or Salt cast in presently sweetened, and healed, with which, as with
Honey distilled out of the Rock, their thirst is wonderfully quenched.

2. As for their Souls, there is in this House abundantly more and better
Provision of all manner of Food, for all sorts of Persons that are of the
Family. Nehemiah tells us of what a great Table he kept, and what was provided
for him ^^^. 5. 18.
daily. Viz. one Ox and six choice Sheep, also Fowls, and once in ten Days
store of all sorts of Wine. Solomon's Provisions for one Day was thirty
Measures of fine flower and threescore Measures of Meal, ten fat Oxen out of
the Pasture, and an hundred Sheep, beside Hearts and Roe-bucks, and fallow Deer,
and fatted Foul; But all his great store is but as a drop to the Ocean, in
comparison of the spiritual Provision prepared every day for the Saints, to
feed upon in this House. The Word of God, and God the Word are a million of
times more in quantity and virtue to nourish and cheer. How sweet Psalm. 119.
103.
are thy Words unto my Taste? Sweeter than honey unto my mouth. Thy words were
found, and I did eat them, and thy word was unto Jer. 15. 16.
me the joy and rejoicing of my Heart.

O Book, insinite sweetness! Let my heart
Suck every Letter, and a honey gain Herb. Ser.

Precious for every Grief in any part
To cheer the breast, to mollify all pain,
Thou aut all health, health thriving 'till it make
A full Eternity. Thou art a Mass
Of strange delights, where we may wish and take.
Here is milk for Babes, the first 1 Cor. 3. 2.
Principles of the Oracles of God, Heb. 5. 12, 13, 14.
and strong meat for those that are of full age, profounder and more mysterious
Doctrines. The Stewards of the House appointed to dispense both to both, as
they are able to bear them. As the Joh. 16. 1^.
head of the House taught them to Mark 4. 33.
do by his practice, every part and particle of the Holy Scriptures, Histories,
Precepts, Prohibitions, Promises, threatenings are all of them choice Viands
wherewith holy Souls are satisfied, as with Psalm. 63. 6.
marrow and fatness, Nor are they only meat but Medicinal also, and therefore
called wholesome words 2 Timothy 3. 16.
that have a healing property in them. The Spirit of God accompanying Esa. 59.
21.
his word is called by our Savior the Water of Life. Had thou asked of me
(said he to the Woman of Samaria, that denied Joh. 4. 20.
to give him of her Water) I would have given thee a better and far more
excellent kind of Water, than this is that I have desired of thee. Whosoever
drinks of this Water Esa. 44. 3.
shall thirst again, but whoever shall drink of the Water that I shall Joh. 7.
38, 39.
give him, shall never thirst. Of this living Water they that dwell in God do
drink continually; whereby the thirst of their Souls after earthly things, the
lust of the flesh, the lust of the eye, and the pride of life is quenched. And
their consciences are satisfied and quieted, against the sense and apprehension
of Gods wrath due for their Cant. 1. 2.
fins. And the sense of his love affected 2. 4.
by this Water, is better than Wine; whose property is to comfort the heart,
beget new Spirits, Es. 55. 1.
purge, warm, refine, and waken them. Yea, this House is a House of Wine. And
the graces and fruits of the Spirit, are delightful to them as Wine, with which
they being spiritually drunk, have inward spiritual joy bred in them, testified
in the private and public Ephesians. 5. 19.
praises of God, by Psalms, Hymns, and spiritual Songs; Their hearts being
merry, and cheerful, They Zach. 9. 15.
make a rejoice, as if they were set on fire with Wine.

But here is another food, which every one of this House have for commons every
Day. The Body and Blood of Jesus Christ. His flesh is meat indeed, and his
blood is drink indeed. Note well that spiritual things have their truth and
reality as much, and beyond comparison in their kind, as corporal ones have
theirs.

This meat and drink surpasses all other upon a manifold account. 1. Of the
place from whence it comes, This is the Bread which comes down from Heaven;
Not Joh. 6. 50.
out of the middle Region of the Air, as Manna did, but from the highest
Heaven. 2. The Variety of Viands in it, for all things are in Christ, who of
God is made unto us, Wisdom, Righteousness, and 1 Cor. 3. 30.
Sanctification, and Redemption. Let our wants be what they will, let our wills
be what they can to feed on this or that dish: Nothing can be imagined
nourishing or cheering, which is not to be found in Christ. Manna, which was
but a type of this true bread, is said to have had all sorts of good tastes in
it.

3. Of the sufficiency of it, for Col. 1. 19.
it pleased the Father, that in him should all fullness dwell, in him 2. 9.
dwells all the fullness of the Godhead bodily. The whole Mass and gathering
together of all Divine and everlasting goods. Whereof the parcels and streams
do issue out upon the Church: They are in him not in shaddows, and figures, as
in the Old Testament, but in reality and substance. And of his fullness have we
all received Joh. 1. 16.
grace for grace; Not a fullness of abundance only, but a fullness of redundance
also: out of which a sufficient portion is distributed to every of his Members.
There can be no want in him, where Riches Ephesians. 3 8.
are unsearchable. As he is able to save them unto the uttermost, that come
unto God by him, and so to satisfy them that feed upon him, as it is said of
those four thousand Men, beside Women and Math. 15. 37.
Children. They did all eat, and were filled.

4. Of the powerful efficacy that is in it, I am the Bread of Life. Joh. 6. 35.
That is there remains in me, received and applied by a lively faith, power to
quicken the Soul that is dead in sin, separated from God the true Spring of
Life, and to preserve it alive by a communicative and continual influence of
Divine grace, and to give it also the life of joy and comfort; yea, and to cure
not only all the Maladies that molest the Life of Grace, but of Nature also.

5. Of the permanency of it, this is not like other Food and Physic, that
perishes it self, and is not able to keep the body, into which it is received
from perishing; Upon which account we are forbidden to labor for it. Labor
Joh. 6. 27.
not for the Meat which perishes, but for that Meat which endures to
everlasting life, which the Son of Man shall give unto you. What is that? The
Bread that I will give is my Flesh. If any Man eat of this 6. 51.
Flesh, he shall live for ever.

This Meat and Drink is every Day received by this whole Household, not after a
corporal and carnal manner, (as those Capernaites conceived Christ's meaning.
How can this Man give us his Flesh to John 6. 52.
eat?) But by believing that it was given for them, and is the Price of their
sins to God. He that comes 6. 39.
to me shall never hunger, and he that believes on me shall never thirst. As
Meat is received into the stomach by eating: so is Christ into the Soul by
believing. He that eats my Flesh, and drinks my Blood, dwells in me, and
I in him: that is to say, is inseparably united to me, and I to him, even as
food is with him that eats it. This and no other way is this meat and drink
received in the Holy Supper, (wherein here is or ought to be a frequent
communicating) where and when every Communicant by eating and drinking the
consecrated Bread and Wine, being Sacramentally Christ's body and blood, Signs
to represent it, Seals to confirm, and Instruments really to exhibit them, does
acknowledge, and preach the benefits of the Lord's Death, and protests to
take part thereof by a lively faith; which is as the Eye and Hand to the Mouth
and Stomach of the Soul, taking Christ into, and uniting him to them; even as
corporal Food is by eating and digesting united to the Body.

6. This is that Feast of fat Esaias 25. 6.
things of Wine on the Lees, of fat things full of Marrow of Wines on the Lees,
well refined; which the Lord of Hosts promised to all Nations, gathered
together in his Church, (to some of all) veiling Heavenly things under Earthly,
condescending so low, as to enter into the inward Man by the outward, our
apprehensions being so weak and narrow, that we cannot otherwise be acquainted
with them while our Souls are in our Bodies. They are much guided by our fancy,
and then spiritual things are conveyed to them this way; only we must remember,
that there is a far greater excellency in the things themselves, than in their
representations: For what is all fullness with marrow, What is Wines on the
Lees? what are all earthly royal dainties, to these rich graces and Divine
special favors and blessings, offered and bestowed, and participated of in the
Sacraments? At which sumptuous and delicious banquet every worthy receiver,
that has made due preparation by self examination, is or should be much
affected and ravished. As the Divine Poet, was, who thus expresses himself.
First as to the manner of Importation, and submission.

Herb. H. Com.
Not in rich Ornament or fine Array,
Nor in a Wedge of Gold,
Thou, who for me wast sold,
To me do now thy self convey;
For so thou should without me still have been,
Leaving within me Sin.
But by the way of nourishment and strength,
Thou creepest into my Breast;
Making thy Way my Rest,
And thy small quantities my length;
Which spread their Forces into every part,
Meeting Sins force and art.
Yet can these not get over to my Soul,
Leaping the Wall that parts
Our Souls and fleshly Hearts;
But as the outworks they may control
My Rebel-flesh, and carrying thy Name,
Affright both sin and shame.
Only thy grace, which with these Elements comes,
Knows the ready way,
And has the Privy Key,
Opening the Souls most subtle Rooms,
While those to Spirits refined at Door attend
Dispatches from their Friend.
Give me my Captive Soul, or take
My Body also thither.
Another life like this will make
Them both to be together.
Before that Sin turned Flesh to stone,
And all our Lump to leaven:
A fervent sigh might well have blown
Our innocent Earth to Heaven.
For sure when Adam did not know
To sin, or sin to smother;
He might to Heaven from Paradise go,
As from one Room to another.
Thou have restored us to this ease
By this thy Heavenly blood,
Which I can go to when I please
And leave the Earth to their food.
When he was pleased to go to this Heavenly Banquet, (and he was so pleased, as
often as might be, and so should every godly Christian) hear him warbling this
Divine Rapture.

Idem the Banquet.
Welcome sweet and sacred cheer,
Welcome deer;
With me, in me, live and dwell:
For thy neatness passes sight;
Thy delight
Passes Tongue to taste or tell.
O what sweetness from the Bowl
Fills my Soul,
Such as is and makes Divine!
Is some Star (fled from the Sphere)
Melted there,
As we Sugar melt in Wine?
Or has sweetness in the Bread
Made a head
To subdue the smell of Sin;
Flowers and gums and powders giving*
All their living,
Lest the Enemy should win?
Doubtless neither Star nor Flower
Has the Power
Such a sweetness to impart:
Only God, who gives perfumes,
Flesh assumes,
And with it perfumes my heart.
But as Pomanders and sweet Wood
Still are good,
Yet being bruised are better sented,
God, to show how far his love
Could improve,
Here as broken is presented.
etc.
Let the wonder of this pity
Be my ditty,
And take up my lines and life:
Hearken under pain of Death,
Hands and breath,
Strive in this, and love the strife.
Nor found he this food beyond all degrees of comparison, nourishing and
strengthening, but he feels it also most effectually healing Physic, as
appears by what he speaks to his prattling Conscience, which called every fair
look sowl, every sweet Dish sower.

If thou persist, I will tell thee
That I have Physic to expel thee.
And the Receipt shall be
My Saviors Blood: when ever at his board
I do but taste it, straight it cleanses me,
And leaves thee not a Word,
No, not a Tooth, or Nail to scratch,
And at my actions carp or catch.
Here is therefore no such provision of food, no such sumptuous fair in any
House as this. Solomon's, so much admired, was as Husks; yea, and stark hunger
compared to this: and each of the Household fares alike. And they have both
Dinner and Supper every Day of the same delicates. Mat. 22. 4.
(that which Matthew calls a Dinner, Luke calls a Supper.) And Luke 14. 16.
they are called upon to feed heartrly. Eat O Friends; Drink, yea, Cant. 5. 1.
drink abnndantly, O well-beloved.

Nor are there any such fellow-Commoners, to Dine and Sup with Acts 17. 11.
any where as here; These are all Esa. 43. 4.
Noble Honorable Persons. The choicest, and most excellent Kings Pro. 12. 26.
and Priests. A chosen Generation, a Royal Priesthood, a Holy Nation, a
peculiar People. Yea, the Rev. 1. 6.
King of Kings, and Lord of Lords Dines and Sups with them. Mephibosheth 1 Pet.
2. 9.
thought it no small honor, Rev. 3. 20. 2 Samuel 19. 28.
that David set him among them that did eat at his own Table. How great honor
must it then be to sit at Christ's Table, who is David's Lord? And to increase
their Psalm. 110. 1.
comfort, they have assurance of the same Session with him in the Kingdom of
Glory. I appoint you Luk 22 29, 30.
(says he) a Kingdom, as my Father has appointed me; that ye may eat and
drink at my Table in my Kingdom.

Nor are there any such servitures in any House, as in this, to wit, the Holy
Angels. Are they Heb. 1. 14.
not all Ministering Spirits sent forth to Minister for them, who shall he
Heirs of Salvation? There Pro. 15 15.
are that make them both Cooks Luke 22. 43.
and Butlers, that dress and dish up, and bring in the provision of Dan. 10. 19.
this continual Feast, attend at Table and Minister Cups of Consolation. And
moreover wait upon every Member of this Family, Psalm. 91.
when they go abroad about the works of their Callings: and in all the changes
of their life; who have care of them, besides this Acts 12. 15.
common attendance, a peculiar Guardian of Angels, from their new birth at
least, as some probably gather from sundry Scriptures. Mat. 18. 10.


Nor are there any such Vessels in any House to serve up the Exodus 21. 29.
Meat and Drink in, as are in this. The Dishes, Spoons, Covers, and ^ 37. 16.
Bowls belonging to the Sanctuary were all of pure Gold, so were all the
Vessels of the pure Table. All the drinking Vessels of King Solomon were of
Gold; and all the 2 Chr. 9. 20.
Vessels of the House of the forest of Lebanon were of pure Gold. At that
Royal Feast which Ahasuerus made to all his Princes and Servants, That lasted
an hundred and fourscore Days, They gave them Est. 1. 7.
Drink in Vessels of Gold. The Vessels of this House, wherein the Saints dwell,
and wherein they have their Meat and Drink served up, are much more precious,
than the Gold that perishes, (which is 1 Pet. 1. 7, 18.
corruptible how pure soever) even 2 Pet. 1. 4.
great and precious promises, in which are contained all the choicest Viands,
that Earth and Heaven can yield, both for the nourishment of Soul and Body. For
Godliness is profitable for all 1 Timothy 4. 8.
things, having the promise of the Life that now is, and that which is to come.

Nor are there any such Seats, to rest both Souls and Bodies on, in taking
repast in any House, as in this? Kings have had their Seats for themselves, and
by them for their Children, and Favorites, on which they sat down to eat meat;
1 Samuel 20. 24, 25.
they were terrestrial, these celestial places. We read of the great King Ephesians
2. 6.
sitting at his Table with his Spouse sitting with him, presented Him Cant. 1.
12.
with the exercise of her Virtues. And of his sitting down with his Twelve
Disciples to eat the Passover, and before this, with many Mat. 26. 20. 9. 10.
Publicans and Sinners. All penitent Sinners, whose habitation the Lord is,
ever had, still have, and ever shall have this Privilege, to sit with Christ
in Heavenly places, which are no other, than the Loves Cant. 1. 2.
of God in Christ: from which Seats neither Death, nor Life, nor Angels, Romans
8. 38. 39.
nor Principalities, nor Powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor
height, nor depth, nor any other Creature shall be able to separate them.

Nor any such Beds to take rest in, which the now named Loves make.

Herb. Evens.
My God thou art all Love,
Not one poor Minute scapes thy Breast,
But brings a favor from above;
And in this Love more than in Bed I rest.
The softest down Beds, compared to these are harder than stones, on which as
little true rest can be taken, as Ahasuerus took the Day before Mordecai was to
be hanged: on that Night could not the Est. 6. 1.
King sleep: or as Job had, when he wanted the sense of these Divine Loves.
When I say my Bed Job 7. 13, 14.
shall ease me, my Couch shall ease my Complaints, then thou scarest me with
Dreams, and terrifiest Genesis 28. 11* 16.
me with Visions. In this Bed of assurance of Divine Love Jacob slept sweetly,
comforted by a Vision, made by a Sign, namely a Ladder set upon the Earth, the
top whereof reached unto Heaven, etc. and in words, promising the Land whereon
he slept, a numerous posterity and protection in his going out, and coming
home, when his Body lay on the cold Ground, and his Head on a Stone. And in the
same Bed David slept securely, when surrounded with Enemies. Psalm. 3. 5* 6.
I laid me down and slept, and I will not be afraid of ten thousand of People,
that have set themselves against me, round about. Yea, when their Bodies are
upon Sick-beds, God himself twines them, makes them soft, stirring up Feathers
of Consolation under them. The Lord will strengthen Psalm. 41. 3.
him upon the Bed of languishing, Thou will make all his Bed in his Sickness.

Nor is there in any House such Linen for Bed and Board, which is spread and
used as often as rest or repast is taken, and has an influence into both, making
them comfortable; yea, into the very Dishes and Vessels, wherein the Meat and
Drink is served up, making them 2 Cor. 1. 20.
precious and permanent, and into the Couches or places of repose corporal, as
well as spiritual, without which those would have no grateful relish: nor these
any refreshing sweetness. (Such as Jeremy found wrapped therein, upon Jer. 31.
26.
this I awaked and beheld, and my sleep was sweet unto me.)

But especially this Linen serves for the clothing this Household (imparting
not only warmth (to which, sufficient has been spoken, but also Ornament
beyond compare: To her (speaking of the Church, the Lamb's Wife) was Rev. 19. 8.
granted, that she should be arrayed in fine Linen, clean and white, for the
fine Linen is the Righteousness of Saints. Of old, great and honorable
Persons, were clothed with fine Linen. Pharaoh Genesis 41. 42.
arrayed Joseph in Vestures of fine Linen. Mordecai went out from the presence
of the King, in Royal Apparel, and with a Garment Est. 8. 15.
of fine Linen. Dives was clothed in Purple and fine Linen. The High Priests
Garments were made of Gold, and of Blue, and Exodus 28. 5.
of Purple, Scarlet, and of fine Linen; The Ephod, and the curious 6, 8, 30.
Girdle, the Coat and the Miter; and so were the Vestures of his Sons, which
are said to be for Glory and for Beauty; that is, to 6. 40.
make them Venerable and Majestic in the executing* of their Office.

Every faithful Christian, Man, or Woman, is a sacred King, a Royal Priest,
has Royal blood running in his Veins: Was born not of blood, (is not such by
natural Generation) nor of the will of the Joh. 1. 12, 13.
flesh: But of God, by the power of his Spirit, unto his own Image, and so is
higher than the Kings of the Earth, has Power as a King to subdue, and keep
under, the rebellious motions and lusts of his own corrupt reason, and will;
and is by faith partaker of Christ's royal Dignity, and Will, being with him
annexed Heir of an Heavenly Kingdom. He is also made partaker of the Dignity
of Christ's Priesthood, (better than the Levitical Priesthood, which was not
after the Order of Melchisedeck) having God propitious to him, by his Death,
having access to God by Prayer, through his intercession: and to offer
spiritual sacrifices to 1 Pet. 2. 5.
him, the Sacrifice of Prayer, that is the fruit of the Lips, giving thanks to
his Name. To do good Heb. 13. 14, 16.
also, and to communicate for with such Sacrifices God is well pleased. The
Linen wherewith these spiritual Kings and Priests are apparelled, being the
Righteousness of Christ's humane Nature, called the Righteousness of God;
Because he is the Supreme Author of it, and appointed his Son who was Romans 1.
17.
true God, for to fulfill and to acquire it out of his mere grace, and imputes
it to the Elect, and accepts it for their absolution; as far surpasses in
fineness, purity, and whiteness, that wherewith Earthly Princes and Priests
were arrayed, as the finest Flax does the coursest Sack or Hair-cloath. For it
is Angelical, yea more pure and bright and transcendently glorious, and makes
them appear so. The Kings Daughter is all glorious within. Psalm. 45. 17.
Yea Glory it self in the abstract, Esa. 4. 5.
yea they do appear so, not only in the Eyes of God, but even in the Eyes of
the Nations of the World, as appears by these words of admiration, uttered by
them. Who is she that looks forth as the Morning, Cant. 6. 10.
fair as the Moon, clear as the Sun, and terrible as an Army with Banners? And
this by reason of Acts 12. 21.
those gorgeous outward Garments, and Jewels that cast a shining luster
wherewith they are invested, and adorned Cap* a pe, (like Herod in his Cloth
of Silver, which being beaten by the Sunbeams, dazzled the Peoples Eyes.) The
exercise Col. 3. 12, 14.
and exerting of those glorious Virtues mentioned by the Apostle, Bowels of
Mercies, kindness, meekness of mind, long-suffering and Col. 2. 15.
charity, which is the Bond of Perfection, make them to shine as lights in the
World. He that will look into the Wardroab of this House, shall find, besides
these, very many changes of rich Raiment, fitted for all Sexes and Ages, which
being put on and worn abroad, must needs make them glorious in the Eyes of all
beholders.

And as there is no such Vestry in any House as this, so neither is there any
such Armony. In the Tower Cant. 4. 4.
of David, which was builded for an Armory, there hang a Thousand Bucklers, all
Shields of Mighty Men. There is in this one Shield, of more worth, to all
intents and purposes, than all those a thousand times told over. The Shield of
Faith, a spiritual Shield serving to beat back and bear off all the fierce
Temptations of Satan, Ephesians 6. 16.
To quench all his Fiery Darts, to hinder their pernicious working. By this the
Fathers of old time, Of whom the World was not worthy, Heb. 11. 34.
quenched the violence of Fire, and turned to Flight the Armies of the Aliens.
Faith is of that force, that it is able to hold Argument, even against the
wrath of God, to quench the fierceness of his Arrows. Though he slay me, Job
13. 15.
yet will I trust in him. Its termed a Shield, every faculty of the Soul is
defended by it, against all manner of temptations. A Shield serves for defense
of the whole Body, and every part of it. Other pieces of spiritual Armor, the
Girdle of Truth, the Breast Plate of Righteousness, the shows of Patience, the
Helmet of Hope, are for particular parts, and serve against particular sins and
temptations; but faith puts by, and blunts all blows, and, as if this grace
were all in all, a Christians whole warfare, is called the 1 Timothy 6. 12.
Fight of Faith. This, with the other now named, are defensive only or mainly,
like to which none can be found in any other Armory. And for offense here is a
Sword, of which it may be said, as David did of Goliah's, There is none like 1 Samuel 21. 9.
that, the Sword of the Spirit which is the Word of God. So called Ephesians. 6. 17.
because the Holy Ghost has framed it, and put it into Believers hands, and is
of a Divine strength and temper to pierce and overthrow the spiritual Enemies.
With this Word, which is sharper than any two edged Sword, Christ himself Heb.
4. 12.
defended himself against the Devil, and with the invincible force thereof
foiled him, fulfilling in part Math. 4. 7. 10.
that Prophecy. In that Day the Lord with his sore, and great, and Es 27. 1.
strong Word, shall punish Leviathan, the piercing Serpent, even Leviathan the
crooked Serpent, and in that Day he shall slay the Dragon that is in the Sea.

Moreover, Princes, and great Men's Houses are stored with goods for Ornament,
as well as for necessity and convenience, serving to delight and please the
outward Senses of Seeing, Hearing, Smelling, and Feeling. (that of Tasting has
been spoken to) Rich Hangings, Curtains, Carpets, Images, and pleasant Pictures
Pourtrayed upon the Walls, Instruments of Music, Ointments, Perfumes,
Treasures of Gold and Silver, and precious Stone. Hezekiah showed the King of
Babylon's Ambassadors his House of precious things, the Silver, and the Gold,
and the Spices, and the precious Ornaments, and all Esa. 39. 2.
that was found in his Treasures.

In Solomon's House were Hangings of Purple, a rich and a beautiful Stuff, of a
red and bloody hue, a dye of great esteem. And in Ahasuerus's Palace, where he
feasted Cant. 3. 10.
his Princes and Servants, There Est. 1. 6.
were white, green, and violet Hangings fastened with Cords of fine Linen and
Purple to Silver Rings and Pillars of Marble. The Beds were of Gold and of
Silver, upon a Pavement of red and blew, and 2 King. 23. 7.
white and black Marble. In the Houses of those unnatural sensuality, we find
Women that wore Hangings, to make them more delightful. No less is employed in
that passage. Let them stretch Esa. 54. 2.
forth the Curtains of thine Habitation; What Lamentation is made when these
are harmed? Suddenly Jer. 4. 20. 10. 20.
are my Tents spoiled, and my Curtains in a moment. Or when they are not
handsomely set up. There is none to set up my Curtains. The Tabernacle had
great store of costly Hangings and Curtains, to make it beautiful and Exodus 26.
1.
glorious, of cunning work woven, but wrought to the Life with a Needle, in
manner of Pictures like Arras work, or other Tapistry. Solomon 1 King. 6. 29.
carved all the Walls of the Temple round about with Figures of Cherubims and
Palm Trees, and open Flowers within and without: Nor was hardly any goodly
House Esa. 3. 16.
without its pleasant Pictures, Images of Men pourtrayed upon the Ezekiel. 23. 14.
Walls with Vermilion.

Nor without Musical Instruments. The Viol, the Tabret and Pipe are in their
Feasts. As the Prodigals Esa. 5. 12.
Elder Brother drew nigh to the Luke 25. 29.
House, he heard Music and Dancing.

But money answers all things. By this Men furnish their Houses Eccl 10. 19.
with all the foresaid Ornament, and their Feasts with variety of all delights.
Thrice happy is that habitation thought to be, where there is no want of this;
and blessed are those Children thought whose Parents go to the Devil to procure
and leave them bags of theirs in abundance.

What shall we say to these things? If God be ours, how shall not all these
things be ours? They whose House the Lord is, have all these, and infinitely
more to please and delight their inward Senses, yea their outward also. That
one sight of Jesus Christ hanging upon the Cross, with his hands stretched
abroad to embrace them, and his Head bowed down to kiss them, and his pierced
Side streaming forth blood to wash them, from the guilt and filth of their
sins, evidently set forth, lively and naturally Gal. 3. 1.
represented unto them, with his Death and Passion, and the Virtue and use
thereof is a Picture most pleasant to their Eyes. So are the Portraictures of
his holy Apostles and Martyrs, with the description and history of their acts
and passions seen and read of them.

And to please your Sense of Smelling, the House is filled with Cant. 1 3.
the savor of Christ's good Ointments (as that House was with the John 12. 3.
Odor of that Ointment of Spiknard, wherewith Mary anointed his Feet.) Those
gifts of the holy Ghost, wherewith the Father has anointed him, and which he
pours upon them by the preaching 2 Cor. 2. 14, 15, 16.
of the Gospel, whereof take a taste only of two words, and hereby judge of the
rest.

Herb. Chapter the Odor.
How sweetly does my Master sound! my Master?
As Ambergrease leaves a rich sent
Unto the Taster:
So does these words a sweet content,
An Oriental fragrancy, My Master.
With these all Day I do perfume my mind,
My mind even thrust into them both;
That I might find
What Cordials make this curious broth
This broth of smells, that feeds and fats my mind.
And farther for the Sense of Hearing, if the Music made by Organs, in the
Church, so sounded in the Ears of that Divine Poet, that drew a Song of
Thanksgiving to it from his Tongue and Pen.

Id. Chapter Mus.
Sweetest of sweets, I thank you when displeasure
Did through my Body wound my mind,
You took me thence, and in your house of pleasure
A dainty Lodging me assigned.
Now I in you without a Body move,
Rising and falling with your Wings;
We both together sweetly live and love,
Yet say sometimes, God help poor Kings.
Comfort I Will dye, for if you post from me,
Sure I shall do so, and much more;
But if I travail in your Company,
You know the way to Heavens Door.
How infinitely sweeter must that Music be to the Ears of this Household,
which the Organ of the Holy Scripture, the Keys whereof are stricken with the
hand of the holy spirit, makes with such strains as these: Fear thou not, for I
am Esa. 41. 10.
with thee; be not dismayed, for I am thy God, I will strengthen thee; yea I
will help thee with the right hand of my Righteousness. When Esa. 43. 2.
thou passest through the Waters, I will be with thee; and through the Waters,
they shall not overflow thee; and through the fire it shall not burn thee,
neither shall the flame kindle upon thee, for I am the Lord thy God, I will
never leave thee Heb. 13. 5.
nor forsake thee. Be of good cheer Mat. 9. 2.
thy sins are forgiven thee. If we 1 John 1. 9.
confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins. Blessed be
the Poor, for theirs is the Kingdom Luke 6. 20, 21.
of God. Blessed are ye that hunger now, for you shall be filled. Blessed are
ye that weep now, for Romans 8. 28.
ye shall laugh. All things shall work together for good to them that love God.
If there be a willing 2 Cor. 8. 12.
mind, it is accepted, according to what a Man has with a thousand Psalm. 51. 8.
more. This is the Music that David desired to hear, which he calls joy and
gladness. Such Music and Dancing there is to it, in this House every moment,
and frequently an expression of spiritual joy, and jollity, in Psalms, and
Hymns, and spiritual Songs, making Ephesians 5. 19.
melody in the Heart unto the Lord.

And as for Treasures of Gold and Silver, there is not one of this House which
has not always plenty of both; Though many of them, many a time may say as
Peter did, Silver and Gold have I none: First Acts 3. 6.
they have that which is a thousand times better; The Word of God, which they
justly claim as their Heritage for ever. Thy Testimonies Psalm. 119. 111.
have I taken as an Heritage for ever: as my true Sovereign and peculiar good,
which I hold from thee as a Child of thy grace. The Law of thy Mouth is 72.
better unto me than thousands of Gold and Silver. More to be desired Psalm. 19.
10.
than Gold, yea than much fine Gold. And in that word they have bonds (which
made by solvent Men are esteemed every whit as good as the sums therein
specified) Divine Promises. One shall suffice for all. Thou shall lay up Gold
as Job 22. 24, 25.
Dust, and the Gold of Ophir, as the Stones of the Brook; yea, the Almighty
shall be thy Gold, and thou shall have plenty of Silver. There are a World of
goods more wherewith this House is stored, the worth whereof is unvaluable, the
smallest quantity whereof being a thousand times more worth, than a thousand
such Worlds as this Visible one is. The Lord, the Lord Exodus 34. 6.
God, gracious, merciful, long-suffering, abundant in goodness and truth; The
Earth is full of the goodness of the Lord, thy right Hand is full of
Righteousness. Psalm. 48. 10.
Touching the Almighty, he is excellent in Power, and in Judgment, and in
plenty of Justice. Holy, holy, holy, is the Lord of Hosts, Job 37. 23.
the whole Earth is full of his glory. Thou Lord art good and ready to forgive,
and plenteous in Mercy Psalm. 86. 5. 102. 8. 29. 4.
unto all them that call upon thee; the Voice of the Lord is full of Majesty.

And O the fullness of God manifested in the Flesh! We beheld his Glory, the
Glory of the only begotten of the Father, full of grace Joh. 1. 14, 16.
and truth. Of his fullness have we all received. With him is plenteous
Redemption.

7. This is a living House, other Houses are made of dead Materials, Wood and
Stone, most of Job 4. 19.
them of Clay, whose Foundation is in the Dust, which are crushed before the
Moth. God the Father John 5. 26.
has life in himself, and he has given to the Son to have life in himself,
and to be the cause and giver of life, of the life of nature to all Men; and of
grace and godliness to sinful Men, and of comfort to sorrowful Men, and of
Resurrection to dead Men, and of Glory to godly Men. It is God Acts 17. 28.
in whom we live, and move, and have our Being, and he it is that maintains
our life. O bless our God ye People, and make the voice of his praise to be
heard, which Psalm. 66. 8, 9.
holds our Soul in Life. Watching continually to prevent them that seek after
it, and lay snares for it. Men that are Princes Life-Guards, are fain sometimes
to sleep, cannot watch always, and Men that dwell in costly Houses are fain to
watch their Houses. Know this says our Savior, that if the good Man of the
House had known in what Watch the Thief would come, he would have watched, and
not have suffered his House to be broken Mat. 24 43.
up: But this House watches over all that dwell in it, that no hurt be at any
time done them. He that keeps thee will not slumber, says the Psalmist
speaking to himself; (who dwelt in the secret place of the most High) in the
spirit) Behold, he that keeps Israel Psalm. 121. 3, 4.
shall neither slumber nor sleep.

This is a new House, always new, and so needs no repair; it is not subject,
as all other Houses are, to age and decay. Though some old things are better
than new, Luke 5. 39.
No Man having drunk old Wine, straightway desires new: for he says the old
is better. They sacrificed to new Gods that came newly up. Yet generally new
things are best, and so accounted, both things of Gods making. Behold, I make
all things new. I create Rev. 21. 5.
new Heavens, and a new Earth. I Esa. 65. 17.
will make a new Covenant. A new Heart will I give you, and a new Jer. 31. 31.
spirit will I give you; thou shall be called by a new Name, which Ez. 36 26.
the Mouth of the Lord shall Name.

And so of Men's Garments, and all manner of Utensils, when and while new, are
most set by: Especially Houses, both themselves live and lodge in, and also
Outhouses when they are over old, they pull them down, and build new ones.
This House is never old, but as new at this day, as it was when the first holy
Man had his habitation in it, as full of luster and glory, ten thousand times
more glorious than that Palace of the Sun, which the Poet describes; and it
must needs be so, because every Inhabitant is not only glorious, made so by it,
but glory it self. Es. 4. 5.
Upon all the Glory shall be a defense. By Glory are meant the Saints of God,
the abstract put for the concrete, to note their eminent shining surpassing
transcendent excellency; though in this life they are compassed about with many
infirmities, which makes their glory less conspicuous, They are all Psalm. 45.
13.
glorious within. Now do but note what kind of defense* what manner of covering
this House is promised to be, to all those glorious ones that dwell in it,
namely like that of the Israelites, when they went out of Egypt. The Lord went
Exodus 13. 21.
before them by Day, to lead them in a Pillar of a Cloud in the way: and by
Night in a Pillar of Fire to give them light. It shall be (though not so
visibly) conspicuous, yet as illustrious and miraculous, and that against all
manner of evils, heat and rain, and for all times Day and Night. There shall
Esa. 4. 6.
be a Tabernacle for a shadow in the Daytime, from the heat, and for a place
of refuge from storm, and from Rain. God has been ever such a house of
defense to all his holy ones, is now and ever shall be, World without end. I am
the Lord, I change not. Jesus Mal. 3. 6. Heb. 13. 8.
Christ yesterday, to Day, and the same for ever.

His works indeed of the first Creation are changable to the worse and weaker,
but so is not he; of old have thou laid the foundation Psalm. 102. 25. 26, 27.
of the Earth, and the Heavens are the Works of thy Hands, they shall perish,
but thou shall endure, they all of them shall wax old, like a Garment, but thou
art the same. And so are all his works of the second Creation. The renewing
graces of his holy Spirit, the older they are, the newer and fresher, and more
flourishing they grow. They that are partakers of them, can say, as Caleb did
to Joshua, Jos. 14. 7. 10. 11.
Forty Years old was I when Moses sent me to epsy the Land, I am this Day
fourscore and five Years old, as yet I am as strong, this Day, as I was the Day
when Moses sent me, as my strength was then, even so is my strength now, for
War both to go out, and to come in. So it is said of Moses, who was an hundred
and twenty Years old when he dyed, yet his Eye Deuteronomy. 34. 7,
was not dim, nor his natural force abated. How much more may it be said of the
everlasting Lord God, that his Eyes are as sharp sighted as ever, nor is his
Divine force abated? The Eyes of the Lord 2 Chronicles. 16. 9.
run too and fro, throughout the whole Earth, to show himself strong Esa. 50. 2.
in the behalf of those whose heart 59. 1.
is perfect toward him. Is his hand shortened, that it cannot redeem? Or have I
no power to deliver? Behold the Lords hand is not shortened, that it cannot
save, neither his Ear heavy that it cannot hear. Psalm. 103. 17.
And as his Power is, so is his 119. 90.
Mercy and Truth. The Mercy of the Lord is from everlasting to everlasting:
upon them that fear him, and his righteousness, unto Childrens Children. Thy
faithfulness is unto all Generations.

This House therefore with all its Furniture is always new and fresh, which can
be said of no other* nor is it new formally only, but also effectively.

Have thou not known? have thou Esaias 4. 29.
not heard that the everlasting God, the Lord the Creator, of the ends of the
Earth faints not, neither is weary? His strength never decays, nor does his
will ever alter toward his, who by a never failing Power of the Holy Spirit
are carried as it were upon Eagles Wings, to Heaven, to the mark of their
supernal Calling. Yea, their Wings grow like unto Eagles, that is, they grow
young, and renew Psalm. 103* 5.
in spiritual Vigor.

9. It is a dwelling house, dwelling in, as well as dwelt in, an habitation,
inhabiting in each of its Inhabitants; which no other house is.

God is often said to dwell in Heaven. Unto thee will I lift up mine Psalm. 123* ^.
Eyes, O thou that dwell in the Heavens. Look down from Heaven Is. 63. 15.
and behold from the Habitation of thy Holiness, and of thy Glory. I dwell in
the High and Holy Place. 57. 15.
The Heaven is my Throne. We must not understand this, placing God in Heaven,
as if he were totally circumscribed there, for this is contrary to his infinite
greatness. Behold the Heaven, and Heaven of 1 Kings 8. 27.
Heavens cannot contain thee. Do not I fill Heaven and Earth? says Jer. 23. 24.
the Lord. Nor must we think he is so in Heaven, as if his sight of things
below were hindered by Job* 22. 12-15.
Heaven, as a Curtain drawn before him, as those great Fools thought: for this
is contrary to his Omnisciency. 1 Cor. 13. 12.
But he is said to be in Heaven, because he does there most immediately and
visibly manifest 1 John 3. 2.
his Majesty, and exhibit the fullness of his Glory, and because from thence he
does most manifest Psalm 19. 1. 76. 8.
his powerful providence, wisdom, justice and mercy: we are commanded, when we
pray to him, Romans 1. 18.
to conceive of him, as being in Mat. 6. 9.
Heaven, to teach us to raise our Souls, as high in praise, as possibly we can
above the Earth (beyond Heaven our thoughts cannot soar:) As also how to make
Prayers pleasing to God, both for matter and manner.

God is as often said to dwell on Earth, to have his Residence among his ancient
People, in the Land wherein they dwelt. Defile Numb. 35 34.
not the Land which ye shall inhabit, wherein I dwell, for I the Lord dwell
among the Children of Israel. Ps. 132. 13, 14.
The Lord has chosen Zion, he has desired it for his Habitation; This is my
rest for ever, here will I dwell, for I have desired it. Blessed be the Lord
out of Zion, 135. 21.
which dwells at Jerusalem. I have surely built thee an House to 1 Kings 8.
13.
dwell in. A settled place for thee to abide in for ever. In that place, as in
the flitting Tabernacle which Deuteronomy. 12. 11*
Moses made, he caused his Name to dwell: that is, he made manifest and known
in those places, the sacred Signs of his Presence, as it were by his own proper
name: His Majesty and Glory in singular and wonderful effects of Grace and
Power.

Every regenerate and faithful Man and Woman has ever been, is, and will be
owned and acknowledged the Temple of the Holy, Blessed, and Glorious Trinity.
Ye 2 Cor. 6. 16.
are the Temple of the Living God, as God has said, I will dwell in Ephesians. 3. 17.
them, and walk in them. That Christ may dwell in your hearts by Romans 8. 9.
faith. Ye are not in the Flesh, but in the Spirit: if so be that the Spirit of
God dwell in you. Know you not that your Body is the Temple 1 Cor. 6. 19.
of the Holy Ghost, which is in you, which ye have of God? These things are
signified by this dwelling of the Spirit in Believers. 1. That his Spirit is
effectual, and mighty to possess and govern them, enlightening their minds to
know, and powerfully guiding them, to do the known will of God. 2. That his
Presence is continual, not as of a Guest, who lodges for a Night at an Inn*
and is gone next Day, nor as a Sojourner, but as an owner, Joh. 14. 16, 17.
and Possessor to abide for ever. I will pray the Father, and he shall give you
another Comforter, that he may ab^de with you for ever: even the Spirit of
Truth, he dwells in you, and shall be in you. 3. The manner* of his Presence,
not by Infiniteness of Power, as he is present to all Creatures to sustain
them, but by his grace and healthful effects. If the Spirit of him that raised
up Jesus from the Dead, dwell in you, he shall quicken your immortal Souls, and
mortal Romans 8* 11.
Bodies, by his Spirit that dwells in you.

10. It is a movable Habitation, according to the motion of those that dwell in
it, accompanying them whithersoever they go, covering them where-soever they
are. Some Creatures carry their Houses about with them: So does every new
Creature, They are never out of this their own House.

The Israelites, during their abode in the Wilderness, dwelt in Tents Forty
Years: The Arabians and other People do so constantly, having no firm
Habitations. In time of War, and in traveling, these moveable Houses were, and
still are in use. (Places to dwell in, so made, as they might be removed and
carried too and fro:) God himself sends word to David, since the Day he brought
up Israel, unto that Day, he had not dwelt in a fixed settled House, But had 1*
Chron. 17. 5.
been from Tent to Tent, from one Tabernacle to another. But I have 8.
been with thee (says he) whither soever thou have walked. Yea, though I walk
through the Valley of the Psalm. 23. 4.
shadow of Death, says David unto God. I will fear no evil, for thou art with
me. While I sleep, 3. 5.
and when I awake, I am still with 139. 18.
thee.

Jacob had this assurance given him, that God would accompany him, and go too
and fro with him, when he fled from the face of his Brother. Behold I am with
thee, Genesis 28. 15*
and I will keep thee in all places whither thou go, and will come back
again with thee. I will not 46. 4.
leave thee. And so when he went to see his Son Joseph, I will go down with
thee into Egypt.

As the Wheels accompanied closely the living Creatures exactly following
their motion and their Ezekiel. 1. 19. 21.
rest, resting with them: When the living Creatures went, the Wheels went: when
the living Creatures were lift up, the Wheels were lift up: when those went,
these went, and when those stood, these stood. This living House as closely
accompanies the living Creatures in it, and as punctually attends their motions
up and down, and rests with them in their resting place every where.

11. Nor is this House capable of, or subject to any such casualties, as other
houses are. The houses of some poor Creatures, which they bear about with them,
are so brittle, that a foot that treads on them, or a Cart-Wheel going over
them, may crush and destroy them. The best built houses may be burnt with Fire,
or blown down with Tempests, or rent with Meteors, or broken up with Thieves;
Job 1. 19.
Job's Sons and Daughters were eating, and drinking Wine in their eldest
Brothers House, and behold there came a Wind from the Wilderness, and it fell
upon the young Men, and killed them. The Hold Judge. 9. 46, 50.
whereinto a thousand Men and Women of the Tower of Shechem entered, was set on
Fire, and consumed with all the Persons in it. 2 Kings 2^. 8, 9.
Nebuzaradan burnt in one Day the House of the Lord, and the Kings Houses, and
all the Houses of Jerusalem, and every great Man's House burnt he with Fire. I
will each. 14. 2.
gather all Nations against Jerusalem, and the City shall be taken, and the
Houses rifled. The Earth Numb. 16. 32.
opened her Mouth, and swallowed up Korah, Dathan and Abiram, and their Houses,
and all their goods.

But there is no fear of any such Psalm. 90. 1. and 91. 1. Esa. 8. 9, 10.
accident to this House, what Plots or conspiracies soever are made to harm it
or them, that live in it, 54. 16, 17.
there shall not a hair of their heads Psalm. 62. 3.
perish, nor their Treasures be touched. Heb. 12. 29.


True it is, this House is it self Dan. 3. 20.
a Consuming Fire, Infinitely hoter than that in Nebuchadnezar's Furnace, the
Flame whereof consumed those Men that took up, Shedrach, Meshach and Abednigo:
but it is only so to them that are without, and dare to come nigh to pillage
it, or hurt any in it, who walk as comfortably in this Fire, as those three
Children did in the burning Furnace, upon whose Bodies the Fire had no Power,
nor was an Hair of their Heads singed, neither Dan. 25. 27.
were their Coats changed, nor had the smell of Fire passed on them.

12. It is a holding House: as it holds the Souls of the Inhabitants in Life,
so it suffers not their feet to be moved out of it, but it keeps Psalm. 66. 9.
them constantly and perseveringly in. Nor is it in the Power of Men or Devils
to eject them, no, nor of the old Man that has still a Being in them, and
persuades them to depart, and make a change: for though they may do both if
they will, yet they cannot will to do either; for God has promised that all
whom he receives within himself, shall not have a heart to leave him, But to
abide for ever in him. I will put my fear in their Jer. 32. 40.
hearts, and they shall not depart from me. And he has power to perform what
he has promised, he Jude 24.
is able to keep you from falling, and to preserve you blameless, before the
presence of his glory is 1 Pet. 1. 5.
exceeding joy. We are kept by the Guard of Gods Power, his strongest (if
degrees be in) Omnipotency through faith unto salvation. There were never any
that went into this House by the Door. (Such as Jesus Christ is. I am the Joh.
10. 9.
Door. By him an abundant entrance is made into the Church, and consequently
unto God. No 14. 6.
Man comes unto the Father, but by me: by him we have access with confidence.)
that ever apostatized finally or totally.

Some that have seemed unto Ephesians. 3. 12.
themselves, and others to be real Col. 4. 14.
Members of this Family ( Demas for example) that went out, but Philem. 2.
they were never truly in, as appears 2 Timothy 4. 10.
by their going out. Hear the testimony of one of the household, the truth of
whom is without question. They went out from us, because they were not of us,
for if they had been of us, they would no doubt have continued with us; but
they went out, that they might 1 John 2. 19.
be manifest, that they were not all of us, the servant abides not in the
House for ever, but the Son abides ever. The righteous is Prove. 10. 25.
an everlasting Foundation. True it is, he may set one Foot out of Doors. David
did so when he 2 Samuel 11.
committed Adultery; and practiced the Death of Uriah, and Peter did so when he
forsware his Mark 14. 71.
Master, and with such direful curses denied that he knew him. But this was
through the violence of temptation: The purpose and resolution of both their
hearts, was not to take a step out, but to keep close within Door.

I have sworn and will perform Psalm. 119. 106.
it, that I will keep thy righteous Judgments. Though all Men should be
offended because of thee, yet I will not be offended. Though I Mat. 26. 34, 35.
should dye with thee, yet will I not deny thee. How fell they then into so
foul sins? Surely they were Gal. 6. 1.
suddenly overtaken: the one with a passion of lust, the other with a passion
of fear, and so they fell. 1 Pet. 1. 23.
But even then both of them had one Foot still within the House, which stayed
while the other stepped. They had sanctifying grace still in their hearts, whose
essential property is constancy, called therefore immortal Seed. And it
appeared (like sparks of Fire, when the ashes covering them, are blown away) 2 Samuel 12, 13.
as soon as they came to themselves: David yielded to the reproof of Nathan
presently. And Peter, when Luke 22. 61, 62.
the Lord turned and looked upon him, went out and wept bitterly. Each drew his
Foot back into the House again, and kept close in unto the end of their lives.

13. It is a House held by the best tenure, none like it; it is held in such a
head as is non-such, Jesus Christ, whom God has made Ephesians. 1. 20, 21, 22.
head of the Church, in a singular and eminent manner, far above the domination
which he has over all other Creatures. Col. 2. 10.


He dearly bought and purchased this Habitation for all the Elect, which they
had forfeited by their first offense, and hereupon were outed of it: He gave
himself 1 Timothy 2. 6.
a Ransom for them all, a Price fully answerable to their Souls, and to this
Inheritance. In him they may have been said to have received Esa. 40. 2.
at the Lords hand double for all their sins.

And for them it were, and not for himself only, that He fulfilled Mat. 3. 15.
all Righteousness, and thereby paid the whole debt of obedience to the Law:
which they did owe to God. All spiritual blessings whereby they are made meet
to be made partakers of this blessed Mansion, Faith, Repentance, and Holiness,
though they be Gospel. Gifts of God, and obtained merely through his Mercy, yet
is this mercy obtained from God only through Jesus Christ. Blessed be God, who
Ephesians. 1. 3.
has blessed us with all spiritual blessings in Christ, in him we have
Redemption through his Blood. Heb. 9. 14. 10. 19.
Which also purges our Consciences from dead Works to serve the living God,
and thereby we have boldness to enter into the holiest, and through his
Intercession, it is that we have our abiding there. Who shall lay any thing to
the charge of Gods Elect? Or bring a Writ of Ejection to them? Who is he that
condemns? Or who is he that passes Sentence, that they must avoid their
House? It is Romans 8. 33, 34.
Christ that dyed, yea rather that is risen again, who is even at the right
hand of God, who also makes Intercession for us. He dyed for, and in their
name and stead, whereby they are absolved from all their forfeits. He is risen
again 4. 25.
for their Justification, to acquit them, as it were by manner of solemn
Judgment. His Resurrection was a certain argument, that God was reconciled, and
that this habitation was regained for them; which could not have been, if he
had remained dead. For the continuation of the Payment, would always have
showed the Imperfection of it. And as he is at the right hand of God in the
Heavenly Glory, fully manifested, so they are at his right hand. Upon thy Psalm.
45. 9.
right hand did stand the Queen. And there he makes Intercession for them, by
continually representing himself, his Righteousness, Merit, and Love before the
face of his Father, and so preserves them in his favor and love, from which
nothing shall be ever able to separate Romans 8. 38, 39.
them, by him they have and hold possession.

14. It is a habitation best accommodated of any other. The conveniences
belonging to it are numberless and matchless. The excellency of the meanest of
them cannot be worthily uttered, nor sufficiently magnified by the tongue of
Men and Angels.

No such passage into any House as this. When the Queen of Sheba 1 Kings 10. 9.
had seen the House that King Solomon had built. -- And his ascent by which he
went up to the House of the Lord: (that most stately Bridge, and great terrace
born up with exceeding strong Walls, which he set upon that hollow place, and
deep praecipice, which divided Mount Zion from Mount Moriah, by which they went
from the royal Palace to the Temple,) There was no more Spirit in her: she was
ravished beyond her self. How insinitely more ravished would she have been, had
she seen by the eye of faith, (as probably she did and so was) the ascent and
passage into this house, which is the Lord. The Apostle tells us that he Heb.
10 19, 20.
by his blood has made a new and living way of entrance, into the holiest for
all believers: who by a lively faith represent unto themselves his humane
nature, with all that he has done in it for them: and hereby get into the
innermost fruition of Gods grace and glory. He in his own Person is the way and
passage into this super celestial Palace. I am the way, no John 14 6.
Man comes unto the Father, but by me.

Nor is there any house that has such Air. Kings have had a care of this
especially, that the edifice when erected, might have fresh Air, and cooling
Gales of Wind continually. Jehoiakim whose pride in building is blamed, is
brought in thus, expressing his purpose. I will build me a high house Chambers
Jer. 22. 14.
through Aired, (the Hebrew has it so, and so the Septuagint.) exposed to
blasts on every side. No house has such continual refreshing Gales as this.
Christ breaths upon his proper household, for an external sign of the Internal
operation of his spirit. He still does Joh. 20. 20.
so upon his whole household of faith: shedding the love of God abroad in their
hearts by his holy spirit, to whom their common Romans 5. 5.
Mother makes this Prayer, each is heard and granted. Awake O North Wind, and
come O South, Cant. 4. 16.
and blow upon my Garden.

By these two Winds of contrary qualities is signified the same spirit, working
either coolness and refreshing of Comfort, or heat and fervency of Zeal. And
Moreover that every Wind shall blow profit to every one that loves God, as
Romans 8. 28.
every one does that to him that dwells in him.

Nor has any House such Gardens, and Orchards, with Variety of Flowers, and
Fruits, and fresh Springs therein, nor such Walks Psalm. 87. 7.
and Arbours belonging and adjoining 26. 3.
to it, as this has. The loss of this parcel of Ground, Gen 2 8, 9.
which was stored with such excellent Plants and Trees, and enriched with more
fruitfulness, and beauty than any other part of the Earth, (called Paradise,
and the Garden of the Lord) made for 3. 23, 24.
Man's use and delight, and out of which he was excluded, and to which he might
no more come near, because of his sin, is abundantly made up to all that dwell
in God. Who have liberty to eat of the fruit of every Tree that is pleasant to
the sight, and good for food. Yea, Of the Tree of Life Rev. 2. 7.
which is in the midst of the Paradise 22. 14.
of God, and to drink of the 17.
Water of Life freely, and to walk at liberty. Yea themselves are the Psalm.
119. 45.
Gardens and Orchards of this House, wherein he walks and delights Cant. 4 16.
to feed. Nor have any Gardens and Orchards, and Springs such Fences and Guards
about them as these. A Garden enclosed Cant. 4. 12.
is my Sister, my Spouse, a Spring shut up, a Fountain sealed: in that Day sing
ye unto her a Vineyard of red Wine. I the Lord Esaias 27. 23.
do keep it, I will Water it every moment; Lest any hurt it, I will keep it
Night and Day. I (says the Lord) will be unto her a Wall Zec. 2. 5.
of Fire round about.

Nor is there any House that has such Lands and Revenues, such a stock
belonging to it. The Psalm. 24. 50.
Earth is the Lords, and the fullness thereof. Every Beast of the 10. 11.
Forest is mine, and the Cattle upon a thousand Hills. I know all the Fowls
upon the Mountains. (They are all before me, ready at my service) The World is
mine, and the fullness thereof: of the upper as well as lower World. Every one
that dwells in this house may say truly, all these are mine. The Apostle says
so. All things are 1 Cor. 3. 21.
yours. Entirely, refinedly, really, safely, serviceably, satisfyingly. He must
needs have all, that has the haver of all. He is by faith in Christ, Heir of
the World. Yea, Romans 4. 13.
they are in actual possession of all things, when they are in want of all
things. Having nothing, and 2 Cor. 6. 10.
yet possessing all things.

15. It is a House of the easiest rent, the chiefage to be paid is not so much
as a Pepper Corn, all that is required, is thankful acknowledgment, and
invocation, which are pointed out by terms of the Law. Sacrifices, Prayers,
and Vows. Offer unto God thanksgiving, and pay Psalm 50. 14, 15.
thy vows unto the most High, and call upon me in the Day of trouble. Thou that
teach another, teach thou not thy self? Yes, that I do, and that
practically and continually. Hear it and know it for your good. What shall I
render Psalm. 116. 12, 13.
unto the Lord for all his benefits toward me! I will take the Cup of
Salvation. I will solemnly and thankfully acknowledge him, (a phrase taken from
the custom observed in thanksgiving, after which they made a place wherein
the Father of the Family took a Cup in his hand, and used a certain form of
blessing, and having drank, and caused the Cup to go round to all the rest.)
And I will call upon the Name of the Lord, I will pay my 14. 17.
Vows unto the Lord. I will offer the Sacrifice of thanks giving, every Day
will I bless thee, and I will praise thy Name for ever and Psalm. 145. 2.
ever. God is willing we should have the comfort of his blessings, but he will
have the glory of them. My glory will I not give to another. Esaias 42 8.
We must give him the glory, which we do, when we give him the praise and
thanks. Whosoever offers praise, glorifyeth me. Psalm. 50 23.
The Shepwards returned, praising Luke 2. 22.
and glorifying God. The Samaritan that was healed, turned back, and with a
loud Voice glorified God, giving thanks. For his healing, 17. 14 -- 19.
now his thanks must not only be vocal, but vital and cordial. Bless the Lord O
my Soul, and all Psalm. 103 1.
that is within me, bless his holy Name. I will praise thee O Lord 9. 1.
with my whole heart, the Life and Conversation also must be rightly ordered.
The best livers are the best thanks-givers. To him that Psalm. 50. 22.
disposes his way aright, will I show the salvation of God. He has showed
thee, O Man, what is good, and what does the Lord require of thee, but to do
justly, and to love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God? And lest any should
think it difficult and grievous to do all this, let these Scriptures be
consulted. 1 John 5. 3. Pro. 21. 15. Phil. 1. 29. 2. 13. Math. 11. 30. Ezekiel.
36. 26, 27.

16. Who ever dwells in this House, shall be sure not to want an Earthly House
to dwell in, with all provision, and furniture convenient. He that gives the
greater, will not deny the less. Thus our blessed Savior reasons. Is not
Mat. 6. 25.
the Life more than Meat, and the Body than Raiment. God out of his Power and
Goodness having granted unto Man his Being, which is the greater, will not
deny him the lesser, which is the preservation Romans 8. 32.
thereof. And the Apostle. He that spared not his own Son, but delivered him up
for us all; How shall he not with him also freely give us all things.

Object. The Son of God himself, when on Earth, had not where Mat. 8. 20.
to lay his head. Those Worthies mentioned in that little Book of Martyrs
wanted houses. Wandering about in Sheepskins, and Goat Skins, Heb. 11. 37. 38.
in Deserts, and in Mountains, and in Dens, and Caves of the Earth. Saint Paul,
describing the condition of himself, and his fellows, says. Even unto this
present Hour, we both hunger and 1 Cor. 4. 11.
thirst, and are naked, and are buffeted, and have no certain dwelling place.
Now the Disciple is not above his Master, nor the Servant above his Lord. And
who will be so arrogant as to think himself Mat. 10. 24.
better, or better privileged, than those of whom the World was not worthy, or
that Holy Apostle?

Answ. Touching our Savior, as he was Voluntary poor to enrich us. Ye know the
Grace of our 2 Cor. 8. 9.
Lord Jesus Christ, that though he was rich, yet for your sakes he became poor,
that ye through his poverty might be rich. He sorrowed that we might rejoice,
dyed that we might live. So he would be houseless, that none of his might want
a House. 1. As for those other Worthies, God did indeed exercise their faith,
and patience. Yet 2. their Dens and Caves were better to them, than any Earthly
Palaces, having God's gracious presence with them, which was better to them
than ten Houses: (as Elkanah 1 Samuel 1. 8.
to Hannah, Am not I better to thee than Ten Sons?) Though Paul had no House of
his own, yet those that had, willingly received him into theirs. Lydia did so.
If ye have judged me faithful Acts 28. 7. 30.
unto the Lord, come into my house, and abide there, and she constrained us. So
did Publius the Chief Man of the Island receive him, and his Company, and
lodged them Three Days courteously. And Paul dwelt two whole Years in his own
hired House. Thus God provided 1 King. 17. 9. 2 King. 4. 8.
for Elijah and Elisha, and thus he provided for his Gospel Ministers, who have
not been suffered to live in their own Houses.

17. They that dwell in this House here, are sure of an Heavenly House
hereafter. We know 2 Cor. 5. 1.
that if our Earthly House of this Tabernacle were dissolved, we have a
building of God, an House not made with hands, Eternal in the Heavens.

18. While they are here, they are, or may be sure no evil shall befall them,
Because thou have made the Lord, even the most High, thy Habitation, there
shall no evil befall thee. See parallel promises, Psalm. 121. 7. Pro. 12. 21.
19. 23. Eccl. 85. By evil, is not meant moral evil, sin and iniquity. Evil of
fault or crime, for the holiest are not free from this, while on this side
Heaven. There is not a just Man Eccl. 7. 20.
on Earth that does good and sins not. Who can say I have Pro. 20. 9.
made my Heart clean, I am free from my sin. If we say that we have no sin, we
deceive our selves, 1 John 1. 8, 10.
and the truth is not in us; if we say we have not sinned, we make God a liar;
and his word is not in us: in many things we offend Jam. 3. 2.
all. Nor are injuries and wrongs from Men intended, in which sense evil is
sometimes taken, for Pro. 17. 13.
none are more subject to these, than the Household of God, nor the matter of
any other poenal evil sent by God, (as indeed all such 20. 22.
evils are) for these befall as well Psalm. 35. 12.
the Righteous, as the wicked. All things come alike to all, there is one Esaias
45. 7.
event to the Righteous, and to the wicked, to the good, and to the Amos 3. 6.
clean, and to the unclean, to him Eze. 21. 3, 4.
that sacrifices, and to him that sacrifices not. As is the good, so Eccl. 9.
2.
is the sinner; as he that swears, so he that fears an Oath. As the evil
partake of common blessings with good Men; so the good of common judgments with
evil ones: yea it is observed, that when God brings any common judgments, he
usually begins with his own, the dearly beloved of his Soul. Yea, that his
strokes are sorer upon them than upon any others. Yea, and when wicked Men
(whose habitation Joh. 6. 60.
the Devil is, as they are his, for he dwells in them; yea, they are incarnate
Devils) when these I say are free from all manner of outward evils, pious Men
who have made God their habitation, have immunity from none. And that they are
more-over obnoxious to inward afflictions, terror of Conscience, and wounds of
Spirit, which is an intolerable pressure; and therefore the promise must be
understood of their freedom from the form of poenal evils, which is the
revenging wrath of God, and the power such evils have to separate the Soul from
the Love of God. And the meaning is, they never have any dram of God's
revenging justice on them. A little of his chastising wrath some afflictions
Romans 8. 38, 39.
may have, for a little moment; nor shall any of them singly, or all of them
jointly be able to separate them from his Love in Mat. 6. 13.
Christ. Nay, they shall all cooperate for the furtherance of their spiritual
and eternal good. They believe as they are taught to pray that God would
deliver them from all evil; That is, that he will either Exodus 14. 13.
keep away evil imminent, that it come not at all, or that he will so assist in
suffering, as that they Psalm. 69. 14, 15.
shall not sink under the burden, or that he will take away the force and
strength of the Instrument, Dan. 3. 27. 6. 22.
that it shall not be able to act according to its Nature, or that he will
remove the evil clean away; or finally that he will take them 2 Samuel 24. 25.
away from the evil to come, or Esaias 57. 1.
that he will alter the nature of the evil, and turn it to good. One of these
ways God will deliver them 1 Kings 14. 13.
whose habitation he is, and any of these ways is this promise made 2 King. 22.
20.
good to them. Genesis 50. 20.


No more need to be said to prove the Lord the best Habitation, and them to be
the most, yea the only happy ones, who have made him their habitation.

THE SECOND SERMON.
THe Question will be, what it is to make God our Habitation? And how may we
know that we dwell in him? To the first part of the Question, I answer, it is
to make choice of him, to close with him, and to cleave unto him.

1. To make choice of God, as the sole Seat of our Souls rest, and the only
object of the Worship and Service of our whole Man. The chief end and use of a
House is well known to be rest. Where is the House that ye build unto me, Esa.
66. 1.
and where is the place of my rest. Every Man's House is the place of his rest?
My People shall dwell in a 32. 18.
peaceable Habitation, and in sure dwellings, and in quiet resting places. I
Nebucadnezar was at rest in Dan. 1. 3.
my House.

Rest is both the Privation, and a perfection of motion. That in respect of the
acquisition of the end of motion. For therefore things move that they may rest.
Rest is deservedly esteemed a choice and chief good. We may say of it, what the
Preacher does of Light. ( Truly Light is sweet) Truly rest Eccl. 11. 7.
is sweet. It was no deception of sight in Issachar, when he saw that rest Genesis
49. 15.
was good: The truth is, it is the good of goods. It may be said of it, as
David did of Goliah's sword. 1 Samuel 21. 9.
There is none like that, give it me. No good like this of rest, all other good
things without it avail nothing. All Creatures desire rest, the wild Beasts of
the Desert, and of the Island, the Satyr, and the Est. 5. 13.
screetch-Owle seek and find for themselves a place of Rest. It Is noted Esa.
34. 14.
as a comfortable privilege, which Foxes, and the Birds of the Air had above
our Savior, that they had Holes and Nests to rest Mat. 8. 20.
in. The Dove sent out of the Ark sought, but found no rest for the Genesis 8. 9.
soal of her foot, therefore returned again to that place of her rest. Special
Order is taken for the Ox Exodus 23. 12.
and the Ass, that they should have One Day of Rest in Seven; It kills the heart
of the Earth to be always tilled, and therefore the Countryman lets it lie
sometimes fallow, that by taking rest it may get heart. The very Devils affect
a House upon this account. The Mat. 12. 43, 44.
unclean Spirit gone out of a Man, walked through dry places, seeking rest and
finding none, I will, he says, return unto my House where I came out, where I
had rest. Yea, God himself seems to be joyed, when a House of rest was builded
for him to dwell in. Arise O Lord unto thy rest, the Lord has chosen Psalm.
132. 8.
Zion, he has desired it for his Habitation. This is my rest, for 13, 14.
ever here will I dwell, for I have desired it for a Habitation, and he blessed
the seventh Day, because that he rested thereon from all his Work. The best
thing one friend can wish to another, or procure for another, is rest. The Lord
grant Genesis 2. 2, 3.
that you may find rest, my Daughter; Shall I not seek rest for thee? that it
may be well with thee. And the worst mischief one can do his Neighbor, is to
spoil his rest. Pro. 24. 25.
Lay not wait, O wicked Man, against the dwelling place of the righteous,
spoil not his resting place. The goodness and badness of every Man's condition
is measured by rest. This has more rest Eccl. 6. 5.
than the other. Yea for rest Death it self is desirable. Why dyed I not from
the Womb? Why did I not give up the Ghost, when I came out of the Belly? Then
had I been at rest. There the weary be at rest. Job 3 11, 13. 17. 18.
There the Prisoners rest together.

Though bodily rest be a great good, and promised as a blessing. Thou shall
take thy rest in safety, Job 11. 18.
Israel shall be in rest and quiet, yet it is not to be compared to the Jer.
30. 10.
rest of the Soul, which indeed is the Soul of rest. And without which, the
best resting places with the greatest conveniences that the Est. 5. 10. 14.
whole World can yield, can give no content, witness Haman. And the
transcendent excellency of this rest is evidenced by its contrary, a restless
unquiet mind is a burden importable. Pro. 18. 14.


Let the Question be put concerning this rest, which Job propounds. But where
shall wisdom Job 28. 12.
be found, and where is the place of Understanding? Where may we find the
Souls Rest, and what is the place of its repose? The Answer is given
negatively, that it is not to be found in any Creatures. They will each of them
give the same answer, which the depth of the Sea does; It is not in me, the
Depth says, and the Sea says, it Id. 14.
is not in me.

Herb. Chapter Peace.
Sweet peace, where do thou dwell, I humbly crave,
Let me once know.
I sought thee in a secret Cave,
And asked if peace were there?
A hollow Wind did seem to answer no.
Go seek else where.
I did, and going, did a Rainbow note,
Surely thought I,
This is the Lace of Peaces Coat;
I will search out the matter.
But while I looked, the Clouds immediately
Did break and scatter.
Then I went to a Garden, and did spy
A gallant Flower.
The Crown Imperial sure, said I
Peace at the root must dwell.
But when I dug, I saw a Worm devour
What showed so well.
Pleasures, Riches, Honors, under which all the good things of the World are
comprehended, are utterly impotent, altogether insufficient to give the Soul of
Man any Rest.

Herb. Dot.
False glozing pleasures Casks of Happiness,
Foolish Night fires Women's and Childrens wishes,
Chases in Arras, gilded emptiness,
Shaddows well mounted, dreams in a Career,
Embroidered lies nothing between two dishes;
These are the Pleasures here.
Riches seem to be something able to do something in order to this end, but in
truth they are nothing, Pro. 23. 4, 5.
can do nothing. Labor not to be rich -- * Will thou set Esa. 55. 2.
thine Eyes upon that which is not? wherefore do you lay out your labor for
that which satisfyeth not?

Take Earthly Honors in, and take his testimony, who had all these in
abundance, made trial of them, to find what good was in them, and was more
able to improve them, than was ever any mere Man, since the fall, and hear him
after his utmost experimental disquisition, that not only, he found not what he
taught, namely rest for his Soul. Vanity of Vanities Eccl. 1. 2.
(says the Preacher) Vanity of Vanities, all is Vanity. But that he found the
clean contrary trouble, sorrow, anguish, bitterness, Vexation of Spirit.

The rich Man is brought in singing a Requiem to his Soul. Soul Luke 12. 16. 20.
thou have much goods laid up for many Years, take thine ease, eat, drink and
be merry. But wisdom Id. 20. 21.
upbraids his folly for placing his joy and peace in his possessions and
promising to give his Soul ease and rest in his abundance.

2. Nor is it to be found in knowledge, Humane or Divine, not in the former,
For in much wisdom is much grief, and he that increases knowledge, increases
sorrow. Learning cannot be attained without great pains of mind and body, and
he that has attained the highest degree and greatest measure, has his mind
more unsatisfied, than when he began to study. And herein Children and fools
have the advantage who as they want wit, so they want woe. Not to know much, but
to know nothing in the sweetest life of all. Nor in this neither, for
experience shows, that such that give themselves most to the study of
Scripture, and get greatest ability to discourse of Divine matters: are as far
from rest, as others which appears by the falling off, of many of them from one
Sect to another, till they have made trial of every dispensation (as they call
it) and then they are as far from satisfaction as ever, and farther.

3. Nor in a form of Godliness, it is not the outward profession of the true
Religion, nor frequent use of holy Ordinances, or religious exercises, public,
private, secret, 2 Kings 4. 29. 31.
that has any more power, to bring rest and quiet to the soul, than Elishah's
staff laid upon the dead Childs face, had to bring heat or life into it. The
frequent complaints of many Christians that are much in both confirm this.

4. Much less in Doctrines and Inventions of Men. These are Husks that Swines
do eat, they that fill their Bellies with them, are like unto Pharaoh's lean
kine. Zech. 10. 2.
And as they nourish not, so they quiet not; miserable Comforters are they all.
All that would take up their rest in any of these, may hear the Prophet
speaking thus unto them, Arise ye and depart, for Mal. 2. 10.
this is not your Rest.

Positively, the Souls true rest is to be had only in God, who is a fit Harbor
and Heaven for the heart to cast Anchor in; because he is a Spirit. 2. Being
infinite, he is able to fill the boundless and endless desires of it. Moreover
he made the Soul for himself. And gave it at the first a Being in himself, a
local Being in the Body, and a Spiritual Being in himself. This being in God is
Man's first being, when Man fell by sin, God in Justice cast him out of himself,
Forsook him; and so the Union and the Communion that he had with God was broken
off. Hence it is that the Soul being out of God, its proper Habitation, can
have no true rest, till it return thither: Return unto thy Rest, O my Psalm.
116. 7.
Soul.

The first step the Soul takes in this return to its rest, is a free and
well-advised choice of God to dwell in him, and serve there, observing and
conforming to the Laws and Orders of the House.

Joshua put the Children of Israel to their choice. Choose you Jos. 24. 25* 26.
this Day whom you will serve, whether the God your Fathers served on the other
side of the Flood, or the Gods of the Amorites in whose Land ye dwell, if it
seem evil unto you to serve the Lord. Professes her resolution; that
whatsoever they did, what choice soever they made, He and his House would serve
the Lord. They make the same profession, express the same resolution. God
forbid that we should do otherwise, we are witnesses against our selves, that
we have chosen us the Lord to serve, even the Lord our God, him will we serve,
and his Voice will we obey. Such a choice David made. I have voluntarily
Decreed to give up my self to be guided by thy Word. I have chosen thy
Precepts, above other Psalm* 119. 173
things for my soverain good and treasure: with which I am resolved to be
satisfied and contented, and precisely to order my words, and thoughts, and
actions according to them. Having inclined my Heart to perform thy Statutes
always, even unto the end. And being fully purposed that my Mouth Psalm. 119.
112.
shall not transgress, and that my 17. 3.
Feet shall run the ways of thy Psalm. 119. 32.
Commandments. Yea, were I put to my choice, I would choose rather to sit at
the Threshold of the House of my God, to be a Doorkeeper in it, than to dwell
in the Tents of Wickedness. The like choice did the three Children make, and so
did Daniel, and Moses, and Mary, and those ancient Martyrs, who would not
accept deliverance, which was offered them conditionally, that they would deny
the true God, and not serve him: this is the first way whereby Men make God
their habitation, namely by choosing him, giving him their judgments, wills,
and affections, the probation before all other Persons, or things, or service.
Whom have I in Heaven Psalm. 73 25.
but thee, and there is none upon Earth that I desire in comparison 63. 3.
of thee. A Day in thy Courts is 118* 8, 9.
better than a thousand. Thy loving kindness is better than Life. How much
better is thy Love than Wine, Zech. 2. 11.
and the smell of thine Ointments than all Spices? The Law of thy Mouth is
better to me than thousands of Gold and Silver. It is better to trust in the
Lord, than to put confidence in Princes.

The second follows, which is by closing with him. Many Nations Esaias 56. 3.
shall be joined unto the Lord, and shall be my People, and I will dwell 6. 7.
in the midst of them. This joining makes this natural dwelling. Neither let
the Son of the Stranger 1 Cor. 6. 17.
that has tied himself to the Lord, speak, saying, the Lord has utterly
separated me from his People. Also the Sons of the Stranger that join
themselves to the Lord to serve him, and love the Name of the Lord, to be his
servants, even them will I bring to my holy Mountain, and their Sacrifices
shall be accepted. He that is joined to the Lord, is one Spirit. United with
Christ, and so to God the Father, in Body and Soul, as by a Bond of spiritual
Matrimony in the Communion of the Spirit of Holiness.

This actual closing with God is, especially by faith, which is a trusting in
his mercy, through the mediation of his Son, with an obediential affiance. I
have trusted in Psalm. 13. 5.
thy mercy, and by this means made thee my Habitation, and Salvation, wherein I
take no small Consolation. Let him trust in the Esaias* 50. 10.
Name of the Lord, and stay upon his God. Rely with hearty confidence upon his
faithful promises, and most powerful, wise, and good providence, for preventing
and removing of evils; and obtaining all good, spiritual, temporal, and
eternal. The want of this is noted in that wicked mighty Man. Lo this Psalm.
52. 7.
is the Man that made not God his strength, but trusted in the abundance of his
Riches, and strengthened himself in his* wickedness. By repenting whereof, and
closing with God, by a religious trust, he might have made him his dwelling
place; for not doing so, he is threatened to be plucked out of his own dwelling 5.
place.

3. God is made our Habitation by cleaving to him, thus closed with persevering
in faith and holiness, adhearing constantly, and abiding faithfully to God.
Seeking and expecting all our safety from his sole protection, and accordingly
qualifying our selves for a capacity thereof, keeping in the way, to which he
has promised his safeguard. This is the meaning of the subject of this
proposition in the first Verse of this Psalm. He that dwells in the secret
Place of the most High. The same with making the Lord, even the most High, our
Habitation. Sticking fast also to him with the affections of the heart,
especially that of Love, which has the Nature of Glue. The Soul of Jonathan
was knit 1 Samuel 18. 1.
with the Soul of David, and Jonathan loved him as his own Soul. Ruth clave to
Naoimi; entreat me not says she to hear thee, or to return from following after
thee: Ruth. 1. 14. 16.
For whither thou go, I will go; and where thou lodgest, I will lodge; where
thou dyest, will I dye; and there will I be buried. Hezekiah 2 Kings 18. 6.
cleave unto the Lord, and departed not from him, but kept his Commandments;
him shall thou serve, and to him shall thou cleave; thus thou shall make him
thy habitation.

To the later Branch of the Question, I answer in the words of the Apostle
John, in his first Epistle, where he gives among others these Char. 1st.
four Characters of Persons dwelling in God. 1. He that keeps 1 John 3. 24.
his Commandments, dwells in him, and he in him. The Commandments of the
moral Law are meant, which whosoever keeps, approves himself to God and Men,
and to his own Conscience, that he has his dwelling in God. He that lives in
the breach of them, evidenceth* that he has not his abiding in God. Nor will
obedience to some of these Commandments be any comfort to a Man's conscience
that God is his habitation. That young Man in the Gospel could say to Christ,
who bad him, if he would enter into life, keep the Commandments, and mentions
sundry of them; All these things have I Mat. 19. 16. 23.
kept from my Youth up. The proud Pharisee thanked God he was not Luke 8. 11,
12.
as other Men were, Extortioners, Unjust, Adulterers, that he fasted twice a
Week, and gave Tithes Mat* 6. 20.
of all that he possessed. Herod did many things. Jam. 2. 10.


Obedience must be Universal; Whosoever shall keep the whole Law, 1 Kings 9. 4.
and yet is guilty in one point, offends in all. David did according to all
that God commanded Luke. 1. 6.
him. Zacharias and Elizabeth walked in all the Commandments and Ordinances of
the Lord; then shall I not be ashamed, when I have respect unto all thy
Commandments. Conscience must be made of every sin, great and small. They only
Psalm. 119 3.
are blessed that do no iniquity. I have refrained my Feet from every evil way.
I hate every false way. 101 104.
Darling sins must be abandoned 18. 23.
and abominated, sins of constitution, calling, company. I kept my Mat. 5. 19.
self from mine iniquity. So must every secret sin, even of thought. Why should
I think upon a Maid? Whosoever 1 These. 5 22.
shall break one of these least Commandments, shall be excluded out of Heaven;
yea, all appearance of evil must be abstained from. And conscience must be made
of every duty, how costly, dangerous, or difficult soever. 2 Cor. 8. 7. Phil.
4. 8, 9. Dan. 6. 10. Romans 12. 19, 20. True it is, we must be most careful of
such duties, that God has laid a charge upon us, especially to perform, namely
substantial duties of Piety and Charity, and the duties of our particular
Callings and Relations. Mat. 22. 38, 39* 23. 23, 24. 1 Samuel 15. 22. Hos. 6. 6.
Luke 3. 13, 14. 1 Timothy 6. 1, 2. Tit. 2. 15. Ephesians. 5. 22.

Not that it is expected that we should legally keep all these Commandments,
for this is impossible, while we are in these earthly Tabernacles. Evangelical
obedience will be accepted which stands in five things. 1. That we approve of
all the Commandments of God. I esteem all thy Commandments to Psalm. 119. 128
be right, the Law is holy, the Commandment Romans 7. 12.
is holy, just and good. 2. That we unfeignedly will, and earnestly endeavor
to keep the whole Law. We trust we have a Heb. 13. 8.
good conscience in all things willing to live honestly. O that my ways were
Psalm. 119. 5.
directed to keep thy Statutes. Let now thine Ear be attentive to the Prayer of
thy Servants, who desire Neh. 1. 11.
to fear thy Name. 3. That there be in us as earnest an endeavor. Herein do I
exercise my self to Act. 24. 16.
have always a Conscience void of offense both toward God and Man. 4. That we
unfeignedly repent, as often as we fall or fail: Grieving that we have done amiss
and resolve to do so no more. Luke 17. 4.
If thy Brother Sin against Thee seven times in a Day, and seven times in a Day
turn again to thee, saying* I repent: thou shall forgive him. Repent and be
converted, that Acts 3. 19.
your sins may be blotted out. I gave her space to repent of her Fornication,
and she repented not. Rev. 2. 21. 16. 9. and 21.
They repented not to give him glory, neither repented they of their murders,
or of their Sorceries, nor of their thefts, no Man repented him of his
wickedness, saying, what have I done? There was under the Law a Sacrifice, even
for Perjury, whereby a Man seals himself to the Devil.

5. That we believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, apprehending and applying the
promises of pardon made in his blood. Believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, and
thou shall Acts 16. 31.
be saved.

2. Hereby know we that we dwell Char. 2.
in him, and he in us, because he 1 John 4. 13
has given us of his Spirit. By spirit are meant the gifts or workings of the
Holy Ghost, which are twofold: one inferior, once slightly enlightening Men's
minds, this is common to the Elect, with many reprobates, who are said to be
made partakers of the Holy Ghost. All Heb. 6 4.
that before God are rightfully baptized, receive the Holy Ghost according Mat.
3. 11.
to the promise. No Man Acts 2. 38.
being able to say that Jesus is the Lord, but by the Holy Ghost. The 1 Cor.
12. 3.
other is a supreme gift, peculiar to the Elect only, a new quality of Holiness
infused into the Soul, transforming the whole Man, effecting a real change and
alteration of the whole Man from evil to good, enabling him to make a good
confession, and to walk in Love, which are the two next Characters.

3. Whosoever shall confess that Char. 3. Joh. 4. 15.
Jesus is the Son of God, God dwells in him, and he in God. This confession
includes and comprehends in it four things. 1. A distinct and cordial knowledge
of this, and all other fundamental Articles of the Christian Faith, which are
inseparable in their own Nature, (For if Jesus Christ be the Son of God, all
his Doctrine must be a Divine and everlasting truth) Especially of that which
the Gospel reveals, concerning Christ, namely that he is an alsufficient
Savior; and offered indefinitely to every reasonable Creature, that will
receive him in a Matrimonial Covenant, as a Wife receives her Husband to be
governed by him, and to cleave unto him in every condition. 2. A lively assent
of the mind to all this is an undoubted truth, with a free and full consent of
the will, to this blessed offer for the incomparable goodness of it, rolling
and relying upon his Person and merits for the obtaining of remission of sins,
and everlasting life after Death. According to that of the Apostle. This is a
faithful saying, 1 Timothy 1. 15.
and worthy of all acceptance that Jesus Christ came into the World to save
sinners. 3. A Verbal acknowledgment of these, and all other known and believed
Gospel Verities, with an open profession of them, before the face of the World.
That this is necessary to be found in every one that would approve himself to
have Interest in God, and possession of him, as his Habitation, appears belike
(in God's grace by Christ, is) by faith in the heart, as in a lively Spring,
and in confession, as a continual respiration, both which are promised in the
Gospel. For what says Moses, The Word is nigh thee, even Romans 10. 8, 9, 10.
in thy mouth, and in thy heart, that is, the Word of Faith, which we Preach,
that if thou shall confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and shall believe in
thy heart, that God raised him from the dead, thou shall be saved, for with the
heart Man believes unto Righteousness, and with the Mouth confession is made
unto Salvation. Nor can the one be without the other. For when God has once
said unto any Man's heart, I have called thee Psalm. 116. 6.
by thy Name, thou art mine. That Man's heart cannot but answer and say, Lord I
am thine. O Lord, truly I am thy Servant, I am thy Servant. And what he has
heard in the Ear, he cannot but declare in the hearing of others. One shall
Esaias 44. 5.
say, I am the Lords, and another shall call himself by the Name of Jacob, and
another shall subscribe with his hand, and surname himself by the Name of
Israel. All manner of Persons that shall join themselves to me with my Church:
shall make open profession of my faith and service, and therefore he Mark 8. 38.
that is ashamed of Christ, and his Words, in an adulterous and sinful
Generation, that would hate, and reproach, and persecute him for a strict
profession thereof; or is affrighted hereby from making such a profession; God
will never own, nor Christ acknowledge such a one. Their hidden faith shall not
hide them from the wrath of God, who Rev. 21. 8.
will take Eternal Vengeance on them for their Cowardice. They who through
carnal fear shall not dare to make profession of my truth, (says Christ) shall
have their part fixed in the Lake, that burns with Fire and Brimstone. These
lead the Van in the rout of Reprobates marching thitherward. Among the Chief
Rulers, many believed on Christ, but did not make public profession of
believing in Joh. 12 42, 43
him, for fear of excommunication: this faith of theirs was properly no faith.
For a true and lively faith confesses that with the Mouth, which is believed
in the Heart. This duty of confessing God was figured under the Law, by the
shaking of things offered, waving them to and fro before the Lord, Heb. 13 15.
which signified the shaking of our Lips, as in uttering and speaking forth his
praise. By him let us offer the Sacrifice to God continually, that is, the
fruit of our lips, giving thanks to his Name. So the telling forth frankly and
boldly what we hold in matter of Religion. 4. A Vital confession joined to a
Verbal. There are some whose lives give their Mouths the lie. They profess that
they know Tit. 1. 15.
God, but in works they deny him, being abominable disobedient, and unto every
good work Reprobate. Unto the wicked God says, what have thou to do to declare
my statutes, seeing thou hate instruction, Psalm. 50. 16, 17.
and castest my words behind thee?

God is love, and he that dwells Char. 4. 1 John 4. 16.
in Love, dwells in God, and God in him. This is a sure note and character of
our dwelling in God, when we find that we love God for himself, and our
Neighbor for his sake, In obedience to his Command. Thou shall love thy
Neighbor as thy self. And because of his Image, which is more or less visible
in every Man; by this we may try the truth of the first note, for the love of
God is the root of all true obedience to his Commandments. Nothing we do is
good in his sight, unless we do it out of love to him. When our Savior gives
the sum of the precepts of the first Table, he does it in these words. Thou
shall love Mat. 22. 37.
the Lord thy God with all thy heart. Giving us thereby to understand what
makes all the service there required to be acceptable unto God. The same makes
the duties of the second Table so. Let all your things be done in love. Romans
16. 14.
Follow the truth in love. Above Ephesians. 3. 15.
all these things put on Love. This Col. 3. 14.
makes them all lovely. Love is the Romans 13. 10.
fulfilling of the Law.

Qu. How may we know we have this love to God and Men?

Answ. Where there is true love to God, the heart is softened: The sight and
sense of sin will fill it with sorrow, for offending God thereby. Zech. 12. 10.
Psalm. 51. 3. Luke 7. 38, 47. and there will be a Psalm. 16. 3.
Daily increase of hatred of sin, a greater desire after, and delight in Cant.
8. 6, 7.
the Word of God, and all other means of grace, and in the Saints of God, and
a more fervent zeal against sin in our selves and others, and for advancement
of God's Romans 10. 2.
glory. For zeal is nothing else but a flame, issuing from the Fire of Love:
And because there is a zeal which is not according to knowledge, the five
requisites in the exerting of our zeal, ought to be examined, namely whether we
have a good cause and calling, and a Romans 10. 1.
good Conscience, and use only good means, and aim at a good end. Where there
is true love to Men, it will be extensive to all, and manifest it self by
unfeigned desire of their salvation, and an earnest desire to procure them all
the goods their necessities require according to our ability: and even Job 31.
29.
to our greatest Enemies, compassionate 1 Samuel 24. 26.
affection toward them, pitying 2 King. 6. 14* 24.
and grieving for any evil that befalls them, with a gentle Exodus 23. 4, 5.
usage of them in speech and action. Mat. 5. 44.
Thus are we commanded to Prove. 25. 21.
deal with our Enemies Ox or Ass. Moreover we are bound to pray for the pardon
of their sins, and conversion of their minds and manners, and readily to
relieve them. But especially we prove our dwelling in God by Love to the
Brethren. Christ's whole spiritual Kindred that are knit to him by the bond of
faith, and among themselves by that of love; Those on whom we discern the new
Man put on, which after God is created in righteousness and true holiness,
though different from us in judgment, in points of faith that are not
fundamental; Our love to these must not only be unfeigned* So it must be to all
others, and with a pure heart free from Lust, Romans 12. 9. 1 John 3. 18.
and evil surmising, but with extraordinary 1 Pet. 2. 22.
heat of affection.

Having thus proved the Doctrine, and resolved the Question, we proceed to
Application: And there are three sorts of Persons to be dealt with.

1. Such as are, or may be sure they have not yet made God their Habitation.

2. Such whose Habitation the Lord is sure enough, but they have no comfortable
assurance that he is so.

3. Such as have this assurance.

The first of these are the greatest part of the Visible Church, (as for the
rest of the World, which are 28. or 31. by computation they are without doubt
without God in the World) wherein there are no less than one and thirty sorts
of Hypocrites, of whom eleven come not up so high as the profession of the true
Religion. The other 20. Persons the true Religion, without being truly
Religious, Affecting the Name Religion, but dis-affecting the thing, The
description of each of these are legible in Crook's Characters. Now an
Hypocrite shall not come Job 13. 16.
before God, cannot subsist in his presence, much less have his abode in him.
Many of them have confidence in Gods mercies. But the 18. 13, 14.
Hypocrites hopes shall perish, whose hope shall be cut off, and whose 11. 20.
trust shall be a Spiders Web: their hopes shall be as the giving up of the
Ghost. For what is the hope 27. 8, 9.
of the Hypocrite, though he has gained when God takes away his Soul. Will
God hear his cries when trouble comes upon him? There is no hope of mercy for
them: no, though the fittest objects of mercy. The Lord shall have no joy in
their young Men. Neither shall have mercy on their Fatherless and Widows, for
every one is an Hypocrite. Nothing but woe is their Portion, as appears by
those 8. woes pronounced against them by Mat. 23.
our Savior in one Chapter. And he makes them (as it were) the Freeholders of
Hell. All others but as Inmates, holding under them. 24. 51.
And he has given 14. Notes together, whereby they may be known, any one of
which reigning in any Man, proves him to have nothing to do in God, that God is
not his Habitation, but that he is a Simon Magus, was in the gall Acts 8. 23.
of bitterness. It is too manifest, alas, that most among us are out of God, by
what has been spoken in answer to the Question. 1. There are none in
comparison that will be persuaded to make choice of God: Not only the whole
World out of the Church lies in 1 John 5. ^.
wickedness, as in a deep puddle have chosen to live under the power and
command of the wicked one, and with the Swine to wallow 2 Pet. 2. 22.
in the mire and filth of Sin, but also the whole Multitude that is within the
Body and Kingdom of Christ: Yea, they have chosen their own ways, and their
Soul delights Esa. 66. 3, 4.
in their Abominations. Psalm. 29. 30.
When I called none did answer, when I spoke none did hear, but they did evil
before mine Eyes, and and 81. 13.
chose that wherein I delighted not. Jer. 2. 25.
They hated knowledge, and did not choose the fear of the Lord, they would have
none of my counsel. Jude 5. 8.
My People would not hearken unto my Voice, and Israel would have none of me.
No, for I have loved strangers, and after them will I Deuteronomy. 32. 17.
go. Strange Nations and Gods, their Idolatries, Superstitions and Customs.
They choose new Gods Jer. 6. 13.
that came newly up, whom their Fathers feared not. From the least of them even
to the greatest, every one is given to Covetousness; from the Prophet, even to
the Priest, every one deals deceitfully. They Job 15. 5.
have chosen the Tongue of the Crafty.

Such a choice most of the sacred stock, and Members of the Church of old made.
The Sons of God saw that the Daughters of Genesis 6. 2.
Men were fair, and they took them Wives, of all which they chose. Without
making any distinction for spiritual matters, or Religion, did intimate was to
be done: and such a perverse choice the Jews long after made, who were the only
Visible Church, For John 4. 22.
Salvation is of the Jews. They cried all, not this Man but Barabbas. 18. 40.
They denied the holy One, and the just, and desired a Murderer to be granted
unto them. And no other choice do the generality of the World among us at this
day make. The World has three Daughters. The lust of the Flesh, the lust of
John 3. 16.
the Eye, and the Pride of Life. One of which every one chooses before God;
the Voluptuous the first, the Covetous the second, the Ambitious the third. And
who, or where is he or she, that is not one of these? Many walk, of whom I Phil
3. 18, 19.
have told you often, and now tell you even weeping, that they are Enemies of
the Cross of Christ. Whose God is their Belly, whose Glory is their shame, who
mind Earthly things.

2. There are as few that lay hold on God, join themselves to him, close with
him. There is none that calls upon thy Name, that stirs up himself to take
hold of Esaias 64. 7.
thee; Where are there any that do as those Children returning to Judea did?
the Children of Israel, and the Children of Judah together, of whom it is said,
They shall go and seek the Lord their Jer. 50. 4, 5.
God, they shall ask the way to Zion, with their Faces thither-ward. Saying,
come let us join our selves unto the Lord in a perpetual Covenant, that shall
not be forgotten. Going and weeping, for repentance for their former sins, for
grief to behold their miserable Estate. Where have we any that have any such
mind to join themselves unto the Lord? To become one spirit with him. We have
too many Acts 11. 24.
that join themselves to Harlots, making one Body with them: Like the
Israelites that committed Whoredom with the Daughters of Moab; and then joined
themselves with Baal Peor, and 2 Cor. 6. 16.
that join together with Thieves, and Drunkards, and Enemies to God and
goodness. Saying, Come with us, let us lay wait for blood, Pro. 1* 11.
let us lurk privily, for the Innocent without cause: though they have done us
no wrong. Come let us Jer. 18. 18*
devise devices against Jeremiah, let us smite him with the Tongue, lay
accusations and calumnies against him.

3. There are fewer that cleave unto the Lord. How many visible Members of the
Church joined a Covenant with God by Baptism, and in fellowship with his
People, have fearfully apostatized? yea, some that have been eminent for
knowledge, profession, and practice of piety, are fallen from their holy
principles and practices. Some to scandalous and foul sins; some 2 Timothy 4. 10.
to Popery, and other Heresies; some to Profaneness, and some to Worldliness,
like Demas, who forsook Paul, Having loved this present World: The eases,
commodities, and carnal securities thereof. How many are there in whom we may
see, as in him that fulfilled which our Savior speaks? Many that were the
first, the forwardest in their love to the Word, in the work of God, in
public, domestical, Mat. 19. 30.
and secret duties, are now become the last, the backwardest of all others:
After they had escaped 2 Pet 2. 20.
the pollutions of the World, through the knowledge of the Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ, They are again entangled therein, and overcome by the Devil.
Again, in some Mat. 12. 43.
manner, and for some time they fought, whereby he has for ever possessed
himself of them. To whom it is happened, according to the true Proverb. The Dog
is 2 Pet. 2. 22.
turned to his own Vomit again, and the Sow that was washed, to her wallowing
in the Mire.

4. How few have any care to keep the Commandments of God? How many give that
answer to his Prophets, pressing obedience, which those Jews did to Jeremy? As
for Jer. 44. 15, 16.
the word that thou have spoken unto us in the Name of the Lord, We will not
hearken unto thee. But we will certainly do whatsoever thing goes out of our
own Mouth, willingly walking after the Hos. 5. 11.
Commandments of Men.

5. Where almost shall we find such a one as Joshua? a Man in whom is the
Spirit, to whom God Numb. 27. 18.
has given his good Spirit, upon whom the Spirit of the Lord rests (as it
did upon Christ) the spirit Nehe. 9. 20.
of wisdom and understanding, the spirit of counsel, and might, the spirit of
knowledge, and of Esaias 11. 2.
fear of the Lord, the spirit of grace and of supplication, the spirit of Zech.
12. 10.
sanctification, of meekness, of faith, of love, and of a sound mind. Such Romans
1. 4.
a Spirit as Caleb had, fulfilling to 1 Cor. 4. 21.
follow God. No such spirit appears 2 Cor 4 13.
in many in our Days. In 2 Timothy 1. 7.
most there is the evil spirit, the spirit that works in the Children Numb.
14. 24.
of disobedience. A perverse Ephesians. 2. 2.
spirit, The Lord has mingled a spirit of perverseness in the Land. He has
taken away the understanding, and troubled them, as if they had drunk some
stupifying Drink. A Spirit of deep sleep. The Esaias 19 14.
Lord has punished their voluntary blindness with a greater astonishment,
depriving them quite of the light of his spirit, against whom 20. 10.
they rebelled, giving themselves over to the spirit of darkness. The spirit of
the World, such a spirit Romans 11. 8.
as has no proportion nor correspondency, but only with worldly things, which
it only values and 2 Cor. 2. 12.
affects. If Men had the holy spirit of God given them, they would be led by
him: follow his directions Romans 8. 14.
and good motions for the guide and Governor of their life; they would live in
the spirit, and walk Gal. 5. 25.
in the spirit, and strive in the newness Romans 7. 6.
of the spirit: and give and offer unto God a spiritual worship John 4. 24.
according to his nature. Bring Gal. 5 22. 23.
forth the fruit of the spirit, which is love, joy, peace, long-suffering,
gentleness, faith, meekness, temperance: but the clean contrary. But none of
all this they do, and therefore God has not given them his spirit, and
consequently they do not dwell in God.

6. Very few confess truly that Jesus Christ is the Son of God, 1 Cor. 8. 2.
They know nothing of him, and his Gospel, as they ought to know, distinctly,
humbly, ^avourly, practically. They give not their unfeigned assent and consent
unto his Holy Liturgy, that all in it is truth and goodness, nor do they own
and acknowledge him with their Lips and Lives.

7. Most Men are so far from dwelling in Love, that the hatred both of God and
Men dwells in them. They are haters of God could wish there were no God. Though
with their Tongue, some Rom 1. 30.
show much love, yet with their hearts they hate him, and his Laws, and ways.
And so they do his Ezekiel. 33. 31.
People, as Cain did Abel, and Ahab Micaiah, wishing evil to them, 1 John 3. 12.
out of a rooted and settled malice, and that for their Holiness, though they
pretend it is for their hypocrisy; 1 Kings 22. 8.
and if any wrong them, they bear implacable spirits toward them: by this it
appears they dwell not in God.

Now my business with all these, is to advise them to give all diligence, to
give themselves no rest, till they have gained the Lord, even the most High, to
be their habitation, and to instruct them in the means conducing to this end.

Motives, many might be given, but sufficient has been spoken in the beginning
of this Discourse, concerning the desirableness and excellency of Rest in
general, and of the Souls rest, which is to be found only in this House. To
which I shall add, that in no other a Man that takes his rest can be secure and
safe, but in this he may. I will both lay me down and Psalm. 4. 8. 91. 1.
sleep, for thou Lord make me dwell in safety. If thou preparest Job 11. 13.
18, 19.
thy heart, make thy self fit to lodge under the shadow of the Almighty,
Thou shall take thy rest in safety. Also thou shall lie down, Pro. 1. 33.
and none shall make thee afraid. Whosoever harkneth to me, uses means to have his
abiding in me, shall dwell safely, and be quiet from the fear of evil. God
says to every one, whom he sends his Ministers 1 Sa. 22. 23.
unto, to come and take their Rest in him; As David to Abiathan, Abide thou
with me, fear not, for Exodus 9. 18* 22
thou shall be in safeguard. Those Egyptians that feared the Word of the Lord,
threatening a direful hayle which should come on the morrow, and should destroy
all Men and Beasts, which were out of Houses. Made their Servants, and their
Cattle flee into Houses. He that regarded not the word of the Lord, left his
Servants and his Cattle in the Field, to their destruction. It will be the
destruction of you and yours to Eternity, if you get not your selves and them
timely into this House, where and no where else there is safety.

The general means is employed in the word making, which speaks stirring and
action. As God the Father has made his Son Jesus 1 Cor. 1. 30.
Christ unto believers, wisdom, righteousness, and sanctification, and
redemption. So he that by faith in Christ, which works by Love, makes God unto
himself all that to him, which in all estates may give him comfort, and
satisfaction, his King, Lord, Husband, Father, Pro. 13. 4.
Sheapherd, Son, Shield, Comfortress, Hiding Place, Habitation and 21. 25.
Portion: You that have as yet no such portion in God, arise and be doing. The
Soul of the Sluggard desires and has nothing, because his hands refuse to
labor; but the Psalm. 36. 8.
soul of the diligent shall be made fat. Such shall be abundantly satisfied
with the fatness of God's House: and he shall make them drink of the Rivers of
his pleasures. Wherefore do they spend Money for that which is not Bread, and
their labor for that which satisfies not? Heathens were wont to say, the Gods
sell good things to Men for Labors.

True it is, all Men are always Psalm. 106 19. Hos. 8. 11. 10. 1. 13. 2.
making. We read of many that have made, and do make woeful work. They made a
Calf in Horeb. Esaias 59. 7.
Ephraim has made many Altars to Sin. They have made goodly Imamages, zech. 7.
12.
Molton Images of their Silver and Idols, according to your own understanding.
Their Feet Heb. 2. 15.
run to evil, and they make haste to shed innocent blood. They have Mat. 15. 6.
made their hearts as an Adamant Stone. Woe to thee that put thy Bottle to
thy Neighbor, and make him drunken. We have 1 Timothy 1. 19.
made Lies our refuge. Ye have made the Commandment of God of none effect. By
the Tradition ye Pro. 14. 9.
have made my House a Den of Thieves. Some having put away Acts 23. 13.
Faith and a good Conscience, concerning faith have made shipwreck. Fools make
a mock of sin. Such Rev. 22. 15.
kind of making makes Men meet to be made partakers of the Inheritance of the
Devil, and his Angels in blackness of darkness for ever.

Another manner of making is required of them that would have God to become
their Habitation. Ezekiel. 18. 31. Jer. 18. 11.
Cast away from you all your transgressions, whereby ye have transgressed; and
make ye a new heart, and a new spirit: return ye now Luke 3. 4.
every one from his evil way, and make your ways and your doings good; Prepare
ye the way of the Heb. 12. 13.
Lord, make his Path straight. Make straight Paths for your Feet. Make the way
of the Gospel easy for 2 Pet. 1. 10.
you. By the diligent Obedience, give diligence to make your Calling and your
Election sure.

More particularly consider, what they that want a House, and hear of a good
one to be had, do, and do likewise.

1. They are sensible of, and lay sadly to heart their misery thereby. What
comfort can that Man have, that has Meat, Drink, and Clothes, and Silver, and
Gold, and Jewels; if with these he has not a House to live in? And such a
House as can keep him, and what he has, dry? A Housless Man is exposed to
unsufferable evils, to all the injuries of Heaven and Earth; in the Day the
draught consumes him, and the frost by Night, and all his Sleep departs from
his Eyes.

2. They consider how happy they are that have a House, and such an one as has
been described for properties, furniture, conveniences; and how happy
themselves should be, if they had the same.

3. The desire of your Soul is carried earnestly after this Happiness, and they
express their desires both by enquiring of them that have, how the House they
have heard of may be had, and requesting them that have interest in the owner
and disposer of it to befriend them in speaking a good word for them, and also
making and putting up their supplication themselves to him, to vouchsafe this
favor to them.

4. They are contented to purchase, or take it at any rate within their power,
are willing to come up to the full price or rent demanded.

5. They put themselves into the way, that leads to this House, with the Price
in their hands, (as those Judges 16. 18.
Lords are said to go to Delilah.)

6. They are careful to qualify themselves, so as to be made meet to enter
into the House, and dwell there. We read of a prohibition to suffer any that
are blind and 2 Samuel 5. 8.
lame to come into the House of Es. 4. 2.
David. Nor might any enter into Ahasuerus Gate clothed in Sackcloth.

7. They are ready to enter into Covenants and Bonds, and an Oath too if need
be, to perform Conditions that are required by him that owns the House, and
must give them possession of it.

1. All this must be done by you that are out of God, that he may become your
Habitation. See and Jer. 2. 19.
know that it is an evil and a bitter Ephesians. 2. 12.
thing to be without God in the World. You have no Union nor Communion with
Christ, the Spring of all spiritual and everlasting blessings. You are separate
from his body, in which only he communicates his grace. You have no Interest
nor Portion in the goods promised by the Covenant of grace; are without all
hope of salvation while in that condition. You are Mal 2. 2.
subject to the wrath and curse of Psalm. 69. 22.
God, your very blessings are curses, your Table is a snare, and that which
should be for your welfare, is a trap: Not only the corporal but spiritual
food, even the consecrated Elements which you receive. Every Creature is your
enemy, and seeks your ruin; yea, all things work together to effect it. You
are every moment in danger of dropping into Hell; out of Esa. 10. 3, 4.
which there is no Redemption. And what will ye do in the Day of Mat. 13. 30,
42.
Visitation, to whom will ye flee for help? There is no help for you out of me.
They shall be bound up and tied together as bundles, and cast into the Furnace
of Fire; there shall be wailing and gnashing of teeth. You may seem to your
selves, and others to be in a good condition, because you have the World at
will, and are perhaps civil and honest; yea, and formally religious like the
Laodicean Angel. Thou Rev. 3. 17.
say I am rich, and increased with goods, and have need of nothing; and
know not that thou art poor, and blind, and naked.

Apprehend these, as the Officers of the Children of Israel did, when Pharaoh
denied them Exodus 5. 19.
Straw, To be in evil case, be afflicted, Jam. 4. 9.
make these miserable, so the word signifies. Go too now 51.
ye rich Men, weep and howl for the miseries that shall come upon you. Though a
sinner do evil an Eccl. 8. 12, 13.
Hundred times, and prolong his Days, yet surely I know that it shall go well
with them that fear the Lord, which dwell in him. But it shall not be well with
the wicked, whose Habitation the Devil is, whom they serve, and with whom they
shall shortly dwell in his infernal House to all Eternity. Mean time their
judgment lingereth not, 2 Pet. 2 3.
and their damnation slumbereth not, but is coming Post-haste to Psalm. 140. 11.
meet them. Evil shall hunt the Violent Man to overthrow him. The punishment
which he has deserved for his persecution, shall persecute him, until such
time, as like unto a Beast forced to some City, he fall and perish. Be sure
your sin will Numb. 32 23
find you out. The wrath of God is revealed from Heaven against all Romans 1. 18.
Ungodliness, and Unrighteousness and 2. 8, 9.
of Men, who hold the truth in unrighteousness; indignation* and wrath,
tribulation and anguish upon every Soul that does evil. The Psalm. 9. 17.
wicked shall be turned into Hell, and all the People that forget God. Upon the
wicked he shall rain 11. 6.
snares, Fire and Brimstone, and an horrible Tempest; this shall be the Portion
of their Cup. Say to thy Romans 7. 24.
self, Is this my portion? O wretched Man that I am, who shall deliver me out
of this dark and damned estate? If Paul cried out so lamentably, because of the
remnant of natural corruption, which was as grievous to him, as if a dead-body
had been tied to him, and he compelled continually to carry it about with him,
What cause have I to lament, that am in the state of corrupt nature, and gall
of bitterness? Till Men have this knowledge, and sense of their misery, in
being out of God, they are not so much as called to come Mat. 11. 28.
into him.

2. See and apprehend how happy you should be, transcendently happy, had you a
God to dwell in, Jehovah, David's Refuge, the most high. The Psalmist having
signified the happiness of those People that were to enjoy health of Body,
abundance of Fruit, Herds and Flocks of strong Cattle, and public Peace,
Corrects himself, concluding his enumeration with this gratulatory Epiphonema,
or pleasant ending; Yea, Psalm. 144. 2. to the end.
happy is that People, whose God is the Lord. And so Moses, after celebration
of Gods great goodness to Israel, in being a most glorious and powerful
protection unto them. In dispossessing their Enemies, and Deuteronomy. 33 26. to the
end.
bringing them into their Land, He elevates their happiness, and celebrates
their exaltation above all other People, in having the Lord for their God and
Habitation. If God be for us, (he is so far for Pro. 8. 31. to the end.
all them that are in him his household of faith, the Lord takes my part with
them that help me) Who Psalm. 118. 7.
can be against us? None to hurt Romans 8. 28.
us, all things cooperate for our good, Afflictions, Sin, Satan, All. If it
sounds harsh to say sin turns to our good, certainly it turns to our good, if
the Christian rises with greater shame and hatred of it, after his fall. Put
not your trust in Princes, nor in the Son of Psalm. 146. 3, 5.
Man, in whom there is no Salvation; happy is he that has the God of Jacob for
his help, whose hope is in the Lord his God, who has him for his Habitation.
Blessed is the Man whom thou choosest, and causest to approach unto Thee, that
65. 4.
he may dwell in thy Courts; We shall be satisfied with the goodness of thy
House. Let your judgments be thoroughly convinced, that the happiness of Man
lies in the enjoyment of God, and that it can never be well with you* till you
have possession of this resting place, and that then your happiness will be
superlative.

3. Let your desires be carried after God, vehemently and constantly, like the
desires of a hungry thirsty Man after Meat and moisture, whom nothing of any
other kind will satisfy; And like Luke 1. 53.
the desire of an Infant, after the Milk of its Nurses Breasts, who Mat. 5. 6.
will cry it self to Death, if it be Esaias 44. 3.
kept from it. Many promises are 55. 1.
made to such desires. Such an affection Rev. 22. 17.
we find to have been in the People. The desire of our Soul Esaias 26. 9.
is to thy Name, or to the remembrance of Thee; with my Soul have I desired
Thee in the Night. As the Heart pants after the Water Psalm 42. 1, 2*
brooks, so pants my Soul for thee O God! My Soul thirsts for the living
God. When shall I come and 73 2^
appear before God? Whom have I in Heaven but thee? And there is none upon
Earth that I desire besides thee. Let the same inward, earnest, constant
affection be in you, and express your desires, asking the way to this House, as
those returning Captives did, with their ^^ 45.
Faces thitherward: And as those punctually pierced sinners did, Men and
Brethren, etc. And as the terrified Jailer: Sirs, what must I do to be saved?
Yea, do as Simon Magus did, pray them that have interest in the Lord to pray
for you. Yea your selves take with you words, and turn unto the Lord, saying,
take away all iniquity, and receive us graciously. Hos. 14. 2.


4. Because this House cannot be had but by buying, nor any of the goods of it.
Take our Savior's advice. I counsel thee to buy of Rev. 3. 18.
me Gold, tried in the Fire, that thou may be rich, and white Raiment that
thou may be clothed: Come ye, buy and eat; yea, come, ^say 85. 1.
buy Wine and Milk: to buy, is properly Genesis 23. 9.
to get a Commodity, by giving the due price of it: thus this House cannot be
bought, nor any spiritual gift. Thy Money perish with thee, because that thou
have thought, that the gift of God may be purchased with Silver. But to obtain
a thing by other means, as to part with something for it, or by pains and
labor, is in Scripture phrase, buying. Thus Paul Phil. 3. 7, 10.
was contented to part with any thing, how dear soever, and to be at any pains
to gain Jesus Christ: and so must you, if you would gain the most High for your
Habitation. Many there are that think this House not worth the cheaping, bid
nothing for it: God is not in Psalm. 10. 4.
all their thoughts. They will part with nothing, no not with the beastliest
lusts, be at no pains at all for God. If he and Heaven will be had for nothing,
without any labor, perhaps they would accept thereof; but upon any harder
term^, you may hear them bidding God depart from them. Job. 21. 14.


Others there are that bid seeming fair, but will not come up to the price.
This did that young Ruler, he yielded obedience to the Commandments of the
second Table, Mat. 19.
and his Obedience was Universal and constant; and more than this, he
proffereth his desire to know, and do more. The five foolish Virgins did more
than he, they kept themselves undefiled from the World, made open profession of
Christ, had faith and convictions to keep their profession alive; nor was their
profession idle, they performed Christian duties, frequented Gospel Ordinances;
their Companions were Christ's, whom as they owned, so sought after: and
finally expressed their earnest desire of saving grace. Those Hypocrites Esaias
58.
of old seem to bid more than these. They sought God diligently, and constantly
delighted to know his ways; practiced good, were steadfast to their Principles,
faithful to their profession, desired to be guided and counseled by God; took
delight in approaching to him; afflicted their Souls with fasting. Judas left
all to follow Christ, continued long with him in his temptation, preached the
Gospel zealously, and so demeaned himself, that none of his followers had any
suspicion of his Hypocrisy.

Qu. What was wanting in these Chapmen, that bid thus fairly for this House,
and went without it?

Answ. Three things, which you must bring to make up the Price of this
Purchase, or fare as they did; Namely, 1. Poverty of Spirit, they came with
Money: You must come without, or go without. Come, buy without Money, and
without Esaias 55. 1.
Price. He that has no Money, Come; apprehend your selves in the prodigals
condition, in extreme want of grace, and in debt to divine Justice ten thousand
Talents, and utterly unable to pay one Unite. To such a Chapman will the Luke
15. 14, 16.
Lord look and hearken. For thus Esaias 66. 2.
says the high and lofty one that inhabiteth Eternity, whose Name is Holy; I
dwell in the High and Holy Place with him, also that is and 57. 15.
of an humble spirit. And to be sure he dwells in God, in whom God dwells.
Blessed are the Poor in Spirit, for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven. 2.
Self-denial. If Luke 9. 23.
any Man will come after me, let him deny himself. Christ was going unto his
Fathers Bosom, (he John 1. 18.
was there always;) they that go after him, must needs go in thither: this only
self-denyers do, who forsake the motions of their own corrupt reason and will,
loath whatsoever Gal. 5. 24.
is lovely to Nature, that will hinder them in the course of godliness,
mortify the old Man, crucify the flesh, with the affections Luke 14. 26.
and lusts; yea, dispose themselves to hate, even their nearest kindred; in
case the love of them be incompatible with the love that is due Acts 20. 24.
^o Jesus Christ. Nor is their life ^ear to them, nor dare they do that which
they do, but suspect is ^ispleasing to God. Many have written divinely upon
this subject. Mr. Baxter incomparably.

4. An entire resignation of the whole heart to Jesus Christ. Take my Yoke upon
you, and learn of Mat. 11. 29.
me, and you shall find rest for your Souls. Yield and submit our selves we
must, both actively and passively.

5. Get into the way that leads unto this House. I am the way Joh. 14. 6.
(says Christ) No Man comes unto the Father, but by me. The way to get into
Christ, is, by a lively faith, denying our own righteousness, and rolling our
Persons, Souls and Bodies upon the Person of Christ, God and Man, and upon his
merits and righteousness, and upon the promises made in him, for remission of
sins and salvation; receiving him not only, as a Savior, but also as a Lord; as
willing to be ruled by him, as well as to be saved. If you find it difficult
to do this, do as that poor Man did, Who cried out, and said with tears, Mark
9. 24.
I believe, Lord help my unbelief.

6. You that are yet in a state of nature, blind and lame, and worse clothed
than with Sack - cloth, and so unmeet to be admitted into this House; Anoint
your Eyes Rev. 3. 18.
with Eye Salve, that you may see. Acts 14. 18.
You know of whom you may have it, and have faith to be healed of your
lameness; as that Cripple from his Mothers Womb had, in whom the Spirit of God
had infused some seeds of Faith: which Paul conceived by Revelation. And cast
away those filthy Garments Esa. 30. 22.
that are upon you, as menstruous Clothes; saying, get you Zech. 3. 3, 4.
hence, and put on other Apparel; The new Man, which after God Ephesians. 4. 24.
is Created in Righteousness, and Holiness of Truth.

7. Nor do you stick at any engagements, or obligations, or oaths required of
you; but freely enter into any that shall be put upon you, by him who cannot
impose any thing, but what is holy, just, and good; And resolve to keep them. I
have sworn, and I will Psalm. 119. 106.
perform it, that I will keep thy righteous Judgments.

Thus do, and you shall not fail to find the Lord to be, what a House, and all
desirable Furniture and Conveniences, can be unto you.

THE THIRD SERMON.
THere is yet one thing more required of you, that would make God your
habitation, viz. That you make your selves his habitation. He will not suffer
any to dwell in him, who freely do not suffer him to dwell in them, in all the
Scriptures we quoted out of the Apostle John's first Epistle, Characterizing
them that dwell in God. We find the 1 John 3 24.
dwelling to be mutual. If therefore 4. 13.
you desire to dwell in God, serve his desire, which is, that he 15. 16.
may enter and dwell in you, in your whole Man, in all the faculties of your
souls, mind, will, affections, memory and conscience, and in all the senses and
members of your Bodies, Eyes, Ears, Mouths, Hands, Feet. But especially he
craves the heart, My Son give me Prove. 23. 26.
thy Heart, and let thine Eyes observe my Ways. The heart first, and then the
Eyes. Lift up your Psalm. 24. 7, 9.
Heads O ye Gates, and be ye lift up O ye everlasting Doors, that the King of
Glory may come in. Men's hearts are compared to Trap-doors, the lifting them up
is the opening of them. They must be lift off 1 John 2. 16.
from things of the World, from the things below, and be lift up to things
above. Set your affections Col. 3. 1, 2.
on things above, not on things on the Earth. See how earnest the Lord Jesus is
with you to give him entrance. Behold, I stand at the Door and knock, if any
Man hear my Voice, and open the Rev. 3. 20.
Door, I will come in to him, and sup with him, and he with me. Read Cant. 5. 2
-- 7. and observe the several degrees, by which this Door comes to be opened
unto him. Now Prove. 10. 10.
because it is not every heart, that is fit to entertain God. The heart of the
Wicked is little worth. The Query will be, what manner of heart it is, that God
is willing and desirous to dwell in. Our Savior resolves the Query, It is an
Luke 8. 19.
honest and good heart. For only such a heart is good soil, fit for the good
Seed of the Word to fall into, and God comes into the heart with his Word.

Qu. What is an honest heart, and what makes it so?

Answ. That is an honest heart, 2 Cor. 8. 21.
That provides for things comely before God and Men. It was honestly said of
those Israelites to Moses: Go thou near, and hear Deuteronomy. 5. 27.
all that the Lord our God shall speak unto thee, and we will hear it, and do
it. They have well said, (says God) all that they have spoken, but O that
there were such an heart in them, that they would fear me. The fear of God is
the principal grace that makes the heart honest. And then a Man fears God when,
distrustful of his own insufficiency to do any thing that God requires, he is
studious and willing to give up himself to Christ, to be taught of him, and
enabled by him to do all the will of God.

A good heart is described, and Acts 10. 33.
set forth in Scripture, by sundry 2 Cor. 8. 8.
Names and Epithites; namely, new, broken, single, whole, pure, perfect. And
although it be true, that he that has one of these, in truth, has all, they
are all one; Yet because each of them requires a several notion to open it, and
because some can better discern of one, than of another, it will be needful to
speak a word or two to each of them. Ezekiel. 36. 26.


That is a New heart which is furnished with a new spirit; that is to say, new
dispositions, inclinations, and habits; It Is called new, because it is opposed
to the old spirit, that of the World, and of the Devil, who by breathing on Men
makes them go an end into old courses; And because its ever fresh and green,
and comfortable to them that have it.

That is a Broken heart, which is Acts 2. 37.
smitten and pierced with remorse 2 Cor. 10 4, 5.
for sin, broken down and brought low, all high thoughts laid flat Hos. 14. 3,
8.
and level, Broken off from the Jer. 4. 3.
ways of sin and stubborness in pursuit of those ways, Broken up as fallow
ground, made soft, and tender, as Josiahs was.

That Is an open heart, which is enlightened to see our estate by nature, Acts
16. 14.
and bewail it; And to see comfort in Christ, and rejoice in it; To have it
also enlarged toward God's faithful Ministers, as Lydia's was toward Paul,
and his fellow laborers, who constrained them to come into her House, and
abide there; as also to run the Psalm 119 3^.
way of God's Commandments.

A Single heart is opposed to eyeservice, Col. 3. 22. 2 Cor. 1. 12. and 2. 17.
Psalm. 12. 2.
and to carnal wisdom, and to double mindedness, and to guile.

A Whole heart is a willing heart; John 1. 47. Psalm. 110. 3. Jer. 17. 5. Hos.
10. 2. Jer. 5. 23.
when we are willing to a thing, (we use to say with all our hearts;) It Is
opposed to a heart withdrawing it self, and to a heart divided, willing to lay
hold on God, and the World too, and that fulfilleth not to walk after God.

That heart is pure, that suffers no sin to abide in it, without disallowance.
It being both against 1 John 3. 3.
the judgment and will, and when after falling into sin, there is a speedy
rising again with self-abhorring.

1. A Perfect heart includes integrity, and uprightness. The heart is then
entire, when it is sanctified throughout, and when there is a study and desire
to attain perfection of degrees, and a readiness to do all whatsoever God calls
for, and a constant holding unto God, Following hard after him, Keeping race
with him. And it is then upright, when it is solid and true, great, just; and
when it is led by a right rule, and aims at a right end.

Such a heart as this God loves and dwells in, and if you provide such a
dwelling place for God, he will be your dwelling place.

Qu. But is all this, or any of this, in the power of mere natural Men; Such as
you have been all this while persuading and advising to do? Is it not severally
taught and held, that no Man can do any thing to help forward, or further his
own conversion? Is it not a truth that no natural Man has any desire of grace,
or of the means of grace, never thinks of it, because he is dead in trespasses
and sins, and how can a dead Man desire Life? or use any means to attain it?
Nor when God by his Word makes offer of his grace, can he perceive it? Nor when
he does by God's Word and Spirit, beginning to enlighten him in some measure to
perceive it, is he able to embrace it? Because wisdom of the flesh is enmity
against God, and because he is under the power of Satan? And is not the
Religion of 2 Cor. 3. 5.
the Papists convinced of gross error for teaching that the natural man, is
able both by his free will to prepare Phil. 2. 13.
himself for grace, and to accept of grace when it is offered: Yea to desire
it, like the Man that lay in the way to Jericho half John 15. 5.
dead; yea, and to do some good works.

If all this were true, yet it hinders not; but that God's Ministers may and
ought to call upon natural Men, to do what they can to reach forth their utmost
toward grace, for the obtaining of it. Hear ye deaf, and look ye blind, that
ye Esa^ 42. 18.
may see. Some power they had, which they are commanded to exaert and act, and
they are reproved for not doing what they could. Ye Hypocrites, ye can discern
the face of the Sky, and how is it that ye cannot discern this time? Yea, and
why even of your selves (That is, your own Conscience dictates to you so many
proofs of God's Luke 12. 56, 57.
truth, and God's Kingdom being set forth so clearly unto you, by so many marks
and tokens:) Judge ye not what is right? that is to say, that I am the Messiah
you have so long looked for. They had therefore power to judge of the
Visitation of Grace, and God's Kingdom, and in the Verses following, they are
told they neglected the time of God's patience. It would befall them as a
Debtor, who suffers himself to be imprisoned, after wearying out his Creditor,
namely, that they should find no more grace or pardon at his hands. Seek Esaias
55. 6.
ye the Lord while he may be found, call upon him while he is near.

Nor ought Nature to be laid over-low, Grace is Nature's perction: what does it
but repair the decays of Nature? Nature is the matter, and Grace the Form of
God's Kingdom, both in Earth and Heaven. It Figures and Forms Nature to the
Image of God. Moreover, this is the way of God's exhibiting grace, there is a
necessity of Natures concurrence. First, this must precede, as we are taught to
pray for our daily bread, before forgiveness of sins. God cannot save an
unwilling Man, the will being incapable of force and violence, and all
possibilities divine are carried on in an ordinary way of Man's industry; who
must therefore carry on himself as far as he can: which whosoever does not, has no
ground to expect common grace. He that does, may expect to receive
supernaturals common; And he that abides with God in these, may probably expect
supernaturals special.

Qu. What are the abilities which Nature may, and must reach forth in the
pursuit of saving grace?

Answ. She may and must approve the good ways of God: More purity of Principles
being left in Man's mind and conscience, than in his will and affections. That
devilish Sorceress could say, I see and allow, and like that which is good and
honest, though I pursue and practice the contrary. That sentence and principle
pressed by our Savior. All things Mat. 7. 12.
whatsoever ye would that Men should do unto you, do ye unto them: was the
Posie of an Heathen Emperor. 2. She may and must assay and make after, Lift at
the Commandments of God, as a blind Horse having heard a noise, has been seen
to lift up his head, and turn that way where the noise came. And a Child being
commanded by his Father to reach a thing which he cannot, will put to the
little strength it has, and tug at it, to remove, bear, and bring it. 3.
Matter of duty and obedience may be done by a natural Man. They did well that 2
Pet. 1. 19.
took heed to the Word, as to a light, shining in a dark place, though the
Day Star was not yet risen in their hearts. There is no outward exercise of
Religion, but we find graceless hypocrites have been conversant in them, even
afflicting their souls, and fasting frequently, and Esa. 58. 3.
praying on such Days very servently. And this is that which God's Ministers
are bound to press upon Men, that are in a natural condition, to do matter of
duty, to set themselves as objects of the spirit of God, attending upon Divine
Ordinances. As a neglected Courtier sets himself in the Kings sight, standing
and waiting where he usually passes; and there humbly faces him. It is
observed that the Ezekiel. 1. 12.
Spirits outgoings are only upon such as face him. He goes right on, and turns
not as he goes. They must do as Esther did, who esteemed her self as lovely as
she could in the Kings sight, set her self in the best dress she had, as an
object of the Kings call: and see what good success she had by so doing.

Qu. How far does nature qualify her self for grace when she reaches forth
her abilities as far as she can?

Answ. 1. Morally God took occasion from Ahab's humiliation to spare his life,
when upon hearing of Elijah's words he rent his clothes, put Sackcloth upon
his flesh and fasted, and lay in Sackcloth and went softly, see thou (says
God) unto the Prophet, how Ahab humbles himself before me? because he humbles
himself before me, I will not bring the evil in his Days. So he took occasion
from what those noble Bereans did, in bringing their Bodies to public
Assembly, taking the heads of Paul's Sermons; and examining the Notes they had
Acts 17. 11, 12.
taken by the Scriptures, to work effectual faith in them. 2. Passively a Man
makes himself an object of the grace Life: a handle for the Spirit to lay hold
upon, when he harps upon the string of his misery: Cries out of his sin,
implores mercy, and waits for grace in the use of means. And it is not only
possible that he may be translated out of the state of nature into the state of
grace, but probable he shall be so. The Gospel being the market of grace, he
that goes to buy there without Money, it is probably he may be furnished to his
mind. As they that lay at the Pool of Esa. 51. 1.
Bethesda, waiting for the moving of the Water, were in fair probability to be
healed of their Diseases. The Scribe that answered John 5.
discreetly, was not far from the Kingdom of God. If there be no Luke 12. 34.
certainty of obtaining saving grace, yet this should not discourage any
natural Man, from doing their utmost, James 5. 7.
for the obtaining of it, no more than the Husbandman is discouraged from
Plowing and Sowing, because he is not certain he shall have his seed again. No
more is the Merchant sure he shall have his Ship come home laden with goods:
yet he ventures, and so do all that trade for earthly commodities. The
Argument, or motive to pains-taking, from a peradventure, or may be, has a
force in it. 2* Tim. 2. 25, 26. Dan. 4. 27. Joel 2. 14. Zeph. 2. 3.

They that neglect to use the means are sure to perish, and such are most Men
in these last Days, who embezzel Nature's abilities, make her poorer than she
is, strip her naked, even of common Principles. Sensual livers, that drown all
in Belial manners, and having stifled Conscience, give themselves over to work
all uncleanness, with greediness; live as if they had no God to serve, no soul
to save, or as if their souls served only, as the souls of Swine, to keep their
Bodies from putrefying.

They that are less licentious, and lead a civil life, are generally
prodigiously sloathful, work not at all, or not with half their might: as if
grace and glory were not worth the while to labor for. Now them that are such,
we command, and exhort to be impatient of a natural condition, to look upon
grace, as lovely, and the Mother of delights.

Herb. Chapter the Foil.
If we could see below
The Spheer of Virtue, and each shining grace
As plainly as that above does show;
This were the better Sky, the brighter place.
God has made Stars the foil
To set off Virtues; Griefs to set off sinning:
Yet in this wretched World we toil
As if Grief were not foul, nor Virtue winning.
Thus says the Lord God, O ye Ezekiel. 44. 6.
House of Israel, let it suffice you of all your abominations. It is now 1 Pet.
4. 3.
even time to turn over a new leaf.

Let possibility and probability put you upon straining your selves with all
your strength for the improving of Nature in her abilities, and prove me now
herewith says the Lord. If so, the common grace I have given you to actuate
nature, I will not also add sanctifying saving Grace.

Yea, let me assure you, that if you find in your selves, a valuing of an
estate of Grace in your selves, above all earthly things, and a vehement and
constant desire to have admission into God's Grace and savor; and that not
only for the benefit and comfort it brings with it, but for the beauty and
excellency it brings with it also, at least you would, and wish heartily that
it were the ground of your desire, and if withal your purpose and resolution
be to persevere in the use of all the means appointed, to bring you to this
estate.

God has begun a work of Grace in your Souls, which he will perfect and you
are in the number of those thrice happy People, whose habitation the Lord
Jehovah is. With Phil. 1. 6.
whom we are next to deal.

And first with those whose habitation, 2d. Sort.
God, is sure enough, but they have no comfortable assurance that he is so,
Cannot say, as David here in my Text, He is my refuge. I say, they are not
comfortably assured, for there are none whose habitation the Lord is, are
utterly without all assurance. Certainly the Lord is theirs, that he dwells in
them, and they in him: but many of them know not that they have this knowledge,
and some of them deny it; yea, conceive and conclude that they are out of God,
and as far from him as Hell from Heaven. That it is possible for Men to know a
thing, and not to know they know it, yea to deny that they know it, appears by
these words of Thomas in the name of all his fellow Disciples to our Savior,
who had assured him, that Whither he went, John 14. 4, ^.
they knew, and knew the way, Lord we know not whither thou go, and how can
we know the way? They knew both, but they knew not that they knew either. And
that Men in the state of Grace, and abiding in God, may be so far from any
sensible and comfortable assurance of their interest in God, of his love and
favor toward them, that they may seem to be assured of the contrary,
apprehend him as their mortal Enemy, appears by those words of Job. He teareth
Job 16. 9, and 13. 24.
me in his wrath, who hates me, Mine Enemy sharpeneth his Eyes upon me.
Wherefore hidest thou thy face, and hold me for thine Enemy?

Now the Grounds and Reasons why many precious Souls have such doubts and
fears, and are apt to pass such a sad conclusion against themselves, that they
are without God, are many. Two of them, we will mention and answer: in which
the rest are included and comprehended.

Obj. 1. They never entered in by the Door, this they make out, and put it on
thus. No Man can dwell Ephesians. 3. 17.
in God, in whose heart Christ dwells not by faith, coming to Christ and
believing in him are all one. He John 6. 35.
that comes unto me, shall never hunger, and he that believes on me shall
never thirst. No Man is called to come to Christ, that is not thoroughly and
truly humbled for sin. The Universal is restrained, Mat. 11. 28.
Come unto me all ye that labor and are heavy laden.

You that labor in the Souls and Consciences, by a lively feeling of your
sins, and terror of God's Judgments due unto you for them. Such are intended,
who being deeply sensible of their sins, and Satan's Yoke, by panting and
groaning under it. Now they never had any such deep humiliation, and therefore
have reason to question Christ's dwelling in them, and consequently theirs in
God, they never had this preparatory work.

To these Objections against themselves, and the work of God's Grace in them, I
have these things to say. 1. By way of Concession, that sound humiliation
arising from the sight and sense of sin, and apprehension of Divine wrath is
necessary, to qualify Men for coming to Christ. They that be whole, Mat. 9.
12, 13.
need not the Physician, but they that be sick. I came not to call the
Righteous, but Sinners to Repentance (sensible Heart-smitten, affrighted, Soul
afflicted-sinners.) The Son of Man is come to seek, Luke 19. 10.
and save that which was lost. Them who see and feel themselves quite undone
and lost, by reason of their sins. The Lord has anointed me Esaias 61. 1, 2, 3.
to preach good tidings unto the meek. He has sent me to bind up the broken
hearted, to Proclaim liberty to the Captives; The opening of the Prison to them
that are bound, to comfort them that mourn. Till Men be thus humbled, they
Numb. 21. 9.
will not care to come to Christ, nor have desire of him, nor prize him, and be
willing to part with Phil. 3. 7, 8.
any thing for him. Paul professed he was willing to part with all to win him,
counted all loss and dung for him. What alone, was this Paul? one that had so
deep a sense of his sins, that he counted himself the chiefest sinner in the
World. No Man can believe the Gospel, till the Law has wrought Repentance in
him, the foundation whereof is a deep sense and sorrow for sin; Nor will Men
hold Christ with any retentiveness, if this were not first wrought in them.

If Men be not weary of Satan's Yoke, they will soon be weary of Christ's. Want
of humiliation is Romans 3. 20. 7. 9. Gal. 3. 10, 24.
the cause of all Apostasy. And therefore there is great need that Ministers
preach and press the Law to bring Men to a sight and sense of their sins. Which
is so far forth a blessing, as it is necessary to drive us to Christ. To show
us how wretched we are without him, to make us pant and groan, and mourn after
him. They err, that hold that Men are fit enough without any such legal
terrors preceding, that never felt their hearts broken, to come to Christ to
dwell in God. As there is no natural birth without some precedent pains of
travel in the Mother: So neither is there any spiritual birth, without some
such in the Child. God has ever used to take this course to cast down sinners,
to lay them as low as Hell, convincing them of their dark and damned condition,
giving them the spirit of bondage Genesis 3. 8, 10.
to fear the Vengeance of Eternal Fire due to them, and then to erect Acts 2.
37. 9. 6. 16. 29.
and comfort them; And so by the Suburbs of Hell, to bring them to Heaven. Thus
he dealt Romans 8. 15.
with our first Parents, and all along 1 King. 19. 11, 12.
downward to this Day. As the great and strong Wind renting the Mountains,
breaking in pieces the Rocks, and the Earthquake, and Ezekiel. 37. 4 -- 7.
Fire went before the still small Voice; And the noise and shaking Rev. 14. 3.
before the Resurrection of the dry bones; and a Voice from Heaven, as the
Voice of many Waters, and Jer. 4. 3. Hos. 12. 10.
as the Voice of a great Thunder, more terrifying and distinct, before the
Voice of Harpers, harping with their Harps; and as plowing precedes sowing, and
the Needle the Thread, and melting the Mettle before the casting of it into a
new form: So must humiliation precede regeneration. Woe to them that being
laden with many sins, feel them light as a Grass-hopper, that have sworn a
thousand Oaths in their ordinary discourse, have told a thousand lies in their
ordinary jesting, officious, pernicious, committed prodigious filthiness
frequently with themselves and others: Have made the Lord's days the Devil's,
by going their own ways, Finding their own pleasure, speaking their own words,
and can carry all these, with a thousand 1 King. 21. 4.
more Omissions, as well as Hos. 7. 14.
Commissions, with as much ease Prove. 1. 22. 2. 14. 10. 23.
as Sampson did the Gates of Gaza. When light outward crosses are heavy to
them, and make them Psalm. 62. 4.
howl; yea, they can make a sport of sin, delight to act it: Make themselves
and others merry, by boasting of it, glorying in their shame. These Men shall
find one Phil. 3. 19.
Day every of their sins, which they feel so light, to be heavier than a
Mountain of Lead; when they shall Rev. 6. 16.
call to the Mountains to fall on Rev. 18. 7.
them, and the Hills to cover them, and the more pleasure they have felt in any
sin, the more sorrow and torment shall be given them. Woe unto you that laugh
now, for Luke 16. 25. 6. 25.
ye shall mourn and weep. Son, remember that thou in thy life time receivedst
thy good things, but now thou art tormented. Every idle, and much more, every
evil word shall be an unsufferable load upon their Consciences to all Eternity.
Unless voluntary humiliation, before they come into that place of torments,
prevent it. As for you Mark 10. 49.
that feel your sins pressing you as low as Hell, take comfort in this, that
you are in the way to conversion. Zech. 12. 10.
And I may say unto you, as the People to the blind Man, be of good comfort,
Christ calls thee. There is a fountain opened With 13. 1.
for sin, and for uncleanness, for them that can mourn over him, whom they have
pierced.

2. By way of Correction, though all before Conversion are humbled, yet all are
not so in a like degree. They that have been notorious wicked livers. Such as
Manasseh 2 Chr. 33. 12.
was, must be humbled greatly, as he was. So they that killed the Lord of Life
were punctually pierced. So the Jailer, and Mary Magdalen, and those whom God
means to bestow more than ordinary gifts upon, or to employ in great business
for him, he humbles deeply. Others that have been civilly educated, never
guilty of any heinous, hideous crimes, but always lived unblameable moral lives;
These have the grace of Regeneration dropped insensibly into them, never feel
such pangs, and terrors, and heart-breaks; nor know the time when God began to
work upon them. These fearful doubting Christians, that I am dealing with, may,
and ought to take comfort in this, that they cannot deny, but that they have
been truly humbled though in a lower degree. It being the truth, and not the
measure that warrants sinners to come to Christ, and qualify them for faith in
him. He says not, come unto me all ye that labor, and are heavy laden in such
a degree. But all that labor, and are heavy laden in a true degree.

Qu. What is the lowest degree of true Humiliation?

Answ. It is that which brings Mat. 5. 3.
him into the Beggars case, Blessed Esa. 66. 2.
are the poor in Spirit, for theirs is the, etc. When is a Man so? Answ. When
out of a sense of his own emptiness, and apprehension of Divine Justice, to
which they are indebted, he is wrought upon by God's gracious promises, to seek
supply from Christ's fullness. As when a Man is extreme poor, and knows himself
to be so, having never a Penny in all the World, and owes a very great Sum,
and that to such a one as will not abate one farthing of the Debt, but exact
the whole; and for default of payment will cast him into Prison, there to lie
and rot; nor has he a friend in all the World to help him, only he hears of a
rich Man that is able to pay all he owes, who has discharged the Debts of many
in his case, but alas he dares not adventure for a good while, to go and speak
with him, because he has no interest in him. In this case he is exceedingly
cast down, not knowing what to do, yet at last necessity forcing, he is
resolved to go to him, and seek supply from him, relying wholly upon his
goodness, having heard how mercifully he has dealt with all that have so done.

Is not this thy case, poor despondent Christian? Have thou not seen thy Soul
totally empty of Grace, yet indebted to God Ten Thousand Talents, whose Justice
thou know will exact the utmost Mite? do not thou see fullness in Christ,
and all sufficiency, that he is able to save them to the uttermost, that come
unto God by him, to discharge their debt, were it ten thousand times greater?
Though thou did not dare to go to him for a while, yet at last did
adventure, being encouraged by what others in as bad a condition have found,
and by sundry gracious invitations and promises, excluding none that have an
heart to come. Upon which promises thou do in great humility roll thy Soul,
and resolvest therein to rest.

Thus the Prodigal saw, an emptiness Luke 15. 14, 22.
in himself knew there was fullness in his Fathers House, was moved to go to
him, trusting in his gracious disposition. So the Syrians, 1 Kings 20. 31, 32.
Behold now we have heard that the Kings of the House of Israel are merciful
Kings. Let us put Sackcloth upon our Loins, and Ropes upon our Heads, and go
to the King of Israel, peradventure he will save thy Life. So they put
Sackcloth upon their Loins, and Ropes upon their heads, and begged their
Masters Life.

Qu. How shall I know I have this poverty of Spirit?

Answ. By the signs of a poor Beggar. He is full of complaints to such as can
relieve him, full of requests. No need to teach him rhetoric, Industrious to
get maintenance; out he will, though the Law be against it. The Belly has no
Ears. If he be blind, he will get some to lead him; if lame, he will get a
Crutch to uphold him. He is more-over meek, patiently bearing checks and
reproaches, content to stay his leisure of whom he begs, and expects an Alms,
full of observance also toward him, ready to obey his commands, trembling at
his frowns, and greatly thankful, if he give him but a Crumb. And if he has
offended, is at no rest till his anger against him be appeased, and his favor
and good will regained. Thou can not but find all these signs in thy self,
in reference unto God, and therefore may take comfort in thy poverty. Add
unto this another sure evidence of true humiliation; namely, thou esteemest sin
the greatest evil, and Jesus Christ the greatest good: put naked Christ in one
Scale, and all the pomp and glory of the World in the other, and whether of
these would weigh the most, in thy judgment and valuation?

Obj. But thou know not the time, when thy heart was broken and humbled.
Ans. Suppose thou saw a good Crop of Corn upon a piece of Ground, would
thou not think it had tillage good enough, though thou saw not when it was
broken up? Nor how deep the Plow went? The fruits thou bring forth of
holiness, righteousness, sobriety and charity, argue the fallow ground of thy
heart to have had sufficient plowing. Though thou know not the time when, nor
the means whereby this was done. Thou walk not in the counsel of the
ungodly; much less stand in the way of sinners, least of all sit in the
seat of the scornful: But thy delight is in the Law of the Lord, and in his Law
thou meditatest Day and Night. As thy affections are, such are thy words
seasoned with salt, such as discover Grace in the Speaker, Minister Grace to
the hearers, and thy conversation accordingly, and actions, such as become the
Gospel. Herein thou exercisest thy self to have a Conscience void of offense
toward God, and toward Men. Thou do good to all, especially to the household
of faith. Art ready to distribute, willing to communicate. Ye Mat. 7. 16, 17.
shall know others by their fruits, do Men gather Grapes of Thorns, or Figs
of Thistles? even so every good tree brings forth good fruit. Thou may and
ought to pass Job 19. 28.
judgment upon thy self, that certainly the Root of the matter is in thee. That
thou art a Tree of righteousness, Esaias 61. 3.
the planting of the Lord, wherein he is glorified. Herein is John 15. 8.
my Father glorified, that ye bear much Fruit, so shall ye be my Disciples. Ye
shall show your selves to be truly such, doing acts worthy of such a Title. And
if you be indeed Christ's Disciples, you need not question your dwelling in God.

Obj. 2. These Godly doubting Christians are so far from acknowledging any such
fruits, or taking comfort in them, that they deny there is any good in them,
any good fruit brought forth by them; They believe themselves, and would have
you believe so too. That their Vine is of the Vine of Sodom, and of the Fields
of Gomorrah. Their Grapes are Grapes of Gall. Their Clusters are bitter, their
Wine of the poison of Dragons, and the cruel Venom of Asps, instead of Deuteronomy.
32. 32, 33.
good fruits. They will tell you your hearts, and tongues, and lives are full
of evil fruits. Vain and vile thoughts, and idle, and ungracious words,
unprofitable, impious, and unrighteous actions. Fruits not tending to Life, but
Death. That they are Trees not for fruit, but for the Fire. Corrupt Trees at
best, whose fruit withers, which have neither life, nor sap to bring forth
any fruit unto Jude 12.
God. Even like Trees after Autome. Yea, quite plucked up by the Roots, quite
cut off from the spiritual communion with Christ, the true foundation of life
and grace. Or if they have brought forth any fruit at any time materially good,
the root, and manner, and end have been all naught, stark naught, worse than
naught. They never did any thing for God, in obedience, and out of love to him,
or with an intent to honor and please him thereby. Take them at the best, and
it may be said of them, what was said of Israel. Hos. 10. 1.
Israel is an empty Vine, he brings forth fruit unto himself: They have been
self-seekers, and selfdependers, and self-ascribers in all that ever they have
seemed to do for God.

Answ. To this Objection I have these two things to say, 1. That it is possible
for a Man to be in God, and yet to see no goodness at all in himself; nothing
but evil, nothing at all to commend him to God* nothing but what may make him
odious in his sight. The Centurion saw nothing of worth in himself; why Christ
should come to him, or he to Christ. Though others thought him to be a worthy
Man, and so reported him to be to Christ. And Christ himself gives testimony,
not only he had true faith, but a great measure of it. I have not found so
great Luke 7. 6, 7, 9.
faith, no not in Israel.

No more did the Woman of Canaan see any goodness in her self, she confesses
her self to be an Mat. 15. 26, 27.
unclean Person; but Christ both graceth and gratifieth her, gives a very high
commendation of her Heroical Faith. And what goodness saw Paul in himself, when
he said, I am a carnal Man sold under Romans 7. 14.
sin? Hear the Confession of our Holy Mother, and all her Genuine Children. We
are all an unclean Esaias 64 6.
thing, all our righteousness is as filthy rags. We acknowledge that our
Persons, and all our actions, even the most praise*worthy of them; namely,
those wherewith we did thy service, are all contaminated with abominable filth.

2. That it is an Argument of true goodness, to see little goodness, much evil
in thy self; If thou can and do bewail the absence of that, the presence of
this, find a disallowance and deep detestation of it in thy heart, and
make continual resistance against it: Mourning for the want and absence of a
friend, argues truth of affection, and love to him. Thou would not, could
not grieve, because thou art not good, if there were not in thee a love of
goodness. And the sight of so much sin in thy Soul, proves thee to have light
in it. For whatsoever does Ephesians. 5. 13.
make manifest is Light. And thy sensibleness of the burden of thy sins tells
thee, that thou live much more, thy stirring and struggling to be rid of them,
and the War thou make against them. A dead man can neither feel, nor stir,
nor strive: there is therefore spirit in thee, as well as flesh. For the Flesh
lusts against the Spirit, and the Spirit Gal. 5. 17.
against the Flesh, and these are contrary the one to the other, so that ye
cannot do the things that ye would. Every new Man is two Men. The two Armies in
the Shulamite maintain civil broils within her, as the two Babes did in
Rebecca's Womb. This Combat with Corruption may comfort thee. Though still I
must grant, that as there is natural life and conscience in the wicked, so
common Grace may strive uneffectually in them. And the Spirit in the Godly does
conquer their reigning sin, as well as strive: but not all their infirmities.
Saint Paul does comfort himself with this raising up his Soul, even to an holy
insultation and triumphing. For after he had described Romans 7. 14. to the end.
the two contrary principles, the Combatants within him: the unregenerate and
regenerate part, and the combat or conflict it self between them. That
hindering from the evil which he would do, and putting him upon the evil he
would not do. This disapproving, and hating the evil which he did, and
approving the good which he did not: he comforts himself in this, that he
consented to the Law of God, delighted in it, that to will, to keep it
perfectly, was present with him; and although he found a foyl given to the new
man, captivated, which makes him make a miserable outcry. Wretched man that I
am, who shall deliver me from this Body of Death! that is, tied to me, and
which I am compelled to carry about with me, tired with the luggage, and
poisoned with the stench. Yet through the Grace of God in Jesus Christ, I am
filled with comfort, rejoice, and triumph, as more than a Conqueror. I thank
God through Jesus Romans 8. 1.
Christ our Lord. So then with the mind, I my self serve the Law of God, but
with my Flesh the Law of Sin. I bless God for his Grace 2 Cor. 10. 3.
in Christ, who does not impute this corruption unto me to condemnation. (But
still that it is only sins of infirmity, and not such as are inconsistent with
spiritual life, which were in Paul, and are in all the Godly.) So though thou
see nothing but Flesh in thy self, if a Man may believe thee, yet thou
walk not after it, for though thou walk in the Flesh, yet thou do not
fulfill the lusts of the flesh, followest not with consent the motions of thy
own natural corruption. Thou sowest not to the Flesh: Gal. 6. 8.
taking no other care, but to please thy carnal appetite; but on the contrary,
thou sowest to thy Spirit, employing thy care and labor in obedience to the
motions of the Holy Spirit, that thy will is to do, so thou can say in
sincerity, and this may be thy rejoicing, as it was Paul's.

Obj. But I am full of hypocrisy, 2 Cor. 1. 12.
which Paul was free from; all the signs of hypocrisy, that I find in the
Bible, I find in my self not one sign of sincerity.

Answ. What the Apostle says of Sin in general, If we say that we have no sin,
we deceive our selves; may be said of this sin of hypocrisy, if we say we have
no hypocrisy, the truth of Grace is not in us.

Obj. But it is said of Israelites John 1. 47.
indeed, that there is no guile in them. And they only are blessed, in whose
Spirit there is no guile; therefore I have cause to conclude my self cursed.

Answ. These places must be understood, Psalm. 32. 2.
as those where it is said. Whosoever abides in him, sins not; whosoever is
born of God, 1 John 3 6.
does not commit sin, and his seed remains in him, and he cannot sin, because
he is born of God. They Psalm. 119. 3.
also do no iniquity. The meaning is, they give not themselves over to sin;
they sin not with full consent, they fall not into the purpose, though
sometimes into the act of Sin. Sin reigns not in their mortal Bodies; that they
should obey Romans 6. 12, 14.
it in the lusts thereof. It has not Dominion over them.

Obj. But this Sin of Hypocrisy Reigns in me.

Answ. But that, it does not, is evident by this, because thou discernest it,
and art so troubled with it, complainest to God and Men of it, and judge thy
self for it, and hate it, longest to be freed from it. It Is Grace certainly
that makes thee able to discern so hidden and close a Corruption, and to hate
it. And as sense and feeling is a certain sign of a living Man, (as was now
said) So thy sense of hypocrisy, Romans 8. 9.
with a hatred of it, is a sure note and token of thy sincerity. So that thou
art not in the Flesh, but in the Spirit. Nor matters it so much what evil
motions thou find in thy self, as how thou stand affected to them. There
are and 1 John 1. 9.
will be filthy scums rising up in thy heart continually, while thou live
here. But while thou castest it off, 1 Cor. 11. 31.
as it rises by confession and selfcondemnation, it shall never hurt thee, God
will not condemn, but absolve and acquit thee of it. Thou may and ought
to take comfort, in the allowance of the Law of God in thy judgment, and in
Phil. 2. 17.
thy will consenting to do it, having an unfeigned desire, purpose, and 1 Pet.
2. 2, 5.
endeavor to please God, and to do his will, this being the work of God's
sanctifying Spirit, and a special 2 Cor. 8. 12.
fruit of Christ's purchase; as real comfort therefore herein as if thou wast
perfect in obedience. For if there be first a willing mind it is accepted
according to that a Man has, nor shall he be rejected Psalm. 119. 4, 5, 6
for that he has not. In this God's choicest Servants have comforted
themselves against all their imperfections Neh. 1. 11.
and falls and failings.

Obj. But I question the truth of my desires.

Answ. That thou need'st not do Heb. 13: 18.
as long as thou esteemest God's grace and favor above all things. Seeking by
prayer and other means Psalm. 4. 6, 7. 27. 4.
every Day to grow less sinful, and 1 Samuel 7. 2.
more holy, and mournest for thy Mat. 5. 4.
Daily miscarriages, lamenting after the Lord.

Obj. But my Conscience condemns me for an Hypocrite.

Ans. O spiteful bitter thought, bitterly spiteful thought! -- Thou have reason
to discredit thy Conscience, if it be opposite to the Word of God, and not to
regard it against the Word of God. If 1 John 3. 20.
our heart condemn us, God is greater than our heart, and knows all things.
He knows the way thou take, Job 23. 10.
that it is right. And his word which is the Judge of Conscience, has given
Sentence on the right side. And therefore thou art bound in this case to check
and condemn thy Conscience, for troubling thee causlesly. So did David and Job:
Let me give thee one caution, take Psalm. 4. 2, 5.
heed of making inherent Grace the only and chief ground of thy comfort. Though
it is indeed the only evidence of thy title to comfort. Job 27. 6.
For in so doing thou shall commit two great evils, one against thy self, in
leaning upon a bruised Reed; for thine own Spirit may fail thee, and be
overwhelmed, and thy heart may reproach thee; another against the Lord, making
an Idol of that gift of his, which cannot be so trusted in without sin. Rely
more upon God's Grace without thee, than that which is within thee: Yet cherish
also inherent Holiness, as thy only evidence of Life Eternal, and the beginning
of it.

Finally, give not credit to thy misgiving heart, that would persuade thee thou
have no assurance that God is thy Habitation: For thou have that degree of
assurance which is necessary to the being of Grace; the lowest degree of
certainty, which is in every true believer, consisting in an application of
adherence. Whereby the Soul of a penitent sinner casts it self upon Jesus
Christ, with a resolved humble recumbency, cleaving to him, as the Ivy does to
the Oak, Eagle to the Carcass, goes out of it self, renouncing its own Merits,
and relying upon the Person and Merits of Christ, his active and passive
obedience for forgiveness of sins, and for Life and Salvation. This is the act
of Faith, and every John 1. 12.
one that thus receives him with an Obediential affiance knows that, and that
through him dwelling in his heart, he has his dwelling in God.

You therefore, as yet that have not any comfortable assurance, cease
henceforth to doubt and fear, and assay to join your selves with them that
have; with whom we are next to deal, as Saul assayed to join himself to the
Disciples at Jerusalem. Who will not at all, as they were awhile of him, be
afraid of you: but receive you joyfully into their blessed Society. And Herb.
Bag. in the end.
when thou have told despair Divine Herbert's strange story. Say to it as he
does. Hark Despair away.

THE FOURTH SERMON.
HAving dealt with those of Third Sort.
this Divine Household, that have as yet no comfortable assurance, that the Lord
is their Habitation, we proceed to deal with them that have higher degrees of
assurance, which carry sensible comfort with them, one is the Application of
Experience; when a Christian discerns in himself Divine impressions, effects of
regenerating Grace, two or three whereof we will mention. The prime and most
general, is, a real change of the whole Man from evil to good. This is a sure
evidence of our being in Christ. If any Man be in Christ, he is a new 2 Cor. 5.
17.
Creature, old things are past away, all things are become new. Whoever is
changed in all his senses motions and affections, speeches and actions, is
certainly ingrafted into the Body of Christ by his spirit. The substance of the
Soul and Body is the same, the qualities and operations altered. Another is
walking in the light, as God is the light. Living and conversing, following
that light of God which is conferred upon us by Grace, evidenceth us to be
partakers of the Divine Nature; Purifying our selves, as 33.
he is pure. Hereby we know we have fellowship one with another: God with us,
and we with him; that he dwells in us, and we in him. Love to the Brethren,
Christ's whole spiritual kindred, who are knit to him, to the bond of Faith,
and among themselves by that of love, another infallible note. We know that we
have passed from 14.
Death to Life, because we love the Brethren. When a Christian's faith in
lively exercise reflects upon its own acts receptive of Christ, and operative
by him, having withal a sanctified Conscience, witnessing sincerity in the
actings, he gathers by discourse and reasoning his own spiritual estate, as
Paul did. Our rejoicing is this, the testimony of 2 Cor 1. 12.
our Conscience, that in simplicity and godly sincerity, not with fleshly
wisdom, but by the grace of God we have had our conversation in the World, and
now abundantly to you-ward. Such an application of experience had Thomas upon
his Faith, not quite exquisit before, Joh. 20. 27, 28.
but very weak, was raised and renewed, by beholding, touching and feeling. The
other application is that of evidence, when the testimony of God's spirit
comes, and concurs with ours, when we Ephesians. 1. 13.
find the Holy Ghost in us, not only as a seal imprinting the graces of Christ
upon our Souls: nor only as an earnest giving us the first 4. 30.
Fruits, and as it were handle of Heaven.

Those holy and Heavenly Gift* conferred in this life, being a pledge of the
perfection which shall be in 2 Cor. 5. 5.
the next, but also as a joyful witness, both clearing our evidences, and
opening our minds to discern 1 Cor. 2. 9, 15.
them. The Spirit it self bears John 2. 27.
witness with our Spirit, that we are the Sons of God. Hereby we come to have
boldness, confidence, and Romans 8. 16.
a perspicuous manifestation of Divine love shed abroad in our heart* Ephesians. 3.
12.
and certain knowledge, and full assurance of knowledge, and hope, of Faith,
Let us draw near Joh. 14. 21.
with all full assurance of Faith* 1 John 3. 2.
The word imports a carrying on Eccl. 2. 2.
with full Sail, like a Ship that Heb. 6. 11. 10. 22.
has Wind and Tide, and all the Sails spread to the Wind. Those three parts
of God's Kingdom* Righteousness, Peace, and Joy in Romans 14. 7.
the Holy Ghost, are consequents and effects of these three Applications. The
first, namely that of adherence has Wind and Tide against it. The second has
Wind carrying it on, but without Tide. The third has both Wind and Tide, and
all the affections like spread Sails filled with the Gales 1 Pet. 1. 8.
of the Spirit causing joy unspeakable, and full of Glory.

In the Church of Rome this Doctrine of full assurance is cried down, and an
impossibility of attaining it by any ordinary Christians, asserted, and the
main reason they render for the Confirmation of this Doctrine, especially as to
the subjective certainty of perseverance, whereof Paul speaks, when he says, I
am sure that nothing Romans 8 38, 39.
shall be able to separate us from the Love of God in Jesus Christ. Is the
mutability of Man's will? but the assurance of Christians depends not upon
Man's mutable, but upon the immutable will of God, and upon his infallible
truth, who has promised to keep them, whom he receives in him by his strongest
power (if there can be conceived any degree in Omnipotency) we are kept* by the
Guard of God's 1 Pet. 1. 5.
Power, through Faith unto Salvation. They asked what ground has any ordinary
Christian for special faith, when there is no special promise, nor any Divine
testimony by audible Voice, such as some choice Persons have had, as Genesis 15.
1. Mat. 9. 2. Luke 5. 20. 47. 48. 23. 42. 43. They are answered, we will not
contend about bare words, whether it be better called special faith or
assurance, gathered from two promises, the one in Scripture, the other in our
hearts, so participating of Faith; for that is our sense of special Faith, but
as to the matter. 1. There are general promises with a command to apply them.
2. Special Faith is gathered by argumentation, thus whoever has God's Spirit
confesses that Jesus is the Son of God, that Man dwells in God. But so have
I: so do I therefore, I dwell in God. 3. Sacraments give ground for special
Faith, wherein is made special application to the receivers. 4. The Spirit is
given for this end to believers, as a seal, and earnest, and witness to assure
them that God is their Habitation and Salvation. And that it is possible for a
Christian in ordinary course to attain this Esaias 60. 1^.
grace, if he do what in him lies. We have God's express promise to this
purpose. Thou shall know 2 Pet. 1. 10.
that I the Lord am thy Savior and Redeemer: and a charge is laid upon every
Christian to make his calling sure, and not to come without full assurance,
when they draw nigh to him in Prayer, and other duties of his Worship. Let Heb.
10. 22.
us draw near him in full assurance of Faith. And we have the experience of
God's People in all ages for it. And though they that profess they had it, as
Job, David, Paul were rare Persons: Yet the Faith of the meanest Christian is
of the same Nature with theirs, though not in the same degree. This is the
Doctrine of the reformed Churches, who yet deny not the difficulty of attaining
the highest degree, and that very few there are that attain it, and fewer that
have it at all times alike, nor any in that perfection, but that there is some
mixture of doubting. And this is one sign of the truth and goodness of it, when
it is attained with difficulty, and assaulted with infidelity. For there are
many, whom Satan and their own heart have deluded in this point, who are
strongly persuaded that God is theirs, never doubted of their interest in him,
make no question, but the Lord is their Habitation, who entered not in by the
Door, never received the spirit of bondage to fear, have no fear of offending
God, no care to please him, but live in known sin against the light of
knowledge, and checks of Conscience, which evinceth them Joh. 2. 12, 18.
to be in the gall of bitterness. Now these who in their own conceits have
taken up their dwelling in God, like those buyers and sellers that took up
their seats in the Temple, without the Warrant, against the consent of the
Owner of that House, must be dealt with by the Ministers of Christ, as those
Intruders by Christ were driven out with a scourge; And as Nehemiah dealt Neh.
13. 7, 8.
with Tobiah, who had got a Chamber in the Court of the House of God, who cast
both him and his stuff out of it. Avoid profaneness, come not here; nothing
but holy, pure and clear, or that which groaneth to be so, may enter, or abide
one Moment at his peril.

To you who can prove your assurance that you are in God, to be of God by the
qualification of your Persons, as having formerly been humbled for your living
without God in the World, and at present humble your selves to walk with your
God, and resolve so to do to the end of your life: Unto you I am sent with a
manifold Word of Exhortation. 1. To prize this as the greatest blessing, and
rejoice in it more than in all other blessings, and accordingly to praise God
for it, that he has given you to know, that he is your Habitation* Lifting up
the Light of his Countenance upon you, and giving you Eyes to see that Light.
There be (...). 4. 6, 7.
many that say, who will show us any good. Lord, lift thou up the light of thy
Countenance upon us. Thou have put gladness in my heart more than in the time
when their Corn and Wine increased: because thy loving kindness is better than
life, my Lips shall praise thee. Thus ^3. 3.
will I bless thee while I live; Because thou have caused me to feel the
effects of thy Grace at full, even as the Sun shoots out his Beams at
Midday: And because I find this to be the life of my life; without which,
every Day would be more bitter to me than Death. Therefore for this above all
Mercies will I bless thee every Day, and I will praise thy Name for ever.

2. To hold fast what you have, and be always adding to it, as worldly Men do by
their Earthly substance. How often are Christians exhorted to hold fast every
good spiritual thing that they have gotten? Hold fast (as with Tooth and Nail)
Tit. 1. 9.
the faithful Word. The pure and 2 Timothy 1. 13.
sincere Doctrine of the Gospel, against those Gainsayers that would snatch it
from you; and not only the matter, but the form of sound words. Let us hold
fast our profession Heb. 4. 14.
of Christian Faith and Religion in words and deeds. That Rev. 2. 25.
which ye have already, hold fast till I come. Especially this grace and gift
of assurance, which is a Jewel of the greatest worth in the World. For as the
happiness of having it, so the misery of wanting it is unspeakable. We cannot
love God heartily, when we doubt whether he loves us. We can have little heart
to pray, our spiritual fight will be uncomfortable, our peace unsettled, our
patience heartless; all heat to holy duties will be utterly dampt in us. This
is made an effect of lively Faith, and an assured mark of those who are living
Members of Christ, namely to hold fast, that degree of assurance: Christ was
faithful as a Son over Heb. 3. 5, 6.
his own House, whose House are we. If we hold fast the confidence, and the
rejoicing of the hope firm unto the end. See an example of this fast holding
and keeping this Pearl of Price in the Spouse of Christ, how servent her
desires were, how forcible her endeavors to make his singular presence with
her familiar with her always. It was but a little that I passed from Cant. 3.
4.
the Watchmen, (great worldly wise Men) but I found him whom my Soul loves, I
held him, and would not let him go.

We are as often exhorted to add unto those good things which we have and hold,
to increase our spiritual store, to grow in all Graces. Besides this, giving
all diligence, add to your Faith Virtue, to Virtue 2 Pet. 1. 5, 6, 7.
Knowledge, to Knowledge Temperance, and to Temperance Patience, to Patience
Godliness, and to Godliness brotherly Kindness, and to brotherly Kindness
Charity. Grow and 3. 18.
in Grace. We beseech you brethren, and exhort you by the Lord Jesus, that as
ye have received of us, how 1 These. 4. 1, 10.
ye ought to walk, and to please God: So ye would abound more and more. That ye
would increase more and more, with the increase of God. Col. 2. 19.
Grow up into him in all things, which is the Head, even Christ. This Ephesians. 4.
15.
will be both for our comfort and credit, profit; Lord, thy Pound Luke 19. 18,
19.
has gained other Five Pounds, be thou over Five Cities. Especially and 17. 15.
we should desire and add degrees to our Faith, as of adherence, so of
experience and evidence, make it our Prayer, Lord increase our Faith; and this
will bind others praises of God on our behalf. We are bound to thank God
always for you Brethren, as it is meet, because that your Faith grows
exceedingly. 2 These. 1. 3.


The great benefit and necessity of this knowledge of assurance, may be motive
sufficient, to persuade you to give all diligence, in the use of all means, to
preserve, and increase it. You will be sure to meet with temptations, to doubt
of your interest in God, of your being in him, to question whether you are
Children of this Family. Christ himself was thus assaulted, though dwelling in
the bosom of his Father. If thou be the Son of Mat. 4. 4.
God. You must all dye shortly, you may presently. For what is your James 4 14.
life, it is even a Vapor, which appears for a little Moment, and vanishes
away. Now, if you be without assurance, that you dwell in this heavenly House,
when Death drives you out of your Earthly; How full of Horror and Torment must
your Hearts needs be! not knowing whether Heaven or Hell must be your dwelling
place to all Eternity: Whereas, if you knew you were in the same House with
Christ, this would quiet your heart from all fear. As soon as Christ was come
into the Ship, wherein the Disciples were tossed, the Wind presently ceased.
God through Psalm. 27. 1.
Christ being your Habitation, your Light and Salvation, whom or what should
you fear, while you live, and when you die? God is our refuge, 46. 1, 2.
therefore we will not fear. And this, and this only is able to make and keep
your hearts lightsome in every condition. Yea, knowledge of your abiding in
God, will give a sweet relish, as to every comfort: So to Neh. 9. 25.
every cross. I have lost a dear Husband, Wife, Child, Friend, a comfortable
dwelling, but not my dear God. And the more assurance, the less fearful, and
more cheerful. Now the means to preserve and increase assurance, are the same
whereby you gained it. The outward are those Ordinances of God, and exercises of
his holy Religion, which he has sanctified to this end, to bring us unto, and
into himself, and to work in us a comfortable assurance thereof, especially the
Word, Sacrament, and Prayer. The more inward and spiritual, are care to keep a
good Conscience: Diligent observation of your own ways: Consideration of the
experiments you have had of God's favor toward you, renouncing your selves:
Resting only upon the free Grace of God, in performance of the conditions
required on our part; looking often over your evidences, and holding the
Conclusion. To learn by heart, and put in practice all those duties that are
incumbent upon all those, to whom the Lord, even the most High, vouchsafes
this high Prerogative of admission to, and possession of his blessed Self to be
your proper Habitation.

The general duty is to walk worthy of the Lord, who has effectually called
you out of the World, and out of your selves, into himself, and has justified
you, and partly glorified you with glorious privileges, graces, and comforts.
For whom he called, them he also Romans 8. 30.
justified; and whom he justified, them he also glorified. This the Apostle
Paul frequently presses. I beseech you that you walk worthy Ephesians. 4. 1.
of the Vocation wherewith ye are called. You know how we exhorted, and charged
every one of 1 These. 2. 12.
you, that ye would walk worthy of God, who has called you into his Kingdom of
Glory: Of God, whose Livery you wear, whose Image you bear, of whose Household
you are. To walk worthy of your Vocation is to walk holily: for the general
Vocation of all Christians is to be holy, as God is holy: unto whom they are
called in Jesus Christ. As he which has called you is holy, 1 Pet. 1. 15.
so be ye holy in all manner of conversation. And as he presses them to this
worthy walking: So he presses God by Prayer for them, that they might by his
grace be enabled to walk; declaring withal sundry Ingredients, and
Concurrents, that make these paces and steps, they take, regular, and graceful,
and the end of the course joyful. We cease Col. 1. 9, 10, 11.
not to pray for you, and to desire that ye may be filled with the knowledge of
his will, in all wisdom, and spiritual understanding, that ye might walk
worthy of the Lord unto all well-pleasing, being fruitful in every good work:
and increasing in the knowledge of God, strengthened with all might, according
to his glorious power, unto all patience and long-suffering, with joyfulness.

Let knowledge show you the ways you should walk, and sanctification carry you
on an end therein, and patience uphold you, till you come to the end of your
Journey, when you shall receive the end of your Faith, even the salvation of
your Souls.

The particular duties are many; in sundry references both to things and
Persons. The first of the former sort we will dwell awhile upon, are Earthly
Houses and Habitations. Some whose dwelling Place the Lord is, have no House on
Earth, which they can call their own. Of those that have, some are not suffered
to live in them; and of them that have this liberty, some have very poor
Houses, with as poor Furniture, or other Conveniences. Others have convenient
Dwellings, with an indifferent outward estate, and some few have gentile and
stately Edifices, with riches and honor in abundance.

1. To those that have no earthly Houses of their own, but are in a state of
beggary, or next to it, of whom some there are, who never had any, others had
comfortable ones, but have lost them by Fire, or other casualty, and so are for
the present Housless; to these I have this word of Exhortation. Let not your
hearts be troubled.

1. Because you are not without Fellows and Companions, better than your
selves, that are in the same Housless condition: you have heard of some, Of
whom the World was not worthy. Who wandered in Heb. 11. 38.
Deserts, and in Mountains, and in Dens and Caves of the Earth. And of the
blessed Apostle St. Paul, Who 1 Cor. 4. 11.
both hungered, thirsted, and was naked, and had no certain dwelling place. And
of our blessed Savior, Mat. 8. 20.
Who had not where to lay his head. And you know how little it troubled these
holy Ones, that they were thus destitute, how well pleased with their want, it
being their Heavenly Fathers good pleasure, that it should be with them as it
was. And how joyfully those believing Hebrews took the spoiling of their Goods,
knowing that they had in Heaven a better Mansion, Heb. 10. 34. 2 Cor. 5. 1.
and a better and an enduring substance.

2. You are not without a House, which likes you best, and which you would not
change for the best House in the World: You hear God asking you, as Elkenah did
Hannah, Am not I better to thee than Ten Sons? Had you not rather enjoy me, and
do you not find more comfort in me, than in Ten Houses? And your Heart
answers, truth Lord. And can it then be troubled? It may be said of all
Houses, compared with this of yours, as it is said of all Nations, they are as
nothing, less than Esa. 40. 17.
nothing, and vanity. And in truth, all Houses and Riches, which others
inherit, are not, though they seem Pro. 23. 5.
to be: You only, and your fellow Inhabitants inherit that which is. 8. 21.
Esther had good reason to be content, when she was preferred to the best place
of the House. And so have you, who are preferred to live in the best House, and
in the best Est. 2. 9.
place, the very heart of it. You are not only graven upon the Palms Esaias 49.
16.
of God's hands, but you are in his heart, set as a seal there; Yea, I will
rejoice over them, to do them Cant. 8. 6.
good with my whole heart, and with my whole Soul. How then can ye choose, but
rejoice exceedingly in the want of all Creature comforts; yea, though you have
to boot the present feeling of the greatest outward evils? And say with the
holy Prophet. Although the Fig Tree Hab. 3. 17, 18.
shall not blossom, neither shall fruit be in the Vines, the labor of the
Olive shall fail: and the Field shall yield no Meat, the Flocks shall be cut
off, from the Fold. And there shall be no Herd in the Stalls. Yet I will
rejoice in the Lord. I will Psalm. 16. 5, 6.
joy in the God of my Salvation: The Lord is the portion of mine Inheritance.
The Lines are fallen to me in pleasant places; Yea, I have 2 Cor. 6. 10.
a goodly Heritage. Having nothing, I. possess all things; having the Haver of
all things.

3. You may and ought to take Psalm. 33. 18, 19.
comfort in the promises which God and 34. 10.
has made to his People in this case of Poverty, which for the present 37. 19.
pincheth you: He is pleased and 132. 15.
to bring you to this want of house and maintenance, that he might Heb. 13. 5,
6.
humble and prove you, to do you good in the latter end. And he is able, and no
less willing to help Deuteronomy. 8. 2, 16.
you, either by inclining the hearts of the rich, to show compassion upon you,
to receive you into their Houses, and feed you at their Tables; or if you have
but Pulse to eat, he can make that nourish you, better than Kingly fare: yea,
he can make you go in the strength 1 King. 19 6, 8.
of one Meal made of a Cake baken on the Coals Forty Days.

Qu. But may we expect God will work Miracles now adays? Yes, that we may
rather than his promise should fail, Is my hand shortened at all? This resolve
upon, that the Eyes of the Lord run too 2 Chronicles. 16. 9.
and fro, throughout the whole Earth, to show himself strong in the behalf of
them whose heart is Mark 9. 23.
perfect toward him: And of this also, that all things are possible to him
that believes. And therefore with Job, resolve to trust in him, Job 13. 15.
though he slay you: and to dye, rather than to help your selves by any
unlawful means, and cast off all solicitous carking thoughtfulness for your
Bodies, where to Dan. 1. 8. 3. 17, 18.
dwell, and what to eat, and wherewith ye shall be clothed. Ponder Mat 6. 25.
to the end.
those Seven Disswasives from distrustful cutting, dividing, distracting cares.
And having Food and 1 Timothy 6. 8.
Raiment, how little, how course soever, be content therewith. Considering
Psalm. 37. 16.
that a little that the righteous Man has, is better than the riches of many
wicked. Nor do you doubt all, but if God see that a House with wealth and
riches may serve to further your spiritual and eternal good, you shall not fail
to have them before you dye. He Psalm. 113. 7, 8.
has raised the Poor out of the Dust, and lifted the needy out of the
Dunghill, and set him with Princes. And so he will you. Hear his express
primise, Wealth and Riches shall be in his House, or if Psalm. 112. 3.
you live and dye poor and mean, your Children shall be blessed with abundance.
His Seed shall be mighty 2.
upon Earth. And you that were some Years since wealthy, but by the rage of the
Fire, or malice and fraud of Men, or other mishaps are become as poor as Job;
do not despair of recovering your loss: but remember what the Man of God said
to Amaziah, who demanded of him, What he should do for 2 Chro. 25 9.
the Hundred Talents. The Lord is able to give thee much more than Job 42. 10.
this: and how he gave Job twice as much as before. Wait upon God, and keep his
way, and he shall exalt Psalm. 37. 34.
thee to inherit the Land. Ye have heard of the patience of Job; and have seen
the end of the Lord, James 5. 11.
that the Lord is pitiful, and of tender Mercy.

2. To you that have Houses of your own, but may not live in them, at least
cannot with any safety. 1. See, and acknowledge the hand of God in your
expulsion, as in every other Cross, so in this you should a Divine Providence.
It is God that, and not Man only that has thrust you out.

2. Examine the cause of your Ejection; if it be so, Why am I thus? That you
may be sure your cause is good, and your heart sincere, in that which you
suffer for.

3. If you had a doubting Conscience indeed, against which it is unlawful and
damnable to act, and not a mere scruple against which Men may act; yet you may
find cause enough, why God should cast you out of his House, and out of your
own. For you honored God in neither as you might have done. And therefore
ought to acknowledge with David, Righteous art thou O God, and just in thy
Judgments. Psalm. 119. 137. 75.
I know, O Lord, that thy Judgments are right, and that thou in faithfulness
have afflicted me.

4. When you have humbled your Souls, and made your peace with God, by
repenting of your neglect to husband time and talent, while a price was in your
hand. Resolve Prove. 17. 16.
to bear with humility and patience the Indignation of the Lord, because you
have sinned against him, Mich. 7. 9.
until he plead your cause, and execute Judgment for you, and believe that he
will bring you forth again to the Light, and you shall behold This is for
London especially.
his righteousness. i. e. his deliverance, the effect of his faithfulness and
love toward you: and of his just severity against your and his enemies; who
intended not to execute his judgments for your sins, whatever their pretense
was: and bless God that you are still permitted to live in the Land of your
Nativity: And that there are any Esaias 10. 7.
who are willing to receive you into 66. 5.
their Houses, as Laban did Jacob, when he was compelled to leave his Fathers
House, and Jethro, Moses, and the Shulamite Elisha, and Lydia, Paul: And that
none can drive you out of your divine habitation, nor shall be ever able to
separate you from his love in Rom 8. 37. 38. 39.
Jesus Christ, wherein you lodge.

3. To you that have convenient Houses, and a competency of means to live upon.
Be persuaded to think your condition better, than if you had fairer buildings,
and more abundant income and revenues. Agar thought a mean estate best, as
appears by his Prayer against riches, as well as poverty. Give me neither
poverty nor riches, feed me Pro. 30. 8.
with food convenient for me; As much as I shall need from Day to Day. So we
are taught to pray by our Savior: Give us this Day our Daily Bread. The word
signifies such a kind or quality, as is fitting for our sustenance or being.
So much as is needful to be added thereto, and no more. Such a measure of
goods, of body and fortune (so Men use to speak) as is necessary, comprehended
by the Apostle 1 Timothy 6. 8.
under Food and Raiment. This was all that Jacob desired of God. If God will
give me Bread to eat, Genesis 28. 20.
and Raiment to put on. If the Query be, What may be counted needful? Answ. 1.
That which Nature requires enough only to hold Life and Soul together, from
Hand to Mouth. (as they say) 2. That which is meet for the state wherein God
has set us. 3. That which is requisite for the charge committed to us. 4. That
which is apparently needful for the time to come. If any provide not for his
own, especially those of his own House, he has denied the faith, and is worse
than an Infidel. No Man's desire must go beyond this. Labor not to be rich.
Superfluity coveted is very dangerous. They 1 Timothy 6. 9.
that will be Rich fall into Temptation, and a Snare, and into many foolish and
hurtful Lusts, which drown Men in destruction and perdition. A moderate estate
has little danger and trouble, much ease and comfort, a plentiful one little
or nothing of these, much of those, and therefore thank God that it is with you
as it is; nor do you, or can you want plenty, abiding in God, for in him there
is all fullness, and enjoying him, you possess all things; yea, you would do so,
if you had nothing (as was said).

4. To you who dwell in earthly Houses, and have all earthly good things in
abundance, I have this word of exhortation. Let your hearts be lift up with
thankful acknowledgment of God's goodness in giving besides himself, these
outward blessings richly to enjoy. When others, 2 Samuel 7. 18.
nothing inferior to you in grace and goodness, are glad to dwell in poor
Cottages, and to feed on scraps; yea, to beg their Bread. Who am I, O Lord God,
Psalm. 23. 5.
and what is my House, that thou have brought me hitherto? Thou preparest a
Table before me, thou anointest my Head with Oil, my Cup runs over. I am
not worthy Genesis 32. 10.
of all the Mercies, and of all the truth which thou have showed unto thy
Servant, for with my Staff I passed over this Jordan, and now I am become two
Bands.

But let not your hearts be lifted up with pride, because of your abundance.
Charge them that are 1 Timothy 6. 17.
rich in this World, that they be not high-minded. Beware that thou forget not
the Lord thy God. Lest Deuteronomy. 8. 11, 12,
when thou have eaten, and art full, and have built goodly Houses, and dwelt
therein, and when thy Herds 13, 14.
and thy Flocks multiply, and thy Silver and thy Gold is multiplied, and all
that thou have is multiplied then thy Heart be lifted up. See God in your fair
edifices, and sumptuous Furniture, and large Revenues, esteeming them as a beam
of the bright Sunshine of his favor, you being enabled by his Grace to make
them instrumental for his glory in the refreshing the bowels of his Saints; and
so to enjoy the good of them, as to avoid the snare. To use them not as
hindrances, but helps to a better life. Consider withal, how easy and quickly
all you have may be brought to nothing, ( Job this Morning, the greatest Man
for wealth of all the Men of the East, and by Night was brought to poverty to a
Proverb) and therefore look upon all as transitory, keeping your affections
loose, and all off from them. And if they make themselves Wings, and fly away,
as an Eagle toward Heaven: let it trouble you as little, as the sight of a
Flock of Foul out of your Ground, flying thitherward would do; and rejoice,
that with Mary, You have chosen that good Luke 10. 42.
part, that shall not be taken from you.

5. To you, who, having dwelt in fair and goodly Houses, which the Fire
consumed, are in your thought and purpose, if not actually building, as, or
more fair and goodly to dwell in, in the same places where the former stood, or
elsewhere be exhorted. 1. To bless the Lord, your everlasting Habitation,
which preserved yours and all the Persons of your Families, and so much of the
movable Goods in your Houses and Shops, from that raging Element; That you have
still wherewith to subsist comfortably, and are in a condition of Rebuilding:
Acknowledge it to be of the Lord's Mercies that Lam. 3. 22.
your selves, and all yours, Persons and things were not consumed; That so many
lives, and so much substance is given to you for a Prey.

2. To take heed to your selves, that none of these evils, no degree of them,
which are noted, and taxed, and threatened in many new builders of old, and
which it is to be feared, will be found in too many of your fellow builders,
whose Houses will be contiguous with your selves, what those crimes are, may be
gathered from such Scriptures as these. Woe unto him that builds Jer. 22. 13,
14.
his House by unrighteousness, and his Chambers by wrong: that says, I will
build me a wide House and large Chambers, and cutteth him out Windows; and it
is ceited with Cedar, and painted with Vermilion. Woe to him that coveteth Hab.
2. 9, 10, 11
an evil covetousness to his House that he may set his Nest on High. Thou have
consulted shame to thy House, for the Stone shall cry out of the Wall, and the
Beam out of the Timber shall answer it. That shall say, I was laid here by
biting Usury, and this shall answer, I lie here by cheating and violence,
extortion and oppression. All the people Esa. 4. 9, 10.
shall know, that say in the pride and stoutness of Heart, the Bricks are
fallen down, but we will build with hewn Stone. The Sycomores are cut down,
but we will change them into Cedars. We will raise up our Houses in greater
splendor and Glory than ever they were. Their Goods shall become a booty, Zeph
1. 13.
and their Houses a desolation, they shall build Houses, but not inhabit them.
Whereas Edom says, we are impoverished, but we will return and build the
desolated places. Thus says the Lord of Hosts, they shall Mal. 1. 4.
build, but I will throw down. For Amos 5. 10, 11.
as much as their treading is upon the Poor, and ye take from him burdens of
Wheat, ye shall build Houses of Hewn Stone, but ye shall not dwell in them. Ye
planted pleasant Vineyards, but ye shall not drink Wine of them. For I know
your manifold transgressions, and your mighty sins. They afflict the just, they
take a bribe, and turn aside the Poor in the Gate from their sight. They build
up Zion with blood, Micah 3. 10, 11
and Jerusalem with iniquity; the Heads thereof judge for a reward, and the
Priests teach for hire; and the Prophets thereof Divine for money. Yet will
they lean upon the Lord, and say, is not the Lord among us? no evil shall
befall us. Therefore shall Zion for their sakes be plowed as a Field, and
Jerusalem shall become heaps. I will smite the Winter Houses with the Summer
House, and the House of Ivory shall perish, and the great Houses shall have an
end, says the Lord. For behold, the Lord commands, Amos 5. 15.
and he will smite the great Houses with breaches, and the little 6. 11.
House with clefts. Woe unto them that join House to House. He will Esaias 5. 8.
destroy the House of evil doers. Whosoever rewards evil for good, evil 31. 2.
shall not depart from his House. Though you, with whom I am dealing, Pro. 15.
25.
are not of the number of these wicked Men, that are building with you; yet it
is your part and duty, to take good notice of the Lord's just punishments,
which he has threatened to inflict upon them, and take warning thereby, not to
follow their footsteps, nor to tread in one of them. The righteous Man wisely
considers the House of the wicked, which being wholly built, and filled with
Goods, gotten by evil means, shall bring them to fall Pro. (...)
into ruin; so far shall it be from being any stay unto them. Take heed of
partaking of their sins, that ye receive not of their Plagues. See that
terrible and flaming place. I will bring the curse forth, and it Ephesians. (...)
shall enter into the House of the Thief, legal, as well as illegal, and Rev.
18. 4
into the House of him that swears falsely by my Name: and of him that
swears vainly, as well Zech. 5. 4.
as falsely; that swears by the inch Exodus 2. 7.
as well as by the Ell, by his faith and troth, as well as by his Maker. Petty
as well as bloody Oaths:) and it shall remain in the midst of his House, and
shall consume it, with the timber thereof, and the Stones thereof.

3. If you have not yet begun to build, take the wise Man's advice ('it is the
loving advice of your living House) Prepare thy work without, Prove. 24. 27.
and make it fit for thy self in the Field, and afterward build thine House.
Regulate your self, and your Building according to thy Purse. Cast the cost
beforehand. 2 Timothy 3. 16.
Which of you intending to build a Tower, sits not down first, and counts
the cost, whether he have sufficient to finish it, lest happily after he has
laid the Luke 14 28, 29.
Foundation, and is not able to finish it, all that behold it begin to mock
him? They will do as much and worse, if you finish with other Men's Money, which
you owing, are unable to repay. By no means run Herb. Chapter Porch. Romans 13. 8
in debt, take thine own measure. Owe no Man any thing, but love.

4. In carrying on this work, as in all others of your particular calling,
approve your selves to God and Men, to be good Men, by doing all things
according to the rule and guidance of well instructed Psalm. 112. 5.
natural reason: A good Man will guide his affairs with judgment. Through
wisdom is an House builded, and by knowledge shall the Pro. 24. 3, 4.
Chambers be filled with all precious pleasant riches. I need not tell you what
is the prime means in order to this end, namely prayer, For the Lord gives
wisdom, out Pro. 2. 6.
of his Mouth comes knowledge and understanding. He is the Author of reason in
Men, and in the guiding of their actions, even in all manual matters. If any of
you James 1. 5.
lack wisdom, let him ask it of God. Your God will direct you to order your
Buildings, that there may be a prevention of deadly mishaps, as he directed his
People of old in theirs. When thou buildest Deuteronomy. 22. 8.
a new House, thou shall make a Battlement for thy Roof, that thou bring not
Blood upon thine House, if any Man fall from thence. In all other points of
prudence and foresight, you shall find him your Instructor.

5. When then the work is done, and your Houses fit for Habitation, remember
and imitate God's people in ancient times, in dedication of their new-built
Houses, solemnly blessing the first enjoying of them, by Prayers and holy
Hymns, consecrating them to God, to be Houses of Prayer and little Churches,
wherein Duties of Religion Deuteronomy. 20 5.
should be performed every Day, and all things done therein, even natural
actions, to the glory of God, by Governors, and governed: according to that of
the Apostle. Whether ye eat or drink, or whatsoever 1 Cor. 10. 31.
ye do, do all to the glory of God. This was Josuas religious resolution. I and
my House, we will Josua 24. 15.
serve the Lord.

Now because all these Five Divine Domestics are apt to have their minds too
much upon the things of the World; they that are Housless and Landless, to be
solicitous how to get a House and livelihood; they that have Houses of their
own, but are prohibited to live in them, to have a hankring desire after
Liberty; they that have their Houses free to live in, and sufficiency, how they
may add house to house, and increase their substance; they that have goodly
Houses with superfluity, how they may yet have more wealth and honor: The mind
of Man being like the Pro. 30. 15.
Hors-leech, which has two Daughters, crying, give, give; the two Forks in the
Tongue of that bloodsucker, setting forth the two passions in the mind of Man;
the one a burning desire of getting beyond measure, the other an unquietness
through sense of want, when more than enough is gotten: and like those four
things that are never satisfied, the Grave, a barren Womb, the Earth that is
not filled with Water, and the Fire: and they that are building, are apt to be
in earnest expectation, that they shall be well and warm in those new Nests. I
think this one consideration needful to be suggested to them all, namely what
power God's grace uses to have in all them that dwell in him, to take off
their hearts from minding earthly things, in that manner they used to do before
they were in God; namely, though not to forsake the World quite, and give over
worldly business, and spend their whole time in private Devotions, nor having
found this House and Treasure, to cast away their wordly Goods. For Religion
binds Men and Women to be good Husbands, to seek to preserve and increase
their estates that God has given them; yet to make them willing to part with
Houses and Lands, and whatsoever is dearest to them in the World, if they
cannot hold them with Gods favor. To lose all things, and Phil. 3. 8.
count them but dung in comparison of it. This made God's people in the Ten
Tribes to leave their 2 Chro. 11. 16.
dwellings and possessions, and to come to Jerusalem, where God Heb. 11. 24,
25.
was purely worshipped. This made Moses to leave Pharaoh's Court, and to join
himself to God's afflicted, despised Church, and to moderate their affections,
to use them with more sobriety and indifferency; It being all one to them
whether they had little or much. I have learned in whatsoever state Phil 4. 11,
12.
I am, therewith to be content, I know both how to be abased, and how to
abound: every where, and in all things, I am instructed both to be full, and to
be hungry, both to abound, and suffer need: Yea, so to take up their hearts, as
to be more careless and forgetful of these things, than they were formerly. For
they having found a better House, and a better Treasure, There their Mat. 6. 21.
hearts must needs be most, if not altogether. Nor can the heart be divided
between the love of God, 24.
and the World: But one of them will and must have all. No Man can serve two
Masters, for either he will hate the one, and love the other, or else he will
hold to the one, and despise the other. Ye cannot 1 John 2. 15.
serve God and Mammon. Love not the World, neither the things that are in the
World: If any Man love the World, the love of the Father is not in him.

THE FIFTH SERMON.
THe second Sort of Spiritual duties incumbent upon you, who have assurance
that the Lord is your Habitation, is in reference to Persons. 1. Those who were
the efficient cause of this your superlative Happiness, both principle and
instrumental. The principle are the three sacred Persons of the glorious Deity,
the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost.

1. Admire the goodness of God in electing you to this happiness. Blessed be
the God and Father of our Ephesians. 1. 3, 4.
Lord Jesus Christ, who has chosen us in Him, before the Foundation of the
World: and in conferring upon you, by the grace of Adoption, the right of
inheriting his Light here and hereafter. Giving thanks Col. 1. 12.
unto the Father, who has made us meet to be partakers of the inheritance of
the Saints in light. Behold 1 John 3. 1.
what manner of love the Father has bestowed upon us, that we should be called
the Sons of God.

2. The love of God the Son, Ephesians. 3 19.
which passes knowledge; who purchased for us this dwelling place with the
price of his blood. (The blood of God) Ye know the grace Acts 20. 28.
of our Lord Jesus Christ, that though he was rich, yet for your sakes he
became poor, that ye through his 2 Cor. 8, 9.
poverty might be rich. When he was in the possession of a perfect Happiness
and Glory in his Divine Nature, that he might bring you into the same
possession. He took upon him your Nature, with all its miseries, wants and
obligements to gain you the Treasures of God's Grace, Righteousness, and
Eternal Life in Him here, and with Him hereafter. He would be without a Mat. 8.
20.
House, where to lay his head, and without any civil propriety of Earthly
Goods, and without any peace, or rest in the World, that you might have a
resting place in God, and a spiritual right to all this, and actual enjoyment
of as much as needs, and is good for you.

3. The powerful Operation of the Holy Ghost in imprinting upon your Souls
those Divine Graces, which are certain signs and tokens of your real interest
in, and present possession of this super-coelestial Mansion, and witnessing
with your spirits, that you are truly Gods Children, and being such, shall
abide Joh. 8. 35.
in the House for ever, for so Sons do.

To provoke and quicken you the more to thanksgiving for this inestimiable
happiness. Consider how infinitely you are bound to these Three Persons, above
innumerable others; whom God the Father did not choose to have their dwelling
in him, and whom the Holy Ghost never wrought upon, to accept this, as he has
upon you. There are who would persuade you otherwise, that is, that God the
Father has in his decree of Election done no more for you, than he has for
other Men, whom he from Eternity choose to be partakers of his happiness
conditionally, that is, if they would, as you have done, accept it offered to
them, as it was to you: because he foresaw that you would receive Christ into
your hearts by faith, he therefore determined to receive you into himself, to
make you eternally happy; because he foresaw others would not, he therefore
passed them by, and rejected them, and decreed to damn them; for he loves all
Men equally, desires and wills the Conversion and Salvation of every Man alike,
unfeignedly and earnestly; that God the Son manifested in the World, who came
in the World to save sinners, dyed for all without difference, intended to give
himself a ransom for all, and every one equally; that the efficacy of the Holy
Ghost, and his Cooperation accompanying the Word, calling Men out of the state
of nature, into the state of Grace, is only by moral persuasion: and that it is
in the power of every Man's freewill, to accept or reject this grace; These are
plausible, but pernicious Errors, against which I shall bring a few Scriptures,
to antidote and fortify your judgments, and establish them in the contrary
truths.

1. Touching the Decrees of God the Father's predestination, the Scripture
makes it absolute, definite, and irrevocable: So as the number of the Elect can
neither be increased or diminished. The Foundation 2 Timothy 2. 19.
of the Lord stands sure, having Romans 9. 11.
this Seal, the Lord knows them that are his, that the purpose 11. 5.
according to Election might stand. Even so at this present also, there John 6.
37.
is a remnant, according to the election of grace. All that the Father 10. 28.
gives me shall come to me; I know my Sheep, and I give unto them Eternal
Life, and they shall Heb. 12. 23.
never perish. Ye are come to the Church of the first born, which are enrolled
in Heaven, rejoice that Luke 10. 20.
your Names are written in Heaven, Whosoever was not found written in the Book
of Life, was cast into Rev. 20. 15.
the Lake of Fire. Insomuch if it were possible, they should deceive the very
Elect. So that howsoever Mat. 24. 24.
Salvation in the execution of it depends upon the conditional use of the
means, yet the will of God is not conditional, incomplete or mutable, because
God has absolutely purposed to give his Elect both will and power to perform
those very conditions required, namely Repentance, Faith, and Perseverance: For
the Decree of God predestinating, must not be considered after this form: I
will choose Peter to Eternal Life, if it shall so happen that he does believe;
but rather thus, I do choose Peter to Eternal Life, which that he may
infallibly obtain, I will give him faith. As many as were ordained to eternal
Acts 13. 48.
life, believed according to the faith of God's Elect. Elect according to the
foreknowledge of God Tit. 1. 1.
the Father, who are kept by the power of God, through Faith unto Salvation.
All gifts of grace leading 1 Pet. 1. ^, 5.
into the habitation of holiness, and whom to salvation are the fruits and
effects of Eternal Election. Neither is it true, that we are Elected for faith
and holiness, for we are Elected unto both, according Ephesians. 1. 4.
as he has chosen us in him that we should be holy. Election therefore is
before the spiritual blessings both in order and time. Ye have Joh. 15. 16.
not chosen me, but I haven chosen you, and ordained you, that you should go:
and bring forth fruit, and that your fruit should remain. For by grace are ye
saved through Ephesians. 2. 8.
faith, and that not of your selves, it is the gift of God. As for this only
General Election of all, and every Man to salvation upon condition of faith, it
is indeed (alone) no Election, because it predestinates no Man actually, severs
no one from another, writes no Name in the Book of Life, ordains no individual
to have his habitation in God, but only prescribes the manner of coming to
salvation, promiscuously to all: neither by it is it decreed, who shall be
saved, but what manner of Men. Moreover, who holds this Universal Election
alone, must also grant an Universal reprobation. For if God will only have all
to be saved indefinitely, if they will believe, he wills likewise that all
shall be damned that do not believe; and so God neither chooses or refuses
any antecedently. Finally, this opinion makes Man's will to overruled God's
counsel. Nor can you believe God's equal love to all Men, when you hear him
professing that he did not equally love two, who were equal Romans 9. 1^.
by Nature, nor that he desires the salvation of all alike, because 12. 13.
all are not converted and saved, it being as easy for him to effect as
desire, and by his effectual Grace to make Men of unwilling willing without
destroying their voluntary liberty.

3. Touching the efficacy of God Ezekiel. 36. 26.
the Holy Ghost working Conversion, that it is not to be restrained to moral
persuasion only, which Man's will may embrace or reject, and finally resist, is
abundantly evinced by that one Text, where the Apostle heaps up so many
emphatical and significant words, on purpose to declare the power of the spirit
of God, put forth in the conversion of a sinner. That they Ephesians. 1. 18.
may know what is the hyberbolical greatness of his power to usward, 19, 20.
who believe according to the working of his mighty power, which he wrought in
Christ, when he raised him from the dead. To which many more may be added, and
that it depends not upon Man's free will, which can neither convert it self,
nor overcome divine grace, to put forth for his conversion. The Scripture every
where plainly and expressly teaches, I mean, that grace which is given with an
absolute purpose to convert. See 2 Cor. 10. 4, 5. Col. 2. 12. 2 These. 1. 11.
Luke 11. 22. 2 Pet. 1. 3.

Next to the principal efficient causes of their happiness, the instrumental
are to be owned and thanked. Those from whom you had your natural being,
without which you had not been capable of this, or any other good. Honor is
due to natural Parents, how poor, how bad soever, nor must they be despised for
any default of body or mind: and it is a point of piety to relieve them, if
they be in want. Nor can you ever sufficiently requite them, though it must be
your study so to do. Let them learn first 1 Timothy 5
to show piety at home, and requite their Parents, for this is acceptable
before God. Your spiritual Parents are much more to be honored, and much less
to be contemned; for as much as they have been instruments of your better
being, your being in Christ in God, without which you had better to have been
Dogs or Toads; Yea, good had it been for you, if you had never been born. In
Christ Jesus I have begotten you through the Gospel. Think nothing too dear 1
Cor. 4. 15.
for these. I bear you record, that if it had been possible, ye would have
plucked out your own Eyes, and have given them unto me. Time Gal. 4. 15.
was, when you held your selves happy in me, and blessed the time that ever you
saw and heard me. Howbeit, I do not say unto thee, Phil. 19.
how thou owe me even thine own self. Bless also all those who have been
fellow-helpers with these, by informing, convincing, reproving, instructing,
advising, comforting you against despair. All these call for thankful
acknowledgment. Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, 1 Sa. 25. 32, 33.
which sent thee this Day to meet me, and blessed be thy advice, and blessed be
thou which have kept me from avenging my self. Let the Righteous smite me,
reprove, and chide me. It shall be a kindness. Psalm. 141. 5.
I will thank him for it, and God for him for it, and God for him.

The next sort of Persons, to whom you owe duty, to the performance whereof, I
shall earnestly exhort you, are they, who as yet are without God in the World,
to whom it may be said. They have Acts 8. 21, 23.
neither part nor lot in this matter, but are in the gall of bitterness, and
bond of iniquity: And that not only without the Pale of the Church, Twenty-Six
parts of the World divided into Thirty-One, having not so much as the Name of
Christians; and of those Five that are Christians in Name. What a World of
Papists are there, besides Heretics that cut off themselves from the true
Church? But even in the reformed Churches, and even in this Land of light, and
Valley of Vision, there are six sorts and a great number of them, who dwell not
in the Light, but sit in Darkness, and in the shadow of Death. Namely, 1.
Grossly ignorant ones, that are utterly unacquainted with the first Principles
of the Oracles of God. These are in Satan's Power, under his Government, who is
the Ruler of the Darkness of this World; against these is the wrath of God
revealed from Heaven, in temporal, and spiritual, and Eternal Judgments.
Knowledge being the Foundation, and Seed of all saving Grace, they must needs
be graceless that want it. 2. Wickedly erroneous ones, those who hold in their
judgments Doctrines overthrowing the Christian Faith, these are not many Doors
from Death. For every fundamental Error has a damnable defilement, being a
Leprosy in the Head, the worst of that kind of Plague. 3. Openly profane
ones that live in the omission of known duties, and in the practice of known
gross sins. Who for the pleasures of the Flesh, renounce the Heavenly
blessings, as Esau did, who for a Morsel of Meat sold his birthright.
Fornicators, Thieves, Drunkards, Revilers, Swearers, Sabbathbreakers, etc. This
ye know, that no such have any abiding in God, but dwell in the Devil, whose
they are, and whom they serve, and with whom they shall abide eternally,
without Repentance. 4 Mere civil ones, who live not in any open offense against
the Second Table, but are utterly regardless of the First: which are of
absolute necessity, to prove Man's being in God. The Gospel teaching us to live
godly, as well as righteously and soberly. Nor without holiness Heb. 12. 24.
shall any Man ever see God. 5. Hypocrites, who though they seem to have a
prime respect, to the First Table (which Christ calls the First and great
Commandment) yet they make little or no Conscience of the Second Table duties;
love not their Wives, are cruel to their Children and Servants, will lie, and
cheat, and cozen, tipple, etc. The damnable estate of these has been
sufficiently discovered, and that the lowest place of Torments in the burning
Lake, is assigned for them. 6tly. Haters and Blasphemers, and Persecutors of
the ways of Godliness, and of them that Phil. 1. 28.
walk in those ways by word or deed. This is an evident token of Perdition,
and the wrath of God 1 These. 2. 15, 16
shall come upon such to the utter-most, if they perish in their malice.

The duty we owe to all these, is to mourn for their undone condition, and to
desire, and strive earnestly to convert them, That they may be in capacity to
live, and lodge with you under the same Roof, and partake of the same glorious
Privileges, and Graces, and Comforts. So you ought to do by these, when you
have occasion to converse with any of them, as Lydia by Paul and Silas,
constrained (...) 1^. 15.
them to come into her House, and abide there, at least by earnest invitation,
and persuasion, as Jael did Sisera, with another manner of mind, Turn in my
Lord, turn Judge. 4. 18.
into me, fear not. You are bound to have the same tender and cordial affection
toward all these, that are out of God's grace, that Saint Paul had toward the
Galatians, Gal. 5. 4.
that were fallen from grace. My little Children, of whom I travel 4. 19.
in birth again, till Christ be formed in you.

1. Be in pain for them, as a Woman in travel is. Grieve, and groan, and sigh,
and weep bitterly for them, as Lot did for the Sodomites, With whose filthy
conversation 2 Pet. 2. 7, 8.
he was vexed, for that righteous man dwelling among them, in seeing and
hearing vexed his righteous soul, from Day to Day with their unlawful deeds. I
beheld the Transgressors, Psalm. 119. 158.
and was grieved, Rivers of 136.
Waters run down mine Eyes, because they keep not thy Law. O Jer. 9. 1, 2, 3.
that my Head were Waters, and mine Eyes a Fountain of Tears, that I might
weep Day and Night, as well for the sins, as the slain of the Daughters of my
People: For they be all Adulterers, an Assembly of treacherous Men, and bend
their Tongue like their Bow for Lies: They proceed from evil Sam. 15. 35.
to worse. Samuel mourned for Soul. Ezekiel. 10. 6.
Even mourned, because of the transgression of them that had been carried away.
Jesus grieved for the hardness of the Heart of the Jews, Beheld their City, and
wept over it. Luke 19. 41.
Out of much affliction, and languish of heart, I wrote unto you with many
tears. Many walk, of whom 2 Pet. 2. 4.
I have told you often, and now tell you weeping, that they are Enemies of the
Cross of Christ, whose end Phil. 18. 19.
is destruction, whose God is their Belly, whose Glory is their shame, who mind
Earthly things. For loves sake, love to God who is dishonored, and your
Country, which is endangered, and to these poor Creatures that are destroying
their poor Souls, and your own Souls, which you will preserve from infection by
this means, lay sadly to heart, and grieve affectionately, for the sad, dark,
doleful, damnable condition, so many thousands in this Land are in. Should you
come into Houses full of dead Men, that had slain themselves, would not your
Eyes affect your Hearts, could you forbear tears? You can scarce come into any
House where some are not spiritually dead, and destroying their own Souls,
which is a thousand times worse.

2. Pray for them, Brethren, my Romans 10. 1.
Hearts desire and prayer for Israel Genesis 17. 18.
is, that they may be saved. O that I shmael might live before thee. If 1 John
5. 16.
any Man see his Brother sin a sin, which is not unto Death, he shall Luke 23
34.
ask, and he shall give him life. God shall pardon him, and by that means free
him from everlasting Acts 7. 60. 17.
Death. Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do. Lord lay not this
sin to their charge. There are none you know or meet with worse than these, for
whom Stephen thus prayed, they were stiff necked; so hard, that they were not
to be made pliable, uncircumcised in Heart, and Ears, as profane inwardly,
and wicked as the Heathen themselves, though they outwardly in their Bodies
carried the Seal of God's Covenant: They always resisted the Holy Ghost by whom
God's truth was not only propounded, but the truth of it likewise so powerfully
demonstrated, that they could not contradict it, but only by obstinate malice.
They gnashed upon that Holy-man, with their Teeth, from madness and malice,
which they bear to the Evangelical Doctrine, which he preached, and they stoned
him with Stones to Death. Pray also that God would work a change in their
minds and manners, draw them by a merciful Violence out of Satan into Christ.

3. To your mourning and prayers add utmost endeavors, using every one
according as his Nature and Condition shall require. Of Jude 22. 23.
some have compassion, making a difference, and others save with fear, pulling
them out of the Fire. The simple, weak, and seduced deal gently with. Those
that are hardened, and perverse, and corrupters of others, be as much as in you
lies Instruments of their Salvation, by more severity. Save them with fear,
namely by a lively denuntiation of God's Judgments darted into your
Consciences, pulling them out of the Fire; that is, doing what you can to draw
them from Perdition, without any vain respects or considerations, as Men draw
things out of the Fire in any fashion, or what way they can. First,

Them that you find grossly ignorant, instruct in Fundamental Truths, without
the distinct knowledge whereof, no Man can have any entrance into this House.
Especially you that have Children, Deuteronomy. 6. 6.
and Servants, take pains in Catechizing them, till they be as able and ready
to render a reason of 7. 11.
their Faith, as to answer to their Names. These words which I command 18, 19,
20.
thee this Day, shall be in thy heart, and thou shall teach them diligently to
thy Children, and shall talk of them when thou sit in thy House, and when
thou walk by the way, and when thou lie down, and when thou risest up: and
ye Fathers bring up your Ephesians. 6. 4.
Children in the nurture and admonition of the Lord.

But you must not neglect to instruct strangers, also even Beggars that come to
your Doors, they have precious immortal Souls, which you should be as willing
to relieve, as your Bodies. You that are godly Women, as well as Men, must
perform this duty. We find Women not only teaching their Husbands* Manoah's
Wife said unto her husband, concluding the Death of himself and her. If the
Lord were Judge. 13. 22, 23.
pleased to kill us, he would not have received a burnt-offering, and a
meat offering at our hands, neither would he have showed us all these things,
nor would at this time have told us such things as these: and their Children
and Servants. What my Son, and what, the Son of my Womb! and what, the Son of
my vow! give not thy strength unto Women, nor thy ways unto that which
destroys Kings -- She opens her Mouth in wisdom among her Maidens, and in
her Tongue is the Law of Kindness, sweet and gracious speeches sounding to
edification in knowledge and holiness, but expounding the way of God to others
also. Aquila and Priscilla took Apollos to them, and expounded to him the way
of God more perfectly. Seeing godly Women may and should be private patterns,
and may have a gift of expounding Scripture, and much more private Men, and use
that gift in the presence of Ministers, for the edification of others, yea of
Ministers themselves.

2. Those you find led away with the Error of the wicked, holding any points
in Religion, contrary to sound Doctrine, denying directly, or by consequence
any Fundamental Verity. Such was that of Hymoeneus and Philetus, and that false
Doctrine which the Galatians held, namely that to be justified before God, it
was necessary together with faith in Christ strictly to observe the Mosaical
Ceremonies, as a part of Man's righteousness and holiness, appointed by the
Law: and that of the Nicolaitans, who permitted the community of Women, held it
a thing indifferent to commit Adultry, and eating Meats sacrificed to Idols;
and Popish, and Pelagian Errors: when ever you have occasion to converse with
any such as these, or that hold any point not consonant to Scripture, though
having less filth and danger, do your endeavor to recover them, by soft words
and hard Arguments. So you are taught by the Apostle James's Practice, who
calls a damnable blasphemy by the gentle name of error, and uses a loving
compellation, (Do not err my beloved brethren) But observe what powerful
Arguments he uses both before and after his dehortation: and by the Apostle
Paul's precept; In 2 Timothy 2. 24, 25, 26.
meekness instructing those that oppose themselves, if God peradventure will
give them repentance to the acknowledgment of the truth, that they may recover
themselves out of the snare of the Devil. Two things especially should move you
to endeavor to convert souls from error, especially if Fundamental. The one
from the nature of such an error, it is like a Canker or Gangreen, a Malady so
contagious that it presently spreads it self into the next Members, and so by
degrees destroys the whole Body; being once admitted into the soul, it will
glide into it, to the total extinguishing of the spiritual life thereof: And
having possessed it Jam. 5. 19, 20.
self in one of the Members of the Church, will spread over all the Body of it,
if it be not withstood in time. Another is the great reward promised to this
endeavor, 2 Cor. 8. 12.
if it prove successful; if not the will, as it is accepted, so it shall be
equally rewarded.

3. Such as are profane Persons, the show of whose Countenance does witness
against them, and declare their sin, as Sodom, and hide it not; that draw
iniquity with Esa. 3. 9.
Cords of Vanity, and sin as it were 5. 8.
with a Cart-rope, and that live in the neglect and contempt of divine
Ordinances, and religious exercises, public, domestic, or secret, professing
by their practice, that they are the Children of Belial, and rank Atheists. If
you find that any of these have not as yet commenced Dogs and Swine, but are
as yet Undergraduates, and in the Devil's Academy, and that you shall not
provoke them to Blasphemy, nor aggravate their rage against you thereby,
allure them to go with you into Divine* Herbert's Church Porch, and then
sprinkle them with his Holy Water-stick.

Beware of Lust, it does pollute and foul.
Whom God in Baptism washed with his own blood.
Drink not the third Glass, which thou can not tame,
When once it is within thee.
Take not his name, who made thy mouth, in vain,
It gets thee nothing, and has no excuse.
Lie not, but let thy heart be true to God,
Thy Mouth to it, thy actions to them both.
Fly idleness, which yet thou can not fly*
By dressing, Mistrissing and Complement.
Look at thy Mouth, Diseases enter there.
Slight those who say among thy sickly health,
Thou live by rule, --
Be thrifty, but not covetous, --
Play not for gain, but sport: -- --
Be sweet to all, --
Catch not at Quarrels. --
Laugh not too much -- Pick out of mirth,
Profaneness, filthiness, abusiveness.
Be useful where thou live --
Restore to God his due, in tith and time.
Resort to Sermons --
Sum up at Night what thou have done by Day,
And in the Morning what thou have to do.
Take heed, lest through fear, or too much respect toward any, whom you hear
speaking, or see acting profanely, you become by your connivance or silence,
guilty of want of Zeal toward God's glory, and of Charity toward your
Neighbors Souls and Salvation. Thou shall not hate thy Brother in Lev. 19. 17.
thy heart, thou shall in any wise rebuke thy Neighbor, and not suffer sin
upon him. Not, but regard must be had to Person, time, and place, and the
manner of reproving, which sometimes may be by discountenancing, as well as by
discourse, and always, so that the party reproved, may see it proceeds from love.

4. Them that are civil, have a care to keep their good word, deal justly with
all that are meek merciful, ready to help such as stand in need of them; when
you meet and converse with such, commend Mark 10. 10.
these and all other good things in them, as being such as God loves, and will
reward: but labor to convince them, that all their Moral parts and actions,
till they be members of Christ, will yield them no Genesis 20. 6.
true comfort, by being in him they are brought to dwell in God. This you may
easily prove unto them by the example of sundry Persons, who though endowed
with many Genesis 25. 27.
civil Virtues, yet are branded by the Holy Ghost, for most unhappy Men. Esau
was a dutiful Child 28. 33.
to his Father, careful to please him, fearful to offend him, of a bountiful
disposition, and free from covetousness. Ahab a kind-hearted Man, pitiful
toward an insolent 1 King. 20. 31, 34.
inveterate Enemy. The Pharisee that went up into the Temple to pray, could
thank God that he was Luke 18. 11.
not as other Men were, Extortioners, Unjust, Adulterers, that he paid his
Tithes duly. And what Man in the World could live a more unblameable life, than
that young Mat. 19. 20.
Ruler did? And so Paul before his Conversion. If any Man think he has
whereof, he might trust in the Flesh. I more touching the righteousness which
is in the Law blameless. Yet without Faith in John 15. 4, 5.
Christ, and a real change wrought in the heart, all this, and much more is
nothing: he being the Fountain of all true goodness. The civil Devil carries
Men to Hell, as well as the profane Devil, though somewhat more about.

5. Those whom you discern to be Hypocrites, by living and allowing themselves
in some one known sin of Omission or Commission: (Thus Jehu discovered himself
to be an Hypocrite. He took no heed 2 King. 10. 31.
to walk in the way of the Lord God of Israel, with all his heart, for he
departed not from the sins of Jeroboam, which made Israel to sin.) When you
have occasion to confer with these, acknowledge the good that is in them, much
more than in Moral Men, as having a prime respect to the first Table, affecting
the Ministry of the Word, giving themselves to Prayer and Fasting, abstaining
from petty, as well as bloody Oaths, strictly observing the Lord's Day, loving
the pure worship of God, and hating will worship; commend them for these
things, but labor to fright and Fire them out of their Hypocrisy, by pressing
that of St. James upon them. Whosoever shall keep the whole Law, and yet offend
in one point, he is guilty of all, that breaks one Commandment. Habitual
sincere obedience is Universal, extending to the compass of the whole Law
evangelically. And as one Leak in a Ship let alone will sink it as well as
many, and one Mortal Wound destroy the Body. So any one sin wilfully continued
in, will drown and destroy the Soul: and finally how more intolerable their
torment shall be in Hell, than any other sinners.

6. In like manner deal with them, who are haters and Persecutors of the People
of God, pretending that it is for their Hypocrisy, that they cannot away with
them, persuade them that their pretense is false; for if they hated them as:
Hypocrites, they would hate them as sinners, and so they would hate all
sinners, and the greatest sinners most: as he that hates a Toad, because of his
poison, the greater the Toad is, the more he would hate it. But these Men know
themselves, and are known to love well enough Drunkards, Whoremasters,
Swearers, and practical Atheists; and therefore the true reason why they hate
strict Professors, is for their godliness, which condemns their irreligious and
loose living: (as Noah by building the Ark, condemned the World) So Cain slew
his Brother Heb. 11. 7.
because his own works were evil, and his Brothers righteous. Saul, Saul, why
persecutest thou me? 1 John 3. 12.
His Conversion presently followed his Conviction. They that dwell in God,
dwell in love. Your love to Acts 9. 4.
poor Souls, that are out of God, expressed thus, by making essays to draw
them unto God, will both evidence to your selves and others that he is your
habitation. Make this therefore your work every day, do as Lot did by the two
Angels. Turn in I pray you into your Servants Genesis 19. 23.
House, no, but we will abide in the Street, and he pressed them greatly, and
they turned in unto him, and they entered into his house. What know you, but you
may prevail, as he did? and if so, you will make Men Angels; for this is their
highest happiness. Always to behold the Face of God. Let love constrain Mat. 18.
1^.
you, not only that which I have now pressed; you owe love to every Man, are
bound to love them as your selves, and to seek their welfare as your own: and
there is no love in any Man to his Neighbor, that loves not his Soul. But the
love of Christ should more constrain you to put the whole strain of your
strength to this work. God having declared his desire to have his House filled,
and his Sons Kingdom enlarged; and there being Luke 15. 7, 10.
joy in Heaven at the Conversion of every sinner: Yea, love to your selves
should force this. It being the best means to increase your graces and
comforts: the more you draw to knowledge, and faith, and holiness, the more
will these graces increase in you, and the comfort of them. As a Man casting
forth of his Seed, brings it him back again with great increase. Nor will Jam.
5. 19.
any work you can do have the like recompense (which was hinted before) They
that turn many to righteousness, Dan. 12. 3.
shall shine as the Stars, for ever and ever. Nor can you be ignorant, that
this is the end, why God has bestowed his graces upon you, whereby you were
made meet to be partakers of this Inheritance, not that you should keep them to
your selves, but that you should benefit others by them. The 1 Cor. 12. 7.
manifestation of the Spirit, (that is, those gifts of grace, whereby it is
manifested, that they dwell in 1 John 4. 13.
God) is given to every Man to profit withal.

Finally, The Lord has strictly commanded, that no Man should content himself
to know and believe aright himself, to repent of his own profaneness, and to
be religious and righteous, but that he should seek also to cause others to be,
and do so, that they may be as well housed as he, as happy as himself. Cause
others to return Ezekiel. 18. 32.
that you and they may live together under the same Roof: and the more the
merrier, and better cheer to.

Obj. There is no hope of doing good upon many, that we meet with, scarce upon
any.

Answ. If with all your pains taken all the Days of your Life, you can win but
one Soul, it is as much as the gaining of the whole World. Yea, one Soul is more
worth than Mat. 16. 26.
the whole World.

2. Despair of none, how wicked so ever: as bad as bad can be, Acts 2.
have been reduced and brought in, Manasseh for example, and three thousand at
once.

3. If assaying three, or four, or five, or six times prevail not, the 7th.
may: Go up now, look toward the Sea. 1 King. 18. 43. 44.
Master, there is nothing, go again seven times, and it came to pass at the
seventh time, that he said, behold, there arises a little Cloud out of the
Sea, like a Man's hand.

4. Suppose when you have done all you can all your life long, no good be done,
yet you may take that Comfort your Master did. Though Israel be not gathered,
yet Esaias 49. 5. 4.
shall I be glorious in the Eyes of the Lord. And in the Verse before, I have
labored in vain, I have spent my strength in naught, in vain. Yet surely my
Judgment is with the Lord, and my work with my God. God knows with what
uprightness I have done his work, and therefore I know he will Crown me with
Glory, though my labor has been lost, as to the most part of the People.

THE SIXTH SERMON.
THe next sort of Persons, in reference to whom Duty lies upon you, are
Christian Societies. Assemblies that profess the Christian Religion, and join
together in the worship of the true God. These are called Churches, and of
these there are two sorts, false and true, and your duty is to separate from
those, and hold fellowship with these. Three things are required to the
constituting of true Churches.

1. That the Word of God, and Doctrine of Salvation be truly taught in them, ye
are of the household of God, and are built upon the Foundation of the Apostles
and Prophets: upon this Rock (this truth confessed by thee) I will build my
Church, the Church is God's Register, that keeps his Records faithfully, the
Pillar and ground of Truth, where the Doctrine of the Law and Gospel is truly
taught, God dwells with that People, and Salvation may be there had.

2. That there be Pastors and Ministers lawfully called, How shall they preach
except they be sent? pray the Lord of the Harvest, that he will send sorth
Laborers into his Harvest, Christ has given his Ministry to his own Church.

3. That the People receive and embrace the Doctrine and Religion of Christ,
and submit to, and join together in the Worship of God. Then they that gladly
Jo^. 2. 41, 42.
received the Word were Baptized, and they continued steadfastly in the Apostles
Doctrine and fellowship, in breaking of Bread and Prayers.

Hereby may be discerned, which are false Churches, and which true: The Roman
Political Church, as the Constitution of it is false, and of Man's Invention.

Obj. They have the Apostles Creed, the Books of Canonical Scripture and
Baptism.

Answ. They acknowledge the Creed in profession and word, but overthrow much of
the sense, by their superadded Articles, and false expositions. They retain the
words of Scripture, though in much, not the sense of the Holy Ghost: nor can
Baptism, though for substance, according to the first Institution, prove them a
true Church, more than Circumcision could Samaria to be so, or a Seal pulled
from the Writing, and set to the bare paper. A Thief may show a true Man's
Purse, but that proves him not to be a true Man: and they overthrow inward
Baptism, the life of that Sacrament, imputed righteousness and holiness, which
in Gods Church must go together with the outward Element.

2dly. As Papists, they have no true Ministers: the Romish Priest, as such, is
no Minister of Christ, not only because of the Antichristian Doctrines, which
he teaches, overthrowing the Foundation of the Prophets and Apostles, but also
in that he offers Christ a real Sacrifice for quick and dead, wherein chiefly
stands his Office; and because as a Papist-Priest he receives his very Power
from the Pope, whose Office is not of Christ.

Qu. Why then should not one Baptized by a Mass Priest, be Rebaptized?

Answ. Because the action of a lawful Calling, done by one that is not lawfully
called, is not a nullity; the Ministry is lawful, though as corrupted by them
is bad.

3dly. Their People oppose God's true Worship, and live in palpable Idolatry,
and profess themselves the Members of a usurping traiterous head the Pope.

Obj. Antichrist sits in the Temple of God, therefore the Church of Rome is
God's Church.

Answ. In the Popish Church, there is the hidden Church of God mingled, as a
little Wheat with much Chaff, as a little Gold with much Dross. So that though
the Church of God be where Antichrist sits, yet the Church whereof he is
Head, is no Church of God; for there are no means there to beget, or preserve
spiritual life, whether we regard Doctrine or Worship.

To speak plainly, it is a part of the Universal Visible Church of Christians,
so far as they profess Christianity, and acknowledge Christ their Head; but it
is the Visible Society of Traiterous Usurpers, so far as they profess the Pope
to be their Head: just as if a Traitor should make himself Deputy of Ireland
against the King's will, and all the People believe he is so; and so profess
themselves Subjects to the King as their Sovereign, and to him as his Deputy:
Here it is a true Kingdom, as it is still under the King, and yet a Kingdom of
Traitors, or Rebels, Secundum quid, or so far as they adhere to the Usurping
Deputy, against the King's command. From this Church therefore, which is
spiritual Babylon, the Mother of Harlots and abominations of the Earth, no
Spouse of Christ, but a Strumpet, no House of God, but an Habitation of Devils,
once indeed a famous Church, but now dead and buried (and as is the Mother, so
is the Daughters) God's People are bound to separate. Come out of her my
people, and yet not from such therein who mean well in the general, and
secretly descent from her damnable Corruptions, is this Obligation of
Separation upon you. Romans 18. 4. Much less ought you to separate from Churches
which have made separation from Rome, as the reformed Protestant Churches in
France, Germany, and other Countries, and these of Great Britain, and Ireland
have done; in whose Congregations is found truth of Doctrine, a lawful
Ministry, and a People professing the true Religion, submitting to, and joining
together in the true Worship of God.

I am not ignorant that many of you, whose Habitation I question not but the
Lord is, who have your Habitations in all the several Countries of this
Kingdom, have drunkin a deep prejudice against all the Parochical
Congregations, whereof you are legal Members, and where all you were baptized,
and thereby were made the Members of Christ, the Children of God, and Heirs of
his Kingdom. I fear some of you will startle at these expressions, found in
the Common Prayer Book. But if*you consult the Holy Scripture, you will find
them warranted in a Sacramental sense; and your prejudice has so far wrought
upon you, that you have forsaken the assembling of your selves together with
your Neighbors in the public Meeting Places.

I know with whom I am dealing, Persons that have a comfortable assurance that
they dwell in God, and therefore are willing to hear any thing that may tend to
the increase of their comfort, and unwilling to retain any error in their
judgments or practice, that may defile and dishonor their dwelling place, or
cause it to be evil spoken of by them that are without; whose mouths you know
your absenting your selves from all the Solemn Assemblies, open wide to cast a
scandal upon your Persons, as profane, and upon that strict profession of
walking precisely, according to the Rule of the written Word, which they think
gives you no Warrant for your separation from their Society in the service of
God: and my humble and earnest request to you is to lay aside your prejudice,
and examine by that good Word, whether your separation be not sinful.

I shall presume you will freely grant both, that it is necessary to Salvation,
that a Man be a member Gen 9. 27.
of the true Visible Church, because in the Word you find the profession of
the true Religion; yea, the very hope of Salvation, Esaias 33. 24.
and joining to the true Chruch, going together: and that so long 44. 5.
as God continues the Doctrine of Salvation to a People, and his Solemn
Worship; so long he dwells Lev. 26. 12.
among that People, and Salvation may be had there, and that no utter Psalm. 76.
2.
separation may be made from those Assemblies, where God dwells, and where
Men may be assured Romans 1. 16.
to find Salvation, though 1 Cor. 1. 21.
there may be many great corruptions both in Doctrine and Worship, in those
Assemblies. There were James 1. 21.
so in the Church of the Jews in Christ's time, the Priests and Teachers John
6. 67, 68.
were ignorant and wicked, and had a corrupt and unlawful entrance into their
Calling; and the People were like to the Priest generally, notoriously and
obstinately ungodly; and the Worship used in that Church was woefully corrupt,
many superstitious Ceremonies, the Observation whereof were more strictly
urged, than the Commandments and Ordinances of God; the Temples made a Den of
Thieves, the Discipline and censures shamefully abused, the Doctrine was
corrupt in many points, and the great Sacrament of the Passover ill timed: yet
the Word tells you, Christ (whose example it binds you to follow) and you
profess your selves followers of him in all imitable things) made no separation
from this Church, professed himself a Member of it, was by Circumcision
incorporated a Member of it, received Baptism in a Congregation of that
People, was a hearer of their common-service, and their Teachers, allowing and
commanding his Disciples to hear them, communicated in the Passover with the
People and the Priest; no more did his Apostles make separation from this
Church, after his Ascension, till their Day had its period. Peter and John went
to their public Prayer in their Temple. So Paul and Barnabas in their
Synagogue. By their example it appears, that till God has forsaken the
Church, no Man may forsake it; and that it is no sufficient warrant to separate
from a Church, because it is guilty of such sins and corruptions, as deserves
God should forsake it, and for which he has threatened in his Word, that he
will forsake it: till it appear that God has put in Execution that which he
justly threatened, we ought to acknowledge and receive it, as his House, and not
to refuse to dwell with him in it. For shall Man be holier than God, and hate
corruption more than he? And yet we may not communicate with it, by consenting
to any corruptions that are, or shall be detected, or proved to be in it,
wherein we have our Savior's example to guide us. All this I take for granted,
that you will surely grant, because many Books largely asserting all this, have
been many Years in the hands of those, who have led away many to separation, a
syllable whereof they have not gain - said: and they are in yours; nor have I
heard a word of your dissenting. But this I hear you say, that you question the
constitution of the Church of England, and that you cannot join with their
Congregations in Divine Worship, because they stand under an Antichristian
Government, and the worship in them is a devised worship. Touching the
constitution of the Church of England, I have no more but this to commend to
your consideration; namely the answer, that was long since given to the
Brownists, to which I never saw reply given. Their Objection was this, that the
People of England were never rightly called; for in the beginning of the
Queen's Reign, they were by her command, and Proclamation, compelled to embrace
the Protestant Religion, and to conform to God's worship: whereas in the New
Testament, we have no Example of People compelled to the Service of God, christ
commanding Fishermen to convert souls by preaching, not Princes to make
Disciples by compulsion: Therefore the church of Christ had no right
constitution. The Answer, to the separation of old, is this, that if we speak
of a Church first planted, the people of such a Nation are first called by the
word, before they come to be a Church; but it is not so of a Country, where
for a long time, true Religion has been professed, which is our case. And as
to that part of the Object, that there is no such example in the New Testament.

1. The Magistrates were then Enemies to the Christian Religion.

2. It suffices that we have examples in the Old Testament. 2 Kings 23. 21. 2
Chr. 15. 13. and 33. 16. and 34. 33. Nor have Christian Princes less power in
their Dominion, to abolish Idolatry, and by Law, and penalties, to compel their
Subjects, where there is a parity of reason.

3. We find that private Governors, in the New Testament, have required, and
brought in their Families, to embrace, and profess the Christian Faith. Joh. 4.
53. Acts 10. 21. and 16. 34. and 18. 8. 1 Cor. 1. 16. But that these did any
more than teach, and command them to learn, consent, and profess, some
question, if they did so much. And so much they did, may, and ought to do, Genesis
8. 9. And whether a Christian Magistrate may do more. For though it is out of
all doubt, that not only all external duties of the Second Table, but also all
such of the First Table of the Moral Law, are directly and properly of
political cognizance; yet they doubt much, whether any Evangelical Ceremonies,
or Forms of Worship, which relate to Christ be so; because they are
supernatural, and Conscience is the only Rule, whereby the Merit of those
Duties is to be Judged, which must be satisfied before any Papal Injunction can
be imposed, or obedience can be safely yielded: and therefore they would have
the ranged not among the essential, but among the contingentials of Political
Government. But they earnestly deny that any internal duties and matters of
Faith, and Evangelical Doctrine fall within the spheer of that cognizance,
either directly or indirectly; because no humane power extends to acts of the
Soul, and it is the duty of the Minister, and not of the Magistrate, to reform
even in such matters: and yet the Magistrate may, and ought to exercise his
power, for restraining and punishing the fruits and effects of such Errors,
when the peace of the Commonwealth comes to be disturbed thereby; but he has
no warrant to punish the misbelief, or incredulity concerning Articles of
Chirstian Faith, no nor Idolatrous Forms of Worship, unless they proceed from
the error or obliquity of their Subjects wills, the reformation whereof is the
absolute and adaequate end of all punishments, and of the exercise of all
Political Power: but punishments were never ordained for the information of the
understanding. To return to satisfy the Objection, It is not necessarily nor
generally true of all Members of the Visible Church, that they be called by the
word: if this be granted which cannot be denied, that as among the Jews Men
were incorporated into the Church by Circumcision; so they are under the Gospel
by Baptism, Col. 2. 11, 12. and that as in those times, many for by-ends, and
through fear joined themselves to the Church, Est. 8. 17. so it may be, and
has been under the Gospel.

Obj. But the greatest part of our people are ignorant, and unsanctified; yea,
profane Persons.

Answ. Ignorant and profane Persons have always been in the Church: It was so
in the Church's Infancy, and so in her perpetual growth, and so shall be to the
end of the World, at least till Christ come the second time; but these are not
of the Church, which has its denomination of the better part.

Obj. But open and profane Persons are not cast out.

Answ. The Law takes Order they shall be. The fault is in the Governors. We are
not no Church, or a false one, because such are suffered. 1 Cor. 5. Rev. 2.

Obj. But we want the Form of a true Church. Viz. a Covenant.

Answ. It appears not in the Apostles times, any thing more was required to
make Church Members of the Church-Universal, than assenting to Evangelical
truths, embracing and professing Christian Religion, and receiving Baptism;
wherein all in our Church enter into a Solemn Covenant, and confirm it when
they come to years of understanding. And moreover to settle them in particular
Churchorder, the Apostle made Bishops or Elders over them in every Church, Acts
14. 23. and required the People to obey them, hear and honor them. 1 These. 5.
12, 13. Heb. 13. 7. 17. 24. 1 Timothy 5. 17. And those that consented to this, and
did so, were Members of that particular Church: so that we confess, as a Man
cannot be a Member of the Universal Church, (if at age) without his own
consent; so neither can he be of a particular Church: (however he may be
antecedently obliged to consent.) But that this consent was wont to be
signified by any express Covenant, between the Pastors, and the Flocks, no
Scripture mentions. It is consent signified only which God requires: But
whether this consent be signified, 1. By the Peoples Election of the Pastors.
2. Or by a Covenant. 3. Or by lifting up the hands, or any such sign. 4. Or
only by constant attendance with the Church on all God's Ordinances there, God
has no where determined; save only as circumstances may make one of these more
fit than another, and so oblige us to it in prudence. And he which makes
Duties, which God has not made, is a maker of superstition, and a false
Teacher, or Speaker of God and his Laws, and adds to them.

As to that, you say you cannot join with our Congregations, because they stand
under a Devilish Antichristian Government, and the Worship in them (by a
number of Common Prayers) is a devised Worship. All that I desire of you is
only this, that laying aside passion, you will but pause and ponder what is
alleged to give satisfaction to this Objection; which may cool at least the
fierceness of your Spirits, and abate that desperate prejudice you have
conceived against the Government and Worship established in these Churches.
Touching the exercise of Ecclesiastical Government in general, you know it is
not of absolute necessity to the Constitution of a Church; and as to the
Government of the Churches by Bishops (speaking of it only as they are
Superior to Presbyters, without meddling with the extent of their Diocesses,
etc.) when you find so much written with so much confidence, that Episcopacy
is the true ancient Apostolical Government of the Christian Church: That it was
received in profession and practice in all Ages, and is so far Divine, that
Bishops were in the very time of the Apostles, that they were ordained and
appointed by the Apostles themselves: That there was an approved succession of
them in the Apostolical Churches: That in all the following Ages, all the
Churches in the World were governed by them, for more than Fifteen Hundred
Years, without any opposition, save by the Arrian Aerius, who was therefore
cried down as an Heretic by the ancient Fathers. That the first reformed
Protestant Churches cast not off Episcopacy with any aversness to the Order, as
appears by the History of the Augustane confession, to which Calvin himself
signed: That some of those Churches are governed by Superintendents, the same
with Bishops. That there was long since a challenge made to them, that have
aversness to the degree or order, in these words. We require you to find out,
but one Church upon the Face of the Earth, that has not been ordered by
Episcopal Regiment: which to this Day (as they say) is not answered. These
allegations may (methinks) so far allay your heat, as to restrain your
thoughts and Tongues from passing so sore a censure upon the Government, that
it is Devilish and Antichristian, till you can solidly absolve all these
Arguments; though notwithstanding all that has been said, you are persuaded
that another Church Government may be better. And that there is no cause why
you should refuse communion with these Churches upon this account, because
Bishops are chief Rulers there. Touching the devised Worship objected, do but
ruminate upon what you have frequently heard and read, and you will see little
reason to condemn stinted Prayers, because invented and devised by Men. For how
many inventions of Men are there of the same nature in God's worship, which you
approve of: namely, set-formes of Catechizing, studied Sermons, Interpretations
of Scripture, division of it into Chapters and Verses, Contents of Chapters,
Marginal references, putting Psalms into Meeter, with a multitude more. True it
is, invented or devised worship is unlawful, yet it is lawful to serve God in a
Form of words devised: For the Form is not worship, but the Prayer tendered in
that Form. And therefore they do not well, that say, a stinted Form of Prayer
is a means of Divine Worship, not ordained of God, and that there is no warrant
for it in the Word of God. For God's Word warrants things, not only by special
Institution (as all substantial means of Worship: and by necessary consequence,
so the Translation of the Scripture is warranted, because it must be read to
edification, and edify it cannot, unless it be understood) but also by the
Light of Nature and Reason, according to the general Rules of Scripture. And
thus accidental means of Gods Worship, which are only circumstances of the
Celebration, as time, places, order, method, phrase, and sorme of words in the
administration of holy things of God; yea, Pulpit to preach in, and Bells to
call People together are warranted. If all such means of worship must be
ordered by special Institution, or they shall be unlawful, God must (upon the
matter) have no Worship at all from us in the means, which he himself has
ordained, because it is impossible to use these means, and not to do many
things which he has not instituted. To return to Prayer, that a true Prayer
may be made to God in a Set form, cannot be denied, because things agreeable to
God's will may be disposed therein, as in the Lord's Prayer; and it is possible
for the heart and affections to go along with it, and faith, and other graces
to be exercised in it. But you question whether Ministers may read in the
Congregation prescribed Forms of Prayer imposed? Admit it were unlawful for
them to do it, yet it is warrantable for you to be present at such Prayers;
because all Prayers wherein you join are stinted to you, and you are tied to
the form of words uttered by him that prays: nor is a holy good prayer made
evil to him that hears it, for the possibility aforesaid.

Obj. But the Prayers in the English Liturgy are Forms, neither holy, nor
good; for the Book it self is an Idolatrous Book, the Mass in English.

Answ. This is as true, that light is darkness; and white, black: Consider what
is the matter of the Popish Mass prayers in an unknown Tongue, to Saints
departed, and to feigned Saints; receiving the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper
in one kind, an unbloody sacrifice offered up for quick and dead, the real
Presence, satisfaction for Venial sins, temporal penance for mortal sins,
blotting out the Second Commandment, or confounding it with the First, etc.
Blackness and Darkness: and what is the matter of our English Liturgy, reading
the Holy Scriptures in a known Tongue; the calling upon God in the mediation of
Christ, and not upon Angels and Saints, for the living, and not for the dead;
the administration of the Holy Supper in both kinds, singing of David's Psalms,
etc. all White and Light.

Obj. But sundry of the Prayers are found word for word in the Mass Book.

Ans. So may a true Man's goods be found in a Thieves Den; and the goods of the
Church may be in the possession of Antichrist an Usurper, which goods she may
lawfully require, and take back again, not as borrowed from him, but as due to
her self, being the rich Legacies which Christ bequeathed to his Church, which
Antichrist had seized upon: the Good therefore in the Mass - Book belonged not
to Antichrist, but the foul gross Errors which are purged out of ours.

Obj. But there are foul errors and gross corruptions in our Liturgy, which
are not purged out.

Ans. Admit there be, or were, yet there are no Fundamental Errors, nor any
that bordereth thereupon objected. The corruptions objected, are
misapplications of Scriptures, frequent repetition of the same things,
disordered Prayers and Responsories, breaking Petitions asunder, etc. No
errors that concern the main grounds or chief heads of Christianity; but
faults that may be tolerated, and for which a Christian has no cause to
separate: Suppose a Teacher misalledge a Text of Scripture, or that something
be amiss in his Prayer, when he exercises his own gifts; is this a ground
sufficient to separate from the Ordinance of God, or reject the good for that
which is amiss? Nor is there any doctrinal passage in any of the Prayers, that
may not bear a good construction, and so Amen may be said to it. Charity binds
us to take every thing in the best sense: nor can you think it pleasing to God,
for some evil that may be fastened upon some passages, to withdraw communion,
especially when communion may be had without approving of any of the errors or
corruptions; though we do not for their sakes with draw from the communion of
the Churches, while they are exercised.

Obj. But most of the Ministers that officiate in these Congregations, are
either blind or superstitious, or profane, or idle, or Drunkards, or
Whore-masters; and they that are not of this last Tribe, are most of them
Apostates from their Principles, and therefore we cannot bring our hearts to
hear any of them pray, read, or preach.

Answ. You may find as bad as any of these in the Church of Israel, and as
many for the space of Ground, before our Savior's time, and in his Days, and
in the Apostolical Churches; and yet you do not find any of the People to have
forsaken the public Ordinances of God. How far the charge is true or false, I
shall not now meddle; In some Countries, I am sure that there are many sober
godly Orthodox able Preachers, yet in possession of the public places. And if
you know any Country where it is worse, consider if Christ himself did not
join with worse.

O that I could persuade with you, to lay sadly to heart the greatness of the
sin of Divisions, and the grievousness of the punishment threatened against it,
and that has been executed for it; and that the Leaders and Encouragers of
private Christians to make this sinful separation, would read often, and meditate
much upon St. Judes Epistle, to v. 20. And that the multitudes that are willing
to be led by them would follow the prescription of the means here to preserve
or recover themselves from this seduction. v. 20, 21. And that both would leave
off their reviling the Government Ecclesiastical, and the Ministers that
conform, and peaceably, and submissively behave themselves, by the example of
Michael, who though an Archangel, and contending in a just cause, and
disputing in an Argument, wherein he was very knowing, did not, durst not bring
a railing accusation, though his adversary was the Devil; But committed the
cause to God, saying, The Lord rebuke Thee. Though Quakers, who pretend to
follow no other Rule save the Light within them, use ordinarily such railing
and reviling Language; yet let no such word ever be heard to Proceed out of
your Mouths, who profess to follow and walk exactly, according to the written
Word of God.

The last sort of Persons, are those of your own House, Fellow Members of the
same Family, and your Fellow-commoners: your duty in reference to these is
manifold. I shall earnestly commend this one; namely, to live in Unity with
them: to move you effectually hereunto, behold how good and how pleasant it is
for Brethren to dwell in unity together. It is like the precious Ointment upon
the Head that ran down upon the Beard, even Aaron's Beard, that went down to
the Skirts of his Garments; as the Dew of Hermon, and as the Dew that descended
upon the Mountain of Zion. For the Lord commanded the blessing for evermore.
Psalm. 133. a Song of Degrees purposely pend for the knitting together the
Hearts of God's People in the blessed band of Unity, Emphatically propounding
both the profit and pleasure redounding therefrom. Behold (a matter worth the
marking) how good in regard of profit) and how pleasant in regard of delight)
it is for Brethren both by nature and grace to dwell together in Unity, both of
judgment and affection. Next, he expounds, and so proves the pleasure, and the
profit of this twofold Unity. First, by parable and similitude, which is
double, to show the pleasure he compares it to, that odoriferous anointing Oil,
which God commanded to be made and compounded after the Art of the Apothecary,
which when it was poured upon Aaron's head, ran down upon his Beard, and thence
went to his Skirts: So this sweet communion of spiritual grace, cunningly
composed of united minds and affections, passes down from Christ our Head, not
only upon the stronger Professors, which are as great an Ornament to the
Church, as a Beard is on the Face of a Man, but also to the meanest and weakest
Christian Members. To set forth the pleasure of it, he compares it Genesis 27. 28,
39.
to Dew, which is a special blessing sent upon the Earth, for the refreshing
thereof, which falls freely (and therefore is said to be begotten of God) and
finely distilled down in so small drops, that it Job 38. 28.
cannot be perceived till it be laid, and fully (it falls into lowest Valleys,
as well as highest Hills) and fitly (in Spring for growth in Harvest for
ripening) and fruitfully Esa. 55. 10*
(making the Ground bring forth abundantly) So it is in all these respects with
spiritual graces, especially with this. And then he proves it by plain, strong,
and binding demonstration: where this Unity is, God commands the blessing,
and life for ever-more; that is, promises and fully performs it in this life,
spiritually, and corporally, and hereafter Eternally.

I hinted this Unity to be twofold, and will speak a little to both. First, of
mind and judgment, it is a thing greatly to be wished and sought after, that
all God's Children and Servants dwelling together, in the same House, might be
of one mind, and judgment in all points. The Apostle often earnestly presses
this, frequently strikes upon this String. Now I beseech you Brethren, by the
Name of our 1 Cor. 1. 10.
Lord Jesus Christ, that ye all speak the same thing, and that there be no
Divisions among you; but that ye be perfectly joined together in the same mind,
and in the same 2 Cor. 13. 11.
judgment: be of one mind for matter of Opinion. If there be therefore any
consolation in Christ, if any comfort and love, if any fellowship Phil. 2. 1, 2.
of the Spirit, if any bowels of mercy, fulfill ye my joy, that ye may be
like-minded, being of one accord, and of one mind. A most passionate
obtestation, importing a most vehement desire of their good agreement:
whereunto he conjures them by all the bonds of love, between him and them.
Persuasion it self could not speak more perswasively. Here are so many words,
so many Weapons able to pierce, and work upon any heart that had not an Iron
sinew. How many Arguments does he take from one, to enforce his Exhortation
with all possible carefulness, To keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of
peace? One Body, one Spirit, one Ephesians. 4. 3*7.
Hope, one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, one God and Father of all. The
Apostle well knew, the nearer they were agreed in Judgment, the faster their
affections would be knit one to another: and beside the great advantage that
all wicked Men take at the disagreement of God's People, should make them
desirous to be all of one mind, and to compose all the differences that are
between them. Let there be I pray thee no strife, Genesis 13. 8*
between thee and me; and between, etc. for we are brethren: not only upon this
account, but because the Canaanite and the Perizzite dwell in the Land; and
because of our dissension, we shall give them occasion to speak evil of our
holy Religion, and alienate their hearts more from it. How often have you had
this cast in your Dish by enemies, both to the form and power of godliness when
you have persuaded them to embrace both? Agree first among your selves. There
is no such stumbling Block at this Day, in this Land, laid in the way of
ungodly Men, through God's just Judgment indeed: and Mat. 8. 7.
it is necessary there should be such offenses; but woe unto you, if you become
occasions of such offenses, if you repent not that you are so, and labor not
to take away the stumbling Block out of your way by endeavoring to be all of
one mind.

But because perfect Unity is not to be expected, till the Church be come to
her perfection. There Ephesians. 4. 13.
must be Heresies among you, Sects, and Dissentions, concerning Tenets 1 Cor.
11. 19.
and Grounds of Doctrine, and ways of Worship: It is a thing unavoidable, by
reason of the Devil's malice, Men's wickedness, and God's most wise counsel,
and according to the frequent predictions of the Holy Ghost.

God indeed has promised to give his People, One Heart, and one Jer. 32. 39.
Way. But the meaning is, that they shall all agree in all Fundamental points
of Doctrine, and in all substantial ways of Worship, in which they should
jointly and conformably serve him; but in points of Religion and Circumstances
of divine Worship, that are of inferior moment, there will be Brethren
different in Opinion and practice from you, toward whom you are bound to bear
brotherly love, which is of a bearing and forbearing nature, and not suffer
difference in Romans 14. 19*
judgment to work in you the least alienation of affection toward them. What a
deal of pains does the Apostle take to work Christians, to a charitable
Toleration each of other?

1. Dissuading them from censuring one another, for, or in the use of things
indifferent: the parties that dissented were weak and strong Christians; the
things wherein, were* Meats and Days; the strong thought all difference of
Meats prohibited by the Law to be abolished by Christ, and therefore did not
forbear to feed on any, and they conceived all Jewish Festivals to be abrogated
by God, and so observed them not. The weak not seeing their own liberty in the
case of Meats, choose rather to eat Herbs, than with a doubting Conscience to
feed upon Meats forbidden, and conceiving the Festivals not to be abrogated,
still observed them. In both these cases, the Apostle gives negative
directions, and exhortations to both sorts of Christians. Viz. That in the case
of Meats, the strong should not contemn the weak, as superstitious for
abstaining; Nor the weak censure the strong, as profane, for neglecting the
observation of distinction of them; And in the case of Days, that neither of
them should do any thing with a gainsaying, or doubting Conscience: pressing
these directions with sundry Arguments, and that by no means, the strong should
give the least offense to their weak brethren, by abuse of their liberty.

2. And he persuades every one to study not to please himself, but his
Neighbor, to edification for his good, by the example of Christ, who did not
only not please himself, but sought the good of others: and so, says he, must
we, bearing one with another, receiving one another, as he received us to be
partakers of his glory. It is the guise and property of too many of you that
think you are assured you are the Lords, to question whether others be so, that
dissent from you; Yea, to pass sentence against some of them, as out of God,
for no other reason, but because they are not of your mind and way, and to say
of them, that its love of the World, or fear of trouble, or some other
by-respect and base end, that keeps them from embraceing these Gospel Truths
which you hold, and whereof they have had sufficient conviction; or if indeed
they see them not to be such, that it is, because the God of this World has
blinded their Eyes. Nor least of all can you bring your hearts to look upon, or
love as Brethren, these who have been of the same mind and way with you, and
are apostatized from their principles and practices: Turn-Coat-Rogues. Have
patience and ponder with your selves, what rashness you discover in censuring
any Man to be Godless, because he sees not those truths which you think you do,
and they may clearly see to be revealed and commanded by God. Barnabas was a
good Man, and full of the Acts 11. 24. 15. 38, 39.
Holy Ghost and Faith: and yet he could not see that, that Paul saw. Viz. That
it was lawful and fit for them to converse with the Gentiles, even in the
presence of the Jews. God bestows his gifts on his Servants, in different
measures and degrees. None that sees the truth in all things, but in some
points he is ignorant and erreth: Setting aside the Prophets and Apostles, who
were infallibly guided in penning the Scripture. Who almost of all the ancient
Fathers, but held some gross Error? Justin Genesis 6. 4.
Martyr, besides that he was a millinary, held that it was the Angels that
begat those Giants. Athenagoras, that the Souls of those Giants were Devils.
Ireneus that man was not created perfect. Clemens Alexandrinus, that none were
saved by Christ before his Incarnation. Tertullian, that God was corporeal,
that Montanus was the Paraclete, that a Christian falling twice after Baptism
was damned* Origin understood much of the Scripture allegorically. Hierom that
Angels were many Ages before the World: that there is no sin in Infants, or not
deserving punishment. Ambrose, that the Gospel was preached to Devils.
Chrysostom, that the Fathers were in Hell before Christ, that we are justified
by works. Augustine's Book of retractations witnesses his manifold Errors,
for a long time. Luther the great Reformer held consubstantiation. Not only
particular persons, but whole Counsels and Churches have erred. The reasons of
this proneness in Men to err, are. 1. Truth is but one, Error manifold; there
is but one right, many bypath. 2. The Seeds of all Errors are naturally in
all Men's hearts. 3. Error has usually on it the Vizard of truth. 4. The
understandings of the strongest Christians are so weak, that it is easy for
them to mistake. 5. Satan and his Instruments are full of subtilty, and cunning
craftiness. 6. God suffers Errors to spring up in his Church, to punish the
wicked, and for trial of his own, and for clearing of truth. Contraries opposed
mutually argue each other.

This consideration should teach you not to be insolent in censuring, and not
to be stiff in your own Opinions or persuasions. Others may be in the right,
and you in the wrong: And if you be in the truth, Love them not ye less, that
err from it in infirmity, but pity them more, and pray for them; and though
you know it to be passion or prejudice that has blinded their judgments (a
greater infirmity than simple ignorance) yet believe they may be godly Men for
all that; and if they be so, you are bound to love and reverence them, how much
soever they differ in Judgment from you. Acts 14. 15.


And if Men that are as practically Psalm. 15. 4.
godly as your selves, hold Ephesians. 4. 2, 3.
those to be truths, which you hold to be errors, seek not to draw them over
to you, but let them quietly enjoy themselves; take the blessed Apostles
advice. I press toward the mark. Let us therefore Phil 3. 14*-17.
as many as be thus perfect, be thus minded, and if any thing be otherwise
minded, God shall reveal this unto you. Nevertheless whereto we have already
attained. Let us walk by the same Rule. Let us mind the same thing; So far as
you freely can join with your dissenting brethren in Duties of Divine Worship.
And let not them that are without have occasion to say you are of several
Religions, or to call you by several Names any longer: But rather to wonder at
your mutual love, and peaceable and quiet spirits, free from any appearance of
raising contention either in Church or State; They that do so, having To* 16.
17, 18.
the Brand of graceless Men set upon them by the Holy Ghost. Now I beseech you
Brethren, mark them that cause Divisions and Offenses, contrary to the Doctrine
which ye Jude 8. 11, 12.
have learned, and avoid them, for they that are such serve not the Lord Jesus
Christ, but their own Belly, and by good words and fair speeches deceive the
hearts of the simple. Every Man that dwells in God, is of a peaceable
disposition, Psalm. 35. 20.
quiet in the Land. As for them that you call Apostates, consider that their
Apostasy is not from any fundamental point in Religion, or substantial worship
of God. And that love of their callings, and the works thereof, and of their
Peoples Souls, and Conscience of obeying the Magistrate in all things, not
expressly forbidden in the Scripture, might move them to do what they have done,
and charity binds you to make the best construction.

Finally, In reference to those that are of your own mind and way. Let
brotherly love continue. Heb. 13. 1.
And abound yet more and more in knowledge, and in all judgment; rejoicing and
weeping together; Phil. 1. 9. Romans 12. 15.
and laying out your selves in a special manner, in a faithful employment of
God's gifts, for the good one of another in things temporal. Gal. 6. 10. Heb.
13. 16. 2 Cor. 8. 9. Psalm. 112. 5. and in spirituals by example. Romans 15. 1, 2.
1 Cor. 10. 33. by admonition, 1 These. 5. 14. Heb. 3. 13. Prove. 10. 21. by
consolation, 2 Cor. 1. 4. Esaias 54. Prove. 25. 25. Romans 1. 12. and by prayer,
Ephesians. 6. 16. Jam. 5. 15, 16. John 16. 24. By thus doing, you shall improve that
branch of the Communion of Saints, which you have among your selves, and be the
fitter to improve that which you have together with Christ by the Spirit, in
respect both of substance and Offices, and Virtues.

THE SEVENTH SERMON.
THere remains yet very much of Duty to be performed by, and to be pressed
upon you, whose habitation the Lord is, and who know him to be so. And first
upon the account of the properties of this House wherein you dwell. The first
whereof is height. And the first duty upon this account, is to lift up your
hearts and voices as high as may be in praises and prayers.

1. In praises, acknowledge your selves bound to acknowledge. 1. As all other
excellencies and transcendent perfections of God; So this, especially of
sublimity, that he is most high. This did David, I will Psalm. 9. 1, 2.
praise thee O Lord with my whole heart -- I will sing praise to thy Name, O
thou most high. I will praise the Lord according to his righteousness, and will
sing praises 7. 17.
to the most high. As he did himself, so he stirs up all others to do so. O
clap your hands all People, shout unto God with the voice of Triumph; for the
Lord most high is terrible, he is a great King over the Earth. Let the Saints
sing aloud upon their Beds. Let the high 47. 1, 2.
praises of God be in their Mouth. And this he tells us is a good thing at all
times, especially on the Sabbath Days. It is a good thing to 149. 5, 6.
sing praises unto thy holy Name, O most High. His Universal Regiment is to be
acknowledged. This matter is by the Decree of the Watchers, Dan. 4. 27.
and the demand, by the Word of the holy One, to the intent that the living may
know, that the most High rules in the Kingdom of Men, and gives it to
whomsoever he will, and sets up over it the basest of Men.

2. His wonderful humility and condescension. The Lord is high above all
Nations, and his glory above Psalm. 113. 4, 5, 6
the Heavens. Who is like the Lord our God, who is most High, who humbles
himself to behold the things that are done in the Heaven and in the Earth? He
does not disdain, from his High Seat of Glory, to provide for all Creatures,
both Terrestrial and Celestial. He has a gracious and loving care of vile
Worms, and grievous sinners; yea, vouchsafes to make their hearts, if humbled,
and contrite for their sins, his dwelling place: For thus says the High and
lofty One, that inhabiteth Eternity, whose Name is high and holy. I dwell in
the high and holy Places, with him also, that is of an humble and contrite
Spirit. Esa. 57. 15.
The humility of the Son of the most high God being the same in substance with
him, and equal in power and glory, condescended to match with a Maid of our
Family, that had neither beauty nor dowry. A greater condescension, than if the
greatest Emperor on Earth should marry the poorest and most deformed Virgin
upon Earth, assuming a humane Nature with his Divine Person; In all things like
unto Man excepting sin, and in that nature to suffer poverty, hunger, thirst,
weariness, and other humiliations, even unto Death. Who being in the Phil. 2,
6-*9.
form of God, thought it not robbery to be equal with God, made himself of no
reputation; Annihilated himself, and brought himself as it were to nothing;
Took upon him the form of a Servant, and was made in the habit of Men; And
being found in fashion, as a Man, he humbled himself, and became obedient unto
Death, even the Death of the Cross.

3. Consider the exceeding high honor he has done you, to be Servants in such
a House, to himself, whom you have made your House, by choosing him and
cleaving to him. Nebucadnezar could not desire a higher honor for the Three
Worthies, whom he saw walking in the midst of the Fire, than to call them
Servants of the Dan. 3. 26.
most high God. Nor the Angel that appeared to Daniel in the Vision of the Four
Beasts, and interpreted it to him, for the Subjects of God's Kingdom, than to
call them Saints of the most high. Yea, the 7, 18. 22. 25.
Angels themselves glory in this title. I am thy fellow servants, and of thy
Brethren. And James styles himself Rev. 19. 10. 22. 9.
not the Lords Brother, but the Servant of the Lord. And God himself, Josua 1.
2.
Moses, not King in Jesuran, but my Servant. My Servant Moses.

2. In Prayers, I will cry unto Psalm. 57. 2.
God most high. Every good and Jam. 1. 17.
perfect gift is from above, and comes down from the Father of lights. We are
commanded to pray to God, as being above in Heaven, to teach us, among many
other things, that our Prayers should be sent forth with such fervencies, that
they may reach and pierce Heaven, where God is; to cry as David did. O my God,
I cry in the Day time, in the day time, and in Psalm. 22. 2.
the Night season. He heard my cry: My most earnest desires in Prayer, arising
from feeling and fear of misery. And so did Moses, Wherefore cryest thou unto
me? God Exodus 14. 15.
seeming to chide him for so doing; but it was not for his fervent praying, but
for his fearing and fainting, his Faith beginning to fail, and to let him know
that he was more ready to hear than he to pray. 2. Learn humility of the most
high God. Be ye followers of God, Ephesians. 5. 1.
as dear Children. Beloved, if God 1 John 4. 11.
so loved us, we ought also to love one another. So if God have condescended
unto us, we ought to do the like to our Inferiors, there being infinitely more
distance and disproportion between God and us, than there is between us, were
we the highest Princes on Earth, and they poorest Beggars. For they are Mal. 2.
10.
all our Brethren. Have we not all one Father, has not one God created us? Be
not therefore high-minded, Romans 12. 16.
but condescend to Men of low Estate. And learn of me (says the Son of the
most High) for I am meek and lowly in heart. Lowliness Mat. 11. 29.
of mind will make you high with God, and meekness of word shall make you sink
into the hearts of Men. Let this mind be in you, which was also in Christ
Jesus. You Phil. 2. 5.
that are higher than others in gifts, wealth or dignity, disdain them not, but
demean your selves humbly toward, them, and honor shall Pro. 29. 23.
uphold you.

3. Take heed of provoking the most High, or of contemning his Counsels, least
you provoke your selves to the confusion of your own Faces: as the Israelites
did; of whom it is said, That they sinned yet more against him, by provoking
Psalm. 78. 17. 56.
the most High in the Wilderness. Yea, they tempted and provoked the most high
God, and kept not his testimonies. They contemned the Counsel 107. 11.
of the most High. Therefore he brought down their heart with labor, they fell
down, and there was none to help.

4. If you have provoked him to anger against you, as David did, when Satan
provoked him to number 1 Chr. 21. 1.
the People, enquire and desire to know the true means to appease him, and to
be reconciled unto him. Wherewith shall I come before Mich. 6. 6.
the Lord, and bow my self before the High God? And turn ye to him with all
your heart, to him I say and not as Ephraim, of whom it is said, They returned,
but not to the most High. Renew your purposes, Hosea 7. 16.
and resolutions, and vows of more wary walking, for the future; and when upon
your humiliation and reformation, he is returned unto you with mercies, offer
unto him thanks giving, and pay your Zech. 1. 16.
vows unto the most High.

5. Comfort your selves against all the injustice and disorders of the World;
and against all the Plots and Conspiracies of wicked Men, against the Church
and People of God. Marvel not at it, but look higher, and expect seasonable
relief, and redress, how high soever their rage does rise, and how low soever,
they lay the Saints of the most High. If thou see the Eccl. 5. 8.
oppression of the poor, and violent perverting of Judgment in a Province,
marvel not at the matter; for he that is higher than the highest regards, and
there be higher than they. Shall any teach God Job 21. 22.
knowledge, seeing he judges those that are high. He is the Sovereign Lord and
Judge of the World, above Genesis 18. 25.
all Power and Greatness. Shall not the Judge of all the Earth do right. He
works all things Ephesians. 1. 11.
after the Counsel of his own will. And his will is the absolute Rule of all
Righteousness. Thy righteousness Psalm. 71. 19.
also O God is very high, Who have done great things: ^ear Joel. 2. 21.
not O Land, be glad, and rejoice, for the Lord will do great things. Though
the Lord be high, yet has Psalm. 138. 6.
he respect unto the lowly; them that are of a poor and abject condition, and
trodden upon by the Foot of imperious contempt. But the proud he knows afar
off, and Psalm. 83. from the beginning to the end.
they shall know, when they have spent all their strength, spit out all their
malice, and done their worst, That thou, whose Name alone 21. 17. to the end.
is Jehovah, are the most high over all the Earth.

From the Second property of this your Habitation. Viz. Strength, learn in your
Prayers, which you Daily make to God for your selves and fellow servants in the
House, who are all weakness, to say, Stir Psalm. 80 ^.
up thy strength, and come for Salvation to us. Show it, make use of it, stand
in the front of thy feeble Army as a Leader, to defend them from their Potent
Enemies. And let it appear that thy Prayer is not idle. Give thy strength unto
thy 86. 16.
Servants. Awake, awake, put on Esaias 51. 9, 10.
strength, O Arm of the Lord, awake as in the ancient Days, in the Generations
of old. Art thou it that has cut off Rahab, and wounded the Dragon? Art not
thou it which has dried the Sea, the Waters of the great Deep, which has made
the depth of the Seas, and way for the ransomed to pass over? Display thy
Sovereign Power for the deliverance of thy Children, as thou formerly did in
Egypt, and at the Red Sea. Look down from Heaven, 63. 15.
and behold from the Habitation of thy Holiness, and of thy Glory: Where is thy
zeal and thy strength, the sounding of thy bowels? When you have thus prayed,
cast off all slavish fear, of what the might or malice of Men, or Devils can
do. Who art thou, O my Esaias 51. 12.
poor, weak, faint-hearted Church, that thou should be afraid of a Man, that
shall dye, and be made as Grass. Take now good courage, setting before thee
thine Enemies approaching and certain destruction. Fear thou not, for I am with
Esaias 41. 10.
thee, be not dismayed, for I am thy God, I will strengthen thee with the right
hand of my righteousness. That is, with mine Omnipotence, I have and will put
forth in righting thee of thine Enemies. The Psalm. 27. 1.
Lord is my Light and my Salvation, Whom shall I fear? The Lord is the strength
of my life, and of whom shall I be afraid? He it is that will dissolve all my
inward darkness of trouble and confusion, and external ones of dangers and 3.
calamities. In this will I be confident, namely in this, that the Lord is my
Light, Salvation, and Strength. My God shall be my strength, thou Esaias 49. 5.
have girded me with strength. The Lord will give strength unto his People: He
delivered me from my strong Enemy; And from them 2 Samuel 22. 40.
that hated me, for they were too strong for me. Thou have guided Psalm. 29. 11.
thy People in thy strength to thy holy Habitation. Thou will do so 2 Samuel 22.
18.
still, and not forsake them, when Exodus 15. 13.
their strength fails. My Flesh and my Heart fails, but God is the Psalm.
71. 9.
strength of my Heart, and my portion 73. 26.
for ever. Be not discouraged at all for the weakness or absence of outward
means. Not by might Zech. 4. 6.
nor by power, but by my Spirit, says the Lord of Hosts. When Men and means,
and hopes and helps, and Hearts and all fail. Trust ye Esa. 26. 4.
in the Lord for ever, for in the Lord Jehovah is everlasting strength. He
gives power to the 40. 29.
faint, and to them that have no 31.
might he increases strength. They that wait upon the Lord shall renew their
strength. They go from 84. 7.
strength to strength. The righteous Job 17. 9.
shall hold on his way, and be stronger and stronger. I will go in the Psalm.
71. 16.
strength of the Lord God. I shall never faint, but always, even every step I
take, gather new strength and courage. Wait on the Lord, be of good courage,
and he shall 27. 14.
strengthen thine Heart. Despair Lam. 3. 18. 21.
not like her that said, My strength and hope is perished. If thou chance to do
so, recover quickly as she did, This I recall to my mind, and therefore have I
hope. Be fully persuaded that what God has promised, he is able also to
perform. Acknowledge as your Father Abraham did, Romans 4. 21.
as his Sovereign truth, so his infinite power, above all inferior order, or
contrary difficulty. Yea, he is able to do exceeding abundantly Ephesians. 3. 20.
above all we can ask or think. Neither do you despair of any Man's Salvation,
for whom you pray: No not of the Jews (whom you are bound every Day to
remember Romans 11. 23.
in your Prayers.) For God is able to graft them in again. When you are tempted
to any 1 Cor. 10. 22.
sin, think thus with your selves. Do we provoke the Lord to jealousy, are we
stronger than he, that we should not fear to provoke him? Can thine Heart
endure, or can thine Hands be strong in the Days that I shall deal with Thee?
Wilt Ezekiel. 22. 14.
thou have courage or strength enough to endure or withstand my Judgments? I
say unto you my Friends, be not afraid of them that can kill the Body, and
after that have no more that they can do. But I will fore-warm you, whom you
shall Luke 12. 4, 5.
fear: Fear him, which after he has killed, has power to cast into Hell.

If Men should be in danger of present Death, by any Men's unjust Decrees, in
case they refuse actively to obey them: They must say, if it be so, Our God
whom Dan. 3. 17, 18.
we serve is able to deliver us; but if not, we will not serve any false Gods:
Nor the true otherwise than he has appointed in his Word. And in the midst of
the most desperate dangers serve the Lord with sweet security; knowing that
your good Shepherd Jesus Christ, is always doing his Office, standing still on
Foot, and watching for the safeguard of his, employing for their safety his
Fathers Divine Power, whereby they shall rest secure, having the King of the
Universe for their Protection. He shall stand and feed in the strength of the
Lord, in the Majesty Micah* 5. 4.
of the Name of the Lord his God, and they shall abide. When you shall be cast
upon your sick Beds, doubt not but he will both turn, and stir, and make them
easy, but strengthen you upon them. His Psalm. 41. 3.
everlasting Arms shall be underneath you, and you shall be able both to do
and suffer all things, through him that strengthens you. Deuteronomy. 33. 27.
Upon all these and many more accounts, Ascribe the strength unto Phil. 4. 13.
God, his excellency is over Israel, and his strength is in the Heavens. Psalm
68. 34, 35.
The God of Israel is he that gives strength and power unto his People.
Blessed be God.

From the third property of your Habitation, Viz. Largeness, Learn rightly to
conceive of this property, holding forth the infiniteness immensness, and
omnipresence of God, being without quantity and measure, every where both
within and without the World, filling all places with his essence: as the whole
Soul is said to be in the whole Body, and in every part of it; so is God whole
and wholly in every part of the World. Behold the 1 King. 8. 27.
Heaven and Heaven of Heavens cannot contain thee. His greatness Psalm. 148. 3.
is unsearchable, infinite, and incomprehensible. The Heaven is my Throne, and
the Earth is my Footstool. Esaias 66. 1.
Am I a God at hand, says the Lord, and not a God afar off? Can any hide
himself in secret Places, that I shall not see him, Jer. 23. 23, 24.
says the Lord, Do not I fill Heaven and Earth? Yea, and Hell too. If I make
my Bed in Hell, behold Psalm. 139. 7-11.
thou art there. This must teach us to banish all gross conceits of God out of
our mind, and to detest the making any Picture of him, by which he is denied to
be incomprehensible, and to see him, though invisible, to be present with you,
Pro. 15. 3.
where ever you are, his Eye beholding whatsoever you are doing. This
Consideration filled David's Psalm. 51. 3.
heart with shame and sorrow for his sin, and made it to lie so heavy upon his
Conscience. I have done this evil in thy sight. All my care was to be secret,
to hide my sin from the Eyes of Men, but all this while thine Eye was upon me.
There is no Man but would be restrained from many sins, if they knew of any
body that was by them, to see what they did. The Murderer and Adulterer are
brought in by Job, imboldening themselves, Job 24. 5.
No Eye shall see me. As if he had said, if they knew there was any Eye to see
them, they durst not do it. Moreover in all their Meditations and
Contemplations of God, take as full a view of him as you can; Hear him saying,
behold me, behold me. Especially take notice of the largeness and greatness of
his goodness and bounty. All the Esaias 65. 1.
dimensions of its breadth, length, Ephesians. 3. 18.
depth and height with admiration. O how great is thy goodness which thou have
for them that fear Psalm. 31. 19.
thee? As high as the Heaven is above the Earth, as the space is between 103.
11, 12.
the East and West. I will mention the loving kindness of the Esaias 63. 7.
Lord, his great goodness, the multitude of his mercies. And labor for
largeness of heart, in some sort 2 Chr. 32. 25.
answerable. From the rest of the properties of this your habitation, and from
all the furniture in it, and from each of the conveniences belonging to it, I
shall leave you to gather comforts and duties in abundance, having this one
thing only more to do; Namely, to acquaint you with some of the Statutes,
Laws, and Ordinances of the House, and earnestly to press upon you the
Observation of them, by promises and penalties annexed. The general Laws of
this House binding all that live in it, are partly natural, and partly
supernatural. The natural are Ten in Number, called in Scripture Ten Words, and
some where One Word. The Divine Deuteronomy. 10. 4.
Law teaching and commanding Moral good, and forbidding Gal* 5. 14.
evil, known by the Name of Moses Psalm. 119. 101.
Law; Uttered and promulgate with God's own Mouth, by his immediate Heb. 10. 28.
Voice, delivered in Fire, Deuteronomy. 33. 2.
and therefore termed a Fiery Law, in the hearing of all Israel; Afterward
Exodus 20. 1.
written with his own Finger, 31. 18,
(by a mere and miraculous divine 32. 16.
Operation) in Two Tables of Stone, Jam. 2. 8.
to signify the perpetual use and continuance of it, to the end of the World,
and so published and committed to the Church for all Ages, as the Moral Law for
Obedience to God our Sovereign Lord and King.

This self same Law did God engrave in Man's heart, even when he created him;
For that before the written Law of Moses there was an unwritten Law of Nature,
must needs be granted; because needs must they be bound to God who had their
Being from him; Nor could they have sinned against him, if they had had no Law
from him. For where no Law is, there is no transgression. Whosoever commits
sin, transgresses also the Law. But sin Men did all this space of time, and
were punished with a witness. Witness Cain, the old Romans 4. 15.
World, Sodom, Onan, and innumerable 1 John 3. 4.
of others, and they were punished for the sins forbidden in Moses Law; and the
Apostle expressly teaches, that the Gentiles who never had the written Law of
Moses, had their Natural Law, even Romans 4. 14.
this Law (though less perfect) imprinted in their Souls; by which they were
instructed and bound to do well, and debarred from doing evil, which are the
two properties of all Laws. And these two properties called The work of the
Law written in their Hearts they showed, Romans 2. 15.
their Conscience bearing witness, their Hearts accusing or excusing one
another. The Conscience being but a correspondency and relation of a Man's
Spirit unto the Law, to bind or unbind, condemn or absolve him. Moreover the
good Laws the Heathen made to punish the evils forbidden, and to draw People to
practice the good commanded in the Law of Moses, and the endeavor of many of
them to act accordingly, argues the Unity of both Laws. The reason of which
unity is the unchangeableness of God, who is always the same.

Qu. What need was there of the repetition and renovation of this Law? Or if
there was need, Why was it not sooner?

Answ. To the former Branch, though Nature brought the same things, yet it did
it very weakly, and many conclusions were obliterated, and others much
obscured; and all Men's hearts were weakly drawn to obey this Law, very strong
to obey the Law of sin. And although the Law of Nature could scarce never have
been extinguished, in Principles and Grounds, yet it might, and was, and would
have been more in Applications. Men took evil for good, and good for evil, and
grew more and more vain in their imaginations.

To the latter Branch, Man's heart was not after his Fall thoroughly humbled,
but thought his own reason sufficient for his Guide; therefore God would leave
the World a while to try them, and let them see their own weakness. Besides,
sin was not come quickly to such a pitch and height, as afterward it did, and
yet we find that God did by peece-meal, and occasionally teach them this Law
presently and almost equipollently before its solemn Proclamation. The Unity of
these two Laws lets you see, as the constancy and Immutability of your God, who
is not as other Lawgivers, who build, and pull down, and whom a Man knows, as
well how to please, as shape a Coat for the Moon; So also the necessity of the
obedience of Mankind to the Moral Law. It Is as inseparable, as its very being,
it being impossible to receive a being, and not with it a bond of obligation.
Men when they sin spurn not only against Moses, but against very Nature. He
that owns the ground owns the Fruit also. We are not our own in any of our
actions. And how easy a way Men have to choke temptations to Atheism! Let
them take leave to deny Moses, and trample him under-foot, yet in their Souls
they find written in very legible Letters, every Commandment of this Law:
'twas born with them, and sucked from Natures own instruction. Why then should
they suspect the Law of Moses, and think it a trick foysted upon them, to
deprive them of their pleasures, Nature bearing witness that Moses is no
Deceiver? Finally, How inexcusable Men are, that live in such an Age, wherein
they have both these Laws; One to confirm the other? Two witnesses, if both
accuse us at the last Day, how shall we escape condemnation? Manifold are the
uses this written Law of God does serve unto: Some common to the Elect and
Reprobate, Viz. to show the excellency of Man's Nature before the Fall, when he
had power perfectly to keep it, and the excellency of that supernatural
condition in the life to come, when there shall be the same, yea, a more
glorious power: and the corruption of our present condition, how short we come
of due perfection: and the Lord's right, notwithstanding to require perfect
obedience of us, and to punish us for default in the least point. It serves
also to illustrate the Law of Nature obtenebrated by the Fall, the Law of
incorrupted Nature being the same in substance with the Decalogue; also to
discover and convince all Men of sin, and their obnoxiousness to eternal Death,
to be a Bridle to restrain them from gross sins; and finally, Men are taught
thereby what a one God is, and how he ought to be worshipped, either proper and
peculiar to the Elect, it serves as a guide to point them to Christ the
Mediator, and to kindle a desire in them to seek eternal righteousness and
salvation by him; and when they are in Christ, to be a Rule of Thankfulness,
for the Redemption purchased by him. Every Man should be thankful in the best
manner he can for a benefit received. What better Rule can a Christian have,
than that which God has made* He has showed thee, O Man, what is good: and
what does the Lord require of thee, but to do justly, to love mercy, and to
walk humbly with the Lord thy God? Micah 6. 8. Tit. 2. 11, 12.

Qu. Why have you dwelt so long upon this point?

Answ. To work in you, whose dwelling the Lord is, a detestation of the
Antinomian Errors. Many have cut off some uses of the moral Law, or falsely
glossed upon it; but few would ever wholly abrogate it, but this unhappy Sect.
Like Nero, who wished Rome had but one Neck, that he might cut it off at one
blow: So these would deal with this Law of Moses. It follows not, the Gospel is
come in, therefore the Law must go out. Hagar Mat. 5. 27.
so long as she is obedient, may dwell in Abraham's House. To 22. 37.
make it clear to you, that the decalogue pertains to Christians, consider, 1.
That it is confirmed by Romans 6. 7.
Christ. 2. Commanded to Christians 12. 13.
by the Apostle. 3. Established by the Gospel, how it teaches 3. 31. ^
Christ to be the end of the Law, and that Justification cannot be had without
that perfect righteousness which the Law requires, or satisfaction for
unrighteousness, and that Men ought to study and endeavor it, and that the
observation of it is a testimony of our communion with God, that he dwells in
us, and we in him, as you heard in a former discourse.

Obj. Christians are not justified by the Law, neither do they receive the
promise by it, therefore it pertains not at all to them.

Ans. The consequence is false, unless they could prove there were no other
necessary uses of the Law, but we have showed many, and there is a number more.

Obj. 2d. If believers are not under the Law, but under Grace, to them the Law
does not pertain; but the former is true, Ergo, the latter.

Ans. It Is a fallacy termed from ambiguous, or that which may be taken more
ways than one. Not to be under the Law, is, not to be freed from it, as a rule
of life, for we are inclined and disposed by God's free Spirit to the willing
obedience of it; but to be delivered from the burden of the Law, exacting in
our own Persons perfect obedience, as necessary to life, and from the
malediction of it due to disobedience: these we are freed from by Christ. To be
under grace, is to be justified and regenerate.

Obj. Christians are mortified and dead to the Law.

Ans. The same fallacy, and the same solution. Believers are moreover freed
from that irratation to sin, which is effected in unregenerate Men by the Law.

Obj. 4th. But now we are delivered from the Law, that being dead wherein we
were held.

Ans. The same again, and the Apostle opens his meaning in the words that
follow, declaring our manumission from the servitude of the Law, from its
rigorous exaction and curse, and that we have a spirit of ingenuity to obey
willingly.

Obj. 5. Gospel Ministers are Ministers of the Spirit, not of the Letter.

Ans. The meaning is no more but this, that their Ministry is more efficacious
than the Ministry of the Old Testament.

Obj. 6. If the Law pertain to Christians, then they are under the curse of it;
but the latter is false, Ergo, the former.

Answ. The meaning of those words of the Apostle, upon which the consequence of
the Connection is grounded, is plainly this, that they that think Righteousness
to come by the works of the Law, and promise themselves Eternal life thereby,
are under the curse of it.

Obj. Christians are no longer under a Schoolmaster.

Ans. 1. The place is impertinent, for it speaks of the Ceremonial Law mainly,
if not only. 2. If at all of the moral, the consequence is denied, for though
they be not under a Schoolmaster, as the faithful under the Old Testament
were, yet it follows not that obligation to obedience is taken away.

Obj. 8. Christians are redeemed from the Laws subjection.

Ans. Not simply, as if they owed no more obedience; but so far forth, that
they are not bound to a perfect fulfilling of it, but that unfeigned assent and
consent shall be accepted.

Obj. 9. Stand fast in the liberty wherewith Christ has made us free.

Ans. From the Ceremonial Law.

Obj. 10. Against Spiritual Men there is no Law.

Ans. To hold their Consciences under guilt, yet they must be taught their duty
by this holy, and just, and good Law.

Obj. 11. The Law is not made for a righteous Man.

Ans. The meaning is, believers, and those that are regenerate by God's spirit,
apply themselves to the obedience of the Law, without constraint or terrifying;
having the habit of righteousness and holiness in themselves, as an inward and
living Law. They have no need of the horror and constraint of it; and also
being justified by Christ, they are freed from the condemnation of it, seeing
that a Sovereign pardon stays and ends all Actions and Condemnations
grounded upon the Law.

Great Houses, with the Gardens, Orchards, Parks and Grounds belonging to them,
have their bounds and limits made by Walls, Pales and Hedges. That great
glorious House which Ezekiah saw in a Vision Ezekiel. 43. 12.
had its limit. This is the Law of the House, upon the top of the Mountain, the
whole limit thereof round about shall be most Holy: God is said to have
determined the Acts. 17. 26.
bounds of all Men's Habitations upon Earth.

The Ten Commandments of the Moral Law, are the Bounds, Walls, Pales, and
Hedges set round about the House, wherein you, that are Saints on Earth,
inhabit, beyond which you may not pass, but must keep within this compass. As
the Waters dwelling within the great Channel have their bounds, which they are
commanded to keep, and forbidden to transgress, pass, or go over. I establish
(says God to Job. 38. 8 -- 12.
Job) my Decree upon it, (speaking 26. 10.
of the Sea) break up for it my Decreed place, set Bars and Doors Psalm. 104. 9.
to it, (Figurative terms to express the concavities wherein the Sea is
enclosed) and said, hitherto shall Jer. 5. 22.
thou come and no further, and here shall thy proud Waves be stayed. You are
commanded in like manner, to keep within the bounds of your Decreed place, and
you are bound to keep within them under a greater penalty, than that which was
laid upon Shimei, when he was confined to his House by Solomon, and to the City
of Jerusalem, the Walls whereof were his utmost limits. The King sent and
called for 1 Kin. 2. 36, 37.
Shimei, and said unto him, build thee an House in Jerusalem, and dwell there,
and go not forth thence any whether: For it shall be that on the Day thou go
out, and passest over the Brook Kidron, that thou shall surely dye. Abide
within: So long as you do so, you abide 1 Cor. 7. 24.
with God. Cursed be the Man, Jer. 17. 5.
whose Heart departs from the Lord. As a Bird that wandereth Pro. 27. 8.
from her Nest, so is a Man that wandereth from his place. Thou have rebuked
the proud that are Psalm. 119. 21.
cursed, who do err from thy Commandments. Thou have trodden 118.
down all them that err from thy Statutes. Take heed Brethren lest there be in
any of you an evil Heb. 3. 12.
Heart of unbelief, in departing from the living God. Every Sin 1 John 3. 4.
small and great, is a transgression of the Law, Exceeds the bounds which God
by his Law has appointed unto Men, for the moderating and regulating of their
thoughts words and actions. And every transgression and disobedience, every
commission and omission received a just recompense of reward. Heb. 2. 2.


If at any time through frailty, or violence of temptation, you pass these
bounds. If at any time said I? Alas, who does not every Day both in thought,
word and deed? There is not a just Man upon Eccl. 7. 20.
Earth that does good, and sins Jam. 3. 2.
not. In many things we offend all. David, a Man after God's own heart, passed
these bounds, often through infirmity, once most abominably. Well, consider what
is to be done after such excursions. Consider your ways in your hearts. Hag.
1. 5. ^.
Bend your minds very diligently, weigh, ponder, think seriously with your
selves what you have done. Most Men are guilty of this neglect. Jer. 8. 6.
No Man repents of his wickedness, saying, What have I done? Esaias 46. 8.
Remember this, and show your selves Men, bring it again to mind O ye
Transgressors. Know therefore Jer. 2. 19.
that it is an evil, and bitter thing, that thou have forsaken the Lord thy
God. Be ashamed and confounded to have been found out of the bounds of your
House. Then shall thou remember thy ways Ezekiel. 16. 61.
and be ashamed. What fruit had ye Romans 6. 21.
then in those things, whereof ye are now ashamed? Let it not be said of you,
as of the generality of the Jews in Jeremyah's time. Were they ashamed when
they had Jer. 6. 15.
committed abomination? Nay, they were not at all ashamed, neither Let the
review, remembrance and thought of every ordinary sinful digression, by rash
anger, or any bitter expression against Wife, Husband, Child, Servant,
Neighbor, by vain, empty, idle, unprofitable conference at any time, by
intemperance in Eating or Drinking, though never so little beyond necessity, or
honest delight, making you unfit for divine service in either of your Callings,
by immoderate sleeping, or not being up as early for God, as for your selves,
or spending more time in dressing your Bodies than your Souls, by wanton
glances of your Eyes, or lusting after strange Flesh, or abusing the lawful
duty of Marriage, by envying and grieving at the outward welfare of others, or
coffeehouse with your own health, wealth, credit; or carking distrustful
caring for to morrow, or hasting to be rich, by passing rash censure upon the
spiritual estate of others, or speaking of their faults and follies with mirth;
by silence at the unsavory speeches of any, or conniving at their miscarriages,
not reproving them at least by discountenance, for fear of giving them offense,
by having too great a hankering of heart after things not evil in themselves;
Tobacco, Hunting, Hawking, Angling, Gameing, though not for gain, but sport; by
suffering, buying and selling, thoughts, and vile distractions to have
incursions, and lodging within you in holy Duties: Let the thoughts I say of
these and numberless other sinful digressions, fill your Souls with shame and
blushing ing and sinful abhorrence. Much more if you call to mind grosser
crimes. Then shall ye remember Ezekiel. 36. 31.
your own evil ways and doings, that were not good, and shall loath your
selves in your own sight for your iniquities, and for your* abominations.

Nor let your shame for taking so many steps out of your Heavenly Fathers
House, or sense of selfloathsomeness, hinder your return thither; but say as
that unclean spirit (for it is lawful and stands with godliness, honesty, and
reason, to learn of an enemy) I will return Mat. 12. 44.
unto my House from whence I came out. And as that penitent Wife that had stepped
aside from her Husband, I will go and return unto Hos. 2. 7.
my first Husband, for then was it better with me than now. So did the Prodigal
resolve to do, I will Luke 15. 18.
arise, and go to my Father, and say unto him, Father, I have sinned against
Heaven, and before thee. O Israel return unto the Lord Hos. 14. 1.
thy God, for thou have fallen by thy iniquity. Go and knock at the Door of
Divine Mercy, confess your folly, accusing and judging your selves. Surely it
is meet to be said unto God, (who has revealed himself not only in his Law by
commanding and threatening, but also in his promises of grace to comfort and
encourage by the remission of sins; so the Italian reads the word following: I
pardon) I have born chastisement, I will not offend any more, that which I see
not, teach thou me: If I have done iniquity, I will do no more. Confess thy
sins with such an honest, as well as broken heart, and thou need not fear,
but God will open the Door to thee, and let thee see himself again. He that
keeps his sins upon his conscience disguiseth and dissembleth them, and does
not confess them to God, and to Men also, if need require it, shall not
prosper; but who so Pro. 28. 13.
confesses and forsakes them, shall find mercy. Let your sins be of what
sort they will, of ignorance, infirmity, presumption, those three Parables of
the lost Sheep, and the lost Goat, and of the Prodigal, may give you ground of
assured hope, after such confession and supplication Luke 15.
for a pardon, that thou shall not fail to receive it, and the sense of it.
Come now, and let us reason Esaias 1. 18.
together, says the Lord, though your sins be as Scarlet, they shall be as
white as Snow, though they 55. 7, 8.
be red like Crimson, they shall be as Wool. If convinced in your own
Consciences, you give glory to God by a free confession, and fly to his mercy
by faith, and a lively conversion. Jer. 3. 1.
He will quickly cause you to feel by effect the forgiveness of your sins, let
them be never so grievous.

This is the Voice of the second of those general Laws, I mentioned, Rom 3. 27.
called the Law of Faith, the Doctrine which offers and promises remission
of sins and salvation, requiring only in order hereunto repentance and faith.
Repent ye, and believe the Gospel. The Mark 1. 15.
two great Gospel commands which you, with whom I am dealing, have been enabled
by grace to yield obedience unto, whereby you have made the Lord your
Habitation: Nevertheless they are duties which all the Days of your life you
are bound to be doing: To act both these graces every Day as there is occasion,
and there will be occasion for acting both while you have a Day to live, to
renew your repentance, and to live by your faith, as it is written, The just
shall live by his Faith: The meaning is, he Romans 1. 17.
shall live healthfully, happily, blessedly, Heb. 10 37.
in which sense living is taken. John 4. 51. 1 Samuel 10. 24. Hab. 3. 4.
psalm. 38. 19. 1 These. 3. 8.

And that this is the Prophets meaning, appears from the scope and occasion of
the words in the 1st. Chap. he complains, and expostulates, Hab. 1. 13.
in the beginning of the second the Lord answers, the just shall have
deliverance, but it shall not be yet. The Vision is yet for an 2. 3.
appointed time, but at the end it shall speak and not lie, though it tarry:
wait for it, because it will surely come, it will not tarry. The Prophet might
have objected, and asked, but how shall the afflicted Jews be able to live in
the mean season, for Seventy Years together? The Lord answers by a distinction:
the unjust puffes up himself with vain confidence, But the just shall 4.
live by his Faith. Whence it is evident, that true Faith, if well managed, is
able to keep a life, yea to make him live healthfully and happily, even in the
worst and sadest times, and to this conclusion, these Scriptures give suffrage:
2 Chr. 20. 20. Psalm. 27. 13. Dan. 6. 23. Esa. 50 10. 26. 3. Heb. 10. 39. 2 Cor.
1. 24. And reasons grounded upon Scripture, come in as Auxiliaries. 1. From the
Object of Faith, namely the promises which are meet matter to maintain life.
Phil. 2. 16. John 6. 63. Jer. 15. 16. 1 Pet. 2. 2. Esaias 55. 1. 12. 3. 66. 11.
Cant. 2. 5. Job 15. 11. 2. From the Nature and Office of Faith, which is to
rest upon God's faithfulness, for the performance of these promises, it
certifies and assures the Soul, that all shall certainly be made good. Psalm.
89. 34. Numb. 23. 19. By this means says gives a Christian actual present
possession of all good things, even in their absence; Faith is the substance
Heb. 11. 1.
hoped for: that is, it gives substance to things that have no Being, The
evidence of things not seen; that is, that it both convinces the judgment,
that such things must come to pass, and it makes the mind conceive them really
present. Joh. 8. 56. 1 Cor. 10. 3. 3. From the fruits, or if you will, the
Children and Daughters of Faith, which are attendant on her, and helpful to
her, in maintaining life, namely hope, which keeps the heart alive, by
expecting better, when things are at the worst, banisheth despair, is compared
to an Helmet and Anchor. 2. Joy, this is the juice of Faith, the Souls
strength, banisheth sorrow, eats up all Earthly griefs 3. Courage and boldness,
which expells fear. 4. Love, this makes bitter things sweet, causing a cheerful
willingness to suffer the hardest things for the sake of the party beloved. 5.
From a singular property and power that is in Faith, to break through all
difficulties, leap over all carnal objections, and remove all impediments, Romans
4. 18 -- 22.

Qu. How may we manage our Faith, so as to maintain this life of joy and
comforts?

Ans. Your care must be to make this sure, not only that you are within the
compass of God's special Covenant (to them that are out of this belong no
promises, nothing but threatenings and curses) but also that these special
qualifications are in you, which are annexed to particular promises, the
fruition whereof depends upon the practice of some choice part of obedience,
which if you neglect, you do but presume and tempt God in making title, and
laying claim to them. Compare Psalm. 91. 11, 12. with Mat. 4. 6, 7.

2. This done, learn Four things concerning the promises: 1. The matter, which
is supply of all good, and deliverance from all evil: 2. The kind or quality of
them; the principle promise indeed, is absolute, but all the rest are
conditional, these shall all be literally fulfilled for you, so far forth as
they may be subservient to that.

3. The manner of propounding them; some promises are expressly declared, both
general and special ones, others are by consequence employed in the examples or
prayers of the faithful.

4. The several ways of God's performing his promises. Sometimes he gives his
People the very thing he promises: Sometimes he denies that, and gives them
some thing equipollent proportionable instead of it, or else that which he
knows is far better for them.

5. You must in every state of life, when you find need, set your Faith on
work, both to fetch in provision out of the Word, and to prepare it, and to
apply it.

1. The way to bring in provision (for the maintenance of life) is by the
memory: whatsoever faith does in the Soul, it does it by the help of this
faculty, Heb. 12, 5, 6. Forgetfulness is the cause of fainting in all time,
therefore of need: whenever you are brought to any straight, that you can see
no way of escape, or means of relief, but begin to faint and sink under
distress and vexation of mind, call to mind such promises, as are fitted to
your condition. For there can be no condition imagined, but there are promises
suited to it, and a Christian wisdom must be to accommodate the remedy to the
sore and malady of his heart. Enquire what word there is in God's Book to still
the tempests and distempers of your spirits, and then make application of it:
Promises faithfully remembered and well digested, will arm and fortify your
Souls, that they shall be able to put any case of trouble inward or outward,
and come off victoriously and triumphantly. Put case you be as poor as Job,
Lazarus, the Prophets Widow: Call to mind the promises of temporal blessings
in abundance. Put case you be persecuted by the tongues or hands of wicked Men,
call to mind the promises, that you shall be delivered, and your enemies
confounded. Put case your hearts be heavy for some great losses of Goods or
Friends: Call to mind the promises, that you shall be gainers by your losses.
Put case your spirits be wounded with the sense of Divine wrath: Call to mind
the promises of pardon, peace, and rest. Put case your Graces be weak, and
corruptions strong: Call to mind the promises of sanctification and quickening.
Put case some great eminent danger threaten you: Call to mind the promises,
that nothing shall hurt you; that every thing that befalls you, shall work
together for your spiritual and eternal good.

2. Provision thus brought in by the Memory, the next work of Faith, is to
prepare and make it fit nourishment. This is done by searching for, and finding
out that Grace, or part of obedience, upon which, the fruition of the promise
depends; to which sufficient has been spoken already: nor will it be
disheartened for weakness, if there be truth, yea, if no more than a true
desire. Mat. 5. 3 -- 6. Neh. 1. 11.

The third and last chief work of Faith, is application of the promises Jer.
15. 16.
to your selves in particular, this is feeding upon the provisions brought in
and dressed. Faith first does its utmost, to assure the soul, Psalm. 37. 1.
that what God has promised, is already done. Mark 11. 24. 15. 28. Job 13. 15.
Yea, and it makes it Joh. 6. 56, 57.
good thus. 1. It has Christ, and he is all. 2. It has, if not the thing
promised, as good, or better. 3. When it finds much ado; It goes to God, and
seeks help of him. Mark 9. 24. 2 Chr. 20. 12. Psalm. 73. 23. 24. 27. and
concludes with the Psalmist 60. 12. 73. 1.

You will be sure to find, while you live here on Earth, the Devil ever anon
throwing his Fiery darts into your Souls. You must take the Apostles advice, to
stand always Armed with the whole Armor of God. Above all, taking the Shield
Ephesians. 6. 13-19.
of Faith, whereby ye shall be able to quench all his Fiery Darts.

THE EIGHTH SERMON.
YOu have heard what the Daily Duty is, of all who live and dwell in God, viz.
To live by Faith. How faith maintains the Soul in life, and the Apostle bidding
you to take the Shield of Faith, and to use, and move, and manage it,
according to the place, Satan casting his Darts at you, aims at, and according
to the kinds of his temptations. I shall give you a truth, and taste how faith
may be managed, and what the several acts of Faith are, by which the
fierceness of these Darts of Satan may be quenched:

There are six Fiery Darts (besides many others) which Satan throws at the
Souls of those that dwell in God, whereby he works them much disquiet and
trouble. The first and worst, is concerning the forgiveness of sins. He would
and often does persuade them, that their sins are unpardoned, and that God will
damn them for their manifold transgressions, and mighty sins. The apprehension
of this fills their Souls with horror, nor can the greatness and grievousness
of this affliction be expressed.

A second is, Concerning their spiritual Estate, he would make them believe,
they are yet in a state of Unregeneracy; and that the Root of the matter is not
in them, but that they are but painted Hypocrites.

A third is, Concerning Mortification of Lusts, and Sanctification of Life,
neither of which they have attained, and they are afraid they never shall.

A fourth is, Fear of Poverty, and temporal Misery; what will become of them in
sickness and old Age, they cannot tell, want coming on them like an Armed Man,
this Dart sets on Fire many Lusts.

A fifth is, Concerning the right use of prosperity and adversity: Satan
persuades them they neither do, nor ever shall use either rightly.

A sixth is, Fear of falling away.

Faith rightly managed, will blunt the piercing points of all these Darts, and
take away all the burning Poison in them; and so repel them, that the Soul
shall not be hurt at all by them: though until Faith have done, it suffer much
affliction by each of them.

I shall not now undertake to show what be the several acts of Faith, that have
force to overcome these several temptations, but will declare very briefly,
what those acts are, whereby Faith supports, and settles the Soul, and makes it
victorious in any trouble or affliction whatsoever, inward or outward, which
may be applied to any of the cases forementioned.

Qu. What use will this Doctrine be to those that are not under any trouble,
that have no manner of affliction upon them.

Ans. There is no Christian that Mat. 6. 34.
is at any time of his life free from all affections: no Day comes Genesis 47. 9.
so fair over any godly Man's head, wherein he meets not with some matter of
grief, yea so much, that Psalm. 73. 14.
he finds enough ado to sustain and master it. Luke 9. 23.

2. Those that are now free from affliction (may, they know not how soon) be
hemmed in, compassed about, and overwhelmed with variety of afflictions, as Job
was, and therefore Genesis 19. 23.
ought to live in continual expectation 1 Samuel 12. 17.
of crosses and distresses, public, domestical, personal; and Psalm. 30. 6, 7.
although there are great hopes of peaceable times, yet hopes may be Psalm. 27.
1.
frustrate: our sins are many and Eccl. 11. 8.
mighty, which gives us just cause to fear God's judgments; we have Amos 6. 3.
also Enemies many, and politic, and malicious, and the Devil, and Esaias 59. 9.
his Instruments are busy: but howsoever, 2 King. 9. 22.
how calm soever the public state may be, yet afflictions Genesis 13. 3.
and miseries may and will sure 15. 16.
enough befall those that fear God; If not outward, yet inward. Many are the
afflictions of the righteous. ^* Chr. 21. 1.
And manifold are their infirmities Psalm. 38. 19
in their afflictions, and therefore they are called by that name. Evils 73. 14.
will not come the sooner, because 34. 19.
expected, but they will fall ^ Cor. 12. 10.
the lighter. And faith is necessary ^ ^am. 27. 1.
that they may so do, it cannot therefore but be necessary and profitable Psalm.
31. 22.
to acquaint you with the acts of Faith, in general at least; 17. 13.
whereby a Christian Soul may be (...). 11. 35, 36.
upheld in evil times, against all Psalm. 71. 3.
afflictions and miseries whatsoever. This grace well acted, will bring 56. 3.
you under the wing and protection of your God, and so free your Hearts from
all fear and discouragement and disquiet.

The acts of Faith, effectual to 23. 4. 27. 1. 125. 1. 24. 5. 11.
this end, are Nine in Number, and in this Order.

The first, is an act of Information. Faith informs the Soul of these things.
Namely, concerning the nature, Author, ends, measure, and continuance of the
affliction.

1. Concerning the nature or matter of it, that it is humane. There 1 Cor. 10.
13.
has no temptation overtaken you, but such as is common to Man. Let it be what
it will, other Men as good, yea better than you, have suffered in the same
kind, drank of the same Cup, yea deeper than any 1 Cor. 4. 8 -- 14.
of you have yet done. Poverty, sickness, reproach, loss of dear relations, 2
Cor. 11. 23. to the end.
trouble of mind; Job, and David, and Paul for example, and Heb 11. 30. 39.
the Macabee Confessors and Martyrs.

2. Concerning the Author, that who or whatsoever is the Instrument, 1 These. 3.
3.
God is the Principle Agent. His Decree ordained it, and his actual providence
has inflicted it.

3. Touching the ends God aims Job 1. 21. Amos 3. 6. 2 Samuel 16. 12. Psalm. 39.
9. 1 Samuel 3. 18. Genesis 42. 21. Luke 15. 17. Deuteronomy 8. 2. Psalm. 66. 10. Esaias 1. 25.
27. 9. Zech. 13. 9. 2 Cor. 1. 9. Psalm. 119. 67. Heb. 12. 10, 11. Hos. 5 15.
Psalm. 78. 34. 1 Cor. 15. 29. Pro. 7. 7. 1 Cor. 11, 32. 2 Cor. 4. 17. Esaias 27.
78. Jer. 46. 28.
at in your afflictions. Among others, they are these. To bring you to a sight
of your sins long since, or lately committed. To humble and reprove you, to
purge and refine you, to work self-denial in you, to reduce you into the right
way, to quicken your devotion: To wean you from the love of the World, and make
you long for Heaven. To cause you to relish mercies and comforts better. To
save you from Damnation, and to make your Crown of Glory weightier.

4. Touching the measure that it shall be no more than needs, and no more than
you shall have strength well to bear. 1 Pet. 1. 6. 1 Cor. 10. 13. All your
Enemies shall not be able to add one scruple more. Job 1. 12. 2. 6.

Wife and loving Parents correct their Children in measure, there is no fear
that they will break their Bones. Learned and loving Physicians have due
respect, when they administer Doses to the strength of their Patients. Such a
Father and Physician is God, and a thousand times more tender.

5. Touching the continuance of Psalm. 103 9. 125 3. Jer. 3. 12.
the affliction incumbent. Faith informs the Soul, that the Dietdrink
prescribed, shall be no longer required to be taken, than till health be
recovered. That the Plaster shall 2 Cor. 4. 17. Hos. 6. 1, 2. Psalm. 3. 5. Es.
54. 78. 10 25. 57. 16. Mich. 7. 18.
lie no longer on the sore, than till the Cure be wrought; that the Gold be no
longer in the Fire, than till the Dross be consumed: at longest it shall be but
until Death, and all the space until then, let it be never so long, is but a
little moment, in respect of Eternity; a little Cloud quickly passing.

The second, is a quickening exciting Lam 3 39, ^0. Ez. 9. 6. Psalm. 38. 18.
act: Faith excites the Soul, first, to make search and scrutiny into this
affliction. 2. To cast it self down, in humble acknowledgment of its own
desert, and Gods Lam. 3. 42. Job 42. 6 Psalm. 62. 8. 142. 1, 2. 57. 1, 2. 2
These. 14. 11. 2 Cor 12. 8. Psalm. 40. 13. Lam. 3. 55. Job 34. 31, 32.
Justice accusing and judging it self, and justifying God in his sharp
Dispensation. 3. To pour out its complaint to God, and cry for mercy, and
pardon of the sin procuring the Cross, and for sanctification and removal of
it. 4. To cast off all purposes of falling into sin again; of giving God any
more cause to punish. 5. To use all lawful means to get the Cross removed or
mitigated. Jos. 7. 11. 13 -- 16.

The third, is an employing act: 2 Chr. ^0. 12. Jer. 3. 23. Psalm 33 16, 17.
127. 1, 2 Esaias 30 7. 31. 3. Hos 14. 3. 2 Pet. 2. 9. Ephesians 3. 26. 2 Chr. 14. 11.
Rom 4. 21. Mark. 1. 40. 2 Cor. 12 9. Psalm. 33 18, 19. Rev 3 19. Psalm. 94 12.
122. 9.
hear faith speaking thus, We have no might, neither know we what to do. It
causes the Soul to renounce its own wisdom, strength, and all confidence in
the Creature, draws the heart from carnal repose in means or friends.

The fourth, is an act of discovery, it discovers to the Soul that sees no help
any where else, all sufficiency of help in God. All Sufficiency of wisdom,
power, grace, mercy, truth, and love; and it discovers 71. 17. 2 Timothy 4. 14. 2
Cor. 1. 10.
also the manner of God's dealing, which usually is to grant deliverance, and
send help then, when to sense and reason it is furthest off. Deuteronomy. 32. 36. Jer.
30. 12 -- 18. Psalm. 142. 6. It looks also back upon former favors, which are
as Bills obligatory of future good things, even all that God sees necessary.
That which God has once done, for any of his in sustaining, relieving, and
delivering them; He will do over and over again for them, if they enforce
themselves toward him.

The fifth, is a meekening act: Pro. 3. 11. Psalm. 62. 1, 5. Mich. 7. 9. 2 Samuel
15. 26. Psalm. 131. 2. 38. 14, 15.
Faith makes the heart willing to submit it self to the good pleasure of God,
and patiently, and gently to bear his corrections. And the considerations,
whereby Faith moves and prevails with the soul to carry it self meekly under
Gods hand, are such as these, first, from the desert of sin: you have merited
all this, and much more, and are punished beneath your iniquities. Ezr. 9. 13.
Job 11. 6. Mich. 7. 9. Joh. 18. 11. Romans 8. 29. Es 53. 3. Heb. 11. 25. 26. Romans
8. 18. 2 Cor. 4. 17.
2. From the hand that lays this Rod upon the back: It is a Fatherly one that
gives you this bitter Cup. 3. From his predestinating you to be conformable to
the Image of his Son, who was a Man of sorrows, acquainted with griefs. 4. From
the recompense of reward, which is infinitely heavier than your sufferings.

The sixth, is an act of remembrance. Es. 63 15. Exo. 2. 25. Gen 31. 12. Rev.
2. 9. Psalm. 31. 7. Psalm. 119. 50. 46. 1. 91. 15. 99 37, 39. Es. 41. 10, 14. 43.
2. 49. 13, 14. Psalm. 34. 19. Job 5. 18. 19, 20. Psalm. 94. 12, 13. 33. 18, 19.
91. 14, 15. Jer. 29. 11. Jam 1. 12 Psalm. 73. 24.
It causes the soul to call to mind those sweet and gracious promises God has
made in his Word, to his People in their afflictions. 1. That he will look down
from Heaven in mercy, and cast a gracious aspect upon them. 2. That he will be
with them, to support and comfort them in their troubles. 3. That he will
deliver them out of trouble. 4. After they have suffered a while, establish,
strengthen them, and then receive them to Glory, where they shall never suffer
more, but in his presence have fullness of joy, and at his right hand, pleasures
that shall please for ever more.

A seventh, is an act of recumbency, Es. 30 15. 50. 10. Psalm. 31. 5. 112. 7.
Cant. 2. 14. 8. 5. Psalm. 71. 20. Job 13. 15. Heb. 11 11.
a resting, rolling, relying act, casting the Soul upon God, and staying there,
clasping, a desiring, depending, committing it self to divine providence, with
assured trust and confidence, that all shall be well, because all shall end
well, though sense and reason say never so much to the contrary; this
confidence does as it were oblige, and bind the Lord to do his People good.
Psalm. 37. 40. 57. 1. and 147. 8, 9. Es. 26. 3. Jer. 39. 18.

The eighth, is an act of expectation, Psalm. 85. 9. Esa. 8. 17. 30. 8. and 28.
16. and 40. 31.
waiting for comfort and deliverance, referring both time, and means, and
manner unto God.

The nineth and last, is an act Jam. 1. 2. Heb. 12. 11. Romans 8. 28. 37, 38, 39.
of rejoicing and triumphing: the former it does, because it feels the Physic
to work kindly, and the latter in assurance of a blessed issue.

There are besides these many several Laws, which you that dwell in God are
bound to observe continually. A few of them I shall commend unto your practice,
you must be always watching, always working, always rejoicing, and always praying,
and always giving thanks, and always ready to remove out of the lower Rooms,
wherein you live into higher, whither you shall hear a voice saying, come up
hither.

Every one in this House must be ever-more working, watching. They ought not to
sleep at any time: Ye Brethren are all the Children of 1 These. 5. 5, 6.
the Light, and the Children of the Day; we are not of the Night, nor of
Darkness, therefore let us not sleep as do others. There is a twofold Psalm. 77
4.
waking, literal and metaphorical; the former is sometimes a punishment. Thou
hold mine Eyes waking. It is always a duty to withold your Eyes from
immoderate and unseasonable sleep. How Pro. 6. 9, 10.
long will thou sleep, O sluggard, when will thou arise out of thy sleep! yet a
little sleep, a little slumber, a little folding of the hands to sleep. Too
many Christians willingly suffer this Thief to steal away the best, and feed
upon the very fat of their time; which are a shame to the House they live in.
It was thought in Austin's time to be an undecent thing, for a Christian at any
time of the Year to have the Sun beams find him in Bed. How early every
Morning was David up Psalm. 5. 3.
at his Devotions! My Voice shall thou hear in the Morning, O Lord. In the
Morning will I direct my Prayer unto thee. Awake up my Glory, awake Psaltery
and Harp. I my self will awake early; yea, 57. 8.
mine Eyes prevent the Night Watches, that I might meditate on thy Word. I have
awaked of my self in the Night, before I have been 119. 148.
called upon by the Watchmen, who give warning of the seasons of the Night.
Yea, at Midnight will I arise to give thanks unto thee. This was ordinary for
the Servants of 62.
this House to do their Master service, as well by Night as Day. Behold, bless
ye the Lord, all ye 134. 1.
Servants of the Lord, which by Night stand in the House of the Lord. Nothing
was more ordinary in Primitive times, in the House of godly great Men, than to
have Vigils. Paul says of himself, that he 2 Cor. 11. 27.
was often in voluntary fastings, which he undertook, to fit himself the better
for Supplications and Prayer. So often in such Watchings. It Is said Luke 6. 12.
of our blessed Savior, that He Joel 1: 13.
continued all Night in Prayer to God. Come lie all Night in Sackcloth ye
Ministers of my God. David fasted and went in, and lay all Night upon the
Earth. This 2 Samuel 12. 16.
was extraordinary literal watching for spiritual ends, and for our imitation
upon like occasions; time allowed to spend in sleep, must sometimes be set
apart for religious Duties. And every Night of of our life when we are awake,
we must take care to spend piously; ^is the Character of a godly Man. His
delight is in the Law of the Psalm. 1. 2.
Lord, and in that Law does he meditate, Day and Night. When 63. 6.
I remember Thee upon my Bed, and meditate on Thee in the Night Watches. With
my Soul have I desired Esa. 26. 9.
Thee in the Night. Stand in Psalm. 4. 4.
awe and sin not, commune with your own Heart upon your Bed. But it is the
latter wakeing and watching, which the Apostle chiefly intends, when he says,
let us not sleep as do others, that is, through carelessness, slacking, giving
over acts of faith and piety, or doing them listlesly, or perfunctorily,
sluggishly, or by being lulled asleep, and over-burthened by worldly desires,
cares, or pleasures; it is an heedful observation of our selves in all things,
and a serious, careful, and diligent circumspection, over all our thoughts,
words and ways, that we may please God by doing his will, and neither commit
any sin, nor omit any duty. This Christian heedfulness is very frequently Deuteronomy.
4. 9.
and earnestly urged upon God's People, no duty more. Take heed 23.
to thy self, and keep thy Soul diligently, take heed unto your selves lest ye
forget the Covenant, take Jos. 22. 5.
diligent heed to do the Commandment and the Law, take heed then Ephesians. 5. 15.
that ye walk circumspectly, not as fools, but as wise. Watch ye therefore,
Mark 13. 35.
for ye know not when the 36. 37.
Master of the House comes, at Evening, or at Midnight, or at the Cock
crowing, or in the Morning, lest coming suddenly, he find you sleeping: and
what I say unto you, I say unto all, Watch. This watchfulness must be in all
things, what Saint Paul says unto Timothy (who was as all Gospel Ministers
should be, religious, faithful Watchmen, warning their People of spiritual
dangers and enemies, as God's Prophets of old were; somewere then Ezech. 3. 17.
Esaias 52. 8. 56. 10.
as too many are now, careless Guids, Watchmen in Name, but not in truth,
wretched or rather wretchless, and scarce Watchmen) he says to every private
Christian. Watch thou in all things, Evil, civil, 2 Timothy 4. 5.
good. Take heed how ye hear, Mat. 6. 1. 1 Cor. 10. 31.
read, pray, give Alms; How you do the works of your particular Calling, and
even natural actions, eat, drink, play: and watch over all the powers and parts
both of your Souls and Bodies, your outward Senses, Eyes, and Ears, and taste,
and touch, Job 31. 1. Mat. 5. 28. Psalm. 119. 37. Esaias 33. 15. Pro. 23. 1, 2, 3.
Your Tongues especially. Psalm. 39. 1. 37. 30. Pro. 15. 4. 7. 23. 18. 20. 25.
11. 1 Cor. 15. 31. Jam. 3. 2. Mat. 12. 34-38. Psalm. 45. 1. Ephesians. 4. 29. Col. 4.
6. But above all, your hearts must be watched over. Pro. 4. 23. Heb. 3. 12. And
you must watch especially against those sins that are most dangerous, and
whereto you are naturally most inclined, Luke 3. 12, 13, 14. 12. 15. The Paths
of your Feet must also be pondered, Pro. 4. 26. And this must be in all places,
and at all times, all the days of your lives. Deuteronomy. 4. 9. Nor must you only
watch over your selves, but over your Brethren also. Heb. 10. 24. 3. 13. Genesis
4. 9. Lev. 19. 17. A great many reasons may quicken you to this duty, besides
the many Precepts that press it, in reference to your selves. 1. The estate and
condition wherein you stand. 1. You are weak at best, full of infirmities. Mat.
26. 41. As they that have weak sickly Bodies observe a strickt Diet, so should
you much more be careful and fearful, whose Souls are so. 1 Cor. 10. 12. Phil.
2. 12. Pro. 28. 14. 2. You are naturally drowsy, and therefore had need to do
as the Nightingal, that is said to set her Breast against a Thorn, to keep her
self from sleeping. Mat. 25. 5. Cant. 5. 2. Ephesians. 5. 14. The wise as well as
foolish Virgins slept: your hearts are naturally wicked, and deceitful, and
desperately wicked. Jer. 17. 10. Psalm. 18. 57. Deuteronomy. 11. 16. Heb. 3. 12. 1. You
are extremely apt to relapse into your former condition. Rev. 2. 5. Mat. 12.
45. 2 Pet. 2. 21, 22. 2. You have many mighty, and subtle, and malicious, and
dangerous enemies. Ephesians. 16. 12. 1 Pet. 5. 8. 3. Great are the benefits of this
continual watchfulness. You will hereby tame your Flesh. The wildest Beasts are
tamed by watching. This will be a great furtherance to your Prayers, and hereby
you will be kept from being foiled by temptations. Mat. 26. 41. 4. Great is the
danger of neglecting this one Moment. There is no sin but may be sown in you,
while you sleep. Mat. 13. 24. witness David, 2 Samuel 11. and so you hazard your
salvation. Means enabling you to the performance of this duty, are, 1. Sobriety
in the use of lawful things. 1 Pet. 1. 7, 8. 1 These. 5. 5, 6. Luke 21. 34. 2.
Filial fear of God, Pro. 14. 16. Romans 14. 16. 16. 6. Psalm. 4. 4. 130. 4. Genesis
20. 11. Psalm. 36. 1. Jer. 32. 42. 3. Remembrance of God's Judgments. Mat. 24.
37, 38 -- 42. Es. 47. 8, 9. Rev. 3. 3. Luke. 21. 34, 35, etc. 1 Cor. 10. 15.
12. especially of the last Judgment. 2. Cor. 5. 10. There are other notable
helps. Viz. Growing in knowledge: a blind Man is unfit to make a Watchman. A
spirit of mistrust-fulness: a Master that mistrusts a Servant will watch to
catch him. Living under a powerful Ministry: a Trumpet continually sounding is
a good means to keep a Man from sleeping. Desiring Friends to admonish you
when ever you nod: They that are inclined to sleep mortally, are desirous that
others should pinch them, to keep them waking. Sobriety and temperance in
eating and drinking. A Drunkard will make an ill Watchman. If you will know
what are the signs of a truly watchful Christian, they are such as these. He
discovers the secret windings and turnings of his own heart, the least stirring
there, and much more if the Fire of any Lust begin to kindle there. If there be
any Fray there, he presently stifles it. And if need be, he calls for help. If
any good news comes he takes present notice of it, and makes it known. Psalm.
66. 16. No blessing of God toward himself, or the Church, that he does not
take thankful notice of. If there be Lightning, or Thunder, or any dreadful
Apparition of God's judgment, he trembles at it, loves and delights in the
Morning light. And for that reason fears not Death, Cant. 5. 2.
the immediate antecedent of it.

Qu. Are all of God's holy household always thus waking and watching.

Ans. The Holy Spouse of Christ acknowledges, that there was a time when she
slept, having eaten and drank largely of her heavenly Husbands blessings. She
began to remit her Zeal, and neglect the works of Faith and Love. Wanting the
pretense of her Husband, and being pressed with the remnants of the Flesh, she
gave Ear to carnal ease and security; occasioned further hereunto by the time
of the Night, and by the weather which was Rainy; that is, by ignorance and
error prevailing, and by the opposition and persecution of Enemies. Her sleep
was neither that dead sleep, that all Men are in by nature, nor that judicial
sleep, the spirit of slumber; a farther degree of that natural sleep, to which
God gives up some as a Seal of their desperate condition, but it was a sleep
arising from the relics of natural corruption unsubdued, prevailing over the
regenerate part: yet was her heart all this while awake, I sleep, but my heart
waketh. Though she had a little laid aside her divine thoughts, and
meditations, yet she still kept the eye of Faith open, and the ear of her
Heart attentive, When the Lord had returned. Thus the wise Virgins slumbered
and slept, but they had their Lamps burning by them which the foolish had not.
Their hearts waked, Mat. 25. 5. They were provided in them with instructions,
in faith and piety, and with the gift of the spirit, which is the Oil that
always burns in all good hearts; howsoever not always in actual exercise. But
O! the dreadful danger that good Christians are in, when it is not so through
the letting down of their spiritual watch, and giving way to sluggishness,
there being no sin, no temptation, no judgment, but a secure drowsy Christian
is open for: Which is the reason of so often enforcing watchfulness by the
spirit of God in the Scriptures. And therefore I beseech you suffer a word of
exhortation, to the next special duty incumbent upon all, whose habitation the
Lord is; Namely, to be always working. God will not have one idle or sloathful
Person in his House. Every one must have a particular honest Calling: The Light
of Nature taught the Heathens this, as appears by Pharaoh's question to
Joseph's Brethren, What is your occupation: Genesis 47. 3. And the Mariners to
Jonas, What is thy Jonas 1. 8.
occupation? Forty Years was Moses a Courtier, and Forty Years more a
Shepherd; that great Men may not be ashamed of honest Vocations: the greatest
that ever, have been content to take up with mean Trades. The contempt of
honest Callings in those that are well born, argues pride without wit. How
constantly did Moses stick to his Shepherds Hook, and yet a Man of great
learning, excellent spirit, good education? I presume all you that dwell in God
are in lawful Callings, wherein you may be serviceable to the Church, or
Commonwealth, or private Families. In these the Apostle forbids you to be
sloathful, Not sloathful in business. Romans 12. 11
To be sloathful, is to be loath to work, willing and desirous to shift it off.
Pro. 21. 25. 24. 23. To be negligent in working, taking up more time than
needs, or not to endeavor to do it well. Not to be sloathful, is to be ready
and forward to be employed, Esaias 6. 8. and to be diligent, and expeditious, and
industrious, to do business in the best manner, Genesis 31. 6. That every
Christian Man and Woman's duty, is to be thus employed continually, appears,
because God prohibits sloathfulness, and commands diligence, Heb. 6. 12. Pro.
6. 9. Genesis 3. 19. Mark 13. 34. 1 These. 4. 11. Curses sloathfulness, and
blessed diligence, Pro. 10. 47. 23. 21. 24. 30. to the end. Jer. 48. 10. Pro.
13. 11. 28. 19. Eccl. 5. 12. Mat. 25. 16, 17, 21, 23. O that every one would
look upon idleness and sloth as a great sin, as theft. 2 These. 3. 10, 11, 12.
Prodigality. Pro. 18. 9. Sodomy, a sin that disposes a Man to all manner of
sin; and which shall be punished with the vengeance of Eternal Fire, Mat. 25.
26, 30. And Heathens and Bruits shall rise up in Judgment against idle
sloathful Christians. You therefore that are sure you dwell in God, take heed
of damping your assurance, and blurring your evidence, by giving the least way
to idleness, or sloathfulness in your Callings. Are you Magistrates? be
continually employing, and applying your power and authority to the uttermost,
for the ends for which God has given it to you. Romans 13. 4. 1 Timothy 2. 2. 2
Chr. 19. 6. to the end. Consider God's wrath declared against you, if you be
slothful to execute Judgment, even upon your dearest Relations that deserve it.
In the example of Eli, 1 Samuel 3. 13, 14. On the other side, the pleasure he
will take in you, and delight to do you good, if you be faithful, and severe:
Jer. 22. 15, 16. Numb. 25. 11, 12, 13. 2 King. 10. 30. If you be Ministers, let
the weightiness of the work, and glorious reward promised to laboriousness
therein, and the Plagues threatened Acts 20. 20, 31.
against loyterers, move you. 1 Cor. 4. 2. 2 Timothy 2. 15. 4. 1, 2. 1 Pet. 5. 2.
Es. 58. 1. 2 Cor. 2. 16. Dan. 12. 3. Jer. 1. 1. 1 Cor. 9. 16. If you be
Governors of Families, set before you the example of the virtuous Woman, Pro.
31. 13 -- 28. If Servants, Eleazar and Jacob, Genesis 24. 31. 6, 40. Col. 3. 22.
to the end. Remember the promise of protection of Angels, while you are
diligent in your Callings, Psalm. 91. 11, 12. and how God has graciously, and
gloriously appeared unto them he found therein, Exodus 31. 2. Judge. 6. 11. 2 Samuel 7, 8. Amos 7. 14, 15. And how he will welcome you with a well done, good
and faithful Servant, Mat. 25. Only be sure to follow these Rules in your
particular Callings: 1. Labor principally for spiritual and heavenly things,
Mat. 6. 33. Esaias 55. 2. Joh. 6. 27. 2. Let your end be right. 1 Cor. 10. 31.
Acts 20. 35. Ephesians. 4. 28. And 3. For the manner, do your work without all
carking care. And without discontent of any providence, and with a heavenly
mind. Phil. 3. 20.

3. Be always rejoicing; God has declared abundantly his will and pleasure,
that you who dwell in him should be continually cheerful and comfortable in
your Spirits; and he has in his Word, as often charged you to be so: and he has
charged you to fear him, and live a godly life. Psalm. 119. Psalm. 2. 117. 32.
11. 33. 1. 48. 11. 5. 11. 68. 4. Mat. 5. 12. Phil. 3. 1. 1 These. 5. 16.

And he is delighted to see you cheerful, and offended much, when you are
disconsolate and uncheerful. Deuteronomy. 28. 47, 48. You are the only People that
have right and title to joy and comfort. Psalm. 116. 15. 47. 11. 64. 10. 106. 4,
5. Romans 5. 1. 14. 17. 15. 13. The objects of your joy are such, as have in
every one of them force and power, if seriously pondered to keep up your hearts
in frame of comfort, and so fill them with joy at all times.

Quest. What are these objects?

Answ. 1. The Lord himself, he is the prime main ultimate adequate object of
your joy, Phil. 4. 4. Psalm. 4. 6, 7. Hab. 3. 17, 18. Jesus Christ, John 16. 33.
Phil. 3. 3. 4. 13. The word of God, Psalm. 119. 92. 94. 19. Romans 15. 4. All the
Ordinances of God, especially Prayer, Phil. 4. 6, 7. The works of God, these
are also a great object of his Peoples joy, both the internal eminent ones,
that werewrought within himself, especially Election: Luke 10. 20. And the
outward, viz. Creation and providence, Psalm. 107. 22. Especially the work of
Redemption. Psalm. 53. 6. 71. 23. 126. 1, 2. All the gifts of God, Faith: Hab.
2. 4. 1 Pet. 1. 8. Hope, Romans 5. 2. The testimony of your sanctified
Conscience, 2 Cor. 1. 12. Experiences of the love of God. Psalm. 63. 3.
Remission of sins, Mat. 9. ^. Cooperation of all things for their good* Romans
8. 28. The Attendants of the holy Angels, the immensity of their wages for
their works, which is from free grace, 2 Timothy 4. 8. Heb. 11. 26. Romans 8. 18.
Afflictions themselves of all sorts, both natural, being prepared for them,
corrected with Lenitives, one whereof is commonness: 1 Cor. 10. 13. Another,
that they are lovetokens, like the Rainbow. And another the effects they
produce, whereof you have heard much; and much more accidental for Religion,
and Christianity sake: Mat. 5. 11, 12. Col. 1. 24. 1 Pet. 4. 13. 2 Cor. 12. 15.
Acts. 5. 41. Jam. 1. 2.

4. Be always praying, opening your desires to God, with reverence and
confidence in the name of Christ, for things agreeable to his will: viz. That
he will glorify his own great name immediately, by himself, and by all his
providential Dispensations: That his paternal Kingdom may be brought to
perfection, both by means and gifts of grace: That his will may be done by your
selves, and others, as the Angels in Heaven do it cheerfully without murmuring,
speedily without delaying, totally without mincing or reservation, sincerely
without self-seeking, constantly without fainting: That you and your fellows
may enjoy all necessary temporal blessings, personal, domestical, Political,
National, have title to them, leave to use them, and comfort in the use of
them: That he will free you from the guilt of sin, grant you remission free and
full: And that he will sanctify you and them throughout, giving you conquest
over all temptations, and perseverance to the end. Neglect not to keep a
constant course of praying twice a Day at least, Morning and Evening, and
occasionally Day and Night, sending up servent short Ejaculations. Continue in
Prayer, and watch in the same with thanksgiving: which is the next duty to be
performed, and the next which every Day must be paid duly.

5. Be always giving thanks, 1 These. 5. 18. In thanksgiving there is both the
Memory, Meditation, and serious acknowledgement of God's blessings. And in
token of the truth thereof, and dedication, and consecration of our Bodies and
Souls, with all we have, to divine use, that is, to the honor and service of
God. This was figured in the Sacrifices of the old Law, which were first set
before the Altar, and so presented to God, and then afterward were offered unto
him. This dedication is made, when the intention of our minds, and purpose of
our hearts, and in all our affections we give up, and set our selves apart.
This was first done in our Baptism, and is continually renewed in the Lord's
Supper. Thankfulness is all the Rent God requires of us for the House we dwell
in, and all the accommodations thereunto annexed, Psalm. 5^. 15. We would not
forfeit any thing we hold for non-payment of rent. Take we heed lest for want
of thankfulness, we give God occasion to dispossess us of himself, and of all
the good things we enjoy in him.

6. Be always willing to remove from these lowest, into higher Rooms in this
House. By Death we do no more, but change our Lodging, from lower to higher
Rooms in the same House. Be willing to dye at any time: So Simeon was, Lord now
let thou Luke 2. 29.
thy Servant depart in peace. So was Paul, Having a desire to depart, Phil. 1.
2* 3.
and to be with Christ, which is far better. Be always prepared to dye, by dying
to sin, and to the World continually. And by making every Day your dying Day,
by breaking off sins; and avoiding all occasions of sinning, and embracing all
occasions of doing good: and doing all in such a manner, as you would, if you
knew you should Esaias 38. 1.
dye presently. Making also to your Luke 16. 9.
selves, Friends of the Mammon of Unrighteousness, and setting your House in
Order, and praying to God continually, To teach you to Psalm. 9. 12.
number your Days, that you may apply your hearts unto Wisdom.

FINIS.
IMPRIMATUR.

Rob. Grove R. P. D. Humph. Episc. Land. a Sac. Dom.
Mart. 9. 1668/9.

