THE WHITE ROSE: OR A WORD for the House of YORK, Vindicating the RIGHT OF
SUCCESSION, IN A Letter from Scotland TO A Peer of this Realm.

(...).
Leges sequi Patrias, pulchrum est.
E Clearcho. LONDON. Printed Anno Dom. MDCLXXX.

THE White Rose.
My Lord,
I NEED not acquaint your Lordship, what a general sorrow invaded us, upon the
departure of His Royal Highness from amongst us, when I tell you, that we looked
upon, and esteemed his coming hither, to be one of the most signal Honors that
has been done Our Nation, since the happy Restoration of His Most Sacred
Majesty. The benign Influence of this generous Prince, vouchsafed to our cold
Clime, seemed like the welcome Approaches of the Sun, to the benighted Indians,
who are said to welcome that glorious Luminary with the Extatick Acclamations
of an (...). If ever Our Nation had any Affinity to (...), whence Etymologists
tell us it is derived, 'twas at the departure of this Great Duke; I cannot,
without fresh Reluctance, acquaint your Lordship, what a mutual uneasiness and
trouble was expressed at parting, His Royal Highness assuring us, That nothing,
but the satisfaction of waiting upon the King, could balance the trouble he
had, to part so soon from us: On the other hand, we made our humble
Acknowledgments, for the great happiness we had in his illustrious presence,
and how much we were obliged to his good Advice and Conduct, protesting, That
as Our Allegiance obliged us to venture our Lives and Fortunes for His Majesty,
our Affections to His Royal Highness would engage us to do the same for Him, if
His Occasions should require it.

This Royal Hero, like the Dove turned out of the Ark, took footing here,
finding the threatening Inundation abated; and, I hope, is some time since,
returned with Safety, and the Olive of Peace, having completed that Imperfect
Conquest which left us but too many Instruments of Revenge; for I am confident,
we have now few Malcontents here, but what his Departure has made. Those
Mists were dissipated so soon as his Royal Rays broke out amongst us; for it is
this Gracious Prince's Peculiar to subdue the heart, (whilst Others can only
tame the Violence of the Man) and make Rebellion lick its own lips and
misshapen Issue, into the beauty and symmetrice of Subjectian and Loyalty,

From the secret instincts of Nature, Birds and Beasts, are taught to obey the
Eagle and Lion: though several are hardy enough, to undertake unequal Matches,
from any of the Lower Rank, especially, if edged by Keen hunger, or Exasperated
by bloody Revenge; yet the same Wolf that bristles at a Bear, will crouch to
the Lion; insomuch, that Ethics seem amputated from the Rational, and grafted
in the Sensitive Stock.

We know what Birds, with greatest noise proclaim their Encounters, as if
mighty matters were Achieved, when a sew despicable Vermin are the sole
Trophies of the scorned and derided Victor, who mistakes the chattering of the
multitude for Ovations, and Io Triumphs, and the Fights of a Coffe House, or
the Registry of an Intelligencer, sufficient Records to eternize his
illegitimate fame and glory. Should I recount the Achievements of His Royal
Highness for the Peace and Safety of the Three Kingdoms. I should intricate my
self in a Labyrinth, too tedious for Your Lordship to expect my Regression* and
possibly offend the Virtue of that Prince, which as it is the blessing of this,
will be the standing Wonder of future Ages; a Prince whose Heroic Spirit,
glories in great and adequate Actions, taking a greater complaisance and
satisfaction in doing brave, than in hearing of it. In short, all that can be
said upon so glorious a Subject, will be so far from Panegyricks, that 'twill
be but telling men, when the Sun shines in their Hemisphere, it is Day.

I proceed therefore to a nearer Observance of Your Lordship's Commands, and
the Letter you were pleased to send me, in which I find so much writ, and so
well, in Vindication of the Right of Succession, that the Author has almost
anticipated all further Discourse upon the same Subject. However, I shall
presume to advance the Superstructure a Story higher, since the Foundation
seems so firm and supportable.

I must confess you have as much engaged me out of my Province, as if
Architecture were the thing to be considered of indeed. But yet I shall show my
Obedience, as well as Unskillfulness in the performance of your irresistible
Commands. I have (since the contracting of this weighty Point) looked into such
Books of Law and History, as I am at present furnished with, which assure me
that the Course of Right Succession to the Crown, is not to be diverted from
its proper Channel: Or if you please* The Descent of the Crown in the Right
Line, cannot (de Jure) be impeded by any Act or Deed whatsoever.

This Proposition I shall endeavor to evince, by Authority and Reason,
proceeding by an easy Climax or Gradation to the Matter, and consider it first
in its less questionable Instances.

And first, says an Brit. Cap. 34. de Donis.
Ancient Author, Roys ausi ne pourront rien aliener, en droit de leur Corone,
ne de lour Royalty, que il ne soit repealable per lour Successors. With which
Tit. de Reg. Off. f. 130.
Mr. Lambard in his ancient Laws of England, concurs, in these words, Debet, de
Jure Rex Omnes Terras and Honores, omnes Dignitates and Jura, and Libertates
Coronae hujus Regni, in integrum cum Omni integritate, and sine diminutione
servare and Defendere. So that the Alienations of Kings, in the Right of their
Crowns, are repealable, by their Successors, and that they are bound by Law, to
defend and preserve all the Lands, Honors, Dignities, Laws and Liberties of
the Crown entire, with all integrity and without diminution.

The Opinion of all the Judges and Doctors, both of the Civil and Common Laws,
assembled in the Exchequer-Chamber upon the Demise of H. 4th. was, Fitz. H.
Abr. Til. Devise. n. 5. Exec. n. 108.
That the said King might make a Will, and give Legacies, but that he could not
bequeath the goods of the Realm, ( vizt.) the Antient-Crown and Jewels: much
less can a King dispose of the Sovereignty it self.

In the time of Roll. Parl. 40. Edw. 3. n. 8.
Ed. the third about the 40th. of his Reign* the Pope, by his Legate, demanded
of the King Homage, for his Kingdoms of England and Ireland, and the Arrears of
1000 Marks per Annum, granted by King John, to Pope Innocent the 3d. and his
Successors; and threatened that if it were not paid, the Pope was resolved to
proceed against the King, by Excommunication etc. Whereupon King Ed. called a
Parliament in which it was declared by the Unanimous Consent of the Lords and
Commons, that no King can put Himself, his Realm, or People, under a Foreign
Subjection, without Assent of the Lords and Commons, in Parliament; and
therefore if King John had done it by the Common Council of his Barons, as his
Charter purported, yet it was altogether invalid, for that it was not done in
Parliament by the King, Lords and Commons; and albeit it might, (though it
appears it could not without Authority of Parliament to back it) yet it is
contra Legem and Consuetudinem Parliamenti, to do such an Act; as by the 42 Ed.
3. n. 7. Lex and Consuetud. Parliamenti.
Record appears; by which it was declared in full Parliament upon demand made
on the behalf of the King, that they the Lords and Commons could not assent to
any thing in Parliament that tended to the Disherison of the King and his
Crown, whereunto they were sworn.

Upon the same Principle, the Attournment of Tenants, seems to have its Basis,
and is Requisite, where Lords dispose of their Manors, Ne Capitalibus Inimicis
subjugentur, Lib. 12. f. 28
that they may not be subjugated to their Capital enemies.

Sr. Edward Cook tells us, that the Dignity Royal is an Inherent inseparable to
the Blood Royal of the King, and cannot be transferred to another,

It is said that Edward the Confessor, Dan. Hist. of W. first.
gave William the Conqueror, a Color to claim the Crown of England, by a
Donation made by Testament; which Act was not of Power to prejudice the State,
or alter the Course of Right succession, and the Reason rendered is this, that
the Crown of this Realm being held not as Patrimonial, but in a Constant
succession by Remotion, (which is a succeeding to another's Place) it was not
in the Power of King Edward to Collate the same, by any Dispositive and
Testamentary will, the Right descending to the Next of blood only, by the
Custom and Law of the Kingdom.

We read in our English Histories, that King Richard surnamed Ceur-de-Lyon,
deposed himself of this Kingdom, and Delivered the same to the Emperor, as his
Supreme Lord, and invested him therein, by delivering of his Hat, But 'twas
adjudg'd that this Investiture, could not prejudice the State, nor alter the
course of Right succession, though it might Keep the King's Head cold, as the
Statists of those times observed.

The Civil-Law Asserts, Principem cum omnia possit, Res tamen Imperii
abalienare non posse, and the municipal Constitution of France is, that the
French King cannot dispose of the Sovereignty of the Kingdom: so that foreign
Laws Concur with Our Own in this Point, which have had the suffrage of the
whole Kingdom, for these many hundreds of Years, being as Judge Fortescue
defines them, an Artificial Perfection of Reason, and the Productions of much
Wisdom, Time, and Experience. The Law is Sanctio Sancta, jubens Honesta,
prohibensque Contraria: to which Lib. 2. de Not. Deorum.
Cicero is Parallel: Recti praeceptio, pravi est depulsio. Having in its
Prospect the same which Religion has, ut Cives bonos efficiat, that it may
make men good. being Iuvenibus Regimen, Senibus Solamen, Pauperibus Divitiae,
et Divitibus Securitas, Religion is to the wicked and faithless a Jurisdiction
against which they readily Rebel, because it rules severely, yet paies no
worldly recompense for Obedience, Obedience being by every human Power invited,
with assurances of visible advantage. The good need not the power of Religion
to make them better, for her power proceeds from threatenings, which (though
mean weapons) are fitly used, since she encounters a base Enemy. It may be
Observed, that all virtuous men, are so taken up with the Rewards of Heaven,
that they seem to live as if out of the world and; no Government can receive
assistance, from any man merely as he is Religious, but as that Religion makes
him active in temporal things, it is acquaintance with the world, and knowledge
of men, that makes abilities of Ruling, for though a sufficient belief of
Doctrine, would beget Obedience, (which is the grand design of Government) yet
since diversity of Doctrine, distracts all Auditors, and makes them doubtfully
dispose their Obedience, therefore Religion has little to do in Government,
and an active spirit is fittest for the menage of an Empire.

But however I think it cannot Rationally be presumed, that any Governor would
purely for the sake of Religion, subjugate himself and People, to a foreign
Power, and make that which is designed for the safety of our Souls, the grand
Instrument of our Destruction.

When the People consider a Ruler they would have him all Dove, whereas Policy
teaches him to be most Serpent; though they look upon this as more dangerous,
than the ills it would prevent, and that outwitting the People is but giving
Reputation to falsehood and corruption, and maintaining the Public by Politic
evils, and the base prostitution of Religion.

I shall not upon Machiavel's word, Recommend Dissimulation and Cruelty for
Cardinal virtues and as the best supporters of Authority; for a Prince ought to
refuse a Kingdom, and retire to Privacy, rather than Reign to the Ruin of
Mankind: but when we consider the mutual sympathy (as between the Head and
Members so) between a Prince and his Subjects, and the complication of their
Interests, and that their happinesses and miseries proceed from each other
mutually, it cannot be presumed, that a Prince of approved wisdom, should so
mistake or divide the Interest, as to precipitate them into Ruin, only to undo
himself by the Rebound,

But to Return to my Province, it may be demanded, whether there are not
foreign Examples to be produced, that Kingdoms have been transferred from one
Prince to Another, by a voluntary Gift?

I Answer Affirmatively, and shall instance in two of the chiefest which occur
to my Memory at this time.

The One is of Alphonzo King of Arragon and Sicily, who having conquered the
Kingdom of Naples from the Duke of Anjou, Gave it to his Natural Son by his
last Will and Testament.

The Other is of Alphonzo el Bravo, King of Castile an^ Leon, who having
conquered Portugal from the Moors, Gave it in Marriage with his Bastard
Daughter to Count Henry of Lorrain, so that here are two Examples, one by
Testament, the other per Donationem inter Vivos.

But here is to be noted, that no Ancient or Hereditary Rights were disposed
of, but the Conquerors new Acquisitions, for it is Affirmed by most Lawyers,
that no King in a Monarchy, that is by the ancient custom and fundamental Laws
of the Realm merely successive, either to the Heirs male or Heirs general, can
any ways dispose of his Kingdom, in prejudice of the next Heir in blood,
according to the Custom; no not, though the Parties interessed, should Commit
Treason, or be excluded by any Act of the States or Parliament.

That Treason cannot avoid a Lawful succession in blood, We have an Example in
Louis the 12th. Who was in Arms against Charles the 8th. both Kings of France,
and Our Own King Henry 7th. stood attainted of High Treason at the time of his
coming into England, 1 H. 7.4.
and by the Judges in their Consultation, in the Exchequer Chamber, Plowd Com.
f. 238.
what should be done for the King concerning his Attainder, it was with
unanimous consent Resolved, That the Crown takes away all defects and stops in
blood, Cok's Litt. f. 16.
and that from the time the King did Assume the Crown, the fountain was
cleared, and all Attainders and Corruption of blood discharged: Ann. H. 7. f. 8.
but however for the sake of Honor (says the Lord Verulam) it is ordained by
Parliament that all Records in which there was any memory or mention of the
King's Attainder, should be defaced, cancelled, and taken off the Fly.

So in the Case of George Duke of Clarence, We find the Pue'ple (though he was
their great Favorite) were not much concerned about his Attainder, since they
had Learnt by the Kings Example, that Attainders do not interrupt the Conveying
of a Title to the Crown.

Hence it is Evident, that by the Laws of this Kingdom, there can be no
Inter-Regnum within the same, and that immediately by Descent, the next Heir in
blood is completely and absolutely King, without any essential Ceremonies, or
Act to be done, Ex post facto; and that Coronation is but a Royal Ornament,
and outward Solemnization of the Descent.

Thus having considered the Subject in the less Disputable Instances, I come to
the Grand Doubt, That is,

Whether An Act of Parliament may alter the Course of Right Succession in
Blood? There are, I must confess, Statutes that make it Treason but to deny it,
but never otherwise made, then only for fear or flattery of the present Prince,
and after, never observed; and I am confident, it is the Desire of the sober and
temperate sort here, That any New One of that nature, may have the same Fate. I
hope we are pretty well secured, having a King of such excellent Wisdom and
Princely Virtue, bearing such a sacred regard to His Laws, that the Royal
Assent shall never be ravished from him, to stamp such an Adulterate Coin, as
must pass Current for disabling His Royal Successor, to inherit the Crown of
these three Kingdoms.

Should our Statesmen suffer this Remora to ding to the Great ship of
Government, in which they are the trusted Pilots, Government would be at a
stand, nay wrecked by that which was designed for her safety and Establishment;
and the People, who are the Lading, a freight more dangerous and much looser
than any other living stowage, being usually as troublesome in Calms, as Horses
in Storms, fall into the hands of Algerines even in there own Harbors; for
where could Liberty and Property tide safe at Anchor?

We are perpetually exclaiming (with the highest detestation) against the
King-killing Doctrine of the -- Jesuits, whose Principles, like the fruitful
slime of Nilus, have increast into so many various shapes of Serpents, whose
windings are so intricate and unknown, that even Justice her self the painful
pursuer of evil men, is almost wearied out.

I have made a Break before the word Jesuit, that your Lordship may add your
own Epithet, for I know none bad enough, for those worst of men, who seem like
Machiavel's Belphagor dispatched from Hell in human shape to negotiate the
Devil's Affairs. Their Order I must confess is specious, and I need not tell
whence it is derived, since Boys of the 2d. or 3d. Class can do it; But they
are no more like their Primitive, than Snow's like the Sun, which warms the
Earth by Antiperistasis, just as these men would save it, by Destruction; when
I consider these Men, they seem like those of Cadmus sprung from the Serpents
Teeth, it is no wonder to find them of such a Serpentine Nature; I can not think
them Christians but that their Baptismal water was so far from being
Sacramental, that 'twas some of the WHORES own making, fit for the putrid Spawn
and Gender of such, Toads I will not call Them, since they are not at Once Poison
and an Antidote, but the first altogether; and though one of their Saints by
his whistle, purged Ireland of all Venomous Creatures, yet they can live there
and retain their Natures, and when they come croaking into the Palaces of
Kings, they prove a worse Plague than those did to the Egyptian Monarch. I wish
all Christian Princes may prove to them as the Stork to the Froggs in the
stable, Kings not to Protect* but Devour: I have made this Digression, first to
Justify my self in your Lordship's Opinion, in the next place that whilst we
are Exclaiming against the Pernicious Principles of these men, we may not
improvidently lay the foundations of far worse; for it is less barbarous, to
destroy a Prince altogether, than keep him perpetually tortured with the loss
of three Kingdoms, and by a Civil death make him survive the Funerals of his
own Royalty.

Let us leave off Annually to Commemorate that Royal Martyr and best of Kings,
Charles the first; unless we resolve upon better usage, toward his Royal
offspring, (...), fiat Justitia, ruat Coelum.

The History of Saul and David, 1 Samuel 24.26.
which we have recorded in Holy Writ, is worthy to be adverted to; when at
En-gedi and in the Valley of the Ziphims, David, who had Saul twice at mercy,
and was hunted after as a Partridge, a Flea, and a dead Dog, even for but
cutting of the Lap of his Garment, was wounded in his heart since Saul was his
King, his Master, and the Anointed of the Lord.

But to come nearer to this great point. In the Civil Wars, between the Two
Houses of York, and Lancaster, how many Statutes have been made in disherison
of the Line of York, 25 H. 8. c. 22. 26 H. 8. c. 2.
and all vanished into smoke. That of H. 8th. in disherison of Queen Mary etc.
And confirmed by another Statute of the same Kings, how have they been
observed? and lastly the great Act which gave Authority to the King that after
his own Line, he might dispose under his Great Seal, 35 H. 8. c. 1.
or by Will, of this Kingdom, have we not been sensible of it, to our lasting
Joy? how happily it has been neglected, so far as that the case, which is put
in the statute of extinguishment of King Henry the 8ths Line, and a Will made
(such as it was) to the disherison of the Scottish-Line, the validity whereof,
was never so much as once considered upon by the great Council of the Kingdom,
as being a matter, that whether the same were a Will or not, skilled not at
all, the Act it self being a void Act, that should have given life and validity
to the Will. So that we may say with the Rhetorician, multi quidem utuntur
malis Consiliis, number me autem dextro, quibus quod malum designabant, cedit in
bonum?

To what has been already said, I shall add the Judgment of that Ingenious and
Learned Gentleman Mr. Roger Coke, whose words are these.

Lib. 3. c. 2. of Inherit. and Succession.
No humane Law can create a humane Right; Jura sanguinis nullo Jure Civili,
dirimi possint. Nor is this Right of Succession, from divine positive Laws, but
observed as well where God's Revelation of himself is not received, as where it
is. And if according to the Resolution of all the Learned Judges in Calvin's
case, Subjection is from no humane Law, but from the Law of Nature, then of
necessity must Regal-Right and Inheritance, be from the Law of Nature; for no
man supposes subjection, where he does not presuppose Power. The Acts
therefore made by H. 4. H. 5. and H. 6. Which intailed the Crown upon their
Heirs Males, were void, and wholly to be rejected: So likewise were the Acts of
Rich. the Third, and Henry the Seventh, which intailed the Crown upon Them and
their Heirs.

But peradventue, though your Lordship may approve of what has been here
offered, yet (with others) You will be ready to Object, that all this and much
more must be laid aside for the preservation of Our Religion, against the
dangers that threaten us from the Romish-Church, and that it is not so long,
since our Ancestors drew their gauled Necks from that heavy Yoke, but that
still Manet al^ a mente Repostum.

I must confess, if the Multitude (whose Character it is, aut humilitr servire,
aut superb dominari) are proper Judges of this Point, and that the Machines of
State, must turn upon their Hinges, the Verdict may pass against me, yet I
shall not magnify the Politics of Euripides so much, as to say, Jus regnandi
gratia Violandum est, aliis in rebus pietatem colas. This indeed is to make the
Mistress serve the Handmaid, to make Religion truckle to Policy, as if the
seasons of the Year, ought to accomodate themselves to Men, rather than Men
accomodate themselves to the seasons. Policy presupposes Ethics, and so the
footsteps of that ancient virtue, are almost worn out and invisible.

But can the Consideration aforesaid, be so weighty as to preponderate that of
Nature? for we are taught in our Church, That the Ties and Bonds of Duty and
Subjection, even to Heathen and Idolatrous Princes, are Sacred and Inviolable;
Dominion and Sovereignty being the Ordinances of God, not as he is the Author
of Grace, but as he is the Governor of the World, and therefore the duty of
Children to their Parents, of Servants to their Masters, and of Subjects to
their Prince, is not a Consequence of Christianity, but a Principle of Nature,
and consquently unalterable, upon the score of Religion.

(...),
(...).
The very Morals of the Heathens (had we no Bibles) teach us a Passive
Obedience to Princes; that we ought patiently to Endure Governors, though set
as a scourge over us, and Pray to the Immortal Powers for liberation. Nay there
is a subjection due even to Tyrants themselves, Sen.
Neque Quenquam Tyrannum occide, Deorum foedera iniens; and why? Imago Rex est
Animata Dei, Regem ergo cum tibi Dii paraverint sis Eo dignus, etc.

(...)* The Greek Poet could tell us, that Kings are by Divine Ordination, and
he that shall kill a King (though a Tyrant) is as much a Regicide, as he that
destroys a Prince of the most gracious and clement temper,

This Consideration made the great Duke of Norfolk, so highly Espowse the
interests of that bloody Usurper Richard the 3d. who notwithstanding the
Caveats that were sent him by the Adverse Party, in this Distick. Good Jack of
Norfolk be not too bold,
For Dicon thy Master is bought and sold.
Made him break out into these Expressions of his Loyalty; That were the Royal
Diadem placed upon a Stake, he would there sacrifice his Last drop of blood and
serve his King with a Victorious Sword or a Glorious Death.

A King is the Animate Image of God, nay we know who it is that says, I have
said that ye are Gods, He then that shall oppose their Rights and Interests,
what is it, but Gyant-like, to invade Heaven?

None but God can make an Heir to a Crown, Coke Litt. Sect. 1.
says Sir Edward Coke; solus Deus haeredem facere potest: and this Heir, is but
an Heir in fee to Lands or Tenements, according to Common Law or Custom: if
then only God can make such an Heir, and the Kings of England in their Royal
styles, Acknowledge the Tenure with a Dei Gratia, the Emperor with a Deus
dedit, and the French King with a Dieu Done, surely None but the same
Superintendent Power (by which Kings Reign) ought or can Dispossess or
disinherit Princes, from their Rights fenced with the Laws of God and Nature,
and established upon the foundation of humane Laws and Customs.

What Atlas shall support the State of the Ruinous and Tottering world, in
these perilous Ends of time, whereinto, as into a Common sink, have sunck all
the foul Enormities of former Ages? We live not only in the Iron Age of the
world, but in the very Rust of it, and may take up the complaint of Old, that
Justice has left the Earth, that Truth sculks into by-Corners, that they are
good Mistresses indeed to those that Keep them, but such as follow them too
close at Heells, may have Rags and broken Heads.

May the Parliament Prove so many Catos or Fabicii; of whom it was said, that
the Sun might as soon be altered in his Race, as they in the Course of Justice,
that they may give no more occasions for Dissolutions, as if frequent
Dissolving Parliaments, were like drawing of Spirits in an Alymbeck, the oftener
the more refined and Essential. The Law is the Pulse of the Common Wealth, when
it beats not at all the Common Wealth is dead; if it have but slow motion, it is
weak; if too quick, feverish and in a fatal Hectic; but if it keep an Equal
Course, then the Common Wealth is in a good Constitution, True is that of a
Learned Politician in the Curious Clock-work of Justice, the Least Pin or Wheel
amiss Distempers and Disorders All, and Causes the whole frame to be taken in
Pieces; and it is heartily wished they may keep time with the Royal hand; and
strike as that Points.

Thus, My Lord, having given You a brief account of my thoughts in such a
weighty matter, I humbly take my Leave and subscribe my self,

My Lord, Your Lordships Most Obedient Servant, W. B.


