THE REHEARSAL, As it was Acted at the Theater Royal.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Dring, at the White-Lyon, next Chancery Lane end in
Fleet Street. 1672.

PROLOGUE.
WE might well call this short Mock-play of ours
A Posie made of Weeds instead of Flowers;
Yet such have been presented to your noses,
And there are such, I fear, who thought 'em Roses.
Would some of 'em were here, to see, this night,
What stuff it is in which they took delight.
Here, brisk insipid Blades, for wit, let fall
Sometimes dull sense; but oft'ner, none at all:
There, strutting Heroes, with a grim-fac'd train,
Shall brave the Gods, in King Cambyses vain.
For (changing Rules, of late, as if men writ
In spite of Reason, Nature, Art, and Wit)
Our Poets make us laugh at Tragoedy,
And with their Comedies they make us cry.
Now, Critiques, do your worst, that here are met;
For, like a Rook I have hedged in my Bet.
If you approve; I shall assume the state
Of those high-flyers whom I imitate:
And justly too; for I will show you more
Than ever they vouchsafed to show before:
I will both represent the feats they do,
And give you all their reasons for 'em too.
Some honor to me will from this arise.
But if, by my endeavors, you grow wise,
And what was once so praised you now despise;
Then I Will cry out, swelled with Poetique rage,
It Is I, John Lacy, have reformed your Stage.
The Actors Names.
Bays. Johnson. Smith. Two Kings of Brentford. Prince Pretty-man. Prince
Volscius. Gentleman Usher. Physician. Drawcansir. General. Lieutenant General.
Cordelio. Tom Thimble. Fisherman. Sun. Thunder. Players. Soldiers. Two
Heralds. Four Cardinals. Mayor. Judges. Sergeants at Arms.
Women.
Amaryllis. Cloris. Parthenope. Pallas. Lightning. Moon. Earth. Attendants of
Men and Women.
Scene Brentford.

THE REHEARSAL.
ACTUS I. SCAENA I.
Johnson and Smith. John's. HOnest Frank! I Am glad to see thee with all my
heart: how long have thou been in Town?


Smi. Faith, not above an hour: and, if I had not met you here, I had gone to
look you out; for I long to talk with you freely, of all the strange new things
we have heard in the Country.


John's. And, by my troth, I have longed as much to laugh with you, at all the
impertinent, dull, fantastical things, we are tired out with here.


Smi. Dull and fantastical! that is an excellent composition. Pray, what are our
men of business doing?


John's. I never enquire after 'em. Thou know my humor lies another way. I
love to please my self as much, and to trouble others as little as I can: and
therefore do naturally avoid the company of those solemn Fops; who, being
incapable of Reason, and insensible of Wit and Pleasure, are always looking
grave, and troubling one another, in hopes to be thought men of Business.


Smi. Indeed, I have ever observed, that your grave lookers are the dullest of
men.


John's. I, and of Birds, and Beasts too: your gravest Bird is an Owl, and your
gravest Beast is an Ass.


Smi. Well; but how do thou pass thy time?


John's. Why, as I use to do; eat and drink as well as I can, have a She-friend
to be private with in the afternoon, and sometimes see a Play: where there are
such things (Frank) such hideous, monstrous things, that it has almost made me
forswear the Stage, and resolve to apply my self to the solid nonsense of your
pretenders to Business, as the more ingenious pastime.


Smi. I have heard, indeed, you have had lately many new Plays, and our
Country-wits commend 'em.


John's. I, so do some of our City-wits too; but they are of the new kind of
Wits.


Smi. New kind? what kind is that?


John's. Why, your Blade, your frank Persons, your Drolls: fellows that scorn to
imitate Nature; but are given altogether to elevate and surprise.


Smi. Elevate, and surprise? pr'ythee make me understand the meaning of that.


John's. Nay, by my troth, that is a hard matter: I don't understand that my
self. It Is a phrase they have got among them, to express their no-meaning by.
I Will tell you, as well as I can, what it is. Let me see; it is Fighting, Loving,
Sleeping, Rhyming, Dying, Dancing, Singing, Crying; and every thing, but
Thinking and Sense.


Mr. Bays passes over the Stage. Bays. Your most obsequious, and most
observant, very servant, Sir.


John's. Godso, this is an Author: I Will fetch him to you.


Smi. Nay, pr'ythee let him alone.


John's. Nay, by the Lord, I Will have him. Goes after him. Here he is. I have
caught him. Pray, Sir, for may sake, will you do a favor to this friend of
mine?


Bays. Sir, it is not within my small capacity to do favors, but receive 'em;
especially from a person that does wear the honorable Title you are pleased to
impose, Sir, upon this. -- Sweet Sir, your servant.


Smi. Your humble servant, Sir.


John's. But will thou do me a favor, now?


Bays. I, Sir: what is it?


John's. Why, to tell him the meaning of thy last Play.


Bays. How, Sir, the meaning? do you mean the Plot.


John's. I, I; any thing.


Bays. Faith, Sir, the Intrigo's now quite out of my head; but I have a new
one, in my pocket, that I may say is a Virgin; 't has never yet been blown
upon. I must tell you one thing, It Is all new Wit; and, though I say it, a
better than my last: and you know well enough how that took. In fine, it shall
read, and write, and act, and plot, and show, ay, and pit, box and gallery, I
gad, with any Play in Europe. This morning is its last Rehearsal, in their
habits, and all that, as it is to be acted; and if you, and your friend will do
it but the honor to see it in its Virgin attire; though, perhaps, it may
blush, I shall not be ashamed to discover its nakedness unto you. -- I think it
is of this side. Puts his hand in his pocket.


John's. Sir, I confess I am not able to answer you in this new way; but if you
please to lead, I shall be glad to follow you; and I hope my friend will do so
too.


Smi. I, Sir, I have no business so considerable, as should keep me from your
company.


Bays. Yes, here it is. No, cry your mercy: this is my book of Drama Common
places; the Mother of many other Plays.


John's. Drama Common places! pray what is that?


Bays. Why, Sir, some certain helps, that we men of Art have found it
convenient to make use of.


Smi. How, Sir, help for Wit?


Bays. I, Sir, that is my position. And I do here averr, That no man yet the
Sun ever shone upon, has parts sufficient to furnish out a Stage, except it be
with the help of these my Rules.


John's. What are those Rules, I pray?


Bays. Why, Sir, my first Rule is the Rule of Transversion, or Regula Duplex:
changing Verse into Prose, or Prose into verse, alternative as you please.


Smi. How Is that, Sir, by a Rule, I pray?


Bays. Why, thus, Sir; nothing more easy when understood: I take a Book in my
hand, either at home, or elsewhere, for that is all one, if there be any Wit
in it, as there is no Book but has some, I Transverse it; that is, if it be
Prose, put it into Verse, (but that takes up some time) if it be Verse, put it
into Prose.


John's. Methinks, Mr. Bays, that putting Verse into Prose should be called
Transprosing.


Bays. By my troth, a very good Notion, and hereafter it shall be so.


Smi. Well, Sir, and what do you do with it then?


Bays. Make it my own. It Is so altered that no man can know it. My next Rule
is the Rule of Record, and by way of Table Book. Pray observe.


John's. Well, we hear you: go on.


Bays. As thus. I come into a Coffee-house, or some other place where witty
men resort, I make as if I minded nothing; (do you mark?) but as soon as any
one speaks, pop I slap it down, and make that, too, my own.


John's. But, Mr. Bays, are not you sometimes in danger of their making you
restore, by force, what you have gotten thus by Art?


Bays. No, Sir; the world's unmindful: they never take notice of these things.


Smi. But pray, Mr. Bays, among all your other Rules, have you no one Rule for
Invention?


Bays. Yes, Sir; that is my third Rule that I have here in my pocket.


Smi. What Rule can that be?


Bays. Why, Sir, when I have any thing to invent, I never trouble my head
about it, as other men do; but presently turn over this Book, and there I have,
at one view, all that Perseus, Montaigne, Seneca's Tragedies, Horace, Iuvenal,
Claudian, Pliny, Plutarch's lives, and the rest, have ever thought, upon this
subject: and so, in a trice, by leaving out a few words, or putting in others
of my own, the business is done.


John's. Indeed, Mr. Bays, this is as sure, and compendious a way of Wit as
ever I heard of.


Bays. I, Sirs, when you come to write your selves, of my word you will find it
so. But, Gentlemen, if you make the least scruple of the efficacy of these my
Rules, do but come to the Playhouse, and you shall judge of 'em by the effects.


Smi. We Will follow you, Sir. Exeunt.


Enter three Players upon the Stage. 1 Play. Have you your part perfect?


2 Play. Yes, I have it without book; but I do not understand how it is to be
spoken.


3 Play. And mine is such a one, as I cannot ghess for my life what humor I Am
to be in: whether angry, melancholy, merry, or in love. I don't know what to
make on it.


1. Phoo! the Author will be here presently, and he will tell us all. You must
know, this is the new way of writing; and these hard things please forty times
better than the old plain way. For, look you, Sir, the grand design upon the
Stage is to keep the Auditors in suspense; for to ghess presently at the plot,
and the sense, tires 'em before the end of the first Act: now, here, every line
surprises you, and brings in new matter. And, then, for Scenes, Clothes and
Dancing, we put 'em quite down, all that ever went before us: and these are the
things, you know, that are essential to a Play.


2 Play. Well, I am not of thy mind; but, so it gets us money, it is no great
matter.


Enter Bays, Johnson and Smith. Bays. Come, come in, Gentlemen. You Are very
welcome Mr. -- a -- Have you your Part ready?


1 Play. Yes, Sir.


Bays. But do you understand the true humor of it?


1 Play. I, Sir, pretty well.


Bays. And Amarillis, how does she do? Does not her Armor become her?


3 Play. O, admirably!


Bays. I Will tell you, now, a pretty conceit. What do you think I Will make 'em
call her a non, in this Play?


Smi. What, I pray?


Bays. Why I Will make 'em call her Armarillis, because of her Armor: ha, ha, ha.


John's. That will be very well, indeed.


Bays. I, it is a pretty little rogue; she is my Mistress. I knew her face
would set off Armor extremely: and, to tell you true, I writ that Part only for
her. Well, Gentlemen, I dare be bold to say, without vanity, I Will show you
something, here, that is very ridiculous, I gad. Exeunt Players.


John's. Sir, that we do not doubt of.


Bays. Pray, Sir, let us sit down. Look you, Sir, the chief hindge of this
Play, upon which the whole Plot moves and turns, and that causes the variety of
all the several accidents, which, you know, are the thing in Nature that make
up the grand refinement of a Play, is, that I suppose two Kings to be of the
same place: as, for example, at Brentford; for I love to write familiarly. Now
the people having the same relations to 'em both, the same affections, the same
duty, the same obedience, and all that; are divided among themselves in point
of devoir and interest, how to behave themselves equally between 'em: these
Kings differing sometimes in particular; though, in the main, they agree. (I
know not whether I make my self well understood.


John's. I did not observe you, Sir: pray say that again.


Bays. Why, look you, Sir, (nay, I beseech you, be a little curious in taking
notice of this, or else you will never understand my notion of the thing) the
people being embarrast by their equal ties to both, and the Sovereigns
concerned in a reciprocal regard, as well to their own interest, as the good of
the people; may make a certain kind of a -- you understand me -- upon which,
there does arise several disputes, turmoils, heart-burnings, and all that -- In
fine, you will apprehend it better when you see it.


Exit, to call the Players. Smi. I find the Author will be very much obliged to
the Players, if they can make any sense of this.


Enter Bays. Bays. Now, Gentlemen, I would fain ask your opinion of one
thing. I have made a Prologue and an Epilogue, which may both serve for either:
(do you mark?) nay, they may both serve too, I gad, for any other Play as well
as this.


Smi. Very well. That Is, indeed, Artificial.


Bays. And I would fain ask your judgments, now, which of them would do best
for the Prologue? For, you must know, there is, in nature, but two ways of
making very good Prologues. The one is by civility, by insinuation, good
language, and all that, to -- a -- in a manner, steal your plaudit from the
courtesy of the Auditors: the other, by making use of some certain personal
things, which may keep a hank upon such censuring persons, as cannot otherways,
A gad, in nature, be hindered from being too free with their tongues. To which
end, my first Prologue is, that I come out in a long black Veil, and a great
huge Hangman behind me, with a Furr'd-cap, and his Sword drawn; and there tell
'em plainly, That if, out of good nature, they will not like my Play, why I
gad, I Will even kneel down, and he shall cut my head off. Whereupon they all
clapping -- a --


Smi. But, suppose they do not.


Bays. Suppose! Sir, you may suppose what you please, I have nothing to do
with your suppose, Sir, nor am not at all mortified at it; not at all, Sir; I
gad, not one jot. Suppose quoth a! -- Walks away.


John's. Phoo! pr'ythee, Bays, don't mind what he says: he is a fellow newly
come out of the Country, he knows nothing of what is the relish, here, of the
Town.


Bays. If I writ, Sir, to please the Country, I should have followed the old
plain way; but I write for some persons of Quality, and peculiar friends of
mine, that understand what Flame and Power in writing is: and they do me the
right, Sir, to approve of what I do.


John's. I, I, they will clap, I warrant you; never fear it.


Bays. I Am sure the design's good: that cannot be denied* And then, for
language, I gad, I defy 'em all, in nature, to mend it. Besides, Sir, I have
printed above a hundred sheets of papyr, to insinuate the Plot into the Boxes:
and withal, have appointed two or three dozen of my friends, to be ready in
the Pit, who, I Am sure, will clap, and so the rest, you know, must follow; and
then pray, Sir, what becomes of your suppose? ha, ha, ha.


John's. Nay, if the business be so well laid, it cannot miss.


Bays. I think so, Sir: and therefore would choose this for the Prologue. For
if I could engage 'em to clap, before they see the Play, you know 'twould be so
much the better; because then they were engaged: for, let a man write never so
well, there are, nowadays, a sort of persons, they call Critiques, that, I
gad, have no more wit in 'em than so many Hobby-horses; but they will laugh you,
Sir, and find fault, and censure things that, A gad, I Am sure they are not able
to do themselves. A sort of envious persons, that emulate the glories of
persons of parts, and think to build their fame, by calumniating of persons
that, I gad, to my knowledge, of all persons in the world are, in nature, the
persons that do as much despise all that, as -- a -- In fine, I Will say no more
of 'em.


John's. I, I, you have said enough of 'em in conscience: I Am sure more than
they will ever be able to answer.


Bays. Why, I Will tell you, Sir, sincerely, and bona fide; were it not for the
sake of some ingenious persons, and choice female spirits, that have a value
for me, I would see 'em all hanged before I would ever more set pen to papyr;
but let 'em live in ignorance like ingrates.


John's. I marry! that were a way to be revenged of 'em indeed: and, if I were
in your place, now, I would do it.


Bays. No, Sir; there are certain ties upon me, that I cannot be disengaged
from; otherwise, I would. But pray, Sir, how do you like my hangman?


Smi. By my troth, Sir, I should like him very well.


Bays. I, but how do you like it? (for I see you can judge) Would you have it
for the Prologue, or the Epilogue?


John's. Faith, Sir, it is so good, let it even serve for both.


Bays. No, no; that will not do. Besides, I have made another.


John's. What other, Sir?


Bays. Why, Sir, my other is Thunder and Lightning.


John's. That Is greater: I Would rather stick to that.


Bays. Do you think so? I Will tell you then; though there have been many witty
Prologues written of late, yet I think you will say this is a non pareillo: I Am
sure no body has hit upon it yet. For here, Sir, I make my Prologue to be
Dialogue: and as, in my first, you see I strive to oblige the Auditors by
civility, by good nature, and all that; so, in this, by the other way, in
Terrorem, I choose for the persons Thunder and Lightning. Do you apprehend the
conceit?


John's. Phoo, pox! then you have it cock-sure. They Will be hanged, before they will
dare affront an Author, that has 'em at that lock.


Bays. I have made, too, one of the most delicate, dainty Simile's in the
whole world, I glad, if I knew but how to apply it.


Smi. Let Us hear it, I pray you.


Bays. It Is an alusion to love. So Boar and Sow, when any storm is nigh,
Snuff up, and smell it gathering in the Sky:
Boar beckons Sow to trot in Chesnunt Groves,
And there consummate their unfinished Loves.
Pensive in mud they wallow all alone,
And snort, and gruntle to each others moan.
How do you like it now, ha?


John's. Faith, it is extraordinary fine: and very applicable to Thunder and
Lightning, methinks, because it speaks of a Storm.


Bays. I gad, and so it does, now I think on it. Mr. Johnson, I thank you; and
I Will put it in profecto. Come out, Thunder and Lightning.


Enter Thunder and Lightning. Thun. I am the bold Thunder.


Bays. Mr. Cartwright, pr'y thee speak a little louder, and with a hoarser
voice. I am the bold Thunder? Pshaw! speak it me in a voice that thunders it
out indeed: I am the bold Thunder.


Thun. I am the bold Thunder.

Light. The brisk Lightning, I.

Bays. Nay, you must be quick and nimble.
The brisk Lightning, I. That Is my meaning.

Thun. I am the bravest Hector of the Sky.

Light. And I, fair Helen, that made Hector die.

Thun. I strike men down.

Light. I fire the Town.

Thun. Let the Critiques take heed how they grumble,
For then begin I for to rumble.

Light. Let the Ladies allow us their graces.
Or I Will blast all the paint on their faces,
And dry up their Peter to foot.

Thun. Let the Critiques look to it.

Light. Let the Ladies look to it.

Thun. For Thunder will do it.

Light. For Lightning will shoot.

Thun. I Will give you dash for dash.

Light. I Will give you flash for flash.
Gallants, I Will singe your Feather.

Thun. I Will Thunder you together.

Both. Look to it, look to it; we will do it, we will do it: look to it, we will do it. Twice
or thrice repeated.


Exeunt ambo. Bays. That Is all. It Is but a flash of a Prologue: a Droll.


Smi. It Is short, indeed; but very terrible.


Bays. Ay, when the simile is in, it will do to a Miracle, I gad. Come, come;
begin the Play.


Enter first Player. 1 Play. Sir, Mr. Ivory is not come yet; but he will be here
presently, he is but two doors off.


Bays. Come then, Gentlemen, let us go out and take a pipe of Tobacco. Exeunt.


Finis Actus primi.
ACTUS II.
SCAENA I.
Bays, Johnson and Smith. Bays. NOw, Sir, because I Will do nothing here that
ever was done before -- Spits.


Smi. A very notable design, for a Play, indeed.


Bays. Instead of beginning with a Scene that discovers something of the Plot,
I begin this with a whisper.


Smi. That Is very new.


Bays. Come, take your seats. Begin, Sirs.


Enter Gentleman-usher and Physician. Phys. Sir, by your habit, I should ghess
you to be the Gentleman Usher of this sumptuous place.


Vsh. And, by your gait and fashion, I should almost suspect you rule the
healths of both our noble Kings, under the notion of Physician.


Phys. You hit my Function right.


Vsh. And you, mine.


Phys. Then let us embrace.


Vsh. Come then.


Phys. Come.


John's. Pray, Sir, who are those two so very civil persons?


Bays. Why, Sir, the Gentleman Usher, and Physicians of the two Kings of
Brentford.


John's. But how comes it to pass, then, that they know one another no better?


Bays. Phoo! that is for the better carrying on of the Intrigue.


John's. Very well.


Phys. Sir, to conclude,


Smi. What, before he begins?


Bays. No, Sir; you must know they had been talking of this a pretty while
without.


Smi. Where? in the Tyring-room?


Bays. Why ay, Sir. He Is so dull! Come, speak again.


Phys. Sir, to conclude, the place you fill, has more than amply exacted the
Talents of a wary Pilot, and all these threatening storms which, like impregnant
Clouds, do hover over our heads, (when they once are grasped but by the eye of
reason) melt into fruitful showers of blessings on the people.


Bays. Pray mark that Allegory. Is not that good?


John's. Yes; that grasping of a storm with the eye is admirable.


Phys. But yet some rumors great are stirring; and if Lorenzo should prove
false, (as none but the great Gods can tell) you then perhaps would find, that
-- Whispers.


Bays. Now they whisper.


Vsh. Alone, do you say?


Phys. No; attended with the noble -- Whispers.


Vsh. Who, he in gray?


Phys. Yes; and at the head of -- Whispers.


Bays. Pray mark.


Vsh. Then, Sir, most certain, 'twill in time appear
These are the reasons that induced 'em to it:
First, he -- Whispers.

Bays. Now the other whispers.

Vsh. Secondly, they -- Whispers.

Bays. He Is at it still.

Vsh. Thirdly, and lastly, both he, and they -- Whispers.


Bays. There they both whisper. Exeunt Whispering. Now, Gentlemen, pray tell
me true, and without flattery, is not this a very odd beginning of a Play?


John's. In troth, I think it is, Sir. But why two Kings of the same place?


Bays. Why? because it is new; and that is it I aim at. I despise your Johnson,
and Beaumont, that borrowed all they writ from Nature: I am for fetching it
purely out of my own fancy, I.


Smi. But what think you of Sir John Suckling, Sir?


Bays. By gad, I am a better Poet than he.


Smi. Well, Sir; but pray why all this whispering?


Bays. Why, Sir, (besides that it is new, as I told you before) because they
are supposed to be Politicians; and matters of State ought not to be divulged.


Smi. But then, Sir, why --


Bays. Sir, if you will but respite your curiosity till the end of the fifth Act,
you will find it a piece of patience not ill recompensed. Goes to the door.


John's. How do thou like this, Frank? Is it not just as I told thee?


Smi. Why, I did never, before this, see any thing in Nature; and all that, (as
Mr. Bays says) so foolish, but I could give some ghess at what moved the Fop
to do it; but this, I confess, does go beyond my reach.


John's. Why, it is all alike: Mr. Wintershull has informed me of this Play
before. And I Will tell thee, Frank, thou shall not see one Scene here, that
either properly ought to come in, or is like any thing thou can imagine has
ever been the practice of the World. And then, when he comes to what he calls
good language, it is, as I told thee, very fantastical, most abominably dull,
and not one word to the purpose.


Smi. It does surprise me, I am sure, very much.


John's. I, but it will not do so long: by that time thou have seen a Play or two,
that I Will show thee, thou will be pretty well acquainted with this new kind of
Foppery.


SCAENA II.
Enter the two Kings, hand in hand. Bays. THese are the two Kings of
Brentford; take notice of their style: 'twas never yet upon the Stage; but, if
you like it, I could make a shift, perhaps, to show you a whole Play, written
all just so.


1 King. Did you observe their whisper, brother King?


2 King. I did; and heard besides a grave Bird sing
That they intend, sweetheart, to play us pranks.

Bays. This, now, is familiar, because they are both persons of the same
Quality.

Smi. 'Sdeath, this would make a man spew.

1 King. If that design appears,
I Will lug 'em by the ears
Until I make 'em crack.

2 King. And so will I, i'fack.

1 King. You must begin, Mon foy.

2 King. Sweet, Sir, Pardonnes moy.

Bays. Mark that: I Makes 'em both speak French, to show their breeding.

John's. O, it is extraordinary fine.

2 King. Then, spite of Fate, we will thus combined stand;
And, like true brothers, walk still hand in hand.

Exeunt Reges. John's. This is a very Majestic Scene indeed.


Bays. Ay, it is a crust, a lasting crust for your Rogue Critiques, I gad: I
would fain see the proudest of 'em all but dare to nibble at this; I gad, if
they do, this shall rub their gums for 'em, I promise you. It was I, you must
know, writ the Play I told you of, in this very Style: and shall I tell you a
very good jest? I gad, the Players would not act it: ha, ha, ha.


Smi. That Is impossible.


Bays. I gad, they would not, Sir: ha, ha, ha. They refused it, I gad, the
silly Rogues: ha, ha, ha.


John's. Fie, that was rude.


Bays. Rude! I gad, they are the rudest, uncivilest persons, and all that, in
the whole world: I gad, there is no living with 'em. I have written, Mr.
Johnson, I do verily believe, a whole cart-load of things, every whit as good
as this, and yet, I vow to gad, these insolent Raskals have turned 'em all back
upon my hands again.


John's. Strange fellows indeed.


Smi. But pray, Mr. Bays, how came these two Kings to know of this whisper?
for, as I remember, they were not present at it.


Bays. No, but that is the Actors fault, and not mine; for the Kings should (a
pox take 'em) have pop'd both their heads in at the door, just as the other
went off.


Smi. That, indeed, would have done it.


Bays. Done it! Ay, I gad, these fellows are able to spoil the best things in
Christendom. I Will tell you, Mr. Johnson, I vow to gad, I have been so highly
disobliged, by the peremptoriness of these fellows, that I am resolved,
hereafter, to bend all my thoughts for the service of the Nursery, and mump
your proud Players, I gad.


SCAENA III.
Enter Prince Pretty-man. Pret. HOw strange a captive am I grown of late*
Shall I accuse my Love, or blame my Fate?
My Love, I cannot; that is too Divine:
And against Fate what mortal dares repine?
Enter Cloris. But here she comes.
Sure it is some blazing Comet, is it not? Lies down.

Bays. Blazing Comet! mark that. I gad, very fine.

Pret. But I am so surprised with sleep, I cannot speak the rest. sleeps.

Bays. Does not that, now, surprise you, to fall asleep just in the nick? His
spirits exhale with the heat of his passion, and all that, and swop falls
asleep, as you see. Now, here, she must make a simile.


Smi. Where Is the necessity of that, Mr. Bays?


Bays. Because she is surprised. That Is a general Rule: you must ever make a
simile when you are surprised; it is the new way of writing.


Cloris. As some tall Pine, which we, on Aetna, find
TO have stood the rage of many a boyst'rous wind,
Feeling without, that flames within do play,
Which would consume his Root and Sap away;
He spreads his worsted Arms unto the Skies,
Silently grieves, all pale, repines and dies:
So, shrouded up, your bright eye disappears.
Break forth, bright scorching Sun, and dry my tears.

Exit. Bays. I am afraid, Gentlemen, this Scene has made you sad; for I must
confess, when I writ it, I wept my self.


Smi. No, truly, Sir, my spirits are almost exhaled too, and I am likelier to
fall asleep.


Prince Pretty-man starts up, and says -- Pret. It is resolved. Exit.


Smi. Mr. Bays, may one be so bold as to ask you a question, now, and you not
be angry?


Bays. O Lord, Sir, you may ask me what you please. I vow to gad, you do me a
great deal of honor: you do not know me, if you say that, Sir.


Smi. Then, pray, Sir, what is it that this Prince here has resolved in his
sleep?


Bays. Why, I must confess, that question is well enough asked, for one that
is not acquainted with this new way of writing. But you must know, Sir, that,
to outdo all my fellow-Writers, whereas they keep their Intrigo secret till
the very last Scene before the Dance; I now, Sir, do you mark me -- a --


Smi. Begin the Play, and end it, without ever opening the Plot at all?


Bays. I do so, that is the very plain troth on it: ha, ha, ha; I do, I gad. If
they cannot find it out themselves, even let 'em alone for Bays, I warrant
you. But here, now, is a Scene of business: pray observe it; for I dare say
you will think it no unwise discourse this, nor ill argued. To tell you true, it is
a Debate I overheard once betwixt two grand, sober, governing persons.


SCAENA IV.
Enter Gentleman-usher and Physician. Vsh. COme, Sir; let us state the matter of
fact, and lay our heads together.


Phys. Right: lay our heads together. I love to be merry sometimes; but when a
knotty point comes, I lay my head close to it, with a pipe of Tobacco in my
mouth, and then I whew it away, in faith.


Bays. I do just so, I gad, always.


Vsh. The grand question is, whether they heard us whisper? which I divide
thus: into when they heard, what they heard, and whether they heard or no.


John's. Most admirably divided, I swear.


Vsh. As to the when; you say just now: so that is answered. Then, for what;
why, what answers it self: for what could they hear, but what we talked of? So
that, naturally, and of necessity, we come to the last question, Videlicet,
whether they heard or no?


Smi. This is a very wise Scene, Mr. Bays.


Bays. Yes; you have it right: they are both Politicians. I writ this Scene
for a pattern, to show the world how men should talk of business.


John's. You have done it exceeding well, indeed.


Bays. Yes, I think this will do.


Phys. Well, if they heard us whisper, they will turn us out, and no body else
will take us.


Vsh. No body else will take us.


Smi. Not for Politicians, I dare answer for it.


Phys. Let Us then no more our selves in vain bemoan:
We are not safe until we them unthrone.

Vsh. It Is right:
And, since occasion now seems debonair,
I Will seize on this, and you shall take that chair.

They draw their Swords, and sit down in the two great chairs upon the Stage.
Bays. There Is now an odd surprise; the whole State's turned quite topsi-turvy,
without any puther or stir in the whole world, I gad.


John's. A very silent change of a Government, truly, as ever I heard of.


Bays. It is so. And yet you shall see me bring 'em in again, by and by, in as
odd a way every jot.


The Usurpers march out flourishing their swords. Enter Shirley. Shir. Hey ho,
hey ho: what a change is here! Hey day, hey day! I know not what to do, nor
what to say. Exit.


Smi. But, pray, Sir, how came they to depose the Kings so easily?


Bays. Why, Sir, you must know, they long had a design to do it before; but
never could put it in practice till now: and, to tell you true, that is one
reason why I made 'em whisper so at first.


Smi. O, very well: now I Am fully satisfied.


Bays. And then, to show you, Sir, it was not done so very easily neither; in
this next Scene you shall see some fighting.


Smi. O, ho: so then you make the struggle to be after the business is done?


Bays. Aye.


Smi. O, I conceive you: that is very natural.


SCAENA V.
Enter four men at one door, and four at another, with their swords drawn. 1
Soldier. STand. Who goes there?


2 Sol. A friend.


1 Sol. What friend?


2 Sol. A friend to the House.


1 Sol. Fall on. They all kill one another. Music strikes.


Bays. Hold, hold. To the Music. It cease. Now here is an odd surprise: all
these dead men you shall see rise up presently, at a certain Note that I have
made, in Effaut flat, and fall a Dancing. Do you hear, dead men? remember your
Note in Effaut flat. Play on. To the Music. Now, now, now. The Music play*
his Note, and the dead men rise; but cannot get in order. O Lord, O Lord! Out,
out, out! Did ever men spoil a good thing so? no figure, no ear, no time, no
thing? you dance worse than the Angels in Harry the Eight, or the fat Spirits
in The Tempest, I gad.


1 Sol. Why, Sir, it is impossible to do any thing in time, to this Tune.


Bays. O Lord, O Lord! impossible? why, Gentlemen, if there be any faith in a
person that is a Christian, I sat up two whole nights in composing this Air,
and apting it for the business: for, if you observe, there are two several
Designs in this Tune; it begins swift, and ends slow. You talk of time, and
time; you shall see me do it. Look you now. Here I am dead. Lies down flat on
his face. Now mark my Note in Effaut flat. Strike up Music. Now. As he rises
up hastily, he tumbles and falls down again. Ah, gadsookers, I have broke my
Nose.


John's. By my troth, Mr. Bays, this is a very unfortunate Note of yours, in
Effaut flat.


Bays. A plague of this damned Stage, with your nails, and your tenter-hooks,
that a man cannot come to teach you to Act, but he must break his nose, and his
face, and the devil and all. Pray, Sir, can you help me to a wet piece of brown
papyr?


Smi. No indeed, Sir; I don't usually carry any about me.


2 Sol. Sir, I Will go get you some within presently.


Bays. Go, go then; I Will follow you. Pray dance out the Dance, and I Will be with
you in a moment. Remember you four that you dance like Horsemen. Exit Bays.


They dance the Dance, but can make nothing of it. 1 Sol. A Devil! let us try
this no more: play my Dance that Mr. Bays found fault with. Dance, and Exeumt.


Smi. What can this fool be doing all this while about his nose?


John's. Pr'ythee let us go see. Exeunt.


Finis Actus secundi.
ACTUS III.
SCAENA I.
Bays with a papyr on his Nose, and the two Gentlemen. Bays. NOw, Sir, this I
do, because my fancy in this Play is to end every Act with a Dance.


Smi. Faith, that fancy is very good, but I should hardly have broke my nose
for it, though.


John's. That fancy, I suppose, is new too.


Bays. Sir, all my fancies are so. I tread upon no man's heels; but make my
flight upon my own wings, I assure you. As, now, this next Scene some perhaps
will say, It is not very necessary to the Plot: I grant it; what then? I meant
it so. But then it is as full of Drollery as ever it can hold: it is like an
Orange stuck with Cloves, as for conceit. Come, where are you? This Scene will
make you die with laughing, if it be well acted: it is a Scene of sheer Wit,
without any mixture in the world, I gad. Reads --

Enter Prince Pretty-man, and Tom Thimble his Tailor. This, Sirs, might
properly enough be called a prize of Wit; for you shall see 'em come in upon
one another snip snap, hit for hit, as fast as can be. First one speaks, then
presently t'other's upon him slap, with a Repartee; then he at him again, dash
with a new conceit: and so eternally, eternally, I gad, till they go quite off
the Stage.


Goes to call the Players. Smi. What a plague, does this Fop mean by his snip
snap, hit for hit, and dash?


John's. Mean? why, he never meant any thing in's life: what do talk of
meaning for?


Enter Bays. Bays. Why don't you come in?


Enter Prince Pretty-man and Tom. Thimble. Pret. But pr'ythee, Tom Thimble, why
will thou needs marry? If nine Tailors make but one man; and one woman cannot
be satisfied with nine men: what work art thou cutting our here for thy self,
trow we?


Bays. Good.


Thim. Why, an't please your Highness, if I cannot make up all the work I cut
out, I shall not want Journey-men to help me, I warrant you.


Bays. Good again.


Pret. I am afraid thy Journey-men, though, Tom, will not work by the day, but by
the night.


Bays. Good still.


Thim. However, if my wife sits but cross-leg'd, as I do, there will be no
great danger: not half so much as when I trusted you for your Coronation-suit.


Bays. Very good, in faith.


Pret. Why, the times then lived upon trust; it was the fashion. You would not
be out of time, at such a time as that, sure: A Tailor, you know, must never be
out of fashion.


Bays. Right.


Thim. I Am sure, Sir, I made your cloth in the Court-fashion, for you never
paid me yet.


Bays. There Is a bob for the Court.


Pret. Why, Tom, thou art a sharp rogue when thou art angry, I see: thou pay'st
me now, methinks.


Thim. I, Sir, in your own coin: you give me nothing but words.


Bays. Admirable, before gad.


Pret. Well, Tom, I hope shortly I shall have another coin for thee; for now
the Wars come on, I shall grow to be a man of metal.


Bays. O, you did not do that half enough.


John's. Methinks he does it admirably.


Bays. I, pretty well; but he does not hit me in it: he does not top his part.


Thim. That Is the way to be stamped your self, Sir. I shall see you come home,
like an Angel for the King's Evil, with a hole bored through you. Exeunt.


Bays. That Is very good, in faith: ha, ha, ha. Ha, there he has hit it up to
the hilts, I gad. How do you like it now, Gentlemen? is not this pure Wit?


Smi. It Is snip snap, Sir, as you say; but, methinks, not pleasant, nor to the
purpose, for the Play does not go on.


Bays. Play does not go on? I don't know what you mean: why, is not this part
of the Play?


Smi. Yes, but the Plot stands still.


Bays. Plot stand still! why, what a Devil is the Plot good for, but to bring
in fine things?


Smi. O, I did not know that before.


Bays. No, I think you did not: nor many things more, that I am Master of.
Now, Sir, I gad, this is the bane of all us Writers: let us soar never so
little above the common pitch, I gad, all is spoiled; for the vulgar never
understand us, they can never conceive you, Sir, the excellency of these
things.


John's. It Is a sad fate, I must confess: but you write on still?


Bays. Write on? I, I gad, I warrant you. It Is not their talk shall stop me:
if they catch me at that lock, I Will give 'em leave to hang me. As long as I know
my things to be good, what care I what they say? What, they are gone, and
forgot the Song!


Smi. They have done very well, methinks, here is no need of one.


Bays. Alack, Sir, you know nothing: you must ever interlard your Plays with
Songs, Ghosts and Idols, if you mean to -- a --


John's. Pit, Box and Gallery, Mr. Bays.


Bays. I gad, Sir, and you have nicked it. Hark you, Mr. Johnson, you know I
don't flatter, a gad, you have a great deal of Wit.


John's. O Lord, Sir, you do me too much honor.


Bays. Nay, nay, come, come, Mr. Johnson, Ifacks this must not be said,
amongst us that have it. I know you have wit by the judgment you make of this
Play; for that is the measure I go by: my Play is my Touchstone. When a man
tells me such a one is a person of parts; is he so, say I? what do I do, but
bring him presently to see this Play: If he likes it. I know what to think of
him; if not, your most humble Servant, Sir, I Will no more of him upon my word, I
thank you. I am Clara voyant, a gad. Now here we go on to our business.


SCAENA II.
Enter the two Usurpers, hand in hand. Vsh. BUt what is become of Volscius the
great?
His presence has not graced our Court of late.

Phys. I fear some ill, from emulation sprung,
Has from us that Illustrious Hero wrung.

Bays. Is not that Majestical?

Smi. Yes, but who a Devil is that Volscius?

Bays. Why, that is a Prince I make in love with Parthenope.

Smi. I thank you, Sir.

Enter Cordelio. Cor. My Leiges, news from Volscius the Prince.

Vsh. His news is welcome, whatsoever it be.

Smi. How, Sir, do you mean that? whether it be good or bad?

Bays. Nay, pray, Sir, have a little patience: Godsookers you will spoil all my
Play. Why, Sir, it is impossible to answer every impertinent question you ask.


Smi. Cry you mercy, Sir.

Cor. His Highness Sirs, commanded me to tell you,
That the fair person whom you both do know,
Despairing of forgiveness for her fault,
In a deep sorrow, twice she did attempt
Upon her precious life; but, by the care
Of standers-by, prevented was.

Smi. 'Sheart, what stuff's here!

Cor. At last,
Volscius the great this dire resolve embraced:
His servants he into the Country sent,
And he himself to Piccadille went.
Where he is informed, by Letters, that she is dead.

Vsh. Dead! is that possible? Dead!

Phys. O ye Gods! Exeunt.

Bays. There Is a smart expression of a passion; O ye Gods!
That Is one of my bold strokes, a gad.

Smi. Yes; but who is the fair person that is dead?

Bays. That you shall know anon.

Smi. Nay, if we know it at all, it is well enough.

Bays. Perhaps you may find too, by and by, for all this, that she is not dead
neither.


Smi. Marry, that is good news: I am glad of that with all my heart.


Bays. Now, here is the man brought in that is supposed to have killed her. A
great shout within.


Enter Amarillis with a Book in her hand and Attendants. Ama. What shout
Triumphant's that?


Enter a Soldier. Sol. Shie maid, upon the River brink, near Twick'nam Town,
the assassinate is taken.


Ama. Thanks to the Powers above, for this deliverance.
I hope its slow beginning will portend
A forward Exit to all future end.

Bays. Pish, there you are out; to all future end? No, no; to all future end;
you must lay the accent upon end, or else you lose the conceit.


John's. Indeed the alteration of that accent does a great deal, Mr. Bays.


Bays, O, all in all, Sir: they are these little things that mar, or set you
off a Play.


Smi. I see you are very perfect in these matters.


Bays. I, Sir; I have been long enough at it to know something.


Enter Soldiers dragging in an old Fisherman. Ama. Villain, what Monster did
corrupt thy mind
T'attaque the noblest soul of humane kind?
Tell me who set thee on.

Fish. Prince Pretty-man.

Ama. To kill whom?


Fish. Prince Pretty-man.

Ama. What, did Prince Pretty-man hire you to kill Prince Pretty-man?

Fish. No; Prince Volscius.

Ama. To kill whom?

Fish. Prince Volscius.

Ama. What, did Prince Volscius hire you to kill Prince Volscius?

Fish. No; Prince Pretty-man.

Ama. So, drag him hence,
Till torture of the Rack produce his sense. Exeunt.

Bays. Mark how I make the horror of his guilt confound his intellects; for
that is the design of this Scene.


Smi. I see, Sir, you have a several design for every Scene.


Bays. I; that is my way of writing: and so I can dispatch you, Sir, a whole
Play, before another man, I gad, can make an end of his Plot. So, now enter
Prince Pretty-man in a rage. Where the Devil is he? Why Pretty-man? why when, I
say? O fie, fie, fie, fie; all is marred, I vow to gad, quite marred. Enter
Pretty-man. Phoo, pox! you are come too late, Sir: now you may go out again, if
you please. I vow to gad Mr. -- a -- I would not give a button for my Play, now
you have done this.


Pret. What, Sir?


Bays. What, Sir? 'Slife, Sir, you should have come out in choler, rous upon
the Stage, just as the other went off. Must a man be eternally telling you of
these things?


John's. Sure this must be some very notable matter that he is so angry at.


Smi. I am not of your opinion.


Bays. Pish! come, let us hear your Part, Sir.


Pret. Bring in my Father, why do you keep him from me?
Although a Fisherman, he is my Father,
Was ever Son, yet, brought to this distress,
To be, for being a Son, made fatherless?
Oh, you just Gods, rob me not of a Father.
The being of a Son take from me rather. Exit.

Smi. Well, Ned, what think you now?


John's. A Devil, this is worst of all. Pray, Mr. Bays, what is the meaning of
this Scene?


Bays. O, cry you mercy, Sir: I purtest I had forgot to tell you. Why, Sir,
you must know, that, long before the beginning of this Play, this Prince was
taken by a Fisherman.


Smi. How, Sir, taken Prisoner?


Bays. Taken Prisoner! O Lord, what a question's there! did ever any man ask
such a question? Taken Prisoner! Godsookers, he has put the Plot quite out of
my head, with this damned question. What was I going to say?


John's. Nay, the Lord knows: I cannot imagine.


Bays. Stay, let me see; taken: O it is true. Why, Sir, as I was going to say,
his Highness here, the Prince, was taken in a Cradle by a Fisherman, and
brought up as his Child.


Smi. Indeed?


Bays. Nay, pr'ythee hold thy peace. And so, Sir, this murder being committed
by the Riverside, the Fisherman, upon suspicion, was seized; and thereupon the
Prince grew angry.


Smi. So, so; now it is very plain.


John's. But, Mr. Bays, is not that some disparagement to a Prince, to pass for
a Fishermans Son? Have a care of that, I pray.


Bays. No, no, no; not at all; for it is but for a while: I shall fetch him off
again, presently, you shall see.


Enter Pretty-man and Thimble. Pret. By all the Gods, I Will set the world on fire
Rather than let 'em ravish hence my Sire.

Thim. Brave Pretty-man, it is at length revealed,
That he is not thy Sire who thee concealed.

Bays. Lo' you now, there he is off again.

John's. Admirably done in faith.

Bays. Ay, now the Plot thickens very much upon us.

Pret. What Oracle this darkness can evince?
Sometimes a Fishers Son, sometimes a Prince.
It is a secret, great as is the world;
In which, I, like the soul, am tossed and hurled.
The blackest Ink of Fate, sure, was my Lot.
And, when she writ my name, she made a blot.

Exit. Bays. There Is a blustering verse for you now.


Smi. Yes, Sir; but pray, why is he so mightily troubled to find he is not a
Fishermans Son?


Bays. Phoo! that is not because he has a mind to be his Son, but for fear he
should be thought to be nobodies Son at all.


Smi. I, that would trouble a man, indeed.


Bays. So, let me see. Enter Prince Volscius, going out of Town.


Smi. I thought he had been gone to Piccadille.


Bays. Yes, he gave out so; but that was only to cover his design.


John's. What design?


Bays. Why, to head the Army, that lies concealed for him in Knights-bridge.


John's. I see here is a great deal of Plot, Mr. Bays.


Bays. Yes, now it begins to break; but we shall have a world of more business
anon.


Enter Prince Volscius, Cloris, Amarillis, and Harry with a Riding-Cloak and
Boots. Ama. Sir, you are cruel, thus to leave the Town,
And to retire to Country solitude.

Clo. We hoped this Summer that we should at least
Have held the honor of your company.

Bays. Held the honor of your Company! prettily expressed! Held the honor of
your company! Godsookers, these fellows will never take notice of any thing.


John's. I assure you, Sir, I admire it extremely; I don't know what he does.


Bays. I, I, he is a little envious; but it is no great matter. Come.


Ama. Pray let us two this single boon obtain,
That you will here with poor us still remain.
Before your Horses come pronounce our fate,
For then, alas, I fear 'twill be too late.

Bays. Sad!

Vols. Harry, my Boots; for I Will go rage among
My Blades encamped, and quit this Urban throng.

Smi. But pray, Mr. Bays, is not this a little difficult, that you were saying
even now, to keep an Army thus concealed in Knights-bridge.


Bays. In Knights-bridge? stay.


John's. No, not if the Innkeepers be his friends.


Bays. His friends! Ay, Sir, his intimate acquaintance; or else, indeed, I
grant it could not be.


Smi. Yes, faith, so it might be very easily.


Bays. Nay, if I do not make all things easy, I gad, I Will give you leave to
hang me. Now you would think that he is going out of Town; but you shall see
how prettily I have contrived to stop him presently.


Smi. By my troth, Sir, you have so amazed me, I know not what to think.


Enter Parthenope. Vols. Bless me! how frail are all my best resolves!
How, in a moment, is my purpose changed!
Too soon I thought my self secure from Love.
Fair Madam, give me leave to ask her name
Who does so gently rob me of my fame?
For I should meet the Army out of Town,
And, if I fail, must hazard my renown.

Par. My Mother, Sir, sells Ale by the Town-walls,
And me her dear Parthenope she calls.

Vols. Can vulgar Vestments highborn beauty shroud?
Thou bring'st the Morning pictured in a Cloud.

Bays. The Morning pictured in a Cloud! A, Gadsookers, what a conceit is
there!


Par. Give you good Even, Sir. Exit.


Vols. O inauspicious Stars! that I was born
To sudden love, and to more sudden scorn!

Ama. Cloris. How! Prince Volscius in love? Ha, ha, ha.


Exeunt laughing. Smi. Sure, Mr. Bays, we have lost some jest here, that they
laugh at so.


Bays. Why did you not observe? He first resolves to go out of Town, and then,
as he is pulling on his Boots, falls in love. Ha, ha, ha.


Smi. O, I did not observe: that, indeed, is a very good jest.


Bays. Here, now, you shall see a combat betwixt Love and Honor. And ancient
Author has made a whole Play on it; but I have dispatched it all in his Scene.


Volscius sits down. Vols. How has my passion made me Cupid's scoff!
This hasty Boot is on, the other off,
And sullen lies, with amorous design
To quit loud fame, and make that Beauty mine.
My Legs, the Emblem of my various thought,
Show to what sad distraction I am brought.
Sometimes, with stubborn Honor, like this Boot,
My mind is guarded, and resolved to do it:
Sometimes, again, that very mind, by Love
Disarmed, like this other Leg does prove.

John's. What pains Mr. Bays takes to act this speech himself!

Smi. I, the fool, I see, is mightily transported with it.

Vols. Shall I to Honor or to Love give way?
Go on, cries Honor; tender Love says, nay:
Honor, aloud, commands, pluck both boots on;
But softer Love does whisper, put on none.
What shall I do? what conduct shall I find
To lead me through this twy-light of my mind?
For as bright Day with black approach of Night
Contending, makes a doubtful puzzling light;
So does my Honor and my Love together
Puzzle me so, I can resolve for neither.

Exit with one Boot on, and the other off. John's. By my troth, Sir, this is as
difficult a Combat as ever I saw, and as equal; for it is determined on neither
side.


Bays. Ay, is it not, I gad, ha? For, to go off hip hop, hip hop, upon this
occasion, is a thousand times better than any conclusion in the world, I gad.
But, Sirs, you cannot make any judgment of this Play, because we are come but
to the end of the second Act. Come, the Dance. Dance. Well, Gentlemen, you will
see this Dance, if I am not mistaken, take very well upon the Stage, when they
are perfect in their motions, and all that.


Smi. I don't know 'twill take, Sir; but I am sure you sweat hard for it.


Bays. Ay, Sir, it costs me more pains, and trouble, to do these things, than
almost the things are worth.


Smi. By my troth, I think so, Sir.


Bays. Not for the things themselves, for I could write you, Sir, forty of 'em
in a day; but, I gad, these Players are such dull persons, that, if a man be
not by upon every point, and at every turn, I gad, they will mistake you, Sir, and
spoil all. Enter a Player. What, is the Funeral ready?


Play. Yes, Sir.


Bays. And is the Lance filled with Wine?


Play. Sir, it is just now a doing.


Bays. Stay then; I Will do it my self.


Smi. Come, let us go with him.


Bays. A match. But, Mr. Johnson, I gad, I am not like other persons; they
care not what becomes of their things, so they can but get money for 'em: now,
I gad, when I write, if it be not just as it should be, in every circumstance,
to every particular, I gad, I am not able to endure it, I am not my self, I Am
out of my wits, and all that, I Am the strangest person in the whole world. For
what care I for my money? I gad, I write for Fame and Reputation. Exeunt.


Finis Actus Tertii.
ACTUS IV.
SCAENA I.
Bays, and the two Gentlemen. Bays. GEntlemen, because I would not have any
two things alike in this Play, the last Act beginning with a witty Scene of
mirth, I make this to begin with a Funeral.


Smi. And is that all your reason for it, Mr. Bays?


Bays. No, Sir; I have a precedent for it too. A person of Honor, and a
Scholar, brought in his Funeral just so: and he was one (let me tell you) that
knew as well what belonged to a Funeral, as any man in England, I gad.


John's. Nay, if that be so, you are safe.


Bays. I gad, but I have another device, a frolic, which I think yet better
than all this; not for the Plot or Characters, (for, in my Heroic Plays, I
make no difference, as to those matters) but for another contrivance.


Smi. What is that, I pray?


Bays. Why, I have designed a Conquest, that cannot possibly, I gad, be acted
in less than a whole week: and I Will speak a bold word, it shall Drum, Trumpet,
Shout and Battle, I gad, with any the most warlike Tragoedy we have, either
ancient or modern.


John's. I marry, Sir; there you say something.


Smi. And pray, Sir, how have you ordered this same frolic of yours?


Bays. Faith, Sir, by the Rule or Romance. For example: they divide their
things into three, four, five, six, seven, eight, or as many Tomes as they
please: now, I would very fain know, what should hinder me, from doing the same
with my things, if I please.


John's. Nay, if you should not be Master of your own works, it is very hard.


Bays. That is my sense. And therefore, Sir, whereas every one makes five Acts
to one Play, what do me I, but make five Plays to one Plot: by which means the
Auditors have every day a new thing.


John's. Most admirably good, in faith! and must certainly take, because it is
not tedious.


Bays. I, Sir, I know that, there is the main point. And then, upon Saturday,
to make a close of all, (for I ever begin upon a Monday) I make you, Sir, a
sixth Play, that sums up the whole matter to 'em, and all that, for fear they
should have forgot it.


John's. That consideration, Mr. Bays, indeed, I think, will be very necessary.


Smi. And when comes in your share, pray Sir?


Bays. The third week.


John's. I vow, you will get a world of money.


Bays. Why, faith, a man must live: and if you don't, thus, pitch upon some
new device, I gad, you will never do it, for this Age (take it of my word) is
somewhat hard to please. There is one pretty odd passage, in the last of these
Plays, which may be executed to several ways, wherein I Would have your opinion,
Gentlemen.


John's. Well, what is it?


Bays. Why, Sir, I make a Male person to be in Love with a Female.


Smi. Do you mean that, Mr. Bays, for a new thing?


Bays. Yes, Sir, as I have ordered it. You shall hear. He having passionately
loved her through my five whole Plays, finding at last that she consents to his
love, just after that his Mother had appeared to him like a Ghost, he kills
himself. That Is one way. The other is, that she coming at last to love him,
with as violent a passion as he loved her, she kills her self. Now my question
is, which of these two persons should suffer upon this occasion?


John's. By my troth, it is a very hard case to decide.


Bays. The hardest in the world, I gad; and has puzzled this pate very much.
What say you, Mr. Smith?


Smi. Why, truly, Mr. Bays, if it might stand with your justice, I should now
spare 'em both.


Bays. I gad, and I think -- ha -- why then, I Will make him hinder her from
killing her self. Ay, it shall be so. Come, come, bring in the Funeral. Enter a
Funeral, with the two Usurpers and Attendants. Lay it down there: no, here,
Sir. So, now speak.


K. Vsh. Set down the Funeral Pile, and let our grief
Receive, from its embraces, some relief.

K. Phys. Was It not unjust to ravish hence her breath,
And, in life's stead, to leave us naught but death?
The world discovers now its emptiness,
And, by her loss, demonstrates we have less.

Bays. Is not that good language now? is not that elevate? It Is my non ultra,
I gad. You must know they were both in love with her.


Smi. With her? with whom?


Bays. Why, this is Lardella's Funeral.


Smi. Lardella! I, who is she?


Bays. Why, Sir, the Sister of Drawcansir. A Lady that was drowned at Sea,
and had a wave for her winding sheet.


K. Vsh. Lardella, O Lardella, from above,
Behold the Tragic issue of our Love.
Pity us, sinking under grief and pain,
For thy being cast away upon the Main.

Bays. Look you now, you see I told you true.

Smi. I, Sir, and I thank you for it, very kindly.

Bays. Ay, I gad, but you will not have patience; honest Mr. -- a -- you will
not have patience.


John's. Pray, Mr. Bays, who is that Drawcansir?


Bays. Why, Sir, a fierce Hero, that frights his Mistress, snubs up Kings,
baffles Armies, and does what he will, without regard to good manners, justice
or numbers.


John's. A very pretty Character.


Smi. But, Mr. Bays, I thought your Heroes had ever been men of great humanity
and justice.


Bays. Yes, they have been so; but, for my part, I prefer that one quality of
singly beating of whole Armies, above all your moral virtues put together, I
gad. You shall see him come in presently. Zookers, why don't you read the papyr?


To the Players. K. Phys. O, cry you mercy. Goes to take the papyr.


Bays. Pish! nay you are such a fumbler. Come, I Will read it my self. Takes a
papyr from off the coffin. Stay, it is an ill hand, I must use my Spectacles.
This, now, is a Copy of Verses, which I make Lardella compose, just as she is
dying, with design to have it pined on her Coffin, and so read by one of the
Usurpers, who is her Cousin.


Smi. A very shrewd design that, upon my word, Mr. Bays.


Bays. And what do you think I fancy her to make Love like, here, in the
papyr?


Smi. Like a woman: what should she make Love like?


Bays. Of My word you are out though, Sir; I gad you are.


Smi. What then? like a man?


Bays. No, Sir; like a Humble Be.


Smi. I confess, that I should not have fancied.


Bays. It may be so, Sir. But it is, though, in order to the opinion of some
of your ancient Philosophers, who held the transmigration of the soul.


Smi. Very fine.


Bays. I Will read the Title. To my dear Couz, King Phys.


Smi. That Is a little too familiar with a King, though, Sir, by your favor,
for a Humble Be.


Bays. Mr. Smith, for other things, I grant your knowledge may be above me;
but, as for Poetry, give me leave to say, I understand that better: it has been
longer my practice; it has indeed, Sir.


Smi. Your servant, Sir.


Bays. Pray mark it.
Since death my earthly part will thus remove Reads.
I Will come a Humble Be to your chaste love.
With silent wings I Will follow you, dear Couz;
Or else, before you, in the Sunbeams buz.
And when to Melancholy Groves you come,
An Airy Ghost, you will know me by my Hum;
For sound, being Air, a Ghost does well become.

Smi. After a pause. Admirable!


Bays. At night, into your bosom I will creep,
And Buz but softly if you chance to sleep:
Yet, in your Dreams, I will pass sweeping by,
And then, both Hum and Buz before your eye.

John's. By my troth, that is a very great promise.

Smi. Yes, and a most extraordinary comfort to boot.

Bays. Your bed of Love, from dangers I will free;
But most, from love of any future Be.
And when, with pity, you heart strings shall crack,
With empty arms I Will bear you on my back.

Smi. A pick-a-pack, a pick-a-pack.

Bays. Ay, I gad, but is not that tuant now, ha? is it not tuant? Here Is the
end.
Then, at your birth of immortality,
Like any winged Archer, hence I Will fly,
And teach you your first fluttering in the Sky.

John's. O rare! it is the most natural, refined fancy this, that ever I heard,
I Will swear.


Bays. Yes, I think, for a dead person, it is a good enough way of making
love: for being divested of her Terrestrial part, and all that, she is only
capable of these little, pretty, amorous designs that are innocent, and yet
passionate. Come, draw your swords.


K. Phys. Come sword, come sheath thy self within this breast,
That only in Lardella's Tomb can rest.

K. Vsh. Come, dagger, come, and penetrate this heart,
Which cannot from Lardella's Love depart.

Enter Pallas. Pal. Hold, stop your murdering hands
At Pallases commands:
For the supposed dead, O Kings,
Forbear to act such deadly things.
Lardella lives: I did but try
If Princes for their Loves could dye.
Such Celestial constancy
Shall, by the Gods, rewarded be:
And from these Funeral obsequies
A Nuptial Banquet shall arise.

The Coffin opens, and a Banquet is discovered. Bays. Now it is out. This is
the very Funeral of the fair person which Volscius sent word was dead, and
Pallas, you see, has turned it into a Banquet.


John's. By my troth, now, that is new, and more than I expected.


Bays. Yes, I knew this would please you: for the chief Art in Poetry is to
elevate your expectation, and then bring you off some extraordinary way.


K. Vsh. Resplendent Pallas, we in thee do find
The fiercest Beauty, and a fiercer mind:
And since to thee Lardella's life we owe,
We Will supple Statues in thy Temple grow.

K. Phys. Well, since alive Lardella's found,
Let, in full Boles, her health go round.

The two Usurpers take each of them a Bole in their hands. K. Vsh. But where is
the Wine?

Pal. That shall be mine.
Lo, from this conquering Lance,
Does flow the purest wine of France: Fills the Boles out of her Lance.
And, to appease your hunger, I
Have, in my Helmet, brought a Pie:
Lastly, to bear a part with these,
Behold a Buckler made of Cheese. Vanish Pallas.

Enter Drawcansir. K. Phys. What man is this that dares disturb our feast?

Draw. He that dares drink, and for that drink dares die,
And, knowing this, dares yet drink on, am I.

John's. That is as much as to say, that though he would rather die than not
drink, yet he would fain drink for all that too.


Bays. Right; that is the conceit on it.

John's. It Is a marveilous good one, I swear.

K. Vsh. Sir, if you please, we should be glad to know
How long you here will stay, how soon you will go.

Bays. Is not that now like a well-bred person, I gad? So modest, so gent!


Smi. O, very like.


Draw. You shall not know how long I here will stay;
But you shall know I Will take my Boles away.

Snatches the Boles out of the Kings hands, and drinks 'em off. Smi. But, Mr.
Bays, is that (too) modest and gent?

Bays. No, I glad, Sir, but it is great.

K. Vsh. Though, Brother, this grum stranger be a Clown,
He Will leave us, sure, a little to gulp down.

Draw. Who ever to gulp one drop of this dares think
I Will stare away his very power to drink.
The two Kings sneak off ^^e Stage, with their Attendants. I drink, I huff, I
strut, look big and stare;
And all this I can do, because I dare. Exit.

Smi. I suppose, Mr. Bays, this is the fierce Hero you spoke of.


Bays. Yes; but this is nothing: you shall see him, in the last Act, win above
a dozen battles, one after another, I gad, as fast as they can possibly be
represented.


John's. That will be a sight worth seeing, indeed.


Smi. But pray, Mr. Bays, why do you make the Kings let him use 'em so
scurvily?


Bays. Phoo! that is to raise the character of Drawcansir.


John's. OF my word, that was well thought on.


Bays. Now, Sir, I Will show you a Scene indeed; or rather, indeed, the Scene of
Scenes. It Is an Heroic Scene.


Smi. And pray, Sir, what is your design in this Scene?


Bays. Why, Sir, my design is Roman Clothes, gilded Truncheons, forced
conceit, smooth Verse, and a Rant: In fine, if this Scene does not take, I
gad, I Will write no more. Come, come in, Mr. -- a -- nay, come in as many as you
can. Gentlemen, I must desire you to remove a little, for I must fill the Stage.


Smi. Why fill the Stage?


Bays. O, Sir, because your Heroic Verse never sounds well, but when the
Stage is full.


SCAENA II.
Enter Prince Pretty-man, and Prince Volscius. NAy, hold, hold; pray by your
leave a little. Look you, Sir, the drift of this Scene is somewhat more than
ordinary: for I make 'em both fall out because they are not in love with the
same woman.

Smi. Not in love? you mean, I suppose, because they are in love, Mr. Bays?


Bays. No, Sir; I say not in love: there is a new conceit for you. Now speak.


Pret. Since fate, Prince Volscius, has found out the way
For our so longed-for meeting here this day,
Lend thy attention to my grand concern.

Vols. I gladly would that story of thee learn;
But thou to love do, Pretty-man, incline:
Yet love in thy breast is not love in mine.

Bays. Antithesis! thine and mine.

Pret. Since love it self's the same, why should it be
Differing in you from what it is in me?

Bays. Reasoning; I gad, I love reasoning in verse.

Vols. Love takes, Cameleon-like, a various dye
From every Plant on which it self does lie.

Bays Simile!

Pret. Let not thy love the course of Nature fright:
Nature does most in harmony delight.

Vols. How weak a Deity would Nature prove
Contending with the powerful God of Love?

Bays. There Is a great Verse!

Vols. If Incense thou will offer at the Shrine
Of mighty Love, burn it to none but mine.
Her Rosie-lips eternal sweets exhale;
And her bright flames make all flames else look pale.

Bays. I gad, that is right.

Pret. Perhaps dull Incense may thy love suffice;
But mine must be adored with Sacrifice.
All hearts turn ashes which her eyes control:
The Body they consume as well as Soul.

Vols. My love has yet a power more Divine;
Victims her Altars burn not, but refine:
Amid'st the flames they never give up the Ghost,
But, with her looks, revive still as they roast.
In spite of pain and death, they are kept alive:
Her fiery eyes makes 'em in fire survive.

Bays. That is as well as I can do.

Vols. Let my Parthenope at length prevail.

Bays. Civil, I gad.

Pret. I Will sooner have a passion for a Whale:
In whose vast bulk, though store of Oil does lie,
We find more shape more beauty in a Fly.

Smi. That Is uncivil, I gad.

Bays. Yes; but as far a fetched fancy, though, I gad, as ever you saw.


Vols. Soft, Pretty-man, let not thy vain pretense
Of perfect love, defame loves excellence.
Parthenope is sure as far above
All other loves, as above all is Love.

Bays. Ah! I gad, that strikes me.

Pret. To blame my Cloris, Gods would not pretend.

Bays. Now mark.

Vols. Were all Gods joined, they could not hope to mend
My better choice: for fair Parthenope,
Gods would, themselves, un-god themselves to see.

Bays. Now the Rant's a coming.

Pret. Durst any of the Gods be so uncivil,
I Would make that God subscribe himself a Devil.

Bays. Ah, Godsookers, that is well writ!

Vols. Could thou that God from Heaven to Earth translate,
He could not fear to want a Heavenly State.
Parthenope, on Earth, can Heaven create.

Pret. Cloris does Heaven it self so far excel,
She can transcend the joys of Heaven in Hell.

Bays. There Is a bold flight for you now! 'Sdeath, I have lost my peruke.
Well, Gentlemen, this is that I never yet saw any one could write, but my self.
Here Is true spirit and flame all through, I gad. So, So; pray clear the Stage.


He puts 'em off the Stage. John's. But, Mr. Bays, pray why is this Scene all
in Verse?


Bays. O, Sir, the subject is too great for Prose.


Smi. Well said, in faith; I Will give thee a pot of Ale for that answer: it is well
worth it.


Bays. Come, with all my heart.
I Will make that God subscribe himself a Devil.
That single line, I gad, is worth all that my brother Poets ever writ. So, now
let down the Curtain. Exeunt.

Finis Actus Quarti.
ACTUS V.
SCAENA I.
Bays, and the two Gentlemen. Bays. NOw, Gentlemen, I will be bold to say,
I Will show you the greatest Scene that ever England saw: I mean not for words,
for those I do not value; but for state, show, and magnificence. In fine, I Will
justify it to be as grand to the eye every whit, I gad, as that great Scene in
Harry the Eight, and grander too, I gad; for, instead of two Bishops, I have
brought in two other Cardinals.


The Curtain is drawn up, and the two usurping Kings appear in State, with the
four Cardinals, Prince Pretty-man, Prince Volscius, Amarillis, Cloris,
Parthenope, etc. before them, Heralds and Sergeants at Arms with Maces. Smi.
Mr. Bays, pray what is the reason that two of the Cardinals are in Hats, and
the other in Caps?


Bays. Why, Sir, because -- By gad, I will not tell you.


Smi. I ask your pardon, Sir.


K. Vsh. Now, Sir, to the business of the day.


Vols. Dread Sovereign Lords, my zeal to you, must not invade my duty to your
Son; let me entreat that great Prince Pretty-man first do speak: whose high
pre-eminence, in all things that do bear the name of good, may justly claim
that privilege.


Pret. Royal Father, upon my knees I beg
That the Illustrious Volscius first be heard.

Bays. Here it begins to unfold: you may perceive, now, that he is his Son.


John's. Yes, Sir; and we are very much beholden to you for that discovery.


Vols. That preference is only due to Amarillis, Sir.


Bays. I Will make her speak very well, by and by, you shall see.


Ama. Invincible Sovereigns -- Soft Music.


K. Vsh. But stay, what sound is this invades our ears?


K. Phys. Sure it is the Music of the moving Spheres.


Pret. Behold, with wonder, yonder comes from far
A God-like-Cloud, and a triumphant Carr:
In which, our two right Kings sit one by one,
With Virgin Vests, and Laurel Garlands on.

K. Vsh. Then, Brother Phys', it is time that we were gone.

The two Usurpers steal out of the Throne, and go away. Bays. Look you now,
did not I tell you that this would be as easy a turn as the other?


Smi. Yes, faith, you did so; though, I confess, I could not believe you; but
you have brought it about, I see.


The two right Kings of Brentford descend in the Clouds, singing in white
garments; and three Fiddlers sitting before them, in green. Bays. Now, because
the two Right Kings descend from above, I make 'em sing to the Tune and Style
of our modern Spirits.


1 King. Haste, brother King, we are sent from above.


2 King. Let us move, let us move:
Move to remove the Fate
Of Brentfords long united State.

1 King. Tara, tara, tara, full East and by South,

2 King. We sail with Thunder in our mouth,
In scorching noonday, whilst the traveller stays,
Busy, busy, busy, busy, we bustle along.
Mounted upon warm Phoebus his Rays,
Through the Heavenly throng,
Haste to those
Who will feast us, at night, with a Pigs Petty-toes.

1 King. And we will fall with our pate
In an Ollio of hate.

2 King. But now supper's done, the Servitors try,
Like Soldiers, to storm a whole half-moon-pye.

1 King. They gather, they gather hot Custard in spoons,
Alas, I must leave these half-moons,
And repair to my trusty Dragoons.

2 King. O stay, for you need not as yet go astray;
The Tide, like a friend, has brought ships in our way,
And on their high-ropes we will play.
Like Maggots in Filberds, we will snug in our shell,
We Will frisk in our shell,
We Will firk in our shell,
And farewell.

1 King. But the Ladies have all inclination to dance,
And the green Frogs croak out a Coranto of France.

Bays. Is not that pretty, now? The Fiddlers are all in green.

Smi. I, but they play no Coranto.

John's. No, but they play a Tune, that is a great deal better*

Bays. No Coranto quoth a! that is a good one, with all my heart. Come, sing on.


2 King. Now Mortals that hear
How we Tilt and Carrier,
With wonder will fear
The event of such things as shall never appear.

1 King. Stay you to fulfill what the Gods have decreed.

2 King. Then call me to help you, if there shall be need.

1 King. So firmly resolved is a true Brentford King
To save the distressed, and help to 'em bring,
That ere a Full-pot of good Ale you can swallow,
He Is here with a whoop, and gone with a holla.

Bays phillips his finger, and sings after 'em. Bays. He Is here with a whoop,
and gone with a holla. This, Sir, you must know, I thought once to have brought
in with a Conjurer.


John's. I, that would have been better.


Bays. No, faith, not when you consider it: for thus it is more compendious,
and does the thing every whit as well.


Smi. Thing! what thing?


Bays. Why, bring 'em down again into the Throne, Sir; what thing would you
have?


Smi. Well; but, methinks, the Sense of this Song is not very plain.


Bays. Plain? why, did you ever hear any people in Clouds speak plain? They
must be all for flight of fancy, at its full range, without the least check,
or control upon it. When once you tie up spirits, and people in Clouds to
speak plain, you spoil all.


Smi. Bless me, what a Monster's this!


The two Kings light out of the Clouds, and step into the Throne. 1 King. Come,
now to serious counsel we will advance.


2 King. I do agree; but first, let us have a Dance.


Bays. Right. You did that very well, Mr. Cartwright. But first, let us have a
Dance. Pray remember that; be sure you do it always just so: for it must be
done as if it were the effect of thought, and premeditation. But first, let us
have a Dance. Pray remember that.


Smi. Well* I can hold no longer, I must gag this rogue; there is no enduring of
him.


John's. No, pr'ythee make use of thy patience a little longer: let us see the
end of him now.


Dance a grand Dance. Bays. This, now, is an ancient Dance, of right belonging
to the Kings of Brentford; and since derived, with a little alteration, to the
Inns of Court.


An Alarm. Enter two Heralds. 1 King. What saucy Groom molests our privacies?


1 Her. The Army's at the door, and in disguise,
Desires a word with both your Majesty's:

2 Her. Having, from Knights-bridge, hither marched by stealth.

2 King. Bid 'em attend a while, and drink our health.

Smi. How, Mr. Bays, the Army in disguise?

Bays. Ay, Sir, for fear the Usurpers might discover them that went out but
just now.


Smi. Why, what if they had discovered them?


Bays. Why then they had broke this design.


Smi. That Is true, indeed. I did not think of that.


1 King. Here, take five Guineys for those warlike men.


2 King. And here is five more; that makes the sum just ten.


1 Her. We have not seen so much the Lord knows when.


Exeunt Heralds. 1 King. Speak on, brave Amarillis.


Ama. Invincible Sovereigns, blame not my modesty,
If at this grand conjuncture --

Drum beats behind the Stage. 1 King. What dreadful noise is this that comes
and goes?

Enter a Soldier with his Sword drawn. Sold. Haste hence, great Sirs, your
Royal persons save,
For the event of war no mortal knows:
The Army, wrangling for the gold you gave,
First fell to words, and then to handy-blows. Exit.

2 King. O dangerous estate of Sovereign power!
Obnoxious to the change of every hour.

1 King. Let us for shelter in our Cabinet stay:
Perhaps these threatening storms may pass away.

Exeunt. John's. But, Mr. Bays, did not you promise us, just now, to make
Amarillis speak very well?


Bays. Ay, and so she would have done, but that they hindered her.


Smi. How, Sir? whether you would or no?


Bays. Ay, Sir; the Plot lay so that, I vow to gad, it was not to be avoided.


Smi. Marry, that was hard.


John. But, pray, who hindered her?


Bays. Why, the battle, Sir, that is just coming in at door. And I Will tell you
now a strange thing: though I don't pretend to do more than other men, I gad,
I Will give you both a whole week to ghess how I Will represent this Battle.


Smi. I had rather be bound to fight your Battle, Sir, I assure you.


Bays. Why, there is it now: fight a Battle? there is the common error. I knew
presently where I should have you. Why, pray, Sir, do but tell me this one
thing, Can you think it a decent thing, in a battle before Ladies, to have men
run their Swords through one another, and all that?


John's. No, faith, it is not civil.


Bays. On the other side; to have a long relation of Squadrons here, and
Squadrons there: what is that but a dull prolixity?


John's. Excellently reasoned, by my troth!


Bays. Wherefore, Sir, to avoid both those Indecorums, I sum up my whole
battle in the representation of two persons only, no more: and yet so lively,
that, I vow to gad, you would swear ten thousand men were at it, really
engaged. Do you mark me?


Smi. Yes, Sir; but I think I should hardly swear, though, for all that.


Bays. By my troth, Sir, but you would, though, when you fee it: for I make
'em both come out in Armor, Cap-a-pea, with their Swords drawn, and hung, with
a scarlet Ribbon at their wrists, (which, you know, represents fighting enough)
each of 'em holding a Lute in his hand.


Smi. How, Sir, instead of a Buckler?


Bays. O Lord, O Lord! instead of a Buckler? Pray, Sir, do you ask no more
questions. I make 'em, Sir, play the battle in Recitativo. And here is the
conceit. Just at the very same instant that one sings, the other, Sir,
recovers you his Sword, and puts himself in a warlike posture: so that you have
at once your ear entertained with Music, and good Language; and your eye
satisfied with the garb, and accoutrements of war. Is not that well?


John's. I, what would you have more? he were a Devil that would not be
satisfied with that.


Smi. I confess, Sir, you stupifie me.


Bays. You shall see.


John's. But, Mr. Bays, might not we have a little fighting for I love those
Plays, where they cut and slash one another, upon the Stage, for a whole hour
together.


Bays. Why, then, to tell you true, I have contrived it both ways. But you
shall have my Recitativo first.


Enter, at several doors, the General, and Lieutenant General, armed Cap-a-pea,
with each of them a Lute in his hand, and his sword drawn, and hung, with a
scarlet Ribbon at his wrist. Lieut. Genesis Villain, thou lie.

Genesis Arm, arm, Gonsalvo, arm; what ho?
The lie no flesh can brook, I trow.

Lieut. Genesis Advance, from Acton, with the Musketeers.

Genesis Draw down the Chelsey Curiasiers.

Lieut. Genesis The Band you boast of, Chelsey Curiasiers,
Shall, in my Putney Pikes, now meet their Peers.

Genesis Chiswickians, aged, and renowned in fight,
Join with the Hammersmith Brigade.

Lieut. Genesis You Will find my Mortlake Boys will do them right,
Unless by Fulham numbers over-laid.

Genesis Let the left-wing of Twick'nam foot advance,
And line that Eastern hedge.

Lieut. Genesis The Horse I raised in Petty-France
Shall try their chance.
And scowr the Medows, overgrown with Sedge.

Genesis Stand: give the word.

Lieut. Genesis Bright Sword.

Genesis That may be thine,
But it is not mine.

Lieut. Genesis Give fire, give fire, at once give fire,
And let those recreant Troops perceive mine ire.

Genesis Pursue, pursue; they fly
That first did give the lie. Exeunt.

Bays. This, now, is not improper, I think, because the Spectators know all
these Towns, and may easily conceive them to be within the Dominions of the two
Kings of Brentford.


John's. Most exceeding well designed!


Bays. How do you think I have contrived to give a stop to this battle?


Smi. How?


Bays. By an Eclipse: Which, let me tell you, is a kind of fancy that was yet
never so much as thought of, but by my self, and one person more, that shall be
nameless. Come, come in, Mr. -- a --.


Enter Lieutenant General. Lieut. Genesis What midnight darkness does invade the
day,
And snatch the Victor from his conquered prey?
Is the Sun weary of this bloody sight,
And winks upon us with his eye of light?
It Is an Eclipse. This was unkind, O Moon,
To clap between me, and the Sun so soon.
Foolish Eclipse! thou this in vain have done;
My brighter honor had Eclipsed the Sun:
But now behold Eclipses two in one. Exit.

John's. This is an admirable representation of a Battle, as ever I saw.


Bays. I, Sir. But how would you fancy now to represent an Eclipse?


Smi. Why, that is to be supposed.


Bays. Supposed! Ay, you are ever at your suppose: ha, ha, ha. Why, you may as
well suppose the whole Play. No, it must come in upon the Stage, that is
certain; but in some odd way, that may delight, amuse, and all that. I have a
conceit for it, that I am sure is new, and, I believe, to the purpose.


John's. How Is that?


Bays. Why, the truth is, I took the first hint of this out of a Dialogue,
between Phoebus and Aurora, in the Slighted Maid: which, by my troth, was very
pretty; though, I think, you will confess this is a little better.


John's. No doubt on it, Mr. Bays.


Bays. But, Sir, you have heard, I suppose, that your Eclipse of the Moon, is
nothing else, but an interposition of the Earth, between the Sun and Moon: as
likewise your Eclipse of the Sun is caused by an interlocation of the Moon,
betwixt the Earth and Sun?


Smi. I have heard so, indeed.


Bays. Well, Sir; what do me I, but make the Earth, Sun, and Moon, come out
upon the Stage, and dance the Hey: hum? And, of necessity, by the very nature
of this Dance, the Earth must be sometimes between the Sun and the Moon, and
the Moon between the Earth and Sun; and there you have both your Eclipses. That
is new, I gad, ha?


John's. That must needs be very fine, truly.


Bays. Yes, there is some fancy in it. And then, Sir, that there may be
something in it of a Joque, I make the Moon sell the Earth a Bargain. Come,
come out Eclipse, to the Tune of Tom Tyler.


Enter Luna. Luna. Orbis, O Orbis,
Come to me thou little rogue Orbis.

Enter the Earth. Orb. What calls Terra firma, pray?

Luna. Luna that never shines by day.

Orb. What means Luna in a veil?

Luna. Luna means to show her tail,

Enter Sol. Sol. Fie, Sister, fie; thou make me muse,
Dery, dery down,
To see thee Orb abuse.

Luna. I hope his anger 'twill not move;
Since I did it out of love:
Hey down, dery down.

Orb. Where shall I thy true love know,
Thou pretty, pretty Moon?

Luna. To morrow soon, ere it be noon,
On Mount Vesuvio. Bis.

Sol. Then I will shine.

Orb. And I will be fine.

Luna. And we will drink nothing but Lipary wine.

Omnes. And we, etc.

Bays. So, now, vanish Eclipse, and enter the other Battle, and fight. Here now,
if I am not mistaken, you will see fighting enough.


A battle is fought between foot and great Hobbyhorses. At last, Drawcansir
comes in, and kills 'em all on both sides: All this while the Battle is
fighting, Bays is telling them when to shout, and shouts with 'em. Draw.
Others may boast a single man to kill;
But I, the blood of thousands, daily spill.
Let petty Kings the names of Parties know:
Where ever I come, I slay both friend and foe.
The swiftest Horsemen my swift rage controuls,
And from their Bodies drives their trembling souls.
If they had wings, and to the Gods could fly,
I would pursue, and beat 'em, through the sky:
And make proud Jove, with all his Thunder, see.
This single Arm more dreadful is, than he. Exit.

Bays. There Is a brave fellow for you now, Sirs. I have read of your Hector,
your Achilles, and a hundred more; but I defy all your Histories, and your
Romances too, I gad, to show me one such Conqueror, as this Drawcansir.


John's. I swear, I think you may.


Smi. But, Mr. Bays, how shall all these dead men go off? for I see none alive
to help 'em.


Bays. Go off! why, as they came on; upon their legs: how should they go off?
Why, do you think the people do not know they are not dead? He is mighty
ignorant, poor man; your friend here is very silly, Mr. Johnson, I gad; he is.
Come, Sir, I Will show you go off. Rise, Sirs, land go about your business.
There Is go off for you. Hark you, Mr. Ivory. Gentlemen, I Will be with you
presently. Exit.


John's. Will you so? then we will be gone.


Smi. I, pr'ythee let us go, that we may preserve our hearing. One Battle more
would take mine quite away.


Exeunt. Enter Bays and Players. Bays. Where are the Gentlemen?


1 Play. They are gone, Sir.


Bays. Gone! 'Sdeath, this last Act is best of all. I Will go fetch 'em again.
Exit.


3 Play. Stay, here is a foul piece of papyr of his. Let Us see what it is.

Reads. The Argument of the Fifth Act.

Cloris, at length, being sensible of Prince Pretty-man's passion, consents to
marry him; but, just as they are going to Church, Prince Pretty-man meeting, by
chance, with old Joan the Chandlers widow, and remembering it was she that first
brought him acquainted with Cloris: out of a high point of honor, break off
his match with Cloris, and marries old Joan. Upon which, Cloris, in despair,
drowns her self: and Prince Pretty-man, discontentedly, walks by the River side.


1 Play. Pox on it, this will never do: it is just like the rest. Come, let us be
gone. Exeunt.


Enter Bays. Bays. A plague on 'em both for me, they have made me sweat, to
run after 'em. A couple of senceless rascals, that had rather go to dinner,
than see this Play out, with a pox to 'em. What comfort has a man to write for
such dull rogues? Come Mr. -- a -- Where are you, Sir? come away quick, quick.


Enter Players again. Play. Sir, they are gone to dinner.


Bays. Yes, I know the Gentlemen are gone; but I ask for the Players.


Play. Why, an't please your worship, Sir, the Players are gone to dinner too.


Bays. How! are the Players gone to Dinner? It Is impossible: the Players gone
to dinner! I gad, if they are, I Will make 'em know what it is to injure a person
that does 'em the honor to write for 'em, and all that. A company of proud,
conceited, humorous, cross-grained persons, and all that. I gad, I Will make 'em
the most contemptible, despicable, inconsiderable persons, and all that, in the
whole world, for this trick. I gad, I Will be revenged on 'em; I Will sell this Play
to the other House.


Play. Nay, good, Sir, don't take away the Book; you will disappoint the Town,
that comes to see it acted here, this afternoon.


Bays. That Is all one. I must reserve this comfort to my self, my Book and I
will go together, we will not part, indeed, Sir. The Town! why, what care I for
the Town? I gad, the Town has used me as scurvily, as the Players have done:
but I Will be revenged on them too; I will both Lampoon and print 'em too, I gad.
Since they will not admit of my Plays, they shall know what a Satyrist I am.
And so farewell to this Stage for ever, I gad. Exit.


1 Play. What shall we do now?


2 Play. Come then, let us set up Bills for another Play: We shall lose nothing
by this, I warrant you.


1 Play. I am of your opinion. But, before we go, let us see Haynes and Shirley
practice the last Dance; for that may serve for another Play.


2 Bays. I Will call 'em: I think they are in the Trying-room.


The Dance done. 1 Play. Come, come; let us go away to dinner.


Exeunt omnes. EPILOGUE.
THe Play is at an end, but where is the Plot?
That circumstance our Poet Bays forgot,
And we can boast, though it is a plotting Age,
No place is freer from it than the Stage.
The Ancients Plotted, though, and strove to please
With sense that might be understood with ease;
They every Scene with so much wit did store
That who brought any in, went out with more:
But this new way of wit does so surprise,
Men lose their wits in wondering where it lies.
If it be true, that Monstrous births presage
The following mischiefs that afflicts the Age,
And sad disasters to the State proclaim;
Plays, without head or tail, may do the same.
Wherefore, for ours, and for the Kingdoms peace,
May this prodigious way of writing cease.
Let Us have, at least, once in our lives, a time
When we may hear some Reason, not all Rhyme:
We have these ten years felt its Influence;
Pray let this prove a year of Prose and Sense.
FINIS.

