St. PAUL's Triumph IN HIS SUFFERINGS FOR CHRIST. With some Directions how a
Christian ought to behave himself under, and may reap Advantage by his
Sufferings.

By MATTHEW BRYAN, LL. D.

LONDON: Printed, for the Author, MDCXCII.

ECCLESIAE
Sub Cruce gementi, ac Simul triumphanti,
Ideoque cis Statum Gloriae gloriosae,
Sole (Portentum aliud Caelo!) amictae, Lunamque conculcanti,
Duodecim Stellarum Corona Capita redimitae,
Mundo, cum Charissimo Crucifixo, beatoque Paulo, crucifixae,
Precibus Lachymisque, Armis suis, militanti,
Satanam, ejusque omnia Opera, fideliter renuncianti,
Schismatis aeque ac Haerese (...) Crimina odio habenti,
Gregi, proh dolor! parvulo,
Ei vero, cui evangelizavit Christus, simillimo,
(...) ergo (cujus noluit facere naufragium) Mundana relinquenti,
Providentia, quae Omnia curat, imo Aviculas and Campi
Flosculos, alacriter victitanti,
Praecepta Dei, Fidemque Jesu, mira tolerantia, observanti,
Doctrinam, Vitamque Christi strenno asserenti ac imitanti,
Pristinum Omnipotentis Cultum, primaeva Pietate, celebranti,
Spiritu ac Veritate Patrem Caelestem adoranti,
S. S. Spiritus Arrhabonem accipienti,
Ac (...) anhelanti,
M. B.
Indignus (...)
Hanc, qualem qualem, Conciunculam,
In grati, fidique Animi testimonium
Humillime dicat consecratque.
St. PAUL's Triumph IN HIS SUFFERINGS FOR CHRIST.
Ephesians. IV. 1. I therefore the Prisoner of the Lord, beseech you that ye walk
worthy of the Vocation wherewith ye are called.


THE Illative therefore naturally points to somewhat that goes before; and for
this we must look back as far as the beginning of the former Chapter. For this
Cause -- that is, considering the many glorious Privileges, which by Virtue of
your Relation to Christ, you are honored with: -- For this cause, I Paul the
Prisoner of Jesus Christ for you Gentiles -- And then he makes a Digression,
explaining and magnifying his Office, wherein, by Commission from Christ, he
stood more particularly related to them. He makes, I say, a Digression in a
long Parenthesis as far as the beginning of the 4th. Chapter, where he resumes
his Argument, from which he abruptly brake off before: -- I therefore the
Prisoner of the Lord -- Which is a Repetition, or Recollection of his former
Words at the first Verse of the foregoing Chapter -- For this cause I Paul the
Prisoner of Jesus Christ for you Gentiles. -- For the Connection of which, to
make it sense, we must have regard to the Words at the first Verse of the 4th
Chapter, -- beseech you that ye walk worthy, etc. -- I Paul the Prisoner of
Jesus Christ for your Gentiles -- beseech you that ye walk worthy of the
Vocation wherewith ye are called. So here, I therefore the Prisoner of the Lord
(which is a Repetition of the former Words) beseech you that ye walk worthy of
the Vocation wherewith ye are called. In which words there are these two things
considerable.

1st. The Character which St. Paul chooses to recommend himself by, and
enforce his following Exhortation. -- I therefore the Prisoner of the Lord. --

2dly. Here Is the Exhortation it self, and that is to a suitable and agreeable
Conversation, worthy of the Christian Vocation: -- I beseech you that ye walk
worthy of the Vocation wherewith ye are called.

The Time will not permit me to speak distinctly to each of these. I shall
therefore insist upon the former, and only touch upon the latter in the
Application.

The first thing which here offers it self to our consideration (and which
shall be the subject of my ensuing Discourse) is,

1st. The Character which St. Paul chooses to recommend himself by, and
enforce his following Exhortation. -- I the Prisoner of the Lord. --

What? may some say, could St. Paul choose no better, no other Character than
that of a Prisoner! a very unpromising, uninviting Character to indear or
recommend, very unlikely to gain Esteem, or Respect, or Credit in the World,
unlikely to gain Proselytes, or draw Disciples after him! For, who is in love
with Prisons and Confinement? who is fond of noisome Goals, and Dungeons of
darkness? who admires Chains, and Fetters, and Shackles of Iron, the Ornament,
the Dress of Prisoners, who are fed with the Bread of Adversity, and the Water
of Affliction, whose Music is sighs and groans, and their recreation whips and
scourges with St. Paul and Silas, or the Stocks with Joseph, where they hurt
his Feet, the Iron entering into his Soul?

The World is apt to worship the rising Sun, to adore growing Greatness and
Magnificence, to court, and be influenced by Riches, Power and Grandeur; and
consequently to despise Poverty and Meanness, Misery and afflicted Innocence.

How unlikely is this Lecture, this Epistle to prevail with the Auditors, which
is delivered, which is sent by Paul the Prisoner, who talks of Riches and
Honor, and Power and Liberty for his Disciples, when himself is poor, and
despised, and weak and in bonds? who would run to him for help, who cannot help
himself? who would go to him for riches, who is poor, for honor, who is
despised, for power, who is weak, or for liberty, who is a Prisoner?

How impolitickly, how imprudently and indiscreetly does St. Paul make his
choice here of a Character to recommend himself by to the good Opinion and
Affections of Men? How unplausible, unpromising, and uninviting a Title is
this, I the Prisoner of the Lord?

It Is true, it is so in the Eye of the World, which is governed and influenced
by Sense, and outward Appearance, and blindly led by Brutal Passions and
Appetites. Thus when our Savior exerted his Power as a King, in working
Miracles, casting out Devils, healing the Diseased, raising the Dead, and
feeding the Living at the Expense of a Miracle, entertaining so vast a
Multitude, so many thousands at that noble, bounteous Feast in the Wilderness,
where a few Loaves and Fishes were miraculously multiplied into a prodigious
Plenty, and abundant Overplus, after the numerous Ghests had eaten and were
satisfied: when, I say, He thus exerted his Power as a King, in working
Miracles, and doing Wonders, he wanted not Followers, he had plenty of
Disciples, who in sholes and crowds thronged after him: but when he preached
the Doctrine of the Cross, which his Disciples must take up and follow him;
when he told them of suffering, and tribulation, and a severe persecution,
which they must undergo for his sake and the Gospel's, of which he had already
begun, and would ere long give 'em a more glorious Example; then they are
offended at him, they halt, and stagger, and run from him; multitudes went
back, and walked no more with him; as the Evangelist St. John tells us in the
6th. Chapter of his Gospel at the 66th. Verse.

Such an Enemy to the Cross was St. Paul, himself before his Conversion; but
after it, his Eyes being anointed with that Sovereign Eye Salve, prescribed by
the wise Physician, receiving an Unction from the Holy One, he saw with other
Eyes, had a new Idea, a new representation of Objects, which were set in a
truer and better Light, and learnt to prize and value what before he despised,
of whose worth he had not skill enough to make a true Judgment and Estimate.

No wonder then that he makes choice, and that wisely enough, (as I hope I
shall convince you before I have done) of this Character here, the Prisoner of
the Lord. And this he does, I conceive, for these following Reasons.

1st. He looks upon this Character, not as matter of disgrace, but as the
greatest, as the highest honor.

2dly. Herein he gives an instance of his being conformed to the Captain of our
Salvation, of his being made partaker of the sufferings of Christ.

3dly. Herein he shows his resemblance to the noble Army of Martyrs, the early
sufferers before the Incarnation.

4ly. Hereby he gives an evidence of his fellowship with the suffering Saints
and Martyrs since the Incarnation, and Crucifixion of Christ.

5ly. It Is a Presumption, if not a Demonstration of the Truth of that Doctrine
which he taught and delivered.

6ly. Suffering is the Touchstone of Virtue, and the Trial of Sincerity.

1st. He looks upon this Character, not as matter of disgrace, but as the
greatest, as the highest Honor.

-- The Prisoner of the Lord, or for the Lord, or for the Lord's sake -- What
greater Honor can there be! To be a Prisoner for his sake, who is the Beloved
of the Father, who is King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, who is exalted far
above Principalities and Powers, and every name that is named, to whom the
whole Family in Heaven and Earth do how and obey; to be a Prisoner in his
quarrel, and to suffer for him, what greater Honor can there be! to suffer for
him, who has suffered for all, and is the great Redeemer and Savior of
Mankind, and who shall come to Judge the World, whose Word shall give Law to
the Universe, and determine the everlasting State both of Men and Devils, from
which there is no Appeal for ever, at whose command and direction rewards and
punishments shall be variously distributed to the many thousands and millions
of the Sons and Daughters of Adam; to suffer for him, and in his quarrel, what
greater Honor can there be!

To be the Prisoner of the Lord, St. Paul esteems as a more honorable,
worthier Title than that of a learned Jew, or a precise Pharisee, a Disciple, a
Scholar of Gamaliel's, or a Doctor, yea, an Apostle of the Gentiles; yea, than
the Son of a King, an Heir to an Empire, or a mighty Potentate, whose Scepters
and Chains of Gold he looked upon to be less beautiful than his Fetters of Iron.
Every Link in his Chain was more ornamental than the Jewels in the Diadems, in
the Crowns of Princes. Romans 1.16.
I am not ashamed, says he, of the Gospel of Christ. We glory in Tribulations.
I am not ashamed of this Chain. 5.3. Gal. 6.14.
God forbid, says he, that I should glory save in the Cross of our Lord Jesus
Christ, by whom the World is crucified unto me, and I unto the World. I take
pleasure in infirmities, in reproaches, in necessities, in persecutions, in
distresses for Christ's sake; as it is in the 2 Cor. 12, 10. He esteems it as a
piece of Honor, a Royal Grant and Privilege to suffer for Christ. Unto you it
is given (says he to the Philippians) in the behalf of Christ, not only to
believe on him, Phil. 1.19.
but also to suffer for his sake, having the same conflict which ye saw in me,
and now here to be in me. He exults, and rejoices, and blesses God that he is
counted worthy to suffer shame for his Name! But that which others counted
shame he counted Glory. So far was he from startling at sufferings, at the Name
of Prison and Confinement, or being ashamed of the Character of Prisoner for
the sake of Christ, that he breaks out into a vehement Passion, and holy Anger
with those who (out of an unseasonable, ill-timed Charity and Pity, and deep
concern for his Temporal Interest, which they passionately advised him to
consult, like Peter of Old, Master pity thy self) dissuaded him from going up
to Jerusalem for fear of those Bonds and Imprisonment, which the Prophet Agabus
said did await him there. What mean ye, says he, to weep and to break my heart,
for I am ready not to be bound only, but also to dye at Jerusalem for the Name
of the Lord Jesus. Act. 21.13.

2ly. Herein he gives an Instance of his being conformed to the Captain of our
Salvation, of his being made partaker of the sufferings of Christ: who is
styled Heb. 2.10. The Captain of our Salvation, who was made perfect by
sufferings. Now the Soldier must be conformable to his Captain. He must engage
in the same War, he must enter the same bloody Field, and fight the same
Battles, and against the same Enemies; he must run the same danger, and undergo
the same hardships that his Captain does: or else he is unworthy of the Name,
or Title, or relation of a Soldier, and instead of being rewarded, deserves to
be punished. Now St. Paul was a Soldier, yea a great Officer, and Commander
under the Captain General of the Spiritual Forces. And he tells us Phil. 3.10.
that he desired nothing more than to have fellowship with him in his
sufferings, and to be made conformable unto his death. And every Christian is
bound according to his measure and capacity to do the same thing. Every
Christian is a Spiritual Soldier, and has obliged and engaged himself to fight
manfully under the Banner of Christ. The Apostle makes suffering to be
antecedaneous to glorification, nay to be the condition of inheriting Glory,
Romans 8.17. observe the Gradation there. At the 16th. Verse the Apostle says,
The Spirit it self bears witness with our Spirit, that we are the Children of
God. And if Children, then Heirs; Heirs with God, and joint Heirs with Christ.
It follows, if so be that we suffer with him, that we may be also glorified
together. It Is an undoubted Truth, that the Christian that refuses to suffer
with Christ shall not be glorified with him.

It Is true, a Christian is not bound to seek, to court suffering, to run
himself into the Fire. If he is persecuted in one place, he is permitted to fly
to another. But if he cannot escape, if he cannot fly, he must suffer. If the
Cross be not only offered to, but laid upon his Shoulder, he must not basely
cast it off. If the Crown of Thorns be platted for and put upon his Head, he
must not refuse to wear it. If a Christian is brought to that straight with
Peter, that either he must take up the Cross, or deny his Master, either suffer
or sin, it is easy to determine which side to take, and what to do. In this
case a Christian is indispensibly bound to suffer, and he that declines it,
refuses to suffer with Christ, and consequently cannot expect to be glorified
together with him.

But perhaps you will say, God forbid that we should refuse to suffer with
Christ. We are ready to suffer Martyrdom for him, to dye for him, to burn at a
stake rather than deny him, or renounce our Religion, in which we were baptized
and educated.

It Is well resolved indeed, but it is sooner said than done. There are diverse
sorts of sufferings for Christ. There is a sort of Martyrdom besides burning at
a Stake. The Christian that resolves to suffer rather than sin is a Martyr in
Will. And that chooses actually to suffer rather than sin, is a Martyr in deed.

Now examine the sincerity of your Resolution in lesser Instances, which are
below the greater Martyrdom, suffering death for the sake of Christ. He that is
poor, and to help himself will steal, refuses to suffer with Christ. He that to
avoid the loss of a little trival Profit, or to secure his Estate, when he is
threatened with the loss of it, will do unlawful things, will lie, and swear, or
forswear, and act against his Conscience, and the word of God, and his own
words too, he denis Christ, and refuses to suffer with him, and consequently
cannot expect to be glorified together. He refuses to fight under the Banner of
Christ, notwithstanding his Vow; but is a perfidious, base Deserter, and runs
over to the Enemies Camp, and therefore cannot expect to be rewarded by his own
General, to whom he has sworn Fidelity, but on the contrary, when he falls into
his hands must expect the fate of base Deserters.

That Is the second Reason of St. Paul's choice of this Character, The Prisoner
of the Lord. He herein gives an Instance of his being conformed to the Captain
of our Salvation, of his being made partaker of the sufferings of Christ. Which
must mightily recommend him to the good Opinion, and Affections of all good
Christians.

3ly. Herein he shows his resemblance to the noble Army of Martyrs, the early
Sufferers before the Incarnation. Whose Martyrology, whose renowned sufferings
are compendiously historified in the 11th to the Hebrews: which tells us that
by Faith Moses when he was come to years, refused to be called the Son of
Pharaoh's Daughter, choosing rather to suffer affliction with the People of
God, than to enjoy the pleasures of Sin for a Season; esteeming the reproach of
Christ greater Riches than the Treasures in Egypt: for he had respect unto the
recompense of reward. By faith he forsook Egypt, not fearing the wrath of the
King: for he endured as seeing him who is invisible. Others were tortured not
accepting deliverance, that they might obtain a better Resurrection. And others
had trial of cruel mockings and scourgings, yea, moreover of Bonds and
Imprisonment. They were stoned, they were sawn asunder, were tempted, were
slain with the Sword: they wandered about in Sheepskins and Goat Skins, being
destitute afflicted, tormented* Of whom, says the Historian, the World was not
worthy. They wandered in Deserts, and in Mountains, and in Dens, and Caves of
the Earth. These were the Proto Martyrs, the early Sufferers before the
Incarnation. To whom our Apostle shows his resemblance by this Character of the
Prisoner of the Lord.

4ly. Hereby he gives an evidence of his fellowship with the suffering Saints
and Martyrs since the Incarnation and Crucifixion of Christ. Hereby he declares
his fellowship with that bold courageous Sufferer, St. John the Baptist, who
was a Prisoner and a Martyr in his confinement: With St. Stephen, the glorious
Proto Martyr after the Ascension of our Lord; to whose death St. Paul was not
only a Witness but an Assistant too, consenting unto his death: with all those
sufferings Christians whom he himself had persecuted, breathing out threatenings
and slaughter against the Disciples of the Lord, and being exceedingly mad
against them, caused them to blaspheme; making havoc of the Church, halling
Men and Women, committed them to Prison, where he himself is now their joyful
Companion.

5ly. It Is a Presumption, if not a Demonstration of the Truth of that Doctrine
which he taught and delivered. There are two ways of confirming any Revelation
from Heaven; Miracles and Suffering.

Now by both these our Savior confirmed his Doctrine, especially by the
former: and the Apostles more especially by the latter, who therefore were
called Martyrs, that is, witnesses to the Truth of the Gospel by their
sufferings. Which gained mighty Credit and Reputation to it; which drew on
multitudes of Disciples, brought in sholes of Proselytes, according to the old
Observation, that the Blood of the Martyrs is the Seed of the Church. He that
dares suffer for his Religion, that can suffer Bonds, and Imprisonment, and
death, for Christ, that can suffer the loss of his Goods and Estate, his
Livelihood and his Life, for the Doctrine he delivers, gives a Presumption that
it is true, and that he believes it to be so. But if when he is called to
suffer, he starts aside like a broken Bow, and will rather deny his Doctrine or
Religion, than suffer in the defense of it, it exposes the Credit of it, gives
a ground of suspicion that it is not true, at least it is an Argument that he
himself does not believe it. Our Savior tells us of some, St. Luke 8.13. that
are like the stony Ground, who receive the word with joy, but in time of
temptation fall away. The time of Persecution, is the time of Temptation, the
time of Trial; which like the cold frosty Air, meliorates and is advantageous
to sound, but pernicious to sickly, unhealthy Bodies, which makes 'em languish
and die away: or rather like the stronger Wind, which ventilates, and fans, and
cleanses the solid Grain, but drives the Chaff, and the empty, lighter Corns a
way. Mat. 3.12.
So John the Baptist uses the Similitude concerning Christ: Whose Fan, says he,
is in his hand, and he will thoroughly purge his Floor, etc. There is a time
when Christ, the Master and Owner of the great Threshing Floor, the Church,
takes his Fan in his Hand, and by the Wind of Persecution does purge his Floor;
the Chaff flies away, which lay mingled amongst the Wheat, but it fans, and
cleanses, and discovers the purer solid Grain, which he gathers into his
Garner, but will burn up the Chaff with unquenchable Fire.

The Apostles and their suffering Brethren were this purer Wheat, that could
endure the blowing, and fanning, and cleansing of the Wind, whilst many others
like Chaff were too light for the Discipline of the Wind, could not endure the
violent Breath, but were instantly blown away. Blessed is the Man, says St.
James, that endures Temptation, i. e. the time of Trial. He is an Honor to
the Gospel, a Comfort to himself, and a Bulwark to Religion. Who will believe
that Man that does not believe himself? And how does that Man believe himself
that dares not suffer in defense of that Doctrine which he has taught and
delivered? But he that can say and suffer, that dares do and die in pursuance
and defense of his Doctrine and Religion; why the Beholders of his resolute
constancy and passive valor will conclude that there is (...), some spark of
Divinity in this, that there is somewhat extraordinary, some beams of Truth
here, which naturally bespeak Credit and Esteem.

The Devil has observed long ago that Skin for Skin, Job. 2.4.
and all that a Man has will he give for his Life. But he that dares part not
only with his Livelihood, but his Life too, in defense of his Doctrine and
Religion, convincingly persuades Mankind to believe the Truth of it, and that
the Sufferer believes it too; in defense of which he will venture so great a
Stake, pay down so large a Praemium, in lieu of which certainly he is assured
of somewhat that is far better, of a much more abundant Recompense. He
certainty most firmly believes the Doctrine of the Gospel, and of future
rewards and punishments, who dares suffer rather than sin against the Revealer
and Dispenser of them. St. Paul dares suffer Imprisonment, and the loss of
Liberty, and Estate, and Life, whilst Impostors, and Cheats, and
Pseudo-Apostles boast and talk, but dare not suffer or die, but are guilty of
base Tergiversation, turning their backs upon the Truth, which they renounce
and deny, when they are put to the Test, to the severe Trial, and critical
point of suffering.

That Is the fifth Reason of St. Paul's choice of this Character to recommend
himself by, and enforce his following Exhortation -- The Prisoner of the Lord
-- Which is a Presumption, if not a Demonstration of the Truth of that Doctrine
which he taught and delivered.

6ly. and Lastly, Suffering is the Touchstone of Virtue, and the Trial of
Sincerity. This he very well knew who knows the Heart, and the workings of it;
and therefore was pleased to put his Servant Job into the School of Affliction,
and to try him with Adversity: Not that he wanted a discovery himself, but to
silence the Calumnies and Reproaches of the Devil and his Instruments, who were
ready to object against the Character and Elogy which God gave of him, -- Does
Job fear God for naught? as we read in that famous Dialogue between God and the
Devil, in the first Chapter of the Book of Job at the 6th. Verse; Now there was
a day when the Sons of God, i. e. the Angels came to present themselves before
the Lord, and Satan, the Arch-Devil, the President of the black Society, came
also among them. And the Lord said unto Satan, whence come thou? Then Satan
answered, from going too and fro in the Earth, and from walking up and down in
it. And the Lord said unto Satan have thou considered my Servant Job, that
there is none like him in the Earth, a perfect and an upright Man, one that
fears God and escheweth Evil? Then Satan answered the Lord and said, Does Job
fear God for naught? Have not thou made an Hedge about him, and about his
House, and about all that he has on every side? thou have blessed the Work of
his Hands, and his substance is increased in the Land. But put forth thy Hand,
and touch all that he has, and he will curse thee to thy Face. And the Lord
said unto Satan, behold all that he has is in thy Power, only upon himself put
not forth thine Hand. Which leave no sooner given, but he improves it to the
utmost; the Commission granted wanted not a sharp and speedy Execution. So
Satan, says the Text, went forth from the Presence of the Lord, to vex and
afflict the Saint, and played the Devil indeed; stirring up the Sabeans, and
Caldeans, the Fire and the Winds against him; opening the Treasury, the
Magazines of the Air (of which he is emphatically called, the Prince)
discharging the Artillery of Heaven against him; making sore and lamentable
havoc in his Estate, in his Goods, and his Children; leaving him in a manner
as naked as the World received him.

Well, but what effect had this upon Job? Did he curse God to his face, as the
Devil said he would? No, but he behaved himself with meekness, and humility,
and resignation to the Sovereign Will, exercising Faith, and Patience, and
Trust in God. He arose and rent his Mantle (a token of Sorrow, being a Stranger
to the Stoical Apathy) and shaved his Head, and fell down upon the Ground and
worshipped, and said, naked came I out of my Mother's Womb, and naked shall I
return thither. It follows, In all this Job sinned not, nor charged God
foolishly.

But tho! the Devil was foiled and deceived here, shamefully baffled and
disappointed as to his expectation, yet he makes another Effort, resolves to
try once more. And to that end presents himself before the Lord upon a solemn
Day amongst the Angels: chap. 2. And the Lord said unto him, v. 3. Have thou
considered my Servant Job, that there is none like him in the Earth, a perfect
and an upright Man, one that fears God and escheweth Evil? and still he
holds fast his integrity, although thou movedst me against him to destroy him
without cause. And Satan answered the Lord and said, Skin for Skin, yea all
that a Man has will he give for his life. But put forth thine hand now, and
touch his bone and flesh, and he will curse thee to thy face. And the Lord
said, behold he is in thine hand, but save his Life. So Satan went forth from
the pesence of the Lord, and smote Job with sore Boils from the Sole of his
Foot unto his Crown.

And fearing that he was not Devil enough with all his Dragon-like violence to
prevail with Job to curse God, he employs an Incarnate Devil, stirred up his
Wife against him, his Bosom Companion, hoping that her Persuasions and
Temptations would be as charming and prevalent, as those of Eve were on her
Husband Adam. Then said his Wife unto him, do thou still retain thine
integrity? curse God and dye. But he said unto her, Thou speak as one of the
foolish Women speaks. What? shall we receive good at the hand of God and
shall we not receive Evil? It follows, In all this Job did not sin with his
Lips: but still exercised Faith, and Patience, and Trust, and Affiance in God.
Though he kill me, says he, yet will I trust in him. Virtue in a good Man
shines the brighter for being clouded with Adversity: of which Job was an
illustrious Instance and Example.

Adversity was ever esteemed amongst the ancient Philosophers to be the Touch
stone of Virtue, Magnum Exemplum nisi mala fortuna non invenit. Sen. de Prove.
c. 3.
and the Trial of Sincerity: No very Exemplary Virtue, they thought, could well
appear otherwise than in notable misfortune: 'Twas so in the Opinion of
Socrates, Plato, Diogenes, Seneca, Cicero, and other ancient Philosophers: who
did not shrink at Adversity, but showed a greatness and presence of Mind,
suitable to their sufferings. Their Virtue did not flag, or wither, or fall by
those blustering Winds. Adversity is like a tempestuous Wind which trys the
strength of Trees: those which are rotten at the Heart, or Root, it breaks and
throws down; but those which are sound are the more confirmed, the more firmly
rooted by those violent shakings.

To approve a man truly virtuous, (...). Plat. de Rep. 2.
and heartily righteous, says an ancient Writer, he must be exercised with all
the Instances of Adversity; not only in his Goods, but his good Name, not only
his Estate, but his Body and Life. He must endure all the Instances of Cruelty,
he must be imprisoned, and put upon the Rack, and tortured and scourged, and
have his Eyes burned out, suffer the pains of Fire, and at last be impaled or
dye upon a Cross.

It was the Cup of Poison, says Seneca, Cicuta Magnum Socratem fecit. Sen. Ep.
13.

Calix venenatus, qui Socratem transtulit e Carcere in Caelum. Id. Ep. 67.

Aequalis fuit intanta inaequalitate fortunae, etc. Id. Ep. 104. Rutilij
Innocentia ac virtus lateret, nisi accepisset injuriam; dum violatur effulsit.
Id. Ep. 79.


which made Socrates a Great man, and which out of Prison did transfer him to
Heaven, or did procure to him that lofty esteem; offering opportunity to
signalize his constancy, his equanimity, his unconcernedness for this World and
Life. And the Virtue, says he, and the innocence of Rutilius would have lain
hid, if it had not, by condemnation and exile, received injury; while it was
violated it brightly shone forth. And he that said this of others, was himself
in nothing so illustrious, as in handsomely entertaining that death to which he
was adjudged by the bloody Tyrant. And generally the most honorable Persons,
in the Judgment of Posterity, for gallant worth, to this very end, (as Sen. de
Prove. 2.3. Plut. de Stoic. Contr. Ep. 1931.
such Philosophers teach) were by Divine Providence delivered up to suffer
opprobrious condemnations and punishments by the ungrateful malignity of their
times. He Is a virtuous Man indeed that can endure all this rather than renounce
his Virtue and Integrity. And such virtuous Men, such stout courageous
Sufferers the World has yielded, and that both amongst the Heathens, and in the
Church of God, of which our Savior, and the Prophets, and Apostles, and
Martyrs were glorious and illustrious Instances.

Thus you see that 'twas for very good and wise Reasons that our Apostle chose
this Character, the Prisoner of the Lord.

And now what Improvement should we make of this, but to apply it to our selves
in three or four particulars.

1st. Let us not be scandalized at suffering, or insult over those that suffer.

Let us not be offended at suffering. It Is the Lot of the Righteous in this
World: the Church's Patrimony, the Portion of the People of God. The Seed of
the Woman, it is promised, shall bruise the Serpent's Head, but it is threatened,
that it shall bruise his Heel. Though the former is more fatal, yet the latter
is no less painful; of which the Seed of the Woman, and it is genuine Offspring
have been, and are sadly sensible. Though God has assured the Church that his
Grace is sufficient for her, yet she must expect a Thorn in the Flesh, the
Messenger of Satan to buffet her. Though he has promised to tread Satan under
her Feet shortly, yet in the Interim the Dragon bites with his Mouth, and
fights with his Tail, and stings, and wounds, and torments the Flesh. Though
the Church is the care of Heaven, and the darling of Providence, yet she is
sometimes like her Lord, driven into the Wilderness, there to be tempted, and
persecuted by the Devil. Though sometimes she is clad with Purple, embraced in
the Arms, and sits upon the Throne with Princes, whom God makes her nursing
Fathers, yet there is a time when you will find her, with Job, upon the
Dunghill, there sitting in her mourning Weeds, sighing, and groaning, and
uttering her complaints in the most doleful Accents, Behold all ye that pass
by, and see if there be any sorrow like unto my sorrow! Which we must not
wonder at; for Tribulation is the Way to Glory. Through many Tribulations we
must enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. This is the common Road, which our
Savior and the Prophets and Apostles went to Heaven in. Christians are
Crossbearers. They wear it from the Font to their Funeral; from the Laver to
the Sepulcher. Their Baptism of Water is often seconded with Baptism of Blood.
The Cross is not only the Ornament of the Forehead, but the Burden of the
Shoulder too. If any one will be my Disciple, says our blessed Lord, Let him
deny himself and take up his Cross and follow me. A Text, which has often
sounded in your Ears, and has been learnedly and passionately improved in many
excellent melting Sermons; but alas! by men rather skilled in the Theory, than
the Practice, in the Art of painting the Cross, than bearing it; in the Charms
of tragical Eloquence, and moving the Passions, than the exercise of Christian
Patience. To whom I am sorry that Character of St. John's Sufferers in the
Revelation does not belong; Rev. 14.12.
Here Is the Patience of the Saints; here are they that keep the Commandments of
God, and the Faith of Jesus. -- We have had excellent Discourses of suffering
and of patience, of bearing the Cross for the sake of Christ, but few Examples
of it. We have had Teachers too much of the Pharisaick Temper, binding heavy
burdens, and grievous to be born, and laying them on Men's Shoulders, which they
themselves will not move with one of their Fingers.

But it is not enough to talk of the Cross, but we must take it up. If any one
will be my Disciple, let him deny himself, and take up his Cross -- He must
neither be offended at, nor yet despise it, or those that bear it. It Is a mark
of an unchristian Spirit to insult over those that suffer for Conscience sake.
It Is to sit down in the Seat of the Scornful, and partake with those, from whom
the primitive Sufferers had trial of cruel mockings. They who insult over,
scoff at, and despise those that suffer for Conscience sake, for their constant
Adherence to the Principles of Faith, and the Truth of the Gospel, and the Laws
of God, would have done the same (had they been then living) to Jesus Christ,
and his Apostles and Martyrs, who suffered for Conscience sake.

2dly. Let us rather choose to suffer than to sin. Of which choice Moses has
given us a President and Example, Heb. 11.25. -- Choosing rather to suffer
Afflicton with the People of God than to enjoy the pleasures of Sin for a
Season. -- Choosing rather -- None would choose to suffer Affliction could he
honestly avoid it: For no Affliction for the present seems to be joyous but
grievous. Heb. 12.11.
It Is a Thorn in the Flesh, which throbs and aches. But better be pricked with
those wounding Thorns than kick against the Pricks. Better walk upon Thorns to
Paradise, though they wound and tear the Flesh, than through flowery Meadows
and upon beds of Roses, which lead to the Precipice, to the horrid Abyss of
Destruction. Better to suffer affliction for a Season, which will end in
Eternal Joy, than to enjoy the pleasures of Sin for a Season, which will end in
Eternal Pain. When sin and suffering come in competition, it is better to choose
to suffer than to sin. Choosing rather to suffer affliction with the People of
God than to enjoy the pleasures of Sin -- Alas! what are the pleasures of Sin?
They are vain and empty, and short, they are but for a Season.

3dly. Instead of declining or repining at suffering, when our Master by his
Providence calls us to it, let us rejoice that he accounts worthy to suffer for
his sake. So did St. Paul, Act. 16.
and his Companion Silas, who were Fellow Prisoners at Philippi, where they are
so overjoyed with the honor of suffering for Christ, that after their hard and
cruel usage by the Magistrates, who rent off their clothes, and caused them to
be beaten and laid many stripes upon them, and then thrust 'em into the inner
Prison, the dark and nasty Dungeon, and made their feet fast in the Stocks, a
cold, comfortless lodging, an uneasy Seat for sore, wounded Men; yet, I say,
they were so transported with Joy, though in that pitiful plight, those
lamentable Circumstances, that they sang at Midnight with the loudest Notes;
which alarmed and awakened the Prisoners -- They prayed and sang Praises unto
God; they found greater comfort, and mirth, and joy, and peace in their Prison,
than their Persecutors did in their Palaces. So blessed and joyful a thing it
is to suffer for Christ, as he himself assures us, Mat. 5.10, 11, 12.
Blessed are they which are persecuted for righteousness sake. Blessed are ye
when Men shall revile you, and persecute you, and shall say all manner of evil
against you falsely for my sake. Rejoice and be exceeding glad: for great is
your Reward in Heaven.

4thly. That we may not lose the Reward of our sufferings, let us be sure that
our sufferings are sufferings for Christ. And to that end let us look to three
things.

1st. That we suffer for a good Cause.

2dly. That our suffering proceeds from a right Principle.

3dly. That it be directed to a right End.

1st. We must be sure that we suffer for a Good Cause. All suffering is not
suffering for Christ. There is a suffering Adversity which accidentally befalls
men, which they cannot avoid, as losses, and crosses, and poverty, and wounds,
and sickness, etc. There is suffering as an Evil doer, for breaking the Laws of
God and Man by Theft, Murder, Treason, Rebellion, etc. This is not suffering
for Christ, though perhaps there are some so hardened as to think so; who think
killing, and murder, and Rebellion, and Resistance, and Regicide; to play the
Devil for God sake, is to do God service. But suffering for Christ, suffering
as a Christian, as St. Peter speaks, is a suffering which we may avoid by
violating our Duty, and renouncing our Virtue and Integrity. If we choose to
suffer rather than to sin, and depart from our plain, known Duty to God
revealed in his Word, and written in his Law with the Pen of a Diamond, this is
to suffer for Christ, and with Christ; this is to suffer as a Christian. For
it is not the Punishment, but the Cause that makes the Martyr.

2dly. Our suffering must proceed from a right Principle, viz. the Love of God
and his Laws, the love of Virtue and a hatred of Vice. For he that has a secret
Love for any Vice, yea, that has not an universal hatred and abhorrence of all
sin, because a Violation of the Law of God; his suffering, whatsoever it be, is
not a suffering for Christ. He that suffers for his constant and resolute
adherence to any one Article of Faith, or Principle of Religion, or Doctrine of
our Church, or any particular Law of God, and yet allows himself in gross and
notorious sins, does not suffer as a Christian. For there must be no commuting
in Religion. The performance of one Duty, cannot expiate for the neglect, or
violation of another.

Thus, for instance, he that suffers for his Allegiance to his King, and yet
will violate his Allegiance to his God, who is King of Kings, suffers as a
Fool. If he dies in his Prince's quarrel, and sacrifices his Life for his sake,
he does but offer the sacrifice of Fools. His suffering is not thank worthy in
God's account: it is not a suffering for Christ, or as a Christian, though in
defense of a Christian Principle. Such a Martyr, it is to be feared, will dwell
in the same hotter Region, will go to the same place, where the Soul of his
Persecutor does. For, alas! what will it avail a man that he will not swear
falsely, if he will swear rashly, and blaspheme his Maker and Redeemer? what
will it avail a Man that he will not rebel against his Temporal Prince, and yet
will daily rebel against his God; that he will not resist the lawful Higher
Powers, and yet will always resist the Holy Ghost, and grieve the good Spirit
of God, which is sent to seal him to the day of Redemption? what will it avail
a Man to be a good Subject and a bad Christian, (if that be not a
contradiction) a Friend to the King, and an Enemy to God; to drink a Health to
his Prince, and Damnation to his Soul by his rioting, and excess, and
prodigious debauchery?

What will it avail a Man to believe rightly all the Articles of the Christian
Faith, and yet be a Stranger to good Works; to believe in God, and yet not keep
his Commandments? What will it avail a man to dispute against, or suffer for
not believing Transubstantiation, when he is guilty of the Body and Blood of
the Lord, which he receives unworthily; tramples under foot the Son of God,
crucifies him a fresh, and puts him to an open shame?

He that suffers for one Principle, and violates his duty to the rest, suffers
rather for his Humor than for Christ, rather as an obstinate man, than a
resolute, humble, conscientious, pious Christian, who with David can assure
himself, that he shall not be ashamed, but have his sure reward, having respect
unto all the Commandments; or rather, in the Language of the Apostle here,
walking worthy of the Vocation wherewith he is called.

3dly. and Lastly. That we may not lose the Reward of our sufferings, they must
be directed to a right end, viz. God's Glory. It must not be for Ostentation
sake, to be accounted a stout, courageous Champion for Christ, a valorous
Christian Hero. This will defile the Sacrifice, and make it stink in the
Nostrils of God. Not unto us, not unto us, O Lord, but to thy Name be the
Glory, whether we do or suffer for thee, must be the Language of the Church,
and every Member of it. And this will perfume the Sacrifice, and make it ascend
like the smoking Incense into God's Holy Temple, where the Celestial Chorus of
Angels, and Saints, and Martyrs continually do sing, Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God
Almighty, Rev. 4.8. V. 2.11.
which was, and is, and is to come. Thou art worthy, O Lord, to receive Glory,
and Honor, and Power. C. 7.12.
Blessing, and Glory, and Wisdom, and Thanksgiving, and Honor, and Power, and
Might be unto our God for ever and ever. Amen.

FINIS.

