TWENTY FIVE SERMONS

BY THE Right Reverend FATHER in GOD, RALPH BROWNRIG, LATE LORD BISHOP OF
EXETER.

Published by WILLIAM MARTYN, M. A. Sometimes Preacher at the ROLLS.

The Second Volume.

LONDON, Printed by Tho: Roycroft, for John Martyn, and James Allestry, and are
to be sold at the Bell in St. Paul's Churchyard, M DC LXIV.

THE R: REVEREND FATHER IN GOD, RALPH BROWNRIG LORD BP OF EXETER* who dyed aged
67. Dec. 7. 1659
portrait Lo here a Prelate, in whom Light, and Heat
Learning and Zeal, Meekness, and Courage met,
In Gods cause, and ye: Kings, our Brownrige was
A Boanerges, though a Barnabas
W: Faithorne sculp:





TO THE Most Reverend Father in God, GILBERT, By Divine Providence, LORD
ARCHBISHOP OF CANTERBURY, HIS GRACE, Primate of all England, and Metropolitan,
And One of His MAJESTY'S most HONORABLE PRIVY COUNCIL.
May it please Your GRACE,
THIS is the Second Volume of that most Renowned Prelat's Sermons, Dr. Ralph
Brownrig, sometimes Lord Bishop of Exeter.

The First, I had the Happiness and Honor to present to my Dread, and Dearest
Sovereign, King Charles the Second; Who was graciously pleased to condescend so
low, as to receive it from me into His most Sacred Hands, while I was upon my
knees before Him.

This Second, I take the boldness to tender to Your Graces Acceptance; being
confident, (with an assurance that disdains to hope) that as the Former from
that High and Mighty Monarch, the Father of the Country, so this Latter from
You, the Great Metropolitan, and Father of the Church, will find a most ready,
and welcome Entertainment.

That, I styled the Sword of Goliath; by the help whereof (through the Blessing
of Him, who is the Captain of our Salvation) the Christian Soldier may prove
truly victorious and triumphant over that great Goliath of Hell, and all his
accursed Agents and Adherents.

This, I will call the Dagger of Ehud. For as that, Judge. iii. let the dirt out
of the belly of Eglon; so will this, (if skilfully wielded, and with
resolution, and courage) that filthy Corruption (Satanae Excrementum) out of
the Heart, with which it naturally abounds, as the Sea with Mire and Dirt.

To Your Grace then, I humbly solicit, I may present, both the Person, and the
Sermons of that good, and great Bishop. His Person to Your Memory; His Sermons
to Your Eye, and Perusal.

For the Person, who was the Composer, I may not, I must not, pass over in
silence; something I must say of Him: Not that thereby I can add so much as the
least dram of real worth to Him; no more, then a curious Picture can Beauty, to
that Face which it represents: But that thereby (according to my narrow
measure) I may set forth, and declare to others that which was before. Which,
whilst I shall endeavor to do, I beseech Your Grace, that that of Plinius
Secundus to his Antoninus may be remembered; Pictores pulchram, absolutamque
faciem, raro nisi in pejus effingunt; An exact face is very seldom drawn, but
with great disadvantage; much more, when a Bungler has it in hand.

His Lordship was one of a sweet nature, of a lovely disposition, of a pleasing
off ability in his carriage, and conversation. He was endowed with a sharp wit,
a quick apprehension, a strong mind, a piercing judgment, a faithful memory,
and milder affections then ordinary.

By Industry, and Art, every Faculty of his Soul was furnished, and filled with
those Ornaments and Qualities, of which they were naturally capable, even to a
very great perfection.

He was admirable for the Profoundness, and Variety of his Knowledge; and
enabled with such an universal Wisdom, as that he was thought worthy
Employment, not only in Affairs of State; but in the Direction, and Guidance
of the House of God, which is the Church of the living God, the Pillar and
Ground of the Truth.

And yet, These had been nothing (not any of them, not all of them) if there
had not been the Salt of Grace to have seasoned them, and the Life of Faith to
have animated them. Without this, all those his other Accomplishments had been
but as gay, and gorgeous Attire upon a leprous Body; as Jewels, and Bracelets
upon a putrid, rotten Carcass. Oh his Religion, his Holiness! this was far the
fairest, and most orient Flower in the Garland of all his other Excellencies;
and incomparably above all his Greatness, had he been advanced even to Desert,
to the highest Pinnacle of Church-Preferment, and Honor. For, what ever
Profane, and Worldly-wise men may think, without all Controversy, one Grain
of Grace is infinitely more precious, and worthful, then the whole Earth,
though turned into a Globe of Gold, or Center of Diamond. And yet, this
Reverend Prelat, now in Glory, was enriched with a very great Proportion of it,
even to Admiration.

In short, He was a wonder to all, who had the happiness to know him, for his
insight into all kinds of Learning, both Ancient, and Modern; of Positive,
Textual, Controverse, Case-Divinity: But above all, for his being sanctified
with an Experimental Inspection into the Particularities of that heavenly
Science of Saving Souls.

Now (may it please Your Grace) these Sermons being the Compositions of so
Learned, so Religious, so Wise a Person, they cannot but be most worthy Your
Graces Patronage, and the Worlds highest. Esteem, and Valuation.

They are Sermons, which deliver the Word in the Purity of it, without those
humane Inventions, which might adulterate it; without that spiritual Treason of
wit and fancy, or of Heresy and Contradiction, which (to use the Expression of
a Learned Bishop) is wont to stamp the private Image and Superscription of a
man upon Gods own Coin, and to torture the Scripture to confess that which was
never in it.

Sermons, that carry Authority with them; and so, able (by the Power of the
most High) to humble the Imaginations, to nonplus fleshly Reasonings, and to
subdue all things to the Obedience of Christ: God having stamped upon his
Lordship more then ordinary Characters of Divinity; and (as it were) more
glistring sparkles and degrees of Majesty, then upon many others; that so with
greater power he might publish the Secrets of Heaven, and with more
unresistableness and glory execute that highest Office of the Lords Ambassador.

Sermons, fraught with spiritual Prudence, with Christian, Religious Wisdom;
(and such the World never had more need of.) How exactly are they accommodated
to every man's temper? How wisely are the Lightnings of the Gospel, mingled with
the Thunderings of the Law? Uses of Comfort, with those of Confusion? Cordials
of Compassion, with Corrosives of Terror? So that the Weak cannot be offended,
nor the Mighty exasperated, nor the Beginners discouraged, nor those who are
without affrighted from coming in, and entering upon, the Path that is called
Holy. Which wisdom, his Lordship neither received from flesh and blood, nor yet
learned of men; but had it inspired from above, From the Father of Lights.

All which, I cannot but apprehend as very great Encouragements of me to this
Dedication; and as sufficient Grounds to build my Confidence upon, that these
Sermons will find Acceptance with Your Grace; though (like precious Jewels from
a Paralytick) they are tendered by a weak, and trembling hand.

The good will of Him, who dwelt in the Bush, make Your Aarons Rod to bud, nay
to flourish more and more, to the Glory of his great Name, to the Advancement
of the blessed Truth, to the Maintenance of the Honor of the Priesthood, to
the furtherance of Your own everlasting Salvation. This is the earnest Prayer
of him, who is,

SIR, Your GRACES Most humbly Devoted Servant, WILL. MARTYN.

A TABLE of the SERMONS.
Two Sermons preached upon Christmas Day.
I. SErmon on 1 Timothy iii. 16. Page 3 II. Sermon on Galat. iv. 4, 5. 21
Seven Sermons upon the History of our Savior's Transfiguration.
I. Sermon on St. Luke ix. 28. 41 II. Sermon on St. Luke ix. 29. 53 III. Sermon
on St. Luke ix. 30, 31. 65 IV. Sermon on St. Luke ix. 31, 32. 79 V. Sermon on
St. Luke ix. 33. 93 VI. Sermon on St. Matthew. xvii. 5. 111 VII. Sermon on St.
Matthew. xvii. 6, 7, 8, 9. 133
A Sermon on Joel ii. 13. 153 A Sermon on Joel ii. 14. 175 A Sermon on Psalm.
lxxviii. 34, 35, 36, 37. 197 A Sermon on Isai. xxvi. 9. 217 A Sermon on Habbak.
iii. 17, 18. 237
Two Sermons preached upon Easter Day
I. Sermon on Job xix. 25, 26, 27. 253 II. Sermon on Romans viii. 11. 273
A Sermon upon Whit-Sunday, on 2 King. ii. 9. 295
A Sermon on St. Luke xxi. 34. 309. A Sermon on Genesis iv. 3, 4, 5. 327 A Sermon
on Psalm. xix. 12, 13 345 A Sermon on St. James i. 22. 361 A Sermon on Philipp.
i. 27. 379 A Sermon to the Clergy on 1 Corinthians. xiv. 1. 395 A Sermon on the
first Epistle of St. John v. 3. 411 A Funeral Sermon on 1 King. xix. 4. 427
Imprimatur.

Geo. Stradling S. T. P. Rev. in Christo Pat. D. Gilb. Archiep. Cant. a Sac.
Dom.
Ex AEd. Lambeth. October 29. 1663.
TWO SERMONS PREACHED ON CHRIST-MAS DAY.
ON
The First Sermon.
1 TIMOTHY iii. 16. And without controversy, Great is the mystery of Godliness;
God was manifest in the flesh. --
THe passage of Scripture we are now in, is a serious Exhortation of S. Paul to
Timothy, for the worthy discharge of his Office, and Ministry.

1. A dignitate Ecclesiae, from the nature and dignity of the Church; the
government of which was committed to him; he is set over the house of the
living God; that is no small dignity. If to be a doorkeeper in the courts of
God, be so honorable in King David's esteem, Psalm. lxxxiv. how great an honor
is it to have the Key of David laid on his shoulder, to have the command and
government of that glorious Family? 2. Ab excellentia Doctrinae, from the
excellency of that heavenly Evangelist? What Is the honor of Timothy's
administration? Much every way; but chiefly, That unto him are committed the
Oracles of God.
From these two heads, S. Paul magnifies the weight and dignity God's house,
and family? What more august and magnificent Title, then to be the disposer and
dispenser of the sacred mysteries of his blessed Truth? Let all the encomiums,
and titles of honor be laid together, which all the Philosophers in the world
have heaped upon their profession, and doctrine, they are all empty, and
jejune, and beggarly, in respect of this glorious description of the Church,
and faith of Christians.

The Text represents to us the great dignity of our Christian Faith. It Is no
subordinate, common, inferior Truth, that our faith believes, and professes;
no, it soars high, mounts above the clouds, transcends the largest compass of
all created truth; enters into the Sanctum Sanctorum, approaches to the Oracle,
and seat of highest Wisdom, and is conversant with the secret and hidden, and
eternal thoughts of God; has access to the treasures of heaven, searches and
discovers even the deep things of God.

In it observe these two things;

1. Here is a glorious Description of it; Without controversy, great is the
mystery of godliness. 2. Here is a summary Comprehension of it, (...), God
manifested in the flesh. That Is the main Principle, the chief Oracle of our
Belief; the first stone in the foundation of the Church, the main basis that
supports the pillar of truth, Christ, God-incarnate; that grand Truth which at
this time the Church most solemnly professes, and adores, (...), God manifested
in the flesh.
First, see this glorious Description of our Christian faith; Without
controversy, great is the mystery of godliness. A magnificent preface and
introduction ushering in this sacred truth; requiring not only the assent, but
the obedience, nay, the devotion and adoration of our faith. When he brings his
Firstbegotten into the world, he proclaims before him, Let all the Angels of
God worship him, Let every knee bow down before him, Let every tongue confess
to him. S. Paul cannot mention Christ, or the mystery of the Gospel, but he
breaks forth into all possible expressions of words and matter, into all terms
of wonderment, and admiration. Indeed, all God's works are wonderful, David
meditating on the works of Creation, Psalm. cxxxix. 17. How precious are thy
thoughts unto me, O God, how great is the sum of them! True; but the work of
Redemption, this Masterpiece of God's Power and Wisdom in his Son's
Incarnation, the Scripture puts upon it all Titles, and Attributes of Honor
and

1. It Is Verbum Veritatis, Col. i. 5. the word of Truth. 2. It Is Verbum Regni,
Matthew. xiii. 19. the word of the Kingdom. 3. It Is the Oracle of God, 1 Pet.
iv. 11. 4. It Is the Counsel of God, Act. xx. 27. 5. It Is a faithful saying,
worthy of all acceptance, 1 Timothy i. 15. And, 6. Here, as full as all,
comprehending all of them, Without all controversy, The great mystery of
godliness.
In it, four steps and ascents of dignity:

1. The nature of it; it is a mystery. 2. The just quantity and proportion;
it is a great Mystery. 3. The divine quality and condition of it; it is a
mystery of godliness. 4. The undoubted, and infallible certainty of it; it is
without controversy.
And out of all these put together, arises a short, but yet full complete
definition of all Divinity; a compendious Epitome of all Religion. What is that
profession which we Christians take great mystery of godliness. A few words,
yet the full Title, and Epitome of the Scripture, the sum and upshot of all
sacred Truth. What Is the use and end of Scripture? To make us wise to
salvation, 2 Timothy iii. To acquaint us with the mystery of godliness. It Is the
grand text of all Sermons; it is the argument, and theme of all Theological
discourses; it is the marrow, and kernel of all discourses; it is the drift and
center of Saints, and Angels.

I. For the nature of it; it is Mysterium. It Is the title of the Gospel, Mark
iv. 11. Unto you it is given to know the mystery of the Kingdom of God;
that is the Gospel. 1 Cor. ii. 7. We speak the wisdom of God in a mystery; a
mystery which was kept secret since the world began, Romans xvi. 25.

Now to understand the nature of it; A mystery is Sacrum Secretum, occultam
habens intelligentiam; An holy Secret, the understanding and knowledge of
which, is close and concealed. And then is (...), the sum of Christianity, a
mystery; It

1. Is it a mystery? then it is in it self full of secrecy, and obscurity,
naturally unknown, vayl'd up in great reservedness. It is called an hidden
mystery; a mystery hid from ages and generations, Col. i. 26. A mystery, 1.
Hidden in God, Ephesians. iii. 9. locked up in the closet of 2. Hidden in Christ,
Colos. ii. 3. In him are hid all the treasures of wisdom. 3. Hidden in the
Scripture, that is vayl'd up with many mysteries; a book in it self sealed up
with seven seals; no man or Angel is able fully to open it, Revel. iii. 18. 4.
Hidden in those types, and shadows, and ceremonies of the Law. 5. Nay, even the
Gospel, though that brings this mystery to some light, yet it is but
imperfectly discovered, still Adhuc manifestat se nobis sicut vult, non sicut
est. Bern. Adhuc Josephus loquitur per Interpretem. He does not yet fully
disclose himself to us. In heaven, adipe frumenti saginantur, and nudo
satiantur grano. We must be content Sacramenti cortice, carnis furfure:
Preachings and Sacraments, they are but the husk and the bark, the bran and the
chaff, not the clean Corn, winnowed and cleansed; Still it is hidden.
2. It Is mysterium; therefore the knowledge of it is a matter of Revelation,
not to be known by the light or benefit of nature, but it is of supernatural
discovery. The eye of nature cannot see it, nor the ear of nature hear it, nor
did it ever enter into the heart of a natural man; but God has revealed it to
us by his Spirit, 1 Cor. ii. 9, 10. All other knowledge has some prints and
footsteps in nature, but this is a mere novelty to nature. Animae creationem,
intelligunt and Daemones; Animae redemptionem, ignorant and Angeli. Herein it
exceeds the perfection of the Law; that is written in our hearts by nature; the
light of reason Non potest doceri nisi a donante, nec addisci nisi a
suscipiente: We cannot see the Sun, but by the light of the Sun; nor know
Christ, till himself discover himself. S. Paul prays that they may have the
Spirit of Revelation. 3. It Is in it self a mystery, therefore the discovery of
it is a matter of dispensation; an arbitrary, voluntary discovery to whom God
pleases, and as much as he pleases. This Christ acknowledges, Matthew. xi. 25,
26. Thou have hid these things from the wise, and prudent, and have revealed
them unto babes: Even so Father, for so it seemed good in thy sight. This will
answer all questions: And that of his to Christ, Ioh. xiv. 22. Lord, how is it
that thou will manifest thy self to us, and not to the world? For natural
knowledge, He enlightens every man that comes into the world, Ioh. i. 9. But
this knowledge he dispenses at pleasure, less to the Jews, more to the
Christians. To the Prophets, it was the light of a Candle; to the Apostles, the
light of the Day Star: Hereafter we shall see the Sun in his shining beauty. 4.
It Is a mystery; therefore the Revelation of it, is a special favor. To
communicate his secret thoughts, the mysteries of his Will, it is a fruit of
greatest love. You are my friends, says Christ, for I tell you all things. S.
John learnt it in the bosom of Christ; and he was the beloved Disciple; he lay
in the bosom, the seat of Affection, and of Secrets too. One dram
Which, if it be a Mystery, then,

1. Reverenter adeundum; we must not approach to the looking into these
Mysteries, but with much fear and reverence. The Heathens exacted all reverence
to their false, counterfeit mysteries. They commanded all profane men to stand
off, not to come near their sacred mysteries. Carelessness, and profanation,
it is the greatest opposite to the mysteries of Religion. How has God exacted
holiness, and reverence, in all that draw near mysteries? Put off thy shoos, it
is holy ground. When God came down on the Mount, they were all to wash and
cleanse themselves; 'twas death to come irreverently. Nadab and Abihu were
destroyed by fire for an unhallowed approach. Levit. x. The Lord will be
sanctified in them that come nigh him, verse. 3. The men of Bethshemesh, for an
irreverent approach to the Ark (the Type of our mysteries) were slain, even
many thousands of them. Of the two, Superstition less offends God, then
Profanation. 'Twas the great Charge God laid Jews, and for which he threatened
to remove his Worship from them to the Gentiles, because they profaned his
Worship, polluted the Table of the Lord, and made the meat of it contemptible,
Mal. i. 12. All the appurtenances belonging to this mystery, are to be
reverenced; the Place, the Time, every Utensil. Is it a mystery? then, 2.
Cast, and sobrie tractandum; we must handle this mystery chastely, and
soberly. The mysteries of Religion are not slightly, or vainly, or sportingly
to be handled; but heedfully, soberly, with all awful attention. 1. The
Minister, who speaks of them, how holily must Pet. iv. 11. Let him speak as the
Oracles of God. It was the charge of the Priests in the Old Law, Be ye clean
that bear the Vessels of the Lord, Esai. lii. 11. All those legal Pollutions
that caused an irregularity in the Priests, made them incapable of ministering;
and they are all enforcements of that purity, and mysteries. This made Moses
refuse; Send, I pray thee, by the hand of him whom thou will send, Exodus iv.
13. And Esaias to cry out, I am a man of unclean lips, Esai. vi. 5. And S. Paul
to cry out, Who is sufficient for these things? 2 Cor. ii. 16. 2. It urges
soberness in the Partakers, who are admitted to the fellowship of this
Mystery. As all irreverence, so all vain curiosity is forbidden: We must
(...); in these mysteries, we must be wise to Sobriety, Romans xii. 3. Gravity
and Sobriety, they are the Handmayds of Piety, the Ushers that always mystery?
then,
3. Fide percipiendum; Religion, and our Christian Doctrine, it is a mystery;
therefore to be apprehended by Faith, not to be fathomed by Reason. Reason will
judge that to be a foolery, which Faith reverences and adores as a mystery.
It Is called The mystery of Faith, 1 Timothy iii. 9. not the mystery of Reason,
or Understanding. And they who are initiated into these mysteries, Credentes,
not Rationales, says S. Aug. It Is not Intelligendi vivacitas, but Credendi
simplicitas, that must converse in these mysteries. Reason laughs at that in
Sarah, which Faith in Abraham embraces and rejoices in. Faith looks for a
Revelation, that God says it is so; searches not after Demonstration, or
Reason, why it should be so. Sufficit pro universis rationibus, author Deus. The
mysteries of Religion check and silence Reason, as the Angel did Zacharias, for
asking, Whereby shall I know this? he would have Reason. What says the Angel?
Luke Behold, thou shall be dumb: he stops his mouth. Reason, deduced from the
principles of Faith, and subordinate to the doctrine of Faith, it is lawful; but
when it opposes Faith, then it is unlawful. Hagar, when she obeys Sarah, may be
entertained as a servant, but if she wax malepert against Sarah, Cast out the
Bondwoman: Abandon Reason, if it contradicts Faith.
It is one excellency of Faith, it is quietativa Intellectus, it quiets and
satisfies all enquiries, with this answer, It is a mystery. Reason, that
questions, How can three Persons be one Godhead? Faith quiets Reason; My soul,
keep thou silence unto God; believe mystery. Reason questions, How can God be
made man? the Divinity and Humanity joined in one Person? Faith hears an Oracle
of Scripture, I must not enquire, it is a mystery. Reason murmurs, How can a
man be born again, and regenerate, and dye anew, and live anew? How can water
mystery. Reason, that cavils, How can Christ give us his Flesh to eat, and his
Blood to drink? How can a piece of Bread, and a taste of Wine convey Grace, seal
up Salvation? How can our souls be nourished? how united to Christ sitting in
heaven? Faith answers all, It Is a mystery. Magis sentio, quam intelligo: Tota
ratio operis, est potentia operantis.

No, in these supernatural Truths, Sapientia hominis, it is Officina erroris;
exclude Reasoning, make use of Believing. Habet palatum Fides, cui sapit mel
Dei. Aug. It Is the taste of Faith Parisiensis,

1. It is Religio Intellectus; the Religion of our Intellectual part. 2. It is
Adoratio Intellectus; the Adoration of the Understanding: Credendo, incurvamus
Intellectum ad adorandum Deum. 3. It is Fortitudo Intellectus; it is the
Strength of the Understanding. Sicut molestias perferre, it is Fortitudo
Voluntatis; sic improbabilia credere, it is Fortitudo Intellectus.
We have seen the Nature of it; it is a Mystery:

Now follows,

II. The quantity and just proportion of this mystery; it is no petty and
inferior Truth, but a mystery of the first magnitude, A great Mystery. The
Scripture advances it with all superlative terms, magnifies the greatness of
it. Phil. iii. 8. S. Paul calls it an Excellent Knowledge; I count all things
but loss for the Excellency of the Knowledge of Jesus Christ. Romans xi. 33. it
is called a Rich Knowledge. Solomon says, it furnishes a man with all precious
and pleasant Riches, Prove. xxiv. 4. It enriches him that has it. It furnishes
and enriches the noblest part of man, his Soul; the precious Pearls. Mat. xiii.
45. The kingdom of heaven is like unto a Merchant-man, seeking goodly Pearls.
This, of all other, is a Pearl of great price. They who are conversant in this
mystery, they deal with the choysest Commodities, with the ^ichest Pearls. The
finding of this Knowledge, is the finding (...) hidden Treasure, verse. 44. It
makes him for ever, that is so (...) as to meet with it. All other knowledge is
but poverty to this Treasure; all other jewels but pebbles to this Pearl.

See how the Scripture extends and enlarges the greatness of this mystery. S.
Paul ascribes to it all the dimensions of Magnitude, Ephesians. iii. 18. That ye
may be able to comprehend with all Saints, what is the breadth, and length, and
depth, and height of this mystery. And Job thus magnifies the exceeding and
incomprehensible Chap. xi. 8, 9. It is as high as heaven, -- deeper then hell,
-- longer then the earth, -- broader then the sea. It exceeds the scantling of
all created Perfections. The greatness of all other creatures may be fathomed;
the height of heaven, the depth of hell, the length of the earth, the breadth
of the sea, all limited, and bounded, and the understanding of man may reach
them. As David speaks, I see an end of all other perfections, but thy Word is
exceeding large.

1. This mystery of God-Incarnate, it is a great mystery, because multiplex
Mysterium, a comprehensive Truth, including in it manifold mysteries. It Is a
mystery pregnant; to the making up of which, many deep mysteries concur. God
manifested in the Flesh. 1. Here is the mystery of Christ's two Natures; his
Divinity, and his Humanity: A glorious mystery! Christ, true and perfect God,
and true and perfect man too; the glory of the Deity, and the infirmity of his
Manhood, both concurring in him. 2. Here is the mystery of the Union, and
conjoyning both these in one. A strange conjunction! The circumference of his
mystery, that it made the Jews to imagine a double Messiah: One, a weak,
frail, mortal man, liable to sufferings; the other, an Eternal, Omnipotent,
Immortal God. They could not reconcile the several predictions of his glorious
Divinity, and his infirm Humanity, as this mystery teaches us. 3. Here is the
mystery of his Person; that both these Natures should be so strangely and
admirably united into one Person; Christ; 1. Not by a concord of wills; 2. Or
by a transfusion of properties; 3. Or by assistance of grace: but, 4. By an
inward union and conjunction in Person: It is a mystery that Divines have
labored to express by any possible similitudes, and could not do it.

2. It Is Magnum Mysterium. This of Christ's Incarnation, it is the grand
Mystery, because all other mysteries are subordinate and serviceable to this:
all sacred truths point at this Truth; To him, give all the Prophets witness,
Acts x. 43. It was the sum, and scope of all their Predictions, All the
Prophets from Samuel, and those that follow after, as many as have spoken, have
foretold his Coming, Acts iii. 24. Of this Salvation, Abraham's promised Seed;
Moses his great Prophet; Samuel's anointed King; Jacob's Shilo; Esay's
Immanuel; Ieremy's Man compassed by a Woman; Ezekiel's Shepherd; Daniel's Holy
One; Zachary's Branch; Solomon's Lilly; David's Lord; Malachy's Angel: All that
prophesied, looked at him. He is the end, and body, and substance of all their
Rites and Ceremonies. He was Abel's Sacrifice; Abraham's First Fruits; Isaac's
Ram; Jacob's Ladder; Moses his Passover; Aaron's Rod; the Israelites Rock; the
Patriarchs Manna; David's Tabernacle; Solomon's Temple; High Priest of our
profession. All the mysteries in Scripture were serviceable to this mystery. 3.
It Is Magnum Mysterium; it is a great mystery, far exceeding all mysteries in
the world. All secrets of nature are but elements and rudiments to this Oracle.
The learned men that can search into all natural knowledge, stand gazing at
this, and cry out, How can this thing be? All mysteries of States they are but
mere follies and dotages to this Wisdom. The vanquishing Chrysostom) they
govern the bodies, this King reigns in the souls of men. Other Kings fight with
bodily weapons, this King with spiritual. Other Kings fight against Barbarians,
Christ against Devils. All subtilties of Art, but mere daubings and botcheries
to this great mystery. That Art can tame Lions, lead about Tigers, How do we
wonder at this? Mystery here can change and alter brutish, savage, barbarous
men, reduce them to all sobriety, and moderation. Christ's Incarnation shall
make the Wolf dwell with the Lamb, and the Leopard lie down with the Kid, and
the Calf, and the young Lion, and the Fatling together, and a little Child
shall lead them, etc. Esaias xi. 6. That Art is curious that can drive away
diseases, lengthen and strengthen life: How far exceeding is this mystery,
that can cure soul-sickness? not only cure sickness, but recover from death,
regenerate and renew a man old, and withered, nay, Evangelium ferreum vas,
reddidit aureum. 4. It Is Magnum Mysterium, a great mystery; because it is a
mystery even to all men of the largest capacity, the most clear understanding.
truths, that may be a mystery to one man, which is but an easy, ordinary
truth to the mind of another. As in Nature, some things seem very mysterious
and obscure to a vulgar understanding, which a learned judicious man can
presently comprehend. As the Eclipse of the Sun, an unlearned man wonders at it
as a great secret of nature, but a Scholar counts the knowledge of it easy,
and obvious. So in works of Art, Aliter judicat peritus Artifex, aliter
imperitus inspector. An unskilful man will account that a curious piece of
work, which an expert Artificer will judge but ordinary. But this Oracle, and
mystery Solomon, who knew the secrets of nature, his large head was too narrow
for it. He confesses, I have not the understanding of a man; I have not learned
this wisdom. It is hid even from the wise and prudent, Matt. xi. Where is the
wise? Where is the Scribe? Where is the disputer of the world? 1 Cor. i. 20.
All their wisdom falls short of this. It fares with the greatest Understanding,
as it does with the bodily eye: The sharpest eyesight that can behold all
earthly things clearly, yet if it look up to the body of the ^un, it mystery,
it overwhelmed and surcharged the most enlightened understanding. When Christ
appeared to Abraham (which was but praeludium Incarnationis) he falls on his
face, and trembles. When Moses had but a glimpse of this glory, I tremble
exceedingly, says he. When Elijah saw but the backparts of Christ, he hid his
face, he durst not look on. When Daniel approaches near it, it lays him for
dead: It casts Paul into a rapture; Peter into a trance; John lay as a dead
man. Excellens objectum, destruit sensum. This knowledge, it is too high, I
cannot attain to it. All humane understandings tremble, adore, are astonished
at it. 5. It Is Magnum Mysterium, a great mystery, not only to humane, but
even to the highest Angelical understanding: it is a great, deep mystery even
unto the Angels. Those Stars of the morning (as Job calls them) are overwhelmed
with the splendour of this Sun. It Is a mystery to them.
This great Work, it was concealed from them; it lay hid in the womb of
Eternity, and they still wonder and admire at the greatness of it. See this in
two places; one is, Ephesians. iii. 10. Unto Principalities and Powers in heavenly
places, is made known, by the Church, the manifold wisdom of God. Not only
some inferior Angels (as Lombard conceits) were ignorant of it, but the most
illuminated Angels; it was a mystery to them; and by the Church they learn it
(as some conceive) that they see and behold mysteries represented in the
Tabernacle, all the curtains being adorned with Cherubs. Another place is, 1
Pet. i. 12. Which things the Angels desire to look into. They do (...), stoop
down, and pry, and desire to look into these glorious Mysteries. This was
prefigured in the two Cherubs on the Mercy-Seat, looking back upon the Ark and
Mercy-Seat; and they still desire it. They cannot fully comprehend, and it is a
ravishing sight to them. Strange! How Christ made Man, it is milk for babes;
rudiments for children; whereas Angels count it hidden Manna.

That Is the second, it is Magnum Mysterium, a great mystery.

Now follows,

III. The quality and condition of this mystery; it is a mystery of godliness.
A short, but yet full comprehension of Christian Religion. It Is the Art and
mystery of Godliness. And this truth branches it self into two particulars:

1. Piety, and Godliness; it is a mystery. 2. The piety of Religion, and the
mystery of Religion must be joined together. We must possess our selves not
only with the mystery of Religion, but also with the piety.
1. Piety, it is a mystery; and therefore, 1. The art of Godliness, the skill
to live holily, it is an high, hidden, supernatural thing; a skill far beyond
the reach and possibility of nature. It Is no endowment of nature; it is hidden
and concealed to natural knowledge. By nature, we are utterly void of this
gracious endowment. Pharaoh's speech is the voice of nature, Exodus v. 2. Who is
the Lord, that I should obey him? I know not the Lord. Thus S. Paul describes
our natural condition; We are alienated from the life of God, Ephesians. iv. 18.
without Christ, being aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel, and strangers
from the Covenant of promise, having no hope, and without God in the world,
Ephesians. ii. 12. This David describes, Psalm. xiv. 2, 3, 4. The Lord looked down
from heaven upon the children of men, to see if there were any that did
understand, and seek God; They are all gone aside, they are altogether become
filthy -- and call not upon the Lord. We naturally know, There is a God; there
is no man born an Atheist; we have some sense of a Deity; but 1. Into
profanation, and so we never worship him; or, 2. Into superstition, and so we
misplace his worship in things abominable to him. When we know God, we worship
him not as God, Romans i. His worship depends upon his own will and revelation.
We know not with what we must serve the Lord, till we come thither, Exodus x.
26. 2 Kings xvii. 26. They know not the manner of the God of this land.
Holiness, it is no invention of nature, but a revelation of grace. Nature may
lead us to civility, train us up to morality; but spiritual piety, and
godliness, is beyond the reach of nature: This wisdom is from above, Iam. iii.
17. Have thou nothing but what thou mystery, it is a Secret to nature.
It gives us a reason why godliness is so scarce, so few are acquainted with
it. That, that is natural, is usual and common; but this is supernatural,
beyond the reach of nature. It is more admirable that any are holy, then that
all are not. Most men live short of the light of nature; wonder not that so few
are advanced beyond nature to the state of grace.

Piety is a mystery; therefore,

2. To natural men, it is, and seems to be, a reasonless, uncouth, unlikely
thing, a mere paradox. Tell a vulgar, unlearned man, of the mysteries of any
Art, or Science, he thinks you speak nonsense; he can see nothing in them, they
seem unreasonable. As many mysteries as you acquaint him with, so many
absurdities; he laughs at them. It Is so with all the mysteries of godliness.
Propound them to a carnal man, he will laugh at them; persuade him to them, he
rejects them; enforce them upon him, he repels them. It Is that which S. Paul
observes, Our Gospel is hid to them that perish, 2 Cor. iv. 3. A natural man
judges these Cor. ii. 14. Therefore the mysteries of the Gospel are called the
foolishness of God, 1 Cor. i. 25. God has wrapped them all up in the vail of
such mystical obscurity, that, at first sight, they appear odd, and unlikely to
a carnal man. As the Ark, though it were within all of pure gold, yet the
coverings were plain, and coorse; of hair, and goatsskins, no outward beauty to
be seen. Thus Christ, the great mystery, is God veiled up in weak flesh; How
can this man save us? The meanness of his outside scandalized the Jews; Is not
this the Carpenter? -- They were offended at him, Mark vi. 3. Christ knew it,
how easily men would stumble at the unlikeliness of this mystery, that he
pronounces him blessed that shall not be offended in him, Matthew. xi. 6. Esaias
liii. This is the reason the Prophet gives, why so few believe in Christ, verse.
1. Who has believed our report? He is as a root, verse. 2. in a dry ground; he
has no form, nor comeliness; and when we shall see him, there is no beauty
that we should desire him.

Yea, the Doctrine of godliness, how absurd seems it to natural reason?
Regeneration, to be born again, become a new man, Nicodemus cannot conceive it,
John iii. To be nourished to life by Christ's flesh; How can this man give us
his flesh? It Is an hard saying, Joh. vi. Self-denial, and mortification, to be
crucified to the world, to cross our own wills, and wrestle with our selves, and
to beat down our own bodies; a mystery of piety, a folly to nature. To hate
father, mother, life it Paul, Phil. iv. 12. It Is more blessed to give then to
receive; to part with all, in hope of gain at the resurrection, in another
world; and, above all, to look for salvation in a crucified Savior; haec sunt
stulta Dei, sed decus fidei; these are the mysteries of our piety, the follies
and paradoxes of natural reason. No, says the Psalmist, The King's daughter is
all glorious within, Psalm. xlv. All the glory of Piety, and the Church, it is
spiritual and heavenly. Worldly wisdom, that is in worldly beauty: As the Church
of the wicked One is glorious with earthly beauty, a Crown of gold, a purple
Robe, beset with Precious Stones, all earthly ornaments; so the Spouse of
Christ, she is Beautiful, but all Heavenly; Clothed with the Sun, Crowned with
the Stars, Treading on the Moon; all Heavenly and Mystical.

Piety, it is a mystery, high, and hidden; therefore,

3. The attaining of this heavenly Skill, and Art of holiness, is a matter of
much difficulty; it requires much search and study, mysteries, are long a
learning. Oh! the Art of godliness, the Trade of piety, the Skill of living
holily, it is no small matter, but very mysterious. The Philosopher could say of
his Art, Ars longa, Vita brevis, a man's life was too short to attain to the
perfection of it. How much more is this high Art of Religion, the mystery of
godliness? It makes David, for all his learning, to cry out still, Teach me,
Instruct me, Make me to understand the way of godliness. S. Paul, that great
Proficient, yet Phil. iii. 11, 12, 13. Brethren, I count not my self to have
apprehended, I have not already attained, I am not already perfect, but I
follow after, and press forward, if by any means I might attain; words of
striving and contention. How hard a thing is it to attain even to the knowledge
of godliness? Then how difficult must it be to mortify thy lusts, to subdue
thine appetite? It Is called a Crucifying. Consider it, you, who think seven
years little enough to learn any Trade of life; but any little time, any poor
pains, sufficient to learn that which the Saints were practicing all their
days. Try thy strength but with one Act, but with one Duty of godliness; and
then tell me, If slubbering over a few prayers, or coming to Church, and
yawning out an Amen, half asleep, half awake, be likely to make thee a skilful
man in this Trade of piety.

That Is the first; Religion is the mystery of godliness.

2. The second Truth is, The Mystery, and the Piety of Religion must go both
together. We must take both to us; not only content our selves with the
mystery of Christianity, but be sure we acquaint our selves with the piety.
True Religion joins both together. Thus S. Paul describes Christian Religion, '
It Is a Doctrine according to godliness, 1 Timothy vi. 3. And Tit. i. 1. it is
called, the Knowledge of the Truth according unto godliness: We may as well
separate light from heat in the fire, as the mystery and knowledge of it from
the piety.

Indeed, first we must get the mystery, then labor for the piety of it.
First, God created light; so it is in man's soul. A man is sooner enlightened
then sanctified: The Sun enlightens in an instant, but it begets heat in the
Air by length of time; but they must never be a sunder. Blind Devotion, would
have the piety without the mystery. Oh! Zealous it would be, but not with
knowledge. Oh! A good heart to God-wards; no matter for knowledge. And profane
Curiosity, that would have the mystery without the piety; understand all
secrets and mysteries, comprehend all Truths; but for the holiness of
Christianity, they have no list to it. True Christianity joins both together.
pleasant to the eye, and a tree to be desired to make one wise, Genesis iii. 6.
but it must be to us as the tree of Life, for Devotion, and Practice. Religion
is not placed in the upper region of the Brain; but in the Heart, the seat of
affection, the fountain of action. It Is a sanctifying Truth; Holy Father,
sanctify them through thy Truth, not enlighten them only, Ioh. xvii. 17.

There is not any Truth so mystical, and contemplative, but must be drawn into
practice. There is no mystery in Scripture, but has its piety. As there is
not any creature, but it is for Non tantum visu delectat, sed usu prodest; so
there is no Truth in Religion, but we may, and must extract from it Piety. Some
Truths, at first sight, seem but dry as to this; but as the Licorish stick, at
first, looks like any weed, but chew it, and you suck sweetness; so, mysteries
that seem to be most remote from practice, have a juice and sap of piety to be
sucked out of them. If ye know these things, happy are ye, if ye do them, Joh.
xiii. 17. This man shall be blessed in his deed, Iam. i. 25.

See how Christ checks Curiosity, and turns all to Practice; Lord, are there
few that be saved? And he said unto them, Strive to enter in at the strait
gate, Luke xiii. 23, 24.

1. Piety, it is the end of Christianity. It Is mysterium practicum. Not a
Science in contemplation, but an Art of doing; not to make us the wiser, but
the holier. 2. Piety, it is the best keeper of this mystery. The knowledge of
Religion, it is a precious Jewel; see the Cabinet S. Paul tells us of, wherein
it must be kept; Holding the mystery of Faith in a pure Conscience, 1 Timothy
iii. 9. Would thou not err concerning the Faith? Take heed of making
shipwreck of a good Conscience. Knowledge in this vessel, is like the Manna in
the golden-pot; it is kept sweet. In a profane heart, it is like Manna in
other vessels, that stank and putrified. God takes away natural knowledge, if
we abuse it, and live not accordingly. When they knew God, and glorified him
not as Romans i. 21, etc. As we try vessels first with water; if they will hold,
and keep it sweet, then we pour wine into them. They who corrupt natural
knowledge, God will not trust them with this mystery.
Take heed thou divide not the piety from the mystery. In all Truths, labor
to be better. In any mystery, make S. Peter's collection; If these things are
so, What manner of persons ought we to be in all holy conversation, and
godliness?

We have seen the quality and condition of this mystery, It is a mystery of
godliness. Now follows,

IV. The infallible, undoubted certainty of this mystery; It is beyond,
without, all controversy.

There is a double Certainty;

1. A certainty in the thing it self. It Is a most grounded Truth. Heaven and
earth may sooner fail, then the least particle of this Truth. It has the
Power, and the Truth, and the Faithfulness of God; nay, his Oath to establish
it. 2. A certainty of persuasion; at this the Text ayms. See with what
confidence and assurance S. Paul seals up this great It Is without controversy.
Observe; True Faith embraces these heavenly Truths with all assurance, and
strength of adhesion, and fullness of persuasion. It Is the nature and office of
true Faith, in matters of God, to breed all possible assurance. It Is a Seal. He
who receives God's testimony of his has set to his Seal, that God is true,
Ioh. iii. 33. Philip shows the assurance of Faith, which he requires of the
Eunuch; Acts viii. 37. If thou believe with all thine heart, that Jesus is
the Son of God. Especially in this Truth, Jesus, God-Incarnate, Faith breaks
through all controversies, and unquestionably must believe.
1. This Truth is clearly revealed in Scripture. And Divine revelation is the
stay and establishment of Faith. Truths that are more obscurely delivered, are
liable to question, and controversy; but this Truth, that, Jesus is the
Messiah, and the Credendum est Deo, vel semel loquenti. 2. This Truth, it is an
immediate, and first principle of Religion; the grand Maxim, and Oracle of
Divinity. Now in all professions, Principles are unquestionable, admit no
gainsaying. He that comes to God, must believe --. 3. It Is a fundamental
Truth; the first Stone that is laid in the building of the Church; the main
Rock upon which the whole Building rests. See, when Christ builds his Church,
he Thou art the Son of the living God; he lays that in the foundation. Now in
all buildings, the foundation must be sure and immovable. Here, Qui dubitat in
fide, est infidelis. Agrippa's almost, it is too weak; no, here, What we have
heard, and seen, and felt --. 4. Errors in this, are most dangerous. As errors
in the conception are hardly corrected, so errors in this first conception of
Faith. Oh! these prime Truths must be firmly, and strongly embraced. Other
consequential and secondary Truths of less evidence and necessity, may admit of
discussion. In some Salva compage fidei; but in this, every error is deadly. In
some Truths, S. Paul's moderation is sweet, If any man think otherwise, God
will reveal it to him; account him as a brother: But in this, he that errs, S.
Paul's threatening is seasonable, You are fallen from grace, you are cut off
from Christ, you must dye in your sins.
There is a necessary Truth; Maria, virgo in partu.

There is a decent Truth; Maria, virgo post partum. Faith puts these Truths
without question. (...).

1. This is the defiance, Faith gives to all the objections and Get thee behind
me, Satan; it is without all controversy. 2. By this, it answers and represses
the contradictions of infidelity; a man's heart is hardly drawn to assent and
mysteries: No, Faith tramples all contradictions under foot; it is without all
controversy. 3. By this, it overcomes the weaknesses and infirmities of Faith.
Faith, at first, has many doubts and fears; But why do thoughts rise in my
heart? I know he is a faithful and true witness; no word is impossible to him.
It Is the victory and triumph that Faith gets over all doubtings, it believes
steadfastly, without all controversy.








ON
The Second Sermon.
GALAT. iv. 4, 5. When the fullness of the time was come, God sent forth his Son
made of a woman, made under the Law, to redeem them that were under the Law,
that we might receive the adoption of Sons.
WHich words set out unto us the great and Redemption: A work undertaken and
wrought by the Incarnation of our blessed Savior. The remembrance of which,
the Church of God does this day joyfully Celebrate. An high Festival it is, and
to be honored by us: whether we respect Christ, and, in him, the mystery of
the day; or respect our selves, and, in us, the mercy, and benefit, which, as
on this day, was vouchsafed to us.

1. Look upon Christ, and the mystery of his Incarnation; so Pharaoh's
birthday, and Herod's, were nothing to it) is kept and celebrated with all
joyful solemnity. That is the mystery of the Christ made, and born of a woman;
so it is a day of joyfulness. 2. Look upon our selves, and the mercy, and
benefit of this day, that redounded to us; and so it is a Feast of deliverance
out of Captivity. This day Christ came to redeem us that lay under the Law,
cast and condemned men: And a day of enlargement out of Captivity, that is a
Feast of Iubile: Such was this day. No Captivity like that of ours; neither the
Egyptian, when they were born slaves; nor that of Babylon, when carried away to
be slaves; both of them fall short of this, the bondage of our much to be
remembered in our generations. 1. It is the day of Christ's Nativity, keep it
with joyfulness. 2. It is a day of our enlargement out of Captivity, keep it
with thankfulness.

The Apostle then sets out unto us, the happy condition that has betided the
Church of God by the coming of Christ in his Incarnation. And he expresses it
two ways;

1. By a comparative opposition to the state of the Church before Christ's
coming. 2. By a positive, or rather superlative, illustration of the happy
condition of the Church, by his coming among us.
1. The Church of the Jews, before Christ, the low condition of that is set out
by three steps of depression and inferiority, in respect of our state of
advancement that Christ's Birth brings to us.

1. Respectu Aetatis, for its Age; it was a Child, or an Infant, verse. 1. A
child in knowledge, in growth of grace, in affections; a child, weak,
imperfect, unskilful. 2. Respectu Conditionis, for the usage and condition in
which it was; it was Servilis; it differed nothing from a servant, under a yoke
of servitude, kept in more servile fear and subjection then Christians. Their
spirit was the spirit of fear and bondage; our spirit is the spirit of love and
liberty. 3. Respectu Educationis, for its breeding and education; it was at the
command, and under the institution of a cursed Schoolmaster, the Law: and but
meanly instructed; acquainted only with the first elements and rudiments of
our Religion; the high mysteries of our Faith, not manifested to them.
And this threefold depression of the Jewish Church, should

1. Were they babes and children? we far worse; dead in our sins; not begot
again to God by any spiritual Regeneration, 2. Were they in the condition of
servants? We not so much as servants; strangers, rebels, cast-aways, enemies in
a forlorn condition. 3. Were they kept under inferior Tutors and Governors?
We far worse; untaught, ignorant, foolish, like the wild Ass, without
understanding, without God in the world.
2. The estate of the Christian Church is illustrated by a superlative Christ's
Incarnation. And this benefit we gain by him is expressed in three remarkable
particulars:

1. The first thing remarkable in this great benefit, is the Time, when it was
performed; When the fullness of time was come. 2. The second thing remarkable,
is, the very Performance and Accomplishment of it; and that is considerable, 1.
In the causes of this benefit, which are three: 1. The Author of it, God. 2.
The Actor of it, His Son. 3. The Assurer of it, verse. 6. that is, the Holy
Ghost. All three persons of the glorious Trinity, as they concurred in our
Creation, so they join and meet in the accomplishment of our Redemption.
2. In the manner of working and performing this benefit; that is remarkable:
and it is twofold, 1. Designando; By designing and appointing the Son to do it;
Emisit, God sent him. 2. Aptando; By fitting, and furnishing, and accommodating
1. Is Aptitudo naturae; A fitness of nature; he made him Man, clothed him with
our flesh, put him into that nature, that was fit to work it. 2. Is Aptitudo
status; A fitness of state and condition, such as was requisite in him who
should work it; Made him under the Law, put upon him that bond and obligation
for us. That Is the second thing remarkable, the very performance of it.


3. The third thing remarkable, is the end and fruit of it; 1. Is Liberatio a
malo; A freedom from misery; that is the benefit of Redemption; That he might
redeem us. 2. Is Exaltatio ad bonum, The advancing of us to happiness by the
benefit of adoption; That we might receive the adoption of sons.

First, that which is considerable, is, The time of our Savior's Incarnation;
it was in the fullness of time. Now this fullness of time, is two ways
considerable;

1. There is naturalis plenitudo temporis; A kind of natural fullness of time;
when time comes to the full growth; when the world was at his ripe and full
age, at the meridian, and noontide of the world; neither in the nonage and
minority, nor yet in the old age and decay of the world; That Is the natural
fullness of time. 2. There is constituta plenitudo temporis; The set, appointed
time, which God had designed for this great Work: when that appointed time came
to the full, then Christ was Incarnate, sent to redeem.
1. Consider it as the natural fullness of time. It Is with the age of the world,
as it is with the age of a man; there is a time of increasing, till he comes to
his full growth; and then there is a time of decaying, and wearing away. It Is
so, in the course of time; The middle 'twixt both, it is the fullness of time:
and in Christ came. Not in the beginning of time, nor yet in the last closure,
and period, and conclusion of time.

1. Christ came not in the beginning, and morning of the world, presently after
the fall of Adam; but stayed, and deferred his coming for a season, for diverse
reasons:

1. Differendo medicinam, aggravavit morbum. When the world had sinned, God did
not presently dispatch our Savior, that the fall and disease of sin might be
more observable, and so the cure prove more gloriously remarkable. Were we
presently cured, so soon as we complained, we should less esteem the danger of
our disease. The long smart, and tediousness of our Christ would not go at the
first Call to cure Lazarus, but stayed three days, that he might be sick, and
dye, and be buried, and putrified; that the case of Lazarus might seem more
desperate: So, God let the world lie and continue in that ruin, that sin might
appear out of measure sinful.

In the course of nature, a wound is sooner given, then it can be cured again:
And in the dispensation of grace, God takes longer time for punishing, and
pardoning, then we take for sinning: Numb. xiv. 34. After the number of the
days, each day for a year, shall ye bear your iniquities; even forty years,
that ye may know my breach of promise. The sin of the Spies and People was but
forty days continuance, but they felt the smart of that sin full forty years.
This course God took with the world, Romans xi. 33. God has shut up all in
unbelief, that he might have mercy upon all: Miriam, for a word spoken amiss,
must be shut out of the Camp seven days. Had her father but spit in her face,
should she not be ashamed seven days? The sense of God's displeasure was to
abide upon us. S. Paul sets out unto us this divine economy, Gal. iii. 19.
After God had promised Christ, many hundred years were spent, ere he performed
his promise. The Law came betwixt; and it was added because of transgression,
till the Seed should come. The world was to look for a Savior; but in the mean
time, the Law was set over them, to convince them of

2. Christ came not presently in the beginning of Time, that so the perfection
of the Church might grow by degrees, till it came to the full age and measure
of Christ. It Is the Apostles Similitude, verse. 1. The Church was first as a
child in the minority; much time to pass over it, till it come to perfection.
It is compared, 1. To a Building; that is, a leisurely, slow work. An House, or
a City, it is not built in a day. First the Foundation, 2. To Husbandry, and
sowing of Seed. It Is not heri sementis, and hodie messis, to day Seed-time, and
to morrow Harvest; but first the blade, then the ear; after that, the full corn
in the ear; then comes harvest, Mark iv. It was sown in Promises, sprung up in
Prophesies, bloomed in Types and Figures; then came the full ear and harvest,
in Christ's Incarnation. The joy of that time is the joy of harvest, Esaias ix.
3. The improvement of the Church, it is compared, 3. To the growth of a Man,
Ephesians. iv. Now of all creatures, the growth of a Man is most leisurely; he comes
slowest on to perfection. When you put a child to School, you place him not in
the highest Form, enter him not into the deepest mysteries of Learning at
first, but begin him at lower: So God first placed the Church, sub lege
Naturae, trayn'd them up in rudiments revealed in a simpler manner; then brings
in the Paedagogie of Moses, sets him to nurture and tutour them in Types and
Figures, then brings in Christ, the great Prophet and Doctor of the Church.
3. Christ came not presently in the beginning of Time, but desire. Thus Christ
delayed, and denied the Canaanitish woman; O woman, be it unto thee as thou
desire. Open thy mouth wide, and I will fill it, Psalm. lxxxi. 10. Delay
enlarges, and stretches out the desire; and the larger our desires of Christ
are, the fuller shall we enjoy him.

This made the Church, before Christ, long and expect, and be earnest, for his
Coming. Abraham, he longed to see this day, Ioh. viii. Jacob on his deathbed,
O Lord, I wait for thy Salvation. It made the Prophets enquire diligently, and
search into the waiters for the consolation of Israel. The Church, like
Sisera's mother, looked out at the window, Why stay the wheels of his Chariot?
O that thou would break the heavens, and come down! The Fathers expound it of
the longings of the Patriarks for the Coming of Christ. Many Kings and
Prophets desired to see this day, Luke x. That is the reason, says Gregory,
why the Saints complained, Their days were shortened, because they could not
live to see Christ in the flesh. They only saluted the Promise afar off, and
dyed in the faith of it.

4. Christ came not presently, deferred his appearance, to teach us the more to
prize him now he is come, and to rejoice in him. Hope, deferred, makes the
heart sick, Prove. xiii. 12. but when it is accomplished, it is a tree of Life.
Has he cost the Church so much longing, and searching, and praying? Sure then
the Church will welcome him gladly, embrace him firmly, retain him constantly.

Those that have been long without children, when God sends them a son, he is
double welcome to them. Isaac, and Jacob, and Joseph, they were long sued for,
before they were obtained; and Quod diu quaeritur, solet dul^ias inveniri,
says St. Aug. The Church before Christ was like barren Hannah, weeping, and
sorrowing, and begging of a son; now that Christ is born, it becomes us to be
like fruitful Hannah, rejoicing at his birth. I was the woman, that prayed for
this child, and the Lord has given the petition which I have asked of him.
Hannah's song, says S. Aug. it is not, Canticum unius foeminae pro filio, sed
totius Ecclesiae pro Christo. It becomes the Church to sing Hannahs song for
the birth of Christ. The Church, after much search, has found out, not the
lost Groat, but an invaluable Treasure; not a


2. Neither did he stay till the last period, and end of Time; Christ,
yesterday, and to day, and the same for ever, Heb. xiii. 8. The Patriarchs,
they believed, in Christum futurum, in Christ afterward to be exhibited: The
Apostles, and the Saints of that Age, they believed, in Christum praesentem,
they enjoyed his bodily presence; they saw and believed on him, present amongst
them. Christians now, they believe, in Christum praeteritum, come, and gone
again into heaven. They that came before, and they that followed after, they
all sung Hosanna. The Patriarchs, they Hosanna, Blessed is he that comes to us
in the name of the Lord. As Kings, when they go in State, have their Ushers
before them, and their Attendants after them, both honor their appearance.
Christ in this fullness of time, is as the Sun at noontide; East, and West are
both enlightened by him. It shows us the efficacy of Christ, and of his blood;
it was effectual, not only when it was shed, but before it was shed, and after
it was shed. It sanctified, and saved the Primitive Saints; and the last upon
earth shall be saved by it.

That Is the first fullness of time, in the natural consideration of Christ came.

II. There is another fullness of time, that is Constituta plenitudo temporis;
that time that was set, and decreed, and appointed by God. For not only
Christ's coming, but all the circumstances of Time and Place were forelaid,
and determined; and Christ's coming into the world, gave a fullness and
accomplishment unto that Time.

That we may conceive how our Savior's Coming brought a fullness to Time, we
must know, there were foregoing times, in Christ was made known to the Church;
but yet there was an emptiness in those times; His Birth and Incarnation gave a
fullness to them.

There were three Preparative foregoing Times, which Christ's Coming fulfilled:

1. Was Tempus Promissionis; that Time and Age of the Church when the Promise
of Christ was first made and published; that was the time from Adam to Moses.
The Church of God lived, and supported it self with that Promise, That
afterward, in God's good time, Christ should be born. Now Promises, are all
for hereafter; Faith knows how to make use of them, but in themselves they are
but empty, they exhibit nothing. They give good Assurance, but put us not into
Possession. A man may be rich in Bills, and Bonds, and Specialties, but yet be
in actual want: as men lay up Evidences among Christ's coming fulfilled those
Promises, gave a Yea and Amen to them. The prayer of David, was the prayer of
the whole Church, Think upon thy Servant, as concerning thy Word, in which thou
have caused me to put my trust. It spread these Evidences before God, as
Hezekiah did the Letter that was sent to him. Ey, but Promises turned into
Performances, is a true fullness. That Is the first; the time of Performance is a
real fullness to the times of Promises. 2. A second Time was, Tempus Typorum,
the time and age of the Church, furnished with Types and Prefigurations of him;
that was Moses. It added to the former time. That had but a Promise of him;
these Types resembled him, described him to them, sealed up, and assured his
coming to them. They were to the Faith of the Church, as Signs to represent
him, as Tokens and Pledges to assure him to them: But yet this falls short of
fullness. Seals and Pledges are good Assurances, but actual Possession is a
great deal better. Annulus iste nihil valet, haereditas est quam reposco. The
Writing and Seal is not the thing we look for; the Estate and Inheritance is
that we wait for. Now Christ's coming filled up the imperfections, and
emptiness of fullness of the Body. Col. ii. 17. They were but shadows of things
to come, but the Body is of Christ. His coming filled the Temple, as the cloud
filled the Tabernacle. He filled that house with glory, when Christ came into
it. 3. A third Time was, Tempus Prophetiarum; the Age of the Prophets; that was
yet a fuller Time: then there was a more clear and particular foretelling the
very manner and circumstances of his Birth and Incarnation. Esaias calculates,
and foretells the time; At such a year, then the Messiah shall come* Micah
foretells Bethleem. They bring it nearer, and closer home; but all of them fail,
and fall short of this fullness. They were but as Heralds and Ushers,
forewarning, and preparing the way before him. The Testimony of Jesus, is the
Spirit of Prophecy: His coming gives a being to all their Predictions. They
all sat like Jonas to see when their Prophesies should be fulfilled; like
Elijah on mount Carmel, looking often, and often, for his blessed Appearance.
His presence accomplished them, and gave them their fullness. Thus God dealt
with his Church, as Boaz with Ruth; first he affords her some gleanings;
So then; Is Christ's Coming the fullness of time? What improvement shall we
make of this point for practice?

1. It should teach us to take notice of our happiness, that were kept and
reserved to live in those times that are fulfilled by our Savior's coming. It
is a great Blessing of God to be born in good times, in days of Peace and
Plenty. We pity our forefathers, who lived in those Swording times, when all
was in an uprore; and after-ages will do the like for us. And one bewailed
himself, that he was born, nec solo, nec coelo, nec seculo erudito, in
barbarous times. How happy are Christians, who have all the Mysteries of our
Redemption accomplished in these days of the Luke x. 23. Blessed are the eyes
that see the things that ye see; for I tell you many Kings and Prophets have
desired to see those things that ye see, and have not seen them. David, and
Solomon, and Josiah, how would they have thrown down their Crowns at his feet,
and adored him? Those Truths concerning Christ, which we count common and
vulgar, and slight and neglect them, how would they have ravished the spirits
of those Saints that were before us? The Mystery of the Trinity, what dark
intimations of it to the Saints of old? That Christ was both God and Man,
David's Lord, and David's Israel, how to conceive it; Matthew. xxii. Our Saviors
Incarnation, Passion, Resurrection, Ascension, we scorn to spend time to learn
them our selves, and teach them others; and yet the Angels, and Archangels
stand astonished at them. They before us received but the Promise, God
providing a better thing for us, that they without us should not be made
perfect, Heb. xi. 40. 1 Samuel xvi. Samuel would not sit down to the Sacrifice,
till young David was b^ught from tending the sheep. Christ's Sacrifice was
delayed, till the fullness of the Gentiles might come in. The Patriarchs were
the eldest sons, and they were put off with a Kid; the fat Calf was killed for
us; the

2. This fullness on Gods part, does challenge and require fullness on our part.

1. Fullness of knowledge. On Gods part Christ is fully revealed, all the
Mystery of Godliness laid open, and unfolded; it is our duty then, fully to know
him. The dim, dark, imperfect knowledge of the Jewish Church will not suffice;
the vail is now taken off, and we all with open face may see and behold him.
When I was a child, I spoke as a child, I understood as a child; that was the
condition of those times. Christians must be grown men, The times of our former
ignorance, God regarded not, says S. Paul, but now he warns every man, Act.
xvii. 30. The times of Christianity are foretold to be knowing times; Every man
shall know me, from the least of them, to the greatest of them, Ier. xxxi. 34.
The earth shall be filled with the knowledge of the Lord, as the waters cover
the sea, says the Prophet Habakkuk; a Springtide of knowledge. Zachary
foretells, that the feeblest Christian shall be as David. John Baptist, a great
enlightened Prophet; yet the least in the kingdom of heaven may be greater then
he, in the Mysteries of Religion.

This fullness on Gods part requires of us,

2. Fullness of Faith, and of steadfast Assurance. We owe our Faith to Gods bare
Promises; Shall we not fully believe his real Performances? The Saints before
Christ met with many difficulties Christ, as it was propounded to the
Patriarchs: 1. Was Obscuritas; They saw all in a dim light; all things were
made known in much obscurity; they had but the light of a candle to discern by:
the light of the Sun shines out to us. 2. Was Generalitas; Christ was promised
to them in more general terms, not so distinctly and personally as he is to us.
They heard of a blessed Seed to be born, that is all their Faith fastened on. We
know who he is, Jesus the Son of Mary; he is pointed out to us (...), with
special circumstances. Hic, and Nunc, 3. Was Improbabilitas; The Promise was
propounded to them with some Improbabilities. A Virgin shall conceive, and
bring forth a Son: How can this thing be? Yes, we know it is performed; that
holy Virgin has conceived, and born him. Performances confute all
improbabilities. Can there come any good out of Nazareth? Come and see. 4. Was
Longinquitas; The Promise of Christ, made to the Fathers, was for a long time
after; many hundred years to be spent ere Christ should come. Tell a man what
shall happen a The Prophecy is for many days to come, said those mockers in
Ezekiel. We need not stretch our faith so far, the Promise is before us. With
Thomas we may lay hold on him, and say, My Lord, and my God.
3. Has Christ brought a fullness with him? It must work in us fullness of
content, and satisfaction; rest fully in him, and in his plentiful Redemption.
The fullness of Christ is abundantly able to satisfy, and fill up all our
desires; Fills the soul with marrow and fatness. All other cravings of the soul
may be quieted for a time, but dream of meat, says the Prophet, and when he
awakes, his soul is empty. This heavenly Manna, it breeds appetite, and yet it
pinches not; it satisfies the soul, and yet it cloys not. Indeed Christ has in
him all that we need, or can possibly wish for. He is the poor man's Riches, the
despised man's Honor, the hungry man's Food, the sick man's Return to thy rest, O
my soul, the Lord has replenished thee. When Simeon had Christ in his arms, he
had enough, then willing to dye; he had seen his Savior. 4. Has God fulfilled
his Promise to us? It requires we should fulfill our promises to him: Not
fullness on Gods part, and emptiness on ours; fast on his part, loose on ours.
The Son of God, Jesus Christ, was not Yea, and Nay, 2 Cor. i. 19. His coming
to us, was not like the willing-unwilling son in the Gospel; first he would go,
and then he would not. Not one word has fallen yea, and nay? The Promises that
have passed 'twixt God and us, are mutual; not simply free, but partional and
foederal; Do, ut des; Facio, ut facias; in the form of a Covenant, and by way
of stipulation. Moses calls it a mutual Avouchment: We avouch him to be our
God, he avoucheth us to be his people, and that is strong and binding, Deuteronomy.
xxvi. 17. Thus Joshua exhorts the people to obedience, Ye know in all your
hearts, and in all your souls, that not one thing has failed of all the good
which the Lord has promised you; all is come to pass. Take heed of being false
in his Covenant. He performs all, we just nothing. 5. At the fullness of time
God made this great Promise good to his Church; It must have a double operation
upon our Faith: 1. It must settle our Faith. 2. It must order our Faith, and
reliance upon God. 1. It must settle our Faith in the hopeful expectance of all
other Promises. This grand Promise of Christ, it is Matrix omnium promissionum,
and, Pabulum Fidei; the foison that Faith feeds upon; it gives strength to all
other promises; In him all are Yea, and Amen. He has not spared his own Son,
with him he can deny us nothing. Accessorium sequitur Principale; other
promises are accessories and appurtenances to this Promise. Manoah's wife
argued strongly, Would God destroy us, he would not have promised us a son.
Has God made good the Promise of his Son? He will fail us in nothing. All his
ways are Mercy and Truth; Mercy in Promising, Truth in Performing. As it must
settle our Faith, keep it from wavering; so, 2. It must order our Faith, keep
it from precipitancy; too much hastening. Our Faith must not antedate the
Promises Luke i. 20. See the date God sets to them, They shall be fulfilled in
their season. Thus the Prophet sets back the overhasty expectation of the Jews
for the overthrow of their enemies. Habak. ii. 3. The vision is yet for an
appointed time, at the end it shall speak, and not lie; though it tarry, wait
for it, because it will surely come, it will not tarry. It is good, not only
to hope, but to wait for the Salvation of God. We should answer, and check our
overhasty cravings, as Christ did, Mine hour is not yet come. When it is come,
Salvation shall come flying upon the wings of the wind. Joseph, in prison, made
means for enlargement, it succeeded not, until the time that his word came; the
word of the Lord tried him, and delivered him, Psalm. cxv. Thus the Hebrews had
their set time for enlargement, the self-same day that God Babylon. The Lord,
he does not (...), but (...), he is not slack, but waits to have mercy upon us,
in the best season, and time of mercy.


We come,

Secondly, to the benefit it self accomplished for us; God sent his Son. We
will take the particulars as they lie. So here are three things considerable;

1. The Author, God: 2. His Action, He sent: 3. The Person who must effect and
perform this Redemption for us, that is his Son.
I. The Author of this great benefit of sending, is God. The Scripture still
ascribes the sending of Christ, unto God the Father. This gracious action it is
appropriated unto him. Hence he is called, the Gift of God, Ioh. iv. 10. So,
Ioh. iii. 16. He gave his only begotten Son. So, Ioh. xvii. 23. praying to his
Father, he adds, They have believed, that Thou have sent me. So, Acts iii. 26.
S. Peter assures the Jews, God has sent his Son to bless you, in turning away
every one of you from your iniquities.

And two Congruities there are, that God should send his Son to Redeem us:

1. Congruity is grounded upon that Order, and Relation which is betwixt the
Persons in the glorious Trinity. As is their Being, so is their Working. The
Father has his Being from himself, so he has his Working. We never read that
the Father was sent by the Son, or by the Holy Ghost. He is Fons Deitatis, the
Fountain and Original of the Deity. He is of himself, and works of himself. But
the Son has his Being from the Father by Eternal generation; and all his
Operations and Actions Father, Ioh. v. 19. The Son can do nothing of himself,
but what he sees the Father do. Thus Christ referrs all his performance of our
salvation, to the sending of the Father. Ioh. iv. My meat is, to do the will of
him that sent me, and to finish his work. And again, Ioh. ix. 4. I must work
the works of him that sent me. Father communicates all these gracious works to
his Son, and sent him to perform them. 2. A second Congruity, why God the
Father must be the Author of our Redemption, is, Because by special
Appropriation he is the Author of our Creation; and none other must Redeem us,
but he who did Create us. 1. The right of Redemption; 2. The glory of
Redemption; 3. The duty of Redemption; all belong to him. 1. We were his by
right of Creation, and that was an indefeasable right. Though we by sin lost
our right in God, yet God did not lose his right in us. Now Redemption belongs
to him, to whom belongs the original right of Possession. I am thine, O save
me; thine hands have made me. Mine own I will bring again, as I did sometimes
from the depth of the sea. The stray lost Sheep was the Shepherds still, he had
the only right to recover it. None but God could lay claim to us, and
therefore none but God could Redeem us. 2. None must Redeem us, but he who
Created us; 3. None must Redeem us, but God who Created us; the benefit of
Redemption does more deeply oblige us, then Sons Blood* then to him who Created
us only by his Breath* More Duties and Services are to be performed to him as
our Savior, then as to our Maker. Should any but God Redeem us, we should be
more deeply engaged to a Creature, then to our Creator, God blessed for
evermore.


We have seen the Author: Let us see,

II. The Action, He sent. Our Saviors Incarnation, for the Sending. Christ
makes it the sum of our Christian Faith; That the world may believe that thou
have sent me, Ioh. xi.

It is a pregnant expression, and affords us diverse truths for our Observation.

1. Christ's Incarnation was a Sending of him; that is Actus liberae
dispensationis, an Action of freedom, and voluntary dispensation. Not (as some
erroneously conceived it) as if his Sending, had been his Making, and giving
him his Being. It was Nestorius his Heresy, That the Person of Christ had no
Being before his Incarnation, but then had his beginning. No, his Sending was
no natural production, but a gracious employment, and voluntary dispensation.
He who was Sent, was before he was Sent, Ioh. xvi. 28. I came forth from the
Father, and came into the world. Again, I leave the world, and go unto the
Father. The Lord possessed me in the beginning of his way before his works of
old, Prove. viii. 22. There is his Eternal generation. But he rejoiced to be in
the habitable parts of the earth, he delighted to be with the sons of men:
There was his voluntary, and gracious Sending, in his Incarnation. Though he
was born at Bethlem, Yet his goings forth, were from of old, from everlasting,
Micah V. 2. 2. Christ was Sent to work our Redemption: Sending, it is Actus
specialis Intentionis; he came to be a Savior to us, upon special Intention.
It gives a great assurance to our faith, that Christ undertook this work, not
occasionally, but purposely; it Incarnation. Not, as David saved Nabal's flock,
while he was in the wilderness, for his own safety; only while he was there,
he did Nabal that kindness: Nor was he like the good Samaritan, that traveled
upon his own occasions, and chanced upon the wounded man, and so stepped out of
his way to relieve, and succor him; but it was his only business. He came to
seek, and to save that which was lost, Matthew. xviii. 11. Now, surely, he will
not frustrate the main end of his Nativity. He was separated to this work from
his mothers womb; Sent from the bosom of his Father to accomplish it. 3. Christ
came, and yet his Father Sent him; it is Actus mutui consensus: He came and so
it was his own Act: and his Father Sent him, so it was his Father's Act. Both
joined, and agreed, in this work of our Salvation. Indeed the Father and the
Son, they always do the same things; but yet more expressly their consent is
observable in our Redemption. The Scripture makes it a matter of their counsel,
and consultation; a matter of covenant, and compact, 'twixt the Father and the
Son. Ask of me, and I will give thee the Heathen for thine Inheritance, Psalm.
ii. In the volume of thy book it was written of me; then said I, Lo, I come; I
delight to do thy will, O my God, Psalm. xl. 7. Both concurred; He came not of
himself, but his Father Sent him; Come, I will send thee to thy brethren, said
Jacob to Joseph; Go, I pray thee, see whether it be well with them. They both
joined in this work, as Abraham and Isaac did in the sacrificing of Isaac; no
striving, or wrestling, or refusing, but a joint consent. The Father Sends him,
and he came willingly, Iephta's daughter to her father, Do as thou have vowed.
It was not the love of Christ only, without, or against his Fathers liking:
not like Ionathans kindness, sore against his father Saul's will* He undertook
not our cause, nor vanquished our enemies, as Jonathan made his onset on the
Philistims, his father not knowing it: nor did God part with him unwillingly,
and upon much importunity, as Jacob did with Benjamin, to ransom his brother;
no, God highly approved his Sons willingness in offering and undertaking this
great Service; they both joined in this work. 4. God Sent his Son to Redeem us;
it is Actus Autoritatis, it carries with it strength of full Warrant, and
Authority. He came with an ample Commission to effect this work. And Christ
published this Commission at his first Preaching. Luke iv. 17, 18. The Spirit
of the Lord is upon me, he has anointed me, he has sent me to deliver the
Captives. The Father that sent me, gave me commandment, Ioh. xii. Him has God
the Father sealed, Ioh. vi. Set him up to be the Prince and Author of
Salvation.

It makes much to the fullness of this work, That Christ steps not in, as a
private mediating friend, but is employed by God, comes with full Authority to
negotiate and transact the Paul terms him, the Apostle of our ^rofession, Heb.
iii. He had Apostolical Commission from God to effect it. It must teach us
perfectly to trust in him, and to commend the care of our Salvation into his
hands, whom God has laid this office upon, to solicit our Salvation.

5. God Sent Christ to us. Sending, it is Actus Praeventionis; it is a
Preventing favor. He stays not till we make means, and send petitions, and
intercessions to him, but is first in this office of Reconciliation. It had
been much to have admitted a Treaty Chrysostom notes, it is not called in
Scripture (...), but (...); He fetched us, and brought us, we went not of our
selves; Non motu nostro, sed ductusuo. S. John insists much upon this
Preventing love of God. In this was manifested the love of God, that God Sent
his only begotten Son into the world, that we may live through him, 1 Ioh. iv.
9. And, verse. 10. Herein is love, not that we loved God, but that he loved us;
and sent his Son to be the propitiation for our sins. He sent to us, when none
of us ever Elisha, mankind may truly say to God, Did I desire a son of my lord?
Did we ever think of this means of Salvation? No* the whole world, 1. Either
lay in security, never minding, nor considering our woeful condition. 2. Or else
were up in hostility; so far from sending for 3. Or were sunk in despair, not
daring to think any thought of pardon, expecting nothing but destruction; and
then he graciously thought upon us, and sent for our deliverance.
6. God Sent his Son; Sending, it is Actus Demissionis; a great (...) (so the
Fathers call Christ's Incarnation) an Act of great Vouchsafing, of much
Condescension: For God to Send to us, to dispatch messengers, begin treaties,
make offers of reconciliation, Preces descendere in omnes, to beseech us to be
reconciled; admirable dignation! He has all the advantages of the better
against us, why should he seek, and Send, and sue to us for peace and
atonement? 1. He is Fortior; all the Strength is on his side. Now Christ tells
us, Luke xiv. 31. that in case of enmity, he who finds himself the weaker,
should send Embassages, and desire conditions of Peace. Alas! we are infinitely
the weaker, not able to annoy him, or to grapple with him. S. Paul gives us
this Item, Romans v. 6. When we were yet without strength, Christ dyed for us. 2.
He is Dignior; that is a second advantage on his side; far above us in all
Honor and Dignity. One would think, the more mean and inferior should Send,
and seek, and sue to his better, if he have offended him. What says Elizabeth
to the Virgin Mary? Whence is this to me, that the mother of my Lord should
come to me? Luke i. 43. What stooping is this, and condescension, that the
High, and the Holy One should send to us in our base condition? (...) is made
(...), says Chrysostom; he makes himself lower than the lowest by this
condescension. 3. He is Pars laesa; that is a third advantage he has against
us. The injury and wrong is done to him, the offense is committed by us: Reason
would, that we who had wronged him, should come in first, and sue to him. As
Shimei, because he had wronged David, came first of all his Tribe and Country
to meet King David, and to make his peace with him. In our petty wranglings,
when the Potsheards contend with the Potsheards of the earth, we stand upon
this, He has wronged me; yet God abates this. All the right is of his side,
and yet he Sends to us. Whose charity sticks not here? we are ready to say, He
has 4. He is Independens, (...); his Self-sufficiency needs not our
friendship, and reconciliation. Amongst men, we must sometimes put up wrongs,
and pass by them; we may stand in need of those who have now offended us. Nec
possum tecum vivere, nec sine te. The head cannot say to the foot, I have no
need of thee. But God stands not in need of us, or of our service. Had we all
perished in our rebellion, he had lost nothing. Eliphaz in Job, tells us that:
Can a man be profitable unto God? Is it any gain to him, that thou art
righteous? Job xxii. 2. No, had we all perished, he had his holy Angels to
serve him: nay, had they all revolted, his glory and happiness is included in
himself, and no ways depends upon the service of his creatures. God gives
Abraham an Item of this, when he made his Covenant with him, I am God
All-sufficient, walk before me, and I will make my Covenant with thee, Genesis
xvii. It was not necessity, but mercy, to covenant with Abraham.

Yet see! he abates this, and all other advantages: Though he be the Stronger,
and needs not fear us; though he be the Better, and so may despise us; though
he be wronged by us, and so may expect submission from us; though he has not
the least need of us, and so may neglect and cashier us for ever; yet see his
wonderful vouchsafing and condescending, he Sends, and seeks to us. We may well
break out with David's admiration, 2 Samuel vii. 19. Is this the manner of man, O
Lord God? Would one man thus deal with another? Stoop so low, to such treaties,
and entreaties of reconciliation; send, and solicit, and importune for
agreement? Nay, verily; it is the unmatchable example of God's love to us, thus
to make after us; to Send, and to Send his Son, to accomplish our peace, and
reconciliation.





SEVEN SERMONS PREACHED UPON The History of our Saviors Transfiguration, as it
is represented by the three Evangelists, S. MATTHEW, S. MARK, S. LUKE.
THE FIRST
S. LUKE ix. 28. And it came to pass, about an eight days after these sayings,
he took Peter, and John, and James, and went up into a mountain to pray, etc.
THis passage of Scripture, is a remarkable relation of our Saviors glorious
Transfiguration; his laying aside his garments of Frailty, and Mortality; and
his assuming to himself his robes of Majesty and Glory. As David, Solomon's
Succession questioned, and opposed, sends him to Mount Gihon, commands Zadock
and Nathan to anoint, and proclaim him King: so here; Christ's Kingdom being
opposed, he is by Gods appointment established: Moses and Elias adore, and
attend him; and a Voice from heaven declares him Messiah.

The Text sets out Christ's Preparation, and Entrance into this glorious
Manifestation of Himself; and the purposed choice of

1. Is the choice of Time; About an eight days after these sayings. 2. Is the
choice of Attendants; Peter, James, John. 3. Is the choice of the Place, fit
for this great work; A mountain. 4. Is the choice of an holy Preparative
Action, Prayer; He went up into a mountain to pray.
First, is the choice of Time: And as in Time, there are two things:

1. Order. 2. Measure. 1. The one is, Succession; 2. The other, Duration. So
here; 1. There is Ord^, or Successio, in these words; After these sayings. 2.
There is Duratio, in these words; About an eight days.


I. Is Ordo, or Successio; After these sayings; and it reflects back to several
remarkable passages going before, in his immediate last discourse with his
Disciples.

1. Is Post Petri confessionem; after S. Peter's Confession, verse. 20. Thou art
the Christ of God. After this Confession of the Disciple's 1. Of Confirmation
of their Faith: 2. Of Reward of their Faith. 1. An Intendment of Confirmation:
Before, they confessed and believed: And now again, their faith is miraculously
confirmed, and ratified. It is Gods gracious course, thus to ^port, and
strengthen the beginnings of a true faith. Revelations, Visions, Miracles,
Signs from heaven, all shall serve for further Confirmation. Thus God to Ahaz,
Ask thee a S^n of the Lord thy God; ask it either in the depth, or in the
heigh^ above, (...). vii. 11. If it be true faith, he will make it stronger. He
is always watering this grain of Mustard Seed. Thus to Nathaneel, Ioh. i. 50,
51. Believe thou, because I said unto thee, I saw thee under the Figtree?
Thou shall see greater things than these. -- Ye shall see heaven open, and the
Angels of God ascending, and descending upon the Son of man. 2. An Intendment
of Remuneration. This faithful Confession is honored and rewarded with an
evident Revelation a glorious Vision. This is the method of Gods dealing with
faith, is not sight, and reason, and evidence; but the reward of faith, is
evidence, and clearness of full Representation. Christians are called (...);
(...), non Rationales; Aug. That is the duty of faith; but, the iss^ and end of
it, what is that? It shall end in Vision. Then we shall see him as he is.
First, faith looks upon his back-parts, and covers its face, as Elias in the
cave; then it is advanced to see him face to face, as Elias on the Mount. To
believe, because we see, it is the weakness of faith; but to see, because we
believe, it is the honor of faith. Aliud est videndo credere, aliud credendo
videre.

After these sayings: That,



2. Is, Post mortis praedictionem, verse. 22. The Son of man must suffer many
things, and be rejected of the Elders, and Chief Priests, and Scribes, and be
slain After that saying, then he was Transfigured, he showed his Glory. And so
it carries with it these Intimations: 1. Quod non ex infirmitate moriturus;
That he was not to dye, out of Infirmity. He who can thus at pleasure assume a
state of Immortality, has no inward necessity to dye. It was not necessity of
nature, but dispensation of grace that exposed him to death. Non impotenter,
sed potenter mortuus est. As Moses dyed, not of weakness; His eye was not dim,
nor his natural force abated, Deuteronomy. xxxiv. 7. but upon special order: So dyed
Christ. As Sampson, it was his strength, not his weakness, that ended him: So
Christ, he dyed, Clamore magno, non singultu. He when he had cried with a loud
voice, he yielded up the ghost, Matthew. xxvii. 50. 2. Quod non ex vi externa;
That he did not dye from any external violence. He who has the title of the
Lord of life, and can assume to himself Impassibility, What violence can
assault or annoy him? No man takes away my life from me, but I lay it down of
my self; I have power to lay it down, and I have power to take it again, Ioh.
x. 18. He who can, Pertransire per medium eorum, pass through the midst of
them, and go his way, Luke iv. 30. sure his death is not enforced, but assumed.
3. Quod non ex odio paterno; That he did not dye, because his Father hated him.
It may be it shall be said, God has forsaken him; His Fathers displeasure
exposes him. No, that scandal is prevented by this glorious Manifestation of
himself. He is by an Oracle from heaven, honored, and acknowledged the Son of
his Fathers love. 4. After his Death is foretold, his Glory is discovered; That
intimates the Order, and Entrance, and Passage into his Kingdom: He did not
pass, a deliciis, ad delicias. No, but first he must suffer, and then be
glorified. Ought not Christ to have suffered these things, and then to enter
into his glory? Luke xxiv. 26. First Mount Calvary must be ascended, then
Tabor, and Olivet. Post fell, favum. He must taste the gall of his Passion; then,
after, he shall taste the honeycomb of the sweetness of Exaltation.
3. Is Post Resurrectionis Intimationem; verse. 22. He must be raised the third
day; After that saying, then he was Transfigured: And so it reflects upon that
saying, in a double notion: 1. Ut ostenderet possibilitatem Resurrectionis. He
who can make his body thus radiant and resplendent, transform it into such
Glory, Why should we judge it impossible, or difficult, to revive, and raise
it? Why should we judge it impossible, says S. Paul, for God to raise the
dead? Acts xxvi. 8. He has power to lay it down, and power to take it up
again. Necesse est Spiritui restituatur Templum suum. Look upon Mount Tabor,
and this Transfiguration; and then go to Golgotha, and doubt not of a
Resurrection. 2. Ut monstraret Modum. The glory of this Transfiguration, shows
the glory of his Resurrection. It was Praeludium Resurrectionis Dominicae. It
shall not only be a bare recovery of life, but an advancing of it. S. Paul
calls it, His glorious Body. The High Priest Iosedeck his vile garments are
taken from him, and precious garments are given unto him. Consider the glory of
this Transfiguration; and then doubt not of the Immortality, Impassibility,
Agility, Clarity of the Resurrection.
4. Is Post Crucis Impositionem, verse. 23, 24. If any man will come after me,
let him deny himself, and take up his Cross daily, and follow me. Taking up the
Cross, losing of their lives for him: After these sayings, then he was
Transfigured. So it imports a seasonable Consolation. They must endure the
Cross, part with life; sad tidings* an hard saying, Who can bear it? These are
things dreadful to flesh and blood. Ay but stay a while, and see him, and his
servants in glory; that will sweeten all. He purposely gives them a glimpse,
and view, and taste of that glory that shall attend their sufferings. Look upon
thy sufferings, and thy spirit may droop; but get up into this Mountain of
glory, see These light afflictions, which are but for a moment, work for us a
far more exceeding, and eternal weight of glory, 2 Cor. iv. 17. Thus Christ
sweetly enterchanges his dealings with his servants: 1. Having put them into
the sad meditation of his Death, he shows them his Glory. 2. Having rejoiced
them with that, then he allayes it with the remembrance of his Death; again
reminds them of his Passion.
5. Is Post Gloriae Promisionem, verse. 24. He tells them, hereafter they shall
save their lives, at his coming in Glory. After that saying, he is
Transfigured. So it is, F(...) Glory Representatio: He puts them not off to
future expectations, and reversions. Totum id quod Christiani sumus, spes est;
says hard to some men's faith: Robusta fides*, strong Faith can hold out
without sight, cares not for present pay, for any thing in hand; but Infirma
fides, weak Faith would droop, without some taste of future Glory. See then, Be
not faithless, but faithful. As Jonathan fainting, with one taste of Honey
recovered sight and vigor; so the least relish of that hidden Mannah revives
faith, and puts strength and alacrity into a believing Christian; makes him as
a Giant refreshed with Wine. As the bunch of Grapes from Eschol Caleb encourage
the people, made them forget Egypt, endure the Wilderness; so this view of
Heaven, it puts spirit into us. Otherwise, we are hardly drawn with naked
promises, Spem periculo emere. Therefore, Hoc infirmitatis remedium, ut
praesentibus sustineatur infirmitas. Ambros. 6. Is Post Regni mentionem. v. 27.
I tell you of a truth, there be some standing here, which shall not taste of
death, till they see the Kingdom of God. After that saying, he was
transfigured. So it is Erroris correctio. They never heard of Christ's Kingdom,
but they imagined a terrestrial outward Kingdom. Christ, to make Jerusalem
comes down from Heaven; It is above, the Mother of us all. All outward things
are Bona Scabelli, the good things of his Footstool, not Bona Throni, not the
good things of his Throne; Solatia mi^, the comforts of the Miserable, not
Gaudia beatorum, the joys of the Blessed.
So much of the first; Ordo, and successio. The other is,

II. Mensura, and continuatio; About an eight days after; St. Matthew and St.
Mark say, Six days; St. Luke here, Eight.

1. They say more exactly; St. Luke not so precisely, but about eight days. 2.
Even both say precisely true. They speak Exclusively, leaving out the day of
this Prediction, and of the Transfiguration; and mention the six days
intervening; St. Luke speaks Comprehensively, reckons both the day he spoke it,
and the day he performed it; and so makes up eight.
Now the exact setting down these days, carries with it a double

1. Is a Moral signification; 2. Is a Mystical.
1. Is a Moral signification. It was after eight days. He stays, and deferrs
so long;

1. To stir up expectation, and to quicken their desires Elijah delays, and
puts off Elisha from seeing his Rapture, to inflame his desire the more to
behold it. The Lord is not slack as men count slackness; but, to enlarge our
desires, he seems to delay. Thus he dealt with the Canaanitish woman.

2. It was after eight days, he stayed no longer. Why? he might have deferred
longer; It was in these terms that he promised, before they die. Time enough
therefore hereafter. Indeed Rabins say, If a man vowed to be a Nazarite one day
before his death, he was to be so presently, because this day may be the last
day; But God knows these times and seasons, and the number of our days. What
then? yet after eight days he performs it. In all his promises he is better,
and fuller, and speedier then his word. It is enough, if thou have comfort,
though it be at the day of death. Oh! but nescit tarda ^olimina. He sends to
his Disciples to meet him in Galile.

2. Is a mystical signification. Eight days. Not only the Fathers, Chrysostom,
Ambrose, others who delight in allegories; but even later Writers, who are more
sparing in those allegorical accommodations of Scripture; they sweetly conceit
a double mystery:

1. Is the Mystery of Christ's Resurrection; He was Transfigured on the eighth
day; raised in Glory on the eighth day afterward. This reason S. Aug. gives
why the number of Eight is consecrated in Scripture. The Circumcision, it was
Octavo die, ut figuretur. Dominica Resurrectio; that was on the eighth day, to
Christ's Resurrection. Many legal clensings, and offerings were on the eighth
day. Thus St. Aug. descants upon some Titles of the Psalms in Octavis, All
prefigurations of Christ's Resurrection. 2. Is the Mystery of our
Transfiguration, and Resurrerection. Six ages of the world must pass first.
Post sex dies, gloriae Dominicae habitus ostenditur. Sex millium annorum
temporibus evolutis, Regni coelestis honos praefiguratur; Hilarious. Six ages,
the world's continuance; the seventh day, that is the day of Judgment; then the
eighth is dies aeternitatis, when we shall be taken up in glory.
So much of the first Circumstance, the choice of time;

About an eight days after these sayings.

Secondly; an other Circumstance, is the choice of Attendants; he took Peter,
and John, and James. And herein observe these three Considerations.

1. Discipuli, comites;

2. Tres discipuli;

3. Hi tres.

I. His attendants are his Disciples; why not the people, the Priests and
Pharisees? As Iud^ says (not Iscariot) Lord, How is it that thou will manifest
thy self unto us, and not unto the world? In likelihood, it would have
convinced, and converted many.

1. It was a Revelation; and revelations of mysteries are not for Infidels, but
for Believers. To you it is given to know the mysteries of the Kingdom of
heaven, but to others it is not given. Mat. xiii. 11. For common Illumination,
he enlightens every man; but special revelation, it is the Childrens bread, the
^den Mannah. He expounded all to his Disciples apart. As every subject may know
the Kings Laws; but his choice counselors, are only acquainted with his
Secrets: So the Law of God is exposed to all; but the mysteries of his Kingdom
are concealed from many, and communicated only to his own. 2. It was a
revelation of his Glory, and therefore not to all, but only to his Disciples.
It was the Oeconomie of his Had they known the Lord of life and glory, they
would not have Crucified him. Hence he charges them, not to publish it till
after his Passion. Thus the greatest Rabins never conceived how David's Son
could be David's Lord; and therefore the Jews to this day, because in some
places they find predictions of Divinity, sometimes of humanity, not knowing
how to accord them, imagine two Christ's; Filium Joseph, he that shall suffer,
and die; and Filium David, that shall rule, and reign. 3. It was a revelation
of the Saints after-glorification, This is a name that none Knows, but he that
receives it. He gives the Earnest only where he will bestow the main Substance;
the first fruits of glory, where he intends the whole harvest. As Christ after
his Resurrection never showed himself but to the Saints; Before, he did to
Priests, Publicans, Pharisees; after, never but to Saints; So in this act of
glory, only to his Disciples. Only St. Paul law Christ, and heard him; they who
were in his company, neither heard* not saw, Act. ix. St. Gregory enquiring how
Satan appeared before God, among the Sons of God; Oh, says he, he was pr^sens
absenti, and so absens praes^ti; ^e appeared because God observed him, not that
he (...) God. As of the appearances of the Old Testament, it is said, N^e shall
see him, and live; so it is true Spiritually, None shall s^e him and die.
II. Tres Discipuli, non omnes. Three of his Disciples, not all.

1. Three is a sufficient number to testify this Miracle. 2. Judas a reprobate,
he was not to be admitted, he was unworthy of it. Therefore, lest he should
murmur, and repine, and grow worse by it, others are left out. 3. Ut sit locus
ordini; Even among his Disciples he observed an order, and precedence. Some
were more eminent and of nearer admission, Cabinet-Counsellers. We see Peter
durst not speak to Christ, but beckens to John to do it. 4. Ut sit locus fidei.
These were taken to see, and testify; Moses sent Spies to view the Land of
Canaan; and they, were to report what they saw to others. 5. Ut sit locus
modestiae. Transfiguratus in monte cor^ paucis, Crucifixus in urbe coram
omnibus.
III. Hi tres. He singles out Peter, John, and James. Why are these made choice
of, and others passed by? We see, at other times he takes these nearer to him,
as at the raising of Iairus his daughter Marc. v. 37. He excludes all others,
admits these: What reasons are there for it?

1. There needs no reason; Sufficient is it, that it is his prosopolepsie to
pass by some, to admit others. He can cross his hands, as Jacob did; give five
portions to Benjamin, deal more sparingly with others. Shall I not do with
mine, own as I please? Etiam Pater, quia sic complacuit. 2. Quoad humanum
affectum, Christ had his Favorites, those whom he made his darling Disciples.
Thus St. John was his bosom-Favourite. As it was said of David, and Solomon,
Such an one was the Kings friend. These Disciples were thus graced. 3. These
three were more eminent for Grace, and Zeal, and Love to Christ. St. Paul
says, they were counted pillars. Christ. As among David's Worthies, there were
the first three. Others were valiant among thirty, but they did not attain to
the three first; so among these holy colleagues, these were of an high pitch in
Grace, and answerably were they honored. 4. These three were admitted to see
his Transfiguration, because these were appointed to assist his Passion, Math.
xxvi. 37. when he underwent his Agony; therefore these are fore-strengthened,
and fore-armed by seeing his Glory. This Tabor, fitted them to abide the
terror of Mount Calvarie. Those whom God will single out for the greatest
trials, he will fit aforehand with the best enablements. St. Paul was
strengthened, and encouraged in a Vision at Jerusalem, before his going to
Rome; Be of good cheer Paul; for as thou have testified of me at Jerusalem, so
must thou also bear witness at Rome, Act. xxiii. 11. 5. These several men are
singled out upon several reasons. 1. Peter was the forward, zealous Disciple,
who led the way to the rest, in that noble confession of Christ; therefore he
is singled out to be partaker of this Vision. Again, Peter is now overtaken
with an error, is sorry to hear of Christ's death, disswades him from it; by
this Vision therefore he is comforted, reformed, instructed in the Christ's
Death and Passion. 2. James he was appointed to be the first Apostle that
should die for Christ; Herod sucked his blood first. As they who must be in the
front of the Battle, have the choysest Armor, because they are to undertake
desperate services; so, because S. James was to be the first in the Army royal,
therefore he was admitted to view the glory of this Transfiguration.
Theophylact says, that this Theophania, made him (...), and (...). 3. John, he
was fore-appointed to be the publisher, and Christ's Divinity; and so, above
all, he soared highest into Heaven. Therefore was this manifestation, of
Christ's Glory and Divinity made to him. He urges it, John i. 14. he saw his
glory, the glory as of the only begotten of the Father. So Peter makes use of
this, 2 Pet. i. 18. We heard a voice which came from Heaven when we were in the
holy Mount. Thus these Congruities show why Hi tres; why These three:

Now follows,

Thirdly, another Circumstance, which is the choice of the He led them up to a
Mountan. What Mountain was this? Interpreters differ.

1. Some say, it was Mount Sinai, where the Law was given. 2. Others say, it
was Mount Libanus, that is near to Caesarea Philippi. 3. Most say, it was Mount
Tabor. But it was purposely concealed, to avoid those superstitions that
after-Ages might imagine, and frame. S. Peter calls it, The holy Mountain. And
hence Papists ground their permanent sanctity of places, and pilgrimages. But
this holiness was not permanent but temporary, holy ground while God was
present in it.
Now for this recourse of Christ to Mountains, it was very frequent. He went up
to a Mountain to Preach: Mat. v. 1. He departed into a Mountain to Pray, Marc.
vi. 46. He went out into a Mountain to Pray* Luc. vi. 12. He ascended to Heaven
from a Mountain. He appoints Abraham to offer up his Isaac on a Mountain. The
Law was given on a Mountain. Moses saw God's glory on the Mountain. Elijah, he
prays on Mount Carmel. Moses dies on a Mountain; So Aaron.

Why so? Is God the God of the Mountains, not of the Valleys? or, are the
Prayers more acceptable that are there performed, then in other places? No
surely. No place now commends our Prayers to God. In all places, prayers are
alike acceptable. As naturally, Universam terram expiavit; omnis locus
oratorium est, Aug. Nunc de Britannis aeque ac de Hierosolymis patet aula
coelestis, Hieron. Elijah's Cave, Daniel's Den, David's Depths, Ieremie's
Dungeon, Ionah's Whale, all lie open unto him. Illi pervium est omne solidum,
apertum omne secretum; ei muta respondent, ei silentium confitetur. Aug.

Indeed Before, the Temple was the place of Prayer. Prayers were more accepted
there, then elsewhere. And so even our public Church-services, for the
solemnity, and joynt-Communion, si in pace Ecclesiae, and unitate corporis
Christi. Aug. Why then does Christ single out a Mountain for Prayer?

1. Ob solitudinem; for retiredness and privacie, he withdraws himself from
tumults and multitudes, sequesters himself to a more intimate Devotion. This is
a blessed opportunity for Devotion, retiredness and solitude. Christ bids them
enter into their Closet to recollect their thoughts. They Pray in plateis, in
the streets, who suffer their thoughts to wander in worldly Christ, when he
raised the Woman, put out the Minstrells, Matthew. ix. Abraham left his servants
below. Jacob sent his carriages over the River, stayed alone to wrestle with
God. 2. Ob elevationem. This bodily ascent teaches us to raise up our thoughts
in Prayer above the sphere of the world. Prayer, it is Ascensus mentis ad Deum;
the scale and Ladder to get up to Heaven. We must mount up as Eagles; clamber
as Jonathan and his Armor-bearer to the top of this Rock. Devout Prayer mounts
the Soul up, transports it into Heaven. It 3. Mons typus coeli. Heaven is
prefigured, and compared to a Mountain. Who shall ascend into the hill of the
Lord? Ps. xxiiii. 3. I will lift up mine eyes unto the hills, from whence
comes my help, Ps. cxxi. 1. The Temple, the type of Heaven, was reared on a
Mountain. Heaven, 1. It is stabile, ut Mons; stable as a Mountain, not moved,
2. It is, excelsum, ut Mons; high as a Mountain. 3. It is amoenum, delightful;
it is Mons olei. 4. It is arduum, ut Mons, much pains to ascend and gain the
top of it. 5. It is securum. Mountains are places of strength; so is Heaven.
4. Ibi liberior conspectus coeli; It gives a glorious view of the beauty of
Heaven, and so administers thoughts of Prayer and Praising. The aspect of that
goodly Frame, how should David, viewing the Heavens, breaks forth into
admiration of God: Psalm. xix. A Psalm penned, as some conceive, upon his being
a Shepherd, and so lying abroad, and contemplating the Heavens.






THE SECOND
S. LUKE ix. 29. And as he prayed, the fashion of his countenance was altered,
and his raiment was white and glistring.
S. MATTHEW. xvii. 2. He was Transfigured before them, and his face did shine as
the Sun, and his raiment was white as the light.
S. MARK ix. 2, 3. He was Transfigured before them. And his raiment became
shining, exceeding white as snow, so as no Fuller on earth can white them.
HAving seen our Savior's solemn Preparation unto his glorious
Transfiguration, verse. 28. Come we now to the actual Entrance, and
Manifestation of this his Glory. And the Text sets it out in two particulars:

1. His holy Disposition, and Action, in As he prayed. 2. His glorious
Transfiguration it self; The fashion of his countenance was altered, and did
shine as the Sun, etc.
First, his holy Disposition, and Action. In it, two things;

1. Consider it in the absolute Performance. Quod or avit; that he Prayed: 2.
In the respective Accommodation of it to this Transfiguration; When he prayed,
then he was Transfigured.
I. Consider it absolutely; that Christ prayed. And the Observation from hence,
is thus much; That our blessed Savior in the days of his flesh, was
religiously conversant in this Duty of prayer. Many Instances of this, in
Scripture: And this he did for diverse Reasons:

1. Ut cultum, and servitium Deo exhiberet; To do homage, Christ, as Man, was
inferior to Him; and so was to perform this recognition of his Father's
Sovereignty. Adoration, is due from the most glorious Creatures to God. All
knees must bow to him; and therefore Christ, the first of all the creatures of
God, tenders this homage to him. Prayer, it is our Moral, and Real, and
Spiritual Sacrifice, enjoined us by the law of Nature, In recognitionem
Universalis and Supremi Dominii. 2. Christ was conversant in Prayer, Ut
Orationem exemplo sanciret, and dedicaret; And so to make it, by his
performance, a Christ was not sanctified by Prayer, but Prayer was sanctified
by Christ.: As Baptism did not sanctify him, but he sanctified and consecrated
it. All God's Ordinances convey holiness into us in the performance of them;
but they drew sanctity from Christ. He makes Word, Prayer, Sacraments, the
holier for his performing of them. The Altar sanctifies the Gift. 3. Christ was
conversant in Prayer; That so he might put himself into the exercise of all
kind of graces. He prayed not out of absolute necessity, as we do; but to stir
up, and beautify John's Baptism, What though he needed not? Yet thus it
becomes us to fulfill all righteousness. The grace of Prayer is so holy a grace,
the Art of Prayer so heavenly, that Christ would abound in this, as in all
other endowments. The Saints, they are more plentiful in some gifts, and more
scanty in others; but Christ was abundant in all. 4. Christ was conversant in
Prayer; To testify his state of Humiliation. Therefore he prays, not only by
way of Compellation, or Intimation, but by way of humble Petition, and
Supplication. 1. To be Man. 2. To be in a continual subjection, and dependence,
from God. 3. That he had put himself into a state of want, and deficiency;
5. Christ was conversant in Prayer, as a special performance of his office of
Mediator. He is our High Priest; all his requests are meritorious for us. He
was set up for us in the things of God. This is a special excellency in
Christ's Prayers. The best of our Prayers have but the virtue of Impetration,
and the grace of Acceptance; but Christ's Prayers were of a Meritorious value.
We know, that, besides the great Paschal Sacrifice, the daily Incense was to be
offered; so, besides Christ's Passion, his Prayer was to 6. Christ was
conversant in Prayer for Spiritual Solace, and Consolation. The enjoying of the
sweetness of Communication with God, it was to the spirit of Christ above all
comforts. As to Preach, so to Pray, was meat that he fed upon, and Spiritual
refection. We see when he was wearied with the multitudes, Matthew. xiv. He went
up to a mountain to pray, as the most ravishing refreshment he had. If any be
afflicted, heavy, sorrowful, thirsting after joy and gladness, let them get
into these holy parleys with God; suck honey out of this honeycomb, it will
glad them
Well then;

1. Did Christ, the natural Son of God, carefully, and religiously tender up
this honor to God? How should we be assiduous in this homage, who are the
lowest, and meanest, and unworthiest of his creatures? He, who in his Deity was
equal to God, yet bows, and prostrates himself; How should we humble our
selves in this holy Adoration? Do Saints in heaven, and Angels, nay, did Christ
himself offer up this Worship? It deeply concerns us to perform it to him. 2.
Did Christ solicit his Father for supply of Mercies? Why, he had right and
title to all: All was his due. How then should we dare to usurp any of God's
blessings, and not beg them by Prayer at his holy hands? Must the Son be a
Petitioner, and shall the servant intermeddle, serve himself in his desires,
without craving by Prayer? Ask of me, and I will give thee the heathen for
thine inheritance, Psalm. ii. 8. 3. Did Christ abound in this grace of Prayer,
though freed from all Infirmities, out of the reach of temptations, though full
of all graces? How then should we, who are clogged with infirmities, 4. Did
Christ sue by Prayer? He was most certain of the event of every thing; knew
that all things were set and purposed; Pray. Then, earnest Prayers may be made
for those things, whereof there may be fullest assurance. We are told, If men
may be certain of Grace and Glory, why do they pray for it? Certainty on God's
part, does not weaken, but strengthen the force of Prayer. Isaac had promise of
a son, yet he begged him. Elijah was sure of rain, yet he prayed for it. David
was sure his house should be established, yet he prayed for it. Christ was sure
of all, yet he abounds in this service of Prayer. Prayer, it is serviceable to
God's Appointments.
II. Consider our Savior's Prayer here respectively to his glorious
Transfiguration; While he prayed, he was Transfigured; and so it imports an
efficacy in his Prayers, producing and effecting his Transfiguration.

Observe the admirable power and efficacy of devout Prayer; It is able to
transport the soul, to ravish the spirit, to lift up the heart into an heavenly
rapture, and to fill soul and body with unspeakable glory. A strange doctrine
to our drowzy Petitioners; they never felt any such thing. Well, says S.
Chrysostom, Sancti intelligunt quid dico. They who abound in this Spiritual
David professes, that Prayer and Praise, was to him as marrow and fatness. My
mouth shall be satisfied as with marrow and fatness, and my mouth shall praise
thee with joyful lips, Psalm. lxiii. 5. I sought the Lord, and he heard me, and
delivered me from all my fears. They looked unto him, and were lightened, and
their faces were not ashamed, Psalm. xxxiv. 4, 5.

Now Prayer has this power;

1. Because it raises the soul into heaven, far above all earthly vanities, or
vexations. The soul lying grovelling upon Revelation, if the Moon be under thy
feet, thou shall be clothed with the Sun. These lower regions are dark and
tempestuous; get up into heaven by Prayer, there is nothing but sere^ity, and
tranquillity. A devout and heavenly Prayer is like the Altar on Olympus, no
blast of wind blows upon it. Say not in thine heart, Who shall go up into
heaven? Prayer will bring thee thither. 2. Prayer will breed those ravishing,
and glorious joys, because it brings us into a communion with the fountain of
joy and Moses being in the Mount, in communion with God, his face was shining
and glorious. As a man long conversant in some fragrant place, his very clothes
will carry those perfumes with him. 3. Prayer shows us the loving, and smiling,
and gracious In his face is life it self. The light of God's countenance
gladded David more than oil, and wine, Psalm. iv. If He be angry, his frown is
the message of death. Prayer pacifies him, and makes his countenance most
amiable. If he turn away his countenance, we wither, our faces droop: if he
shine upon us, we are refreshed. 2 Cor. iii. 18. We all with open face
beholding as in a glass, the glory of the Lord, are changed into the same Image
from glory to glory, even as by the Spirit of the Lord. 4. Prayer brings this
rapture of joy, because it brings with Holy Ghost. These secret cheerings, are
like the fire from heaven that consumed the Sacrifice; and testify, God is
graciously pleased with thy Petitions. What joy like that of Cornelius, to have
Angels bring tidings of Gods Acceptance? Dan. v. 10. Fear not, Daniel, thy
words are heard. Prayer encourages us, like Manoah's The Lord has received a
Burnt-offering, and a Meat Offering at our hand, he will not kill us, Judge.
xiii. 23. Want of this made Cain's countenance fall: This honored and
encouraged Abel. Oh! those inward cheerings that a religious Prayer sheds into
our souls; they are not inferior to the tidings of Angels. 5. Prayer infuses
these glorious joys, because it disburthens our grievances, all of them, into
the bosom of God. If it be an ease to a troubled mind, to communicate its
sorrow to some faithful friend, how much more comfortable is it, by Prayer, to
unfold our sorrows into God's bosom, who pities our griefs, drys David, in his
sorrows, parleys with God, and his soul is refreshed. See this in Hannah, 1 Samuel i. 18. She was a woman of a sorrowful spirit: Elkanah could not comfort
her: She prays in the bitterness of her soul, pours out her soul before the
Lord; and see what comfort she finds in Prayer; Her countenance was no more
sad. See it in David, Psalm. vi. He was in much sickness and sorrow; Lord rebuke
me not in thine ire. His soul was vexed, he was weary with groaning, beginning
his Prayer with much anguish; but, verse. 8. he breaks out into a sudden joy,
The Lord has heard the voice of my weeping: verse. 9. The Lord has heard my
Supplications, the Lord will receive my Prayer. Phil. iv. 6, 7. In every thing
by Prayer and Supplication with thanksgiving, let your request be made known
unto God: And the Peace of God which passes all understanding, shall keep your
hearts and minds through Christ Jesus. 6. This duty religiously performed, even
because it is an I am glad I have done this holy duty. 1 Chronicles. xxix. 9. The
people rejoiced when they offered willingly. So, at Solomon's Sacrifice, the
people went home with joy. As every sin leaves a sting after it; so, the duties
of Piety and Devotion calm the soul, and fill it with much joy and glory, even
as if they heard an Euge from heaven.
Now that this glorious effect may follow our Prayers, three conditions are
required:

1. They must be frequent. To be strange with God, to keep aloof from him, and
yet to think that our rare and disused Prayers shall find such success, it is
groundless. Daniel, who would not abstain thirty days, but thrice every day
prayed, he had an Angel to assure him. Knock, Seek; they are words of
diligence. Daniel's thrice, David's seven times, these find joy. Thou who art
strange to God, can thou wonder if he be strange to thee; if he impart not
those joys that are for his Favorites? 2. They must be cheerful. We must
delight in this communion. God, he delights to hear us pray, Cant. ii. 14. Let
me see thy countenance, let me hear thy voice; for sweet is thy voice, and thy
countenance is comely. If he delights to hear our Prayers, how should we
delight in offering them to him? They who count it the burden of their lives
to pray, irksome, tedious, can expect little sweetness in this communion. No,
David is glad to put himself into this communion, Psalm. xxvii. 8. My heart has
talked of thee, Seek ye my face; Thy face, Lord, will I seek. 3. They must be
fervent. Our remiss, feeble, benumbed suits, what force have they to work upon
God, or upon our selves? See here, our Savior prays himself into heaven: In
Paul praying, was carried up into the third heaven. S. Peter praying, was cast
into a trance: S. John was ravished in spirit. Zeal, it is the wing of Prayer,
the ladder of Heaven, like Elijah's fiery Chariot. Whereas our cold, slumbering
suits, like Meteors in the Air, vanish into nothing. Nay, so far are they from
Intention and Zeal, that they scarce have any Attention and Mind. Can such cold
formalities invite God home into their heart? They at Emmaus were importunate
with Christ, constrained him to stay with them. Lot urged the Angels to turn in
to his house. Use these violences, David's heart panted for God. Oh! When will thou come unto me? Oh! keep this passage open 'twixt God and thee; let no
neglect, stop or damm it up.
We have seen his disposition, Oravit, He prayed. Now follows, Secondly, his
glorious Transfiguration. In it, two things;

1. The nature, and condition of it. 2. The reason, and purpose of it.
First, The nature and condition of it. It is called here, an Alteration: S.
Matthew calls it, a Transfiguration, or, a Transformation. In it, three things:

1. The Alteration it self: 2. The Subject of it: It was, 1. In Vultu, in his
Countenance. 2. In Vestitu, in his Garments.
3. The Manner: Shining as the Sun; that is for his Countenance: Exceeding
white; that is for his Raiment: 1. Ut Nix, As the Snow: 2. Ut Lux, As the Light:
3. Whiter then any Fuller on earth can white them.

I. For the Alteration it self; He was Transfigured. That implies two things:

1. It was Passiva mutatio; A passive Alteration: Non Transfiguravit se, sed
Transfiguratus est; He did not Transfigure himself, but he was Transfigured: 1.
Because his Humanity was only patient, and receptive, 2. To intimate, that it
was the Action of God the Father, putting Honor and Glory upon his Son; and
not so much the Action of the Son, assuming Glory to himself: Father, Glorify
thy Son, that thy Son may Glorify thee. The Merits were the Son's; the
Rewards, his Father's.
2. It was Qualitativa mutatio; A Transfiguration; a glorious Alteration in the
appearance, and qualities of his Body, not a substantial Alteration in the
substance of it. Assumpsit gloriam, non deposuit naturam. Hieron.
And from it, gather these Corollaries;

1. Haec fides nostra; It is a rule for our Faith. It was the same body of
Christ, in nature and substance, before, and in, and after Glorification.
Ubiquitaries, and so Papists, make Christ's Glorification not to consist in
investing of his body with glorious qualities, but in the abolishing, or
turning his flesh into his Deity. Christ's body here, and in heaven, is not
changed in the natural proportion, but enriched and beautified with heavenly
endowments. His nature is not abolished, but only replenished with Glory.
Glory freed him from natural infirmities, it does not strip him of natural
properties. Still, eadem quantit^s. Ubiquitaries Papists say, by virtue of
glorification, it may be any where, in a thousand places at once. Thus in the
Sacrament they have built him a Tabernacle of accidents and shadows. No;
Glory, as Grace, perfects Nature; it does not destroy it. It is a qualitative,
not a substantial alteration. 2. Haec gloria nostra. It was a qualitative
alteration, his body remaining the same; this is our glory. Our flesh is
glorified in Christ, and he communicates to it a glorious condition. Securae
estote caro and sanguis, occupastis coelum in Christo, Hieron. 3. Haec spes
nostra: This is our hope, that these our frail, earthly bodies shall be in his
good time transfigured, and made like his glorious Body. Anabaptists dream of
new bodies to be made. No; what he has showed me in his own, he can, and will
perform in ours. Our vile bodies shall be made like his glorious body. His
glorified body was primitiae, the First Fruits,
So much for the first, the kind or nature of this alteration, Now

II. For the Subject of it,

1. It is Corpus, not Anima; his Body, not his Soul; this was not enriched with
any new increase of glory, but his body only. The Soul by virtue of the
hypostatical Union, was replenished with all grace and glory from his
Conception. Then he was anointed with the Oil of gladness. He was comprehensor
quoad animam ab instanti, but he was viator in corpore, that was in a 1. It was
needless. 2. It was useless. This Transfiguration was purposed for the good,
and profit of the Apostles, and so to be such as was observeable by them.
2. It was vultus; his Face or countenance. No question, all his Body was
clothed with Majesty, but his Countenance was most Resplendent. That is seeds
majestatis. What the natural beauty of our Savior's countenance was, some
curiously Adams in Paradise: But as Moses vayled his Face, so the Scripture
has put a Veil of silence and concealment upon this of Christ. It is best to
resolve; the habit of his Body, as it was utterly free from the least blemish,
and deformity, so was it also 3. It was vestitus; his Garments: that is the
other subject of this alteration. And then follows;
III. The manner:

1. His Countenance, that was shining as the Sun. Not but that Christ's
glorified Body does now surpass all created Glory; all excellencies cannot
equalize his Majesty. But;

1. This is the most glorious Creature, to which we may resemble it. 2. This
Transfiguration was not a full representation of Non erat plenitudo gloriae,
sed similitudo. Had this Sun of righteousness shined in his full glory, the
eyes of the Apostles could not have beheld it. He dwells in that light, that no
eye can approach unto.
Now from this resemblance of Christ's glory, as the Sun; deduce it into these
particulars:

1. Sol, it is origo lucis; all light flows from the Sun, and is derived from
it. The Stars shine by a borrowed light. So Christ, he is the original and
Fons gloriae, the Fountain of glory. Fons gratiae, and gloriae, as the King is
Fons honoris. From his fullness they receive all; he clothes them with light;
if he hide his face, they are eclipsed. 2. Solis splendour, it is purissimus;
the light of the Sun, it is most refulgent. The Moon is waterish, the Stars
glimmering; but the Sun is most pure. So Christ, he is not only pure, but
purity it self. No mixture, or shadow of darkness, or corruption is in him.
There are maculae in Luna, sic in Ecclesia; spots in the Moon, and so there are
in the Church. The Stars are impure in his sight. Cujus participatione, sumus
justi, ejus comparatione sumus injusti. 3. Solis splendour, it is vegetans; the
light of the Sun it enlivens, and quickens, and gives vivacity to all
creatures. Philosophers say, without the influence of the Sun, no creature can
live; This being eclipsed, all things languish. In its departure, there is
nothing but fading and dying; in its return it gives vivacity. So Christ, he is
the Fountain of spiritual and glorious life. A gracious aspect from him,
enlivens us, as it did S. Peter, Malach. iv. 2. The Sun of righteousness comes
with healing in his wings; and ye shall go forth and grow as the Calves of the
stall. 4. Solis splendour, it is laetificans; the light of the Sun it is
cheering and comforting. It is a good thing to see the Sun; darkness is sad,
and irksome. So Christ refreshes and glads the Soul, Ps. iv. 7. the light of
his countenance puts gladness in my heart, more then in the time that their
Corn, and their Wine increased. The Church in persecution therefore, prays,
Ps. lxxx. 7. Cause thy face to shine, and we shall be saved.
We have seen his Countenance, shining as the Sun;

See,

2. His Garments; these are shining, and glorious. And it is expressed three
ways;

1. White as the Light, Matthew. xvii. 2. 2. Exceeding white as Snow, Mark. ix.
3. 3. By a transcendency, so as no Fuller upon earth can white them; exceeding
Art, which is inferior to Nature; nay surpassing Nature.
Here are two Queries that may be put;

1. Why are his garments glorious? A gloryfied body shall have no other
garments, then the robes of immortality, and glory? True: but Christ was; 1.
Not instatu gloriae, but only in actu, in a transeunt passage of glory. 2. Not
in the fullness of glory, but in some resemblance. In Heaven he clothes himself
with light as with a garment, 3. Not inter glorificatos, and so habituates his
body to the decency of humane conversation. How irreligious are some of those
disputes which the Jesuits have, concerning the body of Christ?
2. Whence arose this glory of his Garments? From the glory, and resplendency
that was in his Body. His Divinity, that conveyed glory into his Soul; and
that, transfused it into his Body: and that, transmits it into his Garments; As
his power of miracles was originally in his Godhead, then in his Soul, then in
instrumentum conjunctum.
Now from the glory of his Garments, as Snow, as Light.

1. Gather, what model we must gather of Christ's glory, and our glory with
him. Look upon all the Beauties that are in the world, the most glorious, and
resplendent creatures, and unite all their excellencies, and raise up thy
thoughts by them, and from them to the contemplation of that glory which is in
Heaven. View the curious rarities of Art, and Nature. Is the Snow, a vanishing
Meteor, so white? The material Heavens Solomon in his glory, is clothed more
richly then any of these. Eye has not seen, Ear has not heard, the Heart
cannot conceive the Greatness of his glory. 2. Consider, Qualis sanctitas
Christi, and Sanctorum. How Christ, and which can stand before him? It must be
exact, and pure without all stain and blemish. Glory is nothing but, Excellens
Sanctitas. Our white robes, are the righteousness of the Saints. David prays
to be whiter then Snow. How should we buy of him fine Linen and pure, and wash
our Robes in the blood of the Lamb? The Papist's they have their Fulling-Mills,
Purgatory, Penance. No: those are all polluted. It must be Christ, who must
come with Fullers Soap, Malach. 3. Consider, are his Garments thus glorious?
How holy etc. If these outward applications of garments derive such beauty and
glory from him, how then shall not those near, intimate, spiritual Unions? As
S. Paul speaks; Upon our less honorable members, we put more honor.
So much of the Nature, and Condition of his Transfiguration; See now,

Secondly, the ground and reason why he was transfigured before

1. Christ puts himself into this appearance of glory, to testify and
demonstrate the truth of his Divinity. His Humanity did appear unto them; now
his glory gives evidence of his divine Nature.

Q. But how can this glory of his Face prove his Divinity, seeing Moses his
Face did shine?

A. Christ's glory came not from a gracious dispensation, but from a
substantial bodily inhabitation of the Godhead; but Moses his shining was far
inferior:

1. He had it extrinsecus, by conferring with God; as a Mudd-wall when the Sun
shines upon it: but Christ's glory came from within, from his Deity to his
Soul. 2. Moses his shining was not in such glory: that, was concealed and hid
by the covering of a Vail; Christ's, darts through his Garments. His shinings
were, radii divinitatis, Damasc. Moses had splendorem sub velamento; Christ had
velamen in splendore. 3. Moses his shining was terrible, Christ's was
comfortble: The Apostles were loath to lose the sight of it.
2. Christ was Transfigured to prefigure the glory of his second coming at the
day of Judgment. Then he will have his Saints about him, as Moses, and Elias,
and his Apostles, to be present with him; and he Himself will be in his glory:
His first Coming was in infirmity, but the Kingdom of God shall come with
power. Look upon Mount Tabor, and then believe the glory of his second
Appearance. 3. Christ was Transfigured, consignare Resurrectionem. It shows the
possibility, nay the facility of his own and our resurrection. He who can
transform himself thus into glory, how easily can he raise up himself, and us
also, and translate us into glory? Look upon Mount Tabor, and then doubt not
but Mount Golgotha shall give up her dead. 4. Christ was Transfigured, armare
contra scandalum crucis. He had told his Disciples of his Cross, and
sufferings. It greived Tabor, and be not offended at Mount Calvarie. 5. He
shows himself in glory to his Apostles, gives them a glimpse of Heaven, to
quicken up their appetites to the longing for it. These praeludia of Heaven,
will support any drooping spirit. As Jonathan, the taste of Honey, revived him
presently. Caleb cut down a bunch of Grapes from Eschol, and by the presenting
of that, encouraged the people to desire Canaan. Fix thy Meditations upon these
glories; behold by faith Christ in his glory; not attended only with Moses, and
Elias, but with innumerable Angels; behold thy Throne, thy Crown, thy white
Robes, it will make thee courageous, and desirous to be dissolved.




THE THIRD
S. LUKE ix. 30, 31. And behold, there talked with him two men, which were
Moses Elias. Who appeared in Glory, and spoke of his Decease, which he should
accomplish at Jerusalem.
NOw follows Christ's honorable Attendance, that accompanied him in his
glorious Transfiguration. And in it observe three particulars:

1. The Persons who are present, 2. The Manner of their presence; They appeared
in glory. 3. Their Action and Employment; An holy and heavenly Conference; They
spoke of his decease.
First, The Persons that attended, and were present at his Transfiguration: And
they present themselves in three considerable notions;

1. Their number; Two. 2. Their kind; Two men. 3. Their specialty; Moses and
Elias.
I. Their number, Two.

Why so small a number of glorious Attendants? He could have commanded twelve
Legions. All the assembly of the Saints were ambitious of this honor; heaven
would have emptied it Christ.

Yet but two admitted;

1. This Transfiguration of Christ was but a glimpse of his Glory, no full
manifestation. He shows here but one beam of his Majesty, not the full luster
and splendor of it. When he comes in full Glory, troops and millions of Saints
and Angels shall wait upon him. Now he more privately discovers himself, in the
view of a few: and if he be now so glorious, how resplendent will he be in all
his Saints, and holy Angels? 2. These Saints present, are not present for
attendance only, but as witnesses, to give testimony to the Son of God. And two
witnesses of such choice and note, of so great authority to seal and assure us
of Christ's glorious Divinity, are sufficient. At the mouth of two witnesses,
or, at the mouth of three witnesses, shall a matter be established, Deuteronomy. xix.
15. There need no more. Here therefore only three from earth are assumed to
this vision, and two only from heaven. Hereafter, Every eye shall see him; Now
the sight of him is more reserved and mystical, and of a more reserved
dispensation. 3. Two Saints are assumed into attendance of this Glory, others
are omitted; to show and figure out a disparity and diversity of Glory in those
blessed Spirits. All the Saints have their portion of bliss, but in their
proportion, not in a just equality. As from earth he has his favorites, three
choice Apostles, the rest stood at a more remote distance; so, in heaven,
though all are happy, yet have they their measures, and degrees of Glory. These
two in the Text are taken into a greater nearness, admitted to a more full view
of Christ; others were waiting his coming into heaven, longing for, and
expecting his glorious Ascension. Moses and Elias saw his back-parts: These
again are dignified with this glorious Apparition; assumed with him into his
triumphant Chariot, as Iehu did assume Ionadab.
That Is the first, their number, two.

II. Their kind, two men. Why was he not attended with glorious Angels? Why
were not these commanded to wait upon him, and worship him? No, he assumes not
Angels, but these holy men.

1. They were, magis idonei Testes, more competent and convenient witnesses of
his Deity and Mediatourship, then the choicest Angels. Moses and Elias should
be of more prevailing Autherity, then the Angels. These had Authority of
teaching in the Church. And they bear record here, in relation to what they
were before, with respect to the Scriptures, of which they were Remember them
who have spoken to you the word of God, whose faith follow, considering the end
of their conversation, Heb. xiii. 7. That Doctrine which they taught, brought
them to Glory. 2. Duo homines, Two men; they attend this Glory of Christ,
because they are more concerned in Christ's Incarnation, and Mediatourship.
These are not only Spectators, but Partners. Our Salvation, and bliss, is the
main aim of Christ; the glory of He took not upon him their nature; fulfilled
not their Covenant. To us he was born; to us he lived; for us he died. They are
not the Spouse, but the friends of the Spouse. The Church is Christ's Spouse;
they, like S. John the Baptist, rejoice at the sight of it. As when God led the
Israelites into Canaan, a mixed people followed them, and entered in with them:
so we are the choice people, who are led into heaven; Angels are but Inmates in
heaven, in respect of us. And heaven is said to be prepared for us, not for
Angels. Mat. xxv. Hell is prepared for the Devil and his Angels: but not so
Heaven; A sitting down with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, not with Angels, in the
kingdom of heaven. They are but Pocillatores, but Servitours and Attendants
upon our Glory. 3. It is more comfort to the Apostles, to see Men in Glory with
Christ, rather then Angels. Angels in heaven were ab origin there, never
excluded; but to see Men assumed, this shows that the virtue of our Mediator
has opened Paradise again, quenched the fiery Sword, reconciled us, and given
entrance for our banished Nature into the state of Glory. It was comfort
Daniel, and his fellows, advanced by the king of Babel, and made chief in the
kingdom; for to see Hester made Queen, and Vashti neglected: so, to see flesh
of our flesh, Men in the same captivity and condemnation, reconciled,
glorified; it bids us hope well for a gracious admission.
That Is the second, their kind, Two Men.

III. Their specialty; their Persons, Moses, and Elias. Why not some other
Saints, but these must be singled out? What reasons are there for their
appearance rather then for others? Diverse reasons may be given; reduce them to
these four heads:

1. Some reasons of this choice, are in respect of Christ. 2. Some, in respect
of themselves. 3. Some, in respect of the Apostles. 4. Some, in respect of the
people to whom it was to be published.
1. Moses and Elias appear at this Transfiguration, respectu Christi, in
respect of Christ: 1. Famulantur, ut Domino. These chief, eminent Saints, must
do homage to Christ, as to their great Lord. It added to Mordecai's honor,
that Haman the chief Prince must attend his triumph. See here, the two grand
Pillars of the Church, the most renowned Prophets, Saints high in heaven, wait
upon our Savior. He calls for Elias, see if Elias will come, said they
scoffingly. Behold, Elias, and Moses are present; all their dignity must stoop
to him. Moses was faithful as a servant of the house, but Christ was Lord of
the house. Kings, and Prophets, and eminent Saints Ioseph's brethren, all
honor him; all Sheavs bow down to this Sheaf; all the Stars worship this Sun
of righteousness. 2. Attestantur, ut Messiae. They come and give evidence, and
testimony, that he is the anointed Messiah, that was promised to the Church. He
receives testimony, and witness from Moses, and the Prophets. Thus Philip, Ioh.
i. 45. We have found him of whom Moses in the Law, and the Prophets, did write,
Jesus of Nazareth. Thus S. Peter brings Moses to witness; For Moses truly said
unto the Fathers, A Prophet shall the Lord your God raise up unto you, Act.
iii. 22. To him give all the Prophets witness, Act. x. 43. And Christ accounts
that Moses wrote of him, Search the Scriptures -- they are they, which testify
of me, Ioh. v. 39. This they foretold; now, being exhibited, they set to their
seals of this glorious performance. 3. Sociantur, ut Legis and Prophetarum
complementa. Moses and Elias attend, and behold him as the fulfilling, and
accomplishment of Law and Prophets; to intimate, that Law and Prophets, all aim
at him, and all concur, and join in him; all, like lines, run to this center.
All the Patriarchs were Types of him; Jonas that his Prophecy was frustrate;
it was joy to the Prophets to see all their predictions made good in Him. To
prefigure thee, says Moses, I instituted the Passover, and effusion of Blood;
all my Rites and Ceremonies looked at thee. To foretell thee, says Elias, was
my message and Ministry. All the Prophets from Samuel, and after, pointed at
him. Till his coming, all things were He is AMEN. 4. Venerantur, ut Servatorem:
They appear, to adore him as their Savior and Redeemer. Though they are
already in heaven, and glory; yet they know to whose blood they owe it, Moses
himself could not convey himself into Canaan, the type of heaven; much less
into heaven it self. All the Elders, and Saints, fling down their Crowns at his
feet; all worship, and are tributary to his glory. Elias his Chariot was of
Christ's sending, as Jacob's came from Joseph.
2. Moses and Elias appear, in respect of Themselves; for these reasons; 1.
Conceive them, ut eminentes Sancti. Moses and Elias were persons of admirable
holiness, yet they attend and adore Ambrose speaks; For Publicans, and Harlots,
to be justified by Faith, is no such wonder: but for Abraham, so rich in good
works, yet to stand in need of Faith, and Christ; it highly advances the glory
of Christ. The purest Robe must be washed in this blood, the choycest Saint
must draw grace from Christ. Abraham, the Father of the Faithful, was a Son of
this adoption of grace. 2. Conceive them, ut Sancti mortui, and translati. They
were Moses is dead, Elias translated, yet they do homage to Christ. To teach
us, that he is Lord of quick and dead. While he is upon earth, yet is he Lord
of the spirits in Heaven: Now he is in heaven, he is Lord of all on earth. All
live to him. He is the God of Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob. No state of time,
or place, or condition, excludes his Sovereignty. All Knees in heaven, and
earth, and under the earth must bow, and prostrate to him. The Pope, who
enlarges his power to the world of spirits, yet claims not that authority. He
has not jurisdictionem, but per modum Suffragii. Christ has an homage, 3.
Conceive them ut Sancti Veteris Testamenti; They were not living under the
Gospel, but under the Old Testament; yet they acknowledge they belong as
dependants upon this Messiah. He had an influence backwards to those former
Saints, as well as forward to the times of Christians. They who went before,
and they who came after, all sing Hosanna to this Son of David. The Church of
the Patriarchs acknowledged him for their Head. All of them were partakers of
this common salvation. Christ Jesus, yesterday, to day, the same for ever. It
was a dangerous, and blasphemous error of the Manichees, and Marcionites, to
distinguish the God of the Old Testament from the God of the New. They counted
them a Carnal people, feeding only upon earthly promises; No, their estate was
spiritual, and the promise heavenly, Messiah. 4. Conceive them, ut Assessores
Iudicii. This Transfiguration, is a representation of his last Coming in
glory. Then, these Saints Moses and Elias shall assist his Judgment. The Law,
and the Gospel, shall then appear against their contemners, and give in
evidence against profane sinners. Oh! we think to see Christ only all in
mercy. No, know; Moses will appear, and his Law shall be charged upon thee, and
the doctrine of the Prophets. Do not think that I will accuse you to the
Father; there is one that accuses you, even Moses, in whom ye trust, Ioh. v.
45. Christ shall forgive it thee. Moses grew not weak, or sickly, but continued
in full vigor, till God buried him; so the Law has an eternal obligation, and
force upon thee, and will accuse thee, till Christ discharges it. As many as
have sinned in the Law, shall be judged by the Law, Romans ii. 12.
3. These two, Moses and Elias appear respectively to the Apostles, who were
now present at this Transfiguration, for three reasons; 1. To correct an error
in them. They dreamed of Christ's Christ reign here, what would become of Moses
and Elias, the Saints departed? They are banished from this Kingdom. No, sure
they must sit down with Abraham in that Kingdom. Ye are come unto the heavenly
Jerusalem, -- and to the spirits of just men, Heb. xii. 22. 23. The
consideration of these Citizens, must raise us to the acknowledgment of an
heavenly Inheritance. They sought a City to come. 2. To confirm a truth. They
had made a noble Confession Christ's Divinity. See how Christ confirms them
now, by the acknowledgment here of two glorious Witnesses. As Christ to
Nathaniel; Believe thou, because I said unto thee, I saw thee under the
Fig Tree? thou shall see greater things then these. -- Hereafter ye shall see
Heaven open, and the Angels of God ascending, and descending upon the Son of
man, Ioh. i. 50. 51. They shall have Moses and Elias, two great Witnesses, to
confirm it to them. Thus God honors and rewards, and confirms the Faith of his
servants. 3. To enforce a duty, Moses and Elias assist him in glory. Christ;
and how are they now honored? It urges upon them that holy imitation. Moses,
he was Faithful in the house of God; Elias, he was Zealous, and Jealous for his
glory. Both, ventured their lives in God's Cause. Moses, encountered Pharaoh;
Elias, Ahab. Both Zealous in God's Worship; now they appear in rest and glory.
These great Zelotes were most eminent Favorites. It chalks out to the Apostles
the way of getting high into Heaven. Those who labor and toil in his work,
burn in Zeal for his Glory, pledge their lives in his Cause, give up the fullest
account, and improvement of their pains, these are his choice ones; these
follow the Lamb where ever he goes. As David's Worthies, they were always
about him, placed in greatest command, stand upon Record; so here, these who
encountered Giants, Pharaoh, Ahab, Iezabel, these are they who are highly
honored. 4. These two appear respectively to the people, and their judgment of
Christ. There were three opinions common among the Jews, of Christ; 1. A
blasphemous opinion. 2. A more moderate opinion, but yet unworthy of him. 3. A
partial and superstitious opinion.


All these are corrected by this Apparition.

1. They had a blasphemous opinion of him; that he was an Impostor, a
transgressor of the Law, a blasphemer; This man blasphemeth, Matthew. ix. 3. See
here, Moses and Elias justify him, Moses would not have owned him, much less
honored him. Had he been a blasphemer, as they charged him, Elias, who burnt
in Zeal for God's glory, would he have a-dored him? Now then that these Saints,
of such authority among the people, do they acknowledge him? Surely he is no
transgressor, no blasphemer. 2. The people more moderately, yet most unworthily
judged him to be but some Prophet. Whom do men say, that I, the Son of man, am?
Some say; that thou art John the Baptist, some Elias, and others Ieremias, or
one of the Prophets, Matthew. xvi. 13, 14. That was the best they thought of him;
A great Prophet is risen up among us, Luc. 7. 16. This was well; but yet too
low for Christ. The Devil can be content we should yield him thus much, if we
stay there. The Turk's attribute so much to him. No, here we see the main
Prophet Elias, he adores him, as Lord of the Prophets, to whom all Prophets
ministered, ushered in, foretold. All the Prophets were enlightened by him, all
were sent by him. Elias, and Samuel, and all, stoop to him. 3. The Jews had a
superstitious opinion of Moses, that Christ to be Moses his equal. Thou art his
Disciple, but we are Moses Disciples. We know that God spoke unto Moses; as for
this fellow, we know not whence he is, Ioh. ix. 28, 29. See here, Moses, whom
they dote upon, he gives precedence to Christ; he vails, and bows, Christ.
Abraham; Art thou greater then our father Abraham, which is dead? and the
Prophets are dead, whom make thou thy self? Ioh. viii. 53. Whereas Abraham
desired to see one day of Christ; so did Moses. Many Prophets, and Kings have
desired to see those things which ye see, Luke x. 24. that is, Christ in the
flesh. As S. Paul of himself, What is Paul, what is Apollos? So, what is Moses,
in compare with Christ?
So much of the Persons;

1. Duo; Two. 2. Duo homines; Two men. 3. Hi duo; These two, Moses and Elias.
Next is,
Secondly, The Manner of their Presence, They appeared in Glory. In it two
things;

1. It is a real Appearance. 2. It is a glorious Appearance.

I. It is a real Appearance; not an apparition of fancy, or some Vision to the
mind, but a true, real, personal Appearance of these two Saints.

1. It is propounded, and sealed up with a word of certainty Behold; importing
not only admiration, but evidence, and assurance. 2. The eyes of the Apostles
give evidence of this Appearance. It is said, When they were awake, they saw
his Glory, and the two men that stood with him: And S. Peter, and S. John
affirm, they were eyewitnesses of all this Glory. 3. The Actions ascribed to
these men are real and bodily; talking, speaking, all bodily performances. 4.
It is not suitable to the Glory, and Truth of Christ, to delude men with
shadows, and empty Appearances. He handle me, feel me. All these are evidences
for a real Appearance.
Now this reality of Appearance, assures us of two Truths:

1. Is Veritas Immortalitatis; the truth of the Immortality of souls and
spirits: The spirits of these two holy men, are living and immortal. It is a
wicked opinion of the Sadduces, now reigning among the Jews, that the souls are
extinguished with the bodies. Here is not only Elias, whom they rejected; but
Moses, whom they believed, is here really exhibited. This is the assurance of
our Faith; Ye are come to the spirits of just men made perfect. 2. Is Veritas,
the truth, nay more, facilitas Resurrectionis, the easiness of the
Resurrection. Elias, indeed, in body was Moses was dead, and buried in the
plain of Moab; yet here his body is united to his soul, and appears in Glory.
How easily can the Lord of our bodies and souls, raise, and place our bodies in
Glory? See, he beckens Elias out of heaven, Moses out of his grave. Moses his
body was not as Lazarus's, four days, but two thousand years in the grave, yet
at the nutus of Christ, is it raised, and united. Our bodies and souls shall be
in his hands, not only for safety, and custody; but for guidance, and
disposal. Speak but the word, Lord, and thy servants shall revive.

That Is the first; a real Appearance.


II. It is a glorious Appearance; Appeared in Glory. Moses and Elias, being
attendants upon Christ, appear in Glory, as Noblemen appear in greatest
Magnificence, to attend the King.

1. Here is the glory of the Saints, to attend Christ in Glory. The Jews
thought if Christ were advanced, Moses must down. Whosoever preached Christ,
spoke against Moses. No, Moses was never so glorious, as in this Attendance. It
is otherwise with this Sun of righteousness, and the Saints; then with the body
of the Sun and the Stars. These do, occidere heliace, not appear when they come
nearer to the Sun: But our Sun of Glory makes these Ioseph's dream, the Sun,
Moon, and Stars were all shining together. 2. Moses and Elias appear gloriously
in Christ's presence. Moses is then made manifest and clear, when Christ comes.
Take Moses, asunder, and without Christ, 1. He is obscure; there is no luster,
no clearness, he is under a vail; but Christ, he with his Coming, if he appear
with Moses, he makes all gloriously clear and evident to us. 2. He is
imperfect, nothing but emptiness, and shadows; Christ gives a fullness to Moses;
He is not so much the abolition, Grace and Truth came by Jesus Christ. Paul
calls them beggarly rudiments, void of Christ. 3. Moses apart from Christ, he
is fearful, and terrible: The Law causes wrath. Ay, but look upon Moses
standing with Christ, then he is comfortable. Make Moses a servant to Christ;
the Law, to Faith; and never look upon Moses, but see Christ with him, and
above him; and that will rejoice thee.


That Is the second, the manner of their appearance, in Glory.

Thirdly, see their Action, and Employment, They talked with him. In it three
things;

1. The Action, Collocuti. 2. The Person, Cum Christo. 3. The Matter, de Exitu.
I. The Action, Collocuti; They talked. It was no dumb show, and representation
to gaze upon; but an holy and heavenly communication. Moses and Elias, if they
appear, they appear as Prophets, speaking, and conferring; either speaking of
God, or to God. It is the life of a Prophet in heaven; day and night, without
ceasing, there is nothing but speaking. We have here too, Moses and the
Prophets, let us conferr with them and Christ, it is a glimpse of Glory. In the
Scriptures, we find Moses and the Prophets conferring with Christ, which S.
Peter preferrs before this Vision, and calls 2 Pet. i. 19. A more sure word of
Prophecy.

Now this Colloquium, this Speaking, implies two things:

1. Consensum. 2. Familiaritatem.
1. Consensum. It teaches us, That there is a sweet agreement betwixt Moses and
Elias, with our Savior Christ; that there is no repugnancy or contradiction
'twixt the Old, and New Testament, but a sweet harmony and agreement. Here, the
Law and the Prophets, like the two Cherubs, are both compassing, and looking
upon the Mercy-Seat. This Christ taught his Disciples; All things must be
fulfilled which were written in the Law of Moses, and in the Prophets, and in
the Psalms, concerning me, Luke xxiv. 44. There were certain Heretics in S.
Aug. time, who professed themselves enemies to the Law, and the Prophets. But,
Non potes segregare Legem ab Evangelio, ut nec umbram a corpore. The Lord thy
God will raise unto thee a Prophet from the midst of thee, of thy brethren,
like unto me, says Moses, Deuteronomy. xviii. 15. Like unto me, not contrary to me.
The same Religion, the same substantial Truth, the same Grace and Salvation is
in both Testaments. There is a variety of Ceremonies, but the same Truth and
Substance; there is the same Author James answers this doubt, Known to the
Lord are all his works from the beginning; it is no change in God. As the
prescripts of the Physician, are some of one kind to day, to morrow of another,
both aiming at the health of the Patient; Aug. The Gospel was comprehended in
the Law, the Law is explained, and cleared in the Gospel. The Law shows Moses
veiled, the Gospel unvails him. 2. Denotat familiaritatem. Their talk and
conference betokens a sweet and holy familiarity, and communion with God on
earth. As of Moses it was said, The Lord spoke unto Moses face to face, as a
man speaks unto his friend, Exodus xxxiii. 11.
Observe, Moses and Elias were men of much communion with God upon earth; many
heavenly entercourses passed between them; and now they are admitted into a
near, and sweet, and Christ in heaven. They who never maintain speech with God
here, how can they look to have access in heaven? They who love to come into
his presence, delight in hearing him speak to them, and they to him by Prayer
and Meditation, they shall have nearest, and freest, and sweetest communion
hereafter. That Is the first; the Action, Collocuti sunt, They talked.

II. The Person, Cum Christo, With Christ; Not with the Apostles; nor the
Apostles with them. Here was a miraculous Apparition;

Observe; Here is no show, or appearance of any intercourse 'twixt Christians
on earth, and the Saints in heaven; no invocation, or salutation on the
Apostles part; no revelation, or instruction on these Prophets part. The Lord
has purposely estranged us from all intercourse, 'twixt us and the Spirits
departed. There is no need of Moses and Elias to speak from heaven; we have
Moses and Elias, and all that they can say, behoofeful for us, in their Books
and Writings. Ye are come to the Spirits of just men made perfect, and to Jesus
the Mediator of the New Testament, Heb. xii. 23, 24. He is the only Mediator.

III. The Matter of this Conference, His decease, which he should accomplish at
Jerusalem. Had some the reporting of this Conference, it should have been of
some other matters. May be, of the Succession of Times and Kingdoms; of the
rising and falling of Monarchies. These the Prophets were acquainted with; but
these they talk not of. Others would have reported some Seraphical discourse of
the nine Orders of Angels, and those Hierarchies; or some great discourse of
Limbus Patrum, or of the souls in Purgatory. No such matter; it is here, De
morte Christi, Of Christ's decease. But,

1. Why do they conferr about this? 2. How do they talk of it? 3. Why do they
conferr about the death of Christ?
1. This is the grand, necessary, fundamental Work of Christ for his Church. If
such a Synod as this meet, it is not for trifles; but they talk of the Common
Salvation of the Church. That is the Capital Truth, the groundwork of all our
Faith, and Salvation. This takes up their discourse: Nay, it is the Meditation
of God; His ancient thought from Eternity was busied about this, That Christ
should dye for our Redemption. 2. This they talked of, as a thing that was a
great grief, and offense to the Apostles. A little before, Peter abhorred to
hear of Christ's death. It bred in them; 1. Scandalum tristitiae; They were
very sad. 2. Scandalum dubitationis; It troubled their Faith, how the Messiah
should suffer; We trusted that it had been he which should have redeemed
Israel, Luke xxiv. 21. but he is dead.
Purposely, Christ and these Saints, conferr about this, To acquaint the
Apostles with this Mystery, that so it must be; and that our salvation
depended upon it. 3. This they talked of, as the thing that both Law and
Prophets prefigured, and foretold. All their Sacrifices were Representations of
his Death; all their Prophesies, Predictions of Thus it is written, and thus it
behoved Christ to suffer, Luke xxiv. 46. In this sense, He was the Lamb slain
from the beginning of the world. 4. This they talked of, as the matter of
Christ's greatest Glory and Renown. They being to Adore Christ, and to put
Honor upon him, they invest him with his Garments dipped in Blood. Isa. lxiii.
1. Who is this that comes from Edom, with dyed Garments from Bozrah? This that
is glorious in his Apparel, traveling in the greatness of his strength, mighty
to save? What Honor like this, to dye for his Church, to be the Sacrifice of
the Quapropter, Wherefore God also -- has given him a Name, which is far above
every name, Philip. ii. 9. Absit, therefore, says S. Paul, ut gloriarer nisi
in Cruce Christi; God forbid that I should glory save in the Cross of Christ,
Galat. vi. 14. 5. This they talked of, as the main matter of heavenly
discourse. What do Moses, and the Prophets, Angels, and Archangels talk and
discourse of? They wonder at, and Adore the death of Christ, and Redemption of
the Church. 6. This they talked of, in care and solicitude for the Church. on
earth. They themselves are in Glory: Ay but their brethren yet, as the two
Tribes, fight for their brethren. Securi de se, Soliciti pro nobis. But,
2. How do they talk of it? Reduce all to these three heads: 1. Praedicentes;
Foretelling him of it. Not but that Christ foresaw it himself; but this
Dispensation he used, to know it by Scriptures, and these Revelations. 2.
Gratias agentes; Adoring him for it, magnifying his Thou art worthy to receive
Honor, and Blessing, for thou have Redeemed us. 3. Orantes ut acceleret;
Begging the accomplishment. Peter solicits him, not to dye; Moses and Elias,
they solicit him to finish that glorious work, upon which their Salvation, and
the Salvation

Use.

1. Christus in gloria meditatur de morte; His Glory makes him not forget his
Death. How should we season all our thoughts of joy, with thoughts of our
departure? 2. Do these glorious Saints talk of Death? Oh! let it take up our
thoughts; let it be much in our meditations.










THE FOURTH
S. LUKE ix. 31, 32. Who appeared in Glory, and spoke of his Decease, which he
should accomplish at Jerusalem. But Peter, and they that were with him, were
heavy with sleep: and when they were awake, they saw his Glory, and the two Men
that stood with him.
WE have seen, in general, the sum of this Conference about Christ's Decease:
Now look upon it more particularly, and with

1. Here is Colloquium de Morte; They talk and conferr of his Death and
Passion. 2. Here is Natura, and Conditio Mortis; It Is exodus, a deceasing, or
departure. 3. Here is Susceptio hujus conditionis; It is a fulfilling. 4. Here
is Circumstantia susceptionis; It must be at Jerusalem.
First, Here is Colloquium de Morte. Christ puts himself into this

1. As a moderation of his present Glory and Majesty, into which he is
advanced. Being thus magnified by his Father, and raised to an high pitch of
Glory, he seasons it with this deep, and serious meditation of his Death and
Passion. The thoughts of

Thus Christ interchangeably; In his Humiliation, he refreshes himself with
the expectation of Glory: When he stands at the Bar, Ye shall see (says he)
the Son of man sitting on the right hand of Power, and coming in the clouds of
heaven, Matthew. xxvi. 64. And so before his Passion; O Father, glorify me with
thine own self, with the glory which I had with thee before the world was, Ioh.
xvii. 5. Contrarily; being in the state of Glory, he puts himself into the
cogitations of Death. When the Graecians came to visit, and do honor to him,
he discourses of his Passion; Except a corn of Wheat fall into the ground, and
dye, it abides alone, Ioh. xii. 24. Naturally, Abundance, and worldly
prosperity, raises our thoughts too high, makes us forgetful, nay, to abhor the
mention of death. Greatness, like Ahashuerus, will have no mourning, nor
sackcloth, Esther iv. 2. to appear before him. As the Wiseman has it, O Mors,
quam amara! Ecclesiastic. xli. 1. O Death, how bitter is the remembrance of
thee to them that are at ease in their possessions! The thought of Death, it
should be like that Stimulus carnis, that Thorn in the flesh, to S. Paul, lest
I should be pufft up with abundance of Revelations. Thus the Apostle exhorts;
Brethren, the time is short, -- Let them that rejoice, be as though they
rejoiced not, -- and they that use the world, as not over-using it, for the
fashion of the world passes away, 1 Cor. vii. 29, 30, 31. Thus Abraham,
admitted into conference with God, cries out, I am but dust and ashes, Genesis
xviii. 27. And Jacob, being in honor in Egypt, says, Few and evil have the
days of my life been, Genesis xlvii. 9. Thus Joseph of Arimathea made his Grave in
his Garden.

Christ puts himself into this premeditation of Death,

2. As a condition of his future Glory. This Transfiguration, it was a glimpse
of his after-Glory, into which he was to enter: a pawn and pledge of the full
Possession. But yet, as knowing that through sufferings and death, he must
enter into it, he premeditates, and considers of his Death and Passion. Thus he
must suffer, and enter into his Glory, Luke xxiv. 26.

No certainty or evidence of Glory and Salvation, must make Romans viii. 17.
Ioynt-heirs with Christ; if so be that we suffer with him, that we also may be
glorified together. Our hope of heaven, like the discourse of the Spies, Oh it
is a good land! should encourage us to endure any thing: Let Having these
Promises, let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness of the flesh and
spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of God, 2 Cor. vii. 1. Let us work out
our own salvation with fear and trembling, Phil. ii. 12.


Use.

This should teach us to be frequent and abundant in these thoughts of Death;
to season all our meditations, and actions, with that deep consideration. It
has a manifold virtue and

1. It has a virtue of abating the glut and surfeit of all wordly pleasures;
it will damp those vain lusts that boil in our hearts. Let the Adulterer know
that his body must one day lie in the grave, it will make him tremble at the
defiling of it: Let this thought appear, like the Handwriting on the wall, it
will make the Cup fall out of the hand of the Drunkard. Let the Covetous man
hear of, Stulte, hac nocte, Thou fool, this night shall thy soul be taken from
thee, and he will moderate his craving 2. It has a virtue of persuading to
Repentance, and Reconciliation with God; and preserving of such a Conscience,
that may not affright, but refresh, and comfort us in our last need. 3. It has
a power of abating the fear and horror of Death when it approaches. Death's
face is dismal, acquaint thy self daily with it, view it, look upon it,
forecast it in thy mind; it will not seem terrible, when it approaches to
thee. It Is good to bear this meditation in thy youth.

That Is the first; Colloquium de Morte.


Secondly, Here is Natura Mortis, and Conditio; it is Exitus, exodus, A
departure. It looks two ways:

1. Respectively to this Life. 2. Respectively to Death.
1. Respectively to this Life; so it is Negatio Durationis: It tells us, This
life, it is not a state of perpetuity, and continual duration. Exodus here, is
never used, but in the people's leaving of Egypt, in their departure from
thence. Their being there, Heb. xi. 13. They confessed they were strangers and
pilgrims upon earth; they had no abiding place; dwelt in tents, as strangers,
and travelers; laid no foundations, sought an after-City. Thus our life is
called, the time of a soldier; the stay of a wayfaring 2. Respectively to
Death; so it is, Negatio Annihilationis. Death is a departure, therefore no
destruction, and absolute cessation. Were we of the faith of the Sadduces,
Death were no removal, departure, passage; but a quenching of the life, a
destruction of the soul, an annihilation of the spirit. No, our Souls die not,
but depart only. Solomon calls it, A returning of the soul to God, Eccles.
xii. 7. Immortality is a part of that Image of God, Paul calls Death, A
dissolution, or separation; not a destruction, and annihilation. The light of
Nature taught it the Heathen, and the light of Scripture assures it us. If in
this life only we have hope in Christ, we are of all men most miserable, 1
Cor. xv. 19. The very Philosophers discourse of the regions of souls, and world
of spirits; and places of abode, even after this life.

Use.

1. Is Mors, exitus? Is Death a departure? It must make that word sound in our
ears, Migremus hinc; fix not your rest, David calls the wicked, The men of this
world, Psalm. xvii. 14. They settle here, make this their heaven: But this must
assure us, this life is but an Annuity, it is not a Perpetuity. The fashion of
this world passes, says S. Paul. The world passes away, and the lusts
thereof, says S. John. Sedemus hic juxta flumina Babylonis, omnia transeunt.
Look upon all things here, as such that must be left. He who is to remove from
a Farm, takes not that care as if it were his own; it is not mine Inheritance.
Engage not your Rechabites expecting Captivity, built no houses, but dwelt in
tents. 2. Is Mors, exitus? Is Death a departure? Then see thou finish all thy
work, Quia decedendum. What thou have to do, do it with thy might: for there is
no work, nor device, nor knowledge, nor wisdom in the grave, whither thou
go, Eccles. ix. 10. Might we stay as long as we list, or return again when
we please, then we might presume: but, Statutum est semel mori, It is appointed
to men once to dye, Heb. ix. 27. If we were to return, and die again, we might
recover our omissions; Exodus, then with the Israelites: they carried their
dough upon their shoulders; they had not prepared for themselves any victuals,
Exodus xii. 39. but they did it in 3. Is Mors, exitus? Is Death a departure?
Provide, and forecast for a place of refuge. Death is like a cruel Landlord,
turns us out of doors. What folly is it, not to provide a place to receive us?
This Christ commends in the Parable of the Steward; Make to your selves friends
-- that when ye fail, they may receive you into everlasting habitations, Luke
xvi. 9. This was our Savior's comfort, I leave the world, and go to the
Father, Ioh. xvi. 28. This was the perplexity of men without Christ. The wisest
of them knew not what became of their spirits;

Animula, vagula, blandula,

Quae abibis in loca? whether upward, or downward, as Solomon speaks. They that
are Christ's, are assured of a place after their departure. We know, if our
earthly house of this Tabernacle were dissolved, we have a building of God, an
house not made with hand, eternal in the heavens, verse. 2. For in this we groan
earnestly, desiring to be clothed upon with our house which is from heaven.
This made Lot willing to forsake Sodom, that he had a Zoar to retire to; and
the Israelites to leave Egypt, that they had a Canaan to go to. It was a
judgment upon the false Prophet, that he should go from chamber to chamber to
hide himself, 1 Kings xxii. 25.

That Is the second, Natura, and Conditio Mortis.



Thirdly, Here is Susceptio Conditionis. It is called an accomplishment, or
fulfilling; (...). It is Active, not Passive; not to be fulfilled upon him, but
by him; he himself to accomplish. Christ's Christ's sufferings were not bare
sufferings, but voluntary performances. He was Lord of his own life; No man
takes it from me; I lay it down. That which gave merit and acceptance to
Christ's suffering, was his willing, and free, and active undertaking of it.
And as in Christ, so in Christians, their sufferings, their deaths, they are
active in them, not patients only. A wicked man, Death gnaws upon him, he is
snatched to Death; Christ did. Quis tam facile dormivit? I lie me down and
rest. Egredere, o Anima. -- Non repetent animam, ego reddam.

Now this under-going of death, it is called an accomplishing, fulfilling;

1. In respect of God's counsel, and ordination. Christ's death was appointed
from eternity; he had purposed and forelayd it. Act. iv. 28. To do whatsoever
thy hand, and thy counsel determined before to be done: He is the Lamb slain
from the beginning of the world, in God's wisdom appointing it, in his truth
promising it, in faith believing it; only his actual suffering, that
accomplished it. Ought not Christ to suffer these things, and so to enter into
his glory? This makes Christ so studious to admit of death; else how should the
Scripture be fulfilled.

This consideration makes the Saints suffer all things, Death it self,
naturally, willingly. This commandment received I of my Father; The end of my
times are in thy hand. To God belong the issues of death: Ps. lxviii. If
chance, or violence only appears, Flesh and Blood may struggle; but God's
appointment, that makes us submit; I held my peace, because it is thy doing.
Moses, when God expressed his resolution, he must die, importunes no more, goes
up to the Mountain, lays down his life. S. Peter laid down his life, as the
Lord had showed him; The will of the Lord be done.

2. Death is called an accomplishment, or fulfilling of our departure, because
that is but the closure and ending. All our life, it is a beginning, and
progress to our end. As all Christ's life, it was a pro-passio to his Passio;
his sufferings were all Viae ad mortem; so our life, it is a progress to death.
We no sooner come into the world but we begin to go out. We die daily in this
sense. That part of our life that is gone, it is Morti deputanda; it runns upon
the score of Death. Indeed eternal life, it is tota, and simultanea possessio
vitae, it is vita in statu, fixed; but this, is in fluxu, as waters always
flowing. Youth, it is the death motus and terminus are but one thing really; so
our passing and consummation of life, it is but one continued-death.
That Is the third, Susceptio conditionis.

Fourthly, Here is Circumstantia susceptionis; the place of accomplishment,
Jerusalem.

Conceive the purpose of it in three Expressions;

1. It is, Locus singulariter designatus; a place singularly designed. All the
Circumstances of Christ's death were fore-sett Daniel; the manner of it was
prefigured, and foretold by the Prophets; the place, all the occasions, and
instruments and circumstances were designed. As the Paschal-Lamb, was not only
commanded to be slain, but on what day, in what

And as it is so in Christ's death, so likewise in ours. Our times are set and
fixed; the period of our life, the circumstance of place, all occurrents
fore-layd. Thus God appoints Moses, and Aaron both time and place to die in.
Thus Elias must now, and in such a manner be assumed. Thus S. Peter was
forewarned, by what manner of death he must glorify God. So Agabus shows S.
Paul how he must be bound. It must settle our hearts; Our lives are in God's
book set, that time is fixed; as was the Exodus of the Israelites, the
self-same day. It must make us resign up our selves, our deaths, the whole
carriage of them, to God's wise disposal.

2. It is, Locus typice praefiguratus: Jerusalem, that was foretold, and
prefigured as the place of Christ's death. This was prefigured in Isaac's
Offering on Mount Moriah. On this Hill David Offered, to cease the Plague. This
place he appointed, to build the Temple on. There was no Altar we know allowed,
but this of Jerusalem. Here the Passover was to be slain and eaten. Thus the
Apostle, Heb. xiii. 11. The bodies of those beasts, whose blood was brought
into the Sanctuary by the High Priest for sin, are burnt without the Camp, v.
12. Wherefore, Jesus also that he might sanctify the people with his own
blood, suffered without the Gate. It must seal up unto us the fulfilling of all
our Redemption. Every Circumstance was prefigured, and is now accomplished. Now
was the great Jubilee when Christ dyed; now the whole Burnt-Offering was
tendered up to God. 3. It is, Locus moraliter praefigurans Ecclesiam. Christ
must die at Jerusalem; that is, his death it is proper to, and effectual for
his Church and people. Out of the bounds of the Church, there is no redemption,
or salvation. He who is out of this Ark, Jerusalem, is an Heathen. They err,
who teach, In any Religion there is possibility of salvation. No, Salvation is
of the Jews, said Christ; so now, Of the Christians. Basan is an high Mountain;
but this is God's Mountain, where it pleases him to dwell. They err too, who
teach, that Christ's sufferings may profit even extra Ecclesiam; and that there
is a common grace beyond the pales of the Church. No, no sacrifice but in
Jerusalem, no grace but in the Church. That is the place to which God has
respect: There he has commanded a blessing, and life for evermore. If Shimei
peep in Jerusalem, (his lines pass but to Gath) he dies for it.
Enough of the conference, about Christ's decease.

Come we now to the Entertainment that the Apostles gave to this glorious
Transfiguration. v. 32. It represents the Apostles

1. In a weakness, and indisposition; They were heavy with sleep. 2. In a more
attentive view, and contemplation, when they were awake, They saw his glory,
and the two men, that stood with him. 3. In a sudden, and passionate affection,
motion, and petition, v. 33.
First, here we see the Apostles in a great weakness and indisposition; all
fallen into a sleep. That we may the better conceive

1. As a Natural infirmity; 2. As a Carnal indisposition; 3. As a Spiritual
amazement, and consternation.
I. Conceive it, ut naturalis infirmitas, as a natural Infirmity. No doubt but
they were bound to have attended with all vigilance upon this manifestation of
our Savior, exacting of them a steadfast watching and careful observation, as
Elijah to Elisha, If thou see me when I am taken from thee; yet here these
choice Apostles are clogged with those humane imperfections, and overtaken with
sleep, when they should have been awakned to most attention. Nay the Evangelist
singles out Peter, as the chief Sleeper. So in the Garden, these when they
should have assisted and refreshed Christ in his Passion, they were then fallen
a sleep again. And Christ singles out Peter; Simon, could thou not watch one
hour? It is true, as Commentators conceive, it was in the time of Sleep. Peter,
and the rest were no Church-sleepers; but being called to watch on Mount Tabor,
and Christ Praying all Night, the weakness of Nature prevailed upon them.
Corpus quod corrumpitur, degravat animam. We live here a life of necessities;
we should wish to have Evangelical bodies, always to attend his Glory, and
service. But while we bear about us these clogs of corruption, we are sunk
downward, even in our best performances. This makes the Saints groan, not only
under sinful corruptions, but natural necessities; fain would they be freed
from them, that they might be always exercised in heavenly performances. A
necessitatibus meis erue me, Domine.

But are these three noted not without imputation, that they are asleep,
although excuseable by those forenamed Circumstances? it puts the occasion into
my mouth to awaken our Churchsleepers, and drousie Auditors. A fault though
pardonable, if rarely, and seldom, and little done; yet let us question their
practice, who, like Solomon's sluggard, Fold up themselves in sleep; Esay's
dogs, Delight in sleeping.

1. Whence may it arise? 2. What may it procure? 1. The evilness of the root.
2. The bitterness of the fruit will condemn it as sinful. 1. Quae radix? What
is the root whence it springs? 1. Sometimes out of Infirmity; and a child of
God, and one whose heart seeks the Lord, may be overtaken. That is my case,
says every one, it is mine Infirmity, I wish it were otherwise. 1. It will be
counted an Infirmity if we grieve for it, and be sorry, and humbled, and
troubled at it. Let the sin be never so small, yet if thou continuest in it
securely, with delight, or content; if thy heart smite thee not for it; thou
art excluded from the plea of Infirmity. 2. If it be to be accounted as a
pardonable Infirmity, then we will strive against it; we shall find a contrary
holy inclination, a rousing us out of it. Thus Christ excused Matthew. xxvi. 41.
The spirit is willing, but the flesh is weak. He saw, their desires were good.
Did thou ever labor against it, pray against it, make a Covenant with thine
eyes, as Job speaks? 3. If we daily get some strength, and prevailing against
it. If we live and lie in our Infirmity, and after warning, never improve it;
it ceases to be accounted an Infirmity; it is to be reckoned a voluntary sin.
2. Sometimes it arises from our immoderate labors, defrauding our selves of a
due refreshing, and so enforcing us to Have you not houses to eat and to drink
in, says S. Paul? Has not God given you the night for to sleep, say I, and
your houses and beds to rest in, but you must despise the Church of God? 3.
Sometimes ignorance, and deadness of understanding is the cause of it. When the
spirit of a man is unacquainted with what he hears, when they are things that
his understanding skills not of, naturally the soul sinks into heedlesness, and
drowsiness Did thou know the gift of God: Did thou consider that the word
that is spoken is Life and Power; Were thou acquainted with the mystery of
Godliness, it could not but extort attention. But when we sit as mere Gallio's,
regarding nothing, no wonder though we sleep. 4. Sometimes profaneness, and
neglect, and contempt What will this Babbler speak? They who see no beauty in
Gods Sanctuary; that say, We know what the Preacher can say; such unclean dogs
delight in sleeping. Oh! David had such delight in Gods word, and calling upon
him, that he awakened at midnight; thy dull profaneness makes thee sleep at
noonday. Indecens Christiano, si radius Solis inveniat dormientem: Aug. How
much more unbecoming is it, that the Sun of righteousness should take us
napping? Awake therefore, thou Sleeper, and call upon thy God. 5. Sometimes
Satan works it in men. As he is a dumb spirit, or a deaf spirit; so sometimes
he is a sleepy, drowsy spirit. He hates to see us spiritually exercised. And
if he cannot other ways, yet this way he can prevent the working of Gods word:
He can, like Mercury, lay souls asleep, lest they should hear with their ears,
and believe with their hearts, and should be saved. As, on Saul, and his
servants, a Sleep from God fell upon them; so a sleep from Satan falls upon
many, till they be robbed, like Sampson, of all that they had.

Hae sunt radices.


2. Qui sructus? What does this deserve? 1. It justly provokes God to sleep. We
hear that God has his sleep; He awaked as one out of sleep, Psalm. lxxviii. 65.
Now God sleeps, when he is to us as one that sleeps; that is, hears us not,
regards us not: As Baal, It may be he is asleep, call aloud. Thou that sleep
when God speaks to thee, how do thou deserve that God should sleep, and turn
away, and not regard thee? 2. It justly provokes, upon our selves, even a
spiritual sleep. Esaias tells us of a Spirit of slumber, Isai. xxix. 10. The Lord
has poured out upon you the spirit of deep sleep, and has closed your eyes.
Romans xi. 8. God has given them the spirit of slumber; eyes that they should
not see, and ears that they should not hear unto this day. This is a fearful
judgment, for a man to be spiritually asleep; to have our senses closed up
against all spiritual Inspiration, our Understandings overcast, our Memories
bound, our Motions fettered, our Tongues muzzled, not able to call upon God,
not able to avoid any danger, to foresee any occurrent. 3. It justly deserves
even Eutychus his judgment, Acts Peter says, Their punishment sleeps not, and
will one day upbraid them, Can you not awaken one hour? Then, Ex lethargicis
fient Phrenetici, Aug. They shall awaken out of a lethargy, and fall

So much, De Humana Infirmitate.





II. This sleep of the Apostles, conceive it ut Carnalis Indispositio, it is a
representation of our carnal Indisposition. It represents our incapacity for
any heavenly Revelation. Christ reveals himself in Glory; the nature of man, in
our corruption, is so dull, and incapable, that it is utterly unfit to reach
those mysteries. Naturally our understanding is most dull and unteachable in
these spiritual Truths. In civil, and common truths, we are The natural man,
(...), receives not the things of the Spirit of God, for they are foolishness
unto him: neither can he know them, because they are spiritually discerned, 1
Cor. ii. 14. As the eye of man, to see the earth, and ordinary things, is sharp
enough; but let it look upon the Sun, then it is dazzled. Aristotle compares us
to Owls-eys, that are quick-sighted in the dark, but blind in the Sunshine.
No, as they say, besides Objectum Gloriosum, there must be Lumen Gloriae, else
it is not seen: So there must be Lumen Gratiae, God Nicodemus, the woman of
Samaria; Christ tells her of Living water, for her life she cannot conceive any
other then water of ordinary use. Such is our blindness, that by nature we are
utterly incapable of these spirituals.

III. Conceive it ut Supernaturalis Consternatio. The terror of this glorious
Vision, it has amazed them; so overcome their spirits, that they are sunk into
astonishment. We find the best of Gods Saints thus wrought upon by Gods
appearance. Abraham, Genesis xv. 12. God appeared to him, and a deep sleep fell
upon him; and lo, an horror of great darkness fell upon him: So Ezekiel, i.
28. At the Vision of God he fell down upon his face: So Daniel, x. 8. When he
saw the Vision, there remained no strength in him; for his comeliness was
turned in him into corruption, and he retained no strength. verse. 9. And when
he heard the voice of his words, then was he in a deep sleep on his face, and
his face toward the ground: So S. John, seeing the glory of Christ, he was
struck with astonishment: And when I saw him (says he, Rev. i. 17.) I fell at
his feet as dead.

This Dread arises,

1. Out of the disproportion 'twixt Humane frailty, and Gods glory. Excellens
objectum, destruit sensum. The Sun in its strength dazles the eyes of man, much
more must the glory of God. The Angels hide their faces. We shall surely dye,
because we have seen God, Judge. 2. Secret guiltiness of frailty and corruption,
makes every appearance of Gods Majesty fearful. Not only wicked men (as the
Soldiers at the appearance of the Angel, Matthew. xxviii.) have been confounded,
but the holiest men do tremble, and fear at Gods appearance. Their hearts tell
them, they are Stipula in igne, as Stubble ready to be consumed in this flame
of glory. Even our God is a consuming fire.
And if Saints be thus affrighted and confounded, Who can dwell with devouring
fire? Who can dwell with everlasting burnings?

Thus we have considered the Apostles in their weakness;

Secondly, Let us consider them in their more attentive view and contemplation
of his Glory. It is a good rule, Lex vigilantibus, and non dormientibus
prodest: So, every manifestation of Christ, it cannot affect them, who shut
their eyes against it. Awake thou that sleep, and arise from the dead, and
Christ shall give thee light, Ephesians. v. 14 The Sun may shine, but they who
close their eyes, cannot see it. Outward Revelations profit not, except an
inward Inspiration awaken us to behold them.

When they were awake;

1. They saw his Glory. First they sleep, then they are awakened, then they
behold him. It figures out unto us the order of our enjoying the face of God:
First, we must all sleep the sleep of Death; our Mortality cannot admit of that
Vision: then when we shall awaken out of that sleep, we shall arise renewed,
strengthened, and see his Majesty. Now Faith represents him: The eye of Faith
must be clozed by Death, then at our Resurrection, we, who sleep in the dust,
shall be raised, and stand before him. Psalm. xvii. 15. As for me, I will behold
thy face in righteousness; I shall be satisfied, when I awake with thy
likeness. 2. They saw the two men that stood with him. Saw them, that is, knew
them. But how could they know those whom they never saw? 1. Some Papists tell
us, They had seen their Pictures. So Stella, etc. 2. May be, Ex Colloquio, that
is the best learning of Moses and Elias. 3. Rather, Ex lumine Gloriae; and to
foreshew us the happiness of heaven: Then we shall see, and know certainly all
the Saints past and gone: As Samuel, lumine Prophetiae, knew Saul, antea non
visum; so shall we converse with all the Saints. Adam knew his wife, as soon as
she was brought to him.









THE FIFTH
S. LUKE ix. 33. And it came to pass, as they departed from him, Peter said
unto Jesus, Master, it is good for us to be here, and let us make three
Tabernacles, one for Thee, and one for Moses, and one for Elias; not knowing
what he said.
WE have seen the Entertainment that the Apostles gave to this glorious
Transfiguration; First, In their weakness and indisposition. Secondly, In their
more attentive view and contemplation. Now follows,

Thirdly, Their manner of Entertainment, in a sudden, and passionate, and
affectionate Suit and Petition.

The Text then represents that Effect which this glorious Appearance wrought in
the Apostles. This ravishing joy stirs up in them a sudden, passionate Suit,
and Request, for a constant enjoying of this glorious Vision. And it stands
upon three particulars:

1. Is the occasion of this Request; that is, the departing, and withdrawing of
Moses and Elias; As they departed from him. 2, Is the sum and substance of
their Request; specified, 1. In the person who makes it, Peter: Peter said. 2.
In the person to whom it is tendered, to Christ; Jesus, Master. 3. The Request
it self. In it, 1. A motion for continuance; It is good for us to be here. 2. A
proffer of service to further this continuance, And let us make three
Tabernacles, one for Thee, and one for Moses, and one for Elias. 3. The censure
of this Request; what judgment the Holy Ghost passes upon it; it was
unwarrantable, unadvised; Not knowing what he said.


First, The occasion of this Request; The departure of Moses and Elias. These
two Saints now withdraw themselves from this glorious Appearance, and betake
themselves to those Eternal

The Reason, and Purpose of this present departure, and leaving Mount Tabor,
may be given in diverse congruities:

1. Respectively to themselves. 2. Respectively to Christ. 3. Respectively to
the Apostles.
I. Respectively to themselves: They departed:

1. Quia officio functi; They have performed that service

It represents to us the date of the Saints continuance with us; they have
their employment, and having finished that work, they are removed and withdrawn
from us. Till Moses has done his work, no weakness nor decay appeared in him;
when that time is finished, no strength can prolong him. Elias must not be
weary of his life, till he has finished his course; when that is accomplished,
he is fetched away presently. The Saints, in this respect, Jacob's vision of
Angels; they were all Ascendentes, and descendentes, non commorantes. As S.
Chrysostom, comparing those two places in the Acts; first S. Paul's escaping in
a basket out of Damascus, Acts ix. 24. and his resolute going to Jerusalem,
Acts xxi. 13. observes, till S. Paul had done his work, he shifts for his life;
when he had finished it, he offers himself to death. It is the condition of all
the Saints, Having served their generations, according to the counsel of God,
they are withdrawn, and no more converse with us. As a faithful servant makes
no lingering, or delays, but being sent, and having dispatched his business, as
Elizaeus-servant, they are. Moses and Elias discharging their Office of
Attestation Christ, are called into heaven again; They departed.

2. Quia a visione removendi; They have a view of Christ Incarnate, but they
must not yet fully and constantly enjoy him, but transiently, and so depart
from him. Their joy in heaven will not be full, till Christ be there at his
glorious Ascension. Now they are graced with this temporary enterview, and
withdrawn from it. Even the glory of the Saints in heaven is thus
dispensatively, and by degrees, vouchsafed unto them. They in heaven lived in
expectation of this blessed Appearance: and, till then, lissening, and looking
to see their Savior; they cry, How long, Lord, how long? As before his
Descention, the Saints on earth cried, Oh that thou would bow the heavens,
and come down! So they in heaven were wishing, Oh that the heavens might open
to receive him back again. Their full consummation will not be made perfect,
till we, with Christ, be caught up in the clouds. They are, Sub Altar, non
super Thronos. They are clothed in Whites, Sed nondum Duplicibus induuntur;
they must wait for that accomplishment. We are in Tabernaculis, they in Atriis,
but not in Thronis. 3. Quia ad statum redituri; Because they were to return to
their former state. This their Appearance on earth was Extraordinary, and
Miraculous, by special Dispensation; but their Abode and Mansion, that is in
heaven. The presence of the Saints departed, is not to be expected, nor
imagined, but only in these cases of Miraculous Employment. There is not only
a gulf of Separation 'twixt hell and heaven, but a distance of Separation also
'twixt heaven and us. We have heard, in Popery, of the many Walkings and
Appearances of the Saints departed: But they are all of them dreams of deceived
Men, or lies of deceiving Lazarus must not leave Abraham's bosom not to ease
Dives, not to convert his brethren. What is said of Christ, is true of the
Saints, Whom the heavens must contain. They go from hence, and are seen no more.

They departed,


II. Respectively to Christ.

1. They depart from Christ, Gloriam deposituro: This Attendance and Service
done to Christ by these Saints, it is but temporary, and to cease; and so these
glorious Spirits, having Christ assumed this Transfiguration, so now he resumes
his state of Abasement. When he is invested with his full Glory, then they
follow the (...) wheresoever he goes. Now he leaves his glorious guard of
Angels, and Saints, and sorts himself with mortal, weak, contemptible men. This
Transfiguration, it was Actus Gloriae, but not Status. As to Moses and Elias he
shows his Glory as he passes by them; they saw but his back-parts; but till
his full Consummatum est, he puts himself into the exercise of his Humiliation.
2. They depart from him, In Ecclesia permansuro. Moses and Elias, they have
their limited time, but they must vanish; Christ, he abides in his Church, and
remains for ever. The Ministry of the Law by Moses, and the Prophets, it was
but till The time of Reformation, Heb. ix. 10. but when Christ is manifested,
and he assumes the regiment of his Church, then he is the only The servant
abides not in the house for ever, but the Son abides for ever, Ioh. viii. 35.
They served to usher in Christ into the world; and, he being present, they
vail, and give place. The Law was dated, and limited; but the Gospel, it is An
everlasting Gospel, Rev. xiv. 6. Diverse ways he spoke unto the Fathers, in
times past, by the Prophets; but now by his Son, Heb. i. 1, 2. And there are
none to come after him. These gave light, as A candle shining in a dark place,
2 Pet. i. 19. Lucerna and accendi debet, and extingui potest: Christ is as the
bright Day Star, nay, as the glorious Sun. Floruit hoc semen in figuris;
prodeunte fructu, flos decidit. S. John's acknowledgement, suits Moses, and all
the Prophets, He must increase, but I must decrease, Ioh. iii. 30. Old things
are passed away, all things become new.
III. This departure of them is respectively to the Apostles,

1. To teach them, that this Revelation, and Vision of Glory, is not to be
perpetual. The Apostles are loath to leave heaven, and to relinquish this
happiness: Yes, but though they have a ravishing enterview, yet they must be
parted. Ioseph's brethren were invited to dine with Joseph, but yet they must
back again into Canaan, to their charge and families, and not abide Secundum
hanc gratiam, recessurus accedit, and recedit accessurus. These joys are
transient, we cannot sit by them. S. Aug. on those words, Let the hearts of
those rejoice that seek the Lord, tells us, We must only have, Gaudium
quaerentium, non comprehendentium. Thus Christ appeared, and soon after
vanished.

They depart,

2. Quia ad Scripturas remittendi; These Saints leave them to the ordinary set
course of the holy (...). For extraordinary Assurance, they hear Moses and
^lias; but for the ordinary standing course of Religion, To the Law, and to the
Testimony. We have a more sure word of the Prophets, says S. Peter, Israelites
were fed with Manna; but in Canaan they must feed upon the fruits of the land.
Lazarus must not go to Dives his brethren, They have Moses and the Prophets,
let them hear them, Luke xvi. 29. We have S. Paul, S. Peter, Christ, all, in
the Scripture.

They depart,

3. That the Apostles, Uno Christo contenti sint. The presence of these Saints
is refreshing; but yet though they vanish, Christ's presence is sufficient. As
Christ said, All ye shall leave me alone, and yet I am not alone, because the
Father is with me, Ioh. xvi. 32. So, if all other sweet societies break, yet it
is enough if Christ abide with us. Rather be with Christ in a dungeon, then in
heaven without him. We never prize Christ sufficiently, till he be to us
instead of all comforts. Let us be sequestered from all the Saints, Abraham
knows us not, Israel acknowledges us not, Esa. lxiii. 16 but thou art our
Father, our Redeemer. Christ must be so; 1. For Faith and Doctrine, only
Christ. Papists have Christ is with us. 2. For matter of Comfort; How often do
we lose the society of Saints, and those refreshing fellowships? Yet if Christ
abide with us, if we enjoy his company, it is enough. Whom have I in heaven but
thee? And there is none upon earth that I desire besides thee, Psalm. lxxiii.
25. The Sun alone is more cheering, and refreshing, Christ, then all the
Saints.

So much for the Occasion. Come we

Secondly, to the sum and substance of their Request; specified

1. In the Person, who makes it; Peter. No doubt, the two other were much
affected with this Glory; but Peter is most fervent, and forward, and breaks
out into this Passion. We find not any act of forwardness in Peter, but it is
made by the Papists an Argument of Precedeny. Bellarmine reckons up twenty
Arguments of his Prerogative. If Christ do but enter into Peter's 1. A little
before this Transfiguration, Matthew. xvi. he was Primus in Infidelitate; Christ
must not dye, verse. 22. 2. In this Transfiguration, he was Primus in
Infirmitate. Peter, Signanter; Primus in Temeritate, he breaks out first in
this hasty motion. But as S. Peter's personal Infirmities are not imputable; so
neither are his personal Graces communicable, nor his personal Prerogatives,
hereditary.

This Motion is specified,


2. In the Person to whom it is made; Jesus, Master: and conceive it in two
expressions; 1. It is directed to Christ, not to Moses, or Elias; they make no
Prayer, Motion, Suit to them; there is no intercourse or speech 'twixt the
Apostles, and these Saints: purposely, all parley, You are come to the spirits
of just men made perfect, and to Jesus the Mediator, Heb. xii. 23, 24. Prayers
to Saints departed, are unlawful. They are not to be made, 1. Not to Saints
absent; Quia Oration est actus Rationis; and it is a vain thing to Invocate
those who are absent. Nay, 2. Not to present Saints; Quia Oration est actus
Religionis. All our Supplications must be thus directed, Jesus, Master: None is
our Master-Iesus, but he.
2. It is directed to Christ, even concerning Moses and Elias: Peter being
desirous of their stay, he begs it of Christ; accounting these Saints at his
pleasure, for stay, or departure. He is Commander, and Governor of all in
heaven, and in earth. His Command cited them, his Pleasure dismisses them, his
Word can stay them; in all things he must (...). The Angels are his Attendants;
Legions of Devils are at his Command; the highest Saints are at his beck: As
Pharaoh to Joseph, Without thee shall no man lift up his hand, or foot, in all
the land of Egypt, Genesis xli. 44. So, God has authorized Christ; no Saint, or
Angel, but must Worship him all ye Saints.

Thirdly, Come we to the Request it self: And in it,

I. Of the Motion for Continuance; Bonum est nobis esse hic; It is good for us
to be here. This is a mixed Motion: And let us consider in it, Quae vera, and
bona; and then when we come to the Censure, we will consider, Quae temere, and
inepte.

In this Motion for Continuance, there are several Truths, and very
considerable:

1. Primo territi, nunc gaudio affecti; First, we saw them cast into a kind of
Astonishment, In somno ecstatico; now see it Mary: first, she was afraid; then,
she was raised to Sing her Magnificat. So, with Zechary: So, with the
Shepherds. The Devil, on the 2. Societas Sanctorum semper desideranda. Peter
was loath to leave the Company, and Society of these holy men. Oh! It is good to
be here always. The Communion of Saints, it is a great part of heaven: You are
come to the Assembly of the Firstborn; to the spirits of just men made
perfect. David professes, Psalm. xvi. 3. All his delight is in the Saints on
earth. Ill company is a pattern of hell; hasten from them: But the fellowship
of the Saints is a ravishing comfort; hasten to them. Have thou the company of
Depart from the Tents of those wicked men, Numb. xvi. 26. That Is a second
Considerable. The last is, 3. The joys of Glory, and Presence of Christ, are
ravishing and transporting. Nothing does so satisfy the soul, and inebriate
the spirit, as these rays and beams of Glory. Oh! taste and see how good, how
sweet, God is. Now, how transporting the Comfort is, that is in the glorious
Presence of Christ, will appear by these five Comparisons: 1. Comparatively to
all outward joys and comforts; It makes him forget all; he thinks not of
kindred, friends, any 2. Comparatively to all other manifestations of God out
of Christ; Moses, he trembles; Manoah quakes; Abraham is astonished; Daniel, he
is dead. Oh! God out of Christ, is fearful; God in Christ, is gracious. The
Glory of God, affrights; the Glory of Christ, cheers, and refreshes. 3.
Comparatively to other entercourses with Christ. Peter Bonum est esse hic. 4.
Comparatively to other miraculous manifestations, which would have taken us;
as, 1. In miraculo Cibationis, When he fed five thousand: 2. In captura
Piscium, In the great draught of Fish: 3. In mutatione Vini, When the water was
turned into wine: 4. In captura Argenti, When the Fish was taken with money in
the mouth:
In all these manifestations of Christ's miraculous Power, we would have cried,
Bonum est esse hic. But Peter was not affected with any of these: only, at this
Transfiguration; Master, says he, It is good to be here. 5. Comparatively to
the fullness of Glory; That is not only ravishing, but this glimpse of Glory
too; even the least degree

Corollar.

1. If two Saints be so delightful; Quid Societas omnium Angelorum, and
Sanctorum? What is the company of all the Saints and Angels? 2. If a glimpse of
Glory be so delicious, What is the fullness of it? O, how great is thy goodness,
which thou have laid up for them that fear thee * Psalm. xxxi. 19. 3. If Gloria
Humanitatis be so transporting, How much more, Gloria Deitatis? 4. If Sola
visio sic afficit, quid participatio? If only the sight of Glory do so affect,
What will the participation of it do?


We have seen the Motion for Continuance, It is good being here. Now follows,

II. The proffer of service to further this Continuance; Let us make three
Tabernacles, one for Thee, one for Moses, one for Elias. It is a mixed Motion;
and though rash, and unadvised, and unreasonable; yet, for the generality, it
carries with it some, not only excusable, but commendable affections, in S.
Peter's making Inconsulta, and praematura Devotio. Ambros. Unadvised, and rash;
but yet well-meant, and devout.

View the Prints of Devotion and Goodness that were in it; and in the Censure
we shall see the weaknesses of it; the blots of imperfection that were in it.

1. The first Print of Devotion and Piety, is, That he proffers to erect a
Tabernacle for Christ, and these Saints. Observe, The Presence of Christ, and
his Saints, is to be honored with our best services: No pains, or cost, can be
too precious to entertain such Peter puts not off Christ with empty
Observances; Adoring his Glory, Admiring his Beauty, with wishes only for his
Continuance; but bethinks himself of dedicating, and devoting his Labors and
Cost to Honor and Retain him. Naturally, Religion consults with the Shunamite,
What shall we do for him? If he be a God, then there must be a Religion, and
Worship; if that, then a Temple, or Tabernacle; and if that, then it must be
answerable to his Glory, in the comeliest manner: These are the natural
consequences of Reason and Piety. See David, how careful he was to erect a
Tabernacle for Gods Worship? So forward was he, that the Prophet I will not
serve the Lord with that which cost me nothing; refusing ease, and help, to
support the charge; but he will honor God with his Substance. He envied
himself his own house, till God had his. I dwell in Cedar, and the Ark of God
under Curtains. Nay, it takes up all Psalm. cxxxii. 1. Lord remember David, and
all his afflictions: He would not climb up to his Bed -- till he found out a
place for the Lord. Alas! we can be content to tender him some cheap
Observances; but to be charged, for our Religion, to erect Tabernacles, to
bestow pains, and cost, that sets us off; that is the best God, and Religion,
that costs us least. Oh! It is an argument of our base esteem of God, of
Religion, of our Souls, of the kingdom of Heaven, when we murmur at any charge
our Religion requires of us. The Lord Hag. i. 4. Is it time for you, O ye, to
dwell in your cieled houses, and this House lie waste? The Heathens scorned to
hear of Cheapness in the service of their gods. Phidias persuading to make the
Statue of Minerva, In marmore, potius quam ebore; said, 1. It would last
better: 2. It was vilius, cheaper: The Athenians hissed at that reason.
2. The second Print of Piety in this motion of Peter, is, He consults with
Christ in the choice of this service, that he would Matthew. xvii. 4. Master, if
thou will, let us make here three Tabernacles; he submits to his Appointment
and Direction in all this forwardness.

No Service or Worship is to be tendered to Christ, but what he allows and gives
warrant to. You shall not do whatsoever is good in your own eyes, but what I
command you. In matters of Religion, Invention is Superstition. As Vincentius,
alluding to S. Paul's words, Tradidi quod accepi; quod accepimus, non quod
excogitavimus. As they at Samaria, we must learn the manner of the God of the
Country. Moses, though wise, and holy, yet refers the Worship of God to his
own choice. Exodus x. 26. We know not with what we must serve the Lord, till we
come thither. And all his frame of the Tabernacle, must be done according to
the pattern shown in the Mount. Id utique Deo dignum, quod ipse Deus sibi
fatetur acceptum. That God is to be worshipped, nature tells us; but how, that
is his Choice and Pleasure, and matter of Revelation. Strange fire was
abominable; so are invented Services. Devotion, in respect of forwardness, and
cheerfulness, and frankness, asks, and offers, Wherewithal shall I come before
the Lord, and how my self before the high God? Shall I come before him with
Offerings, with Calves of a year old? Will the Lord be pleased with thousans of
Rams, or with ten thousands of rivers of Oil? Micah vi. 6, 7. But Faith and
Obedience, takes this answer, verse. 8. He has showed thee, O man, what is
good, and what the Lord requires: Freewill-offerings for their kind prescribed,
these will be accepted.

3. A third Print of Devotion, in this proffer of S. Peter, is, Christ, and
these two Saints. He thinks not of himself, and provision for his own safety
and abode; he had no thoughts of a Tabernacle to shelter himself. Love, and
Devotion to God and his Church, transports the Saints out of themselves, makes
them even forget their own comforts in respect of God. All S. Peter's care and
solicitude, is for Christ. Love seeks not her own; but the glory of Christ
has the first thoughts, and deepest consultations. When self-love swayes us,
then we are all for our selves, take care for building our own Tabernacles,
provide for our own. Whereas Tertullian observes, Not any that Christ, that
ever questioned how they should live: None said, Non habeo, quo vivam. Pietas
non respicit vitam, multo minus victum. 1. It is enough for S. Peter to be, In
famulatu Christi. Attendance upon him, is provision enough. As Noblemen count
themselves more honored to serve in the Court, then to Lord it in their own.
2. Faith knows, Christ will take care of them. Take thou care to provide for
Christ, Christ will provide for thee. Let Obed-Edom prepare a Tabernacle for
the Ark, the Ark shall bring a Elias to the Widow, Provide for me first,
venture all thy Meat and Oil, and be sure of a blessing of increase. If Christ
have a Tabernacle, he will not shut us out of doors. As God to David, Because
thou have thought to build me a House, I will build thee a sure house.

So much of Peter's proffer of furtherance for continuance of Christ and those
two Saints with him. Now follows,



III. The Censure that the Scripture passes upon this Motion: It was
inconsiderate and unadvised; He knew not what he said.

Take of it a double Consideration;

1. Consider the Nature and Condition of this sudden, inconsiderate Motion,
whence it arises. 2. Consider the particular Conviction of this rashness in
Peter, in the many particularities of his error, in making it.
First, Consider the Nature and Condition of this Motion, Whence arose this
sudden, and unadvised, and impertinent Motion of Peter's? It was from three
Principles;

1. It arose, Ex passione vehementi: Peter being ravished and transported with
this glorious Appearance of Christ in Majesty, Mark. Observe; Excessive
Passions transport us sometimes to unadvised, unwarrantable thoughts and
desires, even in matters of Piety and Devotion to Christ. See it in S. Peter,
Luke v. 8, 9. there he was overtaken with a passion of Fear at the great Lord,
depart from me, for I am a sinful man: His Fear abandons Christ's Presence and
Society. Here, in this place, a passion of Joy puts him upon a vain,
inconsiderate suit; it casts him into a dream, and he talks like one in a
dream, or trance; Psalm. cxxvi. 1. Then were we like men that dream. Ioh. xiii.
8. Christ offering to wash S. Peter's feet, he is taken with a sudden passion of
preposterous Reverence, and Humility; Lord, thou shall never wash my feet. So,
again, Matthew. xvi. 22. Christ foretelling his death, Peter is overtaken Lord,
be it far from thee; this shall not be unto thee. So James and John, Luke ix.
54. Christ being excluded by the Samaritans, these two are taken with a sudden
passion of Anger and Revenge, and make a Motion accordingly; Shall we call for
fire from heaven, and consume them? Thus Gods children, in rash and violent
passions, they conceive strange and unwarrantable Desires and Motions.

We must inspect, and so examine our passionate wishes, check them, as Christ
did Zebedee's wives suit, You know not what you ask. These passionate Motions
are not so good,

1. Quia minus fundata; They have no root, or bottom, usually. As the stony
ground had present joy, but without root, and so withered. Warmth of affection
may make hasty proffers, that will vanish again. Deliberations and Resolutions
must ground our Devotions: As David, My heart is fixed: One thing have I
desired, which I will require. 2. Quia minus accepta; These hasty proffers are
not set by, or valued by God. He judges of us by our constant bent in our cold
temper. Thus he answered the Lord, I will follow thee, wheresoever thou go.
No, Christ tells him what he must look for; let him sit down and cast the
charges: As we judge of Rivers, not as they swell with fall of waters, but as
their own proper current runs. 3. Quia periculosa; They are, oft-times,
preposterous, and prejudicial to us. If God should take us at our word, it
would go ill with us. If he should not have washed Peter, he should have had no
part in Christ. Misericorditer negat; and, Audit ad utilitatem, non ad
voluntatem. Of our selves, in these passions, we know not what to ask. I said
in mine haste.

This inconsiderate and impertinent Motion,


2. It arose out of the ignorance of Understanding, and humane Peter has here
a view and glimpse of it, but yet knows not how to judge and esteem of it. That
spiritual and heavenly Condition, it is a mere strange thing to us: We
apprehend it in our earthy and carnal manner, and so talk of it, out of gross
apprehensions. Peter thinks, three Tabernacles will well suit with three
glorious Bodies. The thoughts that we have of those unconceivable joys, are,
like our selves, low, and unproportionable. Ask the piercingest judgment, of
those After-joyes, How must they stammer, and fumble, and bewray Ignorance? If
it should be asked, 1. What is that Eternity of Being, which we look for in
heaven? We cannot comprehend it. 2. What are those heavenly Speeches that souls
and spirits use in Glory? We cannot conceive them. 3. What is that
Impassibility, and Agility of our bodies in heaven? We cannot imagine it. 4.
What is that Beatifical Vision, and sight of the Essence of God? We cannot
attain to it.
As Christ to Nicodemus, If we cannot understand more earthly things, as, The
work of Grace, Union with Christ, The manner O! Eye has not seen; and that
sees far: Ear has not heard; and that receives much: nay, Heart has not
ability to imagine, or conceive those hidden things. In this case, we are no
more able to conceive what that life of Glory is, then a child in the womb can
conceive what is the condition of this present life. Our discourses of heaven,
are like theirs, who talk of Countries they never saw. Nay, S. Paul, who was
there, yet found them unutterable. All other knowledge has some help and hint
from nature, but this is a Mystery hid from Generations, and Ages, and locked
up in that storehouse of Eternity.

This inconsiderate unadvised Motion of Peter, He knew not what he said,

3. It arose from the surcharge, and overwhelming of this great Glory. The
exceeding Glory of Christ has overwhelmed the soul, and mind, and capacity of
Peter, and overcomes his understanding. Excellens objectum, corrumpit. Our
understanding is shallow, limited, finite, proportionable to these lower
things; but God, and the fullness of his Glory, are too high for us. As it is
with our Brains; be we on the ground, then they are steady; Bonorum quorundam,
sicut and malorum, intolerabilis magnitudo est. Tertull. Not only the torments
of hell would consume us; but, if God should not put strength into our souls,
the very joys of heaven would swallow us up. Stay me with flagons, comfort me
with apples, for I am sick of love, Cant. ii. 5. As we say of crazy bodies, Too
pure an air, and too accurate a diet will overthrow them: So, our crazy souls
are not able to undergo the eminency of that Glory. Such knowledge is too
wonderful for me, it is high, I cannot attain unto it, Psalm. cxxxix. 6. Hence,
they say, we must have Lumen Gloriae confortans, and elevans intellectum; Our
understandings enlarged, and raised, and strengthened, to undergo that weight
of Glory. The Sun puts out a Candle: So, the light of Glory will soon damp our
poor glimmering Spark. This makes He dwells in that light that cannot be
approached unto; that light is like the Sunbeams to sore eyes. The Queen of
Sheba, 1 Kings x. 5. was overcome with the sight of Solomon's magnificence; she
was spent with admiration, There was no more spirit in her.

We have seen the nature and condition of this Motion, whence it arises.


Secondly, Consider the particular conviction of this rashness in S. Peter, in
the many particularities of his erroneous Motion. Formerly we have seen what
commendable things were contained Peter, and see his failings.

I. In his Motion of Continuance: Master, it is good being here.

1. The first Error; It Is good being here: He would fain abide here always: He
errs, in desiring a perpetuity of that condition, which was but transient and
momentany. This Vision was but a taste of Glory, but a drop from the
Honeycomb, not a full repast of Glory; intended only to strengthen their
Faith, encourage their Diligence, correct their Error, quicken their Christ,
but must have it perpetual. As Mary, she embraces the feet of Christ, would
never have left him: Christ bids us leave off, these were but extraordinary
Appearances, not to be dwelt upon. Besides, the vileness of noysom lusts, which
still would be craying, even the spirit of man loves to glut it self in
spiritual refreshments. How loath were the Apostles to part with Christ's
bodily presence? So, in many extraordinary Appearances, which are not intended
as perpetual, yet there is Libido, and Luxuria spiritualis, we would fain enjoy
those ravishing Elias, said to him, Feed, and be walking, thou must live in the
strength of it forty days; it may be all thy life time: No, stick to Faith,
that is our Ordnary. As Dives, who lived deliciously every day; so, some
Christians, if they be not caught up into heaven, 2. A second Error is, in that
he places the fullness of joy in the view of the Humanity of Christ, but
gloriously Transfigured; and can be content never to see more, or go further,
but to behold this Glory. True, it is a great accomplishment to our bliss, to
see that price of our Redemption, the Body of our Savior, in Glory; but yet it
is not the main and original. No created Glory can be the fountain and fullness
of Glory to us. Even the Manhood of Christ is blessed by derivation, and
participation from an higher Fountain. The Society of the Saints is Show us the
Father, and it suffices, Ioh. xiv. 8. The increated Glory of Christ's Deity,
that is the matter and sum of our blessedness. Ioh. xvii. Our happiness is to
behold the Glory which Christ had with God, not on Mount Tabor, but before the
world was. This is the message which we have heard of him, and declare unto
you, that God is Light, 1 Ioh. i. 5. that we may have fellowship with the
Father, and with the Son, verse. 4. Our hearts are restless, till settled upon
this. All our affections are flowing and running, till they are swallowed up in
this Ocean. The eyes of our body, indeed shall have Christ's Body, as the most
glorious Spectacle of all Comfort; but the eye of our soul, that goes higher.
As the eye of Faith rests not upon the Humanity of Christ, but upon his
Divinity, and so on the whole Trinity; so does the eye of Beatifical Vision,
that succeeds Faith. 3. A third Error, It Is good being here; He would settle
his rest upon Mount Tabor; This was an error, to bring down heaven upon earth.
To enjoy Tabor; he can be content to part with Reuben and Gad, because the land
on this side Jordan was rich and commodious, they beg to be settled there, care
not for the Land of Promise. Like some vain Traveller, who can be content to
settle in some Inn on the road, because he finds good usage there, and never
hasten on to his own Country, to his own home. Not only wicked men would fain
settle here, but sometimes Gods children could be content with the life of
grace here, and think not sufficiently of heaven above. No, we must know, Tabor
is but a viaticum to heaven: It is Manna indeed, comes from heaven, and it will
thither again. Jerusalem is from Tabor is but a Colony that belongs to it. 4.
A fourth Error, It Is good being here; Peter would have Christ set up his rest
here, and never go down more from Mount Tabor: What shall become then of
Christ's Death, and Passion, and the Redemption of Mankind, by his being
Crucified? All our happiness, this on Mount Tabor, that in heaven, depends all
upon this. He has heard our Savior forewarn it, yet is he so transported with
this passionate joy, that Christ must not suffer now; he must forget his
message, and the command of his Father, and the Redemption of his Church, to
bear Peter company Tabor. Nay, as some conceive, purposely he moves it to
Christ, and proffers his assistance, that so he may escape the death of the
Cross. So carnally, sometimes, are our affections set, that we think we love
Christ, and our selves, when we cross him most. No, Christ must descend from
Mount Tabor, and ascend Mount Calvary; Thus it is written, that Christ must
suffer, and so enter into his Glory. How else should the Scripture be
fulfilled, the Church redeemed, Heaven purchased, the Devil vanquished? How
dangerous are our carnal desires, of what fearful consequence, if God should
give way to them? 5. A fifth Error, It Is good being here; He would never leave
this place of Glory, but enter upon the possession of it presently. Ey, but
much labor is to be undergone, many services to be performed, to attain this
rest. No, Peter would slip into heaven in an instant.

Oh! But,

1. Laboranduni. Peter should say, Let us go down, and perform those conditions
of gaining heaven. We must not so linger for heaven, as not to be content to
take pains for it. The Spies that discovered Canaan, came 2. Prius patiendum.
There is a Cup to be tasted of, and Baptism to be baptized with first. Through
many afflictions we must enter into heaven. Fain would we go to heaven without
the Cross; and pass, A deliciis, ad delicias; No, we must be made conformable
to our Head, who was consecrated by afflictions. Crux, scala Coeli; the Cross
is the ladder by which we must ascend to the Crown. 3. Moriendum. We must pass
through Golgotha, to come up to this Mount. Peter indeed, as well all, are loath
to be uncloathed; but we would be clothed upon, that mortality may be
swallowed up of life, 2 Cor. v. 4. The valley of death leads to this Mountain;
That straight Peter, after, is content to lay down his Tabernacle, here he
forgets it. It is the Supper of the Lamb; the labor of the day, and the
evening of death must first come.
6. A sixth Error; Good being here: Fain would he hold Christ ever upon Mount
Tabor. Why, what shall become of all other Saints? Peter will engross Christ
here to himself. Moses and Elias from heaven, and three Apostles on earth shall
enjoy Christ, no matter for others, he takes no thought of them: He will
deprive heaven of Christ, those in heaven must go without him. And Peter to
have been zealous to call in and invite others to the fellowship of these
joys. Indeed, other worldly blessings are diminished by many partakers, but
this is more increased. The Lepers, 2 King. vii. said, We do not do well, we do
not carry tidings into the City. The spirit of Piety, naturally, provokes us to
call in others to share in Christ with us. The woman of Samaria, Ioh. iv. 29.
calls out all her neighbors to enjoy Christ. Thus Cornelius brought in his
kindred, Acts x. 24. Andrew served Peter thus, what share had he had in Christ?
He went and found out his brother Simon, Ioh. i. 41. Peter's Motion would have
put this Light of the world under a bushel. Whereas, 1. Love to Christ, that
will enforce us to increase his kingdom. 2. Love to our brethren, that will
quicken us up to gain them. Matthew calls his acquaintance to be in Christ's
company, Luke v. 29. 3. This will make our selves fuller partakers of Glory:

Peter should have been content to have parted with this Glory for a time, for
the conversion and good of others. When God bids Moses go down from the Mount
for the peoples cause, Moses says not, It Is good being here. S. Paul knew what
the joys of heaven were; yet, for the Churches sake, he was not only content
to be out of heaven some time, but Anathema for ever. Domine, si adhuc populo
tuo sum necessarius, non recuso laborem, fiat voluntas tua; desidero requiem,
sed non recuso laborem. So said Martin in S. Bernard.

We have seen Peter's Errors in his Motion for continuance: Now let us see what
failings there were.

II. In his proffer of building Tabernacles. In it, He knew not what he said.
That proffer has blemishes and imperfections.

1. Being here, as he supposes, in Christ's kingdom of Glory, he forecasts an
erection of three Tabernacles; One for Christ, one for Moses, one for Elias.
Christ here has his family, and Moses his, and Elias his. Whereas Christ's
Tabernacle, and Church being erected, Moses and Elias must not persist: All
must be in Christ's Tabernacle, or utterly excluded. Elias must have a distinct
Tabernacle from Moses, till Christ comes and pitches his Tabernacle among men;
but then they must resign and give place to him. Unum ovile, all must be under
one Head; all one Flock, and one Ducere familiam, be the Master of the house,
but only Christ; all must come in and hide themselves in Christ's Pavilion.
Thus the Corinthians, they would build many Tabernacles: One sets up a
Tabernacle for Cephas, another for Paul, another Tabernacle for Apollo. Paul
flings down these Tabernacles, sets up Christ's only. In the new Jerusalem
there is no Temple, but the Lamb is the Temple, Rev. xxi. 22. Who is Moses, and
who is Elias, but servants of this Tabernacle, of which Christ is Lord? We must
not have, not only Altar contra Altar; but not Altar cum Altari. Christ
alone is the Lord, all the rest are but servants. 2. A second Error; Moses and
Elias must needs have Tabernacles, and abide with Christ, to make up this
Glory. Why? Christ alone, and his Tabernacle, cannot that suffice us? It is an
Error, so to affect the presence of the Saints, as to account Christ an
imperfect Savior, if they be wanting; or our happiness insufficient, if Saints
be not joined with him. It Is comfortable to have the society of the Saints;
but, in point of salvation hereafter, or comfort here, we must know, he is
alone All-sufficient for us. Whom have I in heaven but thee? Nihil, Domine,
praeter teipsum. In this Abraham know us not, and Jacob be ignorant of us, and
Moses and Elias, they abide not; Yet thou art the same, Lord, thou never
failest. The Court is where the King is, though none of his followers attend
upon him. If Christ be not thine, and vouchsafes his presence, all the Saints
and Angels in heaven cannot comfort thee: If thou have him, were they all
strangers to thee, thou have fullness of bliss in him only. The Sun alone, is
more refreshing, then all the Stars in the Firmament. 3. A third Error; Peter
will set up three Tabernacles; One for Christ, then for Moses, then for Elias.
Christ, indeed, is first named; Nimis perversum quod Mosen and Eliam Collegas
Christo facit, cum omnes in ordinem cogendi, ut ille solus emineat. It is too
fellow-like a provision, to sort Christ, and Saints, in such Tabernacles of
equality: All Sheaves must fall down and worship this Sheaf. All Saints must do
homage, and stoop; and not state it in several Courts and quarters, as petty
Christ's. No, Christ's footstool, is a glorious Throne for the highest Saints.

Maldonate the Jesuit, upbraids Calvin with making this construction of Peter's
good meaning. But Calvin is not the first. His own Cardinal Turrecremate
conceits it before him. How has that Church pitched Tabernacles check-mate
with Christ's? The Virgin Mary's Tabernacle is more frequented. There must be a
writ of Command from this to Christ's. What Peter did in an astonishment and
incogitancy, these do wilfully and wickedly; Christ, the Law with the Gospel,
servants of the house with the Lord of it. Three Churches there are built on
Tabor, and a Monastery.

4. A fourth Error; Christ, and Moses, and Elias, in Glory, must have three
Tabernacles. A strange weakness of this holy man! What use have glorified
bodies of these Tabernacles made with hands? Indeed, the Feast of Tabernacles
was a Type of our heavenly joy; but a poor shadow only. A Tabernacle, it was a
Travelers habitation; their journey being past, that was a refreshing; their
toyls over, that was a shelter. It was a Military Moses himself confesses,
Psalm. xc. Lord, thou art our dwelling place.
The carnal thoughts of men think these earthly comforts to have place in
heaven. As the Sadduces thought, If there be a Resurrection, then there is
Marrying, and giving in Marriage. So the Jews thought, That if the Messiah be,
then there must be carnal victory, worldly pomp. So the Turks promise
themselves sensual delights. In this sense it is true, The kingdom of heaven
is not meat, nor drink, nor any such comfort; but righteousness, and peace, and
joy in the Holy Ghost. We look for a Tabernacle, and Building made without
hands. Those Eternal Mansions, whose Foundations are Eternity, and whose Walls
are Salvation, need not our poor Cottages.



THE SIXTH
S. MATTHEW. xvii. v. While he yet spoke, behold a bright cloud overshadowed
them, and behold a voice out of the cloud, which said, This is my beloved Son,
in whom I am well pleased; hear ye him.
WE have seen the Progress of this glorious Appearance of Christ, hitherto,

First, In his holy Preparation, He prayed.

Secondly, In his glorious Transfiguration of his body.

Thirdly, In his honorable Attendance of Moses and Elias.

Fourthly, In the ravishing and ecstatical Contemplation of his Apostles: Now,

Fifthly, We come to the highest pitch and rise of Glory, put upon him by God;
and unto which all the rest were subordinate and purposed; the great Glory and
Honor put upon him from heaven, by God the Father, in this magnificent and
renowned Testimony, This is my beloved Son.

As, when Nathan and Zadock had attended Solomon to Gihon, David his father
gives him the solemn Consummation, in placing him upon his own Royal Throne,
and establishing his Succession by his own Approbation: So here, Moses and
Elias having adored him on Mount Tabor, now God Go forth, O ye daughters of
Zion, and behold King Solomon, with the Crown wherewith his mother Crowned him,
Cant. iii. 11. This David spoke of, Psalm. ii. 6. I have set my King upon my
holy Hill of Zion. Verse. 7. Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee.

Three times we see this glorious voice came from heaven, to magnify Christ:

1. In his entrance, and initiation of his Mediatourship, when he was baptized
by John, then lo a voice from heaven, saying, This is my beloved Son, in whom I
am well pleased, Matthew. iii. 17. 2. Here, in the course and progress of his
Mediatourship. 3. At the end, and closure of it, before his Passion; Then came
there a voice from heaven, saying, I have both glorified it, and will glorify
it again.
Now in this glorious Testimony given to our Savior here in the Text, there
are two things;

1. Is a fitting, and significant accommodation, and preparation for it, A
bright cloud overshadowed them. 2. Is the publication, and declaration of this
glorious Testimony, This is my beloved Son.
First, is the preparation, A bright cloud overshadowed them.

I. A cloud overshadowed them. The overspreading of this cloud upon our
Savior, and the Apostles, was purposed of God, for diverse reasons:

1. To correct the Error of Peter; He would prepare Tabernacles to shelter
Christ, and those glorified bodies; as supposing that those glorified bodies
had need of shelter and coverture. God confutes this Error: Here is an
overshadowing and shelter from heaven; not a Booth, or a Tent pitched by man,
but framed David speaks, He lays the beams of his chambers in the waters, and
makes the clouds his charret, Psalm. civ. 3. He clothes himself with this aerie,
or rather, heavenly Mansion. Thus Solomon, The heaven of heavens cannot contain
him, 2 Chronicles. ii. 6. He has said, he will dwell in the thick cloud, 1 King.
viii. Tabernacles, and such poor earthly helps, suit with our frailty, his
Glory can erect a more wonderful Pavilion. 2. To allay, and moderate the luster
and resplendency of that great Glory. This Transfiguration, and Glory of
Christ, has Peter, he is not able to stand before the brightness of it; he was
swallowed up with it. See here, God attempers himself to their weakness, abates
of that Majesty, and spreads a Pavilion, and Shade of Clouds to shelter them
from the surcharge of Glory, that was too great for them. As Moses put a vail
on his Christ is unsupportable, till he vails himself, and abates his Glory,
and condescends to our frail capacity. 3. A cloud overcasts, and overshadows
them, to hinder their further prying, and looking into that Glory. He gives
them a glimpse of Glory, but overcasts it presently. We must not search too
far, look too much into that Majesty. Our curiosity Galilee stood gazing up
into heaven after Christ, when he was taken up into heaven, A cloud received
him out of their sight, Acts i. 9. Thus God curbs our bold approaches to his
presence. Moses would see the Face of God, God shows him his Back-parts; but
hides his countenance. When he appeared on Sinai, he set bounds to the people.
Tutum est nescire, quod non licet scire. Thus the Temple was framed; the people
were restrained to the outermost Court, the Priests to the inward; but there
was a vail before Sanctum Sanctorum. Psalm. xviii. 11. He made darkness his
secret place; his Pavilion round about him, were dark waters, and thick clouds
of the skies. Thus he does; 1. To strike reverence, and awe into us: The
unsearchableness of Gods mysteries, and our inability to view and comprehend
them, are purposed to work admiration, and adoration in us. 2. Ut sit locus
Fidei. God suffers not our eyes to behold his full Majesty, and those heavenly
mysteries, to exercise our Faith, in believing what we see not. In
extraordinary cases he shines more clearly; but in ordinary, walk by Faith, and
not by Sight. Christiani non rationales, sed fideles. It is the goodness of
Faith, Blessed are they that have not seen, and yet have believed, Ioh. xx. 29.
3. Ut sit locus Expectationi. We must not see that Glory now, but expect it
hereafter. As in the Primitive Church, the Catechumeni were not suffered to see
Baptism, or the Eucharist, the more to quicken their Face to Face. As David
admitting Absalom to Jerusalem, but forbidding his coming to his presence,
provoked him to
4. To withdraw, and separate Moses and Elias from them. Peter lingered, and
sued for a stay; no, a cloud is cast 'twixt him and them. It is our condition;
we may, and naturally we do linger after the society of the Saints, still to
retain them with us; no, God withdraws them, and casts a cloud of separation
and concealment, that they are not to be seen again; all further conversation
with them is denied to us. Papists, they keep the passage open, betwixt us and
the Departed; they pray to them, and for them; and tell us of their frequent
Apparitions. No, our Religion Christ was caught out of sight with a cloud; so
are we hindered from any further conversation with Saints departed. Happy they
who are taken from us, as Moses and Elias, on Mount Tabor, in Christ's
presence, and caught up in a bright cloud of comfort. 5. A cloud appears and
overshadows them, as a Symbol and Token of God the Father's presence. Usually
Gods presence was represented by a Cloud. Thus he filled the Temple with a
Cloud, 1 Kings viii. So Exodus xix. A Cloud appeared upon Mount Sinai. Numb.
xii. 5. He came down, and a pillar of Cloud appeared on the Tabernacle.
Now this representation of the Father in a Cloud implies two things:

1. Patris Invisibilitatem. He dwells in a thick Cloud; that is, his Nature and
Substance; it is hidden, and invisible. This is a glorious Attribute of God. S.
Paul calls him, The Invisible God, Col. i. 15. 1. He is Invisible to the eye of
the Body: That spiritual Nature cannot be looked upon by the eye of any
creature. No man has seen God at any time, Ioh. i. 18. Exodus xxxiii. 20. Thou
can not see my Face. He dwells in the Light, which no man can approach unto;
whom no man has seen, nor can see, 1 Timothy vi. 16. 2. He is Invisible by the
eye of Reason, the eye of the Soul. The reach of Reason and Understanding
cannot comprehend him; No Definition can express him; No Notion resemble him;
No Understanding fathom him. All the ways that Reason has to know him are but
three, and they all fall short. 1. Via Causalitatis: Yet that is unsufficient;
he not communicating his whole Being, or Substance, to any Vestigia, but not,
Plena, and ad^quata. 2. Via Negationis: Removing all imperfections from him;
yet that shows what he is not, not what he is. 3. Via eminentiae: By ascribing
all created Excellencies,
3. He is Invisible to the eye of Grace. That Is the apprehension of Faith, and
goes beyond Sense or Reason; apprehends great things, but yet it cannot attain
to the seeing of God. Faith rather leans on him, then looks on him. It knows
him in his Attributes, Word, Promises, Inspirations, Feelings of Grace, but
himself it sees not; he is still in the Cloud. 4. Invisible, because God the
Father never was Visible Dove, and Cloven Tongues; but the first Person never
made himself known by any visible Apparition. Hence it is, that the Fathers
conclude, That in the Old Testament, whenever it is said that God appeared,
as to Adam, Abraham, Jacob, etc. still it was the Son who appeared; and those
assumed bodies were Praeludia Incarnationis.
2. It represents, Possibilitatem Manifestationis. Still he dwells in the
Cloud. A Cloud, it is obscure; but yet it is vanishing, it Then we shall see
him as he is. In Lumine tuo, videbimus Lumen. The Essence of blessedness, is
this beatifical Vision of God.
That Is the first, a Cloud it was that overshadowed them.

II. It was Nubes lucida, A bright Cloud. That imports two things:

1. Evangelii c^aritatem; the light and clearness that is in the Gospel. When
the Law was given to Moses, there were thick dark Clouds, the Mount was all
overcast with smoke. Here, on Mount Tabor, there was a Cloud, but bright, and
lightsome. Oh! The Law, and the means of Salvation in it, were dark and
obscure, and very reserved, in regard of the shining Light the Gospel brings.
The Law, that is a Cloud, dark and obscure; but the Gospel, that is a clear
Cloud. Still, indeed, the Gospel is a Cloud, it gives no full evident view; but
yet it is a clear Cloud, it has many rays, and beams of light in it. The Law
had a Abraham. Our Baptism is a Cloud, a bodily material Type, an outward
Element; but it is a clear Cloud, representing, distinctly, the washing away
Christ. Their Passover was a dark Cloud, representing their delivery out of
Egypt, immediately; but darkly, the Messiah: Our Lords Supper is a Cloud, a
vail of Bread and Wine is over it, but yet it is a clear Cloud; immediately
showing Christ, and all his benefits. Their Covenant was a Cloud, covered with
temporary Promises, with the Promise of Canaan: Ours is a Cloud indeed, we
cannot see those things that it promises; but yet a clear Cloud, immediately
presenting to us immediate Promises of heaven. The light of the Law, was like
the light of a Candle; Ours, as the Day Star. 2. Pacis serenitatem: A bright
Cloud overshadowed them; signifying Cheerfulness and Serenity. The Cloud of
Sinai, was not so much Nubes, as Nimbus, full of storms and tempests,
thundrings and lightnings. That Cloud kindled coals of fire, it was exceeding
terrible: But the Cloud on Mount Tabor, it is a bright Cloud, the emblem of
Calmness and Serenity. Thus the Gospel, it is all peace and comfort. Mount
Sinai denounced Cursings; Christ, on the Mount, begins with Blessing, Matthew. v.
You are not come to the Mountain that burned with fire; but to the Mountain of
Olives, yielding peace and security. Moses his Mountain was Eb^l, nothing but
Cursings; but Christ is on Mount Gerazim, nothing but Blessings. It Is called An
overshadowing Cloud that is, comforting, refreshing, sheltring. Mons Legis,
tumens; Mons Christi, exultans; full of exultations, and rejoycings.
Now follows,

Secondly, The solemn publication of this Testimony. Two things in it:

1. The Manner of Expression, it is Vox e Nube; A Voice out of the Cloud. 2. The
Matter, and Sum of it, Hic est Filius meus dilectus; This is my beloved Son,
in whom I am well pleased.
First, The Manner of Expression; A Voice came out of the Cloud. I told you
before, the Cloud betoken'd the presence of the Father: see now the
manifestation of him; it is, Per Vocem e Nube.

1. It is, Vox e Nube; A Voice out of the Cloud. It Is the Observation that
Moses makes of Gods speaking out of the Cloud, Ye heard a Voice. A visis,
remittit ad audita. First they had representations to their eyes, They saw his
Glory; now he recalls them to the ear, To hear a Voice. Thus he furnished both
As we have Heard, so have me seen. Thus in the Church, we have Verlum Audibile,
and Verbum Visibile, helps for both Eyes and Ears. What we have Heard, and
Seen, and Felt, says S. John. 2. Vox a Nube; a Visis ad Audita; He recalls
them from In auditu Auris; At the Hearing of the Ear they shall obey. Hearing,
it is that breeds Faith. It is a comfort to have these Visions, Tastings,
Feelings; but if all these fail us, or be denied us; yet if we can Hear, and
Believe, it suffices. We must stick to this. In this sense, All the Body must
be an Ear. Miracula, muta sine voce; but Seals to a Blank. 3. Vox e Nube; This
Testimony of Christ comes out of the Cloud from God the Father: It implies
three Excellencies in this Revelation; 1. It Is Vox e Nube, It is,
Supernaturalis Revelationis; It is sent and discovered to us by extraordinary
Revelation. The knowledge of Christ, and the mysteries of his Kingdom, it is
not inbred, or to be obtained here below, by natural means; but must come by
Revelation, and from above; A Patre luminum, from the Father of lights. Lux, a
primo lucido. The way of this wisdom, is, by natural reason, It Is a path which
no Fowl knows; and which the Vultures eye has not seen, Job xxviii. 7. The
Sun cannot be seen but by its own light; nor can Christ be known, but by his
own Revelation. See how Christ poses, and catechises his Apostles; Whom do men
say that I am? Matthew. xvi. 13. See how distracted they are in their opinions;
Some say, Elias; some, John the Baptist; some, Ieremias, or one of the
Prophets; roving, and ghessing, and all mistaking. But whom say ye that I am?
Thou art Christ, the Son of the living God. Flesh and blood has not revealed
it, but my Father which is in heaven. The knowledge of Christ, it is an
unsearchable mystery; secret, and laid up in the bosom of Eternity. Which if
it be; then, 1. It is made known, Ad placitum. 2. It is dispensative; As much
as he pleases. 3. It is out of special favor. Secret things, to secret ones.
2. It Is Vox e Nube, It is Supremae Authoritatis; It is a Testimony of the
highest, and most sovereign Authority. It comes from the Excellent Glory, as S.
Peter speaks, 2 Pet. i. 17. from heaven; Ours is so without controversy. 1. It
is the confirmation of our Faith, as S. Peter speaks, 2 Pet. i. 16. We have not
followed cunningly devised fables, in preaching of Christ to you: No, This
Voice came from heaven to us. Show us the Father, Lord, and it suffices: Let us
hear his Voice. Here we have it, and it must command the obedience of our
Faith, to yield and embrace it. 2. It is the great conviction of the worlds
Infidelity: Had I not spoken to them, they had had no sin; but now they have
heard, therefore their sin abides. Thus Christ The Baptism of John, was it
from heaven, or from men? Their consciences told them, If we say, from heaven;
Why did we not believe him? Take heed ye despise not him that speaks from
heaven. To despise the Testimony of Men, of Prophets, of Messengers, went not
unpunished. If we receive the witness of men, the witness of God is greater. He
that believes not God, has made him a liar; because he believes not the Record
God gave of his Son, 1 Ioh. v. 10. A liar! Luther says, It is the greatest
Opprobry, of 3. This Testimony from heaven, it seals up our condemnation, if it
be rejected; it makes an Unbelievers Damnation, most confessedly just, beyond
all exception. God has sent his Son, and testified of him, Balm in Gilead; a
Physician is here, make use of him then, or you perish wilfully. Such Judge
themselves unworthy of eternal life, Acts xiii. 46. forsake their own mercies.
Hence we see, Christ referrs it to themselves, to judge what they deserve for
refusing of Christ. Matthew. xxi. 40. Ask them, What will the Lord of the
Vineyard do unto those Husbandmen which reject his Son? They all answered, He
will miserably destroy those wicked men; Their damnation


Enough for the Manner of Expression; A Voice out of the Cloud:

Come we now,

Secondly, To the Matter and Sum of it: What does God publish? What hidden
mystery does he disclose? Even the highest mystery of heaven, That Christ is
Mediator. This, it is the prop of our Faith; it is the tidings of Angels; nay,
it is the Voice of God himself. We count it a common vulgar Truth. What,
Catechize you about Christ? Ask who he was? We wrong Ambrose, Non solum
incipientum, sed and perfectorum; imo coelestium, notitia Filii Dei.

Now, in (...) Testimony, observe two things:

1. A special Designation, Hic est; This is. 2. A special Description; My
beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased.
First, Here is a special Designation; This is my beloved Son. In it there is a
threefold force;

1. It is Vox demonstrativa; A personal pointing out of our Savior; This is
he. Before, the Patriarchs believed In confuso; in 1. Semen Mulieris, to Adam;
The Seed of the Woman: then, 2. Semen Abrahae, to Abraham; Thy Seed: then, 3.
Semen Davidis, to David; then, 4. Semen Virginis; All came nearer and nearer,
but yet they never enjoyed a personal Evidence and Demonstration of Christ. But
this Testimony singles him out, and points out his Person. If now they shall
say, Here is Christ; or, There is Christ; Jesus of Nazaret: We have the
concurrence of all specialties and circumstances to fasten our Faith upon him
with all certainty. And this assurance is required of Christians; not only to
believe in the Messiah; but, that Jesus is Christ.
2. It Is Vox exhibitiva; A Voice betokening an actual, and real, and present
Exhibition. The Church, before Christ, was supported with Promises; He shall
come; He shall be born in the fullness of time; I shall see him, but not yet,
says Balaam. The Saints, before Christ, were all in reversions, and
expectations; They waited for this Consolation; They received not the Promises:
Gaudium quaerentium; ours, Invenientium. They were in a state of Expectation;
saluted the Promises afar off; we possess and embrace them. The stretchings out
of their Faith, are nothing so comfortable as the embracings of ours. 3. It Is
Vox distinctiva; It singles out Christ, and separates him from the rest. Moses,
indeed, was a glorious Saint; Elias, a great Prophet; the Baptist was much
admired of the people; they supposed he was Christ; but still but servants:
Christ is the Son. To which of the Angels said he at any time, Thou art my Son?
This is the grand Prerogative of Christ. All Excellencies are but serviceable
to him. Let us honor Moses, and Elias, and other the King of Saints. Purposely
the Apostles (...) recalled from thoughts of Moses and Elias; Why linger ye
after them? Here is the Prince of your Salvation. That Is the Designation.
Come we,

Secondly, To the Description. In it three things;

1. The Dignity of his Person. 2. The Excellency of his Mediation. 3. The
Authority of his Doctrine.
First, The Dignity of his Person.

1. He is Filius, a Son. 2. He is Filius dilectus, a beloved Son. 1. He is
Filius; the Son of God; Psalm. ii. Thou art my Son: This is the Foundation of
the Church, that Christ is the Son of God: This the Devils acknowledge, Thou
art the Son of God. And that implies these Truths: 1. Filius, ergo ejusdem
Naturae. The Creator and the creature, they are not of the same nature; nor the
workman, and his work: but the Father and the Son are of the same nature. Man
Thou art my Son; hodie genui. Vera Divinit^s, quia vera de Deo nativitas, says
Fulgentius. 2. Filius, ergo distincta Persona. The Son is a distinct Person,
and Subsistence from the Father. He is not a Property, or Attribute in God, o^
a Manifestation of him; but a true, real Person, subsisting in himself. 3.
Filius, ergo paris Dignitatis; 1. Ejusdem Excellentiae; He counts it no robbery
to be equal with God; He is high in the glory of the Father, ad dextram, at his
right hand. 2. Capax ejusdem cultus; He is to be worshipped with equal honor,
as his Father is. All Knees must bow to Him, all Tongues confess Him. All must
honor the Son, as they honor the Father. 3. Ejusdem Potestatis; He is of
equal Power and Authority with his Father. De Domino natus est Dominus, haeres
omnium. All Power in heaven and earth belongs to him; He is Heir of all.

But is Christ God's Son?

1. It is Argumentum Amoris, dare Filium; An Argument of Gods great love to
Mankind, in that he would bestow him upon us. God tried Abraham's love, by
requiring the sacrificing of his Son. 2. It is Fundamentum Meriti; From this,
That Christ is the Son of God, is the Excellency of his Merit: That he could
vanquish Satan, abolish sin, purchase salvation; it was not because he was
Filius Mariae, but Filius Dei; and so his Acts are Infiniti valoris, and
himself the Universale principium gratiae. 3. It is Testimonium gratuitae
Adoptionis. Is Christ God's Son? What need had God then to adopt us to be his
sonns? Adoption is an help Filius, or not Dilectus Filius, or Mortalis Filius:
But all these were prevented in Christ. Yet God adopted us, not that he wanted
a Son, but that we wanted a Father. He made us accepted in his Well-beloved.

That Is the first, He is Filius, A Son.
2. He is dilectus Filius, A beloved Son: He was typified by Isaac, the son of
Abraham's love; by Solomon, called Iedidiah; beloved of God. What, my son? and
what, the son of my womb? and what, the son of my vows? So Christ, He was a
beloved Son.

There are three things that make a Son beloved of his Father, and all
eminently in Christ.

1. Is Proprietas; The Son is the Possession of his Father; as Eve called Cain,
A Possession. Filius aliquid Patris, decisum naturae; The Father has
communicated himself to his Child; and that makes him to love him. Much more
does God love his Son upon this ground; He is not aliquid Patris, but totum. 2.
Is Similitudo; That Is causa Amoris; The Father imprints his likeness on his
Son; In his own likeness he begat him: So Christ is the lively Image of his
Father; 1. In his Divinity; He is the character of his Father's Glory, a full
representation of him. If you knew me, you would know the Father. 2. In his
Humanity; All those created, and infused Graces that are in the Manhood of
Christ, they are prints of Gods Wisdom, Holiness, Mercy, etc. shining in him.
3. Is Conformitas in voluntate; That breeds love, idem velle, and idem nolle.
Christ is a Son, who never displeased his Father; there is no repugnancy in his
will to God. He lost his Life, rather then he would lose his Obedience. No
marvel then, though the Father style him his beloved 1. Circumcessio, (...); He
is in the Father, and the Father is in him, Ioh. xiv. 11. 2. Communio
consiliorum; He lies in the Bosom of the Father, and he communicates his
Counsels to him, and shows him all things. 3. Communicatio bonorum; He has
made him Heir of all things. Psalm. ii. 8. Ask of me, and I shall give thee the
Heathen for thine Inheritance; and the uttermost parts of the earth for thy
possession. Luke xxii. 29. I appoint unto you a Kingdom, as my Father has
appointed unto me.

That Is the first, the Dignity of his Person: Now follows, Secondly, The
Excellency of his Mediation; In whom I am well pleased. This is considerable
two ways;

1. As a Qualification of his Person; God is highly pleased with Christ. 2. As
the Virtue, and Fruit of his Mediation; In whom he is pleased with us.
First, Consider it as a Qualification of his Person. The Person of Christ was
most amiable, and acceptable, and gracious, in the eyes of his Father. Thus
Esaias describes him; Behold my Servant, whom I uphold; mine Elect, in whom my
soul delights, Isa. xlii. 1. and it is repeated, Matthew. xii. 18.

Christ was most pleasing to God the Father;

1. In respect of his Infinite Excellency and Goodness. His Divine nature
infinitely answers to the Will of God: In it there is all holiness, and purity,
and goodness, exactly answerable and equal to the purity of God the Father.
Finite goodness, procures Christ's infinite Excellency, is infinitely delightful
to his Father. Thus he rejoiced with him, and in him, from all Eternity. This
blessed Communion 'twixt the Father and the Son, it took up that
Incomprehensible space of Eternity. It answers to that Atheistical Quere, What
did God before he made the world? He enjoyed his own Glory, and Blessedness;
and his Soul delighted in this Son of his desires, and love, Prove. viii. 30. 2.
God was well pleased in Christ, as he was in the state of his Incarnation, as
God-man; so God was highly pleased with his Son. In the Creation, God was
pleased with all his works; he beheld them, and they were all good. The Lord
rejoiced in his works, Psalm. civ. But Christ, Incarnate, is the choice
Masterpiece of all the works of God. In him, he has magnified all his glorious
Attributes; the greatest Wisdom, the greatest Evidence

There are diverse Degrees of Gods Communicating his Goodness:

1. In Creation, he communicates the Goodness of Being; when he brings forth a
creature out of the dark dungeon of nothing, and makes it subsist. 2. He more
communicates his Goodness, in communicating Life, a ray of his Life, to
creatures living. 3. He more communicates his Goodness, by imparting the choice
Similitude of himself to man: That much pleased him, as the chief of all the
ways of God: which makes David wonder, Lord! what is man? So, Psalm. civ.
surveying all the creatures, when he comes to man, verse. 23, 24. then he
wonders, O Lord, how manifold are thy works? 4. Yet he more communicates his
Goodness, in the Production of Grace, in the Infusion of Holiness; By it he
makes us partakers of the Divine nature. That is a glorious piece of his
workmanship. And he more rejoices 5. The greatest, and most glorious
communication, is of himself in the Incarnation; to make a creature to be God,
by Personal Union. This is the most Incomparable work of God: This, all the
Angels wonder at. If at the creation of Light, all the Angels of God shouted
for joy, and admiration, as Job speaks; sure, when this work was achieved,
then all creatures did wonder much more. And in this, God was highly
3. God was well pleased in Christ, in respect of his perfect and complete
Righteousness. All that our Savior ever did, did highly content, and please
him. The best of all the Saints have their failings, and imperfections. He
found folly in his Angels: In There was no guile found in his mouth. There was
in him, exact Purity of Nature, without stain, or blemish. The Prince of this
world comes, and he has nothing in me, Ioh. xiv. 30. that he can search out,
and accuse me for. As the Son in the Gospel, he can say truly to his Father, I
have served thee always; I never offended thee. It was his meat and drink to
obey him. He was holy, harmless, separate from sinners, Heb. vii. 26.
Secondly, Consider this, in respect of the Virtue of his Mediation. In him, he
is well pleased with us also.

Conceive this point;

1. By way of Negation: In Christ, God is well pleased with us; therefore, out
of Christ, he is offended, and displeased with us. 2. By way of Affirmation: In
Christ, God is well pleased; In him he is graciously appeased, and reconciled
with us.
First, Conceive it by way of Negation: Out of Christ, God is offended, and
displeased with us.

Take a double measure, and proportion of this Displeasure;

1. Is Mensura Intensionis; the depth of his Displeasure. The 1. Is Alienatio;
He is estranged from us; we are cast out of his Covenant. His favor is
withdrawn, we are cast away from his Countenance: As Cain, Genesis iv. 14. He was
driven away from the face of God. We are strangers, and afar off from him,
Ephesians. ii. He beholds us afar off, as one that owns us not. 2. Is Poenitentia;
The Scripture sets out his Displeasure at us, by attributing to God a
Repentance that ever he made us. Genesis vi. 6. It repented the Lord that he had
made man upon the earth, and it grieved him at his heart. Not that God really
repents; For he is not as man, that he should repent, 1 Samuel xv. 29. but he
has no more content in us, then a man has in that which he repents of, and
wishes were undone. 3. Is Ira; In him, are thoughts of wrath and Indignation
against us; a bent, and purpose of will to punish, and afflict, and make us
smart in his Displeasure. In him is wrath, and jealousy, and fury, and storms
of Displeasure; and we are children of wrath, vessels of wrath, into which he
pours out his anger. 4. Is Odiunt; Hatred, that is deeper. Anger may be
suddenly up, and soon pacified; but his Displeasure against us, out Christ, it
is Hatred, that is deep, and deadly, and lasting; it looks at Destruction. Every
punishment does not content Hatred, but it ayms at Perdition. 5. Is Abominatio;
That is more then hatred. It carries with it a secret antipathy, and loathing
of us; his Soul abhorrs The wicked are an abomination to the Lord. His eyes
cannot behold us; he abhorrs to look upon iniquity. 6. Is Gaudium in
Perditione; The Scripture goes thus high: The Lord even rejoices in his
Justice, triumphing over sinners in their Perdition. Ah! I will ease me of mine
Adversaries, and avenge me of mine Enemies, Isa. i. 24. Prove. i. 26. I will
laugh at your calamity, I will mock when your fear comes.
That Is the first, Mensura Intensionis; The other, 2. Is Mensura Extensionis;
The Measure of Gods Extending this Displeasure. It is observable in three
Manifestations 1. It is Universal, with our whole nature. He is not displeased
with some few only, but with root and branch, stock and fruit. The whole
generation of Mankind, is displeasing to him. Not only some few notorious
wretches, as Cain, and Esau, etc. but even the most moderate restrained men (if
there be nothing but Nature in them) they are all out of favor; All of us are
Children of wrath, as well as others, Ephesians. ii. 3. The best of them is a
briar, Micah vii. 4. The Lord looked down from heaven upon the children of men,
to see if there were any that did understand, and seek God. They are altogether
become filthy, there is none that does good, no not one. All have sinned, and
come short of the glory of God, Romans i. 23. Now antipathy is universal, it is to
all of the same kind. The Lamb hates every Wolf. 2. It is respectively to all,
even our best services and performances. Out of Christ, God refuses all,
counts them all abominable. Nay, our Incense, the Odours of our Prayers, if we
are out of Christ, they are all unhallowed breath. The prayers of the wicked
are an abomination to the Lord. Our sacrifices are a burden to him; he rejects
all our attendances. Why tread you in my Courts? Their Vine is the Wine of
Sodom, and of the fields of Gomorrha; their Grapes are Grapes of gall; their
clusters are bitter, their Wine is the poison of Dragons, and the cruel venom
of Asps, Deuteronomy. xxii. 32. Our natural best fruits, respectively to eternal life,
are odious and abominable. 3. The Extent of this Displeasure reaches even to
the creatures that are about us. Even for our sakes, the whole Creation is
involved in his Displeasure. Sin has blasted the beauty of all Gods
workmanship. God is out of love with the whole frame of the world, in
indignation to man's sin. At our Fall, Genesis iii. the earth was cursed; and that
curse, none but Christ can take off. Malachi closes up the Old Testament with
this same curse; I will smite the earth with a curse. The Law leaves the
creatures under a curse. In the Law, the house, the bed, the seat of the Leper,
were all defiled: so, the whole frame of the The whole Creation groans, being
made subject to corruption, and vanity, Romans viii. As it was said of Jerusalem,
Why has the Lord done thus to this City? So of the whole world, Why is it
devoted to destruction? It Is because of God's Displeasure at sinners. Conceive,

Secondly, This point Affirmatively: In Christ God is well pleased, in him
graciously appeased and reconciled with us.

Here, we must make two enquiries:

1. Quibus modis? By what means? 2. Quibus gradibus? By what degrees Christ
has wrought it?
1. Quibus modis? By what means has Christ gained us the love of his Father?
These four ways;

1. By his Intercession: He is well pleased in him, Praying, and Interceding
for us. The Prayer of our Savior is of Infinite power to prevail with God.
Ioh. xi. 42. Father, I know that thou hear me always. It argues the love
and power of friendship, when we obtain, not only for our selves, or those
about us, but can reconcile, and pacify offenses toward others. It argued
Abraham, that he could prevail so much for Sodom. Thus God graced Job, when his
friends were sent to beg his entreaties. Much more do the Intercessions of
Christ, those strong cries and supplication, by which he continually obtains
mercy for us, argue God's being highly pleased with him. Moses his prayer for
the people, bound the hands of God; Now therefore let me alone, Exodus xxxii.
10. Yet that is nothing so prevailing as Christ's Prayer. S. Steven's prayer
procured Readiness conversion; how much more shall Christ's, Father forgive them,
reconcile us to God? recommend us to his mercy? 2. By his Satisfaction he has
wrought this peace, and made him well pleased, having satisfied for us.
Satisfaction, it is the making up of a wrong, or injury, or damage, by the
paying of a full recompensation. Now the sufferings of Christ were 1. Of that
Infinite value in their natural Dignity; 2. Of that high esteem in God's
valuation; that by them, the breach of Gods Law had a condign satisfaction by
this performance. Penal Statutes are never satisfied, but by the mulct and
forfeiture. The Law of God, that is Penal; the price of his Death, the value of
his Blood, that was laid down, and in it God
3. By his Merit: In him God is well pleased, as Meriting for us. Christ's
actions had not only the virtue of impetration, or satisfaction, but of
abundant Merit, to purchase favor for us. Now the reason why Christ's Merits do
thus pacify God, is, Praestando bonum acceptabilius. Christ's obedience gave
God higher content, then our disobedience can discontent him. He is more
delighted in his righteousness, then he was offended by our unrighteousness.
This is like, and beyond Noah's sacrifice, A savor of rest in the nostrils of
God; I will curse the earth no more. This is a main Argument against Despair;
Christ has more pleased God, then thou have displeased him. 4. By his Union.
God is pleased in him, uniting us to him. Not one hair of Christ's head shall
perish. He is the Savior of his Body, Ephesians. v. 23. When we are implanted into
Christ, then God looks graciously upon us. As Isaac said unto Jacob, Genesis
xxvii. 21. Come near, I pray thee, that I may feel thee, my son, whether thou
be my very son Esau, or not: So, when God feels us to be members and parts of
his Son, O, it is the voice of my Son, it is a member of his Body, then his Soul
blesses us. This Union makes us to enjoy a communion in all that Christ did: As
S. Bernard speaks, Non alius qui foris-fecit, alter qui satisfecit, quia caput
and corpus unus est Christus. Christus, non potest habere membra damnata.
That Is the first, Quibus modis? See,
II. Quibus gradibus? Take them in these three steps:

1. In Christo placabilis: Christ's Mediation, and Gods good pleasure in him,
makes him placable, and appeasable, and reconcilable. Out of Christ, God is a
consuming fire, Heb. xii. 29. His thoughts toward us, are only thoughts of
anger: But his Son has founded a new Covenant, in which God is Intreatable,
sin Pardonable, heaven Attainable. This is one step of favor he has wrought
his Father to, to enter a parley and treaty of Reconciliation; He has set up
an Office, to sue out our Pardon; He has set forth a gracious Remedy; opened a
Fountain Non sic Diabolis. God was in Christ, reconciling the world unto
himself, 2 Cor. v. 19. and has sent Ambassadors, verse. 20. to treat, and
entreat for Reconciliation. 2. In Christo placatus: That Is more. Our Peace and
Reconciliation is actually obtained in, and for him only. He has made us
accepted in the Beloved, Ephesians. i. 6. Thus the Apostle, Having slain enmity;
not only weakened it, but overcome it, He has reconciled us unto God, Ephesians.
ii. 16. He presents us to God, obtains our pardon, knocks off our fetters,
discharges us out of 3. In Christo continuo placandus. Christ does not only
set us in Statu quo, and so leaves us; but brings us into favor, and holds us
up in favor. Christ is of perpetual use; not at our first Reconciliation, but
in all our life. This virtue of Christ, 1. Makes our sins of another condition
then when we were out of him: They are not condemnatorta, but our pardon shall
be granted. 2. Makes our actions, though imperfect, yet acceptable, because
done in him. He is the Altar, that sanctifies the Offering: His Odours persume
our Prayers. In Numb. vi. 19, 20. The Priest, at the Offering, was to lay his
hands upon the hands of him who brought it, and to wave it before the Lord: So
Christ, he is to present our Prayers, and all our Offerings, 3. Our persons,
they are looked upon as in Christ, and so with them God is well pleased.

Corollaries from hence, let be these:

1. In quo complacitum; ergo non ex odio Patris morti tradendus. Peter thought,
Christ must not dye; We thought him forsaken of God. No, it was not hatred of
his Son, that brought him to death; for he was most pleased with him in his
death. 2. In quo complacitum; ergo gratuitum; It Is good pleasure, and
acceptance, that is all our tenure. He had a Son who pleased him, he needed not
us. 3. In quo complacitum; ergo firma reconciliatio. If Gods favor were in our
selves, we should soon forfeit all; but our salvation is now put into Christ's
hands. He is Sequester Dei, and hominum. All Is entailed upon him.
Oh, let us bless Christ for making our peace: Let us kiss him, for whose sake
God is well pleased with us;

1. Osculo Fidei. With the kiss of Faith, Thankfulness, Love. 2. Osculo
Gratitudinis. With the kiss of Faith, Thankfulness, Love. 3. Osculo Amoris.
With the kiss of Faith, Thankfulness, Love.
So much for the Excellency of his Mediation. Now follows,

Thirdly, The Authority of his Doctine; Hear Him. In it two things;

1. The Designation of the Person, Him. 2. The Prescription of the Duty, Hear.
First, The Designation of the Person, Him. Christ, he is appointed by God the
Father to be the Prophet, and Teacher of his Church. Hence he is styled in
Scripture, A Prophet: Deuteronomy. xviii. 15. A Prophet will the Lord your God raise
up of your brethren like unto me; Him shall you hear. He assumes this Title to
himself, displaces all Rubbies; One is your Doctor, and Master, even Christ,
Matthew. xxiii. So, Heb. iii. 1. He is called, The Apostle, and High Priest of
our Profession. Ma^ch. iii. 1. The Angel of the Covenant.

Now this Prophetical Dignity of Christ, that he is the grand

1. Enquire into his Authority, who has authorized him; 2. Into his
Sufficiencies; 3. Into his Privileges; 4. Into his Discharge.
1. For his Authority; that is most full and ample: He has a Commission from
heaven: Warranted, 1. By Predictions, and Prophecies; I will give thee for a
Covenant of the people, for a light of the Gentiles, Isa. xlii. 6. to open the
blind eyes, to bring out the prisoners from the prison; and them that sit in
darkness, out of the prisonhouse, verse. 7. The Spirit of the Lord God is upon
me, because the Lord has anointed me, to preach good tidings unto the meek; he
has sent me to bind up the brokenhearted, etc. Isa. lxi. 1. This Christ
applies to himself, Luke iv. 21. So, Ioh. xviii. 37. To this end was I born,
and for this cause came I into the world, that I should bear witness unto the
Truth. Warranted, 2. By his Fathers public Inauguration at his Baptism,
Tabor. This honor God put upon him; and has now set him on Mount Zion, to
preach the Law, whereof God spoke unto him. 3. By Signs and Wonders: Rabbi, we
know that thou art a Teacher sent from God; for no man can do these miracles
that thou d^est, except God be with him, Ioh. iii. 2. As Moses was sent, and
authorized by a wonder-working Power; so Christ had his Commission sealed up by
mighty Works. Miracles are the ratification of his Doctrine. We must have
Sigillum Ecclesiae, in ordinary Calling; or miraculous, in extraordinary.
2. For his Sufficiency: Whom God sends, he fits and enables. Christ has an
All Sufficiency for an absolute Discharge of this great work. He had, 1. The
enablement of Knowledge: He is richly furnished with all kind of Knowledge: In
him are all the Treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge, Colos. ii. 3. 1. Treasures
of Knowledge; i. e. Precious Knowledge, Saving Knowledge. 2. Treasures of
Knowledge; i. e. Plentiful Knowledge. We know but in part; but all the Counsel
of God is made open to him. Solomon, who could speak of Christ. A greater
Wisdom, then that of Solomon, was in him. 3. Treasures; i. e. Hidden and
Stored Knowledge was in him; those Secret mysteries that were laid up
Now this Knowledge is communicated to him, not, as to us, Studio and
Industria; not, as to the Prophets, by Dreams, or Visions, or Revelations of
Angels: but by a clear, full, intimate view, and beholding of the Godhead, the
Fountain of all sacred Knowledge. Christ had, 2. The enablement of all other
gracious endowments, the full assistance of the Spirit. All other Saints were
limited and imperfect in these gifts. Moses was slow of speech; but his lips
were full of grace. Paul was learned, but not eloquent; Apollos eloquent,
Christ had all; His lips drop down myrrh. Then, this assistance was continued,
and constant. Those gratiae, that are gratis datae, are sometimes more full,
sometimes more sparing: Sometimes the door of Utterance is opened to us,
sometimes it is shut: Sometimes we have more assistance, sometimes less: But
Christ had it always in a full measure. As light is always in the Sun, but
the Air receives it, per modum coruscationis, unevenly, uncertainly.
3. For his Privileges. These were far above all Prophets, Doctors,
Instructers. Four main Privileges he had; 1. Universality: He had an
unlimited, and unbounded Commission; not only to one Nation, but to the whole
Church. Nay, not so only to the present Church; but to the Church, present,
past, and to come. All Prophecies were inspired by him: All the Prophets
borrowed their light from him: All sat at the feet of this Gamaleel. The
Spirit that spoke in the Prophets, it is called, 1 Pet. i. 11. The Spirit of
Christ. By this Spirit, Christ preached in Noah, to the old world, 1 Pet. iii.
19. 2. He is Infallibilis Doctor; an unerring, and infallible Doctor and
Teacher. He is not only wise, but Wisdom it self; Christ was most naturally,
and, of himself, Infallible. He is the faithful and true Witness, Rev. iii. 14.
3. He had Excellentiam Doctrinae, above all before him. Moses, and his
followers, they were but Doctors of the Law, the Ministry of Condemnation:
The Prophets, they were Ministers of the Promises; all, De bonis futuris: But
Christ came with Performances: He brought life and immortality to light by the
Gospel, 2 Timothy i. 10. Tidings, and intimations are good; but real evidences,
and performances, they are far more welcome. 4. He is Efficax, a most Effectual
and Prevailing Doctor: He has made my mouth like a sharp sword, Isa. xlix. 2.
So S. John, Rev. xix. 15. Out of his mouth goes a sharp sword: Not in ore
gladii, but in gladio oris; His Teaching is inward and spiritual. Cathedram
habet in coelo, qui docet cor: All others affect the ear; He only speaks to
the heart. He opens our understandings, that we may understand the Scriptures;
He writes his Laws in our hearts. Lastly,
4. For his Discharge, it is with absolute Fidelity, without concealing any
portion of Gods Truth. He gives up an exact account, Ioh. xvii. 8. I have given
unto them the words which thou gave me, and they have received them; and have
known surely that I came out from thee; and they have believed that thou did
send me. Moses was faithful; Christ was as, nay above Moses, in all Fidelity.
He lost none of his Sheep, whom the Father had committed to him. He preferred
the preaching of his Father's Will, before his Food; more then his appointed
Food. Moses, he took the account of the people; and again, when he dyed, the
people accounted, to show his Fidelity. So Christ; Not one whom thou gave me,
is lost, Ioh. xvii. 12.
More particularly; This Designation of the Person, it may be considered in
these five distinguishing Respects:

1. Respectively to the Father; Hear Him. He sends us to his Son. We have no
voice from the Father, but this bidding us to look for no voice but from
Christ. Pharaoh sends all, for corn, to Joseph. Thus he discharges them from
any more Visions and Revelations: there is now no other Urim, and Thummim, but
this lively Oracle. 2. Respectively to Moses and Elias. Peter would gladly
listen to them; that heavenly Conference much affected him. No, God discharges
Moses and Elias; their Ministration is out of date. They have served their
time, now he speaks to us by his Son. They were all like Ushers in the School,
Christ is the grand-Teacher. Ut Josephus, per Interpretem; now we see the face
of Christ, and hear him speaking unto us. 3. Respectively to the subordinate
Ministers, and means of salvation; in their preaching still we must hear Him.
What the Jews did blasphemously, we must devoutly; we must cry out, The voice
of God, and not of man. He that receives you, receives me. Thus the Galathians
received S. Paul, as an Angel of God, even as Christ Jesus, Gal. iv. 14. He who
spoke by the mouth of his holy Prophets, speaks still. He who seeks a proof of
Christ's speaking in his Ministers, let him know, he despises not man, but God;
take heed ye despise not him that speaks from heaven. 4. Respectively to my
Successor, to whom Christ should Hear Him. This is the last time. There is no
other means of salvation. The Law was imperfect, insufficient, therefore it is
abolished; but surely they will reverence my Son. His Gospel, it is Evangelium
aeternum. Nobis non opus est curiositate post Christum, nec inquisitione post
Evangelium. 5. Respectively to all that he shall teach. His Patent, it is
general; no man was ever so authorized, but his Commission was limited. Christ
has an universal Charter. We must question nothing; not doubt of any point of
his Doctrine, not in some cases, but to all purposes. 1. Quamvis supra rationem
in mysteriis. 2. Quamvis contra carnem in officiis. 3. Quamvis ultra spem and
possibilitatem in promissionibus. 4. Quamvis contra Mosen and Elian in lege
abroganda.

That Is for the Designation of the Person, Him. Next is, Secondly, the Act, or
Duty prescribed, Hear Him.

1. Hear Him; Not think of gazing upon him, and erecting up Tabernacles. He
honors Christ most, not who imagines some voluntary service of his own; but
who hears him, believes him, Christ. Peter, like Martha, was troubled to
entertain him; we must, like Mary, sit at his feet, and Hear Him. 2. Hear Him;
Adore him, not only as my Son; believe in him, not only as your Savior, In
quo complacitus sum; but Hear Him, as your Lawgiver. Christ comes with
Commandments and Duties, and expects our attention to them, as well as to his
Promises. Set him up as thy Lord, and Ruler; and resolve to serve Jesus thy
Lord.


THE SEVENTH
S. MATTHEW. xvii. 6, 7, 8, 9. Verse. 6. And when the Disciples heard it, they
fell on their Verse. 7. And Jesus came and touched them, and said unto them,
Arise, be not afraid. Verse. 8. And when they had lift up their eyes, they saw
no man, save Jesus only. Verse. 9. And as they came down from the Mountain,
Jesus charged them, saying, etc.
Verse. 6. And when the Disciples heard it, they fell on their face, and were
sore afraid.
THis sixth Verse, sets out the Effect that this Voice from heaven wrought in
the Apostles. It casts them into a Passion of Horror and Amazement.

In it two things:

1. The Impression of this Passion; They were sore afraid. 2. The Irruption of
it into the body, They fell on their face.
First, The Impression of this Passion, They were sore afraid. Of

1. Ex part Dei; Why God stirs up in them this great amazement. 2. Ex part
eorum; What occasioned it in them.
I. Consider it in respect of God. Purposely, God affects them with this,
rather then with any other Passion, for diverse reasons;

1. Ut altius imprimeret in memoriam. Those lessons that are fastened into us
with extraordinary fear, take deepest apprehension in us, stick fastest in us.
Those Truths are dearest to us, 2. To teach them the fittest and best way to
make use of Christ. He has now propounded him to them; and, to drive them to
this refuge and sanctuary, to make them see their great weakness and
insufficiency out of him, and need to shelter themselves in him, he purposely
affrights and terrifies them. While we are at ease, no fears or terrors seize
on us, we sit loose from Christ; but if Gods Glory once fears us, then we run
to the horns What shall we do to be saved? So the Jailer. Before conversion,
Love is too weak an attractive to our servile nature; Fear works more
powerfully. Lot must be affrighted out of Sodom, and constrained to fly for his
life. The pursuing of the avenger of blood, must make the manslayer to fly to
the city of Refuge. Some save with fear, pulling them out of the fire, Jude,
verse. 23. 3. This fear at the voice of God, was sent upon them, to enforce them
to this particular duty, to hear Christ. The voice Christ is terrible; but
Christ's voice, it is a comforting voice. It is the gracious goodness of God,
and a merciful respect to our infirmity, not to speak to us from heaven, by his
own glorious voice; that would amaze us; but to speak to us, more humano.
Christ Incarnate, and so men of our quality and condition, are the most fit
means to speak to us. Deuteronomy. v. 26. the people desire that Moses may speak unto
them in Gods name; Go thou near, and hear all that the Lord our God shall say;
and speak thou unto us all that the Lord our God shall speak unto thee; and we
will hear it, and do it. So the Apostle, Heb. xii. 19. They that heard the
voice of God, entreated that the Word should not be spoken to them any more:
verse. 20. For they could not endure it. Nay, Moses himself did exceedingly
fear, and quake, verse. 21. Yet how perverse are we? Oh, we think, if God from
heaven would speak unto us, we would believe. Alas! How unable are we to bear
Is not Jesus one of us? His brethren, and sisters, are they not all with us?
Matthew. xiii. 56. If he speak himself, then he is too terrible; if by men, then
too contemptible: They are offended at him. 4. They are cast into this great
dejection and fear, to humble them, lest the glory of these heavenly Visions
should too much puff them up. Naturally, we wax proud upon any extraordinary
favor. As Haman, being alone called to the Banquet with the King, how proud
was he upon it? The Lord, to keep down our spiritual pride, after high favors,
usually exercises us Paul, lest he should be lifted up with those Revelations,
he was buffetted by Satan. To this purpose, 1. Sometimes God humbles us, before
he pleases to reveal himself to us. Thus Abraham was cast into a great horror
before God appeared to him. So Esaias, Ezekiel, Daniel: So Paul, before he was
called to be an Apostle, he was cast down to the earth. Humility is the fittest
preparation to receive any favor, or Revelation from God. It makes us
sensible, 1. Of our weakness, that it is not our strength that attains 2. Of
our unworthiness; To me, who am less then the least of all Saints, is this
grace given, that I should preach the unsearchable riches of Christ, Ephesians.
iii. 8.
2. Sometimes, after God has vouchsafed us some extraordinary favor, then he
abases us, and casts us down. Thus Jacob, after his wrestling with God, was
lamed. We must have this Treasure in earthen vessels, that the excellency of
the Power may be seen to be of God, and not of us, 2 Cor. iv. 7.

II. Consider it in respect of Themselves, what occasioned

1. They were Sancti: If they had been wicked and profane men, it had been no
marvel: For Balaam, and such as he, to tremble, that is no wonder; but for these
holy men to be thus dismayed, is much. 2. They were in a warrantable, and holy
action, yet are they affrighted. For men to be surprised with horror in an
unwarrantable, profane action, that is no marvel; as Balthazar in his Cups, to
be struck with astonishment; and Cain, at the murdering 3. They were in
Praesentia Christi. Indeed, to be left to ourselves, and to see nothing but
terrors on Gods part, there is some cause of fear; but to be so near a
Sanctuary, and yet to 4. They had Visiones laetas, and exhilarantes; were made
partakers of Visions full of comfort, and joy: To see Christ in Glory, and to
enjoy a sweet society with the Saints, and yet to be in fear! No marvel, if the
presence of an angry God, and some dreadful Visions, should terrify. 5. They
heard Vocem Pacificam; that God in Christ was well pleased with them, yet they
tremble. Indeed, to hear the thundrings of the Law, that is terrible; but here,
was Vox Evangelii; here were Harpers, harping with their Harps, Rev. xiv. 2. 1.
These holy men, though Saints, yet they carry about them the conscience of sin,
a secret guiltiness, and that now awakens, and troubles them. The best of us
carry about us the remainders of our father Adam, his guiltiness, his fears. I
heard thy voice in the garden, and I was afraid -- and I hid my self, Genesis iii.
10. Adam, in his Innocence, was void of this fear, be enjoyed a sweet Communion
with God; but since, the best of us 2. The Voice, and Presence, and Approach of
God will awaken this guiltiness of our conscience. His Presence darts in a
light unto us, that makes sin appear, that discovers to us our secret and
concealed sins. Indeed, the Saints, conversing with men, seem, to themselves,
and others, unreprovable. So, S. Paul is not conscious to himself of any thing;
But he that judges me is the Lord, 1 Cor. iv. 4. He knew not Concupiscence to
be sin, till the Law passed upon him. The light of a Candle does not discover
3. This conscience, thus awakened, strikes us with fear and astonishment. Oh,
if the Lion roar, the beasts tremble. Then Job abhorrs himself in dust and
ashes; as a bad servant trembles when he sees his Master. So Esaias; Woe is me, I
am undone -- for mine eyes have seen the King, the Lord of Hosts, Isa. vi. 5.
Thus S. Peter, Lord, depart from me, for I am a sinful man, Luke v. 8.

To strengthen us against these fears;

1. Get strength of Faith. Weak Faith will shrink. Why did ye fear, (...), O ye
of little faith? Matthew. viii. 26. It must 2. Love, that casts out fear, 1 Ioh.
iv. 18. Get the love of God shed into your hearts; and then argue as Manoah's
wife did, If the Lord were pleased to kill us -- he would not have showed us
all these things, Judge. xiii. 23. 3. Maintain thy peace with God; take heed of
making a breach with him. Live not in any known sin: This will make him fall
heavy upon his dearest servants. As Moses, God met him in the Inn, and sought
to kill him, because his child was not circumcised, Exodus iv. 24. If a man be
at peace with God, he fears no ill tidings, his heart is fixed. 4. Acquaint thy
self much with the thoughts of God; often present him to thy soul; set up his
glory in thine heart. If 5. Disburthen thy conscience of all guiltiness of sin.
Let no sin lie there unrepented of. Sin betrays thee to this feat. It is not
outward terrors that so much disquiet, as do inward terrors from sense of sin.
The least inward pain is more troublesome then any outward. A vapor in the
earth, makes an earthquake. 6. Always keep Christ in thine eye. O Master, save
us, we perish. Make him thy Sanctuary: as children run to their father, I will
fear none evil, for thou art with me, Psalm. xxiii. 4. 7. Nourish a voluntary
religious fear of God; it will prevent these violent and enforced fears. All
knees must bow to him; he will be feared. A devout fear, will prevent a slavish
fear. An humble spirit, that bows of it self, shall not be broken. A reed, that
bends with the wind, stands; when an oak is rent up by the roots. Nourish a
reverence of him in all places; especially on Mount Tabor, at his Word; Serve
him with reverence, and fear.
So much for the sixth Verse. Now follows,

Verse. 7. And Jesus came and touched them, and said, Arise, be not afraid.
This Verse sets out the comfortable and gracious recovery of these Disciples,
out of those amazing fears into which they were cast. The sum and substance of
it, may be resolved into these considerable Observations:

First, Observe from the Agent in this recovery: As by the power of God they
were cast into these fears; so it is God alone He has torn, and he must heal
us; he has smitten, and he must bind us up, Hos. vi. 1. He makes sore, and he
must bind up; he wounds, and his hands must make whole, Job v. 18.

Diverse reasons may be given;

1. From the Subject of these terrors. These fears are settled in the soul, and
conscience; clogged with secret guiltiness, awakened by the voice of God,
struck with horror and amazement. Now the soul, and conscience, it is obnoxious
only to the power of God. He only can set these terrors upon it, and so take
them off again. No created power can strike fear into the conscience, or convey
comfort into it. He has appropriated this to himself only. Our outward man is
liable to the wrath 2. From the Nature of these fears: They are supernatural,
and spiritual, and so must be cured by answerable comforts. Outward
applications, cannot cure inward maladies. But spiritual comforts are from God
only. The spirit of a man may sustain all other infirmities, but a wounded
spirit who can bear? Prove. xviii. 14. Sicknesses, losses, natural and humane
means may relieve us in them; but these apprehensions that come from heaven,
and 3. The Grounds of these fears cannot be removed but by God, and so, by
consequence, not the fears themselves. Secret guiltiness, conscience of sin,
apprehension of Gods wrath, they betray us to these fears. Now, none but God
can free us from these. Guilt, it is an obligation, and recognition, in which
the soul is bound over to answer to Gods Tribunal. These fears, like an I have
sinned, what shall I do unto thee, O thou preserver of men? Job vii. 20.
This will appear in these three respects;

1. In those sins that are not punishable by man's judgment, yet the guilt of
these will haunt the conscience. 2. In those sins that are not discernable by
man's observation; when no eye sees us, or can accuse us, yet then the soul is
troubled, and perplexed. As Cain, he had an easy escapal; there was none but
his father upon Every one that finds me, shall slay me, Genesis iv. 14. 3. In
those persons who are subject to no man's censure. Kings, and those who are, in
respect of man, lawless, and uncontroleable, as David was, yet he cries out,
Against thee have I sinned, Psalm. li. Thus the woman in S. Ioh. viii. though
all her accusers forsook her, yet she stood still, trembling before Christ,
expecting his doom, or absolution.
Application.

1. It must teach us to discern the true cause and original of these spiritual
anxieties. We must know, they are the terrors of the Almighty. Do as Rebeckah;
Why am I thus? enquire of the Lord, Genesis xxxv. 22. If we come to these
conjectures, It Is a chance, as the Philistims said, we shall never think of
those courses Naaman's messenger; See, he sends to me to recover a man of his
leprosy; Am I God? 2. It shows the insufficiency of all other means to recover
our spirits thus dismayed. Some other means may, for a time, cast us into a
slumber; like Opium to a sick body, it will stay the sourse of the disease for
a time, but it will break out again with greater violence.

There are three ways of bodily cures; Either,

1. We allay the pain; Or, 2. Stupefie the part affected; Or, 3. Remove the
cause:
So, some outward worldly means, may, for a while, allay and mitigate these
fears and anguishes: As Pleasure; Saul gets an Harper to chase away the evil
spirit: Or Employment; Cain falls to building of Cities, to drive away his
terrors: Or Company; the noise and din of that, may out-noyse our fears; but
this is no cure. Others go about to stupefie the part, to benum, and dead, and
sear conscience, to make it senseless and brawny. Yet this cures not, but heals
only, and skins-over the wound 3. It should make us careful to avoid the
causes and occasions of such spiritual fears, which, by all humane means, are
irrecoverable. Those diseases that have Parabilia medicamenta, are not so
dangerous; men are not so shie of them: but, suppose that a disease were in it
self deadly, and but one medicine in the world could cure it, and that too in
the hand and skill of one only Physician, how careful would we be, not to
endanger the running the better, nay, the worse, she suffered much from
Physicians;
Secondly, Another observable Consideration, is from the present, and speedy
Act of relieving and recovering of these Saints. They being cast into fear and
perplexity, they are not suffered to lie under it, and to be swallowed up of
it; but a speedy, present help is from God reached out unto them; they are
raised

This he does,

1. In much pity and tenderness to them. No mother hastens more to catch up her
child that is fallen, then God hastens to relieve his children. He takes
pleasure in the prosperity of his servants, Psalm. xxxv. 27. He loves to see
them in a joyful, comfortable condition. Isa. live. 7. For a small moment have I
forsaken thee, but with great mercies will I gather thee. Verse. 8. In a little
wrath I hid my face from thee, for a moment; but with everlasting kindness will
I have mercy upon thee, says the Lord, thy Redeemer. This he does, 2. In care,
lest they should be swallowed up, and overwhelmed with grief, and fear^. Isa.
lvii. 16. For I will not contend for ever, neither will I be always wroth; for
the spirit should fail before me, and the souls which I have made. Verse. 18. I
will restore comforts unto him, and to his mourners. S. Paul, how careful was
he, lest the excommunicated C^rinthian should be swallowed up with overmuch
sorrow, 2 Cor. ii. 7. Much more is Christ. God hastens to recover such. S.
Peter being much dejected for his denial, a message is speedily sent to him by
the Angel, Go your way, tell his Disciples, and Peter, that Christ is risen.
Peter thought himself cast off and forgotten; see here a special ^idings
directed to him, 3. He measures out these fears and anguishes to his children,
in a just proportion; they shall undergo no more then is fitting for them. 1.
Suitable to their weakness, and what they can bear. God is faithful, who will
not suffer you to be tempted above that you are able, 1 Cor. x. 13. He wrestles
with Jacob, but yet over-powers him not. Wrestling is, where there is a mutual
strength of resistance. Had he laid his whole strength upon him he could not 2.
Suitable to the measure of their corruption; that must be eaten out: and as
soon as they are humbled and brought to a right temper, then he relieves them.
David had an heavy message dispatched to him, Thou art the man, 2 Samuel 12. 7. I
will raise up evil against thee, verse. 11. As soon as he was thoroughly wrought
upon, then presently comes a message of comfort, verse. 13. The Lord has put
away thy sin, thou shall not dye. So Hezekiah, Isaiah told him, from God, he
must dye, Isa. Josiah, as soon as his heart melted, H^ldah must comfort him.
Saul, when he was sufficiently wrought upon by these fears, Ananias was
dispatched to him; Brother Saul, receive thy sight, Acts ix.
It is otherwise with the wicked; fears and anguishes come upon them in
extremity. As it was with King Saul; God forsook Balthazar; so Judas, finds no
relief, but is swallowed up of these horrors. The reason is,

1. God deals with them as with an enemy, in hatred; but with his own, in love.
2. Their sorrows are as poison to destroy them; No matter how much they have of
them. The Saints fears are as a sovereign medicine, tempered by Gods own hand,
ordered to work health in them. When the Cure is wrought, the Plaster falls
off.
4. He brings them seasonably out of these distresses; because, in them, they
are unfit and unable for any service. Moderate fears and sorrows, often whet
our devotion; but excessive anguish, dulls our spirits. As the Israelites
heeded not what Moses said, for anguish of spirit, and for cruel bondage, Exodus
vi. 9. Metus, hand diuturni officii Magister. He would have us Serve him
without fear, all the days of our lives, Luke i. 74, 75.
Application.

1. It must teach us to become such to whom God uses to moderate and mitigate
these fears. Would thou not have them They shall dwell safely, and none shall
make them afraid, Ezekiel. xxxiv. 28. To a wicked man, God says, What have thou
to do with comfort? I will laugh at your calamity, I will mock when your fear
comes, Prove. i. 26. Tribulation and anguish upon every soul of man that does
evil, Romans ii. 9. Fear, and the pit, and the snare shall be upon them, Isa.
xxiv. 17. But they that trust in the Lord, shall not fear any evil tidings.
Behold, my servants shall rejoice, but ye shall be ashamed: behold, my servants
shall sing for joy of heart, but ye shall cry for sorrow of heart, and shall
howl for vexation of spirit, Isa. lxv. 15, 16. Being so, 2. It should refresh
us in all perplexities. We should say with David, At what time I am afraid, I
will trust in thee. Sorrow may endure for a night, but joy comes in the
morning.
See the diverse carriage of God to wicked men, and to his own children. Matthew.
xxviii. At the glory of Christ's Resurrection, and the Angels Appearance, the
Soldiers were afraid, and the holy Women were afraid: But the fear of the
Soldiers overwhelmed them, and so the Angel left them to shift as they could;
there was not any word of comfort spoken to them: But the good women, though
much perplexed, yet had a word of comfort; Be not ye afraid, verse. 45. I know
whom ye seek. S. Paul was in distresses, but not forsaken. Daniel, when he was
struck with fears, then was it said to him, O man, greatly beloved, fear not;
peace be unto thee, be strong, yea, be strong, Dan. x. 19.

That Is the second observable Consideration.

Thirdly, Here is observable the Person who relieves and comforts them; it is
Jesus. The glorious voice of the Father affrights them; the gracious voice of
Christ, that refreshes them. Observe, It is Christ alone, who can raise and
comfort those whom the terrors of the Almighty has cast down, and dejected.
It Is Christ's peculiar work, and function, to release us from the horrors of
conscience, and amazements of soul.

1. He has merited it at Gods hand, to have this office, His soul was
exceeding sorrowful, even unto death, Matthew. xxvi. 38. I am afflicted, and
ready to dye from my youth, while I suffer thy terrors, I am distracted, says
the Psalmist in the Person of Christ, Psalm. lxxxviii. 15. Those horrors, and
that dread, into which his soul was brought, merited for us a merciful supply
of comfort in our distresses. 2. He was sent of God the Father to preach, and
bring comfort against our fears. Isa. lxi. 1. The Spirit of the Lord God is
upon me, because the Lord has anointed me to preach good tidings unto the
meek; he has sent me to bind up the brokenhearted, to proclaim liberty to the
Captives. He came preaching peace. Moses, he preached terror; Christ, he
preaches comfort. Comfort ye, comfort ye my people, says your God, Isa. xl. 1.
3. God has fitted him with tenderness of compassion; he has put into him
bowels of pity toward all in perplexity. He is touched with a feeling of our
infirmities. He never looked upon any that were in sorrow, or need, or misery,
but his compassion was stirred in him. He had compassion on the multitude,
Matthew. xv. 32. He had compassion on the two blind men, and touched their eyes,
Matthew. xx. 34. He was moved with compassion toward the poor Leper, and
cleansed him, Mark i. 41. 4. He has founded the new Covenant, and Gospel,
which is a state of freedom and comfort. The Old Testament Tim. i. 7.) God
has not given us the spirit of fear, but of power, of love, and of a sound
mind. 5. He gives and bequeaths to us the Spirit of comfort; and has given him
this office, to be a Comforter to us. He is called The Comforter; not the
enlightner, or sanctifier (though these be his works) but the Comforter.
It should teach us to have recourse to Christ in all our fears and
perplexities; as the Apostles, Master, carest thou not that we perish? In all
distresses, make known thy sorrows to him. His peace shall rule your hearts. He
is like the wood that sweetened the bitter waters of Marah.

That Is a third observable Consideration.

Fourthly, Here is yet one more, and that is the manner of Christ's merciful and
gracious recovering them out of this amazement. It is fourfold. He did it,

1. By a comfortable Appearance. His Transfiguration, and Glory, affrighted
them: now, that he might more familiarly, and comfortably refresh them, he
lays aside his Majesty, and Glory, Moses put a vail upon his face, that the
people might endure his sight and presence. How gracious is this Condescending
of Christ, to dispense with his own Glory, for our comfort! Like Joseph, who
discovered himself to his brethren, fell upon their necks, and received them
with mutual embracings. The truest sign of greatness, is to stoop to others
weakness; it is Signum roboris, not infirmitatis, says Gregory. Till that time,
when he will make our bodies like his glorious body; he makes his glorious body
like our weak bodies. 2. By his comfortable approach; He came to them. 1.
Strength of Faith would have carried them to him: as Peter, Matthew. xiv. 20.
Master, bid me come unto thee. 2. Moderate fear would have driven them to him.
Or, 3. It would have made them call to him for help. Oh! but they are in a
weaker and lower condition; their Faith is in a swoun; their fear has
overwhelmed them; there is no power left to seek for succor; therefore, they
not being able to seek out for help, see he offers himself graciously to them.
Here is the comfort of Christians; it is possible we may be so low brought, as
not to be able to call, or look up to Christ; yet then he leaves us not. When
we cannot comprehend him, then he will comprehend us. Our Faith may be so weak,
as not to be able to lay hold upon him, yet then his Spirit apprehends us. In
David was in, Psalm. lxxiii. 22, 23. So foolish was I, and ignorant, I was as a
beast before thee. Nevertheless I am continually with thee, thou have holden me
by my right hand. He did it. 3. By his comfortable touching of them; He puts
his hand upon them. Now this gesture, and action of Christ, was very usual in
his miraculous works. Matthew. viii. 3. He touched the Leper, and cleansed him.
Verse. 15. He touched Peter's wives mother, and Matthew. ix. 29. He touched the two
blind men, and they received their sight. Matthew. xiv. 36. They besought him,
that they might only touch the hem of his garment, and as many as touched were
made perfectly whole.

Christ uses this gesture of touching, for diverse reasons;

1. It is Signum facilitatis. He works wonders with his touch; that is, with
the greatest ease and facility. This was eminently seen in Christ's wonders.
Nature must use stronger means to work any work. Nay, Elias, when he was to
recover the woman's child, stretched his body upon it, often begged of God,
before Christ, he effects it by the least means. The smallest means, in
appearance, are by him made powerful to work effectually. Purposely, he makes
choice of such seemingly improbable means, the more to magnify the glory of
his Power; the means themselves having no force at all to effect such wonders.
Thus Joshua, chap. vi. 3. The compassing of Jericho seven days, blowing with
Rams-horns; Magis videntur mysteria consummare, quam bella: What force were
there in this, to batter down a City? Thus it was in Naaman's washing seven
times in Jordan, 2 Kings i. 5. In the blind man's cure by Clay Siloam, John ix.
6. Thus the looking upon the Brazen Serpent, cured the people. He fed five
thousand with five loaves, and two fishes. To teach us, 1. Not to rest in the
most effectual means, though never so hopeful, but to look up to him who works
by 2. Not to despair in the weakest means, if of his appointment. If they be
Siloam (which is, by interpretation, Sent) he can make them effectual.
2. It is Signum Applicationis; By this touch he shows, that he helps by a real
and close application of himself to us. Omnis actio per contactum. So there
must be a close application of Christ to us, if we mean to receive any virtue
from him. And to this purpose we meet with a double touch: 1. Christ touches
us, as here he did the Apostles; that 2. We must touch Christ; that is contactus
Fidei; Faith must draw near to him, as the woman in Matthew. ix. 21. If I may but
touch the hem of his garment, I shall be whole. Hence, says Christ, Thy Faith
has made thee whole.
3. It is Signum mirae Efficaciae; The least, if true and real, union with
Christ, conveys grace and good to us. Nature Vim, and Moram; nihil tam efficax,
ut in transitu prosit; but the Word, the touch of Christ is effectual. So
Faith, if it be not able to lay hold upon him strongly, yet if it can but touch
him, as the woman, Si tetigero; minimus actus; and, fimbriam, minimum objectum.
4. It is Signum virtutis Humanitatis Christi; The Humanity, and Body of Christ,
was Omnium instrumentum miraculorum; As sanctified and quickened with the Deity,
it served as a powerful instrument to convey spiritual, and supernatural power.
It Is Caro vivifica: There dwelt virtue in it. The leaves of the tree of Life,
saves the Nations. The Humanity of Christ, had not a transfusion of Divine
properties; but it was enriched by the Deity with miraculous virtue; which
being drawn forth by Faith, works wonders. He did it,
4. Voce Consolante; He comforts them by a gracious word of heartning, and
encouragement: Arise, and be not afraid. He will speak peace to his people, and
to his servants, Psalm. lxxxv. 8. Arise, 1. It is a word of Assurance, as making
known to them, that there is no cause of fear. It Is Christ, and his Word
Master, at thy word I will let down the net, Luke v. 5. Let all terrors compass
us, yet if Christ encourage us, it is enough. Fear not, Go forward, made Moses
enter the Sea. 2. It is a word promising Assistance. If he bid us Arise, we
Have not I commanded thee? As Jacob in his fear; The Lord that said unto me, or
bade me return unto my country; that encouraged him. 3. It Is Verbum
Operatorium; It breaths life, and strength, and courage into them. But what can
a word do to a fainting man? Yes, 1. It Is Verbum Dei, that is effectual; He
speaks life and health. That Word made us of nothing. 2. It Is Verbum Spiritu
corroboratum; there goes with it a sweet and powerful concurrence of his
Spirit: Ezekiel. ii. The word of the Lord came unto me, saying, Son of man, stand
upon thy feet, -- And the Spirit entered into me, and set me upon my feet.


Come we to the eighth and the ninth Verses. Of which, in short.

Verse. 8. And when they had lift up their eyes, they saw no man, save Jesus
only.
Verse. 9. And as they came down from the Mountain, Jesus charged them, saying,
Tell the Vision to no man, until the Son of man be risen again from the dead.
We are now come to the closure and conclusion of this glorious Vision. In it
two things;

1. The issue and end of it; They saw Christ alone. 2. The use they were to
make of it; A seasonable concealment of it for a time.
First, For the issue and end of it. And this offers to us a threefold

1. A cessation of all other Appearances. Moses and Elias are vanished and
withdrawn; they see no man remaining. 2. The continuance and abode of Christ.
He stays, and appears, and continues amongst them. 3. Their eyes are fixed upon
him; Him only they behold. And so from hence draw these three Conclusions: 1.
Moses and Elias, the Law and the Prophets, have but a temporary station and
abode in the Church. Christ being brought into the world, they are withdrawn.
2. Christ's Office, and Glory, and Government in his Church, 3. The Eye and
Observation, and Faith of the Church is fixed upon Christ only. They look upon
none other, nor expect any other after him.

I. The Law and the Prophets, they are determined by Christ's Moses and Elias,
they vanish.

1. They were of a finite and limited duration; not set over the Church as a
perpetual Order; but had their times fixed, and bounded. Three times there were
that bounded them: 1. The time of Reformation: God had appointed a more exact,
and perfecter Government of his Church, to succeed them. When that which is
perfect is come, then that which is in part shall be done away; that which is
imperfect must yield. Thus we see Aaron, he was called upon by God to dye; and
then Moses. 2. The Fullness of time; that was their stint, till he should come,
who should fill up all things with his Coming. 3. A third time, was, Adulta
aetas Ecclesiae: When that time is come, the Heir is no longer under Tutours
and Governors, Gal. iv.
2. Their Nature and Purpose was for a time only; 1. They had an use of
Promising; that Age was trained up all under Promises: When the Performance
came, then all Promises were to be abolished. 2. They had an use of
Prefiguring, and Typifying, and Shadowing out of good things to come; When the
Body and Substance comes, the Shadows and Figures cease. Blossoms wither, when
the ripe Fruit appears. 3. They had an use of Prophesying; and Prophecy, we
know, looks not upon present things, but upon future: When the truths of all
Prophesies are fulfilled, then they cease.

II. Christ's Presence, and Authority, and Government in his Church, it is
lasting, and perpetual. Moses, and the Prophets, have served their time, and
have given place; but Christ remains for ever. This the Jews believed, We have
heard out of the Law, that Christ abides for ever, Ioh. xii. 34. Hence, the
Gospel, it is called Evangelium aeternum: And the time of the Christian Church,
it is called, The last time; because, there is to be no more instruction in
Religion; no new Sacrifice, or Priest, or Prophet, or Sacraments, or Form of
Government.

1. He has made a full accomplishment of all Prophesies 2. He has manifested,
and revealed all truth to his Church. This is the dignity that God reserved for
his Son; All things that I have heard of my Father, I have made known unto you,
Ioh. xv. 15. The Church of the Jews had all necessary Truths 1. Not so clearly:
2 Pet. i. 19. That was but as a candle that shines in a dark place: Christ
brings all Truth to light by the Gospel. Now the whole Wisdom of God shines in
the Face of Jesus Christ. We understand more clearly then the Prophets
themselves; 1 Pet. i. 10. 2. Not so fully: Indeed they had a Sufficiency for
that present estate; but now abundance of Truth covers the Earth, as the Waters
cover the Sea. 3. They had Additions, and the rule of Faith was increased to
them. But we are to expect no more; the Word of God is sealed up and ratified.
3. He has accomplished, and effectually wrought all the good that the Church
can be capable of. He has offered up a full Sacrifice, obtained the gift of
the Holy Ghost. This was one cause of abolishing of the Law; it was weak, made
nothing perfect; They received not the Spirit by the hearing of the Law. That
comes by the Gospel. And therefore it is called, (...), The fullness of the
Gospel.
III. The eye of the Church looks only upon Christ, fixes upon him, and
expects no other. This is the main difference betwixt the Jewish Church, and
Ours. They were all in expectation, and were wayters for better times. But our
Faith has him exhibited, and presented, and rests upon him. Hence Christ
forewarns them, not to listen to, or look after any other: If any shall say
unto you, Lo, here is Christ, or there, believe it not, Matthew. xxiv. 23. Go not
forth, look not after him. Oculis videntibus Iesum, nihil dignum praeter Iesum:
The Sun arising, darkens all the Stars; so all the former Saints are obscured
Moses and the Prophets, all yield up their place in the Church to Christ.

Now follows,

Secondly, The Use they must make of this Transfiguration; and that is a
seasonable concealment. In it,

1. The Injunction it self, Jesus charged them. 2. The Nature and Purpose of
it, Not to Publish it. 3. The time how long, Till the Resurrection.
First, the Injunction, Jesus charged them.

Observe, It is the Dignity and Prerogative of Christ, to prescribe to his
Church a Law of Truth, what should be published, and taught in his Church, and
what should be concealed.

1. He is Primarius Doctor, and Legislator: He teaches As one having
Authority; and it is in his power to propound what Truths he will: He is Lord
of our Faith, and may propound to our Faith whatsoever he pleases. All other
are but subordinate, and limited Teachers, and must be regulated from this
grand Doctor. Eccles. xii. 11. The Masters of the Assemblies receive all their
words, as given from one Shepherd. Hence they are described with terms and
title of Limitation. 1. They are Apostles, Messengers, not going in their 2.
They are Ambassadors. They must have Instructions, and limited Commissions.
It Is high presumption to treat of any thing, that is not given them in charge.
3. They are Stewards, not Lords and Masters in the house; but must feed the
family with food appointed them. 4. They are called Interpreters; not Authors
of 5. They are Depositaries; Truth is committed to their trust. That good thing
committed to thee, 2 Timothy i. 14.
2. Christ alone knows, Quae utilia; what Truths are profitable, and useful,
and saving Truths. Humane curiosity would search into many things; and ask as
he did, Master, How many shall be saved? As Peter, What shall become of John?
As the Apostles, Master, Will thou now restore the kingdom to Israel? But
Christ best knows all vital saving Truths. 3. He alone knows the Capacity of
his Church and Children, what Truths are fit for them, what they can bear.
Thus, having given Solomon a large capacious heart, he imparted to him all kind
of Wisdom. For others, he distills-in those necessary Truths which are of a
full proportion for their judgments and understandings. Thus S. Paul, being
guided by Christ's direction, preached only easy Truths to the Corinthians;
gave them Milk, as unto Babes: But to those who have exercised judgments for
them, stronger Truths. Thus as the High Priest was to divide the Sacrifice; to
God, his part;
Secondly, The Nature and Purpose of it; The Vision must be Christ, sometimes
he commands secrecy and concealment. Matthew. ix. 30. Having cured two blind
men, he charges that none should know it. So, Mark v. having raised Iairus his
daughter, charged none should know it. And so for Truths; he has been pleased
to reserve some Truths from public and common notice, and to reserve them till
afterward.

1. Thus in the Old Law; 1. The mystery of the Trinity, it was exceeding
dainty, and reservedly revealed. 2. The Divinity of the Messiah; That he was to
be Man, was more evident; but it was secret that he was God. The Scribes could
not conceive, how David's Son should be David's Lord. 3. The Calling of the
Gentiles, was a Secret hid from generations. The Jewish Church wondered at it.
Who has begotten me these? They counted it blasphemy in Stephen, whenhe said,
The Ordinances of Moses should be changed.
2. So now to us; 1. The Conversion of the Jews. 2. The Overthrow of
Antichrist. 3. The second Coming of Christ; they are all concealed from us.

Thirdly, This Vision of Christ's Divinity and Glory, that must be concealed
till after his Resurrection:

1. Till then, Christ is Instatu Humiliationis, and so he will have his Majesty
and Glory to be covered. Now he terms himself, The Son of Man: He was declared
to be the Son of God, by the Resurrection from the dead, Romans i. Thus he was
pleased 2. It is Documentum Modestiae; His Glory, he is not ambitious to
publish it: As S. Paul, fourteen years concealed his Revelations: He glories in
his Infirmities, and weaknesses; but till he was constrained, he kept his
Rapture concealed. 3. Till his Resurrection, these Apostles were Inepti, weak
and carnal; not sufficiently grounded in this Doctrine of Christ's Divinity.
After his Resurrection, then they were endued with strength from above; and
then those mysteries that they could not bear, the Comforter revealed to them.
4. Quia Incredibile; The Infidelity of the world was not yet to be removed; it
would not believe there had been such a Vision. Infidelity deprives us of many
Truths, that God would otherwise reveal to us. 5. Ne impediret Passionem. It
troubled Pilat to hear it mentioned, That Christ was the Son of God. And S.
Paul says, Had they known it, they would not have crucified the Lord of Life
and Glory. He purposely concealed his Deity, to give way to his Passion. And
hence it is, that he spoke of his Divinity very reservedly. He charged, They
should tell no man who he was, Mark viii. 20. but, verse. 32. He spoke plainly
of his Passion. (...), is the word.








A
JOEL ii. 13. Rent your heart, and not your garments, and turn unto the
THis Chapter (if we cast back our eyes to the former verses) it is a fearful
Prophecy from Almighty God, of Judgment, and Destruction. And yet, not so
much a peremptory Ionas's spirit, with purpose, and desire to have it
fulfilled; but in much compassion, and commiseration; with offers of peace, and
reconcilement, that it might be reversed. Minantur homines ut feriant; Deus, ne
feriat. Man, in his anger, threatens, when he means to strike; God threatens,
that he might not strike; but that we may be forewarned, and ward off his blow.

It is S. Augustins observation of Christ's foretelling the last Judgment; and
it is true in this, and his other menaces; Ideo multo ante praedicitur, ut a
nobis totis viribus caveatur. And again; Invitus vindicat, qui, quo modo
evadere possinius, multo ante demonstrat; non te vult percutere qui tibi
clamat. Observe, God Lex Innocentiam, Evangelium poenitentiam; The Gospel, that
offers all Mercy, and Love; it strictly exacts, and requires Repentance.

The Text then, it is a vehement Exhortation to Sorrow, and Repentance. And not
an Exhortation only what we should do; but a Direction also, how, and in what
manner. Tertullian complained of the Heathen in his time, Per poenitentiam
facilius delinquunt, quam per eandem recte faciunt: And it is as true of the
Jews; They did so misplace the acts of Repentance, in outward

For the words themselves, they naturally fall asunder into these two parts;

1. Here is Praeceptum Poenitentiae: 2. Motivum Poenitentiae.
1. The Precept of Repentance, in these words; Rent your heart, and not your
garments, and turn unto the Lord, your God. 2. The Motive to Repentance, in the
words following; For, He is gracious, and merciful, slow to anger, and of great
kindness, and repeuteth him of the evil.
The Precept of Repentance divides it self into a double Exhortation,
answerable to the two parts of Repentance:

The first is an Exhortation to Contrition, Rent your heart, and not your
garments: The second is an Exhortation to Conversion; And return to the Lord
your God.
1. In the former duty of Contrition, observe two things; 1. Actum: 2.
Objectum. 1. The Act, expressed in this word, Rent: 2. The Object; that is
specified, 1. Affirmative, what we must rent; that is the heart. 2. Negative,
what we must not rent, Not your garments.

And this latter object may be resolved into a double sense:

1. If we conceive it as Objectum solitarium; as divided, and severed from the
renting of the heart; So, it is Sensus pure negativus, a flat negative; Rent
not your garments: Or, 2. As Objectum conjunctum; Join renting of the heart,
and garments together; So, it is Sensus comparativus; Rent your hearts, rather
then your garments. That Is the first, the Exhortation to Contrition.

2. The Exhortation to Conversion, that follows; Return to the Lord your God.
Return; and that implies a Motion. And therein observe three things: 1. Motum
ipsum, the kind of Motion; it is a Returning. 2. Terminum Motus, that whereunto
we must return; that is, the Lord. 3. Habitudinem, mobilis ad terminum; that
habitude, and relation which guides, and byasses us unto the term, in the words
following, Your God. And it is twofold; For, 1. As in all natural Motion, so in
this; there is an attraction Mobile toward it; as the heaven does the fire;
that is in the last word, God. 2. An Impulsive in the Mobile, that which carries
and disposes the thing moved, toward it, as levity in the fire; that is expressed
in this word, Your: He is Your God. That Is the first main Precept, the Precept
of Repentance;


The second follows, the Motive to Repentance, in these words, For he is
gracious, and merciful, slow to anger, and of great kindness, and repents him
of the evil. And in it consider three

1. Speciem Motivi; 2. Parts Motivi; 3. Gradus Motivi.
1. The kind and nature of the Motive; It is a Motive and Persuasion drawn from
one, who is gracious, merciful, slow to anger, of great kindness, and repents
of the ill. All of them invitations of love and favor. 1. Contents not himself
to put us in mind of our duty, We must Return unto the Lord our God; So,
requiring Repentance, Sub ratione officii, as performance of duty. 2. Uses no
threatenings, intermingles no curses; So enforcing Repentance Sub ratione
periculi, for avoydance of danger; But, 3. Urges mercy and favor. Strange,
says Tertullian, proemio invitat ad salutem; So persuading to Repentance, Sub
ratione spei. Thus we see, a loving Father receives his returning Prodigal;
neither strikes him, nor threatens him, no, nor expostulates, Where have thou
rioted and wasted thy time, and my goods? Uses not an harsh word to him, but
2. Take a view of the several parts of this affectionate Motive; contents not
himself to open some glimpse of hope, and 1. To make a full expression of love
in Him; Or 2. A deep impression of hope in Us; enlarges the bowels of his
compassion, sets out the height, and breadth, and length of his Mercy to us,
summons up all his Attributes of grace and favor; Gracious, merciful, slow to
anger, of great kindness, he repents of the evil. That Is the second thing
observable; The
3. Observe the Degrees of the Motive; See how they are all set and purposed to
prevent, and remove, all the fears and discouragements, that a timorous guilty
Conscience can forecast to it self. 1. We are here called upon to present our
selves unto the Lord, to hope for, and expect his love, and favor. Whose heart
will not object, that he is not worthy of so great a blessing, not having the
least desert of the least favor? True: but he is a gracious God, showing his
goodness and sine merito. But, 2. We are not only destitute of any good
deservings, but our lives have been demeritorious, sinful, offensive, deserving
the contrary. True: but he is merciful, and compassionate, even against desert.
That Is the second degree; He is merciful, contra meritum. But, 3. We daily
provoke him by our rebellions, grieving his Spirit, increasing his wrath by our
offenses. Yet let not this discourage us, he is a patient God, forbearing his
people; longanimis, a God slow to anger. That Is the third degree of the Motive.
But, 4. The cry of our sins has ascended up to Heaven, and called loud in the
ears of God; he is already offended, his wrath is kindled, his anger incensed:
yet, despair not, he is easy to be entreated, he is of great kindness. That Is
the fourth ascent of the Motive. But, 5. His wrath has smoked out against us;
his Prophets have threatened and denouneed his judgments; the Decree is come
out, we are all senteneed to destruction; Yet, let not He repents of the
evil. These are the degrees. Then, 1. Do thy sins discourage thee? Let the
offer and invitation of his mercy assure thee. 2. Does the number, and variety
of thy transgressions 3. Does the measure and heinousness of thy rebellions
affright thee? Let the degrees, and plenty of his Compassions comfort thee.
These are the Motives.


First, Let us begin with the first part of the Text, the duty of Contrition,
unto which we are exhorted; And in it,

1. The Act of Contrition is to be observed, in this word, Soindite, Rent. And
the Observation is shortly thus much; That 1. Duritiem in objecto; Stiffness
and obduration in the Object to be wrought upon. A sinful heart is stiff and
obdurate, it needs a rending. 2. Difficultatem in actu; Hardness and difficulty
in the act to be exercised, Repentance, it is no slight, gentle, easy
performance; No, it is grievous and painful, it is no less then a Renting. 3. Vim
in agente; It requires all the strength and might of renting.
1. Durities in objecto; That Is the first Inference. A sinner, not mollified
and wrought upon by repentance, he is naturally hardened, he needs a renting. S.
Paul puts them both together, Romans ii. 5. (...), hardness and impenitency; they
are never asunder.

Observe those measures, and degrees of obduration, that the Scripture discerns
and describes in the nature of man, Deuteronomy. ix. 6. They are a people, durae
cervicis, of a stiff neck, not yielding to the yoke of due obedience. And how
hard, and stiff, the Isaiah tells us, Nervus ferreus, cervix tua, Isai. xlviii.
4. Not only a s^ew, though that be naturally strong enough to resist; but
nerv^ ferreus, hardened with iron, for stronger resistance. Nay, the heart of
man, Ezekiel tells us, chap. xi. 19. is (...) lapide^, an heart of stone;
represented, and resembled (as some conceit it) by those Tables of stone, where
the Law was written. And yet, all stones are not of the like hardness; some
more yielding and easily broken: ours is the nether millstone; and it seems,
that is the harder of the two. Let the seed of Gods word be cast upon it, it
rejects it presently. Nay, harder then Zech. vii. 12. Posuerunt cor, ut
Adamantem, as hard as an Adamant, no strength can soften it. Nay our hearts are
harde^ then the hardest stones; which occasioned that witty, and devout
inversion of Ezekiel's Prophecy, I will take away their hearts of stone, and
give them hearts of flesh: Nay Lord, take

That Is the first collection, our hearts are hardened. And that implies two
things;

1. Durum non sentit. An hard heart is heavy, and senseless. The softest
tempers are of quickest apprehension. Our brawny hearts are dulled and
stupefied. 2. Durum non cedit. An hard heart, it is not yielding, and
penetrable of its own disposition not admitting, nay, repelling; Renting
affords; durities in objecto; the hardness of our hearts, it needs a renting.
And that brings in the second Observation.
2. Difficultatem in actu; Hardness, and difficulty in the act to be performed.
Repentance, it is no easy, light touch of sorrow, or weak impression of grief,
a sudden qualm of melancholy, soon dispelled; no, it is deep, and piercing, it is
a convulsion of the soul, a racking and torture of the heart and conscience;
it is no less renting. See with what terms of extremity the Scripture describes
it; 2 Samuel xxiv. 10. it is a smiting of the heart; Acts. ii. 37. it is a pricking
of the Conscience; nay, a wounding of the Spirit, Prove. xviii. 14. an hewing,
and cutting off, Matthew. v. 30. no less then mortifying, Coloss. iii. 5. and
that the most violent, and painful that can be; Gal. v. 24. it is a crucifying
torment. Zecharie foretells it, Chap. xii. 10. They shall mourn as for their
only Son, and shall be in bitterness, as for their firstborn; Primo-genitus,
and Uni-genitus. The loss of the firstborn, and only begotten, the sorrow of
it (but in those that feel it) it is inconceiveable. Yet affective, by stirring
up, and enforcing our sensual affection, yet appretiative, in a judicious
disallowance, and abomination; if not respectu corporalis perturbationis (as
Aquine expresses it); yet ratione spiritualis displicentiae: if not in outward
bodily vexation, yet in thy intellectual, and spiritual detestation, this grief
must be the greatest. Indeed so great, it is called Contrition, Psalm. li. 17. A
broken, and a contrite heart (says David) O God, thou will not despise. Not
only broken, but even to contrition. Aliud frangi, aliud comminui, and conteri,
says Aristotle in the fourth of his Meteors; a thing may be broken, or cut in
sunder, and soon set together, and joined again; Contrition breaks all in
pieces, as Hezekiah the brazen Serpent, to dust and powder. Had Hezekiah but
broken that brazen Serpent into some pieces, superstition would have reserved
to the dividing of the soul and spirit; it is a renting of the heart strings. My
heart David, Psalm. xxii. 14.) is like melted wax; not warmed, or heat only,
but burnt, and melted in the sense of his sins. That Is the second Observation,
Difficultas in actu; Repentance, it is a painful renting of the heart and soul.
And that inferrs, 3. Vim in agente; It requires a strong, violent renting.
Conceive the strength of it to consist in these particular degrees: Repentance
requires, 1. Vehementiam action is; A man, that will set upon this main work of
repentance, he must be all spirit, and life; Not like S^ul, sparing the life of
any of his sins; but as zealous Samuel, Absalom becomes a rebel, then he can be
content to subdue him; but yet, Spare the young man for my sake; in no case
kill him: Whereas every valiant Ioab strikes and stabs him to the heart without
compassion. In this case S. Augustine advises us to handle our sins as Job did
his soars, violently, and vehemently; Non molli linteo, sed durissima testa. He
wiped them David; I roared for the disquietness of my soul; I have washed my
bed with my tears; His bed, the place of his rest, and quiet repose, even
that is overflown with floods of tears. Mine eyes pour out rivers of waters,
because men keep not thy Law: If tears of compassion for other men's sins were
thus plentiful, how did he set open the floud-gates to his tears of compunction
for his own transgressions? That Is the first step of this violent repenting; it
requires Vehementiam actus. 2. Frequentia actionis; That Is a second degree.
This renting and breaking of an hard heart, requires many, and frequent violent
impressions, all little enough to mollify the heart. In this case, it is
otherwise with our natural heart, then with our sinful; Unico vulnere, cor
hominis; the least prick of a wound kills the Frequentia actionis. Nay, 3.
Omnipotentia actionis; No less then an omnipotency is necessary to contrition.
So great an agency required to the mollifying of an hard heart, that our own
strength is too weak. Consider, how our hearts are not only dead in
trespasses, and sins, but are buried in a Sepulcher hewn out of a rock, and the
gravestone of habitual hardness sealed upon them; and we may well cry out, Who
shall remove this gravestone from us? Who shall Bezaleel to work upon this
brass. Moses, that had faith enough for performance of all other miracles, yet
had scarce faith enough to melt the rock. And the Devil required no greater
argument of Christ's Divinity, then softning of stones. And the barbarous
Centurion, observing the stones to cleave in sunder, concluded certainly, that
Christ was no less then the Son of God. No, it is Digitus Dei, and Spiritus Dei;
no less then the stroke of the powerful Spirit can soften thy heart.

And from it, Let us briefly deduce a double Use; Is repentance so vehement, so
laborious, so tormenting an action?

1. Then consider; Si talis medicina, qualis morbus? If the medicine and cure
of Repentance be so bitter, Oh! what a dangerous disease is the sickness of
Sin? Will thou swallow down that for a little pleasure, and delight of thy
palate, which, if it prove not thy bane, thou must vomit it up again with the
re^ting David have adventured upon the pleasure of adultery, if he had foreseen
those pangs and tortures of his after-repentance? Would he ever have suffered
himself to fall, had he ever considered, that that one slip would cost him no
less then the breaking of his bones? That the bones thou have broken may
rejoice.

It is strange; most men make that a temptation to sin, which truly considered,
would be a powerful disswasion from the least offense, The hope of repentance.

1. Presumption in the wicked, that objects, I may repent, 2. Infirmity in Gods
children, may sometimes conceit, I shall Bonum consilium sed non nunc, said
Hushai the Archite: It Is true doctrine, but not seasonably applied. Cordials
before Purges increase the peccant humor. Hope of repentance before thou
sinnest, makes thee more sinful. Thou shall repent; so did David, and Peter,
and Saul, who went through those anguishes, those pangs, and tortures of
repenting sorrow, which they would not endure again for a world of pleasure.
That Is the first Use, Si talis medicina, qualis morbus?
2. Si talis medicina, qualis mors? If the physic of repentance be so sour?
Oh! how bitter is the death of despair? If Peter wept bitterly, what an hell,
do you think, was in Judas his conscience? If the sovereign medicine be so
unpleasant, how shall we relish that gall, that wormwood, that deadly poison?
If God, when he takes out the fire, and burning, out of thy flesh with the cool
tears of repentance, and oil of mercy, if that breeds such anguish, Oh! how
intolerable will it be, to be plunged into the flames of fire and brimstone? If
when he heals us, gift, Acts xi. 18. If the gift and blessing of Repentance be
so heavy, how insupportable is the curse of Despair? To avoid that Hell, who
would not undergo this Purgatory? Whose heart would not crave, and beg of God,
with that devout Father, Hic ure, hic seca, Domine, ut in aeternum parcas?
Lord, burn me, and lance, and wound me in this life, so that despair may not
torment me in the world to come. That Is the second Use; Si talis medicina,
qualis mors.
I pass on, 2. To the Object, that upon which repentance must work, and
exercise it self, specified unto us;

First, in the affirmative sense; it must be the Heart; Rent your heart. The
Observation from whence, is thus much; that contrition and penitential sorrow,
and grief for sin, must be deep, settled, and grounded in the heart.
Repentance, it must be inward, and hearty; and that especially for these
Reasons:

1. Ratione veritatis poenitentiae; If thy heart be not contrite, and
sorrowful, it is not true repentance. 2. Ratione usus; Except thy sorrow work
upon thy heart, there is no use, or profit in thy repentance. 3. Ratione
acceptationis; Except thy heart be humbled, and cast down for sin, it is no
pleasing, or acceptable repentance.
1. Ratione veritatis; If it be not inward, and hearty, it is Non est converti
in toto, and integro cord, nisi in scisso, says St. Bernard, Thine heart is
not whole, and sound, except by sorrow it be rent and broken. Non est integrum,
nisi sit scissum. How then shall we discern, and know this truth and integrity
of a broken heart? By what signs shall it appear, that our repentance is hearty
and true? 1. True and hearty repentance, is Voluntaria poenitentia; it is a
willing, voluntary sorrow, and repentance. This is a main difference 'twixt
that ingenuous Christian sorrow in a true Penitent, and those hellish torments
in the afflicted conscience activus in poenitentia, provokes, and stirs up
himself to sorrow; a damned Reprobate, he is passivus in poenitentia; sorrow
eats, and gnaws upon him against his will. Christians in their sorrow, imitate
Christ, John xi. T^bavit (...), he fretted, and vexed within himself, as Lot in
Sodo^; they vex their own spirits for their abominations; they need no Devils,
(as the Penitents in Purgatory) to affright and torture them. With Jeremy,
they wish for a fountain of tears; and if they grow dry, they provoke, and
enforce themselves (...) often read over the Lamentations of Jeremy, that by
conceiving of other men's sorrows, he might sorrow himself; As Polus on the
contrary, bearing in his hands his own Son, conceited more deeply another man's
sorrow, by representing his own; As Aug. on his deathbed, painting on the wall
the p^itential Psalms, and by them enflaming his own repentance; always praying
that they might sorrow, grieving, that they cannot grieve, never repenting that
they have repented. That Is the first note of true, hearty repentance; it is
Voluntaria. 2. Vera poenitentia, it is Solitaria. True sorrow for sin, it will
be secret, in privacie, and solitude; and then it works strongest. Ille dolet
vere, qui sine test. Players on the Stage may howl, and mourn, and wring tears
from their eyes, and yet be mad merry fellows among themselves. Ahab can put on
Sackeloth, and go softly, when he spies Elias. And, if they chance to miss
spectators to see, and applaud them, their labor and sorrow it is all lost.
Why have we fasted, and thou see not? Isai. lviii. 3. Whereas a true
Penitent, with St. Peter, goes out, seeks a corner to shed tears; runs not
Joseph shed his tears of commiseration, so a true Penitent his tears of
contrition, in his privatest closet. Thus David, says Saint Chrysostom
speaking of the privacie of his repentance, was in solio regali, velut vinctus
in car^ere; aula regalis erat, tanquam eremi vastissi^a solitudo; his walks,
chamber, closet, bed, they were witnesses of his true repentance. That Is a
second evidence of true, hearty contrition; it is Solitaria. 3. V^ra p^nitentia,
it is Perpetua; It Is a continued, constant, lasting repentance. A wicked man
reckons the shortest fit of spiritual sorrow to be insupportable, he cannot
endure it. Felix, at the first offer, and touch of it, rejects it instantly.
Like little children, or mad men, if the physic be bitter, or untoothsome,
they fling it from them, or spill it presently. A true Penitent drinks deep of
it, and sucks up the David acknowledging the frequency, and constancy of his
repentance, professes he made his tears his food, day and night, Psalm. xlii. 3.
To which St. Bernard alluding in his second Sermon, De Iejunio, tells us, There
is one kind of bread a Christian always feeds on, never fails from, the bread
of tears; which, he says, David made his ordinary standing die^. Lachrym^
factae sunt mihi panes, die ac (...). He used them not as physic, only for
some extraordinary recovery, as most men think of repentance, applying Extrem^
Unction, never but in case of death; no, David fed upon them, and lived upon
them, they were his appointed food, day and night. Jeremy calls it a fountain
of tears, not a cistern that spends it self presently; or a Winter-torrent in
some great affliction, which the Summer of prosperity will soon dry up; but a
fountain of tears, implying constancy, and perennity. Thus, says Chrysostom,
St. Paul not having any present enormities, as fuel to maintain the flame of
his repentance, rather Deleta revocat, I was a persecut^r, I was a blasphemer,
thereby to stir up and maintain his sorrow.

A wicked Reprobate, the least nibbling of the worm of conscience, is
intolerable to him for the least moment; he either destroys it presently, or it
destroys him. Christians delight to continue in it; Even in the midst of this
fiery furnace of an afflicted conscience, they walk, and talk, sing, and
rejoice, like the three Children; whereas Judas, Saul, and other Reprobates,
are presently consumed with the Tertullian, accounting himself, Nulli rei, nisi
poenitentiae natus, Born to repent, and never give it over before he dies. Nay,
were it possible, he would mourn in heaven. Then, at the day perpetua. That Is
the first reason why our hearts must be wrought upon, Ratione Veritatis;
otherwise it is no true Repentance.


2. Ratioue usus; Except thy heart be contrite and penitent, it is no useful and
profitable Repentance. Outward abstinence and reformation, without the heart,
is to no purpose. Radere peccata, non eradicare; shave, or pare off sin, not
kill it at the root. Sin, it is as deeply fastened in the heart, as Ivy that
grows and springs out of a wall; we may shed off the leaves, but if we would
thoroughly destroy it, and root it out, we must dig down the wall, and break it
in pieces: So, if thou would work out those fibrae peccati, that are fretted,
Ratione usus; otherwise it is unprofitable Repentance. Contrition must work
upon the heart, 3. Ratione acceptationis; Otherwise, it is no pleasing, or
acceptable Repentance. In this case, were it possible to divide the man, God
chooses, like the King of Sodom, Tantummodo mihi animas; God expects, and
accepts the heart: If the heart be absent, he accepts not either hand, or head,
or the whole outward man; but even without these, the heart contents him. Thus
David, Sacrificia Dei, Cor contritum: The choice Sacrifice that is best
accepted, is a contrite heart: Nay, Sacrificia, it is all the Sacrifices,
represented by all, and including them all, and, in Gods account, more precious
then all. The Sacrifices of God, are a broken heart; without which, other
Sacrifices find no more acceptance then Cain's oblation. We find that in
Suetonius, Excors Sacrificium, the Emperors Sacrifice that had no Ratione
acceptationis; otherwise, no Repentance acceptable.
Thus having seen the Act of Renting, applied to its proper

Secondly, To the object negatively set down, Rent not your garments.

In the former, Rent your hearts, was discovered their inbred obduration.

In the latter, Rent not your garments, the Lord checks and reproves their
outward Superstition. And that I resolved into a double sense:

1. In disjunction from the renting of the heart; so it is Sensus pure
negativus; a plain Prohibition: Or else, 2. In conjunction together with the
renting of the heart; so it is Sensus comparativus, Your heart, rather then Your
garment.

First, Conceive it negative, Rent not your garments. Renting of garments, an
usual, and allowed Ceremony; nay, often exacted, and required among the Jews.
Ier. xx^vi. 24. At the burning of the Book, Iehoiakim, and his Princes, are
charged, That they rent not their garments. Frequently it was practiced, in
sign either of horror and detestation, in case of Blasphemy; of submission and
humiliation, upon any Calamity; or as an evidence

And, in this respect, in the exercise and practice of Repentance, we may
conceive it, either,

1. As a real protestation and acknowledgment of our unworthiness, by sin, of
the benefit and comfort of Apparel; as fasting is a significant confession,
that our sins have made us unworthy of the least repast of a morsel of bread:
Or, 2. (As others will apprehend it) As it is a voluntary stripping, and laying
our selves open to the strokes and lashes of Gods wrath and vengeance. As it
was usual with the Lictores, to rent off the clothes of notorious malefactors;
and we see it practiced upon Paul and Silas, Acts xvi. 22.
However, let the intent and purpose be never so significant, yet the
Observation out of this negative prohibition is thus much; That all outward
ceremonious practice of Piety, if divided and severed from inward Devotion,
it is rejected of God, without acceptance. With the Superstitious Jew, rent thy
clothes, the garments of thy body; nay, with the frantic Papist, rent thy
body, the garment of thy soul, they are both alike to my purpose; yet if thy
heart be free from compunction, these

An hypocrite (would these outsides of Piety and Devotion serve the turn) would
be a complete Christian, without exception. In Repentance, he can command his
tongue by prayer, Ahab, in wearing sackcloth; his belly shall be afflicted with
often fastings; nay, his eyes shall afford plenty of tears: but his heart
meanwhile is as fat as brawn, he is an utter stranger to a wounded spirit,

What is this, but to deal with God, as Michal with Saul? When Saul requires
David, she sends him a Puppet stufft up with clothes: As the Gibeonites with
Ioshuah, deluding him with worn shoes, and ragged apparel, in the habit of some
traveling Pilgrims, when they were borderers hard at hand; hoping, Iaco^, to
lurch away the blessing under the vizar of counterfeit garments: At most, if,
with the Patriarchs, they can bring a garment rent in pieces, and dipped in
blood, their body lashed, and torn in penance, Oh then Joseph is dead, the man
surely is mortified. Sub istis pietatis (...), la^et (...) animus valde (...);
under these outsides and appearances of piety, and mortification there harbors
too often unsanctified, worldly, and carnal affections.

Not that outward Ceremonies and Appearances of our inward devotion are either
superfluous, or superstitious; nay, they are

1. By way of Expression; As solemn Protestations in the face of the Church, of
that inward Disposition of our inner man. 2. By way of Impression; These
outward signs of sorrow and remorse, being duly considered, reflect and work
upon the heart and conscience; as Anthony, bringing out the bloody garment of
C^sar, enraged himself and his company against his Murderers.
Ceremonies (if accompanied with the heart) are useful and fructus, but (...),
as leaves to the tree; In infrugifera, (...); in frugifer^, maturitatem. Leaves
without fruit, they bring a Curse, Matthew. xxi. Leaves with fruit, they ripen
and help forward a seasonable maturity.

Ceremonies are Garments; As Garments to a Body, so (...) Ceremonies to
Religion. Garments on a living body, they (...) and preserve the natural
warmth; put them on a dead body, they never setch life; And Ceremonies, they
help to cherish and Christ's garments on his own holy Body, they have a (...)
in them; joined with a profane heart, they are Christ's garments on his
crucifying Murderers.

Ceremonies, are to Religion, as the Body to the Soul; A Non sanat, sed tegit,
does not cure, but heal and skin over our corruption.

That Is the first sense, I observed; As Garments are here Objectum solitarium,
as divided from heart, and spirit, so it is an absolute Prohibition; Rent not
your garments. But

Secondly, Take them both together, so it is sensus comparativus; rather your
hearts then your garments, by way of comparison. And from this Exposition, I
deduce this Conclusion, That the contrition and sorrow of the heart is more
necessary and useful,

1. Ratione majoris indigentiae, The Heart needs it more. 2. Ratione
facilioriis consequentiae, Outward Humiliation naturally follows upon inward
Contrition.
1. I say, the Heart needs it more. Deepest wounds must have speediest curing,
and the wound of sin is deepest in the heart. The body is but the weapon that
gives this wound. Membra sunt arma, says the Apostle; and to inflict penance
on the body Membra sunt arma; outward Members, they are but the Weapons of Sin;
the Heart, that is the chief Rebel, and Plotter of Rebellion. Rather stab thine
Enemy, then hack his Weapon. Membra sunt arma; the Members are but Weapons, the
Heart, that is the chief Castle, and Fortress of Sin, 2 Cor. x. 4. Imaginations
are called strong Holds. The Victory is not ours, till the Castle be taken.

The Body,

1. Minus peccat; The Body, even when it sins, yet is not so the Sun, Heat in
the fire, is more intense and vehement Cast the beam out of thine eye, says
our Savior, Matthew. vii. 5. Oh! si trabs in o^ulo, strues in cord; if sin be
as a beam in thine eye, there is an huge stack piled up in thy heart; nay,
sylva caedua, a grown wood, whence this beam first grew and sprouted.

The Body,

2. Rarius peccat; It is not so often sinful. It may be innocent from outward
enormities, when thy heart is guilty of inward rebellions. The heart acts more
in one instant, then the outward man can in a long time perform; as Basil in
Attend tibi ipsi, page 342. (...). All men have not outwardly committed all
sins; but every man's heart has in it the seed and conception, and so is guilty
of all Transgressions. Whence S. Paul, Romans iii. charges every man with every
kind of sin; because the original and spawn of all, lay bred in the heart. And
for these, the Heart must sue for, and obtain pardon; as Saint Aug. says
excellently of his own soul, Tot sunt ei remissa, quot non sunt commissa: Or
else for these (though abortive conceptions) it is liable to judgment. As we
kill a Serpent for the venom within it, though happily it never hurt any by
poison.

That Is the first reason why the Heart is Principal in this Contrition; Ratione
majoris indigentiae.


2. Ratione facilioris consequentiae. Humiliation of the Body, naturally
follows the Contrition of the Soul; but not so on the contrary. Thou may
torture and macerate thy body Bernard's Similitude) if you pour not in Grain
and Corn to be grinded; yet, the Mill stands not still nor stays, but moves
and grindes, and works upon it self: so the Heart of Man, has that restless
motion to commit sin; that, deny it help from without, it conceives and
practices sin in it self. Voluntas ipsa sibi imputatur, says Tertullian, nec
excusari poterit per illam perficiendi infelicitatem, operata quod suum fuerat.
Outward Reformation, neither mortifies, nor yet excuses the Heart. To which
purpose S. Chrysostom sweetly alluding to those words of S. Paul, Gal. vi. 14.
The world is crucified to me, and I unto the world, observes; It is not
sufficient to have the world, and outward temptations mortified, and crucified
to us, Sed mortuus mortuum non luget. Lay two dead friends together, and there
is no love, or lamentation. Thy heart must die unto the World, as well as the
World be crucified to thee: Outward bodily Reformation affects not the soul.

In this Case, it fares with the body of sin, as with the natural Athenian
Soldier first grappled with his right hand; when he lost that, laid hold with
his left; after that was cut off, fastened with his teeth; his heart was not
wounded: So the body of Sin, 'till the heart be crucified, stop the issue of it
in thine hand, it breaks out in thine eye; if thou pluck that out, it will find
vent in thy tongue: A stab at the heart destroys all presently.

Outward Humiliation naturally follows inward Contrition. Physicians observe,
that Passions of the mind oft-times Famula in culpa, will be Socia in
poenitentia. The body, that attended thee in sin, will follow thee in sorrow:
If the Master mourn^, the Servant that attends him, follows him in black; and
if thy Soul, the principal Mourner in true Repentance, if that be sad; thy
Body, the Servant of thy Soul, is dejected and heavy. Otherwise, to enjoin
penance to thy Body, serv^m, nay, jumentum animae, thy bestial, and brute part;
and to solace thy soul, is, as if the Ninevites should have enjoined Fasting
and Sackcloth to their Beasts and Cattle; and Themselves ruffled it in mirth
and jollity.

Repentance observes the same Order in our Regeneration, that the Life of
Nature does in our Generation; Cor primum vivens; When the Heart is formed and
enlivened, the Hands, and Feet, and outward man, it is shaped out presently:
Repentance observes the same Order in our Regeneration, that the Life of Glory
does in our Glorification; It is radicaliter in cord, says the Scholeman,
redundanter in corpore; It rises in the heart, then by a natural flux, and
redundation, shows it self in the body. It Is so in the first motions, and
quicknings of repentance. That Is the second ground, why our hearts should
rather Ratione consequentiae; outward Contrition will naturally follow.

Thus having with Elias observed the former part of repentance, Contrition,
like a mighty strong Wind renting the Rocks; listen with patience to that
gentle voice, wherein the Lord is in

Secondly, The duty of Conversion, Return; Without this latter, Contrition it is
to no purpose. As Luther said well of it, It is fuga Dei, and fremitus adversus
Deum, drives us further from God. It Is not every renting that God accepts. The
contrite heart must be a Sacrifice; not any kind of wounding and killing, but a
religious devout tendering, and offering it up unto the Lord. Cain, and Judas,
and Saul, they rent their hearts, but did not sacrifice them; except to Devils.
This must be a sacrificing of them to God by a sorrowful conversion, not a
cruel murdering

But the time forbids any further enlargement.

Here, we observe three things,

1. Motum. 2. Terminum. 3. Habitudinem ad terminum.
First, The kind of Motion. Repentance, it is a Returning. And that implies, and
inferrs these Observations,

1. Return; Ergo recessimus a Deo. Sin, it is a forsaking, and fleeing, and
departing from the Lord. In every sin, 1. Aversio, A man turns his back upon
God; And then 2. Conversio, sets his face toward the prosecution of sin.

With Cain, we go out of the presence of Ged, set out selves out of his view,
and observation. As the Prodigal, must into a far Country, could not swagger
and revel in his Father's company. A Sinner must either securely put out his
own eyes, that he see not God; or profanely conceit, he can put out God's eyes
that He cannot see him: (Like him, who drew the Curtain

With Abraham, walk before God; With Enoch, walk with God, and keep close to
him; not take a turn, or two, and then part with him: but, walk constantly, and
converse with him, and sin if thou can. In this respect, there is a
proportion 'twixt our walking by faith here, and our walking by sight and
beatifical vision in heaven hereafter. Ask the Scholemen, what is that makes the
Saints impeccabiles in Heaven, that Visio beatifica; they always look upon the
face of God, that they cannot have the least glance, or cast of their thought
to sin. Sin, it is a Departure and Forsaking of God. That Is the first
Observation. Return; Ergo recessimus a Deo.


2. Return; Ergo non progrediendum. To sin, and then sorrow; to sorrow, and
then to sin again, is like desperate Debtors, wipe off the old Score, to begin
a new; like unsatiable Drunkards, cast, and vomit, that they may drink the
larger; or, like Popish Penitents, satisfy for the old Forfeit of Sin, and
renew the Patent, and get further License. What Sorrow, and Contrition is this,
but that which Devils and the Damned undergo? They have torture and anguish,
and yet immobilitati in peccato; Return; Ergo non progrediendum; we must not go
forward. 3. Return; Ergo non cessandum. It Is not sufficient to break off
sinning, and sit still, not putting a foot forward in this duty of Conversion.
Does Paul only give over his journey to persecute the Saints, and lie still
grovelling on the ground? No, Domine, quid faciam? He turned his course,
repaired to Ananias. Repentance, it is the Ergo non cessandum. 4. Return; Ergo
properandum. Travelers out of the way, Paul, I was a persecutor, I was a
blasphemer; there is his straying, and aberration: but since, I labored more
then they all; there is his haste and speed in Conversion. That Is the reason,
says Gregory, why Angels joy more for the Conversion of one Penitent, then for
the Perseverance of ninety nine Innocent, Quia Poenitentes, cautiores,
humiliores, ferventiores resurgunt; they double their pace, and add wings to
their speed in their Conversion. That Is the fourth Conclusion. Return; Ergo
properandum.
Pass we now,

Secondly, To the term specified, and prefixed, in this word, The Lord. And of
it, we will take a double view.

1. As it has Sin standing against him in opposition; Domino, non peccato. 2.
God sends upon them the Assyrians; so take a view of it, as it has the
Assyrians under him, in subordination; Domino, non Assyrio; submit to the Lord,
not to the Assyrians.
1. Domino, non peccato. Most men, otherwise; In their seeming Repentance, not
forsaking, but exchanging Sin. Does their Conscience touch them for their
Prodigality? They betake Aug. observed in Heathenish Moralists. The Romans
ambition suppressed their luxury; Aliis peccatis alia vicenunt; they forsook
some sins, to return to others. Are their Consciences troubled for one sin?
They think it a Remedy to fall into another. In this, they deal with their
Souls, as the Philistines with the Ark of God; being plagued at Gath, they
carried it to Ekron, from thence they hurry it to Askelon; never remembering to
return it again to the God of Israel. Qui sic alia peccata deplorat, ut alia
committat, poenitentiam agere, ant dissimulat, aut ignorant, says Gregory; It Is
either fancy, or hypocrisy; he either mistakes himself, or would be mistaken:
See this well-practised in the returning Prodigal; being pinched in one
service, he does not cast about to get a better, joins not himself to another
Citizen; No, I will home to my Father, that is his resolution, he returns to the
Lord. That Is the first Consideration of it; Domino, non peccato. 2. Domino, non
Assyrio. Their Conversion, and Submission must not be made to the King of
Assyria; he stands in Subordination, he is God's inferior. He is, 1. Minor Deo,
respectu Essentiae; God is the more powerful; Rather make peace with the King
with twenty thousand, then with a weak Prince, that heads but ten thousand. He
is, 2. Subditus Deo, respectu Potestatis; That Is a greater Inferiority:
Supplicate to the King, ^ather then to the chiefest of his Subjects. It Is high
Treason against thy Prince, 3. Servus Dei, respectu Administrationis; That Is a
lower pitch of Inferiority; he is Gods Servant, and Instrument, his Staff, and
Rod of Correction. With the Shunamite Elisha; His Servant and Staff will never
recover thee. No suing to Blastus to procure thy peace, or submitting to the
Captain, while the King is offended. Not only, no returning to sin, God's
opposite; but not to the Assyrian, his Means and Instrument. It cost Asa his
life for seeking to the Physician, though Gods Instrument; as well as Amaziah,
that sought to an Idol, his utter Opposite. Thus Job never seeks to Chaldeans,
or Sabeans; Dominus dedit, and Dominus abstulit; he sues to the Lord: That Is
the second Domino, non Assyrio.

One Word,

Thirdly, Of the last thing observable; Habitudo mobilis ad terminum; That that
orders, and byasses this motion unto the term, He is your God. And therein,

1. The Impulsive, Yours. 2. The Attractive, God.
For brevities sake, put them both together; and then conceive the use and
purpose of them in a double Expression.

1. By way of Direction. Return; To whom? To the Lord. 2. By way of Obligation;
Return to the Lord. Why to the Lord? because he is your God, so it is a Bond and
Obligation.
1. It Is a Direction, and that we need; we are now subject to mistake.
Originally we bore that Image of his, as a touch of the Lodestone, to guide us
toward him; now we are utterly ignorant, and so mistake him: our Notions of
God are dark, and obscure, as Nebuchadnezzar's Dream; he knew he Samuel, we run
thrice to Ely for once to the Lord. We need Direction. 2. It imports unto us a
Duty, and Obligation; We must Return, because he is our God; Fecisti nos
propter te, and irrequietum est cor nostrum, donec redeat ad te; As the Needle,
Let us humbly beseech him, that is the God of the spirits of all flesh; in
whose hands are the hearts of the children of men,









A
JOEL ii. 14. Who knows if he will repent, and return, and leave a blessing
behind him, even a meat offering, and a drink offering unto the Lord your God?
THis Prophecy of Joel, it was directed to the Kingdom of Judah, in the reign
of Hezekiah, and Manasses, after the great Overthrow which God brought upon the
other ten Tribes by the King of Assyria. And in it the

And the Judgment, it is described under the representation of an Army; and
that an Army of Locusts; Either thereby,

1. Intimating a succession of two sorts of Judgments; 1. Of a Famine, by a
dreadful swarm of noysom Locusts that should consume the fruits of the earth.
2. Of War, by the power of the Chaldeans; that should waste, and destroy Judah
and Jerusalem, and carry them Babylon.
These two, the breaking of the staff of Bread, or sending among them the Sword
of the enemy, are Gods two great, and puissant Armies, against a sinful
Nation; Or, 2. Otherwise, this army of Locusts be token but one judgment. 1.
Either that of Locusts; those noysom vermin shall come upon their land like a
mighty army; He destroyed Egypt with such an army; and Verse. 25. God himself
calls them his Great army. 2. Or else it signifies, the army of the Chaldeans;
and they shall come upon the Land, like a swarm of Locusts, to waste and
destroy all, Thus, Isai. vii. 18, 19. the Egyptians, and Assyrians, are
compared to Bees, and Flies; God shall hiss for them, and they shall come
flying, Judah.

Take them either way; the one is a fit Resemblance and Type of the other. The
Locusts, they are Gods army; they shall come in battle array, and make spoil of
the Land; Or otherwise, the Chaldeans, they are as a swarm of Locusts; their
enemies shall break in upon them, as Caterpillars, and Locusts, and shall
waste, and consume, as those creatures do, without any resistance.

This Judgment being denounced against them, the Prophet calls the Jews to
repentance; that being the only possible means to divert this Judgment. Flesh,
and blood indeed, when Syrians assaulted Judah, God offered King Ahaz his help;
no, he would not trouble God so much; Noluit misericordiae divinae oneri esse,
Esai. vii. He would not tempt the Lord, forsooth; he was so modest, as not to
be beholding to God for a deliverance; any other way would please him better.
As Dominicus Soto tells us of a ridiculous and superstitious practice in Spain,
to drive away locusts. When those swarms annoyed the Country, the Chaldeans,
armies of Locusts, or swarms of enemies, can be driven back, but by repentance.

So then the purpose of the Prophet in this Chapter, is to call them to
repentance; and he prescribes a repentance suitable to

1. To the Condition of their Sins; Their Sins were general, and national; They
had all corrupted their ways. 2. The Judgment threatened, that was general; An
overflowing Scourge, as Esaiah calls it, Isai. xxviii. 15. Sword, Go through
the land, Ezekiel. xiv. 17. An end, the end is come upon the four corners of the
land, Ezekiel. vii. 2. Now sure the plaster must be as broad as the sore; so,
accordingly he invites them to a general, and national Humiliation. It was to
be proclaimed by the sound of the trumpet, Ver. 15. not by a knock at a private
man's door. The trumpet was to call together the whole congregation, Numb. x. 2.
If ye look to the first Verse; there the Judgment comes with a Trumpet, it
sounds an Alarm; it threatens all the inhabitants Zephany's humiliation: Chap.
ii. 1. Gather your selves together, yea, gather together, O nation, not
desired. It must be like the feast of Expiation, which was the yearly fast in
Israel, Lev. xxiii. 28, 29. all must humble themselves; It is a day of
atonement, to make an atonement for you, before the Lord your God. Whatsoever
soul it be that shall not be afflicted in that same day, he shall be cut off
from among his people.

Personal, and private humiliation, is not of that prevailing efficacy Noah,
Daniel, and Job, Ezekiel. xiv. 14. should not divert a judgment from the whole
nation: they might escape themselves; but if the Nation repen^^d not, the whole
Land should perish. There is more must go to the removing of a general
Judgment. We may spit out a spark; or ^^e man's diligence may quench a small
fire; but when a whole Town is on fire, every man must bring his Bucket. One
man's prayer, to remove a national judgment, is, as if we should go about to
quench a raging fire, by the sprinklings of a castingbottle. Sam. vii. 2. All
the house of Israel lamented after the Lord. And see how they expressed and
testified it, Verse. 6. They gathered together to Mispeh, and drew water, and
poured it out before the Lord, and fasted on that day, and said there, We have
sinned against the Lord. Their eyes were as buckets, their heads fountains of
tears.

And, is not a fire kindled among us? How many smoking firebrands are scatterd
through the land? We may say of our present sad condition, as our Prophet Joel
speaks, Chap. i. 2. Hear ye old men, and give ear, all ye inhabitants of the
land; Has this been in your days, or even in the days of your fathers? Who can
remember such distractions in our Kingdom? When did this Kingdom shake and
totter as now it does? First troubles in the North; when that is quenched, the
flame breaks out in Ireland; sparks are scattered among our selves; As Ezekiel
prophesies, Chap. vii. 26. Mischief shall come upon mischief, and rumor shall
be upon rumor, therefore our humiliation should be general.

Now, this duty of Repentance and Humiliation, it is pressed upon them by a
double Motive;

1. By denouncing of a judgment; and that is not only barely foretold, but
exactly described in a dreadful manner; the more to affect them. God musters up
his forces, and sets them in battel-array, from the second verse, to the
twelfth. The Chariots of God are twenty thousands, even thousands of
judgments, and the Lord is among them, to turn the battle to the gate. Ey,
this will work fear; and, Metus, it is Instrumentum poenitentiae: Fe^r, it is a
good ingredient into Repentance. Thus God urges his people to Repentance, by
presenting of terrors. Amos iv. 12. Therefore thus will I do unto thee, O
Israel; and because I will do thus unto thee, prepare to meet thy God, O
Israel. Yes, God looks for this submission, that we should be startled at his
threatenings. Amos iii. 8. The Lion has roared, who will not fear? That is one
Motive, Fear; and that will drive us to Repentance: But then he adds, 2.
Another Motive, and that is Hope; and that is a powerful attractive, that will
draw us to Repentance. Repentance, it is a compounded thing of Fear and Hope.
Sp^m, metu miscet; it takes Motives both from Law and Gospel; but yet it works
most kindly by Evangelical means, that is hope of Mercy; and that is the Motive
of my Text, Qui^ novit? Who knows, whether the Lord will return?
So then, the former Motive was an affrightment to Repentance; but this in my
Text, it is an encouragement to Repentance, upon hope of Mercy. And in it
observe these two

1. The Matter of their Hope: 2. The Measure of their Hope.
1. The Matter of their Hope; and that is laid down in four particulars; 1. The
first Matter of their Hope, is the regaining of Gods grace and favor toward
them; He will return. 2. The second Matter of their Hope, is the recalling of
his threatenings and judgments; He will repent. 3. The third Matter of their
Hope, is the renewing of his He will leave a Blessing behind him. 4. The fourth
Matter of their Hope, is the re-establishing of his holy Worship among them,
that he will afford them A Meat Offering, and a Drink Offering to the Lord our
God. That Is the first thing, the Matter of their Hope;
2. The Measure of their Hope, how far-forth they may hope, and that is set
down in a somewhat strange expression; and it is very considerable. Here is no
full assurance; here is but an inkling, and intimation; here is not a Door of
Hope set open to them, as Hosea speaks, chap. ii. 15. here is but a small
chink, or creviss, to spy some Hope at: It Is but, Si forte, It may be, God will
be merciful; it is but, Quis novit? Who knows but he may be merciful?
Come we to the Matter of their Hope: And the

First Matter of their Hope, is the regaining of Gods favor; that he will
Return. His turning away from them, that signifies his displeasure, that he
has no delight in them, but is provoked and offended: His returning to us,
it is the renewing of his favor, and of his good will toward us, when he
vouchsafes his Presence, and will rest amongst us.

So then, for the understanding the nature of this Mercy, this Return of God to
us will afford us these three Considerations;

1. It is our main happiness, could we so esteem it, to enjoy 2. It is the
bitter fruit of Sin, that it causes God to withdraw his Presence, and to turn
away from us. 3. It is the blessed fruit of Repentance, that it recovers Gods
Presence, causes God to return graciously to us.
I. I say, it is our main happiness, to enjoy Gods Presence, to have him dwell
amongst us. And this happiness we enjoy by Gods Presence, will appear by three
advantages, which his Presence and abode, does bring unto us;

The

1st. Advantage, is, Gods Presence and abode with a people: It is the holiness
of a Nation, where he dwells, and vouchsafes his Presence. That people, by
virtue of his Presence, becomes an holy Nation. All holiness comes by
participation; it is not inbred in us, but must be derived from Him, who is
Holiness it self; and all participation comes by union with him. A people near
unto him, are an holy people. He is the holy One of Israel; and by that near
relation, They are made an holy people unto the Lord their God, Deuteronomy. vii. 6.

We see that this Presence of God makes a people holy, even by that Legal and
Ceremonial holiness amongst the Jews;

1. The land of Israel was called an holy Land, because God dwelt in it, and
vouchsafed his Presence Defile not the Land which ye shall inhabit, wherein I
dwell; for I the Lord dwell among the children of Israel, Numb. XXXV. 34. 2.
Jerusalem, it was called the holy City, because it was the City of the great
King. God dwelt in her palaces, therefore it was accounted a sacred, and an
holy City, Matthew. iv. 3. The Temple, that was an holy place, because Gods Name
dwelt there; I have sanctified this House, says God that my Name may be there
for ever.
All other Nations, because God was estranged from them, were an unholy people;
every other land, was a polluted land. Here is one excellency a Nation gains by
retaining God amongst them; they are more to God, then all other Nations in the
world. They are a Kingdom of Priests, and an holy Nation. Thus we see God
promises to dwell in the midst of Zion, Zich. ii. 10. and then he tells them,
verse. 2. That he will inherit Judah, his portion, in the holy Land. For this
cause, the unclean were to be put out of That they de^ile not their Camps, in
the midst whereof I dwell, Numb. v. 3. While we retain his Presence amongst us,
we are an holy Nation: If we cause him to depart from us, we become as the
uncircumoised, and a profane people.

A

2d. Advantage we gain by Gods Presence, is, That it brings with it the Glory
of a Nation. It is the high dignity, and renown, and honor of a people, that
God abides with them; as S. Paul speaks, Romans iii. 1. What advantage then has
the Jew? What is the dignity of having God so near to them? Much every way.
Thus Moses sets out the dignity of the Jews, from this near reference 'twixt
God and them: Deuteronomy. xxvi. 18. The Lord has avouched thee this day to be his
peculiar people: And, verse. 19. To make thee high above all Nations which he
has made, in praise, and in name, and in honor. This nearness of Gods
Presence, God compares, in Ior. xiii. 11. to a Girdle, cleaving to his loins;
As the girdl^ cleaves to the loins of a man, so have I caused to cleave unto
me, the whole house of Israel that they might be unto me for a people; and for
a name, and for a praise, and for a glory. So, likewise, Isa. xliii. 4. Since
thou wast precious in my sight, thou have been honorable, and I have loved
thee. When God reckons up the dignities of his people, this is the main; Psalm.
lxxxvii. 5. Of Zion it shall be said, that he was born in her. Thus Moses
re-minds the Israelites wherein their dignity consists; Deuteronomy. x. 21. He is thy
praise, and he is thy God. There are many titles of Honor amongst men; but
this, above all, is the truly honorable Title, that we have God near unto us.
Deuteronomy. iv. 7. What Nation is there so great, who has God so nigh unto them, as
the Lord our God is to us? While he vouchsafed his Presence to them, how
renowned were they? When he withdrew himself, and cast them off, how became
they a vile people, the hatred, and

A

3d. Advantage that Gods Presence brings, it is the Strength and Safety of a
Nation. I'sal. xlvi. 5. God is in the midst of her, she shall not be moved. He
calls himself, 1 Samuel xv. 29. the Strength of Israel. Balaam could not fasten a
curse upon Israel, while God was among them: Number. xxiii. 21. The Lord his God
is with him, and the shout of a King is among them. It was this that encouraged
the people of Israel against the Canaanites; Numb. xiv. 9. Their defense is
departed from them, and the Lord is with us; fear them not. Though there were
Giants, and their Cities be walled up to heaven, yet fear them not. So again,
Moses encourages them; Deuteronomy. vii. 21. Thou shall not be affrighted at them; for
the Lord thy God is among you, a mighty God, and terrible.

And so, on the contrary, when the people, being in a great sin, would needs go
up to fight, Moses dislwades them; God had then withdrawn himself; Go not up,
for the Lord is not amongst you. Sampson wist not that God Moses lament, when
God said, He would not go with them. So does the Psalmist, Thou go not forth
with our Armies. His Presence, it is our Palladium, our Shield, and Fortress.
The Shields of the earth belong unto God, Psalm. xlvii. 9. It was said to
Constantine, In hoc vinces.

Well then, If so much good comes to us by Gods Presence amongst us, it is
worth the enquiry, Wherein does this Presence of God consist? How is he said
and known Ier. xxiii. Nor do we now speak of his glorious Presence, where his
Majesty and Glory shines, that is in the heavens; Heaven is his Throne; No, Is
the Lord amongst us, yea or no? No, besides all these, he has a gracious
Presence, by which he dwells amongst us. Yes, that gracious, and merciful, and
beneficial Presence, is that we speak of: How shall that appear to us?

1. God dwells in a Nation, which he chooses to be his Peculiar people, the
people of his Covenant; amongst David speaks, The Lord has chosen Jacob to be
his Inheritance. Thus Hosea calls the Nation and Country of the Jews, The
Lords Land, Hos. ix. 3. All the world is his dominion: but by special purchase
and possession, so the Church is his. That is like the Lords Demeans, which
himself holds in his own hand. 2. The place of Gods delight, that is the
residence of his special Presence. Delight fixes a man to his Here will I
dwell, for I have a delight in it. The Lord has chosen Zion, he has desired
it for his habitation, here will I dwell, and rest in it, Psalm. cxxxii. 3.
There are we to reckon of Gods special Presence, where he sets his Family; that
is the usual place of presence and abode. Where we see God gathers to himself a
Church, is daily collecting to himself a people, to know him and worship him,
there we Christ is described, to walk among the Churches, Rev. i. When it may
be said of a place, as God says of Corinth, Acts xviii. 10. I have much people
in this City, there resolve that God is present. When they grow thinner and
thinner, it is to be feared God is then removing. 4. There we conclude is a
place of Presence and abode, where a man bestows most cost. A Landlord will
keep up all his possessions; so does God the dwells among such a people. 5. A
man is said to dwell, where his abode is most constantly. Sometimes God makes
his Progress, and Excursions, into other places; as he did to Niniveh, by the
preaching of Jonah: He may be sometimes, as a wayfaring man, that lodges for a
night, Ier. xiv. 8. He may show some rare tokens of his being amongst them: But
when he pitches his Tabernacle, where his Ordinances are constantly, and he
fixes them there; that, is the place of his Presence.

We have done with the first, God's presence it is the happiness of a Nation.

II. The second Consideration is, It Is the bitter fruit of sin, that causes God
to withdraw his presence, and to turn away from us.

1. This is the malignant effect of sin, that it parts God and us, makes a
separation, moves him to withdraw and turn away from us. He rejoices in the
habitable parts of the world, and his delights are with the sons of men, Prove.
viii. 31. But sin and wickedness causes an alienation in Cain complained, I am
east away from thy face, Genesis iv. 14. So Saul, upon his disobedience, cries
out, God is departed from me, 1 Samuel xxviii. 15. I will show them the back, and
not the face, Ier. xviii. 17. It was the woeful condition of mankind, by nature
we were strangers from God, nay, without God in the world. So Paul tells them
at Lystra, that God suffered all Nations to walk and wander in their own ways,
never owned, or regarded them. Our sins separate twixt God and us; and he hides
his face from 2. Not only the world of wicked men reap this fruit by their
sins; but Gods own people find this uncomfortable desertion: when they
grievously offend him, he turns away from them. This, Moses showed them in a
visible Resemblance, Exodus, xxxiii. 7. The people there had sinned against God;
then it is said, Moses took the Tabernacle, and pitched it without the Camp, a
far off from the Camp, thereby signifying God's displeasure against them, and
his departure from them. Otherwise, the Tabernacle was to Numb. ii. But God was
offended, and withdrew himself from them. 3. Yea, not only his visible Church,
but even God's Darling-Saints find this woeful effect, that their sins bring
upon them, that God stands aloof off, and withdraws David mourn for this, and
pray against it? Psalm. x. 1. Why stand thou a far off, O Lord, why hidest
thou thy self in time of trouble? So again, Psalm, xxxviii. 21. Forsake me not O
Lord, O be not far from me. Upon his sin of Adultery, O*cast me not away from
thy presence. This the Saints often find and feel; if they turn unto folly, God
turns from them, stands afarr off, not to hear them, not to help them, not to
own them. And Tertullian gives the reason, Res delicata est Spiritus Dei, he
will not rest in a defiled soul. 4. Some sins of his people are of higher
Provocations, and so set him off, far from us. As, 1. Blood, and Oppression,
and Violence; That cast off Cain. So God said, He would remove Judah out of his
sight, for the bloodshed committed by Manasseh. When you make many prayers, I
will not hear you, for your hands are full of blood, Isai. i. 15. 2. A secure
neglect of God's Offers of grace; That turns him from us. When he stretches
out his hand to us, and we will not come in, and be reclaimed, then says God,
I will get me to mine own place, Hos. iv. 15. This cost the Spouse in the
Canticles sorrow; when Christ knocked, and still she refused to open to him, at
last, I opened to my well-beloved, but my well-beloved had withdrawn himself,
and was gone. 3. Falsness in his Covenant; When we corrupt that holy Religion,
which he has committed to us, that turns him from us. See what that works,
Zech. xi. 8. My soul then loathed them, and their soul also abhorred me. God
will bear with many failings; but once when we come to this height, to
adulterate his Worship, ye may see what that will work, in the Case of the
Psalm. cvi. 39. They were defiled with their own works, and went a whoring after
their own inventions, then he abhorred his own inheritance; It made him forsake
the Tabernacle in Shiloh, the Tent which he had pitched among them, Psalm.
lxxviii. 58. This Sin, it is counted spiritual Adultery; that dissolves the
Marriageknot 'twixt God and us, and causes him to turn away, and to divorce us.
4. Incorrigibility under means of Reformation, when God strives with us, and we
resist him; It was the Case of the old World, His Spirit would strive no longer
with them, but he Isaiah notes it, chap. lxiii. 10. They rebelled, and vexed
his holy Spirit, therefore he was turned to be their enemy, and fought against
them. Thus God is giving over Judah; Why should ye be smitten any more? Isai.
i. All that labor is spilt upon you.

III. Come we to the third Consideration; It is the blessed fruit return
graciously to us. When I name Repentance, I understand a real, cordial,
spiritual repentance; that, and that only can re-gain us Gods favor, and
return him to us. That you may better acquaint your selves with this necessary,
and sovereign duty (not to enter upon any large discourse about it) that duty
will require of us, these three Acts;

1. Humiliation. 2. Deprecation. 3. Reformation. I will exemplify this to you
by the repentance Ninevites.
1. They put themselves to great Humiliation; Jonah iii. The King himself came
down from his Throne, laid his robe from him; and covered himself with
Sackcloth; nay, man and beast was covered with Sackcloth, prostrating, and
debasing themselves before an angry God. We must put our mouths in the dust,
Lam. iii. be ashamed, and abashed, and even abhor our selves in dust and
ashes. That is their Humiliation. Next, 2. Is their Deprecation; they Cried
mightily unto God, Verse. 8. The spirit of lamentation, and supplication must
abound in us; Jacob, he had power over the Angel, and prevailed; he wept, and
made supplication to him. We must put our selves not only to an exercise, but
to an agony of repentance. Jacob wept. Tears, they are ^udor animae, the Sweat
of the soul in this holy agony. 3. Reformation; That was a main point in the
Ninevites repentance, Verse. 8. Let them every one turn from his evil ways, and
from the violence that is in their hands. Violence, that was the sin of
Nineveh; they were an oppressing people. It was this last, v. 10. God saw their
works, that they turned from their evil way, and then it is said, God repented.
He saw their Humiliation, he heard their Deprecation; but yet that which
pleased him best, was their Reformation; He saw, his eye was chiefly upon that.
That is the fat of the Sacrifice. Such repentance is like to prevail with him;
Let him be turned away, he will draw near to us again. See two places, Psalm.
xxxviii. 18. The Lord is nigh to them that are of a broken heart, he will save
such as be of a contrite spirit. Nigh? how nigh? Isaiah tells, even to dwell
with them; that is a constant presence. Isai. I dwell in the high, and holy
place, with him also that is of a con^te spirit, to revive the spirit of the
humble.
Indeed,

1. Repentance so pleas^ him, that the very imperfect acts of repentance, if
they be true and sincere, though not according David cried out, Peccavi, I have
sinned, and presently God absolved him. The loving father meets his returning
Prodigal Son halfway, when he was yet afarr off, and but making toward him.
2. Repentance so pleases him, that the very thoughts and intendments of
repentance, be they in good earnest, prevail much with him; Thus David found
it, Psalm. xxxii. 5. I said, I will confess my sin unto the Lord, and thou
forgavest me the iniquity of my sin. So God promises his Before you speak, I
will hear, and answer you. 3. God is so propitious to repentance, that even
outward repentance, if it be serious, has some some good success with him, at
least for the escapal of temporal judgments. Ahab was a wicked man, he sorrow'd
not for his sins, but for fear of sufferings, yet God passed by him at that
time upon his humiliation, such as it was. So the Israelites repentance, it was
an unsound repentance; yet, upon that, though it were no better, God was so
merciful, that he would not destroy them, Psalm. lxxviii. 38.
And will you know the reason of it?

1. It is the property of a gracious nature, to relent upon submission and
deprecation; to be (...), not to be implacable, and revengefull. It Is so with
men, how much more is God graciously inclined? He is slow to anger, and ready
to forgive. Two rare properties amongst men; Those that are soon angry, if they
be soon pleased again, we count them good natures.

Irasci facilis, tamen ut placabilis esset.

On the contrary, they go too often together, Hardly angered, and as hardly
pleased: But, God is hardly angered, soon pleased. With God, Poenitentia, it is
illex misericordiae, it allures, and draws on, and invites mercy. Tertul.

2. Especially, when the breach is amongst friends, then love will be soon
renewed and revived. Thus it is 'twixt God and his people, Ezekiel. xvi. I will
remember the days of thy youth when I first set my love upon thee. 'Twixt God
and his people, there is a league of love, and love is soon intreatable. 3.
Repentance removes the matter of Gods anger, and 4. Mainly, it is his own
gracious Covenant that works all for us; The sweet condescension of the Gospel,
that makes Christ, and his Gospel, that our repentance prevails thus with him.
The moral Law, the very Law of nature requires repentance; if we do amiss, we
are bound to be sorry for it. Yet the Law exacts it as a duty, but it does not
prescribe it as a remedy; that is the condescension of the Gospel.
We have done with the first matter of our hope, the regaining of his favor.
Come we to the,

Second Matter of Hope; that is, that God will repent. That is

Surely, It is a strange thing to see God repent. Repentance, it is for man,
and for sinful man. God is not as man, that he should repent, 1 Samuel xv. 29.
Amongst men, we use to repent upon two Cases; and neither of them are incident
to God:

1. When there is something happens upon our action, which is improvisum; which
we did not foresee: that makes us repent of what we have done. Ey, but God
commits Known to the Lord are all his works from the beginning, Acts xv. 18. 2.
That that makes us repent, is improbatum; when we do that which we do not
approve, but dislike and condemn in our selves. Ey, but God's works are holy
and unblameable; Why should He repent?
And yet we see the Scripture uses this language. Here, and so Genesis vi. 6. It
repented the Lord, that he had made man, and it grieved him at the heart. So it
is said, 1 Samuel xv. It repented the Lord that he made Saul King. To speak
properly, God has not those motions and affections, which we find and feel in
our

1. Poenitentia immutat, It works a change in us. There is no change in God. 2.
Poenitentia affligit, Repentance afflicts us. God is not subject to any
sorrowful affliction. 3. Poenitentia condemnat, Repentance condemns and blames
that action of which we repent. But all the actions of God are just, and holy,
and unreproveable. How is it then, that God is said to repent?
It is a speech after the manner of men. Not that God has the passions and
affections of Repentance; but he exercises those actions, which, in man, flow
from Repentance. When God changes his deeds and dealings with men, then the
Scripture says, He repents. Repentance in God imports a change in some Mutat
sententiam, sed non mutat consilium, says Gregory; he is said to reverse his
sentence, but not to alter his counsel.

Or, take it thus; Repentance has a double Aspect;

1. It looks backward to what we have done, so it begets this thought in us,
Nollem feeisse, I wish I had not done so. Such an act of Repentance, it is not
in God; he is never displeased for what he has done. 2. It looks forward; and
so Repentance says, Nolo ultra facere, I will do so no more. This action of
Repentance, I will punish you no more; I will change my dealings, I will bless
where I have cursed, I will promise where I threatened. We may conceive this
notion in terms of Scripture. Sometimes the Scripture calls it Repentance for
sin; that is the act of grief and contrition. Sometimes it calls it, Repentance
from sin; when we give it over, commit it no more. Semblably, God never repents
for what he has done; but he may be said to repent from doing it again.
Yet we must not part with this sweet expression of God's repenting toward us.
We may conceive it (...), after the manner of men; yet so, as we order our
expression (...), as may well agree with the Honor of God.

We see, that God clothes himself with this relenting and melting affection of
Repentance. Thus ye have it, Judge. ii. 18. It repented the Lord because of his
peoples groanings: So Amos vii. God threatened many judgments; and then he adds,
The Lord repented of it, said, It should not be so, Psalm. cvi. 47. He repented
according to the multitude of his mercies: Let us repent according

Will you see how Gods relenting, and reversing of his threatenings agrees with
our Repentance in the several acts and motions of Repentance?

1. Dolet; A penitent man is sorrowful for what he has done. So does God.
(Still I speak after the manner of men.) He assumes to himself the regret of
Repentance. In all their afflictions he was afflicted, Isai. lxiii. 9. How does
he condole and compassionate their sufferings? He Isai. xl. 2. Ye have received
of the Lords hand, double for all your sins. See how his bowels of pity are
moved toward them, Hos. xi. 8. How shall I give thee up Ephraim? my heart is
turned within me, my repentings are kindled together. That Dolet. 2. Abrumpit;
That Is another act of Repentance, to break off our course, that which we were
in. Thus God assumes Repentance to himself. If he has punished, he will cease
from punishing; if he has threatened, he will recall his threatening; if he has
passed a sentence, he will reverse and cancel it, Ier. xxvi. 3. there he
desires to repent of the evil he had purposed against them. 3. Irascitur;
That Is a third Imitation of Repentance. He that repents, is angry with all that
provoked him to do I will render unto Babylon, all the evil they have done unto
Zion, Ier. li. 24. The Nation that shall oppress them, I will judge, says God
to Abraham, Genesis xv. 14. 4. Facit contrarium. He who repents of what he has
done He has wounded us, and he will heal us, says the Prophet Hosea, vi. 1.
5. Vovet contrarium. A true Penitent will vow the contrary to what h^ has
done; bind himself over to better abearance: So does God in his repentings over
us. He swears to his people, that hereafter he will spare them. Isai. live. 9.
This is as the waters of Noah to me; for as I have sworn, that the waters of
Noah should no more go over the earth, so have I sworn, says God, that I will
not be wrath with thee, nor rebuke thee. 6. Repentance duplicat contrarium. A
true penitent will not only do the contrary, but he will do a great deal more;
he will redeem his former actions by a double amendment; So God repents of
afflicting his people. For a little anger, he will show them a great deal of
mercy. You may see it, Isai. live. For a small moment have I forsaken thee, but
with everlasting kindness will I have mercy upon thee.
You see the many gracious Expressions of Gods repenting toward us.

Come we now to the,

Third Matter of their Hope; that is Gods renewing of his mercies upon them, He
will leave a blessing behind him. Here is a third benefit we gain by our
Repentance; It gives us hope that we shall recover his former mercies, which
our sins have deprived us of: It prevails with God, not only to free us from
his judgments, but to store us with mercies. This good we shall get by Turning
and Repenting; We shall not be losers by our former sufferings and afflictions.

See here this goodness of God; It is expressly promised, in verse. 25. I will
restore to you the years that the Locust has eaten, the Canker-worm, and the
Caterpillar, and the Palmer-worm, my great army which I sent among you. Not
only you shall not suffer any more annoyance by them, but you shall regain
your former damage: You shall not feel the smart of former judgments; but the
plenty you shall enjoy, shall make you forget your former losses: It shall be
contrary with you, then it was in Pharaoh's dream; here the full and the
fruitful ears of corn shall consume the blasted; the fat kine shall devour the
lean kine; the years of plenty, shall make you forget the years of scarcity.

These are the welcoms that Repentance finds at Gods hand. In statu quo, but he
betters our condition. Thus the loving Father, entertaining his returning
Prodigal, Luke xv. he not only receives him, but kisses him, and embraces him;
not only clothes him, but adorns him; not only feeds him, but feasts him.
Here is the Kiss, and the Gold-ring, and the rich Robe, and the fatted Calf,
and Music, and Rejoicing. This is the Superpondium of mercy, the overplus of
mercy. This is Dos Poenitentiae, the Dowry of Repentance. Where God pardons, he
does not only take off his judgments, but brings on plenty of mercy upon
them. Is this the manner of man, O Lord? We count it fair favor, to escape a
deserved punishment; but God deals over and above, He leads us with mercies.

And the Manner of Expression is to be observed:

1. It is called, A blessing. 2. It is, A leaving of a blessing behind him.
1. I say, it is called A blessing. See how Repentance will purify and refine
our language: Prosperity, and Peace, and Plenty, they were our own before: We
could speak in Esau's style, I have enough; or, in Nabal's language, My bread,
and my flesh: Blessings of God, from his holy hand. Our peace before, it was
the wisdom of the State, or the dread of our enemies, or 2. It is called, A
leaving a blessing behind him. It implies two things: 1. Ordinem Benedictionis:
What Is that? First, he hopes for favor in Gods gracious return to them: Then,
after it, he hopes for fruits of favor, and a supply of other blessings. Yes,
this is the right method of Repentance; first, and above all, it labors for,
and ayms at the recovering of Gods favor; Pardon my sin, Lord, cast me not
away from thy Presence, return to us in mercy, and loving kindness, own us as
thy people, take us for thine inheritance: then, after that, we may hope for,
and expect any other favors. A true Penitent, prizes Gods favor better then
life it self, or the means of life; other mercies of plenty and Mephibosheth
did to King David, Let Ziba take all, now the King is returned in peace. Let
the worldlings enjoy plenty; here is the main comfort of a true Penitent, God
is returned to my soul in peace. This Expression, He will leave a blessing
behind him; it shows, 2. Successionem Benedictionis. Though he does punish and
chastise us, yet here is our hope, He will leave a blessing upon us. It Is a
Penitent's comfort, that God reserves mercy till Non durabit aetatem; that The
rod of the wicked shall not always rest upon his inheritance; that he will do
good to us, at the latter end, after our afflictions. The end of that man is
peace, Psalm. xxxvii. Here is the contrary vicissitude in Gods dealings with the
wicked; there is a great difference betwixt these two ways of God's
proceedings; To begin with a Judgment, and to end with a Blessing, that is his
childrens portion; and, to begin with a Blessing, and to end in a Judgment,
that is the lot of the ungodly. They shall suck up the dregs of Gods anger.
Sodom may have Genesis xix. 23. but the day ended in fire and brimstone: But the
Church may have a foul morning, but the Sun will break out upon them; they
shall have a fait evening; God will leave a Blessing behind him.

Come we now to the

Fourth Matter of Hope, that is the re-establishment of Religion, and Gods
Worship amongst them; That we may have to offer, a Meat Offering, and a
Drink Offering to the Lord our God. It Is a pregnant speech, and contains many
particulars; I will name four of them;

1. It is Finis Liberationis; it is the end we should aim at, in seeking
deliverance from any affliction, That we may appear in his Temple, and worship
our God with an holy worship. It was the end that Hezekiah set to himself, when
he prayed for recovery out of his sickness; 2 Kings xx. 8. What shall be the
sign that the Lord will heal me, and that I shall go up to the house of the
Lord? Then we ask Peace and Safety to purpose, that we may enjoy the
opportunities of serving God. Zachary teaches us this lesson, That, being
delivered out of the hands of our enemies, we ^ight serve him without fear, in
holiness, and righteousness, all the days of our life. S. Paul teaches us to
pray for our Governors, that we may live in peace and quietness. Stop there,
will the worldly man say: No, S. Paul adds, In all godliness and honesty. Peace
without Piety, it is a carnal (...), and it will not last long. Pax, it is
Sepimentum Ecclesi^. Peace, it is Gods hedge about his Church: If his

A Meat Offering, and a Drink Offering to the Lord our God,

2. It is Fructus Poenitentiae; it is the Fruit of Repentance, Meat Offerings,
and Drink Offerings, they were Sacrifices of Thanks giving: When are they in
season? When we have appeased God by Repentance, then our Services, and
Sacrifices, shall be accepted. We must Placare, before we can Placere. Till we
be reconciled, and in favor with God, all our Oblations are Abominations; but
Repent, and then God will accept thine Offerings. if he blessed an Id^l, when
he prays; but the prayers of a Penitent soul shall be accepted.

A Meat Offering, and a Drink Offering, to the Lord our God,

3. It is Dedicatio Benedictionis; They hope for a Blessing of Plenty and
Prosperity; and if they obtain it, see, they will devote it to his Honor and
Worship. Yes, this is a right way to obtain a Blessing: Devote it to his
Service; let him have the honor, and then thou shall have the comfort of it.
Says Parisiensis, As a Landlord lets out his ground to halves; let God have
the glory, and then thou shall have the profit of his Blessing.

Peace and Plenty, every man wishes for it; it is every man's Prayer. Ay, but
where are thy Vows? Do thou promise to God to serve him with his Blessings,
and to consecrate them to him? Imitate Hannah; She prayed for a son, and she
devoted Deuteronomy. xxviii. 47. Because thou served'st not the Lord thy God, with
gladness of heart for the abundance of all things, therefore thou shall serve
thine enemies in hunger and want.

A meat offering, and a Drink Offering to the Lord our God, 4. It is Solicitudo
pietatis; It argues an holy care for God's public Worship, that it be
maintained, and plentifully supported. God challenges the Jews for neglecting
of it, when they returned from captivity; They said, the time was not yet come
to build the Temple, Hag. i. 2. they would stay till they had Ezra? What Is
become of Nehemiah? Have we no Zerobbabel, that takes care of God's worship,
before all other cares? And is it not our fault? We observe the Logicians rule,
but in a wrong way, Primum in intention, is ultimum in executione; the
establishment of Religion, was the first in our Promises, but we see it is last
in our Performances. But true Piety preferrs God's Service before all our
Seekings. It Is the study of pious men, if God will be good to us; 1. God shall
have the Glory of it. 2. He shall not have a Verbal Glory, but it shall be with
Cost too. 3. And we will provide not only for a Present, but for a Perpetual
Worship.

Tantum de Materia. Come we now to the other particular of the Text; We have
seen the matter of their hope, now follows the measure of their hope, and that
is some what strange: It Is but a cold encouragement one would think; puts all
their hopes upon a peradventure; it is but Quis novit? Who knows? It may be so;
that is all

1. It is a strange speech, seemingly contrary and inconsistent with God's
goodness. It Is the excellency of every good nature to be ready to pardon, and
to be entreated. Jonah thought God too ready to pardon, I knew thou art a
merciful God, and would forgive presently. O the King of Israel is a merciful
King. 2. It is inconsistent with his present Invitation of them to Repentance.
And does he prescribe Repentance at peradventure? Who prescribes Physic so?
Take this Medicine, who 3. It is inconsistent with his present Encouragement,
v. 13. There he reckons up all his sweet Attributes, The Lord is gracious, and
merciful, slow to anger, and of great kindness, and repents him of the ^vil;
and now he seeks to cross all, and so disheartens Quis novit? 4. It seems
contrary to his absolute Covenant, and Promise to pardon Penitents, Ezekiel.
xviii. If the wicked do that which is right, he shall live. It Is the
fundamental Promise of the Gospel.
And yet we see this manner of expression, by, It may be, Who knows? This is
sometimes used by God in the Scripture. I find four places wherein it is used,
besides this in my Text;

1. The first is, Jonah iii. 9. Who can tell if God will turn and repent, and
turn away from his fierce anger, that we perish not? 2. A second place in
Daniel iv. 27. Break off thy sins, if it may be a lengthning of thy
tranquillity. That was the speech of the Prophet Daniel himself; but yet it was
to a wicked, and profane King. Well, there is yet, 3. A third place that goes
higher; It may be that the Lord God of Hosts will be gracious unto the remnant
of Joseph, Amos v. 15. That Is a Speech of a Prophet, and to Gods Visible A may
be, Quis novit? There is yet, 4. A fourth place, Zeph. ii. 3. Seek the Lord, ye
meek of the earth, it may be you shall be hid in the day of the Lord's wrath.
That Is a Speech of an holy Prophet, and to holy Men. The meek Ones, Calvin
renders the Saints, They who have wrought his judgments, done righteously; yet
it is but fortasse to them; but an half suspensive promise; It Is but, Quis
novit? It Is but, It may be you shall be hid. That Is a strange Promise. What
says S. Augustine? Si Deus fortasse non perdet malos, sine dubio non perdet
bonos; potius illud eligamus, ubi dubitatio nulla est; in Psalm. lxxvii.
What shall we think of this Speech? Surely this inkling and intimation of
hope, it may be useful;

1. It shows us deliquium spei, the faintings and faltrings of hope upon some
sins. As we strengthen our sins, so we weaken our hope. Great sins are
hardliest pardoned. As Saint Peter spoke to Simon Magus, Repent, said he, of
this thy wickedness, if perhaps the thought of thy heart may be forgiven thee.
Gross Sins make great gashes into the Conscience; we can hardly attain 2. It
shows magnitudinem periculi; We may come to such a case, be brought to so low
an ebb, beset with so many miseries, that there is but small hope of delivery.
It made Amos cry out, By whom shall Jacob arise? Amos vii. for he is small, Son
of ^an, can these dead bones live? Lord, thou know. In such a case, any hint
or inkling of hope will be some comfort to us. 3. This kind of Speech, Quis
novit? It Is remedium (...) desperationem. As this Speech does not fully assure
us, so neither does it wholly reject us. If we be past hope, we grow
presumptuous and resolve to sin; as they in Jeremy xviii. 12. They say there is
no hope, we will walk on in our own evil ways. It is the lowest degree of
hope; if we have no more, yet hold I will wait and pray, if I cannot get
assurance; yet I will not cast away my hope, God may be gracious, This is one
degree of hope to know that God is intreatable, and sin is pardonable, and
mercy is attainable, and Hell is avoydable. Part not with this hope, lest thou
fall into desperation. 4. This Speech, Quis novit? It shows incertitudinem
beneficii. The judgment that is threatened is a temporal judgment; and for the
avoiding of that, the most we can make of it, is but a Quis novit? We are not
sure to escape it. Indeed for spiritual judgments, upon our Repentance, we may
know David? Thou forgavest them, O Lord, and yet thou did punish their own
inventions. It was so with the Jews. The sins of Manasseh upon his Repentance
were forgiven him; but yet for all that (even after Josiah his Reformation) God
would not spare Jerusalem for those sins of Manasseh, but cast them into
Captivity: No stronger are our hopes for temporal Prosperity. As Jonathan said
to his Armor-bearer, It may be the Lord will work for us, 1 Samuel xiv. 6. Or,
as Ioshuah of his own prevailing for his Inhe^itance, Josh. xiv. 12. If the
Lord will be with us, I shall prevail, and drive them out. 5. This Speech, Quis
novit? It shows gravitatem peccati. What sin is that? The Violation of his
Covenant, when we deal falsely in that; the forsaking of his Religion, the
embracing of a false Worship, the choosing of a new God; that, that puts his
People into a sad Condition? Who knows that he will be merciful to such a sin?
We have nothing to relieve us but this Quis novit? We cannot then plead for
niercy by the Tenure of his Covenant. In some sins, we may sue out our Pardon
John, If we confess our sins, God is faithful; not only merciful, but
faithful. We have his Covenant for it; but if we falsify his Covenant and
forsake it, that breaks off our hold. It was so with the Israelites; when they
made and worshipped the Golden Calf, Moses to the People, Exodus xxxii. 30. O ye
have sinned a great sin, peradventure, I shall make an atonement for you. It
was but peradventure; he could give them no better assurance. And what says he
to God? verse 33. If thou will forgive, forgive; as if he should say, I cannot
plead for pardon, I can only beg for it, If thou will forgive, forgive. That Is
the last particular; The measure of their Hope, Quis novit?








A
PSALM. lxxviii. 34, 35, 36, 37. When he slew them, then they sought him, and
they returned and enquired early after God. And they remembered that God was
their Rock; and the high God, their Redeemer. Nevertheless they did flatter him
with their month, and they lied unto him with their tongues. For their heart
was not right with him, neither were they steadfast in his Covenant.
THis Psalm, we may term it a Psalm of Record, or a Psalm to bring to
Remembrance. It is an holy Panegyric, or Song, for the whole Nation, and
people of the Jews; a solemn recital of the many memorable passages in that
Commonwealth, from their first settlement. And it has been the wisdom of
Kingdoms and Commonwealths, to have their Chronographos, those who should
Record, and Register his Sacred Penmen, and Secretaries, to Enroll and
Register

In particular, besides those sacred annals of his Church, contained in the
Historical books of Scriptures, the Holy Ghost has purposely framed some more
summary and compendlous, but yet full, and perfect relations of the affairs of
his Church; and those likewise composed and framed into Songs, and Psalms, to
make them more fit carriage for memory; and that, by the pleasantness of them,
they might sink more deeply into their hearts, and more strongly affect them.

Thus Moses, after all his Sermons and Commemorations, made to the people in
Deuteron^my, of Gods dealings with them, and their carriage toward him, at last
he composes a Song, and sings it to the people, and commends it to posterity,
as a lasting Monument for all generations, Deuteronomy* xxxii. Thus the Poets' among
the Heathen, whom, in Titus, Paul calls their Prophets, had their Carmina
saecularia, their State-songs, comprising the affairs of their Commonwealth.
Answerably, that Sweet-Singer of Israel, the Prophet David, is studious to
frame such sacred Songs: As, first, this present Psalm; so again, the eighty
ninth; then the hundred David does that which the Prophet Esaias speaks of, Chap.
v. I will sing to my Well-beloved, a song of my Well-beloved, touching his
Vineyard.

I termed it a Psalm of Record, or of Commemoration; and so it is, if we
respect the materials of which it consists. It is a recital of Gods gracious
dealings toward his people; and of their ungracious dealings toward him
again. But yet I find another name given it by the Psalmist. It is called
Maschil in the Maschil, is a Psalm to give Instruction. It is not only
Historical, but Doctrinal. Even these Historical parts of Scripture, are not
only Gods Day-book, to tell us what has passed before; but they must be to us
as a Law-book, to teach ^s what we must do; not only Reports, but Presidents,
(...). It is not only a Psalm to bring to Remembrance, which is ^he ^le of the
thirty eighth, and seventieth Psalms; but (...), a Psalm for Instruction.

1. When he commemorates his ancient Mercies to their Forefathers, Maschil, a
Psalm of Instruction. We have heard with our ears, O Lord, and our fathers have
told us what works thou did in their days, in the times of old. What Is the
Instruction of that? It should teach us confidence in God, That they might set
their hope in God, verse. 7. 2. When he commemorates their ancient Deliverances
from Maschil, a Psalm for Instruction, to look for the like deliverances from
him in our dangers, and distresses. Psalm. cvi. Many a time did he deliver them.
Verse. 47. Deliver us, O Lord our God, and gather us from among the Heathen. 3.
When he commemorates the wicked and ungracious courses of their Forefathers,
that is Maschil, a Psalm of Instruction, to avoid their fathers sins: Verse. 8.
Not to be as their forefathers, a stubborn, and rebellious generation, that set
not their heart aright, and whose spirit was not steadfast with God.
And this Instruction was not only for them, that the after-ages of the Jews
should make a profitable use of the former times; but it reaches to us
Christians. S. Paul tells us, that the time of the Jews concerns us Christians:
Romans xv. 4. Whatsoever things were written before-time, were written for our
learning. And again, 1 Cor. x. there he acquaints them what befell the Jews;
then adds, verse. 6. These things were our examples, to the intent we should not
lust, as they also lusted: And then, verse. 11. telling them of the judgment
that befell the Jews, he says, These things happened to them for examples, and
they were written for our admonition.

So then, this Psalm sets forth the great disobedience and stubbornness of the
people of Israel under Gods government.

1. It upbraids them with forgetfulness of his Mercies. 2. It objects to them
their unproficiency and unteachableness, even by miracles. 3. It reminds them
of the profane abuse of his patience. 4. It reproves them for their
incorrigibleness by his chastisements. 5. It shames them with the falsness, and
unsoundness of their
The Text, it contains this last; and so take the purpose of it to be Gods
censure, and reproof of the Jews unworthy repentance. And in it observe these
two particulars;

1. Is the several Acts of their repentance; then, 2. The many defects and
faults of their repentance.
The first will show us how far they went in the practice of repentance. The
second will discover their faultrings, and failings, how much they came short
of a true, spiritual, saving repentance.
First, the Acts of repentance, which here they performed, they are five;

1. Seeking; They sought him. 2. Returning; They returned. 3. Inquiring; They
enquired early after God. 4. Remembering; They remembered that God was their
rock, and the high God their Redeemer. 5. Renewing their Covenant with God,
that is employed in verse. 37. They were not steadfast in his Covenant.
Secondly, The Text sets out the defects of their repentance, how much they
failed in it: These are four; The

1rst. Defect and fault of their repentance, It was untimely; a fore-slowed,
and delayed repentance: that is employed in this word, When; not till such a
time; then, not till then. The 2d. Defect and fault of their repentance, is*
that it was enforced repentance, not ingenuous and voluntarily undertaken; it
was extorted by plagues: They repented when they were under the rod, nay, under
the sword; it was, When he slew them. The 3d. Defect and fault in their
repentance, That it was an unsound repentance; not true, and sincere, but
fained and acted only: It was a flattering, and lying repentance; They
flattered him with their mouth, and they lied unto him with their tongues. The
4th. Defect and fault of their repentance was, That it was a momentary,
transitory, unsettled, unconstant repentance, not firm and lasting; Their heart
was not right with him neither were they steadfast in his Covenant.
These four faults;

1. Untimely, and backward; 2. Enforced, and extorted; 3. Unsound, and
dissembling; 4. Vanishing, and unconstant.
And these four are usually linck'd together, one draws Esay's Cart-rope of sin.

1. He that puts off, and procrastinates, and delays his repentance, he will
never bethink himself of it, or set himself to it, till some judgment awakens
him, and constrains him to it. 2. He that repents not, but by constraint, and
when he is under the lash, usually, if he look not well to it, it will be but a
show of repentance, some outward humiliation, and no better: And then, 3.
Unsound repentance, will never prove lasting repentance;
Come we to the

First, and here briefly take a view of the Acts, and Exercises of their
repentance; Seeking, returning, enquiring after God, remembering of him, and
covenanting with him. Actions, all of them, in their own nature good; all of
them, if rightly performed, penitential acts, good ingredients into repentance.

Put them together, they are such acts as accompany Repentance, and they will
afford us a double Meditation.

The first Meditation arises by way of Supposition. The second, by direct
Position.
I. By way of Supposition; these actions of Seeking, Returning, Enquiring, etc.
acts, and duties, and exercises of Repentance, they all suppose the quite
contrary actions that accompany our

1. When we repent, then we set our selves to seek God; therefore when we
commit sin, then we part with God. Repentance, that is a seeking, therefore sin
and wickedness, that is a losing of God. 2. In Repentance, there is a returning
to God; it is a work of conversion; therefore in our sinning, there is a
departing from God, and a forsaking of God, that is more; Forsaking is more then
losing. 3. In Repentance, there is an enquiring after God; therefore 4. In
Repentance, there is a remembering of God, and of his mercies; therefore by sin,
we do not only not actually think of him, but we grow into a forgetfulness of
God, we have no remembrance of him. 5. In Repentance, we renew our Covenant
with him; therefore by sinning, we break and forfeit, and, as much as lies in
us, we disannull our Covenant with him.
These five evil effects of Sin, take notice of them; By

Here is the condition of a stubborn and a wilful Sinner. A man that lives,
and lies in sin, he does wretchedly cast off all communion with God, rejects
and abandons him. Though he may have some vanishing notions of God, yet to all
good purposes he is an arrant Atheist, without God in the world; no interest in
him, no effectual cogitation of him.

This estimate the Scripture puts upon a wicked people;

1. It calls them Forsakers of God, Isai. i. 4. Ah sinful nation, they have
forsaken the Lord. So Ierem. xvi. 11. Your fathers have forsaken me. Saints are
a generation of Seekers, so these are a generation of Forsakers. 2. It calls
them Departers from God, Eze. vi. 9. They have departed from me with an whorish
heart. So David describes a wicked man, Psalm. xviii. 21. I have not wickedly
departed from my God. There is a wicked departure. The Apostle forewarns them
of it, Heb. iii. 12. Take heed of an evil heart; to depart from the living God.
3. It calls them Revolters, Isai. xxxi. 6. The children of Israel have deeply
revolted; and Ier. vi. 26. They are all grievous revolters. 4. It represents
them as thrusting God from them; Isai. xxx. 11. Cause the holy One of Israel,
to cease from before us. 5. And for matter of Enquiry, or Thought, or
Remembrance of God, the Scripture makes this the mark and guise, and character
The wicked, through the pride of his countenance, will not seek after God, God
is not in all his thoughts, Psalm. x. 4. God is far above out of his thought; he
tushes at the name of him. Pharaoh said that which every wicked man thinks, Who
is the Lord? I know not the Lord. Ye that forget God; a wicked man's
description, Psalm. xl. All the nations that forget God, Psalm. ix. 17.
It should beget some sad thoughts in us. Were there nothing else in Sin, no
after mischievous consequences following upon it, it should strike upon the
heart of obstinate sinners;

Even the children of God in their failings, and infirmities, they find these
sad effects partially, and in some degrees. Not a fault that they commit, but
it sets them off some degrees from

That is the first Meditation, the Supposition. The next is, II. By direct
Inference, and Position. And this is the Meditation; That true Repentance will
enforce upon us, a seeking of God, whom by sin we have lost; a returning to
God, whom we have forsaken; an enquiring after God, whom we have neglected; a
remembering of God, whom we have forgotten; a renewing

1. It will puts us to a Seeking; and that is, 1. An act of estimation; it
values that which it seeks. If we count it as good lost as found, no great
matter whether we hit, or miss, there will be no seeking; if we meet Matt.
xiii. 45. When we come to this resolution; If I miss of Gods favor, I am
undone; if I find it again, I am made for ever; then we seek as we should,
because we value it as we should. Thy favor is better then life it self, Psalm.
lxiii. 3. See how David valued it, Psalm. xxviii. 1. Be not silent to me, lest
if thou be silent to me, I become like them that go down into the pit. It Is
death to miss him; better then life to find him. It 2. An act of diligence.
Search implies labor and anxiety, and all possible endeavor. Such are the
seekings of repentance; not a few sluggish wishes, but it will be active and
industrious; it lights up the Candle, and sweeps the House, Luke xv. A penitent
soul will give no rest to it self, till it has recovered God and his Favor.
That Is the seeking God will accept. Ier. xxix. 13. Ye shall seek me, and find
me, when ye shall search for me with all your heart; not like the lazy
seekings of the Spouse; in my bed by night I sought him; I sought him, but I
did not find him: but when she gets up into the streets among the watchmen,
then at last he finds him. That Is the first.
2. Repentance, it will put us to a returning; it will make us tread over all
our stops, and strayings, and wanderings from God with sorrow, and regret, undo
what we have done before, do the quite contrary. It will make us resolve with
the Church in Hosea ii. 7. I will go and return to my first husband, for then
was it better with me than now. So again, Hos. vi. 1. Come, let us return unto
the Lord. It Is called a Conversion; a full and pregnant word. 1. Not a mere
Aversion from some sin. Repentance, it is not a mere cessation, and giving over
what we did before, and there rest. A man that is out of his way, recovers not
himself by a mere step, and stay; no* he must go back again. 2. It Is not a mere
Diversion; give over this sinful course, and turn into another; I will be no
more prodigal, but I will fall to some other carnal, or sensual practice. Here
is alia semita, sed eadem via; a keeping of the same rode still, though you
change the track. But, 3. It Is a full Conversion; that brings him to the first
point, Jeremy directs, Chap. iv. 1. If thou will return, O Israel, says the
Lord, return unto me. It brings a man round about, makes him quite another man.
3. Repentance will put us to Enquiring. That is a buisie Peter puts them
together, I Pet. i. 10. Our Savior calls it Seeking, and asking, and knocking.
It Is a consulting with others, who can direct as. Thus the Penitents in the
Acts of the Apostles, Chap. ii. 37. enquired of Peter, and John, Men and
brethren, what shall* we do? help, and direct us. So the Penitent Jailer, Acts
xvi. Sirs, what must I do to be saved? The Prophet Jeremiah shows them this
duty; Stand in the paths, and ask for the old paths, where is the good way? And
Isaiah quickens them to this enquiry, Gh. xxi. 12. bids them enquire of the
Watchmen; and what say they? If ye will enquire, enquire ye, that is, do it,
and do it again, do it to some purpose. 1. Enquire of the Guldes that God has
set up. 2. Enquire of those that have strayed; and wandered, and lost him, and
now have found him; what course took they? And, 3. It must be early; Take the
wings of the morning. Early begingings may do much. Isaiah gives us this Item;
The Watchman says, The morning comes and also the night, if ye will enquire,
enquire; Return, come. The days are short, the morning
4. Repentance, it will quicken our memories; They remembered that God was their
Rock, and the high God their Redeemer. It will make us re-call to mind all the
good ways of God toward us. Thus the revolting Church of Israel, when she
bethinks her self of returning to God, she recounts how well it was with her,
when she kept her self to him. Hos. ii. 7. So the returning Prodigal, Luke xv.
he remembered the plenty of his fathers house.

This remembering of Gods gracious dealings with us, has

1 It will upbraid us of our base unthankfulness, Deuteronomy. xxxii. 6. Do ye thus
requite the Lord, O foolish people, and unwise? Is not he thy father that has
bought thee? has he not made thee, and established thee? 2. It melts our hearts
into remorse, and sorrow. (...)! the love of Christ constrains us. 3. It
encourages, and puts heart into our repentance; I will remember the years of
the right hand of the Most High.
5. Repentance will cause us to renew our Covenant with Verse. 37. They were not
steadfast in his Covenant. That Is the true and principal work of Repentance, it
makes us enter into new Covenants with God. Initial repentance, that first
enters us into the Covenant with God; we engage, and bind our selves over, by
solemn Covenant, to become
Here is the right method of Repentance; Not only bewail thy particular sin,
into which thou have fallen; but remember, thou have in thy Baptism entered
Covenant with God. Mourn for the violations of that, recall to mind that great
and solemn Engagement.

Thus, when the people of Israel rebelled in the wilderness, God commanded them
to return to the Red Sea again. They were Baptized in the Red Sea, as S. Paul
speaks: Now that they had fallen from God, God recalls them thither again, to
bewail the breach of Covenant, that there they made with him. The remembrance
of that Covenant, must work us to Repentance. Renew that again, not in the
Ceremony, and Sacrament, but by thy new purposes, and promises of better
Obedience. In this sense, a Christian must be an Hemero-baptist, wash himself
every day in that holy Laver.

We have seen the Several Acts, in which their Repentance consisted;

Now follows, the

Second thing observable; that is the failings, and defects of their repentance,
that made it unacceptable. And they were four;

1. It was fore-slowed, and untimely; 2. It was extorted, and enforced; 3. It
was false, and hypocritical; 4. It was momentary, and inconstant, and ^ickle.
I. It was untimely, a delayed repentance. First they sinned; verse. 10. They
kept not his Covenant: again, verse. 17. They sinned yet more: still they went
on. Yet again, verse. 32. For all this they sinned still: whiled off, and
delayed, and set back their repentance. Even this is a malignant circumstance,
breeds a great flaw, and blemish in our repentance, the late date it bears. Oh!
repentance should be a timely, a speedy, and an early work.

1. It Is presently due, as soon as we have sinned. So, Ratione officii, by the
law of right Reason, a man is bound to be sorry as soon as he has done evil.
It is Gods Due, and he demands Solomon bids us not put off till to morrow; much
more in paying thy debts. 2. It Is good repenting betimes, Ratione in^erti. Do
it while thou may do it, while we have time: In the morning sow thy seed,
Eccles. xi. 6. Thou know not what a day may bring Repentance may be hid from
thine eyes. We all pretend, our resolutions are to repentance; we grant we must
repent; and resolve to repent before we dye. Be it so. Be sure thou repent
before thou dye, and then thou must repent speedily; for, time to come, is a
most hazardous uncertainty. The Jews have a rule, He who vows to do any thing
before he dies, he must do it speedily out of hand, because he is not certain
whether he shall live till to morrow; and then his Vow is broken, and he must
answer for it. 3. It Is good repenting betimes, Ratione facilitatis. Timely
repentance is the most kindly, and gentle, and easy repentance. A wound is
best taken, when it is green; deferr to dress it, and it will rankle, and
fester. A bone is best put into joint, as soon as it is out; neglect it any
time, it will hardly keep in. Repentance, it is the physic of the soul; and
physic, you know, is best taken in a morning. Thus Peter went out presently.
When I was instructed, I smote upon my thigh, Isa. xxxi. 19.
Ey, this is the failing of these men's repentance; it is all

1. They took little pleasure in it. 2. They came unwillingly to it; as a Bear
to the stake, who must be fetched about, with a ring in his nose; they were not
led to it by any inward principle of grace, but upon other inducements, or
enforcements rather.
But yet there is one word in the Text, that seems to set a timelier date upon
their repentance; It Is said, They enquired early after God. How can this stand
with this procrastinating When? Mane properabant; so Calvin; In the morning
they hastened; Diluculo veniebant; so others, By daybreak.

True, true; All this takes not off the charge and imputation of late
repentance:

1. Is It not a Sarcasm, an holy scorn, and derision, of their slow, and
sluggish returning unto God? Yes, yes; after so much time wasted, and mercies
abused, and provocations multiplied, now you bestir your selves; Is this your
early return to God? So shaming their backwardness in this needful duty. 2. The
Scripture, even in the same place where it upbraids sinners with delays, yet
then uses this term of early seeking. Prove. i. 24. Because when I have called,
and ye refused; I have stretched out my hand, and no man regarded; therefore,
verse. 28. they, then shall call upon me, but I will not answer; they shall seek
me early, but they shall not find me. Here are two extremities; very late, nay,
too late; and yet early. Such conversions then 1. They have Vespertinum culpae;
Look at the time of their sinning; oh! it is very late e're they repent; all the
day long, and they never thought of it. But then, 2. There is Matutinum poenae,
The morning of their punishments. When Gods judgments break in upon them, then
they bestir themselves. Take their time of sinning, so it is Vesperi: Take
their day of suffering, Mane. Sero quoad culpam, Cito quoad poenam.
3. Or, they seek and enquire early, and yet very late. That Is early, or mane,
when a man awakens. The Sluggards morning, when he breaks off sleep, that may
be at noon, or night, in true computation. Security lays a sinner in a deep
sleep; when Gods hand awakens him, that is his morning; till then, he was
asleep. That Is the first fault, Untimely.
II. A second defect of their repentance, is, That it was enforced: Cum
occideret, When he slew them, and his judgments fell upon them, then they
bethought themselves and turned to him. When he slew them, and fell upon them
with a destroying judgment:

1. Quando peccarunt; As soon as they had sinned, had they any grace, they
should have repented. I told you before, Repentance is presently due, as soon
as we have sinned. God calls all delayers, fools. O ye fools, how long will ye
love foolishness? Prove. i. 22. As Tertullian, God Dedicavit poenitentiam in
Paradiso: So the time as soon as ever Adam had sinned, God summoned him to
repentance. Wisdom and Grace would have us do so. Thus it was with David, when
he numbered the people, presently his heart smote him; he saw his fault, and
sorrowed for it.

Well, suppose they took not that first time; there are more intermediate times
before he came to slay them:

2. Quando benefecit eis; When he did good to them; that should reclaim them.
1. They sinned, and yet he ceased not from blessing 2. They murmured, and yet
he blessed them. 3. They tempted him, and yet he fed them. 4. They would pose
his Power, whether he could fetch water out of the rock, and he did it for
them.

Oh! that is high time for repentance, when Gods goodness wrestles, and strives
with our wickedness, and would overcome us. Luther tells us of a man, wicked
and yet prosperous. Vicisti me, Domine, nimia bonitate tua. He overcame him
with love. S. Paul charges it deeply upon impenitent sinners, tells them, It
makes them inexcusable, Romans ii. 4. Despisest thou the riches of his goodness,
not knowing that the goodness of God leads thee to repentance?

There is another time, when they should have repented;


3. Quando invitavit; When by the Ministry of Moses, and Aaron, he found fault
with their sins, and called them to repentance. That sure is a just time for us
to repent, when Gods Word calls us to repentance. It Is that which Christ
commends in the Ninevites, Matthew. xii. 41. The men of Nineveh shall rise in
judgment with this Generation, they repented at the preaching of Jonah; No
sooner did God dispatch a Prophet to them, to call them to Repentance, but they
yielded presently, in auditu auris. One look of Christ made Peter weep
bitterly. It was that, which S. Paul takes comfort in, in the matter of his I
was not disobedient to the heavenly Vision, Acts xxvi. 19. It was that also
that commended the Conversion of those Penitents, Acts ii. When they heard
this, they were pricked at the heart. One Sermon of S. Peter, reclaims them
presently. The Ministry of Gods Word is the great sanctified Instrument to
work us to Repentance.

Yet there were other Opportunities, that in all reason they should have taken
to repent, though they slighted the former; That Is

4. Quando castigavit; When he did visit their sins Carrying into the
Wilderness, Hos. ii. 14. I will bring her into the wilderness, and there speak
unto her heart.
It Is the usual way God takes with us; when his word alone will do us no good,
to write our lessons on our backs with his Rod. Prosperity makes us wanton,
Affliction often times hunts Hosea, chap. ii. 6. compares afflictions to an
hedge of thorns; Behold, I will hedge up thy way with th^rns, so that you shall
have little list to break out. Thus was Manasseh converted; Chr. xxxiii. 12.
When he was in affliction he besought the Lord his God, and humbled himself
greatly before the God of his Fathers. It was Luther's speech, Schola Crucis,
Schola Lucis. And it is the great aggravation of wicked King Ahaz, 2 Chronicles.
xxviii. 22. In the time of his distress, did he trespass yet more and more
against the Lord; this is that King Ahaz; that is his brand: as if he should
say, Here is a sinner, whom Affliction will not tame. It Is to great purpose
that Solomon advises us, Prove. iii. II. My son, despise not the chastening of
the Lord. Gentle Corrections must David his father counted it an happy thing to
get good by such chastening, Psalm. xciv. 12. Blessed is the man, whom thou
chastisest, and teach him out of thy Law. He shows it will prevent this same
Occideret, That thou may give him rest from the days of adversity, until the
pit be dug for the wicked, verse 13. Happy chastisements, that prevent
slaying! To do as Isaiah speaks, chap. xxvi. 16. Lord, in trouble have they
visited thee, they poured out a prayer, when thy chastning was upon them. No,
this wrought not with them, Quando castigavit.

So then, here is the unworthy servile baseness of their Repentance; no time
would serve but quando occidit; when he slew them; never till their heads were
on the block. Yes, this is Pharoah's Repentance; he stood out many a stroke;
but when it came to a destruction, then he seeks to Moses, O I have sinned,
save me from this death only. We condemn it in Pharaoh, and wonder at it here
in the Israelites; and yet upon examination, we shall find, it is the case of
many of us. Take it,

1. Either more collectively and largely, for our national Repentance; Or, 2.
More privately and personally for each man's particular. 1. Let us look abroad;
not to censure and descant upon other men's estate, but yet we may soberly
consider the sins of the times, and lay them to heart. Have we not passed all
the former Quandoes, the Seasons of Repentance with small Amendment? 1. Not
when we sinned; God knows many sins stand upon the Score, uncancelled by
Repentance. 2. Not when he blessed us with Deliverances, with Peace, Plenty,
Freedom from Annoyances; yet Evidentibus Beneficiis ingrati. 3. Not when he
has by his word invited to Repentance; Nay, that Mannah comes out at our
Nostrils, we begin to loath it. Ye begin to question whether 4. Not when he
has chastised us in measure, shot off warning Pieces, rather then murdring
Cannons; Commotions, and Plagues, and unnatural Discontents: we despise those
Chastisements. 5. When he comes to slay us, then we will bethink our selves:
When the Kingdom is on a light fire, and Invasions of Enemies, or intestine
Rebellions begin to destroy us; then it is to be hoped we will repent.
2. Let us take it more privately, and personally; and then ask your hearts
what time you set for your Repentance? It is, cum occidet, when we are on our
Deathbeds, and no hope of life; when God sends his last Executioner, to cut us
off from the land of the living, then we resolve to repent. Well, it is
possible, you may do so; De nemine desperandum, quem patientia Dei sinit
vivere: Yet consider, 1. It is Infamis Poenitentia; here is a brand set upon it
by the Holy Ghost. 2. It is Incerta; There is small encouragement the Scripture
Prove. 1. 26. Because I have called and ye refused, I have stretched out my
hand, and no man regarded, verse 26. I will also laugh at your calamity, I will
mock when your fear comes -- when distress and anguish comes upon you, verse
28. then they shall call upon me, but I will not answer. See what encouragement
such early Seekers have. 3. It is Suspiciosa Poenitentia; there is great cause
to suspect the goodness of such Repentance, which is forced from us, cum
occideret, when the fear of death surprises us. A man may 1. That lust which
reigned in him is nipp'd, and forced back by his affliction: it is like the sap
of a tree in Winter, all shrunk to the Root. Sorrow, and sickness, and any
great affliction, is like Winter-Weather, it nips the Branches, hinders our
Corruption from sprouting; and so we think it is dead; but the Root holds life
and sap: Warm Weather of Prosperity will make it spring again; like Job's tree,
chap. xiv. 8, 9. Through the sent of waters it will bud, and bring forth boughs
like a plant. 2. In the fear of death, or any sore affliction, we may take our
selves to be mortified, because afflictions will justle out temptations of
sinful pleasures; he has lost the relish of them for a time: As sick men can
find no sweetness in meats, 3. In sickness many take themselves mortified, not
because sin is weakened in them, but nature is infeebled; that withdraws her
strength by which sin was active: recover nature, and sin will recover. As a
(...) in a tree, let the tree spring, and that will spring too. It Is not the
body of sin that is mortified, but the body of nature is infeebled. Put not thy
Conversion then upon such hazardous adventures; stay not till



Come we to,

III. The third defect of their Repentance, that is falsness, and dissembling;
it was a flattering, unsound, hypocritical Repentance. Nevertheless they did
flatter him with their mouth, and they ly^d unto him with their tongue. All
their conversion and turning to God was but flattery and falsehood. And this
Flattery and falsehood will appear,

1. In their Professions. 2. In their Promises; Flattering Professions and
false Promises. 1. Flattery is seen in Professions; 1. A Flatterer will profess
a great esteem of goodness and worth in the Person whom he applies himself to;
ready to ascribe much unto him: So did these hollow Converts; In their
Affliction, they acknowledged, God was their rock, and strength, and the high
God their Redeemer, verse 35. Thus the Herodians flattered Christ, Matthew. xxii.
16. Master, we know that thou art true, and teach the way of God in truth,
and regardest no man's person. Christ discovers them, Why tempt ye me, ye
hypocrites? Such are the soothings of unsound repentance, when affliction
presses us. Oh! then we will acknowledge God, and his goodness; As Benhadad did
with the King of Israel, O the Kings of Israel are merciful Kings; but yet
false and treacherous for all his profession: when he recovers his strength, he
will renew his war with him. 2. Flattery is seen in profession of great love,
and affection. Judas his kiss, a testimony of great love, as if Christ were
dear to him. Such Professions hypocritical repentance will make under
Affliction. Such love Ziba shows to David; professed great Isai. xxix. 13. They
drew near him with their mouth, and with their lips did honor him. In our
extremities, who but God, and Christ are in cur mouths? then we seem much to
affect them. 3. Flattery is seen in profession of sorrow for any offense. A
Dissembler to escape his due (...) will confess all, and profess great sorrow
for former offenses. Thus did railing Shimei to David; Oh, Sam. xix. 18. And
such professions an hypocrite under the lash will make to God. The Israelites,
when thunder and lightnings were about their ears, O we have sinned in asking a
King, besides all our other sin^, 1 Samuel xii. 19. These are flattering
Professions.
2. As they flattered in their Professions, so they were false in their
Promises. Repentance will make Vows and Promises; and so will this false and
counterfeit Repentance abound Pharaob, If God spare thee this time, will thou
let Israel go? O yes, No longer stay. An Hypocrite will go about to bribe God
with Promises; Spare me this one time, I will become a new man; yet all false.
A double Falsness; 1. False in Intention; He says what he never means, his
tongue contradicts his heart. 2. False in Performance; He never makes good what
he says. David calls it a lying, fained Obedience, Psalm. lxvi. 3. Through the
greatness of thy power, shall thine enemies yield fained obedience unto thee;
False
So then, In that these Jews were thus false and fraudulent in their
repentance; it will discover unto us the dangerous condition of this sin of
Hypocrisy, in three strains of Hypocrisy:

1. See the guile of Hypocrisy; Rather then fail, it will counterfeit and act
any duty, though never so unacceptable, as Repentance is. No duty in Religion
goes down so hard with an Hypocrite, as Repentance. Repentance is a shaming
duty; A penitent must confess, and acknowledge he has sinned; I am unclean.
Now Hypocrites are, Animalia Gloriae, all for their Credit and Reputation. In
matter of Opinion, they are in no Error; Quod volumus sanctum est. What? Are
we ignorant and blind also? Job. ix. 40. In matter of Conversation, they You
are they which justify themselves before men. Luke xvi. 14. It is hard to
bring them to acknowledge either error or fault; But yet, if it makes for
their turn, they will even act a penitential part, and confess, and recant, and
seem to be sorry for sin. So did Simon Magus, and King Saul. 2. See the
pertinacy, and obstinacy of hypocrisy; It will act, and counterfeit, and not
give over, no, not in the greatest affliction. Cum occideret, when Gods hand is
slaying them, yet then they will counterfeit. Neither mercies, nor miracles,
nor chastisements, nor plagues, will alter or change him. yet he will not learn
righteousness; Nay, Let Gods hand be lifted up, yet they will not see it. Isai.
xxvi. 10. Of all other sinners, an Hypocrite is the most hopeless, and
incorrigible. Afflictions have brought home profane sinners; but an Hypocrite
will stand out that too; either accuse God for afflicting him, or dissemblingly
accuse himself; like some desperate Cutpurse, that will steal in the
Sessions House, or at the Gallows. 3. See the stupor, and brutish sottishness
of Hypocrisy. It will not only undertake to deceive men, but God also; think
to mock him with flatteries, and lies. As Ah^z, how did he O he would not tempt
God. What says Isaiah? Isai. vii. 13. Is it a small thing to weary men, but
will ye weary my God also? An Hypocrite will not only faulter with men, seek
to delude the world but, they are lying children to God. Isai. xxx. 9. Thus S.
Peter charges Ananias and Sapphira, that they lied not to men, but to the Holy
Ghost, Acts v. 4. Thus Isaiah brings in the Hypocrites of his time, boasting
even to God, of their hypocritical service and devotion, Isai. lviii. 3.
Wherefore have we fasted, and thou see it not? Wherefore have we afflicted
our soul, and thou take no knowledge? Indeed, Hypocrites are in truth, secret
Atheists, They turn the glory of God into an Idol, so hoping to put him off
with vizards, and counterfeits; worse than Jacob toward Isaac, God can neither
see, nor feel, nor find out their mockeries.


That Is the third, the falsness of their Repentance. Come we to,

IV. The fourth defect of their Conversion and Repentance, It was momentary and
unconstant, Verse. 37. Their heart was not right with him, neither were they
steadfast in his Covenant.

And this clause comes in as a proof of the former; it is a Conviction of their
unsound and hypocritical repentance. And here

1. Because it was not hearty. True repentance is hearty repentance. If the
heart be wanting, it is counterfeit, and hypocritical: Their heart was not
right with him. Their 2. Because it was not lasting and durable; They were not
steadfast in his Covenant.
1. It was hypocritital, because it was not cordial and hearty. How was it not
hearty? were they not in earnest? was it mere outside, acted, pretended
repentance? It Is likely not. There is a double Hypocrisy; 1. Formal, and
express, when he that acts it, intends only to counterfeit, means nothing
else. That Is gross hypocrisy. Such were the Pharisees in Christ's time, and the
world is full of 2. There is hypocrisy of a finer thread, that is
interpretative hypocrisy; Such an hypocrisy wherein we deal falsely with God,
and our selves too: Such as God will judge hypocrisy. How Is that? when a man
rests in some acts of repentance, but yet fails, and falls short in the main,
and is careless of that. As 1. There are some actions of repentance, as
confession of Sin, calling for Mercy, promising Amendment; these are 2. There
are some affections, and passions of repentance; as sadness, and sorrow, and
feat, and anxiety, dejection of mind, and other passionate motions; these also
are good, but yet fall short. 3. What then is wanting? The main of all is, that
the heart must be changed. I say, changed. It may be affected, dejected, and
troubled, and yet remain as bad as ever. So it was with Pharaoh; the terrors
of God deeply affected him. So Ahab was strangely cast down upon Elijah's
threatenings; was sad in Judas? was not he much affected? But yet, no true
change was wrought in their hearts; they were the same men still; Pharaoh an
oppressor in his heart, Ahab a persecutour.

Here then is that which makes up repentance to be true and spiritual, and such
as God will accept; when it puts a new heart into us, changes our natures from
what we were before, begets in us new resolutions, that we choose what we
refused, love what we hated; frames the very heart anew. In this case,
hypocrisy works like Art, sincerity like Nature. How is that? Why Nature's

Judge thy conversion by this trial; Art thou another man? a etc?



2. A second Conviction of their unsoundness of repentance is, that it was a
flitting, momentary, unconstant repentance; They were not steadfast in his
Covenant. That Is a second Conviction. True repentance will prove lasting
repentance; Hypocritical repentance is slippery, and unconstant.
A true Convert has an inward principle of repentance planted into him; Grace
is a second Nature, and works constantly,

A great difference 'twixt affectation that will tire; and affection, which
will hold out: A great difference 'twixt passion, which is sudden, comes and
goes; and fixed resolution, which is constant. An Hyocrite is like an unbroken
Horse, he may strike a stroke or two right, but falls to his trot. Sudden
flushings of heat are one thing, and the kindly warmth at the heart is another.
David? My heart is fixed, O Lord, my heart is fixed. Psalm. lxvi. 13. I will pay
thee my vows, which my lips have uttered, and my mouth has spoken, when I was
in trouble. In his repentance, he has renewed his Covenants with God, and he
will not break with him. Failings he may have, but yet he revoltes not; trip he
may, but yet recovers. David's resolution is his, I will never forget thy
Commandments, for by them thou have quickened me.

A
ISAI. xxvi. 9. -- When thy Judgments are in the earth, the Inhabitants of the
world will learn righteousness.
THis Chapter is styled by the Prophet Isaiah, Canticum, A Song. Verse. 1. In
that day shall this Song be sung in the land of Judah. A Song, penned and
prepared for the people of God against their return out of Captivity. Babylon;
but foresees, and assures them they shall not perish there, but they shall be
brought back again into their own Country.

Thus the Prophet, placed in Excelsa Fidei specula, in Faith's Watchtower,
foresees their miseries, and foretells their deliverance. And this prediction of
their deliverance is framed into a Song; that, as the occasion will be
comfortable, the matter triumphant, so it bespeaks suitable affections,
cheerful and joyful Thus light is sown for the righteous, and gladness for the
upright in heart, Psalm. xcvii. 11. In the midst of all troubles and
afflictions, yet there is a Seed-time, and there shall be an Harvest of Joy,
and Comfort. Esaias, he sowes this Seed in Promises, and, in Gods good time, they
shall reap the Harvest in

This Song consists of many sweet strains; It Is partly Eucharistical, a Psalm
of Thankfulness; and partly Didactieal; M^schil (as David terms many of his
Psalms) a Psalm, or Song, to give Instruction. And the Text belongs to this
second sort; It Is a strain of Instruction. This well learned, and practiced,
will make the other strain seasonable unto us. Let us first learn
righteousness, by Gods just judgments; and that will bring us to a condition
of Joy, and Thankfulness, for his merciful Deliverances.

The Text, it shows us what use we are to make of Gods Visitations; what is the
profit, and improvement we must make of our sufferings and afflictions. They
are (...); they are so many lessons, and instructions to us; and we must
undergo them accordingly, and learn righteousness by them.

So then, the Text recommends unto us this Truth, That the land of Affliction,
it is, and ought to be, the School of Instruction. And herein we may consider
two things:

1. Doctorem. 2. Disciplinam. 1. What is that that must teach us; that is, our
Afflictions; they are our Instructours. 2. What we must learn by them; We must
learn righteousness by them: That Is the Discipline and Instruction we must
receive by them.

First, Let us consider what is that which must teach and instruct us; They are
our Sufferings and Afflictions. And they are here described unto us in a
threefold Notion*

1. In their Nature and Propriety, what, and whose they are; what we must
esteem our Afflictions to be; they are no other Gods judgments. 2. They are
described by their Time and Season; that is employed in this particle of Time,
Quando, When. 3. They are described by the circumstance of Place, where they
are inflicted. That which God makes the School of Correction, that is the earth.
When thy judgments are in the earth.
1. Consider their Nature and Propriety. Afflictions and Calamities, they are
Gods judgments. It is a point of Piety, to know and acknowledge this Truth,
That whatsoever befalls us, Jeremiah makes it a point of Wisdom to acknowiedge
this, chap. ix. 12. Who is a wise man, that may understand this? -- for what
the land perishes. It is great wisdom to know from whom, and

1. It is an acknowledgement that God expects from us. He looks we should see
him in all our Sufferings, and observe his hand in them. Hear the rod, and who
has appointed it, Mica. vi. 9. and know whose hand it is that brings it. 2. He
challenges these Afflictions to himself, as his own special administrations.
Is there any evil in the City, and the Lord has not done it? Amos iii. 6. I
form the light, and create darkness; I make peace, and create evil; I the Lord
do all these things, Isai. xlv. 7. 3. He takes it hainously, as a great
indignity offered to his Providence, that we will not acknowledge him in all
our Sufferings. Our Prophet complains of it, verse. 11. Lord, when thy hand is
lifted up, they will not see it; give no testimony to his just proceedings. See
what construction God makes of this; he accounts it no better then a reproach,
and slander cast upon him. Ier. v. 12. They have belyed the Lord, and said,
It Is not he. In all our Sufferings, it must make us confess with old Eli, It is
the Lord: and conclud^ of our Affliction, as David did of Promotion, It comes
neither from the East, nor from the West, nor any other In the hand of the Lord
there is a Cup, and he reaches it to us, and pours it upon us.
A necessary Truth it is, and yet we are exceeding backward to learn it. And
this backwardness in us, is grounded upon two difficulties:

1. This acknowledgment, it is Confessio Fidei; and all men have not this
Faith, to see and discern our calamities and miseries from whence they come.
Many feel the rod, that cannot hear it; feel the smart of it, that cannot
apprehend who has Belshazzar, we can see the Handwriting upon the Wall but we
cannot read it, and understand the meaning of it. As the Jews, when God spoke
from heaven, John xii. 29. They said, it thundered; it was but a rattling in the
Sky, they made no more of it: So, a natural man without Faiths prospective, can
hardly look so high as to the hand of God. The evil we suffer, it is but some
distemper in nature; or the malice of men; or, if it be more immediately from
God, then it is chance and fortune, any thing rather then God, that does
afflict us. Whereas Faith and Piety overlooks secondary causes, and fixes upon
God. Job neither mentions Sabeans, nor Caldeans in all The Lord has given, and
the Lord has taken away. This made Joseph, when he was shamefully entreated by
his unnatural brethren, acknowledge to them, Non vos, sed Deus; 'twas not you,
but God, that lent me into Egypt. 2. Men are exceeding loath to acknowledge
their sufferings to Confessio reatus; it bewrays our guiltiness; it carries
with it an acknowledgment, that all is not well 'twixt God and us, but that he
is become our enemy, and fights against us. Now naturally we are very unwilling
to think that God has any quarrel against us. It is a deceit which we are
exceedingly subject unto. Prone we are to delude our selves with this false
persuasion, that God and we stand in good terms. How hardly could Samuel
dispute Saul out of this delusion, and make him confess there was a breach
'twixt God and him? We are very desirous in all our afflictions, Iudiciis Dei
detrahimus, ne peccatores nos esse cognoscamus, says Salvian. As Pharaoh
labored a long time to prove that God sent not those plagues upon him, but
that Moses wrought them some other way; his Inchanters could do as much as that
came to. It is no easy matter to make us acknowledge, either our doings of
evil to be sins against God; or our sufferings of evil, to be judgments from
God. Thy judgments, says David, are far out of his ^ght; that makes him tush,
and puff at all his afflictions.
So then, the point is briefly thus much; The evils and calamities which we
suffer, they are Gods judgments; it is our duty so to esteem them, to
acknowledge them Acts of Divine Justice. And that will draw from us three other
Acknowledgments, and clear and justify Gods proceedings from three Imputations.

Are our afflictions Gods judgments? Then,

1. They are deserved by us; God does justly inflict them upon us, Sine
iniquitate. 2. They are advisedly decreed, and wisely ordained; he brings them
upon us, Sine temeritate; he does not cast 3. They are proportioned in a just
and holy manner, with a due measure and moderation; he sends them upon us, Sine
furore; not in rage and fury. 1. Our miseries and afflictions, they are Gods
judgments, and therefore deserved. We must not charge God foolishly, but
acknowledge him to be righteous in all his proceedings. Indeed, while we have to
deal with men, In foro humanae Iustitiae, we may have something to say: We may
charge them with violence and oppression, and plead our innocence: But when we
I know, O Lord, says David, that thy judgments are just, Psalm. cxix. The
violence of men does not impeach the justice of God; nor does the justice of
God warrant, or excuse Iehu must answer for all that blood which was shed in
Iezreel; and yet Iezreel, by Divine Sentence, was devoted to destruction, Hos.
i. 4. Vos cogitastis malum, sed Deus vertit in bonum; You thought evil against
me, but God meant it to good, said Joseph to his unnatural brethren, that sold
him into Egypt. Their wicked designs were no impeachments to Gods holy
purposes. Quod homo facit improbe, Deus facit just. The malice of men can be
no prejudice to the justice of God.

We owe this dutiful acknowledgement to God in all our afflictions. We must
accept of the punishment of our iniquity, Levit. I will bear the indignation of
the Lord, because I have sinned against him, Micah vii. 9. And so again, Lam.
i. The Lord is righteous, for I have rebelled against him.

In all heavy calamities of war and bloodshed, of dearth and famine, of
sickness and diseases, we may take up the Prophet Habakkuks question, Was the
Lord displeased against the Rivers? Was thine anger against the rivers? Was thy
wrath against the Sea? So may we say; Is the Lord displeased with the course of
nature, that he makes it unkindly? Is he angry with the quiet and

2. Our miseries are Gods judgments, and therefore wisely decreed, and ordered
by God; he sends them upon us, Sine temeritate; not unadvisedly. Our
afflictions, they are not casualties, In regno providentiae, non est locus
temeritati. Chance, or mishaps, have no place, bear no sway, in the kingdom of
Providence, and government of God. Our sufferings, they are not Missilia
fortunae, scatterings of fortune (as the Philistines thought of their diseases,
It may be, it is but a chance that has befallen us.) No, they are right-ayming
thunderbolts, as the book of Wisdom excellently calls them. Our chastisements,
they come from the hand of God, that does wisely order them; they lie not at
the feet of Fortune, to be spurned into the world at all adventures.

Thus the Scripture tells of the bending of his Bow, and the preparing of his
Arrows; and he shoots not at rovers (as that man that hit Ahab in the battle,
it was unwittingly done, and at all adventure) but he has a steady aim. He
sets up a sinner as his mark, at which he levels and directs his stroke. The
most uncertain, Exodus viii. I will send swarms of flies, and the houses of the
Egyptians shall be full of them; but in Goshen, where my people dwell, no
swarms of flies shall be there. Thus also he calls the Annoyance of Locusts,
and Catter-pillars his great Army, of which he is Commander; and see how he
orders They shall march every one in his ways, they shall not break their
ranks, they shall walk every one in his path, as a well-ordered Army, Joel ii.
It makes us acknowledge it is neither fate, nor fortune, neither natural
destiny, nor uncertain casualty, but the holy hand of God that does afflict and
punish us.

3. They are Judgments, and therefore proportioned in a due measure, and
moderation; he brings them upon us, Sine furore. Rage and fury are boundless,
does all in extremity. But Justice and Judgment sets limits to it self; keeps
within Dispensator poenarum est, and non profusor. S. Basil calls them, (...).
1. He proportions our sufferings to the measure of our sins. That Is Proportio
Iustitiae. He ponders our punishments with the weight of our sins, Ut punire
videatur justitia, non potestas, says Salvian; therein rather discharging the
office of a Judge, then fulfilling the pleasure of an angry Potentate. Yea, and
this he does with much abatement. He punishes not ultra, but citra; his
Judgments fall short, and on this side of He punishes us less then our
deservings, Ezra ix. He serves out his Judgments with the Strike, not with the
heaped Measure. 2. He proportions his Judgments with an eye to our infirmities;
That Is Proportio Misericordiae. He considers not only what we do deserve, but
what we can endure. He knows our weakness, and will not over-charge us with
unsupportable Judgments. I will not contend for ever, neither will I be always
wroth, says God in Isaiah, for the spirit would fail before me, and the souls
which I have made. He so remembers us to be sinners, His punishments do not
come upon us in their perfection, as elsewhere he threateneth, Isai. xlvii. 9.


Thus God proportions our Afflictions, as he did the manner He destroyed them
not, and did not stir up all his wrath; for he remembered they were but flesh,
spiritus vadens, and non rediens, a wind that passes away, and comes not
again. Hence arises that seeming Contradiction betwixt his peoples confession,
and his pity and compassion; Thou have punished us less then our iniquities;
nay, says God, I have punished You have received at the Lords hand double for
your sins. He is sorry for their afflictions, and seems to blame his Justice,
for being too severe.

We have seen the first Particular, the Nature of our Afflictions, what they
are, and what we must account them to be, They are Gods Judgments. Consider,

II. Their Time and Season. And that is set forth in this Particle of Time,
Quando, when: When thy Judgments are in the earth. And we may consider this
Circumstance of Time in a threefold Notion;

1. This When, it is Tempus restrictum; It Is a limited and confined Time. This
Quando, it is but Aliquando; This Time, it is but Sometime. His Judgments are not
always abroad in the earth; He is not always smiting, not ever punishing, and
afflicting the sons of Men. He does not always chide, says David, nor keep his
anger for ever, Psalm. ciii.. What we say of the offers of his grace, it is most
true also of the testimonies of his wrath; they are hodie, they are not
quotidie; they have a limited time, they are not always upon us. There are
other times pass over our heads, before this time of Judgment begins; 1. There
is the time of his goodness and bounty; and that is like a long Summers-day; a
time that God delights in, to do good unto us; to win us to himself by his
mercies, that we might serve him with gladness of heart, and delight our selves
in his great goodness.

And,

2. There is the time of his Patience; and that is a long day too, (...). He
has his time of long-suffering and patience, when he waits upon the hardness
of our hearts, when his Spirit strives with us to reclaim David speaks* Psalm.
xi. and he will not take that advantage which our sins give against us. These,
and
2. This Particle of Time, When, admits of another Notion; It Is Tempus
praestitutum; He has a set Time and Season for Execution of Judgment. What
Paul says of the Last Judgment, it is true of all other Punishments that do
befall us; God has appointed a day in which he will judge the world, Acts
xvii. Thus we see God has appointed a Birthday to his Judgments; and when
that day comes, his Judgments shall appear, Isai. xlii. 14. I have a long time
held my peace, I have been still, and refrained my self; now will I cry like a
traveling woman, I will devour and destroy. According to the time of life, the
mother is delivered, and brings forth her child; So God has his appointed
time, when the conceptions of his anger shall be brought forth, and shall no
longer stay at the place of breaking forth. Jeremy calls it, The day of
calamity; Ezekiel, The day of trouble; Amos, the day of darkness. And though
these times are in the certain knowledge and power of God only; yet, as our
Savior speaks, There are signs of the times, by which we may conjecture them.

Ripeness of Sin, that is the Season of punishment. Put in the sickle, for the
harvest is ripe, their wickedness great, Joel iii.

1. Great in the kind; when outrageous crying sins, Blood, Oppression, all kind
of Excess abounds. These hasten Judgments. 2. Great in the spreadth, and
generality of sin; when all flesh has corrupted their ways; as they in Sodom,
from all quarters; A puero usque ad senem, All the foundations of the earth are
out of course. 3. Great in the degree; that sin grows impudent and They declare
their sin as Sodom, they blush not at them, Isai. iii. 4. Great in their
obstinacy, that they are impatient of cure. Lot must not find fault in Sodom.
Amos must not prophecy in Bethel. The word of God is become a reproach to
Jeremy, and a derision daily. When they mocked Gods messengers, and despised
his words, and misused his Prophets, then the wrath of the Lord was against his
people, till there be no remedy, 2 Chronicles. xxxvi.
3. This Circumstance of Time admits of another Notion; Tempus ultimae
instantiae; It is then the last Season, and most urgent Opportunity to look
about us, to take-out this Lesson, which God is teaching us.
Indeed, there were other Times when this should have been done, when our
learning and amendment would have been more

1. Tempus admonitionum; When God had called upon us by his Word, warned us by
his Ministers, and Messengers, whom he has dispatched unto us; In auditu
auris, as soon as he speaks, we should answer him presently. That had been an
acceptable time, and would have proved a time of Salvation. What S. Paul said
to the Mariners in their distress, Acts 27. may justly be the exprobration of
our unteachableness by such fair warnings; Sirs, you should have hearkened unto
me, and then you had gained this harm and loss. 2. Tempus benignitatum, The
time of mercies and goodness of God, when he invited us to himself by his
loving-kindnesses, would have drawn us with the cords of love, wooed us to
amendment by his favors; Oh! the bounty of God, that should have prevailed
with us, and led us to Repentance. 3. Tempus castigationum; The time of more
mild and gentle Corrections; when he sends upon us more tolerable tokens of his
anger, abates somewhat of our plenty, cuts us short of our abundance, frowns
upon us with some smaller appearances of his displeasure, that should make us
to look about us, and bestirr
These indeed should be the times of our amendment; and it would have been more
pleasing and acceptable. But such is our servile and base nature, such is our
want of faith to discern him in these smaller appearances of his displeasure,
that nothing will work upon us, but his more heavy Judgments. His Judgments
must drive us in, his Mercies will not draw us; that is too gentle Physic, it
will not work upon us. Our Prophet complains of it, Verse. 10. Let favor be
showed to the wicked, yet he will not learn righteousness. Nay, threatenings
will not do it; Though thy hand be lifted up, they will not see it, verse 11.
never be moved, till we feel it fall on us. Yea, naturally we are prone to set
light by Gods more gentle and mild Visitations; Nubecula cito transibit.
Solomon forewarns us of it, My son, despise not the chastisement of the Lord,
lest his milder Chastisements, turn into severer Judgments. This Contempt of
smaller Punishments, will beget an other Contempt, that will little please us.
Ezekiel tells us of it; The Sword shall contemn the Rod, says he; gentler
Chastisements shall give place to more heavy Pharaoh, and the Egyptians; first,
He admonished them by his Messengers; then, He awakened them by his Miracles;
then, He scared them by his Threatenings; then, He visited them with more remote
Afflictions; then, came home to them with sores

What says the Prophet in the foregoing Verse? In the way of thy judgments
have they waited for thee. We should have done it in the way of his mercies;
but we have lost that opportunity. It Is high time we should turn to him in the
way of his Judgments. It had been our wisdom to have prevented our sufferings.
As Solomon makes it a point of wisdom, Prove. xxii. 3. The prudent man foresees
the evil* and hides himself. But that is not our Case now. Our (...) has failed
us, let us be sure our (...) may

There is yet one Particular more; and that is,

III. The Circumstance of Place, where these Judgments are inflicted, (...), as
Saint Basil calls it; the School of Correction; that is the Earth: And this
Circumstance does put upon these Judgments three useful Qualifications to

1. These Judgments, they are in the earth; that is, they are outward, and
visible, and external Judgments. 2. These Judgments, they are in the earth;
they are common, and general, and over-spreading Judgments. 3. They are in the
earth* and so they are present and actual Judgments. Three good Advantages to
make them profitable to us.
1. They are visible, and external Judgments. And they are the Judgments that
are fittest to teach us Spiritual Judgments I will send my plagues upon thy
heart, says God to Pharaoh; that made him past hope, marked him out for
destruction.

As Gregory distinguishes of sins, so may we of sufferings; Carnalia peccata
sunt majoris infamiae, sed spirit^alia peccata sunt majoris culpae: So, outward
bodily Judgments may be more Quando non patimur id quod acriter ^lolet, sed
facimus id quod turpiter delectat; that says S. Aug. is Ira Dei gravissima.
It Is a fearful token of Gods heavy displeasure, when David's Aug. speaks, lib.
1. cap. 24. contra adversar. Legis and Prophet.) Crimina criminibus
vindicantur, and supplicia peccantium sunt incrementa vitiorum; there is small
hope then to enter into his righteousness. Oh! take heed of being Agents in the
Judgments of God. Sufferers may be pitied, but when we come to be
Self-destroyers by wilfulness in sin, that puts us into an hopeless condition:
when we sport our selves with our miseries, like the Citizens of Caesarea in
Africa; of whom S. August. reports, that upon a set time every year, they
divided themselves

2. His Judgments are in the earth; They are common, and general, and
over-spreading Judgments; and they are most likely to work good upon us. God
has not only his Personal, but his National, and Epidemical Judgments.
Sometimes he takes a Sinner with a private Judgment, as with an Angle;
otherwhile he has his (...), his Verriculum, and Drag-net that catches all
kind of Sinners. He has his Arrows in private Aug. observes well; Non sicut
Regi hominum, aut Principi, sic Deo; quicquid a multis peccatur, inultum est. A
multitude of offenders among men, even forces an impunity. And, as elsewhere he
says, Neque Rex neque Multitudo, -- Excommunication must not reach to Kings,
nor to whole Congregations. It Is so with Men; but God knows how to punish
Multitudes of Sinners, be they never so many. Though we have our ten thousands,
he has his twenty thousands to come against us, as our Savior Joel. iii. He
has his Rasor, not only his Volsellae to pluck out some disordered hair, but
to shave and make bare all the body, Ezekiel. v. 1. He can command his Sword to go
through the Land, Ezekiel. xiv. 3. His Judgments are in the earth; and so they are
present, and actual Judgments. Conceive them in a threefold nearness and
propinquity: 1. When these Judgments are aliorum poenae. When we see should
learn righteousness. It Is the wisdom which Christ teaches us; When our enemy is
afarr off, we should send and sue for conditions of peace. That Is the first,
and best way of amendment by Gods Judgments; when the visible Judgments of God
upon others make Sapere aliorum exempl^; to learn our lesson by other men's
sufferings.

Well, we have over-slipt that time, we are nothing bettered Samaria have
wrought no good upon Jerusalem; There is yet,

2. A nearer propinquity, when these Judgments of God are Nobis impendentia.
Ecc^ Iudex ante for^s adstat; The Judge stands before the door; that comes
closer to us, and does more nearly concern us. When a dismal cloud of
vengeance hovers over our heads, when we find ourselves beset with his
judgments, when the tokens of Gods displeasure begin to appear upon us;
discontents, divisions, great thoughts of heart, rumors shall be upon rumors,
as the Prophet speaks; when God has unsheathed his David did over Jerusalem,
ready to smite us, then it is high time to look about us; Quando nondum (...),
sed adhuc imminente and minante adversario, p^cem quaerimus, that is Sapere
nostro periou^o. To learn Righteousness, upon fear of Judgments, it is servile;
but yet it may be accepted, may prevent actual punishments. Had we feared them,
we should not have felt them.

Well, we have lost that advantage too* There is yet,

3. Another propinquity, and that is worst of all. That is, When his judgments
are Nobis incumbentia. They are already Sapere proprio damno. What? Know you
not that Egypt is destroyed? O! it is high time to awaken, when Gods judgments
have broken in upon us, and begun to consume us.

We have seen the first particular of the Text; Doctorem, that which must teach
us, His Judgments; Now, let us consider

Second; that is Disciplina, the Lesson we must learn by them; We must learn
Righteousness.

And here we have three things observeable;

1. Who are the Scholars; They are the Inhabitants of the World. 2. What is
their Duty; they must be Learners. 3. What is their Lesson; they must learn
Righteousness.
1. The Inhabitants of the world; they are the Scholars that must be taught and
instructed by these judgments. The Prophet's speech, we see, is of a large
circumference. It takes in all, It aims not at any one rank, or order of men,
to reform them and all will be well; No, the amendment must be answerable to
the judgment. If that be general and over-spreading the earth, the reformation
must be as general. The plaster must be as broad as

There is a necessary connection in these two combinations.

1* National sins, bring National judgments; that is the first; and then 2.
National Judgments call for National Repentance.

In Joel ii. we read of two Trumpets sounding;


1. One in the first Verse, there we have it; Blow the Trumpet in Sion, Sound
an alarm, let all the inhabitants of the Land tremble at it; then, 2. At Verse.
xv. There is another Trumpet sounding; Blow the Trumpet in Sion, proclaim a
Fast; call all to repentance.
This Trumpet must sound as loud, give as shrill a noise, as did the other
Trumpet* all the inhabitants of the Land must be called to repentance. And the
Use of this second Trumpet belongs to us of the Clergy. We are to lift up our
voices like trumpets, to call to repentance. As for that other Trumpet, to
Aaron observe that rule which God gives to them for this use of the Trumpet,
Numb. x. 7. When the Congregation is to be gathered together, you shall blow,
but you shall not sound an Alarm. Sure, in all the Scripture, we find not any
Prophet of God, by any sound of theirs, quickening or hastening of a judgment.
And when they did but foretell it, they did it with much regret and
commiseration* My bowels, my bowels, says the Prophet Jeremiah, I am pained at
my very heart, because thou have heard, O my soul, the sound of the trumpet,
the alarm of war, Ier. iv. 19. But for the Trumpet that calls to repentance,
let that like the Trumpet on Mount ^inai, sound louder, and louder. You are the
Lords Remembrancers, keep not ye silence. It Is our office, to teach every man,
and to warn every man, by the sound of this Trumpet. They say, there is a
tenure of Land in the Northern borders, which they call the tenure of Cornage;
they hold their land by sounding of a Trumpet upon the approach of an Enemy.
That is our tenure for what we possess. Our sound must go into all the earth,
and our words unto the end of the land; all the inhabitants of the land must be
called to repentance. Indeed, sometimes God punishes a few, that all may amend,
and his mercy delights in such compendious cures; but he never punishes all,
that a few only may mend; but expects, and exacts a general reformation. all
flesh have corrupted their ways, it is not Noah, Daniel, or Job, that can
prevail with God; nothing can appease him but a general repentance. Thus you
see, Who are the Scholars* All the Inhabitants of the Land. 2. What is their
duty? They are required to learn; And learning on our part, supposes teaching
on God's. His judgments Aug. Rarius inter prospera, crebrius inter adversa; I
spoke unto thee in thy prosperity, says God, but thou said, I will not hear,
Ier. xxii. 21. but then he opens our ears by his corrections, Job xxxvi. he
delivers us over to afflictions, (...), (as S. Basil speaks) as to so many
cursed Schoolmasters, that we may learn obedience by the things which we suffer,
as the Apostle speaks, Gedeon, he took briers, and thorns, and with them he
taught the men of Succoth; Judge. viii. 16. Res prospera donum est consolantis;
res adversa, donum est admonentis Dei, says S. Aug. Does he grant us
prosperity? then he does encourage us; Does he send us adversity? then he does
admonish us, Ut, qui beneficiis non intelligitur, plagis intelligatur, says
Cyprian, that we may learn to know him by his punishments, whom we would not
acknowledge in his mercies. His judgments, they are speaking judgments; as God
says to Moses, Exodus iv. If they will not hearken to the voice of the first
Sign, Gods judgments are Iudicia vocalia, and clamantia too; not dumb and
silent, but loud speaking judgments.

And that calls for our Attention; Audiam quid loquatur Dominus; If he speak,
it becomes us to listen; If he teaches, it is fit He that planted the ear,
shall not he hear? says David; The consequence is as good and strong; He that
planted the ear, shall not he be heard? he that chastises the Heathen, shall
no^ he correct Us? That is the duty of the Text; We must all learn
Righteousness. Surely, if Gods Rod be upon us, we may conclude, there is some
things, either not known, or mistaken, or forgotten, or neglected in point of
duty. Indeed, as S. Aug. says, Ti^a shame for some men to begin to learn, but
it is a greater shame to continue ignorant. We should be (...), learn betimes;
but if we have let slip that opportunity, we must Paul to such? What, have you
suffered so many things in vain? If it be yet in vain, Gal. iii. 4.

And Learners we must be, and that looks at our own duty, what concerns our
selves to know and do; not become teachers of other men's duties. And yet, to
invert the words of the Apostle; Whereas for this time, we should be all
learners now; how few of us are learners? how many of us will teach, and find
fault with others? Aliena satagimus, and nostra negligimus, as Chrysostom What
have I done, says Jeremiah of the people of his time; and it is too true of
us. So far we are from Ionahs confession, Propter me temtest^ haec, My sin^
have had an hand in raising this tempest, that we come not to the Disciples
suspicion of themselves, Master, is it I? Every man will be an officer to
attach others, none acknowledges himself a malefactor, and condemns himself.
Curiosum genus ad cognoscendam vitam alienam, desidiosum ad corrigendam suam;
exceeding curious to find fault with others, extreme careless to reform
themselves. (...), very diligent to search other men's sores, but neglect our
own, and let them rankle and putrify.

Learn then we must; and that, may be, we will be content to do. It Is but the
business of the brain. Hearing, and conceiving, and remembering, there is no
great pains in that; nay, may be, much delight and pleasure in learning and
knowing. (...), says Aristotle; there is much pleasure in learning, and
increase of knowledge. Man, naturally, is (...), an men, if we do not practice
them; (...), Ambulando discimus ambulare; we teach children to go, not by rules
and precepts, but by making them go. S. John bids us take heed we mistake not
in this point; Little children, let' no man deceive you, he that does
righteousness, is righteous, 1 John iii. 7. A good understanding have they that
do thereafter, Psalm. iii. Such learning, is to some purpose. And this brings in,

3. The last particular, the Lesson to be learned; that is Righteousness. And
take the sum of this duty in these three particulars; 1. It is Primarium
officium. Righteousness is that which God chiefly aims at in all our
afflictions; To make us a righteous people, zealous of good works. Indeed,
there are other substantial duties, which he requires of us, and expects at our
hands, in the day of our visitation. Prayers, and Fastings, and Mourning, and
the acts of Humiliation; they are pious, and profitable, and seasonable duties
when Gods Hand is heavy upon us. Humble your selves under the mighty hand of
God, says Saint James, Return to me, with fasting, and with weeping, and with
mourning, says the Lord, Joel ii. In that day did the Lord call to weeping,
and to mourning, and to girding with Sackcloth, Isai. xxii. 12. And the neglect
of those duties, were an high provocation; Verse. 14. But yet, the doing of
these, is not the thing that God chiefly aims at; as if all were well when
these services were performed. These are not Iustitiae, but conditurae
Iustitiarum, as Origin speaks; they are but instrumental, and preparative
duties, to fit and dispose us to the great duty of Righteousness; 1. They are
Realia insignia, real confessions of our sinful 2. They are Incitamenta
poenitentiae, good provocations to Conversion and Amendment. 3. They are
Testimonia interni doloris, visible testimonies of our inward Contrition.
But yet they come short of the works of Righteousness. They may serve for
Physic, but not for Diet, and the regiment of health. We do not say, a man is
recovered, because his physic works kindly. The life, and strength of Piety,
consists in Righteousness. It Is not (...), says Chrysostom, Righteousness, and
the amendment of their lives that prevailed for deliverance. It Is not said,
That God saw their Fasting; but, God saw their Works, that they turned from
their evil way, and he repented, and spared them. It Is Righteousness, says
Solomon, that delivers from death. 2. It is, Substantiale officium. The Lesson
to be learned by Gods judgments, is Righteousness; and that is a Substantial
duty. Our Savior calls them, (...), the weighty things of the Law. It consists
in the performance of real, and substantial, and moral Obedience. The neglect
of those duties, God revengeth; and the practice of these, he calls us unto by
his severe judgments. It is not the altering of some outsides, and rituals, to
purchase some external forms, that God will be appeased with; or that which he
ayms at in his heavy judgments: and yet this is the construction that we make
of all his judgments; As if we should pull down an house, to remove a few
cob-webs, that are in the roof of it; or pluck out the eye, that we may free it
from a mote; or (as Gerson wittily) as if to kill a Fly, that is on a man's
forehead, we should take an hammer, and beat out his brains. No, What says
God, when he reckons with his people? Psalm. l. I will not reprove thee for thy
Sacrifices, and Burnt-offerings. It Is in Righteousness and Holiness. We must
not, cum capiti mederi debeamus, reduviam curare, think to cure a vital part,
by washing away a mote, or freckle that appears in our face. Relieve the
oppressed, says God, judge the cause of the poor, break every heavy yoke, let
Righteousness run down like a mighty stream, that is able to quench the flames
of Gods anger, and just indignation. 3. The Lesson to be learned, is
Righteousness, and that is Universale officium; it is a comprehensive duty, of a
large circumference. 1. It takes in all estates, and orders of men. Some
virtues are appropriate to some sorts of men, they suit not with others. Good
Government, that is the Magistrate's virtue; Obedience, that is the duty of the
people: and so in many others. But Righteousness, it is of universal
concernment. It speaks, like John Baptist, to People, to Publicans, to
Soldiers; teaches every one of them what they must do. Warns us, as S. John
does, I write unto you Children, I write unto you Young men, I write unto you
Old men: It gives every man his charge. And 2. It takes in all sorts of duties;
it is (...), every virtue: As health is the (...), the good temper of all the
humors of the body, so is Righteousness the just proportion, and exercise of
every virtue. And Gods judgments ayms at both Chron. xxviii. 10. And now ye
purpose to keep under the children of Judah and Jerusalem for bondmen, and
bond-women unto you; but are there not with you, even with you, sins against
the Lord your God? It was a word in season, and gave a check and stop to their
rage and fury. Oh! that it might do the like with us. And then every


No; Let us resolve of an universal Reformation, and then Return, and Repent,
and leave a Blessing behind him. Let us first learn the Didactical part of
Esay's Song; and then we shall have cause to take up the Eucharistical part. He
will put a new Song into our mouths, even Thanksgiving unto our God. The
righteous Nation shall have perfect peace, as our Prophet here promises. The
Apostles words will admit of this inversion; we shall find it true, The fruit
of Peace, it is sown in Righteousness. Indeed, in this holy Husbandry, Et
tellus, and annus sructificat; Righteousness and Peace, they help each
Righteousness, that is the soil out of which Peace springs; and Peace, that
is the season, in which Righteousness flourishes. Sow to your selves in
Righteousness, and reap in mercy, Hosea x. 12. The work of Righteousness shall
be Peace; and the effect of Righteousness shall be Quietness, and Assurance for
ever, Isa. xxxii. 17. As S. Augustine sweetly meditates on those words of the
Psalmist, Righteousness and Peace have kissed each other; Fac Iustitiam (says
he) and habebis Pacem; duae amicae sunt, tu unam vis, and alteram non facis;
nemo est, qui non vult Pacem, sed non omnes volunt operari Iustitiam. Every man
wishes for Righteousness. No, says the Father, Si amicam Pacis non amaveris,
non amabit te Pax. Either love Righteousness, the companion of Peace, or Peace
it self will never love thee, or delight to dwell with thee.

Now. the God of Peace, that delights in the Peace and Prosperity

To whom, etc.









A
Habbakkuk iii. 17, 18. Although the fig tree shall not blossom, neither shall
fruit be in the vines; the labor of the olive shall fail, and the fields
should yield no meat, The flock shall be cut off from the fold, and there shall
be no herd in the stall; Yet I will rejoice in the Lord, I will be joyful in
the God of my salvation.
THE Text, it is a Prophetical Intimation of a Judgment of Dearth, and Famine,
that should fall upon the Land. In it, the Lord threatens to break the staff of
bread, to send cleanness of teeth, and scarcity of all things; a general want
of all the supports of life.

And this passage of Scripture, together with the Context, sets down the
entertainment that the Prophet,

1. They entertain it with fear; Verse 16. When I heard this, my belly
trembled, my lips quivered at the voice, rottenness entered into my bones, and I
trembled in my self. 2. They entertain it with faith, and confidence; yea, with
Although this affliction shall befall us; Yet will I rejoice in the Lord, I
will joy in the God of my salvation.
See a sweet combination, and mixture of two contrary dispositions in the heart
of this holy Prophet.

1. A disposition of fear, and sorrow. 2. A disposition of joy, and comfort.
1. When he foresees this great calamity, he fears and trembles at it. 1. Take
it either as a natural affection, hearing of Abraham in Egypt is afraid of his
life: Good Jacob, when Esau comes toward him, is afraid to meet him. David,
pursued by Saul, cries out in fear, I shall one day fall by the hand of Saul.
Elijah was subject to the like Passion; he fled for his life. Want, and
poverty, and pain, and misery, are fearful conditions even to the Saints of
God. Or, 2. Conceive this fear, as an holy, and religious disposition in them.
When God threatens to bring a judgment upon us, the first apprehensions we must
have of his menaces, must be apprehensions of fear and sorrow, and humiliation,
motions tending to Repentance. My flesh trembles for fear of thee, says David,
Psalm. cxix. 120. And I am afraid of thy Judgments. It is not fortitude, but
fool-hardiness to stout it out with God, and not to startle at the signs and
tokens of his displeasure. How was God delighted with this awful disposition in
good Josiah, when he wept and his heart melted at the hearing of those Ahab.
2. When this grace, has had a perfect work in us; then faith, and hope, and
confidence, will be seasonable graces. I trembled in my self, that I might rest
in the day of trouble, v. 16. Then fear shall give place to joy and comfort.
This holy fear, will bring in faith. And this faith, will cast out fear. As
mercy, on Gods part, rejoices against judgment; so faith, on our part, shall
triumph over fear. In the multitude of the sorrows that I had in my heart, thy
comforts have refreshed my soul, Psalm. xciv. 20. In the midst of all these sad
occurrents, yet will I rejoice in the Lord, I will joy in the God of my
salvation.
These are the two blessed Entertainments of any threatened

1. A deep Humiliation. 2. A steadfast Faith, and Consolation.
For the words themselves, we may resolve them into these two particulars;

1. Is a sad Supposition; Although the fig tree shall not blossom, the
strength, and comfort of all the creatures fail us; and we suffer a want and
destitution of all things; That Is the Supposition. Here is, 2. A comfortable
Resolution; Although these miseries befall Yet will I rejoice in the Lord, I
will joy in the God of my salvation.
First, For the Supposition. And the Sum and Substance of it will appear unto
us in these three Extractions, which we will draw out of the Text.

I. The Strength and Comfort of the Creatures, may fail us; there is in them a
fading, and vanishing Condition; The fig tree may not blossom, the Vine may be
fruitless, the fields may yield no meat: we may be destitute of all these
succors, and supports

All these helps, and supplies for life, have a possibility in them of failing
of us. Reckon not upon them as certain and unchangeable comforts, that will not
disappoint us. As it was in the Manna, which they fed on in the Wilderness;
it is so in all the helps and means of this life, there is a Worm of Corruption
that will breed in them.

This uncertainty, and failing in the Creature, will appear to us in these
three Particulars;

1. In their production and breeding, there is a great In the morning sow thy
seed, and in the evening withold not thine hand; for thou know not whether
shall prosper, either this, or that, says Solomon, Ecclesiast. xi. 6. He who
sowes, sowes in hope, upon adventure, God gives it a body at his pleasure. The
dew of Heaven, the influences of the Stars, the lust and strength of the Soil,
all uncertainties to man's Providence. Ye have sown much, and bring in little,
says God in Haggai, chap. i. 6. Ye looked for twenty measure and there were
but ten; for fifty vessels, and there were but twenty, chap. 2. 16. A great
uncertainty in their Production. 2. There is a great deal of uncertainty and
insufficiency in their use; there may be a failing in that. It is possible we
may receive the fruits of the earth in plenty, and abundance, and yet come
sho^t of the comforts of them. The Prophet tells us of Bread, and of a Staff of
Bread. This Staff of Bread may be Levit. xxvi. 26. When I have broken the Staff
of your Bread -- then ye shall eat, and not be satisfied. There is (...), and
(...); Bread and the Foison, and nourishing strength in Bread. We may have the
first, and yet miss of the second; and so, that creature will prove empty, and
insufficient to us.

And the reason is, because the vigor, and nourishing power of the creatures,
are not originally in them, but by a voluntary derivation from God into them.
He is the Author, and Fountain of Life. Thou sendest forth thy Spirit, and
they are quickened, Psalm. civ. 30. It is in him, that we live, and move, and
have our being. This strength, and helpfulness in the creature, it is but as a
beam from the Sun; intercept the Sun, and the beam vanishes. It is as a branch
from the root; divide it from the root, and the branch withers. It is but as
a stream from the fountain; seal up the fountain, and the stream dries up. Our
Saviviour tells us, Matthew. iv. 4. Man lives not by bread alone, but by every
word that proceeds out of the mouth of God. He must speak that word, or our
bread will not nourish us. There is a threefold Word on which it does depend:

1. A Verbo ordinante. He has given an original Law and command to the
creatures, that they may nourish us. 2. A Verbo sustentante. These weak
creatures must, in their use, be supported by the word of his Power, or they
cannot comfort us. If he withdraws away his face, they perish, Psalm. civ. 29.
3. A Verbo benedicente. That virtue that is in them will lie dead, unable to
put forth it self, except his Blessing gives it an actual working, to refresh
and cherish us. who fills our hearts with food and gladness, Acts xiv. 17.
Without which influence from God, how poor and insufficient are all helps of
nature? As the Prophet Haggai expresses it, Chap. i. 6. Ye eat, but ye have not
enough; ye drink, but ye are not filled with drink; ye cloth you, but there is
none warm. Of themselves, they are poor, beggarly elements, empty husks, their
goodness is not enclosed in them. The comfort they convey unto us, it is from an
higher fountain. That Is the second, they may fail in their use. 3. The very
being, and substance of these natural helps, carry with it this condition, That
they are vanishing, and fading. 1. As creatures; so there is a seed of decay,
and fading in them. The most excellent, and permanent creature of it self Heb.
i. 6. There is a Pondus Naturae, and there must be Manutenentia Divina, that
must sustain it. As S. Augustine speaks of man, He is Terraefilius, Nihili
nepos; the Earth was his Mother, Nothing was his Grandfather. As all creatures
came out of Nothing, so thither would they sink again, and return to nothing.
2. As sublunary creatures, so by their natural composition, they are subject to
fading and corruption. All things under the Moon, are fading and transitory.
The heavens have a frame of perpetuity; but these creatures, that are the means
of 3. Consider the creatures as living under Gods curse for the sin of man, and
so they are subject to a greater weakness and vanity. Gods displeasure does
blast them, suck out the strength, and vigor of them; and it brings upon them,
not only Adam's punishment, not to yield us fruit without our labor; but,
often times, Cain's curse, they are barren, fruitless, though we do labor. As
his Blessing can put a strange virtue and vivacity into them; Daniel's Pulse
was more nourishing then the Master, the tree that thou cursedst, is presently
withered. See this in the Israelites, they must needs have Quails, and
Dainties, the most nourishing food; he sent it them to the full; but what says
David? He sent leanness withal into their soul, Psalm. cvi. 15. It never
thrives with them. He sent among his fat ones, leanness, Isa. x. 16.

This vanishing weakness of the creatures, should make us think what to reckon
of our lives. Such as the fuel is, such perishing meats: Labor not for the
meat that perishes, John vi. 27. And S. Paul sets out this condition, both of
meat and life, 1 Cor. vi. 13. Meats for the belly, and the belly for meats, but
God shall destroy both it and them. Whosoever drinks of this water, shall
thirst again, John iv. 13. Consolatiunculae temporales, as S. Augustine calls
them, petty, transient comforts, like the refreshings of Ionah's gourd, but the
shade of a few leaves, and there is a worm at the root of

So much of the first Extraction; The creatures are weak, and may fail us.

II. A second Extraction from the Text, is, When Scarcity and Want comes as a
judgment from God, and from his wrath and heavy displeasure, then it is
extreme, and extraordinary, and beyond the course of nature. The creatures have
naturally some weakness in them, they are subject to fade and decay; but when
his anger blasts them, then Want and Scarcity proves far more heavy, and
unsupportable. It is like a sharp arrow, shot by

1. Gods anger will cause a dearth and famine in a most plentiful and fruitful
land. The land of Canaan was the fruitfullest of all lands, as the garden of
God; a land flowing with milk and honey; a land of vineyards; the best of all
lands, as Moses describes it, Deuteronomy. viii. It was Terra fructus centesimi; it
brought forth to Isaac, no less then an hundredfold, Genesis xxvi. Eschol, and
the people, who had seen the plenty of Egypt, admired it. It was so rich a
land, that it was the granary of other neighboring Countries. It had not only
plenty for it self, but bounty for others. Solomon gave twenty thousand
measures of Wheat, for food; and twenty measures of pure Oil, to Hiram, King of
Tire. 1 King. v. 11. And the Country of Tire was nourished by this Country.
Acts xii. 10. Yet, when God is displeased, Psalm. cvii. 34. A fruitful land
makes he barren. He turns Paradise into a wilderness. He brings Want, in monte
filii Olei, Scarcity in a most fruitful land. That Is the first Aggravation. 2.
Gods anger will cause a Dearth in those Fruits, that are naturally most
yielding and pleasant. The Fig Tree, of all trees, is most fruitful, bringing
forth of it own accord, with the least care, and culture, fructifying in the
most barren, and stony places; bearing twice a year; soonest ripening; almost
never failing. So the Vine, that is a fruitful Plant; it is made the Emblem of
Plenty, and Fruitfulness. That Is a print of Gods judgment, when the most
hopeful, and plentiful of all the creatures, 3. A third print of Gods anger in
this Scarcity threatened, is, That it is a national, general, over-spreading
Famine. Usually, if one part of the land suffers Scarcity, other parts abound
with Plenty. But when God calls for a Famine, sends a Rashan languisheth, and
Carmel, and the flower of Lebanon languisheth, Nahum. i. 4. These were the
richest soil of all the Country, yet these were parched up, and fruitless, by
his displeasure. When he sends a Judgment, he will bid it go through the land,
Ezekiel. xiv. He will make the whole Land to mourn, bring an overflowing scourge
upon it. 4. A fourth print of Gods anger is, He makes it an universal scarcity
upon all kinds of food, and supports of life. Here is the staff of Bread
broken, and the herds and flocks fail, and the The Land is as the Garden of
Eden before it; and behind it, a desolate Wilderness, Joel ii. 3. Joel. i. 2.
Hear this, ye old men, ye who can talk of dear years, has this been in your
days, or even in the days of your fathers? -- That which the Palmer-worm has
left, has the Locust eaten; and that which the Locust has left, has the
Caterpillar eaten. O, Gods Judgments make a full end. He makes the decays of
Nature excessive, and violent. As it is said of the Grass-hoppers of Egypt,
there were never such since; exceeding grievous.
Now, Gods displeasure oft-times breaks out in this kind of

1. It is a most just Judgment, thus to cut us short, to diminish our portion,
to call for a dearth, and poverty upon the land, to withdraw from us the
succor and supply of the creatures. For sin forfeits all our interest and
right we have in the comforts of the creatures. We are not sovereign and
supreme owners of them, but we hold them of God; our title to them is from him,
and that upon condition of our duty, and homage, and obedience to him. Thus we
see God claims, and challenges them all, as his own. It Is my oil, and my meat,
my flour, and my honey, Ezekiel. xvi. 18, 19. Now, wicked men, they incur not
only some smaller penalties, but it is just with God to seize all the
creatures into his own hands, and to forbid them to yield their fruit unto us.
Thus he punished the first sin, Cursed be the earth for thy sake, thorns, and
thistles shall it bring forth unto thee, Genesis iii. Cains wickedness, When thou
tillest the ground, it shall not yield to thee her strength. So also he
threatened the Jews for profaning his Sabbaths, That the land should lie waste,
and keep her Sabbaths; there should be neither sowing, nor reaping, Lev. xxvi.
34. God tells us the Land is his, we are but sojourners with him. Or, as
Parisiensis tells, God does as some Landlords, lets out the world to halves.
There arises a double fruit. 1. Glory, that he reserves to himself. 2. Comfort,
that is our half.
Pay him his glory, or else it is just with him to deny us our 2. This scourge
of Scarcity, it is an equal, and suitable, and proper punishment. Our sins are,
usually, the sins of abusing the plenty of a good Land, to luxury and excess;
and it is the usual rule of Gods proceedings, In quo quis peccat, in eo
plectitur. The matter of our sinning, commonly becomes the matter of our
suffering. Thus God fits the punishment of Jerusalem, suitable to their sin;
Thou have taken my meat, and my flour, and mine oil, and offered them to Idols;
therefore I will diminish thine ordinary food, Ezekiel. xvi. 19. So, when God
threatens a scarcity of wine, Joel i. 5. Whom does he call upon to take notice
of this Judgment? Awake ye drunkards, and weep, and howl all ye drinkers of
wine, because of the new wine, for it is cut off from your mouths; howl ye
drunkards; and so, howl ye worldlings when scarcity seizes upon you; you have
sinned in the abuse of these creatures; your excess has brought this judgment
upon you. God usually meets with men in their own ways. Covetousness, and
earthly-mindedness, luxury, and excess, all of them are abuses of these good
gifts 3. This calamity of dearth, and scarcity, the failing of the creatures,
that the earth does not give her increase, it is a proportionable judgment. The
creatures are made to be our servants, we are made to be Gods servants. As long
as we do perform our service to him, the creatures shall yield their strength,
and increase, and prove serviceable to us. But, if we fail God, how just is it
then that the creatures should fail us? As S. Aug. sweetly observes, our Reason
would not obey God, therefore our Sense shall not obey Reason. As Hushi said to
Absalom, Whom all Israel, makes King, and serves, him will I serve; excusing
his seeming revolt from David; so, when the creatures start aside, and revolt
from us, prove unserviceable to us, it is their real profession, They must serve
their grand Lord; if we revolt from him, they revolt from us. The Father's
words are these, Lib. 13. de Civit. Qui superiorem Dominum deseruerunt,
inferiorem famulum ad suum arbitrium non tenebant; And, de Nupt. and Conjug.
lib. 1. cap. 16. Injustum erat, ut ei obtemperetur, a servo suo, qui non
obediverat domino suo. 4. God oft-times, singles out dearth and famine, to
punish a Nation with; it is a deep, and evident, and apparent judgment. War,
and oppression, and captivity, many other calamities, man's hand is seen in
them, they are agents and instruments in bringing them upon us. And in such
calamities, we can be content not to see Gods hand in them, but to charge our
sufferings upon the Pharaoh labored a long time to prove that God sent not
those plagues upon him, but that Moses wrought them some other way, his
Enchanters could do as much as that came to, till at last they cried out, It is
the finger of God. Now, in such a judgment as want, and famine, to weaken the
strength of nature, to make that fruitful womb of the earth barren to us, none
but God make the heavens as brass, and the earth as Iron, and restrain the
celestial influences. Can man bind the sweet influences of Pleiades? or loose
the bonds of Orion? Job xxxviii. 31. Can any but God, forbid the clouds to drop
fatness? No, these Judgments are (...), we must cry out, God fights against us.
5. Famine, it is a Scourge wherewith he uses to chastise a people, as being a
comprehensive Judgment, like a chain-shot that bears all before it. Many other
calamities that are brought upon us by humane means, are most-what avoidable by
humane daily bread. The profit of the earth is for all; the King himself is
served by the field, Eccles. v. 9. No King can help against this Judgment. If
the Lord do not help thee, whence shall I help thee? Out of the barn-floor, or
out of the wine press? said the King of Israel, in the famine of Samaria, 2
Kings vi. 27. These extremities are unavoidable; They will make us look up to
heaven, and say with Iehosaphat, O Lord, we have no might against this Judgment
that comes upon Neither know we what to do, but our eyes are toward thee, 2 Chronicles. xx. 12.
III. A third Extraction from the Text is, Gods own children and servants, are
liable to these extremities of want and scarcity, which God brings upon the
world, as well as others. The Prophet

Indeed, sometimes, and in some Judgments, God vouchsafes a special exemption
to his Church and Children. Instance in three cases;

1. To preserve an holy portion of his People, and a Nursery for his Church.
Isaiah acknowledges it, Chap. i. 9. Except the Lord of hosts had left us a
small remnant, we should have been as Sodom and like unto Gomorrah. Still a
remnant shall be saved. And S. Paul applies it to the preservation of his
chosen People, Romans ix. 29. Gods Church must remain to all Posterity, no
Judgment must sweep them all away. In this case, when common Judgments are sent
upon the world, he exempts his own. When the deluge came upon the old world, an
Ark was provided to save Noah, and the holy seed. When he visits them, he does
it in measure, he makes not a full end of them. 2. God exempts his own People
from common Judgments, when the Judgments are sent in the cause of his Church,
to manifest and maintain that they are his People, and that their Egypt, Gosben
was privileged; he put a difference betwixt the Hebrews, and the Egyptians; he
passed over them, when he plagued their enemies. Thus in the case of famine,
Isaiah tells the enemies of Gods People; Behold, my servants shall eat, but ye
shall be hungry; Behold, my servants shall drink, but ye shall be thirsty;
Behold, my servants shall rejoice, but ye shall be ashamed; Isai. lxv. 13.
Malachi assures them of this exemption, and that God will make it appear Who
are his, Chap. iii. 17. In that day, when I make up my jewels, I will spare
them, as a man spares his own Son that serves him; and then shall ye diseevn
between the righteous and the wicked, between him that serves God, and him
that serves him not. 3. In the punishment of those sins, which his children
have withstood, opposed, protested against, and mourned for; usually in that
case, God exempts such Saints, and Servants of his. This obtained Lot's
exemption out of Sodom's overthrow, he mourned for the abominations that were
done in Sodom; and S. Peter makes it a ruling case, and argues from it, 2 Pet.
ii. 5. If God spared not the old world, but saved Noah, the eighth person, a
Preacher of Righteousness; and in the overthrow of Sodom, verf. 7. delivered
just Lot, vexed with the filthy conversation of the wicked; thence he gathers
this Conclusion, verse. 9. The Lord knows how to deliver the godly out of
temptation. This protected Jeremiah, and kept him out of captivity. This holy
carriage exempted Baruch; Ezekiel. ix. 4.
But out of these, and the like cases, it is true, Gods own people and servants
are subject to these common calamities, and judgments, as well as others.
Abraham and his family, are by famine driven into Egypt, Genesis xii. So Isaac and
his family were driven into the Philistines country, Genesis xvvi. And Jacob, and
his family, by want, were driven into Egypt. Thus the People of God in David's
time, suffered a famine of three years. Eli^s that great Prophet, was forced
out of the land of Israel, into Sarepta, by reason of want.

The Saints have their share and portion in these common calamities upon diverse
Reasons;

1. The differences, that God puts 'twixt his own and others, are not seen in
the administration of these outward things, not in making their portion in
riches, and outward prosperity, more full then others. As he makes the wicked
partakers of temporal blessings, his Sun, and his Rain does good to them,
Matthew. v. 45. Communia esse voluit, and commoda profanis, and incommoda suis,
Tertul. Solomon observes it. Eccle. ix. 1. No man knows love, or hatred, by all
that is before them; all things come alike, to the righteous, and to the
wicked. The privileges of Gods People are not temporal, but spiritual; not
exemption from common sufferings, but grace and comfort in them; that is the
Saints portion. Otherwise, Religion would not be a matter of faith, but sense;
and men would serve God, not for piety, but for plenty. 2. The Saints are
partakers in these common sufferings, as being parts and members of those
Societies and People who are thus punished. A Christian, is both filius Seculi,
and filius Dei. He has that in him, which belongs to the present generation,
as well as that which pertains to the state of regeneration. Now, the sins of
any body, or nation, may involve all the members in the same Judgment. Haec
mala, nos quoque perstringunt, ut vobis inherentes. Lot was carried away in the
Captivity of Sodom, as cohabiting with them. As in personal sins, the Father's
sin does subject the Son to punishment, quia filius pars patris; all Achans
family was Achans sacrilege; so, in national sins, the Saints of God, though
personally innocent, yet because members of a nocent body, are liable to
undergo the temporal smart of national Judgments. 3. The Servants of God, are
often contributers to the common heap of sin, that brings down Judgments.
Though they be Manasses his bloodshed, but even good Hezekiah his vanity, and
boasting of his riches, brought upon the Land the Babylonish Captivity.
Saint Augustine meditates upon this point piously; and gives reasons, why good
Christians are involved in common calamities.

1. Quamvis long absint a flagitiis, non tamen a delictis; Sinners they are,
though not outrageous ones; and their sins, may be, are tanto crebriora, quanto
minora. Small sins frequently committed, are just provocations. 2. They are
punished here with wicked men, says he, Quia non sic vivunt cum impiis, ut cum
iis vivendum est. They suffer with wicked men; because living with them, they
do not teach them, and admonish 3. Saints suffer in temporal things, because,
though they do not luxuriously abuse them, yet, says he, they do too much
enjoy them. Simul cum impiis flagellantur, non quia simul agunt malam vitam,
sed quia simul amant temporalem vitam; non aequaliter, sed tamen simul.
We have seen the Supposition; Come we now;

Secondly, to the resolution; though all these evils come upon Yet will I
rejoice in the Lord --

And here are two prints of Piety in this Speech of the Prophet;

1. Is implied in this Particle, Although; that is an act of forecast; these
miseries may befall us. 2. Is implied in this Particle, Yet; that is an act of
preparation against these miseries. 1. Quamvis, Although, that forecasts the
misery. 2. Tamen, Yet, that forelays the Remedy. Praevidet, He foresees sorrows
in the first. Providet, He provides against them in the second.


1. He forecasts it, that miseries and afflictions may, nay, will befall us.
That Is one point of wisdom, and print of piety, to forecast it in our
thoughts. Prosperity will not hold always; we must look for changes. Summer
will not last all the year long, a Solomon's counsel, Eccles. xi. 8. If a man
live many years, and rejoice in them all; yet let him remember the days of
durkness, for they shall be many. It is good to premeditate on evil days, to
acquaint our selves with the thoughts of poverty, and sickness, and adversity,
and mortality. It will have a threefold good operation upon thee. 1. It will
moderate thy care, and pursuit after these outward things. What, shall I toil,
and vex my self to get that which I cannot hold? but must part with all, I know
not how soon. It Is Solomon's advice, Prove. xxiii. 4. Labor not to be rich,
cease from thine own wisdom; Will thou set thine eyes upon that which is not?
for riches certainly make themselves wings, they fly away like an Eagle
toward heaven. Certainly they will do so. All the certainty that is in them
is, that they are uncertain. 2. This Forecast, it will moderate thy delight in
them. Will thou place thy joy in that which thou can not enjoy? It will make
us we shall not, apponere cor, not set our hearts upon them. 3. It will
moderate our sorrow in parting with them. It
2. As he forecasts them; so, in this Particle Yet, he provides against them.
And that sets out the holy entertainment which the Prophet will give to this
foreseen Calamity. 1. Tell an Atheist, a Judgment is coming from God, he
entertains Let him hasten his work, that we may see it, said those mockers in
the Prophet, Isai. v. 19. 2. Tell a voluptuous man of it, that poverty and
scarcity is approaching, What says he? Let Us then enjoy the world while we
may, let us crown our selves with Rose-buds before they be withered, Let Us eat,
and drink, for to morrow we shall die. 3. Tell a Worldling, that want and
poverty is a coming, what says he? Let Us store up then, and provide against
it, lay up against a dear year, fence out Gods Judgments when they shall
besiege us, keep them out from entering upon us. These, and such

And this Piety in the Prophet appears in two degrees, that

1. Here is the low degree of the affliction; he takes it at the worst; he
supposes himself not only in some necessity, but in extremity, in want of all
outward things. He says not, Only if I have food, and raiment, though but
hard fare, and coarse clothing, it shall suffice; He submits not only to
Agur's portion, Neither riches, nor poverty, but food convenient to sustain
nature; He stops not at Micaiah's diet, Bread of affliction, and water of
affliction; No, he knows how to undergo the loss of all things. Let poverty
come upon him as an armed man, and spoil him of 2. The Prophets Piety is seen
in another degree, that is the high degree of affection, with which he will
entertain this great affliction. 1. He makes not only use of his patience; he
will suffer patiently, and meekly, he will not murmr at it. 2. He resolves,
not only to be content with it, and well pleased with this condition; that is a
degree higher. Patience suffers it, but Contentment feels it not. Contentment,
is an Autarchie, it feels no want. But the Prophet rises higher; 3. He knows
how to rejoice in affliction. Joy, that is the affection that belongs to
happiness, and felicity. (...), Chrysostom. In the day of prosperity, rejoice;
but in the day of adversity, consider, says Solomon, Eccles. vii. 14. Sad
thoughts, one would think, are then seasonable. No, here the Prophet can
rejoice in the day of adversity. Nay, more, as S. Paul exhorts, Rejoice in the
Lord always, again I say rejoice, Phil. iv. 4. So here, this Feast of Joy, has
two Courses; 1. I will rejoice in the Lord. 2. I will joy in the God of my
salvation.




TWO SERMONS PREACHED UPON EASTER DAY.
ON
The First Sermon.
JOB xix. 25, 26, 27. For I know that my Redeemer lives, and that he shall
stand at the latter day upon the earth: And though after my skin, worms destroy
this body, yet in my flesh shall I see God: Whom I shall see for my self, and
mine eyes shall behold, and
THis Text is a Prophecy and Prediction of our Savior Christ's glorious
Resurrection; the great benefit, and mystery of our Religion, which the
Christian Church does this day celebrate. A Sacred Truth, requiring not only
the Assent, but the Devotion, and Adoration of our Faith. The work of this day
lays the greatest proofs of Christ's He was declared to be the Son of God, by
the Resurrection from the dead, Romans i. 4. And, when God was to bring his Son
back from the grave, this, and the like Prophesies, as Ushers, attended him,
and proclaimed before him, as Pharaoh before Joseph, Abrech, Bow the knee. Let
all the Angels of God worship him; Let every knee bow before him; Let every
tongue confess him; Let every soul receive, and embrace him.

It Is true, the incredulous, unbelieving Jews labor to obscure, and deface
this, and all other Prophesies of Christ's Resurrection; and, by a
mis-construction, to draw it away to another sense. They answer all these
Prophesies, as Esaias complains of them, chap. xxx. 10. They say to the Seers,
see not; and to the Prophets, prophecy not unto us right things, but prophecy
to us deceit.

The Jews, they pervert the Text, and some other Expositours mistake it; and
draw down the height and mystery of this

And, it is of good use to look back to these Prophesies, even after their
fulfilling: As the Angel spoke this day to the women at the Sepulcher, Come see
the place, where the Lord was laid; Christ is risen, it is of use to our faith,
to review these Prophesies; Come see the place that foretold his rising again;
the fulfilling of these Texts will greatly confirm our faith of his
Resurrection. As in your purchases, and possessions, though you be already
seized and stated in them, yet ye desire to get in all former Conveyances, to
strengthen your tenure: So, though you be possessed of this days benefit, yet
these Prophesies are as our forefathers records; we claim these Testimonies as
our Inheritance; our Faith holds by them.

To reflect upon these Prophesies, will confirm our belief in all other Truths,
as yet to be fulfilled; Impleta credimus, impleri videmus, implenda confidimus,
says S. Augustine: It will put David's Song into our mouths; As we have heard,
so have we seen: Heard it foretold, Seen it fulfilled. We may sing with the
Psalmist, All the ways of the Lord, are Mercy and Truth: Mercy in Promising,
Truth in Performing. We may confess with Solomon, Blessed be the Lord, who
spoke it with his mouth; and has with his hand fulfilled it. We may open our
Text, as Christ did; This day is this Scripture fulfilled in your ears; our
Faith may safely

For the words themselves, they report unto us a memorable, remarkable
Prophecy of the Resurrection; of a double Resurrection:

1. Here Job fore-sees, and fore-tells the Resurrection of Christ. Christ, who
by his Death Redeemed him, has again obtained an endless Life; That after his
fall by Death, he is recovered, and got up again; stands, and shall stand last
upon the earth. 2. He Prophesies of his own resurrection, That though he were
now in a dying condition, death had already seized upon him; yet he knew there
was hope in his death, that he should be raised from the grave of corruption,
to an everliving and blessed state and condition.
Now, surely, this is a Text of Scripture worthy of all acceptance,

1. It Is a clear Prophecy; there is not a fuller, more express description of
the Resurrection, in all the Scripture, then this of Job's. He speaks like an
Apostle, rather then a Prophet. O virum ante Evangelium, (...)! With Thomas, he
puts his hand into Christ's side, he holds and embraces him, and then his Faith
worships and adores his Redeemer; My Lord, and my God. 2. And then there is
another Excellency that commends it, Moses was the Penman of this Book. Job
lived in Moses his time, or before him. St. Chrysostom reckons him the fourth
from Esau. So timely a Prophecy of our Saviors Death and Resurrection, it is a
rare Monument. S. Peter tells us, that Christ's Resurrection was the Purchase of
our Inheritance. Now, in matters of Inheritance, the ancientest Deeds and
Conveyances are always the best. Here is a Court-roll written by Moses, the
first Penman that God ever employed; and here is a Copy taken up by Job, one
of the Primitive Saints, and by him conveyed to the Church for ever. It Paul,
that he had Posthumam fidem Resurrectionis; Last of all he was seen of me, as
born out of due time, 1 Cor. xv. Contrary, it is a great Dignity to Job, that he
is Primogenitus Fidei; First of all he was seen by him. His Faith has the
Birthright of all the Saints in the Old Scripture. It was the high praise of
those good women in the Gospel, that they rose early to go to the Sepulcher.
Job's Faith out-strips them all, carries him betimes to the grave of Christ; he
believes, and confesses his Resurrection.
The words then, they set out unto us a lively Profession of Job's Faith. Job,
indeed, is propounded to us as a pattern of patience, Iam. v. Ye have heard of
the patience of Job: And it was most remarkable. But yet patience, it is not an
original virtue; but springs, and arises from some other Grace. It Is Filia
Fidel; the Daughter of Faith, Romans v. It flows from Faith. Would you know what
made Job so patient in all his aff^ictions? Here I should utterly have fainted,
but that I believe to see the goodness of the Lord in the land of the Living,
says David, Psalm. cxvi. So should Job; his Faith kept him from fainting. Nay,
not only so, says S. Paul, Romans v. but by virtue of true Faith, We glory in
Tribulations. It makes Job endure them, cheerfully, comfortably, and even to
glory in them.

So then, let us a little vary the Apostle's Expression, and say, We have heard
of the Faith of Job. He makes a double Profession

1. Here is his Belief concerning Christ. Then, 2. Here is his Belief and
Confidence concerning himself.
First, his Profession concerning Christ. Wherein three things are observable;
all of them requisite in a right Believer:

1. Here is Salvificum Objectum; the (...) Object of his Faith, that is Christ,
in three main Articles of Faith to be believed: 1. Quod Redemptor; that he was
his Redeemer. 2. Quod Vivit; that his Redeemer was dead, and is alive Christ's
Resurrection. 3. Quod I^dicabit; he believes that he shall appear again at the
last day to judge the quick and the dead. He has redeemed me, He rose again
for me; He shall judge, and absolve, and give sentence for me: That Is the first
thing considerable, the Matter and Object of his Faith.
2. In his Profession; here is the Act of his Faith, and that is strong, and
lively, full of (...): He staggers not through unbelief, but is fully persuaded
of it: It is Scio, I 3. Here is Appropriatio Fidei, his Personal Interest that
he claims in Christ, and in all his benefits, in Meus; he is Mine; died, and
rose again, and will come at the latter day for my good and benefit. He
contents not himself with a Catholic Profession of these Truths in general;
but possesses himself of them, makes them his own by a close application.
I. See the Object of Job's Faith; that is,

1. Christ, a Redeemer: 2. Christ, alive from the dead: 3. Christ's appearing
again at the last day. These three are the stays and props of his hope, the
supporters of his comfort. And briefly take a double view of them: 1. In
reference to Job, who makes this holy Profession. 2. View them in themselves.

1. Job's Faith acknowledges Christ his Redeemer, Raiser, Judge; It was the
Faith which he lived by: And the Excellency of this Profession will appear, if
we take notice of Job in three Considerations: 1. Job a Patriarch; one long
before the Gospel was revealed: In the first and primitive times of the Church,
he speaks of Christ, fastens upon him, and comforts himself in him. 1. It is
the great Efficacy of our Saviors Mediation; the virtue of it was operative
in all differences of time: It Job, it rejoiced Abraham; nay, it recovered
Adam. The Arrians blasphemy of his Deity, it is as false also of his
Mediatorious Efficacy; Tempus fuit, quando non fuit. No, he was yesterday, and
to day, and the same for ever. Chrysostom puts this difference 'twixt the
Sacrifices of Christ, and of those under the Law: They were renewed, and
oftentimes offered; Christ died but once, and found Eternal Redemption: They
were like weak plasters, shifted and changed Christ's Blood was Efficax
pharmacum, quod semel impositum, semper sanat: By one offering of himself, he
has perfected for ever all them that are sanctified, Heb. x. 2. It is the
great Excellency of our Christian Faith, that the Church, before Christ,
received and embraced it. The Prophets, as well as the Apostles, they all saw
his Glory, and spoke of him. They who went before, as well as they who came
after, all sung Hosanna to this Son of David. The Gospel, it is of greatest
Antiquity. The Law (says S. Paul) came in afterward. The Gospel has the
Birthright; it put forth the hand first. The skarlet thread, dipped in Christ's
blood, testifies for it, though the Law took place for a time, and seemed to be
elder. It Is a great support for our Faith, that we believe in him, whom all the
Saints, and Patriarchs rested on. Thus S. Paul takes off the scandal of
novelty, which the Jews cast on the Gospel, Acts xxvi. I am judged for the hope
of the Promise made by God to our Fathers; Why should it be thought a thing
incredible to you, that God should raise the dead? It was this day, that
Abraham desired to see, and he saw it, and was glad. That day, say some, was
the day of the Resurrection: Then, when he offerr'd up Isaac, Accounting that
God was able to raise him up from the dead, from whence he received him in a
figure. The mystery of this day, Abraham rejoiced in. That Is the first, Job a
Patriarch.
2. Job a Gentile, none of the lineage of Israel, a stranger in the land of Vz,
he lays claim to the Redeemer; he builds his Faith on Christ's Resurrection.
Gentiles, as well as Jews, some in every Nation, have their share and portion
in Christ's Resurrection. Christ preached this Truth at his first Sermon at
Nazareth, Luke iv. Naaman the Syrian, and the Widow of Sareptha, both of them
Heathens, yet God visited them, and sent Salvation to Naaman's corrupt flesh,
restored as the flesh of a young child; all whole, and sound again. The Widow
of Sareptha's son raised from the dead again: Two great signs of the
Resurrection. The great Prefiguration of Christ's Resurrection was performed
among the Heathen. Jonah devoured by the Whale, and after three days restored
again. That sign was done at Niniveh, the head City of the Gentiles. This
mystery of the Resurrection, Christ himself preached to the Gentiles, Ioh.
xii. When Greeks came to Christ (and they were Gentiles) he acquainted If the
Wheat-corn dye not, it abides alone; but if it dye, it brings forth much fruit.
The first great Manifestation of his Resurrection to all his Disciples, it was
in Galilee of the Gentiles: Go into Galilee, there you shall see me. From
Galilee this preaching began, How that God raised up Christ the third day, Acts
x. It Is the foundation of our hope; we are Sinners of the Gentiles. So that
Gentiles as well as Jews, Job as well as Moses, are admitted into the
fellowship of his Redemption, and Resurrection. 3. Job a Just man, highly
commended for his Sanctity, and Christ is his Redeemer from death and
destruction. Not only notorious sinners, but the chiefest Saints stand in need
of a Savior, must trust to a Redeemer; desire to be partakers in his
Resurrection. 1. That they are Saints, they owe it unto him: They are the
children of God, because they are children of the Resurrection, Luke xx. 36. 2.
And when they are Saints, yet so short is their Sanctity, so full of failings,
that the best of them all must shelter Their own garments do defile them, says
Job. Their garments, that is their virtues, that beautify and adorn them; yet
these cast a soil and defilement upon them. S. Paul disclaims his own
perfection, and righteousness, desires to know Christ, and the power of his
resurrection. Our Sanctification, it is not our fundamental Title to Heaven, but
our Redemption. Gloriabor, non quia justus, sed quia redemptus, says Bernard.
Our first resurrection from sin, is so lame, and imperfect, that the second
death might still lay hold on us, were it not overcome by Christ's
resurrection.
That Is the first Consideration of this Object of Faith in reference to Job;
Job a Patriarch, a Gentile, a just man; In all these three respects, he
professes his interest in Christ's death and resurrection.
2. Let Us view these Particulars in themselves. 1. Christ a Redeemer. 2. Christ
alive from the dead; and then, 3. Christ appearing at the latter day. The
improvement of these three Titles, makes up our Salvation.
1. His Redemption, that made the Purchase for us. It Is called, The Purchase of
the inheritance, Ephesians. i. And then, 2. His Resurrection, that seals up the
Title, and conveys the Title to us. Our Justification, which entitles us to
heaven, it is ascribed to his Resurrection; Romans iv. He was delivered to death
for our sins, and rose again for our justification. 3. His last Appearing, that
gives us livery and seisin, and actual possession. We shall then be taken up
into the heavens, and be ever with the Lord. All these three are necessary, we
can spare none of them.
1. His Redemption is necessary; If not redeemed by his death, we shall not be
saved by his life, Romans viii. Christ must first be our Redeemer, then after he
will become our Raiser, and Absolver. First, make sure of thy Redemption, and
then promise to thy self a joyful Resurrection. Get sin pardoned, and
Hezekiah's faith observed, Isaiah xxxviii. Thou have in love to my soul
delivered me from the pit of corruption, for thou have cast all mysins behind
thy back. Thou will not give thine holy One to see corruption. Solum sanctum,
says Bernard, non viderit corruptionem. It Is that, that embalms our bodies,
and keeps them from corruption. Without this first, our right in his
Redemption; the two other, his Resurrection, and last Appearance, will afford
us small comfort. Had he not died for us, and by it Herod thought that John was
risen from the dead, he was troubled, and perplexed at it. The Soldiers who
watched Christ's grave, were as dead men, at his resurrection. Bring those mine
enemies, and slay them before me. They who have despised the blood of his
redemption, nothing remains for them, but Heb. x. 27. (...), a fearful looking
for of judgment. O! his redeemed ones, lift up your heads for joy; your
redemption draws near; but ye despisers, hang down your heads for sorrow; your
confusion approaches. That Is the first, He must be Redemptor. 2. It must be
Redemptor vivit. Our Savior, who has redeemed us by his death, must recover,
and revive, and live again. His resurrection puts life, and efficacy into his
redemption. Indeed, Emmaus; We trusted that it had been he which should have
redeemed Israel, but he is dead, and our hopes are dead with him, Luke xxiv.
Had he not rose again, the scoff of the Jews had been too true of him; He saved
others, himself he could not save, let him come down from the Cross; nay, let
him die on the Cross, and rise out of his grave, and then we will believe on
him. 1. Our Redeemer must rise, and live again, how else should he overcome
death? He must redeem us from our Paul.) Death overcame him when he died, but
He overcame death, when he rose again. He was crucified through weakness, but
he lives by the power of God, 2 Cor. xiii. 4. 2. He must rise again, how else
could he apply the virtue of his death, and make it effectual? The High Priest
was not only to shed the blood of the sacrifice, but he was to sprinkle it on
the people, and to go into the Sanctum Sanctorum, and present it before God. In
his Passion, he shed his blood; but the tendering it to 3. He must rise, and
live again, to quicken and revive our hope in his redemption. He raised him
from the dead, says S. Peter, 1 Epist. i. that our faith, and hope might be in
God. We are begotten to a lively hope by the resurrection of Christ from the
dead, says the same Apostle. The Sun, when it is at the farthest, keeps life
in the root of a tree; but it is the approaching of the Sun, that brings life
into the branches. When Christ was in the grave,
3. His standing on the earth is necessary, at his last appearance (I will but
name it). It is one main end of his resurrection; By it he was sealed and
autorized to be the supreme Judge of quick and dead. Acts. xvii. 31. He has
appointed a day, wherein he will judge the world by that man whom he has
ordained, whereof he has given assurance unto all men, in that he has raised
him from the dead. Joseph was not only enlarged out of prison, but advanced to
the place of government and judicature; The Egyptians, and all his brethren
must bow before him.

1. This Prerogative of Christ, it is the reward of his Passion; for it, he is
made Lord of quick and dead. 2. It Is the full finishing, and the accomplishment
of his mediation. He shall then present us to God his Father; Lo, here I am,
and those whom thou have given me! 3. It Is the full possessing of his redeemed
ones, of their purchased inheritance. Come ye blessed of my Father, enter into
your possession. 4. It Is the glory of his exaltation; then all thrones shall be
cast down, and be made his footstool, and he alone shall be exalted in
judgment.
We have done with the object of Job's faith. Come we now, II. To the Act, in
Scio, I know; A word of confidence, and great assurance. It fully expresses the
nature of faith; it is strongly Suidas defines it, (...), a vehement surmise
only, but a firm assurance: Can these dead bones live, says God to Ezekiel?
Lord, thou know, says the Prophet. Put the question to Job; yes, I know
they can; nay, more then so, I know they shall live.

And this knowledge of Job will appear the greater, and more admirable, his
belief in this point of faith, being beset with

1. There is Magna difficultas; that is one Impediment, the resurrection of the
dead. To insist on that which is proper to the Day. It Is a matter beyond all
reach of reason. Nature helps forward the belief of some points of faith; but
this of the Resurrection, it is, res purae fidei, far beyond all conceit of
reason. The great men of reason, at Athens, laughed at Paul, when he preached
the Resurrection. The Philosopher in his disputes about the Soul, makes (...)
an impossible absurdity, not to be admitted. Recta ratio How can it be? Faith
only resolves it. Sufficit pro universis rationibus, Author Deus; Nothing is
impossible to an omnipotent God, nothing incredible to an omniscient Faith.

In these Mysteries, says S. Augustine, Christians must not be rationales,
fideles. It Is the homage our Understanding ows to God, to believe what we
cannot comprehend, says Parisiensis. It is one rare property of faith, it has
Vim satisfactivam; it will satisfy all doubts; it will assoyl all
difficulties. Ask a natural man, Is it possible Christ should rise again? No,
it is impossible, Ask S. Peter, what says he? It is impossible but he should
rise again: Acts ii. 20. Him has God raised, having loosed the pains of death,
because it was impossible he should be holden of it. Here is the triumph of
Job's faith; Credo, quia impossible est. These Mysteries are Stulta mundi, but
Decus fidei; our faith glories in them.

2. Another Impediment in Job's faith, that makes it more admirable, was, Magna
distantia; Things at a distance are not discernable. It was the Economy of
Divine revelation, the mysteries of our Christian faith were but dimly
discovered to the faith of our forefathers; I shall see him, but not now, I
shall behold him, but not nigh. And it is observable, The nearer the
accomplishment of Prophecies, the clearer were the Predictions. The Cocks, the
nearer to the Sunrising, the louder they crow. But, the time Job lived in, it
was but Conticinium fidei, yet see, he speaks of Christ's Videndo credere,
that is Thomas his faith; he saw Christ was risen, and therefore believed; Plus
oculo, quam oraculo credidit; but, Credendo videre, that is Job's faith, he
believed it as fully, as if he had seen it clearly. This is the benefit of
faith's prospective, it brings the remotest things home to the eye. It is
Quoddam aeternitatis exemplar, praeterita, praesenti, futura vastissimo quodam
sinu comprehendit; it sees at all distances, and fathoms eternity. 3. There was
a third Impediment to Job's faith; that was Magna contrari^tas. Distance
hinders sight; but darkness, and indisposition of the air, much more. Yet Job,
in the thickest mist of contrariety, and contradiction, sees clearly, believes
assuredly: God afl^icts him, sets him as his enemy; yet, Scio quod Redemptor;
he is still my Redeemer; though he slays me, nay, while he slays me, I will put
my trust in him. Temptations from Satan, disheartnings from friends,
afflictions from God, Job looks through them all, sees comforts beyond them. To
know God a Redeemer, while he is a punisher; a quickner, and a raiser, while he
is a killer; an O Job, great is thy faith! Sure he was not to learn this now in
his adversity; he has studied this point long, acquainted himself with it;
now, in affliction and death, how it refreshes him? Weak Faith may serve in
fair weather, Scio will support thee: Weak Faith cannot breed strong
consolation.
That Is the second; Scio, a clear apprehension. The next follows, and that is,

III. In Meus; his close application. Scio, that was the eye of Faith, it
beheld him clearly; but Meus, My Redeemer, that is the hand of Faith, and holds
him firmly. It is the property of Saving Faith; it has vim, (...), it has a
force to appropriate, and Christ our own. Without this, a general remote belief
would have been cold comfort. He loved Me, and gave himself for Me, says S.
Paul. What says S. Chrysostom? Did Christ dye only for S. Paul? No, Non
excludit, sed appropriat; He excludes not others, but he will secure himself.
This word Meus, does facere Deum, possessionem nostram, says S. Augustine, in
Psalm. xxxii. make God our own. It is the ligature and joint of Faith that
incorporates us into Christ; (...), it glues us to the Lord, and makes us one
Spirit with him. Job, in his Scio, did not glance, but fix upon him here in
Meus. He uses no light touchings, My Well-beloved is mine and I am his: And
again, My Well-beloved is as a bundle of Myrrh, that lies betwixt my Breasts. A
general, notional, catholic Faith, walks in a garden of Myrrh, that is pleasant
and delightful; but this special Faith, that Job stays by, gathers this Myrrh,
binds it in a bundle, lays it 'twixt his Breasts; that is fragrant and
comfortable. This application, it is always useful, especially when we are in
Job's case. Temptations, and Afflictions, they will make us run to God, clasp
fast about him: Deus Meus, Deus Meus, in the closest application.

We have done with the first particular of the Text, Job's Faith of Christ's
Resurrection: Come we now to the

Second, the faithful Profession he makes of his own; That, although death had
already seized upon him, yet he was assured he should rise again, and be made
partaker of a joyful Resurrection.

That we may take a more full view of this holy Profession, and observe the
many Excellencies that show forth themselves in this Faith of his, we will
reduce all to three observable Particulars:

1. Veritas *Fidei; There we shall see those Truths that are couched here in
Job's holy Profession; and thence we shall learn the dogmatical part of this
sacred mystery of our Resurrection. 2. Pietas Fidei; The many Evidences of
Piety and Devotion, 3. Beneficium Fidei; The many seasonable and useful
advantages of his Faith, which this holy man found in this Meditation, and
Profession.
First, observe the several Truths included in this Faith of Job, concerning
his own resurrection: Reduce them all to these three heads;

1. Here is Certitudo resurrectionis propriae: He apprehends the truth of his
own resurrection with fullest assurance. I know it; Christ's Resurrection, but
it sets out the confidence he had of his own.

Christ's Resurrection and ours, are made two several Articles of our Creed.
First, we believe Christ rose the third day; then again, we believe the
Resurrection of the body, that we shall rise also. Now Divines observe, that
which makes several Articles of our Faith, are the several difficulties that
are in those Articles, which we profess to believe. Now our resurrection
carries with it the show of some difficulty, and improbability, that Christ's
Resurrection; so that a man may yield to the truth of Christ's Resurrection, and
yet stick at ours, and doubt and question that.

1. Christ was God; it was easy for him to raise up himself. He had power to
lay down his life, and power to take it up again, at pleasure. But Job, and all
we, are frail, and weak creatures; when the pit has shut her mouth upon us,
how shall we rise again? 2. Though Christ were dead, and so his soul severed
from his body, yet his Godhead and Divinity were still united to it. His dead
body, was the body of the Son 3. Christ's body in the grave saw no corruption,
or putrefaction, no incineration, turned not into dust and ashes; lay but three
days in the grave, and revived. Job's body, and ours, shall be eaten with
worms, turned to corruption, rotted in the grave many hundred years.
It is easier then to conceive Christ's Resurrection, then to believe ours. Yet
Job, ye see, sets his Scio to both: I know, Christ I know, I shall arise. Both
Articles must be believed with the same assurance. We are told by some, that
those Truths that concern Christ, and the Church in general, you may believe
firmly, and certainly Christ has Redeemed me, Sanctified me, will Raise me to
Life and Glory, there is no Scio for them; we cannot be sure of them; hope well
we may, but with contrary doubtings and suspicions. No, in all Gods Promises,
Faith must labor to work out assurance. Quod propter Deum creditur, aequaliter
creditur. If God says, Faith assures it self of it. It is the infirmity of
Faith to doubt, not the duty of Faith. Then Faith works kindly, when to every
Truth revealed, it sets to its Scio. That Is the first, Certitudo Fidei. 2. Here
in this Profession of Job, is Fundatio Resurrectionis; the ground and
foundation that he lays to his Faith of his own resurrection. Why is Job sure
he shall rise again? Because he is sure that Christ is risen. First he knows,
Christ is alive; then he inferrs, I shall live again. Our resurrection is
founded and built upon Christ's Resurrection. It Is that that gives footing and
fastening to our Faith. Still the Apostle inferrs our resurrection from that of
Christ's. He that raised Christ from the dead, shall also quicken your mortal
bodies, Romans viii. And this Inference, it is good upon three grounds: 1. Christ's
Resurrection, it is Argumentum possibilitatis. We may strongly argue from
Christ's Resurrection, to the possibility of ours. If God raised him, the same
power can raise us also. Tota ratio facti, it is Potentia facientis.
Omnipotency sticks at no difficulty. Nay, Christ's Resurrection argues the
possibility of our resurrection, and that with advantage. Christ underwent a
cursed death; death was in its full strength when it seized upon him. If Christ
brake through the Irongate, Christ's was a full death, so is not ours. 1 These.
iv. 14. If we believe that Jesus dyed, and rose again, them which sleep in
Jesus, will God bring with him. For whether is it easier to say, Awake thou
that sleep; or, Rise from the dead? Do thou doubt of thy resurrection?
Remember that Jesus was raised from the dead; and be not faithless, but
faithful. 2. Christ's Resurrection, it is a good ground of ours; it is Exe^plum
Resurrectionis, the exemplary cause of our resurrection. He shall change our
vile body, that it may be fashioned like unto his glorious body, Phil. iii. 21.
Neither Lazarus, nor the rest in Scripture, are exact patterns of our
resurrection: They rose, to dye again; Lazarus rose with his grave-cloaths on
him, still clothed with mortality: Christ left the grave-cloaths behind him,
he is the example of our resurrection. An example, is not a casual resemblance,
but that which has a similitude drawn from it by an intended imitation. So,
only Christ's Resurrection is the example of ours. Hence S. Paul says, We are
planted into the similitude of his Resurrection, Romans vi. Christ's Resurrection
has an Elijah applied every member of his living body, to those of the dead
child, and so recovered him. It Is Exemplum Resurrectionis. 3. Christ's
Resurrection, it is a good ground of ours; it is Principium effectivum nostrae
Resurrectionis. Vivo ego, and vos vivetis; there is the derivation of our
living again, John xiv. 19. The Jews fondly say, that there is something in
Spina dorsi, that does not putrefie in Robur dorsi, but Virtus Capitis, the
influence of our Head, Christ, that shall convey life to us. We are to look
upon Christ's resurrection, as the fountain, and original of ours. He was (...),
says S. Basil. Christ did not rise as a private person, for himself, but as a
public principle of all our resurrections. Hence he calls himself, The
Resurrection and the Life. S. Paul calls him, Primitias dormientium: The
First Fruits dedicate the whole Crop; so our resurrection, Christ. Tertullian
calls our resurrections, Appendices resurrectionis Dominicae. It was
represented as on this day. When he rose, the graves of many Saints were
opened, and they rose with him. As at Kings Coronations, when they receive the
Crown, they enlarge prisoners, dispense honors, advance their favorites. Non
tam Christusin carne nostra, quam caro nostra in Christo. As Ioseph's
advancement, was the advancement and safety of all the Hebrews; and all the
Jews were honored in the preferment of Hester; so all the body of the Church
was raised in Christ. Indeed he entered the grave as our Surety, and lay under
the arrest of death for our debt; that being discharged, he has effected not
so much his own, as our enlargement. That Is the second, Fundatio
Resurrectionis.
3. Here in this Profession of Job's, is Realitas Resurrectionis; his Faith
believes, and expects a true, real, substantial, bodily resurrection. Nay, here
is not only a reality, but an identity; he shall have a body, and the very
same body; 1. He expects a true, real body: Not as some Heretics, that turned
this high mystery into a moral Allegory; Why the soul, by sinning, neither
dies, nor sleeps, but is immortal, not capable of a resurrection. Thy dead men
shall live, together with my dead body shall they rise, says the Prophet Esaias.
Chap. xvi. 19. 2. And as there is a reality, so here is likewise a perfect
identity; we shall receive the same bodies, not new bodies created for us: In
my flesh shall I see God* these eyes shall behold him. 1. Else it were not a
resurrection; Quod cecidit, hoc resurgat; quod mortuum est, reviviscat; says
the Father. And, 2. Justice and Equity would have it so. The body is partaker
in sin, as well as the soul. Famula in culpa, Socia in poena, says Salvian. If
the Master mourns, the Servant that attends him, follows him in black: If the
soul, the principal in sin, if that suffers, the body that is accessory, must
share in the punishment. 3. The grand pattern and Example of our resurrection
confirms it. Christ rose not only with a true body ( Feel me, a spirit has
not flesh and bones) but with the same body. Cicatrices Corporis, were Indices
Resurrectionis. 4. Mercy delights to have it so; It will pour forth a redundant
reward upon soul and body. God will not forget the labor of love, that the
body has undertaken. That flesh which thou have chastised and mortified, those
hands that have been lifted up in prayer, reached out to the poor, employed in
good works, those eyes that have shed tears of repentance, He shall wipe tears
from those eyes. Utique, and iisdem oculis, qui flebant, quique adhuc flerent,
nisi indulgentia Divina siccaret. Nay, not an hair of our heads Si sic
custodiuntur superflua tua, in quanta securitate est Caro tua? S. Augustine.
This flesh, this body shall be raised, and glorified.


We have seen the first thing observable, the several Truths professed and
acknowledged by Job in this faith of the resurrection.

Secondly, Pietas fidei, the Motions, and Evidences of Piety his faith
expresses;

1. Here is Fortitudo fidei; here appears the great strength of his faith, that
foresees, and forecasts all the future difficulties and hindrances of his
expectation, and overcomes them all, and is resolute against them. He considers
death, and the consequences of death, rotttenness, and corruption: Can a body,
when it is wasted, and consumed in the Grave, ever rise again? Yes, yes, says
Job, Nothing is impossible to an omnipotent God;

A weak Faith is glad to look off from these difficulties, and shrinks back at
them: As Martha, considering Lazarus was four days dead, and began to putrefie,
her faith began to fail her; it was too late now to remove the Gravestone. But
Faith in its strength, considers all these, urges these impossibilities, (...)
and yet overcomes them: As Elijah in his dispute with Baals Priests, took all
the disadvantages to himself; Pour on water, and again, Pour on more water,
Faith shall fetch fire from Heaven to inflame the Sacrifice; so, says Job, Let
me die, and not, and putrefie in praedae suae oustos, like the Lion that killed
the Prophet, and then stood by his body, and did not consume it. Job's faith
laughs at impossibilities, is ashamed to talk of difficulties; with Abraham,
considers not his own dead body, but believes above, and against hope; knew God
would restore it.

2. A second print of Piety, is Alacritas fidei; the great alacrity and
cheerfulness of his faith, against present discouragements. See how cheerfully
he views the horrid face of death, now seizing Tertullian says, he played with
the Worms) he surveys all the ghastly appearances, and approaches of death,
confidently, comfortably, through this faith of the Resurrection.

This blessed assurance makes him look Death in the face undauntedly. Alas we
how does any appearance of death affright us? If we see but another man die,
the cold sweat, and the pale face, and the pangs of death upon him, how does it
dismay us. Job finds all these in himself, and speaks comfortably of them. It Is
Augustin's pious counsel, Si times mortem, ama resurrectionem; If thou be
afraid of death* acquaint thy self with the hope of the resurrection. If a man
go to prison, and be able to say, I know I shall be bayled, I have one who will
quit my debt, and enlarge me, such an one fears not the Prison. Let death
arrest us, Christ We are prisoners of hope, Zech. ix. How cheerfully did Jacob
take his journey, when God spoke to him, Genesis xlvi. Fear not to go down into
Egypt, I will go down with thee, and I will surely bring thee up again. This
hope made Job, not only not to fear death, but even to desire it; Chap. xiv.
Oh that thou would hide me in the Grave; then he asks this question; If a man
die, shall he live again? Yes, says he, Thou shall call, and I will answer
thee, thou will have a desire to the work of thine hands. That Is the second,
Alacritas fidei.

3. There is yet another print of Piety, Sancta expectatio Fidei. In my flesh
shall I see God; and mine eyes shall behold him. It Is that that makes the
resurrection comfortable; not that we shall live ever, but be ever with the
Lord. It was small joy for Absalom to dwell at Jerusalem, and not be admitted
to see the Kings face, 2 Samuel xiv. Heaven is not Heaven, but a place of
confinement, without this glorious and blessed Vision. Though Moses, and Elias
vanish on Mount Tabor, yet to see Christ in glory, is abundant happiness. Do
occidere heliace; the glory of the Whom have I in heaven but thee, and whom do
I desire in comparison of thee? Psalm. lxxiii. The good women at the Sepulcher
this Day saw a Vision of Angels, but that contented them not, till Christ
himself appeared. Job knew he should enjoy the society of Saints, and Angels,
sit down, and feast it with Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob in the Kingdom of
Heaven; but here is the height of his happiness; I shall see my Savior.
Heaven, as it is Coenaculum sponsi, the Guest-chamber for the supper of the
Lamb, it is a place of comfort; but, as it is Thaelamus sponsi, the
Bride-chamber of the Lamb,
Thirdly, the last thing remains, that is Beneficium fidei, the use and benefit
Job makes to himself of this Meditation. And the benefit is threefold,
suitable, and seasonable to a threefold condition in which Job now was.

1. Job was overlaid, and oppressed with affliction. Suitable to this condition,
this Meditation affords, Vim sustentaetivam; it supports his spirits amidst all
his afflictions. Here is the patience of the Saints; mockings, and scourgings,
and bonds, and imprisonments, a better resurrection. Heb. xi. That blessed day
will make amends for all. It was this hope that sustained S. Paul, kept him
from fainting, 2 Cor. iv. Knowing, that he which raised up the Lord Jesus,
shall raise us up also with Jesus, -- and for this cause we faint not. If in
this life only, we had hope in Christ, we were of all men most miserable; But
there is a Resurrection, after this life we have hope in Christ, and therefore
of all men most happy. This assurance will stand by us, when all things else
fail. It was Esau's confession, Behold, I am at the point to die, and what
profit shall this birthright do to me? But, to be Filius resurrectionis, that
Birthright will relieve us at our last agony, and support us comfortably. Job
felt the good of this Meditation, and he insists upon it; Here is Masticatio
fidei, he chews it in his mouth, and 2. You may see Job in another condition,
transported with passion, and suitable to that, this Meditation it had Vim
quietativam; a great virtue he found in it, to settle, and compose him. In the
Verses going before, his spirit is stirred within him, he is full of
complainings, and murmurings, and quarrellings with God, and expostulations;
See how he rebukes, and allays these storms and tempests, with this Meditation;
O my soul, keep silence unto God, for of him comes my salvation. Thus David
stills discontents, Why art thou so troubled, O my soul? Why art thou so
disquieted within me? I shall yet praise him. The day shall come, that I shall
see his countenance, and for ever enjoy him. Mortale mori, is one ground of
settlement against these perplexities, and Job makes use of it, Chap. xiv. but,
Mortuum reviviscere, is satisfaction with advantage; that will calm, and quiet
all his complainings. 3. Lastly, behold Job in another condition; he is charged
by his friends, with the sin of hypocrisy; and then this Meditation, it has
Vim apologeticam, it is his defense and apology against that accusation.
Against all their surmises and suspicions It is God that justifies me, who are
ye that condemn me? It Is Christ, that is dead, and now risen again, he shall
judge and acquit me. O! hypocrisy shrinks at the thought of death, trembles to
hear of a resurrection. These painted Sepulchers till then, make a goodly show;
they are the beautifullest parts that are in the Church; but when the Vault
shall be opened, and all secrets disclosed; nothing will appear then, but
horror and confusion, rottenness and corruption. But truth and integrity
appeals unto that great Trial; knows, that the Name that is written in Heaven,
My witness is in Heaven, and my record is on high. That Is the great avowment of
Jobs truth, and integrity; till then, it matters not much what the world says
of us. Lingua Petiliani, non est ventilabrum Christi; there lies an appeal of
all men's censures,
A joyful appearance before which, He grant unto us, who as this Day overcame
death for us, and opened unto us the Gate of eternal life, even Jesus, that
has delivered us from the wrath to come. To whom, with the Father, etc.









ON
The Second Sermon.
ROMANS viii. 11. But if the Spirit of him that raised up Jesus from the dead,
dwell in you; he that raised up Christ from the dead, shall also quicken your
mortal bodies by his Spirit that dwells in you.
IN this Context and passage of Scripture, the Christ, now he lays down
grounds of comfort against those infirmities, and imperfections, that
Christians find and feel themselves to be subject to.

1. He discovers these infirmities, chap. vii. I know that in me, that is, in
my flesh, there dwells no good thing. Odi quod sum, non sum quod amo. Aug.
Epist. 106. The good that I would, I do not; the evil which I would not do,
that do I. It Is that which S. Augustine calls, Rixa and jurgium, inter carnem,
and spiritum; Hannah and Peninnah under the same roof, vexing each other; the
one provoking, the other weeping; both disquieting the peace of Paul, will heed
and observe them; have his eye upon his thoughts and inward inclinations. The
Naturalists say, that man has two muscles in his eyes more then other
creatures, that make him look upward. A Christian has two more, to make him
look inward, to search and descry the stirrings of his heart. 2. As he
discovers them, so he bewayls and mourns for them. (...); O wretched man that I
am, who shall deliver me from the body of this death! See the spirit of S.
Paul; he rejoices in afflictions, but he mourns for corruptions. Verse. 35. Quis
separabit? He defies afflictions, the greatest of them: But, chap. vii. 24. he
has another exclamation, Quis liberabit? He groans under infirmities and
corruptions, the least of them. Ey, here is the true mark of a Spiritual man;
he chooses affliction rather then iniquity. Affliction sits light, but sin
sits heavy on him. Tu nosti gemitus cordis mei, de hacre, and flumina oculorum
meorum, says S. Augustine, bewailing but one of his infirmities. 3. He finds,
and lays hold upon help against them. Faith represents Christ, and his power
ready to succor and deliver him; I thank God, through Jesus Christ my Lord.
These infirmities Paul, but yet he does not weep out the eye of Faith; looks up
to Christ, as to his sovereign Antidote, to cure and recover him. And then, 4.
He comforts himself against those many evils, that are consequent fruits
arising from these infirmities. There are three main evils that arise from
them; 1. These sinful infirmities; in themselves, have a condemning power in
them; they deserve, in justice, no less then the curse of God, and eternal
damnation. Papists, and others may slight these first motions, and count them
no sins; S. Paul judges them Paul finds a Consolation, verse. 1. There is no
condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus; that State and Condition, brings
with it Pardon and Absolution. 2. A second evil consequent from these
infirmities, is that Thraldom, and Captivity, and Vexation, which these
remainders of sin bring upon the soul of a Christian. Though he has

It is matter of great heaviness to the Saints, that they are thus Hagar should
insult over Sarah; the bondwoman over the free; that Ishmael should overtop
Isaac; that Esau, in the womb of grace, should struggle with Jacob; that the
house of Saul should still be quarrelling with the house of David. But against
this, he comforts himself and others; The law of the Spirit has made us free
from the law of sin; -- ye are not in the flesh, but in the Spirit, verse. 9.

3. A third evil is, that these infirmities, and remainders of 1. Though sin be
pardoned by the death of Christ; 2. Though the dominion and power of it be
broken and subdued by the Spirit of Christ; yet, 3. As long as it remains in us
in the least and lowest degree, it makes us subject to the power of death.


Yet against this, S. Paul finds a double comfort:

1. This subjection to death is not total, it is but half a death; The body
indeed is dead (that is subject to death) because of sin; but the Spirit, that
is life, because of righteousness, verse. 10. Our chiefest and best part, the
proper seat of misery, or happiness, that is put into a state of spiritual and
glorious immortality. Fear not that, that kills the body, and can do no more;
It is not a total death. 2. Even this bodily death to be undergone, it is not
perpetual; The righteous shall have dominion over Death in the morning. Our
bodies, in the holds of Death, are Prisoners of Hope; there will be an
enlargement; Death shall be swallowed up, and abolished; the Power and Spirit
of God shall free these mortal bodies, bring us, like Peter, asleep out of the
dungeon. If the Spirit of him that raised up Jesus from the dead dwell in you.
The Text then, it is the blessed Assurance, and Evidence of a Christians happy
Resurrection. In it observe these four particulars:

1. Is the Condition, upon which it is promised, and we may expect it; If the
Spirit of him that raised up Jesus from the dead dwell in you. 2. Is the main
Cause and Efficient of this our Resurrection; It Is he who raised up Christ from
the dead. 3. Is the Acting and Performing of it; He shall quicken your mortal
bodies. 4. Is the Ground and Reason of it; Because his Spirit dwells in you.
First, for the Condition, If. I call it a Condition, and yet it carries a
threefold force in it:

I. It has the force of a Connection; it makes a Connection with the former
privileges and comforts of a Christian.

1. No condemnation for sin, verse. 1. that is one comfort. 2. No dominion, nor
power, nor absolute sway of sin; that is 3. No total, nor final, nor utter
destruction by sin; Death is abolished; that is a third comfort.
It shows us a blessed concatenation, and linck of a Christians privileges.
Mercy, it begins in Pardon, and grows, and diffuses it self in Grace, and
never gives over till it has placed us in Glory.

1. Here is the fat Calf killed for us; the holy Lamb of God redeeming us from
condemnation. 2. Here is the Ring put upon our finger, the Seal and 3. Here is
the choice Robe of Glory and Immortality, that we are invested with. It Is a
Connection.
II. It has the use and force of an Illation; But if. He deduces and proves
our Resurrection out of former antecedent principles, and privileges. The
raising, and glorifying of our bodies, it is an appendix, and deduction from
some other things. Our Resurrection is not so much a principle, as a conclusion
of Faith; and it must be inferred, not by an Enthymeme, but by a Sorites; it
hangs not upon one principle, but upon many; Not Praescivit, ergo glorificavit;
but, He has redeemed, he has called, he has mortified, and sanctified,
therefore he will raise us, and at last glorify us. These assurances are not
immediate, and clear in themselves, but are contained in their causes. We must
not presently affirm, I shall be saved, my body shall be raised; but it must be
lawfully concluded, out of warrantable grounds; If I be justified, If I be
sanctified, If the Spirit of God dwell in me; make sure of these, these are
Evidences, and Arguments, and Pledges of our Resurrection. That Is the second;
it has the force of an Illation.

III. It has the force of a Caution, and necessary Proviso. And so it makes
our Resurrection conditional. But how can that be?

1. Our Resurrection, it is absolute and necessary, ex exigentia Iustiti^; it is
appointed for all men to come to Judgment, Heb. ix. The Resurrection shall
bring the prisoners from the Jayl to the Bar. True, and yet it is conditional.
That there shall be a Resurrection, it is grounded on Gods Justice; but the
resurrection to Life, that is capable of a limitation, and condition; If I may
attain to the resurrection of the dead, says S. Paul, Phil. iii. 11. That
there shall be an Assizes, and Jayl-delivery, is settled by Law; but how the
prisoners shall speed, whether pardoned, or condemned, there is hazard in that.
On Phara^h's Birthday, both Butler and Baker shall come out of Prison, but
whether to Advancement, or Execution, is not so certain. But then, 2. This
resurrection to Life, has a certainty in it; Gods purpose has determined it,
Christ's merits have purchased it. True, and yet it is conditional. Not any
promise, or mercy on Gods part, but supposes, and requires conditions on ours.
We cannot immediately from Gods purpose, or Christ's merits, leap into heaven;
but there are pre-requisite conditions, and subordinate means for our actual
fruition. I strive, if by any means I may attain to the Resurrection, Phil.
iii. The ladder to heaven has many staffs, and steps, and degrees; many Iffs,
and Conditions to be observed. 3. Our Resurrection, it is Articulus Fidei, a
fundamental Article of our Faith, and yet limited with an If. Though in it
self, never so infallible, yet a personal, and comfortable apprehension for our
selves, depends on Condition. Let our Resurrection be never so certain in it
self, yet, extra studium Sanctitatis, it is not certain to us. Without Holiness,
no man shall see God, Heb. xii. He that has this Hope, purifies himself, as he
is pure, 1 Ioh. iii.
So then, for conceiving of this condition, we will take of it a double
Consideration:

1. Let us consider it in the several Particulars: 2. Then, in the Summary
drift, and purpose of it.
I. Take it asunder into Particulars; If the Spirit of him that raised up Jesus
from the dead dwell in you. Here we have a description of the Holy Ghost, by a
threefold Reference.

1. In reference to God the Father; so he is called The Spirit of Him; that is,
of God the Father. The Holy Ghost, is the Spirit of the Father. 2. The
Holy Ghost is described with reference to Christ; as it was the Spirit of the
Father, raising Christ from the dead. 3. He is described in reference to us, by
a gracious habitude, to dwell in us. 1. Here is a blessed relation; he is the
Spirit of the Father. 2. Here is a glorious operation, He raised up Jesus from
the dead. 3. Here is a gracious Possession, He dwells in us.

1rst. Look upon the first Reference; the Holy Ghost is here called, The Spirit
of the Father. These relations, in the sacred Trinity, are incomprehensible: He
dwells in the thick darkness. Sanctius and reverentius haec creduntur, quam
discutiuntur. It Is safer to meditate on the gracious relations of God to us,
then of those mysterious relations within himself. The light in the air is
easier seen, then the body of the Sun. Briefly therefore, the Holy Ghost, is
both the Spirit of the Father, and of the Son; proceeds alike from both of
them. The denial of this truth, by the Greek Church, caused that great Schism*
'twixt the Eastern and Western Bellarmine) this error was remarkably punished
by God; the City of Constantinople being, on the Feast Day dedicated to the
Holy Ghost, sacked and overthrown.

However, the Christian faith acknowledges the Holy Ghost to be, the Spirit of
the Father, and the Spirit of the Son.

Sometimes he is called the Spirit of the Father, John xv. 26. He is called the
Spirit of truth, which proceeds from the Father. Luke xxiv. 19. The same Spirit
is called, The promise of the Father; Both in procession and in mission; his
being, and his sending

Again, sometimes he is called (and that in truth and propriety of speech) the
Spirit of the Son, Romans viii. 9. If any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he
is none of his, Gal. iv. 6. God has sent forth the Spirit of his Son into your
hearts. As the Spirit is the promise of the Father, so likewise he is the
promise of the Son, John xvi. He promised to send them the Holy Ghost, the
Comforter. This procession from the Son, was sweetly, and aptly represented by
that outward Sign and Ceremony, which Christ used in giving the Holy Ghost,
John xx. 22. He breathed on them, and said unto them, Receive the Holy Ghost.
Spiratio, it is ab intra, it showed the Spirit proceeded from him. The Apostles,
they gave the Holy Ghost, but not spirando, it proceeded not from them. Christ
gave it (...), they gave it (...), as S. Basil speaks; he by authority, they
ministerially. S. Paul expresses it, Gal. iii. 5. They ministered to them the
Spirit.

The Holy Ghost then* being the Spirit of the Son, as well as of the Father,
why then is he here called the Spirit of the Father?

1. Quia pater, fons Deitatis, the Father is the fountain, and original of the
Deity; and does communicate it, both to the Holy Ghost, to the Pool, or Sea,
into which, both Fountain, and River does run and flow. All one in the
substance, yet distinctly apprehended 2. Saint Paul here names the Holy Ghost,
under this expression, The Spirit of the Father, as delighting to show the
consent, and concurrence of the whole Trinity in the work and carriage of our
salvation. The Father, Son, Spirit, all joined in this great Work. As in our
creation, Let us make; so in our repair, and recovery, the power of the Father,
the wisdom of the Son, the grace of the Holy Ghost, all concurred in this work.
Thus Ephesians. ii. 18. Through the Son, we have access by one Spirit to the
Father. The Son recommends us, the Spirit conducts us, and the Father receives

Mulciber in Trojam, pro Troja stabat Apollo.

One was against Troy, the other stood for it. Our God, Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost, all set themselves to atchieve our salvation.

3. By this expression, the Apostle would send us to the Wellhead of all
grace, and teach us to whom to seek for the gift of the Spirit; the original
donor of it is God the Father. Hence, He is called, The promise of the Father,
Acts i. 4. We had need be set right in this point. S. James tells us, we are
subject Err not, my dear children; Every good and perfect gift comes from
above, from the Father of lights, James i. 16. Lux a primo lucido. Our Savior
appropriates it to the Father, Luke xi. 11. Your heavenly Father shall give the
Holy Ghost to them that ask him. He has abundance of spirit, as Malachi
speaks. In all those diversities of endowments and operations that are in the
Church, it is the same God that works all in all. It must teach us to whom to
have recourse, even to this Fountain of holiness from whom it is communicated
and conveyed to all that receive it. That Is the first Reference; it is the
Spirit of the Father.
2d. Then here is a second Reference to Christ, in a miraculous operation; The
Spirit of him that raised Jesus from the dead. God the Father, he raised
Christ, by the Spirit from the dead. The point is observable, that the
resurrection of Christ, is in a specimanner attributed to the Father, Acts ii.
32. This Jesus has God raised up, and is by the right hand of God exalted; and
Acts iii. 26. God has raised up his Son Jesus.

Indeed, we find the Resurrection ascribed to all the three Persons;

1. The Father, he raised him up; Him God raised up the third day, Acts x. 40.
2. Christ, he is the author of his own resurrection; his Divinity was
inseparably joined to his Humanity; united not only to his living, but also to
his dead body; and by virtue of that Union, he raised himself; He had power to
lay down his life, and power to take it up again, Ioh. x. 18. As the Sun sets,
and rises by his own motion. 3. The Holy Ghost raised up Christ; 1 Pet. iii.
18. He was put to death in the flesh, but was quickened by the Spirit.
So then all concur; yet here it is especially attributed to the Father, for
diverse reasons;

1. In general, all actions of the Deity, originally, flow from the Father; As
in being, so in all acting, and working, he is the first in order. Hence it is,
that Christ ascribes all that he does to his Father, John v. 19. The Son can do
nothing of himself, but what he sees the Father do; for whatsoever things he
does, these also does the Son likewise. The Father, says Christ, gave him
those works to do. 2. The Father is said to raise Christ from the dead, because
the Father in a special manner is the fountain of Life: As the Son is made
known by the attribute of Wisdom; the Holy Ghost by the attribute of Love; so
the Father is represented by the attribute of Life. Christ calls him, The
living Father, John vi. 57. It Is his glorious Title, The living God. It was S.
Peter's confession, Thou art the Son of the living God. And this life, the
Father John v. 26. As the Father has life in himself, so has he given to the
Son, to have life in himself. This, Paul makes an act of Gods Paternity to
raise Christ. His resurrection was a second generation, Acts xiii. 33. Thou art
my Son, this day have I begotten thee. If thou be the Son of God, come down
from the cross; Why? it is as good, If thou be the Son of God, rise up from the
Grave. 3. The Father is here said to raise up Christ; His resurrection being
the first step of his glorious exaltation, it is ascribed to the Father, rather
then to himself, desirous rather his Father Phil. ii. 7. He made himself of no
reputation, he took upon him the form of a servant, he humbled himself, and
became obedient; wherefore God highly exalted him. Usurping Adonijah, steps of
himself into his fathers Throne. This is our ambition; Shun the work, but
snatch the reward. Solomon will be placed by his father, anointed, and advanced
to the Throne by David's appointment. He that humbles himself shall be exalted;
active in his humiliation, passive in his exaltation. Christ, though he had
power and authority to exalt himself; it had been no robbery, S. Paul tells us:
yet he observes this gracious Economy, makes his Father the approver of his
obedience, the accepter of his merits, the rewarder of his passion, the author
of his exaltation. 4. The Father is said to raise up Christ, purposely as a
Christ is risen by his own immediate power; weakness of Faith will object,
Christ was God too; his Deity was united to his dead body, it was easy for him
to take up his life; but we are nothing in our graves, but weakness and
corruption. True, but this Scripture ministers more comfort; it tells us, That
Christ's resurrection was performed by the Power and Spirit of the Father; God
reached out his hand to him, and raised him up. Here then is our comfort; The
same Spirit of God is communicable to us, the same arm of Power may be reached
out to us. Christ, Ephesians. i. 19. He will use the same exceeding great Power to
usward that believe, which he wrought in Christ, when he raised him from the
dead.
That Is the second Reference. 3d. Now follows the third gracious Relation, and
that is of the Spirit to us; that is a Reference of Inhabitation; He dwells in
^s. A speech of great Emphasis, importing the near, and close, and intimate
conjunction, and union, 'twixt the Spirit,

And this Inhabitation is expressed in Scripture, in a double Notion:

1. It is Domestica, and familiaris habitatio; it is Habitatio ut in domo; that
is a near conjunction. Thus the Church is called, The house of the living God,
1 Timothy iii. 15. And, Heb. iii. 6. Whose house are we. And again, Ephesians. ii. 22.
We are built for an habitation of God, through the Spirit. 2. It is Sacra and
Religiosa; it is Habitatio ut in Templo; that is more. The first, In Domo,
imports a near Conjunction. The second, In Templo, inferrs a Sacred Presence.


Indeed, Gods Presence makes us a Temple, sanctifies, and consecrates us to
holy Uses. 1 Cor. iii. 16. Know you not that you are the Temple of God, and
that the Spirit of God dwells in you? Nay, not only our souls, but our bodies
are hallowed to be a Temple. 1 Cor. vi. 19. Know you not that your body is the
Temple of the Holy Ghost?

For the understanding of this sacred Inhabitation, let us consider,

1. How the Spirit dwells in us. 2. What this dwelling implies.
I. How does the Spirit dwell in us?

1. This dwelling of the Spirit in us, it is like the Spirit it self, wholly
spiritual; all in a mystical and heavenly manner. As Christ; we must corporally
receive him into our bodies. No, says S. Cyprian, Nostra, and Christi
conjunctio, non miscet personas, nec unit substantias; sed affectus consociat,
and confoederat voluntates. (...), 1 Cor. vi. 17. 2. This Inhabitation is
performed in us by the production, and infusion of those saving Graces, which
the Spirit works in us. As Luther speaks of the Soul, it is Officina Dei mei;
it is the Workhouse, where the Holy Ghost frames, and fashions the new 1. Is
Faith; that is the Grace that lets in God into the soul, and gives him
possession. Ephesians. iii. 17. He dwells in our hearts by Faith. Infidelity
excludes him; Faith receives and entertains him. 2. Is Charity; by it the
Spirit dwells in us. God is love, and he that dwells in love, dwells in God,
and God in him, 1 John iv. 16. Love, amongst men, it is a cohabiting Amor
congregat; it is an associating virtue; it is the glue and cement of the world; it
makes men dwell together. These two, are the two uniting Graces. Faith, unites
to God mystically; Love, morally. It Is the formal union of the soul with God.
3. The Spirit dwells in us, not only by his gifts and graces, but really. The
Holy Ghost is present, and applies, and unites himself to a Christian. Our
bodies are the Temples of the Holy Ghost, not of his Graces, but of his own
sacred Person. The Fathers, prove the Holy Ghost to be true God in Substance,
Habitatio, it is Actus Personae; properly, none but a person is said to Inhabit.
Indeed, Substantially, the Holy Ghost is every where; but yet Dwelling, adds to
his natural Presence, a more special Habitude: He is tanquam in suo, where he
does Inhabit. A stranger may be present in an house, as well as the owner; but
to be there by special Interest, as in his own Possession, so the Holy Ghost is
present in a Christian.
That Is the first Consideration, How the Spirit dwells in us.

But,

II. What does this Dwelling imply?

1. Dwelling implies Propriety, and special Right and Interest. It is a
Possessive word. The soul, and body of a Christian, is Gods more immediate
Possession; he has the reference of a lord, and owner to it. Thus S. Paul
tells us, 1 Cor. vi. 19. Ye are the Temple of the Holy Ghost, and ye are not
your own. A Christian is Gods upon a fuller right and title, then another man.
All are his; as all wastes are the lord's of the Soil; but his lordship, and
mansion house, are more specially his. Such a reference has a Christian to
God. He is his, not upon common tenure, but by peculiar appropriation. 2.
Dwelling implies Residency, and Continuance, and Fixedness of abode. A man is
not said to dwell in an Inn, or in the house of a friend, though he sometimes
be in them. A stranger, or a wayfaring-man, says the Prophet Jeremy, turns
aside, to tarry for a night. There a man dwells, where he resides, and abides
constantly. So then, the Spirit dwells in a Christian; that is, he is
constantly, fixedly in him, sets up his rest, makes him his Mansion; Here will
I dwell, for I have a delight in it. Thus David expresses Gods residence in his
Church, Psalm. cxxxii. 13. The Lord has chosen Zion, he has desired it for his
habitation: verse. 14. This is my rest for ever, here will I dwell, for I have
desired it.

Thus the Spirit fixes his abode inseparably to the soul of a sanctified man.
His Graces have

1. Firmitatem radicis, they take root in us. 2. Perennitatem fontis, they are
always springing, never decaying. The Anointing which you have received of
him, abides in you, 1 Ioh. ii. 27. His Grace, it is laid in oil; no waterish
colors, that will wash off presently. Indeed, for his (...), some such
endowments, they are in a man, Per modum actus transeuntis, as Prophecy; but
Saving Gr^ces, are Per modum habitus permanentis. According to some Graces, the
Spirit comes and goes, says S. Gregory; Recessurus venit, and venturus
recedit; sed sine quibus ad vitam aeternam non pervenitur, in elec^orum
cordibus semper permanet; Saving Graces are never vanishing. That is a second
residency.
3. Dwelling implies Command and Authority, and right of Disposal of all
things. He who dwells, and possesses as an owner, does like the Centurion; he
says to this, Do, and he does it; to another, Go, and he goes. It was the law
of the Medes and Persians, That every man should bear rule in his own house,
Esther i. 22. So then, Does the Spirit of God dwell in us? He Voluntas
Superioris quomodocunque innotescit, vim praecepti obtinet. The Master of the
house, the glance of his eye, the beck of his hand, must Paul practices, Gal.
ii. 20. I live, yet not I, but Christ lives in me. Christ, and his Spirit, bore
all the sway in S. Paul*s life. Christians must be (...), acted, and managed
all by the Spirit. S. Paul expresses it, Acts xx. 22. (...), bound in the
Spirit; carried by a strong guidance of the Holy Ghost in all his conversation.
Has he vouchsafed to dwell in thee? Yield up thy self to his command and
authority. 4. Dwelling implies Care, and Protection, and Provision. All that
are within the Verge, are under Protection. The Master Aristotle gives this
rule in his Oeconomicks; (...). The care of his house belongs to him. Nor is
this Spirit of Christ wanting in this property. A Christian, possessed by God,
has a Patent of Protection, a full supply of all comfortable provision. He
will safeguard his house, and protect it; he withstands all assaults made upon
it. (...), must be (...); he resists the assaults that Satan makes upon it. He
that destroys the Temple of God, him shall God destroy. See the My servants
shall eat, but ye shall be hungry; my servants shall drink, but ye shall be
thirsty; my servants shall rejoice, but ye shall be ashamed, Isai. lxv. 13.
For use;

1. It should teach us gladly to yield up our selves as Mansions for him to
dwell and abide in us; not only to receive him guest-wise, or at some good
time only, as at a Communion; but resign up all to him; give him the keys, let
no room be shut up against him. Invite him to come in unto us, to Turn in, my
Lord, turn in to me. 2. When he has taken up his dwelling, offend him not by
any thing that may make him mislike, much less give over and forsake his
dwelling. Res delicata est Spiritus Dei. Tertul. It Is not every rude and homely
entertainment that will content him. Nobilem hospitem habes, O anima. O man,
thou lodgest a glorious Inhabitant, study to please him. We must not grieve
him, Ephesians. iv. 30. much less resist him, Act^ vii. least of all, despise him,
Heb. x. 29. He will abide no longer than where he is observed. As the spirit of
man stays no longer in the body, then 3. This Inhabitation of the Spirit in
us, challenges a reverence of the souls and bodies of Gods Saints, as of the
Mansion-place, where God himself abides. Violence to a Temple, Do you despise
the house of God? says S. Paul. As Christ says, He that swears by the Temple,
swears by it, and him that dwells in it; so, he that violates the body of a
Saint, offers indignity to that God that dwells in it. Take heed of profaning
your selves, being dedicated and devoted to the Holy Ghost. Thus S. Paul
dehorts them from uncleanness; The body is not for fornication, but for the
Lord, and the Lord for the body. Portastis Dominum in corpore vestro, as the
old Translation has it. Possess them in Holiness and Honor.
We have seen the particulars; Now,

II. Briefly take notice of the summary intent and purpose of this Clause, If
the Spirit of him that raised Jesus from the dead dwell in you, he that raised
Jesus from the dead, shall quicken your mortal bodies.

The Exigence, and Illation from this Conditional, is thus much; That
Sanctification is a necessary Requisite to a glorious Thou will not give thine
holy One to see corruption, says David, Psalm. xvi. Solum Sanctum non videbit
corruptionem, says S. Bern. It Is holiness that embalmes our dead bodies, and
will keep them from corruption.

The many habitudes and references that Holiness has to Happiness, Grace to
Glory, will confirm this truth.

1. Grace in reference to Glory, it has Rationem seminis. Everlasting life, it
is called the fruit of holiness, Romans vi. 22. and Galat. vi. 8. He that sowes
to the Spirit, shall of the Spirit reap life everlasting. Sementis hodie, and
^ras messis, says S. Chrysostom. This life is the Seed-time, the next life is
the Harvest. If there be no Seed-time of Grace, never expect any Harvest of
Glory. 2. Grace unto Glory, has the respect of a First Fruits to the whole
Crop, Romans viii. 23. We that have the first fruits of the Spirit, wait for the
redemption of our bodies. The First Fruits dedicated the whole Harvest. These
ripe Ears of Grace, are a blessed, assurance of the full Sheaves of Glory to be
reaped hereafter. 3. Grace unto Glory, has the respect of a Fountain to a
Stream, or River, Ioh. iv. 14. The water that I shall give him, shall be in
him, a well of water springing up to everlasting life. And what that Well of
water is, he tells us, chap. vii. 39. This spoke he of the Spirit, which they
that believe on him, should receive. 4. Grace unto Glory, has the respect of a
pledge or earnest, or seal unto a full actual Possession, 2 Cor. i. 2. Who has
sealed us, and given the earnest of the Spirit in our hearts: And again, Ephesians.
i. 13. Ye are sealed with that holy Spirit of Promise, which is the earnest of
our inheritance, (...) etc. says S. Chrysostom. It seals up all, and is in stead
of all. Theodosius made it a Law, That they who received not Rahab's house; if
we part with that token, we cannot escape. 5. Indeed there is so near a
Conjunction twixt Grace and Glory, that the Scripture makes them both the same
thing. Saint Peter calls Grace, The Spirit of Glory; The Spirit of God, and of
Glory rests on you, 1 Pet. iv. 14. They differ but in degrees; as the
Morning-light does, to the light of the perfect-Day, Prove. iv. 18. Grace, it is
the beginning, and daybreak, and dawning gratia consummata; and the
blessedness of Heaven, it is gloriosa sanctitas, holiness in the brightest hue,
shining in its full luster.
This makes the Scripture urge and enforce the necessity of Holiness, Follow
holiness, without which, none shall see the Lord, Heb. xii. 14. etc.

We have done with the first Particular. The Condition upon which our
Resurrection is promised; If the Spirit of him that raised up Jesus from the
dead dwell in you: Now follows,

Secondly, The efficient cause of it; He that raised up Christ from the dead,
shall quicken your mortal bodies; That is, God the Father, he will be the
Author of our Resurrection.

Diverse Reasons and Congruities, there are for this truth.

1. The first Founder of life, must be the Repairer and Restorer of it to us.
As he first breathed life into us; so he will send forth his Spirit and renew
us, and recall us back again. The interest he has in us by our Creation, gives
him the right to atcheive our Resurrection. Job observed that, chap. xiv. 14,
15. If a man die shall he live again? Yes, yes, Thou shall call and I will
answer thee; thou will have a desire to the work of thine hands. That hand
which created us, shall again raise and restore us. Mine own I will bring back
again, Psalm. lxviii. 22. 2. The soul in death, returns to him that gave it. It
is in his hand, and power, and custody, and so none but he can return Dives in
Hell confessed this truth; Father Abraham, send Lazarus to my brethren. He has
the keys of hell, and of death, and of all the Chambers of the grave, Rev. i.
18. 3. He is the Restorer of life, in the Resurrection, as being the supreme
Disposer of all Rewards, and Honors, and Retributions. As the King is the
Fountain of all civil Dignity, and Honor, and he must dispense it; so all the
Dispensations of Glory, are at his disposal. The Preferments in Heaven, are
given to them for whom they are prepared, by the Father, Matthew.
Now this Author of our Resurrection is specified, not barely by the mention of
his name, or person, but represented under an expression of much hope, and
assurance; He that raised Christ from the dead, that gives footing and fastening
to our faith, that he will raise us also. That great work makes our
Resurrection possible, and hopeful, and certain too.

There are many Praeludia Resurrectionis; many miraculous works in Scripture,
that did sweetly prefigure our Resurrection, but none like this of raising
Christ.

1. Enoch's Translation, that he saw not death, Genesis v. 24. God delivered him
from the power and possession of death. That which was to him Gratia
praeveniens, shall be to us Gratia subvenieus. He who exempted him from death,
can rescue us. 2. Elijah's Rapture, and Assumption in a fiery Chariot; he
likewise was exempted from the necessity of death; his exaltation was a type of
our resurrection. 3. Aaron's Rod, a dry, dead piece of wood, made to bud, and
flourish, and bring forth ripe fruit: that argues a 4. The Garments of the
Israelites for forty years, though used, and worn, yet decayed not. He who can
preserve our Garments from wearing out, sure he can preserve our Bodies from
perishing. 5. The three Children cast into a fiery Furnace, yet preserved; no
smell of fire was upon them: that is a great assurance that the Furnace of the
Grave shall restore us to Incorruption. 6. Jonas cast up again, when the Whale
had swallowed Praedae suae custodes; and hopeful and comfortable Assurances of
our Resurrection.
All these are sweet Resemblances and Arguments of our rising again, but none
like this; He that raised Christ from the dead, shall raise us also. Christ's
Resurrection,

1. Argues ours possible. S. Paul argues strongly from it; If Christ be risen
again, how say some, that there is no Resurrection? 2. It makes ours probable,
and easy. Death is now vanquished by Christ's Resurrection. When the Prison
door is set open, it is easy to escape. 3. It makes ours necessary: If the
Head be risen, the Members must follow after. Christus non potest habere membra
damnata. The living Head, must not be united to dead Members.
We have seen the Author.

Thirdly, What is the Action? He shall quicken our mortal bodies. Mortal
bodies? Why not, Our dead bodies? That seems to be more. Mortuum sounds more
then mortale. No, purposely the Apostle uses this expression in this point of
the Resurrection. Mortale is a great deal more then ^ortuum; To be raised a
Mortalitate is a great deal more, then to be raised a Morte. It expresses three
Excellencies of our Christian Resurrection.

1. It frees us a possibilitate mortis; it takes away the necessity, nay more
then so, the possibility of death. Death shall have no more dominion over us.
Not only death shall be swallowed up in victory, 1 Cor. xv. but mortality
shall be swallowed up of life, 2 Cor. v. 4. Our Resurrection shall be according
to the power of an endless life, as the Apostle speaks. This Resurrection far
exceeds the Resurrection of Lazarus, and those others in Scripture. They were
raised a morte, but not a mortalitate, The fit was rather removed then the
disease cured. It Is a rule they have, Qui comitialem morbum habent, ne quidem
diebus quibus morbo vacant, sani dicuntur; They who are troubled with the
falling sickness, upon their good days are not counted Mortalitas, it is
Morbus caducus, our Resurrection cures us of that; the core of death is
consumed, the root and fibrae of death, all stub'd up.

Nay, our Resurrection sets us in an Immortality beyond that of Adam. He was
endued with an Immortality, but not like this of ours. As was his liberty from
sin, so was his immortality and freedom from death. Prima libertas fuit non
peccare; and so Prima immortalitas was posse non mori. He might not have
sinned, that was his Liberty; he might not have died, that was his Immortality.
But the liberty from sin in heaven, is, Non posse peccare, there they cannot
sin; so is our immortality, Non posse mori, that we cannot die: it takes away
possibilitat^m mortis.

2. This Expression of quickening our mortal bodies, it brings with it a second
excellency, a freedom from infirmities, diseases, Mephibosheth shall leap;
blind Isa^c shall see clearly; and ulcerous Lazarus shall be whole and sound.
3. It brings a third Excellency; it will free us, a miseria. Miseries and
afflictions, and vexations, they are the concomitants of our mortality; this
resurrection shall exempt us from them too. Saint John assures us of it, Rev.
xxi. 4. God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes, and there shall be no
more death, neither sorrow, nor crying, nor any more pain; all these are passed
by.
I come,

Fourthly, To the last thing, that is, the ground and reason of all, Because
his Spirit dwells in you. The inhabitation of God's Spirit, that is the ground
of our Resurrection. And the force and evidence of this reason may be deduced
into these Particulars;

1. The dwelling of Gods Spirit in us, is a ground of our resurrection, because
it is Vinculum Unionis; the Spirit is the bond of our union, and conjunction
with Christ. By it we are incorporated into his holy Body, and made members of
it; Now Not a bone of his was broken. This union by the Spirit, it is like the
touch of a Lodestone, it will attract, and draw us to him, that where he is,
we shall be also. It is spoken of his hypostatical, but it is true also of his
mystical union, Quod semel ass^mpsit (...) dep^suit. Christ will part with none
of his members. Father, I will that where I am, they shall be also. Because I
live, ye shall live also, John xiv. 19. 2. This inhabitation of the Spirit
grounds our resurrection, ratione proprietatis. Our bodies by this
inhabitation, are consecrated to be a possession of the Holy Ghost; and the
Temple of God must not be destroyed. What Christ said of his own body, it is
true of ours; Destroy this Temple, and I will raise it up again. Necesse est
Spiritui reddatur Templum suum, says Tertul. Gods Spirit takes pleasure not
only in these living Temples, but owns them when they are dead; takes pleasure
in the dead bones, and favors the dust of them, Psalm. cii. As Philosophers say
of the Soul, it is Artifex sui domi^ilii, it frames its own house of the body;
so the Spirit of God repairs, re-edifies, rears up this Fabric 3. This
Inhabitation of the Spirit, works our resurrection, as being the Auhor of both
that initial grace that entitles us, and gives us claim to the state of a
resurrection; Regeneration makes us Children of the Resurrection; as also,
because it is the author of Primitiae gratiae, so there are Reliquiae peccati;
Those remainders of sin dispose us to death; but our final and finishing grace
roots up those Fibrae peccati; and sin, being abolished, death has no dominion
over us.
So then, for use of all,

1. Is the Habitation of the Spirit the ground of our Resurrection? does that
give us interest into the resurrection of Christ? Sure then, 1. The benefit of
this resurrection belongs only to them, Christ, dwelling in them. The wicked,
and reprobate, they have no share in Christ's resurrection; Not but that Christ
raises the wicked at the last day; but this he does, officio Iudicis, not
beneficio Mediatoris; by the authority of his supreme Judicature: All shall
hear his voice, his summons shall raise them out of their Grave; but the fruit,
and benefit of his mediation, or resurrection, extends not to them. 1. Not by
way of Merit; he communicates no merit in the world to come to those, who have
no interest in his merits in this present world. 2. Not by way of any actual
efficacy; there is no influence of Christ, but into his own members; all
influence of grace and virtue, either tends to union, or flows from it. 3. Not
by way of Example. Christ's resurrection is not so much as the Pattern and
Samplar of theirs; there is no assimilation 'twixt Christ and the wicked. They
do not bear the Image of the second Adam; they are not planted into the
Similitude of his death or resurrection. He is the resurrection, and the life
to them that believe, John xi.
2. Besides; the Resurrection that Christ merited, and communicates, is a
beneficial, and beatifical Resurrection. Meritum sonat in bonum; the
resurrection of the wicked tends to damnation. Better not rise, then rise to
perdition. Better stay in prison, then to be brought to execution. This rising,
destroys not death, but increases, and redoubles it. In short, 3. The
Resurrection of the wicked, it is no fruit of the Gospel, but a sequel of the
Law; not flowing from the second Adam, but is consequent upon the first; no
part of the Promise, The seed of the woman shall bruise the Serpents head; but
a part of the Threatening, Thou shall die the death; soul and body, both to be
destroyed.
2. Shall we be raised, because his Spirit dwells in us? See the sweet fruit,
and benefit of giving place to Christ, and his Satan uses the bodies he
possesses, Luke ix. 39. (...), He rent, and tore them; Oh! the Spirit of God
keeps, and preserves them. As men say of their houses: Better Let them
Rent-free to some that will use them well, and keep them in repair, then for
Rent to others, that will havoc, and spoil them; If Satan possess thy body,
besides the base usage he will put it to, he will make it a sink of sin, a
dunghill of corruption, a rendevous of unclean Spirits; all the Rent he pays
thee, will be ruin, and destruction. Christ's Spirit possess thee, besides the
honor which his presence puts upon thee (if the King be in a Cottage, he makes
it a Court) he will secure it, and maintain it, and make it good to thee.
Use thy body, and devote it to sensuality, it will end in corruption; devote
it to God, and his Spirit, it will rise to immortality. S. Paul speaks, 1 Cor.
vi. 13. Meats for the belly, and the belly for meats; and what will become of
it? God shall destroy both it and them. But, the body is for the Lord, and the
Lord for the body; and then what follows? Verse. 14. God has both raised up the
Lord, and will also raise up us by his own power.

Dos immortalitatis; Immortality, it is the Dowry that God assures to the body;
The body is not for Fornication, but for the Lord; and he assures this Dowry,
even a blessed Resurrection;

Which God grant for his sake, who is the Resurrection, and the Life. To whom,
etc.





A SERMON PREACHED UPON WHIT-SUNDAY.
ON
The First Sermon.
2 KINGS ii. 9. And it came to pass when they were gone over, that Elijah said
unto Elisha, Ask what I shall do for thee, before I be taken away from thee.
And Elisha said, I pray thee let a double portion of thy spirit be upon me.


THe two Testaments have a mutual relation, and reciprocal aspect, and
interview one with another. Not any mystery of the New, but was shadowed out
in the Old; not any type of the Old, but is represented, and exhibited, and
fulfilled in the New.

They are placed about Christ, as the two Cherubs upon the Mercy-seat, looking
each on other, and both on Christ. The Faith of the Old Testament looked
forward, expecting to behold the fullness of those types; Shadows sometimes
useful before the Messiah, by way of prefiguration;

In particular; Those two glorious mysteries of our Faith, Christ's Ascension,
and his Donation of the Spirit (the one lately Celebrated, the other the
subject of this day's Solemnity) they were lively prefigured in the Prophet
Elijah, Christ's Ascension, was typified in Elijah's Fiery-Chariot: The gift of
the Holy Ghost was typified in this gift, and Grant, that is made to Elisha,
The doubling the spirit of Elijah upon him: That was upon Elisha; The Spirit of
Christ upon his Disciples.

The Text, it is a relation of the settling the gift, and spirit of Prophecy
upon Elisha: And it is conferred upon him, not suddenly, and unexpectedly; but
by the interposition of some mutual intercourse betwixt the Prophet, and Elisha.

This intercourse stands upon two parts;

1. Elijahs gracious proffer; Ask what I shall do for thee, before I be taken
away from thee. 2. Elisha's wise, and religious desire; I pray thee let a
double portion of thy spirit be upon me.
First, In Elijah's proffer, there are two things;

1. The Substance of the Motion, Ask what I shall do for thee. 2. The
Circumstance of Time, and so the Opportunity of it, Before I be taken away from
thee.
I. For the Substance of Elijah's proffer. In it these four particulars are
remarkable:

1. The forwardness and freeness of it: It Is a preventing offer. Elijah stays
not till Elisha sues to him, but prevents him, and makes the Motion first, and
freely invites him to enjoy a blessing from him. True Charity, and desire of
doing good, Isaac called his son to bless him, unsought-to. Thus Christ called
Matthew, who never looked after him; bids himself to Zacheus. As the Prophet
bids the Widow borrow vessels of her neighbors to pour Oil into; so Charity
borrows and begs of others to receive the communion of those graces with which
she is furnished. Elisha's first calling was a preventing favor; now his
second calling, it is by prevention. Christian Charity, is not like a dry and
deep Pump, that must be often pumped before it sends out water; but like a full
Chrysostoms observation of S. Paul's readiness to the Macedonians; it must be an
express revelation that must forbid him to preach in Asia and Bithynia. They
who are of Elijahs, and S. Paul's spirit, expect nothing but the opportunities,
and advantages of Acts xvi. That Is the first, the freeness of it. 2. A second
thing observable, is the fullness, and largeness of this his Offer; Ask what
thou will. The Popish Saints are limited to some sorts of blessing, wherein
they may prevail. Such a Saint, he can pleasure thee in thy health; such an one
is for such a disease; such an one can bestow such a favor.

Here is a Favorite of heaven can speed any suit, procure any favor, or
blessing, that is fitting for thee. What cannot the prayer of an Elijah obtain?
He can open, and shut heaven; James speaks of him. Am I God, to kill and make
alive, that this man does send to me? said the King of Israel to those that
were sent to him from Syria, 2 Kings v. But what says Elisha? Let him come now
to me, and he shall know that there is a Prophet in Israel. God has given a
kind of Omnipotency to the prayers of his Saints. The King can deny you
nothing. Prayer is a key, that opens all Gods Storehouses. And he gives this
key to his Saints and Children. Happy they who enjoy the society of such an
Elias. But thrice happy they, who have the spirit of Elijah; who can be agents
for themselves,

But I demand, Was it safe to make such an unlimited offer to Elisha? To trust
him with such an unbounded wish, to ask what he would?

I answer, We must conceive this large and liberal proffer is bounded, and
circumscribed with these limitations:

1. The Caveat of lawful Conditions, and matter of Expediency. God never gives
us so ample a power to ask what we will, but straitens it up with these
proviso*s; If lawful, If useful, If absolutely necessary, If agreeable to his
Will, If serviceable Solomon, in 1 Kings ii. 21. bids Bathsheba, Ask on, my
mother, for I will not say thee nay. But yet her unadvised petition, was justly
denied her. If we ask things agreeable to his will, we know he hears us, 1
John v. 14. Then God says, as to the woman of Canaan* Matthew. xv. 28. Be it
unto thee, even as thou will. 2. A second limitation, is, Congruitas
vocationis. If Elisha means to speed, it must be a Suit answerable and fitting
to his State and Calling. Elisha was a Prophet; let him ask what befits
Zebedees sons sped not in her request to Christ. Why? Her suit in general might
be lawful, but it agreed not with them to ask such favors; Ye know not what ye
ask: Are ye able to drink of the Cup that I shall drink of, and to be baptized
with the baptism that I am to be baptized with? Matthew. xx. 22. So Jeremy to
Baruch, Seek thou great things for thy self? Seek them not, Ier. xlv. 5. 3.
A third limitation, is, Idonietas person^ (...): Ask what is fit for Elijah to
grant thee. Do thou meet with a Prophet? Ask the proper gift of a Prophet. We
must learn the art of making the best improvement of the Saints of God, to
share in those excellencies wherewith God has furnished them. As Christ says
to the woman of Samaria, If thou knew the gift of God, and who it is that
says unto thee, Give me to drink, thou would have asked of him, and he
would have given thee Living water. As S. Peter said to the lame man, Silver
and gold have I none, but such as I have, I give thee: In the name of Jesus
Christ of Nazareth. Rise up and walk, Act^ iii. 6. Thus where the Apostles, or
Christ came, they brought out their sick, and their blind, and their dumb, and
their deaf. Do thou gain the opportunities of an Elijah (...) Ask that which
is proper to an Elijah to grant. When one said to Christ, Master, speak to my
brother that he divide the Inheritance with me: He said unto him, Man, Who made
me a Judge, or a Divider ever you? 4. A fourth limitation that warrants this
Offer, is, Intima directio: That Spirit that directed him to offer, would
direct Elisha to ask. We know not what we should pray for, as we ought; but the
Spirit it self makes Intercession for us, Romans viii. 26. God bids Solomon ask
what he would; but withal, inspires him with such a prayer as should find
acceptance.
3. A third thing observable, is the Reality and Efficacy of this proffer;
What shall I do for thee? There is Substance and Reality in that word. Alas!
What can Elijah do? For temporal blessings, he was to seek himself: for
spiritual, they are Isaac's benediction and blessing of Jacob, Genesis xxvii. 37.
Behold, I have made him thy lord, and all his brethren have I given to him for
servants; and with corn and wine have I sustained him. How did he this? verse.
28. He said, God give it thee; God give thee of the dew of heaven, and the
fatness of the earth, and plenty of corn and wine. A faithful Prayer, it is as
good as an actual Donation. Thus S. Paul, 2 Cor. vi. 10. As poor, yet making
many rich; as having nothing, and yet possessing, and bestowing all things,
Oration, it is prom^ and (...). It is set over all Gods Storehouses. They, under
God, are the true Benefactours, that 4. A fourth thing observable, is the
Wisdom and Order of this proffer: He will have him ask it, before he gives it.
Though Gods grace be never so free, yet he requires that we should crave it of
him. There is one blessing that God gives unasked, and that is the grace of
Asking. After-graces are given when we pray; only he prevents us with the
grace of Prayer. God is found of them that sought not for him, Isai. lxv. 1. to
wit, by giving them the grace to seek for him. We must not look for his Spirit
to enter into us sleeping, or without thinking of it. Ask, and it shall be
given you; Seek, and you shall find; Knock, and it shall be opened unto you,
Matthew. vii. 7. Your heavenly Father will give the holy Spirit to them that ask
him, Luke xi. 13. The Well of Grace is deep; but, Oration, it is situla gratiae;
the Bucket, without which there is no drawing up any water of Grace.
Happy we! who may have Grace for asking.

Wretched we! who will not ask, when we may have it.

We have done with the Substance of Elijah's proffer. Come we now,

II. To the Circumstance of time, Before I be taken from thee. Before I be
taken from thee, beg what thou will.

1. Observe, Elijah being to leave the world, his thoughts are for
after-succession, that he may leave a Prophet in the Church of God; he will not
leave the Church unfurnished, the people of God unprovided for. Oh! The Saints
of God are solicitous, not only for the present age wherein they live, but
forecast for succession, that the worship of God may survive Moses, how does he
pray for a Leader after him? Numb. xxvii. 16, 17. Let the Lord, the God of the
spirits of all flesh, set a man over the Congregation, which may go out before
them, and may go in before them, and which may lead them out, and which may
bring them in, that the Congregation of the Lord be not as Sheep which have no
Shepherd. How does S. Paul charge the Churches for things after his death?
Acts xx. S. Peter being to dye, fore-warns the Elders -- 2 Pet. i.

How wicked are they, who, so they may see peace and prosperity David, though
he was forbid to build the Temple, yet how did he store up for Solomon's Temple?
1 Chronicles. xxii. Oh! we enjoy the worship and service of God, and now stand by
the care of others, let us not be wanting Jesus Christ to Judgment.

2. Observe, he provides for the enabling of Elisha: He did not only anoint
him, but now furnishes him, being himself to dye, and to leave the world. Flesh
and Blood would have thought, Let him be imperfect, and deficient, they will
wish me again; his defects will be a foil for my excellencies. An unworthy
Successor, commends his Predecessor. Oh no; He desires to empty out all his
Graces into Elisha; and rejoiced to Elisha so able to succeed him. The Nobles
prayed, 1 King. i. 37. The Lord make the Throne of Solomon, greater then the
Throne of King David; yet there was no jealousy in David. Glad they are that
the Graces in their Successors may obscure them, that they may not be missed.
3. Observe, Elijah is now most forward, and ready to do good, when he is to
depart, and to leave this world. Saints, though they are always desirous to do
good; yet at their death, oh then, they are more abundant in all holy desires
of doing good. Full of blessing they are always, but at their leaving Moses in
his Song; so dealt Isaac, and Jacob; and so did Elisha deal with the King of
Israel; Christ with his Disciples on mount Olivet; S. Peter when he was to lay
down his Tabernacle. Oh then all Graces are most pregnant; their Faith, their
Repentance, their Hope, their Prayers, their Blessings, Counsels, Reproofs;
they will take their fill of them. The box of Ointment, when it is broken,
fills the house with the smell. They love to be sacrificed upon the service of
the Church. S. Paul leaving the Ephesians, preached till midnight, imparts all
4. Observe, he says, Ask of me, before I be taken from thee: Had Elijah been
of the Faith of Rome, there had been no need of this limitation; nay, rather,
Ask of me, and invocate, and pray to me, after I am in heaven; there I shall
sue for thee, call then upon me. No such matter. If we will make use of Elijah,
do it now. We may use reverend compellations now, not tender religious
supplications thither. Heb. xii. 23. Ye are come to the spirits of just men
made perfect, and to Jesus the Mediator of the New Covenant; they are not
Mediators. Joseph desired Augustine, upon those words of the Psalmist, Psalm.
oxxiii. 2. Behold, as the eyes of servants look unto the hand of their Masters,
and as the eyes of a Maiden unto the hand of her Mistress, so our eyes wait
upon the Lord our God, until he have mercy upon us. Observe, says the Father,
here upon earth we have Masters, and Mistrisses; but in heaven, Non habemus
Dominum and Dominam, but only our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, that must
have mercy upon us.
Now follows,

Secondly, Elisha's desire; I pray thee let a double portion of thy Spirit be
upon me. He answers not Elijah, as Ahaz to Isaiah, when he bad him ask a Sign;
no, I will not ask, Isai. vii. 11, 12. Elijah no sooner maks proffer, but he
lays hold on it. It Is good making use of Elijah while we have him with us,
unfold our wants to Elijah must not always continue among us. The times may
come, when we shall wish to see one of the days of the Son of man, and it shall
not be. Oh, in this thy day, now the Angel is stirring the water, yet Elijah is
among us; do as Elisha, he makes haste, petitions him presently.

Of which Petition, take a double Consideration:

1. Quid Supponit. 2. Quid Petit.
I. Quid Supponit; Here are four Supposals:

1. The first Supposal, is, Identitas Spiritus. He supposes Elijah. Here is a
continuation of the same Spirit in a succession of men. Elijah is taken away.
Yes; but his Spirit shall remain. The means and instruments of grace may be
removed, but the gifts of the Spirit shall continue still. It is worth the
observing, God ties not himself to any personal perfections. Oh, we think, If
such a Saint dies, what will become of the Church? It Is a loss; but yet, in
diversity of men, here is the same Spirit. When Moses died, his spirit rested
upon Joshua. Aaron died, Eleazar was invested, and clothed with the same
Spirit. It must comfort Paul, a Luther, etc. yet the same spirit remains, and
breathes in his Church. As it was said to the evil servant, Toll talentum, and
da; so of the good. The Lord needs no man's person, or parts, he can set his
Spirit upon another. 2. A second Supposal, is Portio Spiritus. The Spirit of
Elijah is apportioned out in a limited dispensation. It is (...). We receive
but in part; no man has all in kind, or degrees. To one is given by the
Spirit, the word of Wisdom; to another, the word Knowledge by the same Spirit;
to another the gifts of Healing, to another Prophecy, etc. 1 Cor. xii. 8, 9.
10. The most enriched Saint has but what he enjoys, in measure; they have
indeed a fullness, but then it is only, 1. A fullness of Capacity. 2. A fullness
of Sufficiency for their use, but not of absolute Aaron had the Spirit poured
on him, others had it but sprinkled. Quantum causa exigit, propter quam datur,
Ambros.
3. A third Supposal is, Inaequalitas portionum. There is a single portion, and
a double portion. Some have one talent, some two, another five. There is not
any Saint but has one, not any that have all, but some more, some less.
Benjamin's mess was five times as much as any of the rest of his brethrens. 4.
A fourth Supposal is, Duplicatio in juniore. Elisha the successor, and junior,
may have a double Portion, more then Elijah his predecessor. God can cross his
hands, as Jacob did, and lay his right hand upon Ephraims head, who was the
younger; and his left hand upon Manassehs head, who was the firstborn, Genesis
xlviii. 14. We cannot prescribe to God. It Is neither the age of men, nor the
precedence of times, that is any thing; but the Lord may be as bountiful to
this Age, as unto Antiquity. It is no disparagement to Elijah, that Elisha
exceeds him. After-ages may be furnished with more eminent men in some kinds,
then the more Primitive and Ancient times have been. We worthily reverence
Antiquity, and rise up at the gray head; but yet God Augustine, Hierom, the
rest, were most reverend; yet Luther, Calvin, others, more famous in their
generation.
There is a double Use of a double Portion.

1. For Founding. 2. For Repairing and Reforming of Churches; And as great a
measure of the Spirit is as necessary for this, as that. John must come, in
Spiritu Eliae, to found the Gospel. After-ages have the promise of the spirit
of Elias too, in reforming. The one to preach Christ, the other to resist
Antichrist. How do some These Novelists, Modern, Yester-day-Divines. But, Quis
contempsit diem parvulorum? And, let no man despise thy youth. As it is said of
some good Kings, none like David, none like Hezekiah, none like to Josiah,
before, or after; Why? because each excelled in some personal grace of zeal, or
piety, or integrity; So these late-ones were eminent in some things, before all
other that preceded. Patres tum demum vincunt cum vincuntur a filiis. Ancients
would have gloried in their posterity, and why enviest thou for their sakes?
That Is for the first; Quid Supponit? Now follows,
II. Quid Petit? The sum of his Desire; That a double portion of thy Spirit
may be upon me.

In it observe two things:

1. The Matter of his Desire, that is Elijah's Spirit. 2. The Measure of it, A
double portion.
First, The Matter of his Request. Had many of us such a large Offer made us,
to ask what we would, I fear we should not have pitched upon this request of
Elisha, for a spiritual blessing. Elijah had a power of curing, and raising
from the dead; health, and long life, some would have asked. Elijah could cause
plenty, bring famine, increase oil; others would have urged a supply of riches.
Elijah could bring down fire to consume his enemies, others would have desired
victory, and safety. The Lord implies, that, naturally, these are our carnal
desires, in his reply to Solomon, 1 Kings iii. 11. Because thou have asked this
thing, and have not asked for thy self long life, neither have asked riches for
thy self, nor have asked the life of thine enemies, etc.

See, here is one who passes by all these, and knows how to frame a Petition
aright, that he is sure shall speed; the prayer for the Spirit. Oh, it is a
great advantage, to know what to pray for. Docet dare qui prudenter rogat; The
choosing of the better part, prevails with God. Herod offers to the Damosel, to
ask what she will; and she asks the head of S. John the Baptist, the life of
her enemy. Piety will ask the spirk of the Baptist.

But why does Elisha pitch upon this request? Why begs he

1. He had Spirium vocantem, now he begs the Spirit enabling. He was called to
a spiritual Function, now he sues for a spiritual enablement for the discharge
and execution of it. If God puts us into a Calling, we must beg and seek for
gifts answerable to it. See Moses, how importunate was he with God for
enablement? Solomon, called to the Kingdom, begs a Kingly spirit. How many are
there, who sue for the Calling, but seldom crave the Enabling? It must be so in
every employment. Art thou called to an Office? beg wisdom, courage, fidelity.
Art Jacobs Sons were men of Activity, therefore Pharaoh would employ them. 2.
He asks that which was fittest for Elijah to grant him. Elijah had a kind of
Universality of obtaining any thing, but it Dona dextrae that move most
readily; Dona throni, not Bona scabelli. With men we grant small requests, and
stick at great gifts; but God gives his best gifts most readily. 3. Elijah is
now leaving the World: Now Elisha sees what Elijah, and stood him in stead. Oh,
it was this, that he had been an able and faithful Prophet, an holy man; it was
that which made him leave the World thus peaceably, comfortably, willingly.
This makes Elisha crave the Spirit. All outward things, what comfort can they
breed at our last parting? Give me that that may breed matter of comfort at my
last need; make me such a Prophet, that I may so live, as I may die like
Elijah.
Look upon a rich man dying, see what comfort he gets by his riches, or
honors. Look on a man replenished with Gods Euge, and to enter into that joy;
it will make thee wish one dram of grace, rather then the whole World besides.
Judge of Elijah, hid in Mount Carmel for Persecution; and look on Baal's
Priests ruffling in Iezabels Court, it may tempt thee to wish their Honor: Ey,
but stay a while, see their Honor, and Elijah's glorious Death, or Departure,
it will make thee neglect the one, to beg the other; and choose rather to die in
Elijah's hairy Mantle, then in all their bravery.

So much for the matter of his desire; Now follows,

Secondly, The measure of it, A double portion of thy Spirit. Why so? What
makes him desire a greater measure then Elijah had? What? Was it envy, and
carnal emulation, to outstrip Elijah? Or ambition, to be more renowned in his
Generation? It Is true, a man may be proud of the Spirit, desirous to set up
himself. But it was not so in Elisha. What may we conceive raised his desires
so high?

1. Dignitas doni; The excellency of these kind of gifts. Spiritual graces
deserve eager pursuits, and vehement desires of them. A man may beg too much of
outward blessings; but of Cor. xiv. 1. Be zealously affected to spiritual
Graces, strive to excel for the edifying of the Church. Solomon craves
abundance of Wisdom; but of Riches, only what is moderate and convenient. S.
Peter, when he heard of the virtue that was in Christ's washing; then he says
to Christ, Lord, not my feet only, but also my hands and my head. How
preposterous are our desires generally? We crave two Portions of outward
Blessings; but, a little Knowledge, little Abilities to do good, content us 2.
Eminentia exempli; The luster of Elijah's example has ravished him: The Spirit
that was so eminent and conspicuous in him, it begets an holy emulation to
attain, and outgoe him. Oh, to see grace of any sort incorporate and incarnate
in another Simon Magus, to see S. Peter so glorious, he would needs purchase
such a gift. When we see Religion clasped up in Books, it works not so
effectually; when we see it real and operative, then it works kindly upon us,
makes others (if they have any mettle in them) to attain the like. Those who
damp and smother the gifts of God in them, they hinder the progress and growth
of grace in others. To see men carry grace, as men do a candle in a dark
lanthorn, only for themselves, it hinders emulation; 3. Gustus initialis
gratiae; Elisha had some beginnings of these gifts before; he had felt the
sweetness, and excellency of them; it makes him therefore the more earnest and
eager to be rich in grace. They who have once felt the sweetness of Gods Spirit
in any kind, they cannot satisfy themselves in any stint, but are earnest for
more. The true Relishes of Gods first gifts, beget not loathing but longing;
makes men to cry out, Lord, evermore give us this bread, and to desire That the
word of God may dwell plenteously in them. Grace, it is always growing,
ascending. They who content themselves with their first beginnings, have cause
to suspect, they were not true and kindly. How does S. Paul pray for more
enablements? They who think they know enough, know nothing as they should. 4.
Pondus officii; He is now to undergo a weighty service, to become the main
Prophet of the People of God; it is a burden heavy enough for Angels, and
Archangels: The sense of this weight makes him call, and beg for a double
Portion. Elisha's employment. This made Solomon beg; Oh, it is a great People,
give thy Servant therefore a large Heart. It made Moses shrink his shoulder
from under it. They who in any kind, are to govern others, undergo a weighty
burden; they must beg a double Portion. 5. Ardor zeli; His desire of doing much
good makes him of gifts. Here is one who is ambitious of gaining God much 6.
Gravitas damni; The loss of an Elias stirrs him up to crave a double Portion.
Elijah was set for the defense of Religion, the burden of the Church rested on
his shoulders; Now, that the Church has lost him, it inflames Elisha to get
himself furnished for to do that service. Oh, when we see the Church loses her
choicest Patrons, and Upholders, it must not make us faint, but double our
endeavors, that that loss may be recovered. So, Moses my servant is dead,
arise Ioshuah, play the man now. This made Elijah zealous before; there is none
left, I, even I only am left, 1 Kings xix. 10; so it does now Elisha. The
daily losses that the Church suffers, should make us more forward in doing all
the good we can. 7. Sensus infirmitatum; He desires a double Portion in respect
of Elijah, out of a sense of his own infirmities. He conceived Elijah to be a
man more able and sufficient, even by natural parts; and he was conscious to
himself of his own insufficiency; and therefore he judges a double Portion was
necessary for him, whereas a less Portion enabled Elijah. A true sense of our
unworthiness, and infirmities, will make us more zealously I am a man of
unclean lips, Isai. vi. 5. Moses often pleads his insufficiency. Would thou be
stirred up, and made more capable of grace in any kind? Look not upon thine own
strength, but upon thine infirmities; Lord, I am a child, and cannot speak, who
is sufficient for these things? Saul got a new spirit, when he said, I am of
the smallest of the Tribes of Israel, and my family the least of all the
families of the Tribe of Benjamin, 1 Samuel ix. 21. 8. Sensus difficultatum;
Elisha's Ministry was likely to fall Ahab and Iezabel had so spawned the
Church with Idolatry, and Sorcery, and Persecutions, that Elisha sees nothing
but Opposition. He is to encounter with a whole Nation of Idolaters. There were
seventy Sons of Ahab left in Samaria, and a Succession of Persecutors like to
continue. According to the difficulty of the work he begs the larger
enablement. He shrinks not from the Service, only he beggs Assistance.
The rising of Persecution and Opposition, must not discourage, but provoke,
and stir us up to solicit for greater enablement. Acts iv. 28* Now Lord,
behold their threatenings, and grant unto thy servants, that with all boldness
they may speak thy word, By stretching forth thine hand, Verse 30. The
Persecutions of the Church, must not deterr, but provoke us to a greater
enabling of our selves. In danger of Heresy, be more grounded in Religion. A
double portion of Knowledge is then requisite.

Well then.

1. Does Elisha beg of Elijah? If He draws from the Channel, how should We have
recourse to the Fountain? Christ is not only the Obtainer, but the Sovereign
Dispenser of all grace. Go to him now ascended. Elijah ascended, ceases his
Intercession. Christ now intercedes most of all; He is set over all Joseph was
over those of Pharaoh's in Egypt: As therefore they to Joseph, so let us to
Christ. When he ascended on high, He gave gifts unto men, Ephesians. iv. 8. He it is
who breathes out the Spirit. Ever unfold thy wants to him, beg supplies of him.
2. If Elisha begs Prophetical Endowments, which are variously bestowed, then
may we be more forward to pray for those necessary, sanctifying graces of the
Spirit. A man may seek for those (...), and God sometimes deny them; But
Faith, Repentance, Holiness, those he will never deny. They are covenanted 3.
Does Elisha thus seek for enablements to do the Church Service? It should
provoke others to join with Elisha in this request. It is for thy good that
Elisha prays, that he might be fitted to save thee, Ought not thou to join,
in obtaining this Paul calls upon the Churches, Pray for me, that utterance may
be given unto me, that I may open my mouth boldly, to make known the mystery of
the Gospel. Let us pray that God would shed his Spirit richly upon his
Ministers. They who feed the Nurse, do it for the Child's sake that sucks on
her. So should you pray, that the Lord would increase his Spirit, on those that
dispense the Word to you. 4. Elisha, he desires to imitate and exceed Elijah.
Elisha a Prophet, sets Elijah a Prophet for his Pattern. So in all Callings and
Professions, propound the Examples of the choicest Worthies that are before
thee. Art thou a Magistrate? say, Oh Nehemiah may be doubled upon me. Art thou
a Master? Oh that the Spirit of Cornelius, whose whole Household was religious,
may be doubled upon me. Art thou poor, or sick? Oh that the Spirit of Job may
be doubled upon me. Art thou rich? Oh that the Spirit of Abraham, or (...), may
be Isaac might be doubled upon me. Art thou a Servant? Oh that the Spirit of
Eleazar might be doubled upon me. Look upon the choicest Copies, write after
them, imitate those, that do excel in the way, wherein God has placed thee.








A
S. LUKE xxi. 34. Take ^eed to your selves, lest at any time your hearts be
overcharged with surfeiting and drunkenness, and cares of this life, and so
that day come upon you unawares.
THe Chapter contains,

First, A serious fore-warning that Christ gives to his Disciples of the
approach, and drawing near of the day of Judgment. A Truth, never unseasonable
to be taught, The last days, Heb. i. 2. Brethren, the time is short, says S.
Paul, 1 Cor. vii. The ends of the world are come upon us Christians, 1 Cor. x.
11. Not but that the times before Christ had this warning given them; and those
Primitive Saints took notice of it. Enoch, that lived in the first age of the
Church, preached this Truth to the old World. God, by the Spirit of Proph^sie,
revealed it; and he, by the eye of Faith, clearly Christ coming in the Clouds.
Hear what S. Jude says, verse. xiv. Enoch, the seventh from Adam, prophesied of
these times; Behold, the Lord comes with ten thousands of his Saints, to
execute Judgment. And the Prophets spoke so clearly of our Saviors coming to
Judgment in Glory, that the Tertullian observes) mistook his second coming for
his first; they interpreted the predictions of his last appearance, for his
first coming into the world in his Incarnation.

The teaching of this Truth, was not then unseasonable; but yet, of the two
Ages of the Church, the doctrine of the day of Judgment is most proper and
agreeable to us Christians. The Faith of the Patriarchs and Prophets, was
chiefly employed about Christ's first Coming, and Incarnation; the Faith of
Christians must now expect and wait for his second Coming in Glory to Judgment.
They listened to hear the first voice, gentle

Answerable to these two Epoches, and periods of the Churches Faith, the
Scripture tells us of two days of Christ.

1. The day of his Incarnation; the Prophets and Patriarchs fixed most upon
that; Abraham rejoiced to see that day, John viii. 56. Then, 2. The Scripture
tells us of a second day of Christ; that is, the day of his Coming to Judgment.
That is called, The day of the Lord, 2 Pet. iii. The day of Jesus Christ, Phil.
i. 6. It is called, The dreadful day of the Lord, Malach. iv. 5. The great day
of his wrath, Revel. vi. 17. For this day, must be the expectation and
preparation of Christians. S. Peter tells us, It Is our duty to look for, and to
hasten to the Coming of this day of God, 2 Pet. iii. 12. That is the first
thing I note here, Christ forewarneth it.
Secondly, He does not only forewarn it, that one day, sooner or later it will
come upon us, but he tells them of many signs and prognostics of the
approaching of it: verse. 25. there shall be signs of it, and they certain, and
infallible, and dreadful, and Christ has furnished his Church with such signs
and tokens of it, in the fulfilling of which, we may plainly conclude, The day
is drawing on, and now approaching; that we may resolve with S. John, 1 Ioh.
ii. 18. We know that it is the last time. See, says S. James, The Judge
stands before the door. Who knows how soon he will enter in upon us? That Is
the second; he foretells the signs of it.

Thirdly, He does not only forewarn it, and foretell the signs

1. Be the truth of his Coming never so certain: 2. Be the signs and tokens of
it never so manifest: yet, 3. If we look not well about us, we may be surprised
by it. Paul tells us, It shall come suddenly, as the throes and travel of a
woman with child, 1 These. v. 3. Let a woman with child keep her reckoning never
so carefully, yet the just time and season of her travel she may not know; she
may be taken with those pangs, when she little looks for them.
So then, we have here a strict Caveat given us; a warningpiece shot off, to
arouse and awaken us against the day of Judgment. And it stands upon two
Particulars;

1. Here is a special Caution against a dangerous indisposition Gravedo cordis;
a spiritual surcharge and surfeit that our souls may fall into, that will so
clog, and dull, and oppress the heart, that it can never heed, nor expect, or
once think of the day of re^koning that must come upon us: That Is verse. 34. 2.
Here is a special direction to an holy preparation, and ^itting our selves
against that day; that is the duty of Vigilance; that we should keep Sentinel
continually, stand upon our Watch, expect daily, prepare hourly, fit our selves
carefully for the entertainment of that fatal day, verse. 36.
The Text contains the first, the ^aution. In it observe these particulars;

1. The Caveat it self; Take heed to your selves, lest at any time. 2. The
distemper and indisposition to be avoided; that is, oppressing, and
overcharging our hearts. 3. The Causes that will breed this surcharge of our
hearts, surfeiting, and drunkenness, and cares of this life. 4. The mischief
that will follow, if this Caveat be neglected; That day may come upon us
unawares; and then, woe be
We come,

First, to the Caveat: In it three things:

1. Is the duty of heedfulness, and attention; (...), Take heed. 2. The persons
concerning whom this Caveat is given, Your selves. 3. The greatness, and
measure, and strictness of this heed, in this vigilant, and watchful word of
circumspection, (...), Lest at any time.
I. The first thing you must consider, is the duty of heedfulness and
attention, Take heed, says Christ. It Is the solemn watchword and warning of
Scripture, often urged, and pressed upon us. Take heed to thy self, says
Moses, that thine heart be not deceived, Deuteronomy. xi. Take good heed unto your
selves. Josh. xxiii. Take diligent heed, Josh. xxii. Take heed, and beware,
says Christ, Matthew. xvi. It is a warning always seasonable, we all stand in
need of it; but especially in three Exigencies;

1. If the duty we undertake, the business about which we are employed, be
weighty, and ponderous. Matters of less moment and consequence, may be
slubbered and slighted, but matters of importance require heed and attention.
Now, matters of Religion, that concern our spiritual state and condition, the
eternal welfare of our souls, are of all others, of highest consequence, of
greatest concernment. O^ set your hearts unto it, Moses, for it is not a vain
thing for you, because it is your life, Deuteronomy. xxxii. 46. So again, Deuteronomy. iv. 9.
Only take heed to thy self, and keep thy soul diligently. And, amongst all the
duties of Religion, the fitting of our souls for the day of Judgment, the
survey, and examination of our consciences, making (...) our accounts against
that day of reckoning, it is a most weighty business. That is the first
enforcement of this duty of Heed; the matter is exceeding serious. 2 There is a
second Exigent of this Care, and Heed, which makes this Caveat seasonable, that
is, the approach of some great Salutis funambulus. The way to heaven, it is no
broad high way, but a narrow path, we may soon tread awry. Especially, the
dangers of the last day, the hazards that our souls must run, at that great day
of trial and account, are most perilous. 3. Above all, this Caveat is most
seasonable, and necessary, if the miscarriages we may fall into be
irrecoverable, and such as there is no getting out of them. In those
miscarriages that may be recovered, and fetched about again, there is some
hope; but if the danger we go upon, be deadly, and desperate, once miscarried,
and lost for ever. Oh then take heed, the whole stock is at the stake, if thou
miscarriest here, thou art undone for ever. Such is the hazard and miscarriage
of the day of Judgment. Other days, and duties may have a revolution; if we
fail at one time, we may mend it afterward, an after-game may As the tree
falls, so it lies. As death leaves us, so Judgment shall find us. It is
appointed for all men once to die, and then after death comes judgment, Heb.
ix. 27. Once to die, and but once. Had Origin, and some others fondly ^ancied)
then, had we miscarried in one, we might recover our selves in a second. No, we
must die once for all, and then comes Judgment. The sentence that then shall be
passed upon us, it is not to be re-called; it is not (as the Civilians speak in
their Law) an Interlocutory Sentence; but final, and peremptory, never to be
reversed. Deliberandum est diu, quod statuendum est semel. In all Contracts and
Bargains, every man will take heed of that that must bind him for ever. How
much more should we take heed to our selves in this final, and fatal business;
in our
Come we to the next Particular; which is,

II. The Persons who are concerned in this Caveat, to whom our Savior directs
this Caveat, Attendite vobis, Take heed to your selves. Christ brings this
Caveat home to them, and lays it close to their hearts and consciences; they
must look about them, it concerns them.

And then the strength, and force of this Application to these persons, will
appear by these three expressions, which will more fully set out the nature and
necessity of the Caveat.

1. Vobis sciscitantibus, and inquirentibus; You that are questioning, and
enquiring about that day, Take you heed to your selves. In the seventh Verse,
we find the Disciples (so S. Matthew terms them, Chap. 24.) asking of Christ,
1. Concerning the time of his Coming. 2. Enquiring of those signs that shall
forego, and usher in, the day of his Appearing. And Christ in part satisfies
their Query; acquaints them with his coming to judgment, and the signs of it;
But withal, takes occasion from their curious question, to enforce upon them a
profitable, and useful, and necessary exhortion, Take heed to your selves. He
does not say, Attendite signis; you do well to be inquisitive about the signs
of my Coming, to be able to calculate the times, to foresee, and foretell the
end of the world, and my coming to judgment; but this he urges; Attendite
Vobis, look well to your selves, to your own state and condition, how that day
shall find you; Ask your selves Isaiah's question, Chap. x. 3. What will ye do
in the day of Visitation? A^k also Ezekiel's question, Chap. xxii. 14. Can
thine heart end^re, or ^an thine hand be strong in the day that I shall deal
with thee? And yet again, Isai. xxxiii. 14. Who amongst us shall dwell with
(...) fire? Who shall dwell with everlasting burnings?

Our Savior calls them off from musing upon these wonderful prognostications,
(as the Angel speaks, Acts i. 11. Ye men of Galilee, why stand ye gazing into
heaven?) The darkness of the Sun, the falling of the Stars, the roaring of the
Sea, the trembling


It gives plain check and reproof to the curious Enquiries that naturally we
are prone to make into Gods secrets. Our brains will be full of questions, and
speculations, about many high Mysteries; but our hearts remain void of those
sad, and serious thoughts, to make good use of them to our selves. A man may be
very curious, and yet withal extreme careless; exceeding inquisitive in
matters of knowledge, and yet notoriously

The consideration of the day of Judgment, it is not a matter of contemplation;
as it were, to see a blazing Star, an Eclipse of the Sun, or some wonder in
Nature: but it abodes some great thing to us-wards. Meditate upon it, as upon
the day of thine account, and of thy making or marring for ever. Thus S. Paul
brings this doctrine of the day of Judgment to practice. 2 Cor. v. 10. We must
all appear before the Iudgment-seat of Christ. Knowing therefore the terror of
the Lord, we persuade men. So S. Peter, Pet. iii. 10. The day of the Lord will
come as a thief in the night, and the heavens shall pass away with a noise --
Seeing then these things shall be dissolved, what manner of persons ought we to
be in all holy conversation? Thus Noah, when he was warned of the Deluge, he
was moved with fear, and prepared an Ark for the saving of himself: he asked no
question, disputed not how it could be, that all the world should be drowned;
but fell to building of an Ark for his preservation. How many are ready to
dispute, How long it will be to the end of the world? and yet live so, as if it
were but a mere dream and fable.

No; Christ shows us the right use of these truths; calls us to Christ, Luke
xiii. 23. Lord, Are there few that shall be saved? A strange Querie, How many?
Mark Christ's answer to him; Strive to enter in at the strait gate; Few, or
many, what is that to thee? strive thou to be one of them. As S. Aug. piously
silenced that intricate Question, How original Sin is conveyed? Oh, says he,
Let us strive how to remove it. It were strange, when we see an house on fire,
to stand questioning, how it kindled? No, let us bestir our selves and haste to
quench it.

It is strange, in this so serious a business of the day of Judgment,

1. How long to it? 2. In what place of the world, the judgment shall be held?
3. What kind of fire shall then be burning? 4. Whether Christ shall come with a
Cross carried before him? As if Malefactors in the Jayl, should fall a
reasoning, and debating what weather it would be at the day of Assizes? or of
the Judges habit and retinue? and never bethink themselves how to answer their
Indictment, that they may escape condemnation. Oh, what David says of his own
days, let us say of that day of Christ; Teach us, O Lord, so to reckon, and
meditate of that day, that we may apply our hearts to Wisdom. That is the
first, Vobis sciscitantibus.
2. Vobis vivis, and praesentibus. Christ gives this Caveat to his Disciples
then alive, and present with him, and now long since dead, before the day of
Judgment. Christ, by his divine knowledge, understood well enough that these
men should die long before the end of the world, and yet he judged not this
Caveat unseasonable for those times and men, and bids them take heed to
themselves, lest that day surprise them.

Admit, this day overtook them not de facto; yet de possibili, and for ought
they knew, it might have teached them, and laid hold on them. We are to judge
of these events, not by enquiring Regions look white, non tantum albae ad
messem, sed aridae ad ignem, Bern. not like ripe corn, ready to be reaped, but
like dry stubble, fit to be burned; when the Harvest looks ready for the
Sickle, when all flesh has corrupted their ways; it is time then, Lord, to lay
to thine hand. We must meditate upon that day, Secundum exigentiam justitiae,
not secundum exigentiam decreti. His Justice may now hasten it, though his
patience delays it, and his secret purpose has set to it a longer

Saint Paul speaks diversely of this day; sometimes he sets it forward, and
sometimes backward; both to great purpose.

1. To those that would needs be calculating, and foretelling that day in a
curious ungrounded speculation, to them he sets it backward, folds it up in
obscurity, 2 These. ii. 1, 2. I beseech you, brethren, by the coming of our Lord
Jesus Christ, that ye be not troubled, by spirit, or by word, or by letter, as
from us, as if the day of Christ were at hand; as you love that day, so
patiently 2. To quicken up our care, and preparation, he seems to hasten that
day, and to set it forward. See how he speaks of himself, as if he looked for
that day, while he continued in the These. iv. We that are alive, and remain to
the coming of the Lord. St. Paul put himself into the thoughts of seeing Christ
coming; as S. Hierom, thought he heard the sound of the last trumpet every day
in his ears. Ey, this thought and expectation of it every day; 1. It is Sancta
cogitatio; Oh, how will it damp our lusts, quicken our piety, keep our hearts
in awe? 2. It is Tuta cogitatio; It is the safest way, to expect him too soon,
then too late, and so to be surrprized ere we be aware. He that said, My
Master, (...), defers his coming, you know how it went with him. 3. It is
Officiosa cogitatio; He purposely conceals it, that we may always expect it.
Christians must be, adversitores, Servants appointed to meet their Master,
whenever he comes. 4. It is Vera cogitatio, in the equivalence. The day of
thy death, it is the day of thy judgment, then thy doom is past upon thee. It
is all one for thee, whether thy trial be at the Quarter Sessions, or be put
off to the Grand Assizes.

To conclude this point of the fixed time of Christ's coming to Judgment. S.
Aug. makes the best resolution; and he lays it down in three assertions;

1. Qui dicit citius venturum; He that says, the Lord will come speedily, he
speaks most comfortably; Even so come Lord Jesus, come quickly. 2. Qui dicit
tardius venturum; He that says, it will be long ere he comes, he in some
sense speaks more warily; but, 3. He who says, he knows not the certain time
of his coming, but believes it firmly, desires it earnestly, expects it most
watchfully, he speaks most soberly.
That is the second; Vobis vivis, and praesentibus. 3. Vobis discipulis, and
credentibus; You that are my Disciples, and Believers, holy, and sanctified
men, though justified, and so passed from death to life, yet, for all that,
take heed to your selves; this Caveat concerns you. 1. Dies; The day of
Judgment concerns you. And that not only the hopes, and comforts of that day;
but the dread and terror of it must deeply afflict you. Nullus intrepidus
vadit ad judicium Domini, habens conscientiam peccatorum. Hier. Lib. 2. contra
Pelagian. The Saints of God are to consider, and lay to heart, not only the
Promises of God, but his Comminations, and Threatenings also; Not only the hope
of Heaven, but the fear of Hell also, must have its work on them. S. Paul
reminds We must all appear before the Iudgment-seat of Christ, Romans xiv. 10.
And Heb. xii. Our God is a consuming fire. Thus holy Job kept himself in awe;
Destruction from God was a terror to me, Job xxxi. 23. The thought of that day
made him afraid. Moses at the giving of the Law, said, I exceedingly fear and
quake: How should we tremble at the day of reckoning for the breaches of this
Law? 2. Morbus; The danger of the distemper concerns them; they may fall into
this disease Christ forewarns them of, gravedo cordis, the surcharge of the
heart. Snares and Temptations may Consider thy self (says Saint Paul, speaking
to the spiritual man) lest thou also be tempted. Many a good Christian has
slumbred securely, and fallen into these sins that Christ gives warning of; if
that day had then surprised them, it had been woe with them. Noah, Lot, David,
how were they surcharged with the distemper of these sins? Warnings, and
Caveats, and earnest Exhortations, they are not unuseful, or unseasonable to
the most holy men. They are in tuto, as long as they are in cauto; no longer
safe, then they are circumspect. The safety of a Christian from sin, it is like
the 3. The mischief, and miscarriage concerns them; if they look not to it,
That day may come upon them unawares, and the sad sequels of it. The best
Christians are liable to these surprisals, and so stand in need of these
comminations, Romans viii. Though S. Paul assures the true believers, that, There
is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus; yet he thought it
necessary to add this Caveat, Verse. 13. If ye live after the flesh, ye shall
die. The Promises of Heaven, and the Assurance of it, they hold only in
studio, and praxi bonorum operum. Hold on in the track of piety, and then lay
hold on the Promises. But if thou turnest aside into the ways of iniquity, the
threatenings then will lay hold on thee; and the day of Judgment will prove
dismal to thee.

Now follows,

III. The greatness, and strictness of this heed, and caution to be used; that
is expressed in this busy, and watchful word of circumspection, (...), ne
quando, left at any time; or else, ne forte, lest upon any occasion. It shows
the great diligence and

Observe; It is not sufficient for a Christian, that he give not himself over
to the full source and swindg of these sins of voluptuousness

1. For security; Their hearts are always surcharged, benumbed, brawnie. They
study how to be secure, they put the The Lord will do neither good, nor evil,
say they in Zeph. i. 12. They can frame arguments to disprove this truth of
Christ's coming to Judgment, 2 Pet. iii. 4. Where is the promise of his Coming?
Profane man! What talkest thou of Promises? It Is a threatening to thee. Well!
but hear what they say. All things continue as they were from the beginning of
the creation, and so are like to do. Or else, they will set back the
expectation of it for many years hence; they look not to see it in their days;
-- Maneat nostros ea cura nepotes, Let the ages to come fear that day. This was
the profaneness of the Jews in Ezekiel's time; when he prophesied of an evil
day, Tush, they put it off with a jest, Ezekiel. xii. 22. It was grown a Proverb
among them; The days, say they, are prolonged, and every vision fails; they
say, The vision he sees is for many days to come, he prophesies of the times
that are afarr off; and so they settle themselves in a course of security. And
so,

2. For voluptuousness, they give over themselves to that too. It is a carnal
man's constant practice, Ephesians. iv. 19. Being past feeling, they give themselves
over to lasciviousness, to work all uncleanness with greediness. Thus Isaiah
describes them, Chap. xlvi. 12. Come, we will fetch wine, and fill our selves
with strong drink, and to morrow shall be as this day, and much more abundant.
Let us eat and drink, for to morrow (forsooth) we shall die, if ye will believe
the Prophet; scorning the threatenings of that day. And then, 3. For the cares
of this life (which is the third ingredient into this gravedo cordis, this
cardiaca passio, this surcharge of the heart,) the men of this world, they are
overwhelmed with them. Their heart goes after their covetousness, Ezekiel. xxxiii.
31. They all look to their own way, every one for his gain, Isai. lvi. 11. The
world is set in the midst of their hearts, as Solomon speaks; it is all they
mind. As S. James describes them, Go to, let us go to such a City, and continue
there, and buy, and sell, and get gain.
Thus you see the Condition of wicked men;

1. Constantly secure. 2. Studiously voluptuous. 3. Wholly given over to the
world, and covetous practices; No marvel if destruction come suddenly upon
such.
But a Christian must not only abstain from such wilful and habitual courses
of sin, but must take heed of being in any degree at any time over-taken and
surprised with them. Blessed is the man that fears always, Prove. xxviii. 14.
It is not sufficient for him, that he is able to say; God, I thank thee, I am
not as common worldlings, I am no usual glutton, or drunkard, or all for the
world, or profanely secure; I believe the Day of Judgment, and when I say over
my Creed, I think of it; I fast sometimes, and take off my self from my worldly
affairs: that is not all, that is required of a Christian; he must be more
exact and circumspect. He musts not only not wilfully rush into these sins,
but take heed, lest by any oversight he slips, and stumbles, and falls into
them. It is not sufficient that these sinful distempers

Consider, these Distempers are stealing, and sly evils, they will easily grow
upon us.

1. Security is an encroaching sin. What though thou do not give over thy
self to security, not lie down to sleep, wrap thy self up, shut the windows,
draw the curtains, repose thy self upon the bed and pillow of covetousness? But
yet how soon may thou slumber and take a nap of security? 2. The Sins here
that occasion this Security, they are slippery and gliding, and insinuating
Sins. Voluptuousness and Sensual Pleasures will strangely grow upon thee, if
thou be not vigilant. Noah, and Lot, and David, were strangely overtaken with
these sins. And for the World, though the Scripture affords not a Saint tainted
with that sin, yet it is full of insinuations, and allurements. Worldly Cares,
are dangerous Snares. They are called, deceitful Riches. 3. Gravedo cordis; the
dullness of the heart, it is a disease that the Saints are subject to, if they
take not heed. As it is in Peter, and James, and John, they were oppressed with
sleep at two most remarkable times; 1. In Splendore Transfigurationis; upon the
Mount of Christ's glorious Transfiguration, then they fell asleep. 2. In Horrore
Passionis; In the Garden of Christ's Agony, They forgot the miracle of the
loaves, for their hearts were hardened, Marc. vi. 59.
4. This duty of attention, and heedfulness, is exceeding hard. As it was to
Elisha a matter of great diligence to have his eye still upon Elias, to see him
taken away, and carried up into Christ's Coming to us. And therefore this duty
of attention, it is compared not only to the waking of the day, (he is a
sluggard that will sleep then;) but to the watching of the night. It Is hard to
hold open our eyes all night without much attention.
This, this Circumspection, it is needful; and that holy care and jealousy
which this word (...) puts upon us, must show it self in a threefold Caution.

1. It must make us watch over our own inclinations. materia prima to all sorts
of sins, susceptive of any unlawful Impression. The Spirit that is in thee, may
be willing, but the flesh is weak, nay willful too. 2. It must make us watch
over Satan's temptations. Take heed of them. Art thou not given to these sins of
Voluptuousness, and Covetousness; yet if thou look not to thy self, Satan
Consider thy self, says St. Paul, lest thou be tempted. Let our hearts seem
never so empty of these sins, Satan can fill our hearts with these lusts, as he
did to Ananias and Sapphira, Why has Satan filled your hearts with
covetousness? Acts v. 3. Though thy heart be not habitaculum for Satan's
temptations; yet it may prove hospitium. 3. We must watch over all occasions.
Take heed of them; shun not only these sins, but the occasions that may bring
thee unto them: As Solomon speaks of unlawful haunts, Avoid it, pass not by it,
turn from it, come not near it. He that
So much of the Caveat; Come we,

Secondly, to the Distemper to be avoided: And in it

1. The Causes that breed it: And then, 2. The Disease it self, Gravedo cordis.
The Causes that breed this surcharge, are three,

1. Surfeiting. 2. Drunkenness. 3. The Cares of this life.

And then the Enquiry must be,

1. Why does Christ so forewarn them against these sins? 2. Why, especially,
with reference to the day of Judgment?

The Scripture tells us, there are other great sins, that will reign and
prevail in the world about that time. Infidelity, which is Atheism against the
Gospel, that will then prevail; When the Son of Man comes, shall he find Faith
on the earth? Luke xviii. 9. Want of Charity, that will then abound in the
world; The Charity of many shall then wax cold, Matthew. xxiv. Apostasy, giving
over Religion, Antichristianism, and Idolatry, and corruption in Religion, that
shall prevail in the world, at Christ's coming, 2 These. ii. It Is true; these,
and many outrageous sins shall prevail then, Iniquity shall then abound, Matthew.
xxiv. but yet Christ forewarns them especially of these evils in the Text.

I. Why so?

1. These sins of Voluptuousness and Worldly-mindedness, they are more natural
to us. Heresy, and Idolatry, and Blood, and Oppression, men are not so prone
to these; but to be overtaken with excess in pleasures and profits, our nature
is exceeding subject to these evils. 2. As they are more natural, so these sins
are most general, and universal. Outrageous villainies, many will abstain from
Peter, 1 Pet. iv. 4. They think it strange, a man runs not with them into
excess and riot. John came neither eating, nor drinking, and they counted him a
devil; Otherwise he would have done as other men did, and played the
good fellow. Survey the whole world, and all, almost, are taken with one of
these two. Young men, they are for Pleasures; old men, they are for Profits.
They will haunt the same man in a succession; as when a Hydropi^am habent
conscientiam;) so, when Pleasure forsakes him, Covetousness lays hold upon
him. 3. These are such sins as Professors of Religion will venture upon. They
will be no Heretics, no Idolaters, nor yet unnatural the Sons of God, the true
Worshippers, fell by Voluptuousness. S. Paul tells us of loose-living
Christians, Whose God is their belly, and that mind earthly things. 4. These
sins Christ forewarns them of, as being unworthy, and unsuitable with the Faith,
and Hope, and Religion of Christians. The prevailing of these sins, wrung tears
from S. Paul. I tell you weeping, they are enemies to the Cross of Christ.
Enemies Christ's Religion, it is a Religion of Sobriety and Moderation. When
the world offers us these delights and profits, we should answer as Christ did,
when they offered him meat, I have other meat, which you know not of: So should
a Christian say, We have other pleasures, and treasures, which the world knows
not of, which our Religion affords us. Ey, but Christ's Cross, that is of the
greatest force to mortify these sins. Christians profess they serve a
crucified God ( Sub spinato capite, membra delicata!) That Cross should
crucify us to the world, Gal. vi. and make us dye to it. Lovers of pleasures,
more then lovers of God; What a great indignity is that to our Religion? And
for worldly-mindedness, our Savior tells us plainly, it is inconsistent with
piety, Matthew. vi. 24. Ye cannot serve God and Mammon. O, yes! We can mind the
world, and Gods service too: Such quick and large-parted men there are, that
can deal in diverse businesses. Well, Christ tells us, We cannot serve two
Masters. 1. It will breed a distraction. God requires this service of thee, the
world will forbid it: God says, Relieve the poor; No, Spare thy purse, says
the world: God says, Set daily some time apart to pray to thy God, 2. Christ
adds, Thou must love the one, and hate the other; that is more then a
distraction; it implies a contrariety: We cannot serve two at all, much less
two that are in contrariety and enmity: So is God and the world. The love of
the world, is enmity to God, Iam. iv. 4. Denias has forsaken me, and loved
this present world, 2 Timothy iv. If you love the world, you must hate God.
Christ, 3. You must cleave to the one, and despise the other. If you
II. Christ principally forewarns them of these sins, with a special reference,
and eye to the day of Judgment; and that for three causes:

1. These sins of voluptuousness, and worldliness, they are Peccata
praecurrentia: The prevailing of these sins are a certain prognostic of that
day; these sins will then overspread Christ, and S. Peter, make types and
resemblances of the day of Judgment. And Christ notes these sins, as the
symptoms and forerunners of this Judgment: 1. He instances in the Deluge, and
Flood, that drowned the old World. See what Christ says of that, Matthew. xxiv.
37. As the days of Noah were, so shall the coming of the Son of Man be. For as
in the days that were before the Flood, they were eating, and drinking,
marrying, and giving in marriage, and knew not till the Flood came, and took
them all away, so shall also the coming of the Son Man be. 2. He instances in
the Overthrow of Sodom. Christ makes that a type of the day of Judgment. What
says he of that? Luke xvii. 28. As it was in the days of Lot, they did eat,
they drank, they bought, they sold, they planted, they builded, and then it
rained fire and brimstone from heaven, and destroyed them all; so shall it be
in the day of Christ.
See here the practices that Christ instances in: In the old Sodom, they ate
and drank, they bought and sold, builded and planted. Why, the Scripture
charges both those times and places, with far greater sins.

1. The old World is charged with blood, and violence, and heavy oppressions.
Men lived like Giants, oppressing and devouring others; That is a crying sin:
So, 2. Sodom is charged with other kind of sins of unnatural abominations. Yet
observe, Christ instanceth not in the oppressions and violence of the old
World, nor in the abominations Sodom, but in their eating, and drinking, and
buying, and selling, and driving after the world; to teach us, That when the
world comes to this state and condition, to be voluptuous, and covetous; let
their voluptuousness be natural, eating, and drinking, and the enjoyment of
they bought and they sold, traded fairly, paid for what they took; yet a secure
giving over our selves to these courses, is a forerunner of judgment. As some
sicknesses, ( Morbi symptomatici) are more fearful, not in themselves, but
because they are forerunners of plague and pestilence; so are these sins
dreadful. When the World lies in them, in a careless security; when men say,
Peace and Safety; every man chears up his neighbor, Be not afraid, all shall
be well, then shall come upon them sudden destruction, 1 These. v. 3. Malacia,
it is a certain sign of a storm and tempest.
2. These sins, they are Peccata accelerantia; when these sins are
overspreading, come to a ripeness, and predominancy, they do not only foretell,
and prognosticate, but they hasten the day of Judgment, and bring it upon the
world. And so they are more considerable. Bare signs are not to be neglected.
But these sins are not only ominous signs, but effectual provocations, and
speeders of judgment. S. Paul tells Timothy, that these sins will make the last
times perilous times, 2 Timothy iii. 1, 2. This know also, that in the last days,
perilous times shall come; for men shall be lovers of their own selves,
covetous -- lovers of pleasures more then lovers of God: These, and the like
sins, will be dangerous sins; make perilous times; expose the world to
vengeance; provoke judgment. Should we see the Sun darkened, the heavens to
tremble, the Stars to fall, the Sea to roar, it would make us to look about us:
Why, to see the world drowned in voluptuousness, and security, and greediness
of gain, loving pleasures, and profits, more then God; to a spiritual man, are
indeed more fearful. Those only foretell; these hasten, and ripen, and pull
down 3. Christ bids us beware of these sins, respectively to the day of
Judgment, because these sins, they are Derisoria Iudicii; they will beget a
profane spirit of deriding, and scoffing at the day of Judgment.
Voluptuousness, that is a mocker: Solomon tells us so, Prove. xx. And
Covetousness, that is a mocker too: Luke xvi. 14. All these things heard the
Pharisees, which were covetous, and they derided him. And Security, that is a
mocker too: They mocked Gods Messengers, saying securely, These things shall
happen to themselves.

No doubt, Noah had many a flout put upon him for talking of the Deluge, and
building his Ark. So Lots sons-in-law made but a jest of the tidings of
destruction. Lot seemed as one that mocked. And the threatenings of Captivity
were but derided by the secure ones in Isaiah's time; Let him make speed, and
hasten his work, that we may see it. And, answerably, S. Peter tells us there
will be mockers at the last day; There will come at the last, scoffers, walking
after their own lusts, and say, Where is the promise of his Coming? 2 Pet. iii.
3. And mocking, that is a most dismal provoker of judgment. Trembling at
threatenings, even in Ahab, did set back Gods judgments; but mocking and
deriding Gods threatenings, that hastens judgments. Take but two places for it:

1. One place is, 2 Chronicles. xxxvi. 16. They mocked the Messengers of God, and
despised his threatenings, until the wrath of the Lord rose against his people,
till there was no remedy. Salvation it self could not save such. 2. Another
place is, Isai. xxii. 12. In that day the Lord did call to weeping, and
mourning, -- and behold, joy, and gladness, slaying oxen, and killing sheep,
eating flesh, and drinking wine; Let us eat and drink, for tomorrow we shall
dye: yes, I warrant you, that was their Song. And it was revealed in mine ears
by the Lord of Hosts, Surely this iniquity shall not be purged till they dye.
He would not be merciful to such Voluptuous, Sensual, Secure Mockers.




A
GENESIS iv. 3, 4, 5. And in process of time, it came to pass, that Cain brought
of the fruit of the ground, an offering unto the Lord. And Abel, he brought
also of the firstlings of his flock, and the fat thereof, and the Lord had
respect unto Abel, and to his offering: But unto Cain, and to his offering, he
had not respect, and Cain was very wroth, and his countenance fell.
THis Story which we have now entered upon, is the first relation that the
Scripture makes of any public Worship that by mankind was offered up to God.
And so it carries with it a Type and Representation of the Practice of
Religion, which in succession of times should be used, and performed, in the
Church of Christ.

And this solemn Service, it is observable, and exemplary in diverse respects;

1. In the Condition of the Persons that perform this Service. Who were they?
Cain, and Abel, both Husbandmen. Cain a Tiller of the ground, Abel a Keeper of
Sheep, Verse. 2. 1. These two, though the firstborn Patriarchs of mankind,
though the Heirs of the world, yet were they brought up in 2. Though their
Profession were secular, yet they accounted the matters of God, and duties of
Religion, no impertinent things to them, but they were trained up in the
knowledge of God, and duties of Religion, and esteemed it a main part of their
duty, to be conversant in it. The Worship of God is not peculiar to any one
sort of men, as profane men think it; Let Churchmen mind the Duties of the
Church, let them attend the Worship of God that live by it. No, Piety is a
common duty, binding every State, Order, and Condition of men,
2. The season and age of the Church, in which this Worship was performed,
makes it more exemplary; 1. It was not in the time and state of Innocence
before the Fall, but, it was after mankind had sinned; and that is one
Condition. 2. It was after Christ, and his Gospel was promised, and preached to
mankind; and so, for the substance, this Worship was Evangelical, and
instructs us Christians; and, 3. As it was after the Fall, so it was before the
Law of Moses,
3. This Story, it is the more memorable, and worthy of our consideration, as
carrying with it an intimation of three things observable. 1. This Story shows
us, Antiquitatem Ecclesiae, the venerable antiquity, and old age of the Church,
and Worship of God. It appears by this story, that Religion is no late upstart
invention, Tempus erat, quando non erat; From the beginning it was not so. No,
the Church is as old as the World. Religion is of the same date, and standing
with the Creation. God imprinted the sense of Religion into the heart of Adam,
and this print was not fully defaced by his fall. And God renewed, and restored
it soon again, established a Church presently, instituted a Religion, and
Worship of himself.

Of all other sins, Atheism is of a later-birth. We read of Lust, And the one
was the end of the other. God made the world, not House of Prayer. That Is the
first thing observable.

2. This Story shows us, Mixturam Ecclesiae; the mixed temper and composition
of the Church, even from the beginning. Cain, and Abel are here the Church
Representative. And who were they? Indeed, both worshippers of God in outward
profession, but yet Cain was a false-hearted, unfound, hypocritical man, a
wicked ungodly man under the mask of Religion.

Observe, as there was never any time, when there was not a Church, so there
was never any Church free from this mixture of good and bad; of sound and
substantial Christians, and false-hearted professors. Adhuc Arca continet
Corvum, and Columbam. Aug. Ep. 145. Clean and unclean birds, the Dove and the
Raven, are both in the Ark, and house of God. Those holy families of the
Patriarchs, were so many Churches; the speech of S. Paul agrees to them, The
Church that is in their house; yet in these holy Families, you may find this
mixture of good and bad. In Adam's Family, there was holy Abel, and wicked
Cain; in Noah's Family, there was blessed Sem, Cham; in Abraham's Family, there
was devout Isaac, and ungodly Ishmael; in Isaac's Family, there was religious
Jacob, and profane Esau; yea, in Christ's own Family, there was a Judas, a Son
of perdition. In this Net of the Church, there are fish, good, and bad, Matthew.
xiii. 47. In this Field of the Church, there grows Wheat, and Tares, Matthew.
xiii. 38. In this Floor of the Church, there is good corn, and chaff, Matthew.
iii. There must be, Agri concretio, before there be, Messis discretio. Aug. We
must stay till the day of purging and winnowing comes; the day of separation
shall sever the Goats from the Sheep; till then, they feed together

3. This Story shows us, Discordias Ecclesiae. It lets us see the fruits and
success of quarrels, and discontents, that arise about matters of Religion, and
Worship of God. Here are two brothers, of a near and dear relation: Twins they
were, (as some conceive them) both of the same birth; and yet see, here a
discontent arises in point of God's Worship. Abel's worship is allowed, Cains
disallowed by God, and that works an alienation Cain from his brother Abel.
Yea, more then so, it works a bitter hatred and opposition, it breaks out to
murder. Difference and dissentions in matters of Religion, and Worship of God,
are of all others, most outrageous, and deadly. If the Israelites espy an Altar
erected, as they conceive, against their Altar, they arm themselves presently
to make a war with their Josh. xxii. These quarrels will make the Father
betray the Son, and the Son the Father; Brother shall betray brother to death,
Mark xiii. 12. O, differences in Religion, are of most dangerous consequence.
What said Moses to Pharaoh? Shall we safice the abomination of the Egyptians,
and will they not stone us? Exodus viii. 26. When one man's Religion is another
man's Abomination, it will beget bitter envies, and strife, and bring confusion,
and every evil work, as S. James speaks, Chap. iii. 16.
For the words themselves, they set out unto us a solemn Service Cain, and
Abel. And in it, observe these two things;

1. Is the Performance of the Worship, Verse. 3. They both brought their
Offerings to the Altar of God; then, 2. Is the Success of this their service,
and worship, what acceptance it found with God; that is expressed in verse. 4.
and 5. God respected Abels sacrifice, but to Cains oblation he gave no regard.
First, The Performance of this Service is considerable,

1. In the circumstance of time, when it was tendered; that is said to be, In
process of time. 2. It Is considerable in the substance of their Service.
I. It was, In process of time. And this circumstance of time thus expressed,
admits of a double construction;

1. It may be taken indefinitely. In process of time, that is, after many days,
so some understand it; after much time had passed over their heads, many
revolutions, then they sacrificed. And so it shows us, Lentum progressum
Religionis; the leisurely, slow growth and progress of Religion. Gods worship,
and Service, comes but slowly forward in the World. The seed of Religion, sow
it never so timely (as no question Adam did in his Sons) comes

See, these two are their crafts-masters in their secular Trades and
Professions; Abel a Shepherd, Cain an Husbandman, expert in those mysteries,
but their Profession of Religion comes after many days. The Trade of Religion
is long a-learning. After our fall, man is become but an auk creature for any
discipline, very unteachable; but above all, most untoward, and dull to receive
Religious instruction. Line after line, and precept after precept, much
planting, and watering, and yet but slow increase. Ye account it an unkindly
year, when ye receive no more then Thick sown, and thin come up, argues a bad
soil, and it is near unto cursing, as the Apostle speaks. He who sets himself
to gain men to Religion, is like him who goes to make a fire of green wood;
much a-do there is, to make it take fire, and it is soon out again. How

2. In process of time; take it word for word, it is, At the end of days. And so
it imports a more definite, and determinate circumstance of time; At the end of
days, that is, at the just revolution of days; at the end of the year. So 1 Samuel ii. 9. The
Set, solemn times for the Worship of God, are of ancient, Cain, and Abel. It
was after, commanded by God, Exodus xxiii. 16. The feast of Harvest, the
first fruits of thy labors, which thou have sown in the field, and the feast
of In-gathering, which is at the end of the year, when thou have gathered in
thy labors out of the field. -- then thou shall appear before the Lord with a
Sacrifice. And this Law was so strict, that men might not taste of their
fruits, till this Service was performed. Lev. xxiii. Ye shall neither eat
bread, nor parched corn, nor green ears, until the same day that ye have
brought an Offering unto your God. God will be first served, and our
recognition-Sacrifice, the tribute and homage we owe him, must be performed,
ere we put forth our hand to taste of his blessings.

God justly challenges this at our hands, as being our great Landlord; we are
but his Tenants, Levit. xxv. 23. There ye may see our Tenure of what we
possess. The land is mine, says God, Ye are but strangers, and sojourners with
me. How well does it become us, to present our selves, and tender our Sacrifice
Moses; the very Heathens pitched upon this practice. They had their (...), and
their Cerealia festa post fruges comportat^s. Aristotle speaks of it, that
after Harvest they offered up a solemn Sacrifice. And the great Lawgiver Numa,
strictly forbad any to taste of new corn, or wine, till the Sacrifice was past,
and the Priest had received Gods appointed portion. It Is a shame for us
Christians, to be so backward in this Service, and to suffer Gentiles, and
Pagans to outgo and exceed us.

So much for the circumstance of time. Come we now,

II. To the Substance of this Service, and religious performance. And of it, we
may take a double consideration.

1. Let us look upon this Service and Sacrifice of these two men in common; and
then 2. We shall see the difference 'twixt them in the second part of the Text,
in the success, and acceptance God gave to them.
This Service, and Worship of Cain, and Abel, look upon them both together,
they agree in these five Particulars, to be noted in them.

1. It was Personalis cultus; each of them in his own Person performs this
Service, and Worship to God; Cain has his Offering, and Abel has his. Here is
one observable point of Religion, and take notice of it; the performance of
religious Worship Adam, they rest not in any other man's devotion, but they take
themselves bound personally to appear before God, and worship him. No man can
worship God by a proxy. He who will serve God by a proxy, must look to go to
heaven by a deputy. No, the duty of Piety binds every soul. As David says, No
man can make an atonement to God for his brother. We can neither buy, nor
borrow this oil of our brethren; we must all have it ready in our own vessels.
Thus Moses answers Pharaoh, We will go with our young, and with our old, not an
hoof must be left behind. That soul that neglects to keep the Passover, must be
cut off from Gods people. So strict was the Law for the Worship of God, Exodus
xxxiv. 23. every man must appear before God, to perform this Worship. Every
soul, from a Month, and upward, were to offer to the Lord, in token of their
redemption, Numb. xviii. 16. If any man can exempt himself from being Gods
vassal, and liege-man by Creation, he may deny his homage. If any can plead his
innocence, that he stands not in need of redemption, he may neglect his
atonement by Sacrifice. If any man can say, he stands 2. A second thing
observable in this joynt-worship of Cain Abel, is Rectitudo cultus; it is a
true, warrantable, and lawful worship that was performed by them. 1. It was a
worship directed and performed to the true God, an invocation of Jehovah. Not
only Abel, but Cain brought his Offering to the Lord; And, 2. It was Cultus
legitimus; such a worship as was prescribed, no superstitious worship invented
by themselves, but taught by Revelation, received by Prophetical Instruction,
such as we see God allowed by after-approbation. These brethren were not like
Aaron's sons, Nadab and Abihu, they offer no strange
This way of worship, Abel learned it from Adam. Adam, he was taught it of God,
and taught it his children, says Pererius. Inventions of Gods Worship are but
Superstitions. That God is to be worshipped, even Nature teaches us; but how he
is to be worshipped, He alone must direct us. As Moses said to Pharaoh, Exodus
x. 26. We know not with what we must serve the Lord till we come thither, and
he teach us. Indeed, the times when Cain and Abel offered, were Primitive
Times, the Form of Religion was not yet degenerate and corrupted: post-natus to
Religion, of an afterbirth. The Field was first sown with good Seed, the
envious man came afterward and sowed his Tares, Matthew. xiii. Idolatry, it is a
Super-semination. Id verum, quod prius; id falsum and adulterinum, quod
posterius, Tertul. True Religion has the Birthright, pleads Prescription
before all false Worships. Christ in his Reformation brings the Jews back to
that which was first, Abinitio non fuit sic; checks all Superstitions with this
Exception, It was not so from the beginning. It is our Plea, Where was
Invocation of Saints, and Angels, or Worship of Images? Did Moses, or Abraham,
or Abel, so worship? No, it was the malice of Satan that sowed these Tares,
foisted in these Corruptions. Purposely God kept Religion untainted in the
beginning of the World. Though a deluge of other sins brake early into the
World, Cruelty, and Lust, and Violent Oppression; yet Idolatry was kept out,
that the very novelty of it might make it suspected. 3. A third thing
observable in this Worship of Cain and Abel, is Unitas Cultus, their joint
brotherly consent and unity in their worship of God. As they were twins in
their birth, so, as twins, they join hand in hand to compass Gods Altar. We
read not of an Altar that Cain erected, and another that Abel set up

The Jews conceive, it was all one place, where Adam sacrificed, and now his
Sons; and after, Noah; Though they go too far when they say, it was where
Abraham sacrificed Isaac; and after, David sacrificed; and where after, Solomon
built the Temple, and erected the Altar. Surely Concord in the Worship of God,
it is most necessary and comely. Without these two, Truth, and Unity, God
accepts no service. Truth and Peace are the Supports Peter, forbidding discord,
and commending to Christians domestic peace, presses this reason for it, That
your prayers be not hindered, 1 Pet. iii. 7. Discord breeds Distraction in holy
duties. Quarrelling and Contention, it is the bane of Devotion. See how
uncomely was Aaron and Miriam's quarrelling with Moses, Number. xii. What
Disturbance did it breed in the public affairs of the people of Israel? It
hindered their Progress into the Land of Canaan, and set it back. It Is said, the
people journied not till Miriam was brought in again, and the breach made up
again. So, on the contrary, what a gracious Christ make to Prayers made in the
spirit of Unity? Matthew. xviii. 19. If two of you shall agree on earth, as
touching any thing that they shall ask, it shall be done for them of my Father
which is in heaven.

These two Brothers here, they came in Unity. They had one God, one Altar, one
kind of Service by Sacrifice, one Time too; and no doubt they came in one
Affection; the grudge grew afterward. See with how many bonds S. Paul labors
to continue Christians together in an holy Concord, Ephesians. iv. 5. There is one
Lord, one faith, one baptism, one God and Father of all, one body, one spirit,
one hope of our calling, therefore keep the unity of the spirit in the bond of
peace. Christians must say, We are all one man's children. Our cognizance is
Love, and Unity, and Concord. The quarrels and contentions, that did arise
amongst Christians, 'twas a great hinderance to the Conversion of the Gentiles.
When they could not answer the Christians Arguments, then they objected the
Contentions of Christians, that they could not agree amongst themselves. Hoc
est Opprobrium Gentium, says S. Augustine, Non consentitis. The Gentiles cast
that in their teeth, that there was not Concord, and Unity amongst them.

4. A fourth thing observable in these two brethrens Worship of God, it was
Cultus cum sumptu. They did not put off God with empty shows, but they are at
charge here in the worship of God, they can be content to be at cost in
honoring of him Cain, he is an husbandman, he brings of the fruit of the
ground to honor God with, a Sacrifice of Corn. Abel, he is a Shepherd, he
brings his Offering of the Herd and Flock. Nature it self teaches us this
Truth. If there be a God, then sure he must be worshipped, and that worship
must be maintained, though with cost, and charges. It Is a spice of Atheism, to
say as Pharaoh did, Go ye your selves and worship God, but let your flocks
alone; as S. Augustine complains of the wealthy men in his time, they would be
rich at Home, but poor at Church; they would leave their purses at Leave your
flocks behind you. No, says Moses, we must have them with us, Of them we must
offer a sacrifice to our God. This Solomon commands us, Honor God with thy
substance, and the first fruits of thine increase, Prove. iii. 9. And he learnt
it of his father, David; he chose to be at cost in serving of God, 2 Samuel xxiv.
24. I will not serve the Lord with that which cost me nothing.

Thus doing, we honor our God; ey, and we honor our selves, and our substance
too. The Jews knew how to prevail Christ, for the good Centurion; He loves our
Nation, nay he loves our Religion, and has built us a Synagogue. As Origin
discoursing of the liberal Contribution for the erecting of the Tabernacle,
Quam gloriosum erit? says he; How great an honor is it, that it shall be
said, This man's Gold made the Ark? This man's Silver made the Pillars and
Sockets for them? This man's Wealth furnished the Tabernacle? And it is also an
honor to our wealth to be thus employed. As Protarchus in Aristotle said,
Those stones were happy stones of which Altars were made. Sure, it is an happy
employment of what God gives to us, that

Superstition spares for no cost, and shall Religion be closehanded? The Jews
that lavished out their gold Earrings, and Jewels, to make the Golden Calf,
were afterward as forward to contribute their gold and silver for the Ark and
Tabernacle. Our Christian Worship, it is more spiritual then that of the Jews,
but that discharges us not of this duty. God's House, his Ministers, the
Provision for his Worship, they must be supported, and honorably supplied.

This is strange doctrine to the world. We count nothing too mean, too homely
for the Service of God. If we remove the Ark, put it in a Cart; if we give
place to it, lodge it in a Cottage. That Religion is best, we think, that is
best-cheap.

5. A fifth thing observable is, that it was Cultus per sacrificium, Christ.
Moses gives Rules and Canons for this Service. Nay, as Christ says of
Circumcision, we may say of Sacrifice, It was not of Moses, but of the Fathers;
all from Adam, and downwards, Abel, Noah, Abraham, and the rest of the
Patriarchs, abounded in this Service. And it carries with it these
significations. 1. It was a real Recognition and acknowledgment of Mittite
agnum dominatori terr^; Isai. xvi. 7. Se^d ye a lamb to the Ruler of the land,
as a Sacrifice of Homage and Subjection. 2. It was a sad Remembrance and
acknowledgment of sin, and of the due debt, and just desert of death by sin.
The slaying of the Sacrifice was a confession, that they deserved death and
destruction. 3. It was a Protestation, and Profession of their faith in Christ,
the great Atonement to be offered for them, 4. They were Testimonies and
Professions of humble thankfulness for mercies received.


But then the Inquiry must be, Where is our Christian-Sacrifice? Have not
Christians something to offer, and sacrifice to God?

I answer, These carnal and external Sacrifices of Beasts, belong all to the
Law of Ceremonies, and so cease now, and are out of date. Christ has put an
end to them. The Salt that did

But then, have Christians no Sacrifice?

Yes verily. The sum and substance of those Sacrifices is complete in Christ.
He is the only Priest, and Sacrifice of the New Testament. He offered up
himself once for all; He gave himself as an Offering, and a Sacrifice to God
for a sweet smelling savor, Ephesians. v. 2. A Sacrifice of that efficacy, that it
need not be offered often; it was once offered, and is for ever effectual. S.
Chrysostom compares the Jewish Sacrifices to weak Plasters, that must be often
renewed. Christ's blood was like a Sovereign plaster, Semel impositum, semper
sanat; once applied, it

But yet, though we have now no proper Sacrifice external, and bodily, yet we
have still our Evangelical and spiritual Sacrifices. For, besides that every
good work, and holy action, done for the honor of God, is a Christian
Sacrifice; Feci Deo, as David speaks, makes it a Sacrifice. As S. Augustine
speaks, Opus bonum* quod fit ut sancta societate inhaereamus Deo; Any good work
that may join us to God, and commend us to his acceptance, that is a Sacrifice.

Besides that, a Christian offers up to God a fourfold Sacrifice:

1. Sacrificium cordis contriti; The Sacrifice of a Contrite heart, in the
practice of Repentance. Thus S. Paul calls the Repentance and Conversion of the
Gentiles, The Offering up of the Gentiles, or the sacrificing of them. And
David acknowledges, The Sacrifice of God, is a broken and contrite heart,
Psalm. l^. The killing of our lusts, the mortifying of our sins, it is an holy,
and acceptable Sacrifice and Service unto God. A Christian has, 2. Sacrificium
cordis devoti; the Sacrifice of a devout heart; David acknowledges, Let my
prayer be as Incense, and the lifting up of my hands, as the evening Sacrifice,
Psalm. cxli. 2. Theodoret observes, when Christ cast out the sheep, and the
doves out of the Temple, and said, My house shall be called an house of prayer,
he abolished all other Sacrifices, and appointed prayer to be the solemn
Sacrifice, and Service of the Church. 3. A Christian has another Sacrifice,
that is Sacrificium cordis grati, the sacrifice of a thankful heart, the
sacrifice of praise, and thanksgiving unto God. Thus we see, Psalm. l. God
rejects their bloody sacrifices; in stead of them, he tells them, Whosoever
offers praise and thanks to him, he honors him. Will I eat the flesh of Bulls,
or drink the blood of goats? Offer unto God thanksgiving. He takes away the
first, that he may establish the second. And, Heb. xiii. 15. Let us offer the
sacrifice of praise to God continually, the fruit of our lips, giving thanks to
his name. And in this it is the Cup of blessing, and calling upon the name of
the 4. A Christian has yet another Sacrifice; that is Sacrificium cordis
benefici, the sacrifice of Alms-deeds, and charitable communication, the
distributing to the necessities of our poor brethren; that is accounted by God a
Christian Sacrifice. The relief which the Philippians sent to S. Paul, it is
called, An Odor of a sweet smell, a Sacrifice acceptable, and well-pleasing to
God, chap. iv. 18. So the Apostle; To do good, and to distribute, forget not;
for with such Sacrifices God is well-pleased, Heb. xiii. 16. These four, 1. The
Sacrifice of a Contrite heart; 2. The Sacrifice of a Devout heart; 3. The
Sacrifice of a Thankful heart; 4. The Sacrifice of a Charitable and
Compassionate heart; these are the Sacrifices of a Christian, which God accepts
of him.

We have seen the Performance of this Service: Now follows,

Secondly, the Success and Acceptance of it. Abel and his Service is respected;
but Cain and his Offering is rejected. We have

1. The Author of this different Acceptance, that is God. 2. The Ground of this
different Acceptance. 3. The Nature of it; that is Respecting, and
Not-respecting.
First, The Author of this different Acceptance, is God. See here the
Inversion that God makes. In their approach, verse. 3. there Cain has the
Precedence; first comes Cain, then afterward Abel is named in the second
place. Ey, there is the order Abel the precedence, names Cain in the second
place; The Lord had respect unto Abel, but unto Cain he had not respect. Ey,
here is the order of Gods free Grace. He crosses his hands, as Jacob did with
Manasses and Ephraim; he lays his hand of Acceptance on Abels head, his hand
of Disallowance upon Cain. Carnal prerogatives avail not in Gods favor, in
matters of Grace. Nature has no ground of prerogatives; there the New Birth
carries it. They were in Christ before me, says S. Paul, Romans xvi. That was a
good ground of dignity. Paul was a Post-natus, Born out of due time: It was a
matter of debasement to the Apostle.

Secondly, let us consider the ground of this different Acceptance. Why did
God regard the one, reject the other? We may conceive, there was a double
ground of difference:

1. In respect of the Persons: 2. In respect of their Actions.
I. The first is taken from their Persons. It Is Gods method, he looks first to
the Persons, then after to their Offerings. Men observe another order. With
men, the Gift commends the Person to favor: As Solomon tells us, A gift out of
the bosom, makes way for a man, it prospers wherever it goes; it makes room
for him, and brings him before Great men, Prove. xviii. 16. It Is not so with
God; with him, the Person must commend the Gift, not the Gift the Person.
First, God respects Abel, and then Cain, and then rejects his Service.

And in their Persons there was a double difference:

1. God puts a difference betwixt them. 2. He finds a difference.
1. God puts a difference betwixt them; that is the main original difference,
his free choice and favor: Here is the higest cause. Why did God respect Abel?
It was because he had a favor unto him. Why passed he by Cain? He left him
where he found him, in his corrupt original, and so turned away from him. It
must answer the Apostles question, John xiv. How is it, that thou will manifest
thy self to us, and not unto the world? Here is the supreme cause that must
answer and satisfy all such enquiries, I will have mercy on whom I will have
mercy; Even so, Father, for it was thy good pleasure. 2. Gods sees, and finds a
difference in their Persons. Abel was a just, and an holy man; God gave a
testimony of him, that he was righteous, Heb. xi. Cain, a mere counterfeit in
Religion. He was of that wicked one, says S. John, 1 John iii. Here then is
the second ground of difference; it is the piety and holiness of the Person,
that commends the work and service unto Solomon teaches us; A good man obtains
favor of the Lord, Prove. xii. 2. And on the contrary, says David, If I regard
iniquity in my heart, the Lord will not hear me, Psalm. lxvi. And so again,
Prove. xv. 8. The sacrifice of the wicked is an abomination to the Lord, but the
prayer of the upright, is his delight. See, the wicked, they have their
Sacrifices, they can offer the outward carcasses of Religion; but it is the
prayer of the upright, that is accepted, their spiritual devotion: And then,
the sacrifice of the wicked is an abomination to the Lord; it is not only
vain, or offensive, or odious, but it is abominable unto
II. A second ground of difference, and that is in their Actions, and
performance of their Sacrifice.

1. Some conceive, there was a difference in the Matter of their Sacrifice.
Abel, he made choice of the best, the Firstlings of the Flock, and the fat
thereof: Cain makes no such choice, but takes any thing that comes next to
hand, thinks any thing good enough to offer to God. O! it is matter of just
provocation; God takes it in high displeasure, to have the meanest, and vilest
things tendered to him; He expects a fat Sacrifice at our hands, Numb. xviii.
12. The best of the Oil, and the best of the Wine, and of the Wheat, shall thou
offer unto the Lord. God complains of this base usage of him, Malach. i. 13. Ye
have said, It is a weariness, and ye have snuffed at it, and ye have brought
that which was torn, and the lame, and the sick; should I accept this at your
hand? Cursed be the deceiver, says God; He accounts it fraud, and couzenage.
The coarsest grain, the least heap, the lightest sheaff, must be Gods portion.
The Jews say, Cain was a covetous man, and his Sacrifice smelt of it: They say,
he was the first that used false measures, and false weights, and he served his
God with them. Nay, sure, Religio de optimis; Religion calls for the choysest;
and, Gratitudo de optimis, Thankfulness will be no niggard, but open-handed to
God. Can any 2. Besides this difference in the Matter, others conceive it in
the Manner of their service and worship. Abel, he sacrificed to God,
religiously, reverently, devoutly; Cain in mere formality, without reverence
and devotion. Placebat in munere, qui placuit in cord, says Cyprian. Abels
heart was devoutly affected; that set the price upon his Oblation. A devout
heart, makes a fat Sacrifice. Oh! God abhorrs our loose, negligent, careless
addresses to him. God is greatly to be feared in the assembly of the Saints,
and to be had in reverence of all them that are about him, Psalm. lxxxix. 7. Let
us have Grace, whereby we may serve God acceptably, with reverence, and godly
fear; for even our God is a consuming fire. 3. But the main ground of the
difference S. Paul gives, Heb. xi. 4. By Faith, Abel offered unto God a more
excellent Sacrifice then Cain. That one Ingredient seasons all our Sacrifices.
If that be wanting, God never regards them. Indeed, Faith is all in all in this
work.
1. Faith is the Priest that only sacrifices; Non or at nisi fides. Aug. 2.
Faith, that is the Altar on which we must offer. Unusquisque Sanctus, Altar
Domini in se habet, quod est Fides, says S. Hierom. A believing heart, it is
the Christians Altar that sanctifies the Offering. And, 3. Faith, it is the
Offering too. Primogenita cordis, fides, says Aug. Faith is the firstborn
Grace in the soul of a Christian; and the first fruits, they must be offered,
they dedicate, and consecrate the whole lump to God. By this Faith, Abel
excelled his brother; he sacrificed, 1. In fide mandati, in conscience of Gods
Commandment; Cain for custom, and fashion-sake only. Worship upon conscience
is one thing, Worship upon custom only, is another. Abel offered, 2. Ex fide
promissi; Abels Faith looked up to the Messiah, saw him by Faith, that was the
life of his Sacrifice; Cain rested in Impossible est placere Deo, nay, Necesse
est displicere, said Bernard. By Faith, Abel pleased God; for want of Faith,
Cain displeased him. Thirdly, Let us consider the nature of this acceptance;
that is said here, to be Respect, and Disrespect; He respected Abel, and his
offering, but to Cain and his offering, he had no respect.

1. He respected Abels Offering. Wherein consisted this respect?

1. He respected it, that is, he allowed it, it stood with his acceptance. A
great mercy, no doubt, for God to take our Euge, Well done good servant, thy
prayers and thy sacrifice are come up for a memorial before God; a great
favor, for God to own our devotion; Thy prayers shall come up with acceptance
upon mine Altar, Isai. lx. 7. 2. He respected it, that is, he took a delight in
it, it was exceeding pleasing unto him. The devout prayers of his servants, are
matter of delight unto him, he takes pleasure in them. As, on the contrary,
when we are weary of serving him, he is weary of our service. When we come to
say with them in Malachi, O, what a weariness is it; God will answer us, as he
did those in Isaiah, Your services are abominable unto me, I am weary to bear
them. But the prayers of Gods people arising from faith, and devotion, they are
like Noah's Sacrifice, God smelt a favor of rest in it, it is an offering of a
sweet smell unto God. Their prayers are in Gods nostrils as sweet odours, holy
incense, heavenly perfumes. Who is this that comes like pillars of smoke,
perfumed with Myrrh, and Frankincense, with all powders of the Merchant? Cant.
iii. 6. 3. He respected it, that is, he honored it with a public Inflammavit
Deus sacrificium Abel. Thus God honored Aarons first Sacrifice, Lev. ix. A
fire came from before the Lord, and consumed it. Thus he did testify his
acceptance of David's Sacrifice at Arauna's threshing-floor; and Solomon's
Sacrifice in the Temple, and Elias his on Carmel. It Is that which David prays
for, Remember all thy offerings, and accept thy burnt-sacrifices, Psalm. xx. 3.
turn them into ashes, and consume them. 4. He respected it, that is, he
graciously rewarded it, granting his request, pouring out a blessing upon him.
He showed some good token of favor to him. First, he delighted in him, and
then in his Sacrifice, and then in the prosperity of his servant. Manoah's
wife, argues well, If the Lord would destroy us, he would not have accepted a
burnt-offering at our hands, Judge. xiii.
But then, with Cain, all goes contrary; no respect had to him, his Sacrifice
is rejected. And it is a requital in kind. He heeded not God, when he
sacrificed to him, and God heeds him not. Mere fashion, and formality in Gods
Service, makes God to be respectless of our prayers. Why should God hear him
pray, who hears not himself? Excors sacrificium, among the Heathens, the
Sacrifice which wanted a heart, was counted prodigious, and of ill abode.

And as it is a just requital, so it is an heavy one; The miss of his favor,
the turning away of his countenance, the stopping of that they cannot enter,
Lam. iii. 8. When he is angry with the prayers of his people, Psalm. lxxx. 4.
Oh! it was death to David, O Lord, make not as though thou hear not, lest I
become like them that go down into the pit, Psalm. xxviii. 1. It is an heavy
doom, that God passes upon sinners, Though you make many prayers, I will not
hear you, Isai. i.

For Use of all. Is this the great success of our prayers, that God should
respect them? It must put us into a threefold disposition in our addresses to
him.

1. We must be Cauti, exceeding careful, and circumspect. If there be such
hazard in our service, it may be accepted as it may be performed, or it may be
rejected; it concerns us to look to the manner of performance, so to tender up
our service unto him, that it may be accepted. Naturally, we are all Popish in
this point; we think, that the Opus operatum is sufficient; we rest in the
outward deed done; so we dispatch with God in a perfunctory way, we think all is
well, and that our Sacrifice shall fall on fire of it self, though we put not
one spark of devotion under it. How foolish a thing is Formality in Gods
Service? to frequent 2. Is there such hazard in our prayers to God? It must
make us Attentos, diligent, and attentive to observe how our prayers speed with
God, what acceptance they find, how God till he have mercy upon us, Psalm.
cxxiii. Well; how shall that be? how shall we discern that our prayers are
accepted? Besides the real grant of what we pray for, which is a sensible
evidence of the speeding of our prayers; Observe, 1. Whether, does God
Inflammare sacrificium? does he Abels Sacrifice. 2. Does God inspire comfort
into thine heart, when thou have prayed unto him? Feel thou an inward
cheerfulness in thy soul? Art thou able to say with David, I am well pleased,
my soul is filled, as with marrow and fatness? Like Hannah, she was no more
sorrowful after she had prayed; as David, who in the begininng of his prayer
mourned, but then felt that comfort that made him shout for joy. The Lord has
heard the voice of my weeping, he has heard my supplication, the Lord will
receive my prayer, Psalm. vi. 3. This gracious acceptance of our prayer, it
should make us alacres, it should beget in us an alacrity, and holy delight in
the duty of prayer. It was David's resolution, Psalm. cxvi. Because he has
inclined his ear unto me, therefore will I call upon him as long as I live. So,
Psalm. civ I will sing praise to my God, while I have my being; my meditation of
him shall be sweet, I will be glad in the Lord.





A
PSALM. xix. 12, 13. Who can understand his errors? etc.
THIS Psalm is a pious and devout Meditation of the Prophet David. Now
Naturalists observe, that there be two acts of the soul of hardest performance;

1. The act of Reflection, to make the soul look inwards, and to recoyl upon it
self. Motus reflexus, it is duplex motus, a double 2. The act of Meditation, to
make the soul ascend, and look upwards, to keep it still upon the wing. And
therefore, the Psalmist to maintain and strengthen his meditation, uses an
inspection into a threefold Book. 1. Is Inspectio libri Creaturae, into the
book of the creatures, Verse. 1. The heavens declare the glory of God, etc. He
looks upon that great Volume of Heaven and Earth, and there reads in Capital
Letters, the Prints, and Characters of Gods glory. Aliter pictura, aliter
scriptura placet; he gazes not as children upon 2. His Meditation ascends
higher by a second Inspection, and that is Inspectio libri Scripturae, verse 7.
The Law of the Lord is perfect, converting the soul, etc. And this Book is more
precious Ambrose observes of Abraham's journals; he came out of the land of
Chaldea, into the land of Promise. God bids him look up to the stars; (and the
Chaldeans were great beholders of the stars and firmament) but yet Abraham
asks, In quo cognoscam? How shall I know that I shall inherit it? He could not
gather that, by beholding the Creatures; the Word of Promise, and the Book 3.
He proceeds further, and feeds his Meditation by a third Inspection, and that
is, Inspectio in librum Conscientiae; he unclasps that, which is the
compendium, and sum, and transcript of the other Book, the Book of the
Scripture, and there dwells upon a serious, and sad Meditation, Who can
understand his errors?

1. He looks up to Heaven, and wonders as it, Who can comprehend the number of
the stars? Quis intelligit potentiam? Who can understand his power? 2. He looks
into the Scriptures, and finds this a more large Book. The former is but a
shrivelled Scrole to this sacred Volume, as Christ compares it: Who can
understand those sacred Truths, and profound Mysteries? Who can conceive the
Perfection of the Law? 3. He looks into his own heart, makes a search into his
Conscience, brings that Book out of the Rubbish, as they did the Book of the
Law in Iosiah's time; who can count, and number up the blemishes of his soul?
who can understand the errors of his life?
1. The first Book, Convincit, it has a power of Conviction; Meditate on it,
and observe Gods Power, or thou art an Atheist. 2. The second Book, Convertit,
it has a power of Conversion; Meditate upon it, and learn his will, and
worship out of it, or thou art an Infidel. 3. The third Book, Accusat, it has
the power of Accusation; Look, and meditate upon it, and there discover, and
bewail thy sins, or thou art an Hypocrite.
The Text then contains David's Meditation upon that third

1. An holy Perplexity in the soul of David, which makes him cry out, Who can
understand his errors? 2. An holy Redress he seeks in this perplexity, O
cleanse me from my secret faults. 3. An holy Prevention for the time to come,
Keep thy servant from presumptuous sins, let them not have dominion over me. 4.
An holy, both Resolution, and Consolation,; Then shall I be upright, and I
shall be innocent from the great Transgression.
1. In the first Part, we see the nature of Sin; it casts a man into
Perplexity, it breeds gripings, and anguishes in the soul, and conscience. 2.
In the second, we see the nature of Mercy; that pardons, 3. In the third, we
see the nature of Grace; that prevents, keeps us from presumptuous relapses;
that preserves us so, that no wickedness shall have dominion over us. 4. In the
fourth Part, we see the nature of Integrity; that gives comfort, and
consolation, that strengthens it self in all good purposes and resolutions.
And these Particulars represent unto us the whole life of a Christian; they
set in order the motions of the soul in the beginnings

1. What is the first Motion, and quickening of life in a Christian? Examen
Conscientiae, a searching out of his sins; not a confident stepping into
Heaven, in a present assurance, but a sorrowful penitential perplexity. 2. The
second Motion in the heart of a Christian, is Supplication, and Suit for pardon
and peace, Cleanse me, purge me. 3. The third Motion is imploring of help,
Prayer for grace and assistance against Relapses, establish me with thy spirit,
Keep back thy servant from presumptuous sins. 4. The fourth Motion is Studium
integritatis, and Gaudium in studio, resolutions and endeavors for integrity,
and all possible innocence, and the keeping of a good conscience toward God
and man.
Now put these together, and then we may discover three Combinations;

1. A Combination of two sorts of Sins, not all of the same size and magnitude;
here are Errores and Contumaciae, sins of Infirmity, and sins of Presumption;
sins of a weaker tincture, and sins of a double die; Lapsus in via, and
Excursiones extra viam; 2. A Combination of two sorts of Graces; here is Gratia
purgans, and Gratia custodiens. 1. Pardoning and purging grace. 2. Preserving,
and protecting grace. That, is the grace of subvention, when we have sinned;
this, the grace of prevention, that we may not sin.
3. A Combination of two states and conditions of a Christian. 1. Purgandus a
secretis; for sins of Infirmity, who can avoid them? 2. Custodiendus a
contumacibus; for sins of Presumption, we must not come near them. We cannot be
free A Culpa, from sins of daily Incursion; but we may, and must be free A
Crimine,

The first thing considerable is David's holy Perplexity; Who can understand
his errors? And of it, take a double Consideration:

1. Quae occasio? What Is the occasion of this Perplexity? 2. Quae conditio?
What Is the nature of it?
First, What Is the occasion of this sudden Perplexity in the spirit of David?
He was taken up even now into an heavenly contemplation of the works and word
of God; and the consideration of both these, was always delightful unto him.

1. For his works, Psalm. xcii. 4. Thou, Lord, have made me glad through thy
works, and I will triumph in the works of thy hands. 2. For his word; The
meditation of it was delightful to him, sweeter then the honey, and the
honeycomb, more pleasant then his appointed food; it was his song in the house
of his Pilgrimage. How then comes all this over-casting in David's soul, like a
sudden thunderclap from a clear sky? I answer, The causes of many
perplexities, and astonishments in the soul of man, are not always discernable.
The spirit of fear, as Christ speaks, comes not with observation; 1. Non cum
observatione peccati. Not only some great notorious sin, but even some smaller
offense, that thou little think of, may fret and rankle in thy conscience,
and breed perplexity. The pricking of a pin may rankle, and fester, and prove
as dangerous, as the wound of a weapon. Thus David's heart smote him, for an
irreverent touch of Saul, as well as for the cruel murder of Uriah. Slight not
the commission of smaller sins; thou may hear of them when thou little
think of them. 2. Non cum observatione personae. Indeed for notorious
debauched wretches, for them to be put upon the rack of a perplexed Saul, but
David; not only Judas, but Peter have suffered, and felt the anguishes of a
guilty conscience. 3. Non cum observatione temporis. Indeed, a sin lately
committed, The Clouds may return after the rain. Thus Job complains, Thou
writest bitter things against me, and make me to possess the iniquities of my
youth, Job xiii. 26. Thus the Patriarchs, many years after the fact, were
troubled and perplexed with the sin of selling Joseph; Genesis xlii. 21. We are
guilty concerning our brother, say they:

But yet, what might be the occasion of this perplexity in the Prophet David?
David was now looking into the law of God, considering the great light and
glory of it, and a beam of that light has darted into his conscience, a spark
of that fire has fallen into that fuel, and that ^ets all on fire; casts him
into a sudden amazement, and makes him cry out, Who can understand his errors?

Observe from hence, that the word of God has a secret, unavoydable power upon
the soul, to convince it of sin, and to cast it into horror. Good Josiah, at
the first reading of this Word, had his heart melted with fear and
astonishment. Thus S. Paul, Romans iii. 20. By the Law, is the knowledge of sin.
And, Romans vii. 11. The Commandment slew him, and was found to be death unto
him, verse. 10. And there be diverse reasons of this Truth:

1. In the Scripture is presented a transcendent rule of holiness; the infinite
purity and sanctity which is in God himself. He has magnified his Word above
all his Name, Psalm. cxxxviii. 2. In it shines the purity of his Nature, not
capable of blemish, or imperfection. Now then, the soul seeing this
transcendent holiness in God, is presently convinced of infinite impurity. Mine
eye sees thee, wherefore I abhor my self, and repont in dust and ashes, says
Job, chap. xlii. 5, 6. Probavit aurum, and reprobavit, says S. Bernard; The
Angels, though as fine as gold, are impure in his sight. Qui discernit inter
Stellas, quanto magis inter glebas? If the Stars are not pure in his sight,
how much less (Job xxv. 5.) man, who is but Cujus participatione sumus justi,
ejus comparatione sumus injusti, says S. Augustine: They, who by derivation
from him are made holy; in comparison of him, are most unholy. Nay, the holy
Angels themselves, in their approaches to him, do Sancti Angeli in
Propitiatorio, quanto magis peccatores prae Tribunali? If Angels on the
Mercy-Seat tremble, what shall sinners do, that stand at the Bar, before the
seat of Justice? 2. As in the Scripture there is a transcendent rule presented,
so is there also an exact rule of holiness prescribed. The Law forbids all sin,
enjoins all holiness. No passage in the life of man, but is ordered in it. As
Theodoret observes in the Ceremonial Law, and in the furniture of the
Tabernacle, that every particular was curiously prescribed: Sitales imagines,
quales veritates? says he. If the Ceremonial Law was so accurate, and precise,
how strict is the Law of moral holiness, of which that was but a type? The
Measures, and Weights of the Sanctuary, were double as much as the ordinary
Measures. Thine actions may carry weight, and be allowable amongst men in
common conversation, which yet will be found light in the Sanctuary of God.
Mensurant se in dolosa statera consuetudinis humanae, non in statera
Sanctuarii, says S. Augustine. Bring thine Actions to this standard, and thy
defects will be discovered; and then that which seems warrantable, and
commendable amongst men, will 3. The Law of God, it is a spiritual rule, not
resting only in an outward conformity, but requires the exactness of soul and
spirit. It keeps secret thoughts under awe; and judges of outward actions,
according to the heart; not of the heart according to outward actions. I the
Lord search the heart, even to give to every man according to his ways, and
according to the fruit of his doings, Ier. xvii. 10. Thus S. Chrysostom,
discoursing of the exactness of Gods Law in the true intent of it, says, The
Pharisees forbade the outward commission of uncleanness; the Law John Baptist,
he had Zonam pelliceam circa lumbos, a leathern girdle about his loins; whereas
Christ had Zonam auream circa pectus, Rev. i. 13. a golden girdle about his
breast; repressing the first rise, and stirrings, and motions of sin. This
makes the Saints mourn for the first conceptions of sin, though they prove
abortive. Libera me a cogitationibus meis, says the devout Father; Free me,
and purge me from my sinful cogitations. 4. The Law of God is operative, not a
dead letter, but Verbum Dei, non est opus, sed operans, says S. Ambrose. The
Spirit of God goes along with it, and makes it quick, and powerful, and sharp,
and mighty in operation, Heb. iii. As in the frame of a man's body, under every
vein there runs an artery full of spirits; so, under
This discovers the ground of that aversness that is in most men from this
blessed Word. Why can any other discourses find entertainment rather then this?
Why? It breeds trouble and perplexity; It discovers my sin; It affrights my
conscience; makes me out of love with my self, and appear ugly. These
Spectacles are too true for my false eyes. Ahab cannot endure to talk with
Micaiah, nor meet with Elijah, they never speak good unto him. The generalities
of Scripture we can like well enough; Amant veritatem lucentem, oderunt
redarguentem, says S. Ambrose. And that is the first Consideration, Quae
occasio?

Secondly, A second Consideration of this perplexity in David, is, Quae
conditio? What is the nature, and purpose of it? And we see it expressed in a
vehement, and passionate question; Quis intelligit? Who understands his
errors? And it may be resolved into these three Expressions:

1. It is Vox ignorantis; It is the speech of a man, who confesses 2. It is Vox
admirantis; It is the speech of him, who sees many errors in himself, and
suspects more, and is astonished at the Consideration of them. 3. It is Vox
gementis; He utters his thoughts with a sighing Acc^unt, and groans within
himself at the sense of them.
First, It is Vox ignorantis; He knows not his errors; and then it implies
this Observation; That the perfect discovery of the errors of our lives, is a
thing most hard, and even impossible.

1. In the Strength of David's Affection. 2. In the Matter of it. 3. In the
Grounds. 4. In the Consequences. 5. In the Uses to be made of it.
I. The Strength of it. David propounds it not by way of bare assertion only,
No man can know them; but by way of question, and that is a form of greater
Emphasis, and Impression: And then, he propounds this question, not only to
himself, or Who can?

1. Quis in lege intelligentissimus? Let him be never so cunning, and skillful
in the Law of God, the greatest Rabbi that Ezra, an exact Scribe in the Law of
his God; though, with Ezekiel, and S. John, he has swallowed the Book, yet he
may run into the commission of some errors, that he is not aware of. Even the
High Priest himself was to offer for his own ignorances, and infirmities, Heb.
v. ^ta nihil est in hominibus tutum, ne Pontifex quidem, says Origin. 2. Quis
in conversatione cautissimus? Who, though never so accurate, and watchful in
his conversation, can know all his errors? Let him keep never so strict a
watch over his own heart, yet so^e sin will escape him. In many things we
offend all, says S. James, Chap. iii. 2. He says not, In many things some of
us offend, or in a few things all of us offend, but in many things we offend
all. They who are all clean, had need wash their feet, says our Savior. To
which S. Bernard alluding, gives this warning; that though we choose our way,
and pick our path, and so avoid mire and dirt, yet, In bono itinere, pulverem
colliges; in the fairest, and cleanest way, our feet will gather soil, some
errors will be committed. 3. Quis in examine conscientiae diligentissimus?
Who, though never so frequent and diligent in examining and revising Ignoramus;
and though not conscious to themselves of any sin unrepented of, yet, to make
all sure, will beg pardon of God for unknown transgressions. As men, not guilty
of any breach of Law, to their own knowledge, will obtain a general pardon of
the King, to prevent the worst. That Is the first, the strength of this
Assertion; Who does understand? etc.
II. The matter of this Question; Who understands his errors? Take it in three
Particulars;

1. Quis intelligit naturam errorum? Who understands the nature of all his
actions, whether they be erroneous, yea, or no? whether that which he does, be
warrantable and good, or otherwise? Indeed, for the main Capital duties, those
Principia practica, and heads of morality, and those likewise that are of the
nearest, and most evident proximity unto them, he is hardly a Christian who
knows not them; but for many particular Cases, and Questions of conscience
incident to the life of man, who can in three Parables, Luke xv. The lost Son,
The lost Sheep, The lost Groat. Art thou not as the lost Son? Do thou not
break away from God by wilful rebellion? Yet thou may be as the lost Sheep,
and stray away from thy God by a sin of infirmity. If not so, yet Who has not
been as the lost Groat, and his action has slipped away out of his hand, betwixt
his fingers, as it were, by ignorance, and incogitancie? 2. Quis intelligit
numerum errorum? Who ever yet kept such a careful account in his conscience,
as to register, and book down the just number of his sins? David, who had not
sinned so frequently as we have done; yet, when he surveys the number of They
are more in number then the hairs of my head; mine heart has failed me, to see
the swarms and numbers of them. Upon which place, Saint Augustine devoutly
meditates; Capilli minuti sunt, sed multi, says he. David had little sins,
like as hairs; but yet multiplying, and increasing as the hairs of his head.
Thus S. Bernard counsels us, In our addresses to God, to consider, whether we
can meet with him, with ten thousand sins repented of, who comes against us
with twenty thousand sins that we never thought of. 3. Quis intelligit
aggravationes errorum? Who understands Job respecting the substance of his
actions, and his good intentions, confidently says, O that I were weighed in a
balance; but if he takes in the many mis-carrying circumstances, then, if he
will be weighed, he must follow S. Bernard's counsel, Statera sit crux Christi,
the beam and standard must be Christ's Cross, and the worth of his merits must
help down the weight, or it will be too light.
As in the miracle of the Loaves, Matthew. xiv. the loves were but five in bulk;
Ey, but what says our Savior? Colligite fragmenta, Gather up the fragments;
and then there were twelve baskets full. So, though thy sins at first appear
but few, and small, yet gather up the fragments, the many circumstances, and
aggravations of them; Thou did such a sin in such a place, at such a time,
being of such a calling, after former pardon obtained, and vows made, and grace
received; these aggravations will make a small sin, exceeding sinful. That Is
the second branch, the Matter.

III. Quod fundamentum? What is the ground? Whence arises this difficulty of
discerning errors? We shall find it chiefly from these three.

1. Sublimitas Legis; the divine excellency of the Law of God; a most
comprehensive Law, requiring exact holiness, and 1. The first is the Maximum
quod sic; and that scantling is set down in the first Commandment; With all thy
mind, with all thy heart, with all thy strength. 2. The second Dimension is,
the Minimum quod non; and that scantling is set down in the last Commandment,
Non concupisces, Thou shall not lust.
Now judge of thine actions by these two Dimensions;

1. In thy good actions, have thou kept the first Proportion? have thou done
the good that thou should do with all thy might? Then, 2. In thy sins, have
thou observed the second proportion? have thou not so much as lusted after some
unlawful actions? have thou been free from all motions, and inclinations that
way?
Ye see, betwixt these two dimensions of the Law of God, David break out into
admiration; I see an end of all perfection, but thy Law is exceeding broad. 2.
The second ground of this difficulty in finding out our sins, is Subtilitas
cordis, the mavelous subtilty, and closeness in every man's spirit. The heart
of man is an unsearchable lurking place for sin; there are many windings and
turnings, and corners in it. It Is full of excuses, and concealments, framed
like a labyrinth, or maze, or like an harbor for thieves, with many secret
passages, and close conveyances in it. It will excusare excusationes, as David
says, weave cunning excuses. It will hide a sin like Rachel, when Laban
searched for the Idols; bury it like Achan, in the midst of his Tent. David
finds it so intricate a work to search his own heart, and to find out his sins,
that he begs Gods help in it. Psalm. cxxxix. 23. Search me, O God, and know my
heart, try me, and know my thoughts, and see if there be any wicked way in me.
3, The third ground of this difficulty, is Falsitas Satanae, the falsehood of
Satan, his depths of deceitfulness, by which he will persuade us, and bear us
in hand, that it is otherwise with us then we conceive and fear; Either he
tells us, it is no sin, as he did to Eve, ye are mistaken; or, else he tells
us, it is not so great How much owe thou my Master? Our conscience tells us
an hundred Measures, nay, ten thousand Talents; but he will falsify our
account, and make us us write wrong; and set down fifty. That Is the third
branch, Quod Fundamentum?
IV. Quae consequentia? What be the consequences of this truth?

1. Is this true, that none can understand his errors? nor know what sins he
has committed? Then sure it is much more true, Quis intelligit quae non
commisit? Who understands what sins he might have committed, had not God
restrained, and by his Grace prevented the commission of them? And so it is
Motivum gratitudinis, a provocation to thankfulness. There is not Tot sunt mihi
remissa, quot non commissa, says S. Augustine piously. 2. Is this true, Who
can understand the errors he has committed? Then this is true also, Quis
intelligit quae commissurus est, Who knows what sins he shall fall into, if God
leave him to himself? And so it is Motivum vigilantiae, a provocation to
watchfulness. Thou that stand now, little know thou Consider thy self,
says S. Paul, Gal. vi. 1. lest thou also be tempted. Hazael could not
conceive, nor believe, that he ever should be so cruel, and bloody, as Elisha
foretold him, What, am I a Dog, that I should do so? It could not enter into
the heart of S. Peter, that he should ever deny his Master, though Christ
forewarned him of it. Rather let us imitate the Apostles; when they heard of a
Traitor, they all cried out, Master, Is it I? Wherein they discover, 1. A
confession of their ignorance, They knew not their 2. A suspicion of the
possibility of it, I may be found a Traitor, for ought I know.
3. Is it true, No man understands his sins he has committed? Then, Quis
intelligit semina peccatorum? Who knows all the seeds of sin, and inclinations
unto evil, that are inbred, and lie lurking in his heart? And so it is Motivum
humilitatis, a provocation to humility. The spawn of all sin is inbred in us.
Original sin is virtually, and seminally every sin. As all natural de potentia
materiae, from the first matter, so all actual sins spring and grow from that
confused Chaos of original sin. In respect whereof, see what an hideous
description S. Paul makes of every man; Their throat is an open Sepulcher, with
their tongues have they used deceit, the poison of asps is under their lips;
their feet are swift to shed blood, Romans iii. 13. etc. Not that every man is
guilty of these actual sins, but because the spawn and original of them is
inbred in every one. That Is the fourth thing, the Consequences.
V. Qui usus? What are the Uses to be made hereof? They are of three sorts.

1. Of Conviction. 2. Of Caution. 3. Of Consolation.
1. Of Conviction. Is David thus troubled, and perplexed upon examination, and
search into his heart? 1. In what case are they, Qui nunquam inquirunt, who
never so much as call their hearts to examination? If David, who has so often
reckoned with God, and by frequent Repentance labored to make all even with
him, yet finds so many back-reckonings; how fearful is their case, who multiply
their arrearages, and run use upon use, and never account with him? 2. And
worse; In what case are they, Qui peccata abscondunt? If David searches, and
sorrows for unknown sins, how desperate are they, who when Conscience accuses,
and would David; how forlorn are they then, who when their Sin, like the Pox*
would break out, they drive it in again, as Felix did, and strike it back to
the heart? 3. And worst of all are they, Qui palam profitentur, who are
sinners, and know themselves so, and glory in it. David mourns for secret sins,
and these boast themselves in manifest Impieties. They who are Saints, and
Angels, and already in Heaven, in compare with thee, mourn for suspicious sins,
and thou
2. Of Caution, Is this true, no man understands his errors? Then, 1. Non
sufficit Iudicium alienum. What though no man can accuse thee of sin? That will
not acquit thee. Many think to go to Heaven by the voice of the Country, if no
man can blame them: No, we must distinguish betwixt a good name, and a good
conscience. Fama propter homines, Conscientia propter Deum, says S. Augustine:
A good name will carry it amongst Quid prodest tibi neminem habere conscium,
habenti conscientiam? says Lactantius. What though thy neighbors and brethren
absolve thee? yet God and thy conscience can condemn thee. The good Centurion,
Luke vii. carried it clear by Dignus est, verse. 4. He is worthy that thou
should come to him; Ey, but his own conscience reproves him, verse. 7. Domine,
non sum dignus, Lord I am not worthy to come unto thee. 2. Is this true, none
can understand his errors? Then non sufficit Iudicium proprium; the
absolutions of thine own conscience cannot fully discharge thee. I know nothing
by my self, says S. Paul, 1 Cor. iv. 4. Yet am I not hereby justified; but he
that judges me is the Lord; who can find fault with those actions which we
account unblameable, and very commendable. Aliter judicat peritus artifex,
aliter imperitus inspector, says S. Aug. A skilful workman, will find great
fault there, where an unskilful smatterer can see no failing. 3. Non sufficit
Iudicium Satanae. It is possible Satan may not be able to accuse us, and yet
notwithstanding, his silence cannot acquit us. As in his siftings of Job, he
could find no matter of any just accusation. In that Plea against Job, the
Devil nonsuited himself, he had nothing to object against him. As S.
Chrysostom observes, when God asked Satan the second time, Whence come thou
Satan? The Devil answered, From compassing the earth: he does not say from
tempting of Job; he had no complaint against him. But though Satan could not,
yet God could, and did lay many things against him; Thou writest bitter things
against me, and make me to possess the iniquities of my youth. That Is the
second sort.
3. Of Consolation. Art thou cast into this perplexity with David? Cryest thou
out with him, Who can understand his errors? Then ease and comfort thy self,
with these three relieving Considerations. 1. Quis intelligit multitudinem
misericordiarum? Who Chrysostom, discoursing upon that passage, Psalm. iii. 5,
6. Thy mercy, O Lord, is in the heavens, and thy faithfulness reaches unto the
clouds; Thy righteousness is like the great mountains, thy judgments are a
great deep. See, says he, the dimensions of his mercy are far beyond the
bounds of all his other Attributes: The height of the Clouds, the bigness of
the Mountains, the depth of the Sea, they may be fathomed, but who knows the
largeness 2. Quis intelligit vim, and virtutem meriti Christi? Does thy heart
cry out, Who can understand his errors? Quiet and comfort it with this
Meditation; Who can understand the Christ's blood, the price of his merits, the
plenty of his redemption? He is able to abolish all kinds of sin. His blood is
compared to the depth of the Sea; I will cast all their sins into the depth of
the Sea, Micah vii. 19. and that can drown Mountains as well as Mole-hills. The
strength of his mercies is like the strength of the Sun, and that can dispel
the thickest clouds, as well as the thinnest vapors, Isai. xliv. 22. He will
blot out as a thick cloud thy transgressions, and as a cloud thy sins. 3. Quis
intelligit vim poenitentiae? Answer these doubtings of thine own heart, with
this Meditation; Who understands

1. Of general Repentance, for sins known, and unknown. In this case, if upon
search thou can not discover all thy sins, deal as the Israelites were to do,
in finding out of a Murder, Deuteronomy. xxi. 1. They were to search into all their
Cities, and to measure round about them, and if they could not find it out,
they were to pray, Lord be merciful to thy people. So, measure thou, and search
thou into every corner of thine heart, and say unto the Lord, Forgive me mine
unknown sins. Look upon the whole Law of God, and acknowledge the whole
Indictment, David confess thy self a great sinner, Psalm. xxv. with S. Paul,
confess thy self the greatest of sinners. This very general Repentance, will
much ease and comfort thee. 2. Who understands the virtue of daily Repentance?
There is great use of that to ease thee of these anxieties. For, 1. It has a
virtue of Prevention of greater sins. The daily pumping of a leaking Ship, will
keep it from sinking. As they do, who would prevent the 2. Daily Repentance
will facilitate the harsh and bitter work of Repentance, which is exceeding
unwelcome to flesh and blood. Use thy self to it daily, and it will free thee
from those fearful pangs of late Repentance. A green wound is easily cured; S.
Ambrose speaks, if it be diurna, it will not be diuturna. Christ says of
Cares, is most true of Sins and Repentance for them, Sufficient to the day is
the evil thereof.

Felix qui potuit.







A
St. JAMES i. 22. But be ye doers of the Word, and not hearers only, deceiving
your own selves.
THis passage of Scripture is S. James his Exhortation for an holy, and
religious receiving and entertaining the word of God. A duty in it self
exceeding useful and beneficial; It is able to save our souls; no less good
verse. Now miscarriages in such weighty performances, are very dangerous and
prejudicial. The best things, when they are abused, prove most mischievous. And
therefore the Apostle contents not himself to commend this duty to us at large,
and in general terms, so it be done any way, it is enough, all is well; but
prescribes an holy manner, sets down a strict caveat and proviso, how we should
receive the word of God, so that we may reap profit by it, and be blessed in
the deed.

So then, the Text it is a strict severe Caveat for the due receiving the word
of God. And it is framed in that manner, as is like to be most prevailing, and
effectual; and that is, by forewarning us of a great inconvenience and mischief
that will befall us, if we fail in the duty. And so in the words we may observe

1. Officium, the Duty prescribed, and enjoined us: 2. Periculum, the great
Danger we run into, if we fail in the Duty, and miscarry in the performance of
it.
First, The Duty prescribed; and in it observe three things:

1. Here is Suppositio officii praevii; A previous preparative Duty
presupposed; that is, Hearing of the Word; we must become Hearers, set our
selves to attend, and listen to what God speaks to us. That Is the Duty
necessarily employed, and supposed. 2. Here is Prohibitio officii erronei; A
Prohibition of a gross mistake in performance of this Duty; Beware you err not
in this duty of Hearing, and place all your Religion in bare Hearing, as if
that were all which God requires of us, to give him the Hearing; That Is
expressed in this word, Only; Be not Hearers only. 3. Here is Injunctio
officii debiti; The main, full, complete Duty we owe, and must perform, to the
word of God, if we look for any good by it. What Is that? We must be Doers of
the Word; Practice what we Hear, and yield our
Secondly, follows the other Particular of the Text, to enforce this Duty;
that is the danger and mischief we shall fall into, if we fail in this Duty, and
that will prove to be an heavy miscarriage, We shall deceive our own selves.

First, Come we to the Duty prescribed; and in it, to the

I. First Particular, that is Suppositio officii; The Duty presupposed. The Text
premises, and supposes this, That we must be Hearers. And because there are
many things that will crave our The ear is not satisfied with Hearing, says
Solomon, Eccles. i. 8. therefore in point of Faith and Religion, the Apostle
limits our Hearing to the only, and peculiar, and proper Object, and that is,
The word of God.

So that here are two things considerable;

1. The limitation of the Matter, that must take up our Hearing, and that is
the word of God: And then here is, 2. The prescription of the Duty, this word
of God must be Heard, and attended to.
1. Then for the Object. All our religious Hearing must be conversant about
this one thing, the word of God. The Text places us, like Mary, at Christ's
feet, commends unto us that Unum necessarium, that one thing necessary. I will
hear what God the Lord will say, says David, Psalm. lxxxv. 8. Thus when God
Christ's Voice, This is my Well-beloved Son, Hear him, Matthew. xvii. 5. Faith
has an ear for no other Voice, but only to Christ's Voice, speaking in the
Scripture. Romans x. 17. Faith comes by Hearing, and Hearing by the word of God.
It Is the indoles, and natural disposition of Faith, to listen to Christ's Voice,
and to none but his. My Sheep Hear my Voice, but the voice of strangers they
will not Hear, John x. Thus Origin expresses it, Ut naturalis quidam attractus
quibusdam inest, ut magneti ad ferrum, bitumini ad ignem; sic Fidei ad Divinum
Verbum. As only the loadstone There are three things we should aim at in our
religious Hearing; and all three are the peculiar effects of the word of God:
1. To Enlighten us. 2. To Regenerate, and Reform us. 3. To Save us; 1. It is
proper to the blessed Word, to Enlighten us, and to acquaint us with the mind
of God. He opened their understanding, that they might understand the
Scripture, Luke xxiv. 45. The holy Scripture, that is able to make us wise to
Salvation, 2 Timothy 3. 15. And when all comes to all, Saving Wisdom, it is the
only Wisdom. By thy Precepts I get understanding, says David, Psalm. cxix.
104. Ignorance of this Word, it is the mother and breeder of all error. Ye err,
not knowing the Scriptures, says Christ to the Sadduces, Matthew. xxii. 29. This
Word made David wiser then his Elders, for all their age and experience; it
made him wiser then his Teachers, for all their craft and policies, Psalm. cxix.
98, 99, 100. 2. It is proper to this good word of God, to Regenerate, to
Sanctify, and Reform us. Of his own will has he begot us with the word of
Truth, James i. 18. The Word has Vim seminalem, and plasticam; it is the only
proper seed of Regeneration. So says our Savior in that holy Prayer of his
for his Disciples, Sanctify them through thy Truth, thy Word is Truth, John
xvii. 17. And again, Now are ye clean through the Word which I have spoken unto
you, John xv. 3. It, and it only, can quicken us, and cleanse us; can
sanctify, and reform us. 3. Salvation, it is proper to this word of God.
Search the Scriptures, for in them ye think to have eternal life, John v. 39.
In other Truths there may be Sal^britas quaedam, in hac salus ipsa ^renda est.
Some sober Truths may be in other words; but saving Truth is only to be found
in the Word of God. The Angel to Cornelius, gives this Testimony of it, Acts
xi. 14. Send for Peter, he shall tell thee Words, whereby thou, and all thine
house shall be saved. It is the main end of the Scriptures, John xx. 31. These
are written, that, believing, ye might have life through his Name. It Is called,
The Word of life, Phil. ii. 16. S. Paul calls this Word of the Gospel, The
Power of God to Salvation, Romans i. 16. It Is called The Gospel of the Grace of
God, Acts xx. It Is the Gospel of the Kingdom, Matthew. iv. The Gospel of
Salvation, Ephesians. i. and so the only Object of the hearing of Faith.

2. Here is Praescriptio actus. Our Attention and Hearing of this blessed Word,
it is enjoined us. It Is no indifferent, arbitrary 1. It is enjoined us as a
Duty. It Is the Preface which God premises to his Law, Hear O Israel. Necessity
is laid upon us, and woe be to us, if we do not. So S. James, chap. i. 19. Let
every man be swift to Hear: Swift, ready, quick, diligent, suffer not a word to
fall to the ground. He that planted the ear, shall not he Hear, says David,
Psalm. xciv. 9. It follows as strongly, He that planted the ear, shall not he be
Heard? Shall we turn the He that turns away his ear from Hearing the Law, even
his prayer shall be abominable, says Solomon, Prove. xxviii. As if he should
say, He who abhorrs to hear God, God will abhor to hear him. That Is no great
matter, says the prosane man; let not him trouble us with Preaching, and we
will not trouble him with Praying. Oh, say not so, there will come a time when
we would be glad God would hear us, as David speaks, Psalm. xxviii. Lest if thou
be silent to me, make as if thou would not hear, I become like them that go
down into the pit. What said Iotham? Hearken unto me, that God may hearken unto
you, Judge. ix. 7. As it is a Duty, so 2. It is a weighty duty, not slightly to
be esteemed. It Is a great part of our Religion. In it we make a real
protestation of our allegiance and humble subjection, which we owe to our God.
By it we acknowledge him to be the Supreme Lawgiver in his Church. Hear him, was
the word by which Christ was declared the great Prophet, and Doctor of his
Church. 3. It is a fundamental duty; the prime original duty of our Religion;
the breeder, and mother, and nurse of all other Paul makes it the first
beginning of Religion. Romans x. 14. How shall they call on him in whom they have
not believed? How shall they believe in him, of whom they have not heard?
Auris, it is Os animae, says S. Augustine. The soul is nourished by the ear, as
the body receives nourishment by the mouth. 4. It is a duty exceeding
profita^e, and beneficial to us. Many rich and precious Promises are made to
the due receiving and entertaining of the word of God. See two main ones in the
Context: 1. It is (...), An engraffed Word; able to alter and change our
nature; of a wild Crab-stock, it will make Invenit labruscam, says Chrysostom,
facit Olivam. It sanctifies our nature, and makes it fructify. 2. It is able
to save our souls: Isal. lv. Hear, and your soul shall live. There is in it a
Divine Power to free us from perdition, to give us entrance and admission into
heaven. They have Moses and the Prophets, says Abraham to Dives; if they
listen to them, they may escape this place of ^orment, Luke xvi.
5. It is Perpetuum officium; not only a duty and means Semen, but Lac; not
only Lac. but Cibus. It is not only incorruptible Seed to beget us, 1 Pet. i.
23. but Milk to nourish us, 1 Pet. ii. 2. not only Milk, but Strong-meat to
strengthen us, Heb. v. You shall see the date of this duty of Hearing, Psalm.
xcv. Donec cognominatur hodie, While it is called to day, hear his voice; the
day of Grace, the day of Life: This body, must be quotidie; This day must be
every day. Consider the multiplicity of duties required of us, the
imperfections of knowledge in the best of us, the weakness of Grace that still
hangs Paul calls them, the Wantings of our faith, still to be made up; and it
will appear, this Hearing of the Word to be a perpetual duty.

We have done with the first Particular, the Duty supposed; Now follows,

II. The second, that is Prohibitio officii erronei, the Mistake we must beware
of, in performing this Duty. Hear we must, but we must not only Hear: As if he
should say, All Religion is not in Hearing, mistake not your selves, more goes
to make a good Christian then bare Hearing. There are more duties then only

1. Hearing, it is not Totum officium; it is not the whole sum, and body of
Christianity and Religion; it is but a part only: All our Religion, it is not
in lissening and attending to the word Pietas consistit ex integris causis. He
is no substantial Christian, who Pharisee's Religion, he inquired after some
one great Commandment. No, says Christ, The second is like unto it. He who
fails in one, is guilty of all. He who says, Thou shall not miss a Sermon;
says also, Thou shall not neglect Prayers, and other Duties of Christianity.
Now, if thou fail'st in any of these, thou art a Transgresson These things ye
ought to have done, and not to leave other things undone, is Christ's rule for
obedience. Add to your knowledge, other graces, says S. Peter, 2 Pet. i. 5, 6.
Fear God, and keep (all) his commandments; Hoc est totum hominis; that is the
whole Duty of man. 2. Hearing, it is but par^s initialis; as it is but one part
of piety, so it is but the first part, and stop of piety; It is inter
principia. As, to life and growth, is required nourishment; to that,
concoction; to that, feeding, and receiving meat: Now as he, who only tastes
meat, and goes no further, is far off from nourishment, because he stays at the
beginning, (...) nothing; 3. Hearing, it is not officium propter see^* It is a
religious Duty, but not prescribed for it se^, but in reference, and
subordination to other Duties; it is propter aliud; like those Arts that are
called, Instrumental Arts, and are only to enable, and fit us for other, and
higher Preformances; their use is only for Preparation; Hearing, that is but
receiving of Seed; fructifying in good works, 4. Hearing, it is levissimum
officium; In compare with the substantial parts of plety, bare Hearing is but
an easy Duty. Indeed to hear as we should do, attentively, reverently,
devoutly, is a Task of some Pains, but yet of a great deal easier Discharge,
then other Duties are. Hypocrisy and Formality, will be very assiduous in
lissening and attending, Swift to hear; but slow and dull to more weighty
Performances. Repentance and Mortification, and the Trade of Godliness in
Holiness and Righteousness, Oh, that is an hard saying. How unworthy is it, to
put off
Thus we see that only hearing of Gods word, falls short of our main duty,
makes us no good Christians. And not only bare hearing, but take this hearing
with all the advantages of it, that are short of practice; all make it but a
defective duty, such as will fail us, and be unprofitable unto us.

It may be we will grant, that the bare, outward, bodily hearing of the Word,
may be justly reproveable; but yet we think

1. If it be a diligent Hearing, constant, and assiduous; if we frequent the
House of God, miss not any opportunity of hearing the Word, that we hope will
go for good Service, and stand us in some stead: if we be such as S. James
speaks of, Verse 19. Celeres ad audiendum, Swift to hear, in season, and out of
season, upon all occasions. Indeed such as are backward to this duty, seldom
setting themselves to be instructed, often estranging will wait daily at
Wisdoms doors, yet if they rest in that, their Religion is Vain. S. Paul tells
of some that are always learning, and so would be taken for devout Christians,
and yet he passes an hard censure upon them. And Christ tells us of such who
could affirm, they were his constant Auditors, heard him daily preach in their
Synagogues, He knows them not. Will you see what Christ says to a very
forward, and diligent Auditory, that frequented his Preaching, Luke xii. 1.
There were gathered together an innumerable multitude of people, in so much
that they trod one upon another; Beware of hypocrisy; All this Diligence, and
Forwardness, may be so far from sound Piety, that it may be no better then
gross Hypocrisy. So then, bare Hearing, though it be diligent, and assiduous,
will not go for good Service. 2. What if it be Hearing with some Proficiency,
when we so hear as that we understand, and grow in knowledge, and our mind is
edified, such as do as Christ bids them do, Hear, and understand, Matthew. xv.
10. or, as he speaks Mark xiii. 14. Let him that reads, understand; such an
hearing, we trust, will serve the turn. Indeed, to be always learning, and yet
never to come to the knowledge of the truth, as S. Paul complains of some
Dullards, 2 Timothy iii. 7. such as he reproves, Heb. v. 11. that are Segnes
auribus, Dull of hearing; still remaining unskilful in the word of
righteousness; have Line upon Line, Precept upon Precept, and yet no
Proficiency; such as the Psalmist complains of, that after long teaching, still
err in their hearts, that have not known Gods ways, Psalm. xcv. that are wise to
do evil, but to do well have no knowledge; Such Hearers we grant are
unprofitable, they can Paul describes, Romans ii. 18, 19, 20. One, who know
Gods will, and art instructed out of the Law, that can be a guide of the
blind, a light of them that are in darkness, an instructor of the foolish, a
teacher of babes, and have the form of knowledge, and of truth in the law; yet,
even this great progress in knowledge, if thou stoppest there, will stand thee
in no stead. Were thou able to understand all Mysteries, to resolve all doubts,
to clear 3. But what if our hearing, go another step further, and so it be an
affectionate Hearing, that we hear the word with great warmth of affection,
sure then we are past danger; such kind of Hearing will go for current, and be
well-excepted; 1. If we bring with us to our hearing of the Word, the affection
of reverence; Indeed that is exceeding lovely. A reverend Auditour is a comely
Creature in Gods Church; he beautifies the Congregation, and makes it
honorable. As for drowzy, and heedless, and profane Auditors; such as with
Christ speaks of in the Gospel, Matthew. xxi. 28. when his Father bid him, go
work in his Vineyard, heard him, and answered him very reverently, said to him
forthwith, I go Sir; but that was all. He gave his Father, a regardful, and
reverend answer; but for all that, he went not, and is condemned for it. So the
young man in the Gospel, that in all the haste would needs be a Disciple of
Christ, demeaned himself to Christ exceeding reverently, Mark x. 17. He came
running, and fell down on his knees to Christ, and calls him, Good Master, and
desires to be instructed of him; but that Christ injoyns him what to do, he
turns his back upon our Savior, refused to obey him. So then, a reverend
hearing will not suffice, if it stops there, and comes short of practicing. 2.
What if we bring with us another commendable affection in our hearing, the
affection of joy, and gladness, and delight in Hearing? That is much indeed; we
hope that will be accepted. As for those, who are listless in this Duty, who
have no appetite, find no relish, taste no sweetness in the word of God, we
condemn them for unworthy Auditors; such as call the Word A Burden, as they
did in the Prophet Ieremiah's time. It was a byword with them so to taunt the
Prophet, What is the burden of the Lord? Ier. xxiii. Or like those whom the
Prophet Malachi complains of, Chap. i. 13. they cried out, What a weariness is
it to serve the Lord! they snuffed at it. Or, as those in Amos his time, Chap.
viii. 5. who would fain be rid of the days of Gods worship, saying, When will
the new Moon be gone, and the Sabbath, that we may fall to our work again? Such
kind of Auditors have little hope to find mercy, or acceptance with God. Nay,
not only such, but thou may hear Ezekiel met with such kind of Auditors,
who took great delight in hearing him preach, Chap. 33. 32. Lo, says God to
Ezekiel, thou art unto them as a very lovely song, of one that has a pleasant
voice, and can play well on an instrument, for they hear thy words, and do
them not. Oh! they were much taken with Ezekiel's Sermons, they were as Music
to them, sweet aires, delicate strains, they were ravished with his eloquence,
but that was all; the Music is ended, and so was all their Devotion. Thus our
Savior compares some sort of Auditors to stony ground. And what are they?
Such as hear the word, and with joy receive it, but it never takes root, or
fructifies with them, Matthew. xiii. The seed rots under the clods, as the
Prophet Joel speaks, Chap. i. 17. Such Auditors were the High Priests
Officers, who were sent to apprehend Christ; they were transported with his
heavenly Sermons, Never man spoke, as this man speaks, Ioh. vii. 46. but yet
fell short of Salvation. Nay, Herod, as wicked a man as he was, was much
delighted in John Baptist's preaching. Mark vi. 20. it is said, He feared John,
accounted him an holy man, observed him, and heard him gladly; and yet Herod
was a Reprobate for all that. It Is S. Augustine's Question, Nunquid omnes qui
delectantur, mutantur? Mistake not, says he; many are delighted to hear
Sermons, that yet are never Delectare, suavitatis est; sed flectere, victoriae.
There is that sweetness in the word of God which may much delight us; but then
the word has got a full conquest over us, when it bows and bends us to the
obedience of it. That Is a second; Hearing with delight is not the thing that
God accepts, if it falls short of Practice. 3. But what if this hearing of the
word of God does so much affect us, that it begets many good motions in us; and
we find our selves inwardly wrought upon, many good thoughts and purposes are
stirred up, and quickened in us; then we conclude, Christ speaks of, Matthew. xi.
17. We have piped unto you, and you have not danced, we have mourned unto you,
and you have not wept; the Promises cannot allure them, the Threatenings of Gods
word cannot affright them; brawny-hearted men, nothing can enter into them; No
hope of such men. Ey, but we, you should know, are other-ghess men, are much
taken at a Sermon; when we hear God thundering fall short of heaven. A man may
be in that condition that Capernaum Capernaum be cast down to hell. Balaam had
his devout wishes, very heavenly raptures, and yet a Castaway. Agrippa had a
great pang of devotion at S. Paul's Sermon; he was well-nigh a Christian on the
sudden, but nothing came of it. Felix was much wrought upon by S. Paul's
preaching; it made him to tremble, and quake, but he proved a Reprobate.

A man may be Sermon-sick, and have a qualm come over his conscience, and some
gripes of remorse, and yet recover again Non concipi tantum sufficit, sed and
nasci, says S. Augustine. It Is not the conceptions, but the birth of the new
man that makes us Christians. These conceptions may prove abortive; like the
untimely fruit of a woman, never see the Sun. Ye may have sudden flashes, good
moods, passionate wishes, nay purposes, and good intendments at the hearing of
Gods Word, and yet ye may miscarry. Many good purposes have been thought on,
and yet the men who made them are in Hell. It Is not purposes, but performances
that will bring us to Heaven.

We have done with the second, Prohibitio officii erronei; bare Hearing, though
accompanied with many good qualities, will not do it.

We come to the next; that is,

III. Injunctio officii debiti; Be doers of the word. And here comes in the
Conjunction of both duties, Hearing, and Doing. These put together, make up a
good Christian. Still ye shall find the Scripture puts these two together,
Hearing, and Doing, Deuteronomy. 5. 28, 29. This people have well said, all that they
have spoken; O that there were such an heart in them, that they would keep all
my Commandments always. And so again, Verse. 1. Hear, O Israel, the Statutes,
and Judgments which I speak in your ears this day, that ye may learn them, and
keep, and do them. And this is not only the voice of the Law, but of the
Gospel too; Not only Moses, but Christ, is for doing. If ye know these things,
happy are ye if ye do them, John xiii. 17.

And great reason there is for this Conjunction, to keep these two duties
close, and undivided, Hearing, and Doing; to know, and to perform. Not to hear,
nor know, breeds a blind Religion; we would be doing, but we know not what. To
know, and not That the soul be without knowledge, it is not good, Prove. xix. 2.
And if it has knowledge, without practice, it is never a whit the better. For,
as the bare knowledge of evil, if we do not practice it, makes us never

1. The nature of Religion requires it. What is Religion? Wherein consists it?
It is not a matter of contemplation, but of action; it is an operative practick
virtue. It is an art of holy living. It begets not a speculative knowledge
swimming in the brain, but works devotion, and obedience in the heart and life.
It Is not a doctrine of words, and names, as Gallio profanely mistermed
Christianity; Non magna loquimur, sed vivimus, says Tertullian. Christians are
not talkers, but doers. It Is not a verbal 2. The Author of Religion, is
represented in Scripture, not as a Teacher, or Doctor only, but as a
Commander, and Lawgiver. There is one Lawgiver, says S. James, who is able
to save, and to destroy; Chap. iv. 12. So the Prophet Isaiah, Chap. xxxiii. 22.
The Lord is our Judge, the Lord is our Lawgiver, the Lord is our King. A King,
a Lawgiver, a Judge; words importing, and requiring duty, and obedience, and
practice of us. 3. The Subject of Religion wherein it is placed, is not so much
the knowing part of our soul, as the active and practical Prove. xxiii. My Son,
give me the heart. I Wisdom, dwell with Prudence, Prove. viii. 12. Prudence,
that looks to practice. 4. That Religion is an holy art of life and practice,
the summary description of Religion in Scripture shows us. It Is called a
doctrine according to godliness, 1 Timothy vi. 3. It Is called the mystery of
godliness, 1 Timothy iii. 16. a mystery, teaching us to be godly. It Is called a
form of sound words in faith and love, Tim. i. 13. It Is an exercise of keeping
a good conscience toward God and man, Acts xxiv. 16. all, matters of practice.
Now, practical truths are best learned by practice; their goodness is best
known by use and performance: As a rich and costly garment appears then most
comely and beautiful, not when the Workman has made it, but when it is worn,
and put upon our body ('it is S. Chrysostoms Similitude) Sic Dei mandata pulchra
sunt cum exponuntur, multo autem pulcriora cum implentur; So, says he, the
Scripture appears glorious, when it is by the Preacher expounded; but far more
glorious, when by the people it is obeyed,
Without this doing and practicing what we hear, all our hearing and learning
is but in vain: As eating of meat, except by the heat of the stomach it be
digested, and conveyed into all the parts of the body, will never support life;
so, it is not receiving the James, Chap. iv. 17. To him that knows to do good,
and does it not, to him it is sin, that is, says S. Chrysostom, Cibum sumenti,
and non digerenti, morbus est; it is as he that eats meat out of a false
stomach, and never concocts it, to him it breeds sickness.

We have seen the duty, Now follows,

Secondly, the danger, if we fail in this duty; What Is that? The We deceive our
own selves; that is the mischief; we run into a gross foul error, which will
prove exceeding prejudicial and hurtful to us. And the force of this will
appear in these three resolutions of it;

1. They are deceived; that is evil. 2. They are self-deceived; and that is
worse. 3. They deceive themselves in a matter of the greatest moment and
consequence, and that which does most of all concern us; and that is worst of
all.
First, They are deceived, foully mistaken, who place all their Religion in bare
hearing, let go all practice. They run into a double deceit;

1. They are deceived in their Opinion. 2. They are deceived in their
Expectation.
Now, the Philosopher tells, that, of all Errors, two are the worst;

1. Error circa primum principium; 2. Error circa ultimum finem. And both these
are here incurred; 1. Deceived in his Opinion of hearing the Word, that is
Principium. 2. Deceived in his Expectation; that is Finis.

I. They suffer a Deceit in their Opinion, run into a gross Error. And that is
a misery, were there no more but that in it. Man, naturally, is a knowing
creature, abhorrs to be mistaken. Errare, labi, decipi, it is an infelicity to
an understanding creature. As S. Augustine says, He has known many that love
to deceive others; but to be deceived themselves, he never knew any.

Now, they who think hearing of the Word is sufficient, without out doing and
practicing, they show, they utterly mistake the

1. The Word of God, it is called a Law; Give ear, O Israel, to my Law. When the
King proclaims a Law to be observed, shall we think him a good Subject, who
listens to it, or 2. The Word of God is called Seed. Were it not a gross error
for an Husbandman to buy Seed-corn, and store it up, and then let it lie, and
never go about to sow his land with it? 3. The Word, it is called Meat, and
nourishment. Is not he foulely deceived, who, when he comes to a Feast, will
look upon what is set before him, commend it, or taste it only, and then spit
it out, and never feed of it; Is 4. Saint James calls the Word, A
Looking-glass. A Lookingglass is to show our spots, and what is amiss in us. Is
not he deceived, who thinks, it is only to gaze into, and never takes notice
of any uncomeliness, to amend, and rectify it? 5. The Word, it is the Physic
of the Soul, the Balm of Gilead. Is not he deceived, that shall take the
prescript of a Physician, and think all is well if he reads it, and 6. The
Word, it is called, The Counsel of God. What a vanity is it to listen to good
counsel, and never to follow it? Such, and more then such, are the errors and
deceits that empty and bare hearers incurr, if they do not practice it?
And this miscarriage, that they run into error, and are foulely mistaken, is
a just punishment proper and pertinent unto them who will be only hearers, and
knowers of Religion

1. They are punished, In eo quod affectant. They aim only at knowledge and
rest in that, it is just they should be punished in that which they so much
affected; that they should fail in that which they only aimed at. In stead of
knowledge, they are fallen into error. What says S. Paul of such Gnostics,
who are all for knowing? He tells them plainly, they are mistaken, They know
nothing as they ought to know, 1 Cor. viii. 2. In stead of sound knowledge,
they get a knowledge falsely so called, 1 Timothy vi. 20. Take heed how ye hear,
says Christ, for from him that has not (that is, no practice with his
hearing) shall be taken from him, even that which he seems to have; it is but a
seeming knowledge. No, says Christ, He that will do my Fathers will, he shall
know it, and none but he. For others, Because they receive not the love of the
truth (and love is a practiser) therefore they are given over to errors. 2.
They are punished, In eo quod ostentant; and that is a fit punishment; These
hearers, they pride themselves in knowledge, they boast of their skill in the
Law; they are the only knowing Christians, none but they; As their forefathers
the Pharisecs spoke, Are we also deceived, and blind? John ix. 40. They Peter
tells them, such as are unfruitful in their knowledge, are blind, and cannot
see afarr off; they have forgotten, and mistaken themselves; they are punished
in that whereof they boasted. 3. They are punished, In eo quod imponunt aliis.
It Is just, such hearers should be deceived. These hypocritical hearers aim at
deceiving of others. If they can make a show of godliness, blear other men's
eyes, that is the upshot of their Religion, not to be, but to Paul's speech
fulfilled in them, (...), deceiving, and being deceived.
II. As they are deceived in their Opinion, so they are deceived in their
Expectation. These Christians that are all ears, and no hands; hearers, not
doers; they promise great matters to themselves, Gods favor, and Heaven it
self; and hope to do as well as the most laborious practisers. Vain men! Paul
speaks. The hypocrites hope, says Solomon, shall be like the house of a
Spider; they have been but Cop-web-Christians, no solidity in their Religion,
and their expectation shall be as slight and slender, swept away, and come to
nothing. These weave the Spiders web, but their webs shall not become garments,
Isai. lix. 5, 6. Our Savior shows how they will plead for heaven upon their
hearing-Religion, Luke xii. Lord, Lord, open to us, we have eat, and drunk in
thy presence, we have heard thee preach in our streets; how will They that sow
the wind, shall reap the whirlwind, Hos. viii. 7.

That Is the first evil Consequence, They are deceived.

Secondly, They are self-deceived; that is a second mischief, and that is worse.
Malim errare, quam fallere, says Tertullian; It Is ill to be deceived; but to
be authors of our own errors and disappointments, to deceive our selves,
that is a double misery. These hypocritical Christians, they deceive themselves.
They think to deceive others, but upon the issue they will find they most of
all deceive themselves;

1. They think to deceive God, to beguile him with their empty shows of
devotion: As Ananias and Sapphira meant to put him off with half they had
promised him, and to bear him Paul to these Hearers, that would serve God on
free-cost, Hear his Ministers, but withold their maintenance? Be not
deceived, God is not mocked; for whatsoever a man sows, that shall he reap,
Gal. vi. 7. Empty services, shall have empty rewards. Thou would Hear him,
but not Obey him; he will Hear thee too, but he will not Answer thee. 2. They
think to deceive the Minister, put him off with a bare Hearing, and listening
to what he says; and they hope Gehazi thought to carry it cunningly, and to
delude Elisha, but it will be found that they will cozen themselves. Isaiah met
with such Auditors; complained he had labored in vain, spent his strength to
no purpose; but my work is with my God; he will reward him. Though the sick
Patient die, yet the Physician has his fee, is paid for his pains. The
Minister is not deceived. 3. They think to deceive their neighbors, and by
their seeming-forwardness to delude them. Well, that Imposture holds Adam. The
Devils misguided themselves, our first Parents were deceived by the Serpent.
Nay, such self-deceivers, they act a double part in sinning, and so shall
undergo a double portion in punishment. Christ) shall both fall into the ditch.
Here one man does both evils, and so shall suffer a double damnation.
That Is the second, They are self-deceived.

Thirdly, They deceive themselves in a matter of the greatest moment and
consequence; and that is worst of all; we overreach our selves in the greatest
business, in the matter of our souls: And such a deceit as this, has these
three Aggravations;

1. It Is Maxim pudenda deceptio; it is a most shameful couzenage: Slight
over-sights are more excusable; but Mala emptio, semper ingrata est. Every man
laughs at him who is penny-wise, and pound-foolish; and twit him with his
over-sights, and upbraid him with them: This is the man who is cunning in
trifles, but grossly deceiving himself in Soul-business; How shameful is that?
S. James lays load on this folly, chap. i. 26. This man deceives his own
heart, his Religion is vain. O! vanity and deceit in our Religion, to be
mistaken in that weighty business, it is a most shameful deceit! 2. It Is
Damnosissima deceptio; he brings upon himself the most costly deceit; the
greatest loss, the loss of Salvation, that is an inestimable loss; Error circa
ultimum finem. The Prophet Esaias cries out of these deceits, denounces a woe unto
them, Isai. iii. ix. Woe be unto them, they have rewarded evil unto their souls.
Oh, the deceits of sin are deadly. Sin deceived me, and slew me, Romans vii. 11.
3. It Is Irreparabilis deceptio, that adds to the Aggravation; it is an
irrecoverable deceit. Other mistakes may be rectified, and regained; but he who
cheats himself of his Esau's bad bargain, when he cheated himself of his
Birthright for a mess of Pottage; he could not recover it, Though he sought it
with tears. To have all our thoughts to perish, all our imaginations and hopes
of going to heaven, to be a mere delusion; not to be mistaken in some
particulars, but in the end to be a fool! Ier. xvii. 15. Oh this is a bitter
reproach when God calls us fools. Sure heaven was never made for fools. The
foolish shall not stand in thy sight, Psalm. v. 4.
A
PHILIP. i. 27. Only let your conversation be, as it becomes the Gospel of
Christ, that whether I come and see you, or else be absent, I may hear of your
affairs, that ye stand fast in one spirit, with one mind, striving together for
the faith of the Gospel.
THE Context is an affectionate Protestation of S. Paul's love to the
Philippians. He assures Christ, Verse 23. Yet see his charity and love to
Christ's Church; when he thinks of them, he checks and abates his former desire.
For the furtherance of Gods people, and for the promoting of their salvation,
he is content, yea willing, and desirous to keep out of Heaven, to forbear
those joys; and preferrs their spiritual Verse 24.

See what an high pitch of Piety and Grace, S. Paul has attained unto. A
little to insist upon the Context. Ye may observe many remarkable evidences,
and degrees of his piety in

1. He has attained to a strong assurance of his future happiness, and bliss;
he knows his dissolution shall be a translation of him into a blessed
condition; death shall prove to him a great advantage, Verse 21. To die, is
gain to him. It is an high improvement of piety to attain to this Christian
Confidence, and Assurance. No doubt, it cost S. Paul much pains and labor to
work his heart to this holy confidence, to be persuaded, that death (which a
worldly man accounts the utmost loss) should bring to him the greatest gain.
There are, who talk of their assurance of Salvation; but it is to be feared, In
many it is but imaginary, a groundless presumption; in others, it is but
intellectual and notional, inferred and gathered happily by way of argument and
discourse, and so goes no further then a speculative Conclusion. But this of
Saint Paul, it is cordial, and affectionate, and experimental, the fruit of many
prayers, and holy endeavors. And such an Assurance is rare to be found. It Is
that hidden Manna, which few taste of; Osculum Spiritus Sancti, that Kiss of
love and peace, which God bestows on his devout and dearest Favorites. It
costs a Nesciunt quantis gemitibus, and lachrymis constet, says S. Aug. Happy
are they, who after long seeking, can at length attain to it. Ye see S. Paul
has found it. That Is the first. 2. A second pitch of Piety in S. Paul, is not
only that he has attained to a bare contentment, but a great willingness, yea
more then so, an earnest longing to die, and to be dissolved, Verse. 23. That Is
a further, and higher degree and growth of piety. It argues much strength of
faith, a great prevailing of grace, to sigh and groan in our selves till we be
dissolved. This Paul professes of himself, and such as he was, Romans viii. 23.
We that have the first fruits of the Spirit, we groan within our selves,
waiting for the adoption; the redemption of our bodies. And so again, 2 Cor. v.
8. We are confident, and willing rather to be absent from the body, and to be
present with the Lord. It is well with us, we think, if we can with much ado
work our selves to any tolerable contentment to die, and to leave the World. We
account it a great Mastery over our selves, if, after much struggling, and
resisting, we at length submit to that necessity, and yield to death. But Paul
is not here barely content best of all to be dissolved, and to be with Christ,
Verse 23. O, when shall I appear before the presence of God, 2 Cor. v. In this
we groan earnestly, desiring to be clothed with our house which is from
heaven. S. Aug. tells us of Christians of the weaker, and more imperfect sort;
Paul) though they be content to live, yet they wish, and desire, and long to
die. The former, have mortem in patientia, vitam in desiderio, they die
patiently, but would live willingly; the other, as S. Paul here, they have
vitam in patientia, and mortem in desiderio; this life, it is the matter of
their patience, but a blessed death is the matter of their desire. That Is the
second.

3. See here, in Saint Paul, an higher degree, and growth of 1. Having gained
this great Confidence, and assurance of Heaven; And, 2. His soul panting and
longing for the enjoyment of it; yet, that he may do God more service, and
promote the spiritual estate and welfare of his Church, he can be content to
delay those enjoyments, to forbear his salvation, to keep out of Heaven, to be
serviceable to the Church. Desiderat requiem, sed non recusat laborem. He could
wish he were at rest; but yet for all that, he is willing to labor still, and
to travel in his Ministry.
In those times to be a faithful Preacher of the Gospel, was to be no less then
a Martyr. Well, S. Paul has counted the cost, forecast the worst; Pains,
Poverty, Persecutions, he can endure them all for the love of Christ, and for
the good of his Church. He chooses to suffer all sorts of miseries, and
afflictions, so he may be serviceable to Christ, useful to his Church, rather
then to leave that holy Work undone, and to enter into Heaven. Saint Augustine
makes it a trial of our love to God, if, when God should put the offer to our
choice, Live as ye list, satisfy every Sed non videbis faciem mea^, only you
shall not see my face; if we refuse that offer of outward enjoyments, that we
may be partakers of that blessed Vision, it is a good argument of our love to
God. Here is a greater trial of S. Paul's love to Christ; Will thou presently
enjoy me in Heaven, or still serve me on Earth? Will thou for my sake keep out
of Heaven? Nay, more then so, undergo Pains, suffer Persecutions, for my
Churches good? Yes, S. Paul accepts of this employment on Earth, and will
forbear his preferment in Heaven. O Paul! Christ, and to his Church. Thus S.
Chrysostom, and S. Bernard, express this choice of S. Paul: As if a poor Woman
should stand at the door of some great Palace, wherein are all kinds of
Pleasures and Delights; and being without, cold, and hungry, should be offered
her self to come in, but to Paul here, had rather stay out of Heaven, then
forsake those Babes in Christ, whom he had begot to the Gospel. Not only, as
Moses, he chose rather to suffer affliction with the people of God, then to
enjoy the pleasures of sin; but, rather then to enjoy the happiness of Heaven.
Nay, see the fervency of his love to the people of God, Romans ix. 3. He could
wish himself Anathema, separated and accursed Christ for ever, for his
brethrens sake, that he might gain them to God; not only forbear Heaven for a
season, but forgo it for ever, that others may gain it.

4. This he desires and this he hopes for, still to be continued to them for
the furtherance of their faith. And yet that being liable to uncertainty, Saint
Paul not knowing how long God would hold him to this work, employ him in this
service; uncertainty of life, that is one hazard, he was in deaths often; and
then many vexations, and distractions intervening in his Apostolical Function,
the care of all the Churches lying upon him; Only let your conversation be as
becomes the Gospel of Christ, that whether I come and see you, or else be
absent, I may hear of your affairs, that ye stand fast in one spirit, with one
mind, striving together for the faith of the Gospel.
The Words then which I have read unto you, are S. Paul's Apostolical, and
fatherly Charge, and Caveat to the Philippians. In it observe these three
particulars;

1. Is the weight and greatness of this Charge; the Caveat he gives to them is
very ponderous; that is implied in this emphatical word, (...), only. 2. Is the
extent and largeness of that Charge; it has no stint, or limitation, it
reaches to all seasons, and occasions; 1. His presence, and abode with them. 2.
His absence, or being from them, Whether I come and see you, or else be absent.
3. Is the Charge it self, and that is manifold; It consists of a threefold
Injunction, which he lays upon them: 1. Is Sancta conversatio; an holy and
Christian-like conversation; Let your conversation be as becomes the Gospel of
Christ. 2. Is Sancta concordia; unanimity, and concord, and the spirit of
peace: That in all their affairs, they should stand in one spirit, and in one
mind. 3. Is Sancta constantia; an holy resolution, and constancy, and courage
for the truth, striving together for the faith of the Gospel. 1. In themselves,
Holiness. 2. Amongst themselves, Peace. 3. Against the enemies of the Gospel,
Courage, and Resolution.


First, Here is considerable, the weight, and greatness of this charge which he
gives them; Only; As if he should say, It Is (...), as he elsewhere speaks,
it is the main and chief charge I lay upon you; the upshot and sum of all my
Exhortations; let this saying sink deep into your hearts, mind this, and
remember it above all things, that your conversation be Christian-like,
suitable to the Gospel, live in peace, and concord, contend earnestly for the
faith which is committed to you. And

1. Only; it is Summum votum meum; Of all my desires, this is the chief; of all
my prayers, and studies, and requests, this is the main, and sum of them all,
That you live as Christians.

Observe the true spirit of Paul, and such as he was; the spiritual good, and
growth in grace of them that are committed to them, is their main desire and
care, the height of their wishes. S. Paul preferred their well-doing, before
the care and thoughts for himself. He had even now spoken of his own life and
death; Moses, how did his spirit burn in him for his peoples good? Blot me out
of thy Book; only be gracious unto thy people, do not cast them off. He had
rather God should destroy him then them. S. Chrysostom says, That speech of
Moses was a greater wonder then all the miracles he wrought in Egypt. It David,
to say, Spare these Sheep, and let thine hand be upon Me; they were Innocents,
he was the Offender; but in Moses his speech, the people were the offenders, he
was most innocent, and yet he prays, Destroy me, but spare them. So Samuel,
though unkindly, and ungratefully dealt withal by the people, yet, God forbid,
says he, that I should cease praying for you. The Prophet Jeremiah was so
earnest with God for the Jews, that God is fain to forbid his importunity; Pray
not for this people. The Apostle S. John professes, it was his greatest
comfort, to see his Disciples thrive in grace. I have no greater joy, then to
hear that my children walk in the truth, Epist. iii. 4. S. Peter, how does he
make it his main care, to further the salvation of the people of God? 2 Pet. i.
12. I will not be negligent to put you in remembrance of these things, Verse.
13. As long as I am in this Tabernacle, I will stir you up: Nay, I will
endeavor, that after my absence, remember these things; Like another Elias,
who prepared an Epistle before his departure out of this world, to be sent to
the King of Judah, who should reign afterward, 2 Chronicles. xxi. 12.

It adds to the joys of Gods servants in heaven, that their people are
proficient in the ways of piety. And it seems by the Apostle, it abates of
their comfort, if their people miscarry. That they may give an account of you
with joy, and not with grief. Heb. xiii. 17. Why so? If they have done their
duties, though the people miscarry, yet they shall be rewarded: the Physician
has Paul is most abundant in these gracious expressions. How earnestly does he
pray for the Churches, to whom he writes? Ephesians. i. 16. I cease not to give
thanks for you, making mention of you in my prayers. Again, Ephesians. iii. 14. For
you I bow my knees, to the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, Phil. i. 9. I pray
that your love may abound more and more, Coloss. i. 9. I cease not to pray for
you, and to desire that you may walk worthy of the Lord, 1 These. iii. 12. The
Lord increase you, and make you to abound in love. And again, Now the very God
of peace sanctify you throughout.

Indeed, this care for the Church, took up Paul's heart, and life; he forgot
all other things in respect of that;

1. It was the aim and intendment of all his pains and labors. We do all
things for your edification, 2 Cor. xii. 19. 2. It was the sum of all his
cares; The care of all the Churches lay upon him, 2 Cor. xi. 3. It was the sum
of all his desires; Phil. i. 8. God is my record, how greatly I long after you
in the bowels of Jesus Christ. 4. It was the matter of all his joy; Phil. iv.
1. My brethren, dearly beloved, and longed for, my joy and crown. 5. It was the
matter of all his sorrow. The disorderly conversation of some Christians, wrung
tears from his eyes; I tell you weeping, they are enemies to the Cross of
Christ, Phil. iii. 18. 6. It was the end of all his sufferings; I endure all
things for the Elects sake, that they may obtain salvation, with eternal glory,
2 Timothy ii. 10. 7. It was his very life to him, to see them do well; Now we
live, if ye stand fast in the Lord, 1 These. iii. 8. 8. It was the matter of all
his thankfulness; What thanks can we render unto God for all the joy wherewith
we joy for your sakes before God, Verse. 9. That Is the first expression of this
Only, it is Votum Apostoli;
2. This Emphatical word, (...), Only, admits of another expression, it notes
Summum officium populi; the greatness of the duty which he charges upon them;
which is an holy, and Gospellike life, and conversation. Take it in these three
Expressions; 1. This duty, it is Sum necessarium; it is a duty of the greatest
necessity, which he does so earnestly call upon them for. Men lay not this load
and weight of entreaty upon perfunctory services that are but of slight
concernment; and more indifferent. Thus we find this manner of speech used in
the Scripture: Be not afraid, only believe, Mark v. And again, Luke viii.
Believe only, and he shall be made whole. So, 1 Cor. vii. Let her marry to
whom she will, only in the Lord. All these speeches are strict provisoes; and
show the duty enjoined to be of great necessity. Such is the duty of the Text.
An holy, and unblameable conversation, it is not slightly commended to us, but
strictly enjoined, and upon the most absolute necessity. 1. Take it negatively;
without this duty, there is no hopes of heaven, Heb. xii. 14. Follow peace with
all men, and holiness, without which, no man shall see the Lord; no salvation
2. Consider it positively; as without it no salvation, so upon it salvation is
assured. It Is not a Sine quanon only, enough to hinder us from heaven, if
wanting; but it is an effectual condition, upon performance of which, heaven is
assured to us, Psalm. l. 23. To him that orders his conversation aright, I will
show the salvation of God.
2. As it is Sum necessarium, so this, Only, imports another notion; it shows
the duty of the Text, it is Officium praecipuum; it is the only One. That Is a
signification of the greatest David speaks of the Sword of Goliath, There Is none
to that; such is this duty of an holy conversation. As it is of greatest
necessity, so likewise it is of greatest excellency. It Is both a fundamental,
and a finishing grace. It lies low in the foundation, there is the necessity of
it; and then it is chief in the David, They are the excellent of the earth,
Psalm. xvi. S. Augustine says it of Charity, which is one part of holiness;
Sure that is a rare grace, without which, all other graces are nothing; and by
which, all other graces are made of some value. This grace, it is the
assimilating grace, which makes us like unto Christ. In this S. Peter places
our conformity to Christ, 1 Pet. i. 15. As he which has called you is holy, so
be ye holy in all manner of conversation. John calls a walking as Christ
walked, 1 John ii. 16. Walk as he walked. How is that? not as he walked on the
waters, in a miraculous operation, but as he walked in the ways of piety, in
all holy conversation; So to assimilate him. 3. This (...), this Only, carries
another Emphasis with it; it shows the thing he exhorts to, is Sum
desideratum, the main thing which he desires of them. It Is a form of expressing
our chief desires and requests we make; it shows, what above all is most
acceptable to us. As David, One thing have I desired of the Lord, which I will
also require. Unicus, is put in Scripture for Sum dilectus, the only One,
for, the dearly beloved. Prove. iv. 3. I was my fathers Son, tender, and only
beloved in the sight of my mother. So Cant. vi. 9. My Dove, -- she is the only
one of her mother.

Here then is the main return that S. Paul requires of all his love to them,
his care for them, his labors amongst them, that their life be answerable to
their holy Calling, and Profession. S. Paul's pains were great amongst them,
teaching, exhorting, warning every man. What is the fruit of his labors that
he expects from them? That they should express the power of his Isaiah bewail
the loss of this fruit? Esai. xlix. 4. I have labored in vain, I have spent my
strength for naught. And the Prophet Micah mourns for this want of fruit, Chap.
vii. 1. Woe is me, there is no cluster to cat, my soul desired the first ripe
fruit.

We have done with the first Particular, the weight of this Only; Now follows,

Secondly, the Extent of this Charge, the compass that it takes; it reaches to
all seasons and occasions; Whether I come to see you, or be absent; it is in his
Presence; and in his Absence. It gives a scantling, and dimension to a double
Duty.

1. Here is the dimension and scantling of S. Paul's care for them. He is not
only studious of their good, while he is among them; but the necessary
occasions of his absence are here supplied, with an earnest desire to hear well
of them. Love, and the spirit of doing good, is full of care and forecast.
Those whom God has committed to our charge, should always be in our thoughts:
As S. Paul speaks, 2 Cor. vii. 3. You are in our hearts to live, and to dye
with you. The High Priest was to have all the names of the children of Israel
engraven on his shoulders, and on his breast plate, Exodus xxviii. Aaron must
bear their names before 1. Upon his shoulders, never to cast off that burden;
and, 2. Upon his breast plate, that is the seat of love and affection.
Thus S. Paul expresses his continual watchfulness over the Colossians, chap.
ii. 5. Though I be absent in the flesh, yet am I with you in the spirit;
joying, and beholding your order, and the stedfastness of your faith in Christ.
He had not only a spirit of Revelation, Care of all the Churches. Is he
present? He labors amongst them: Is he absent? He prays for them, thinks of
them, writes to them. As S. Ambrose says of Zachary; Zacharias, cum non potuit
loqui, scripsit; when he could not speak, he wrote; So does S. Paul to the
Churches. His care expressed it self in this way of putting them in remembrance
by writing. He wrote more Epistles, then all the Apostles. He seems to satisfy
for what he had done against Acts ix. 2. Now, he is Spiritui Sancto ab
Epistolis, The great Secretary of heaven, the great conveyer of heavenly
Epistles to them. And as it is in the Ministerial Function, so it should be in
all our other employments. Love will be thus solicitous, both present and
absent. As Jacob was for his sons, being absent, he sends to visit them: Go, I
pray, see whether it be well with thy brethren, and bring me word again. See,
he had a privy Monitor among them, that should inform him of all their
miscarriages, Genesis xxxvii. See this care of Job over his children; It may be,
my sons have sinned, and blasphemed God in their hearts; he presently
Sacrifices for them; Thus did Job every day. That Is the first dimension of S.
Paul's care of them, both present, and absent.

2. Here is the dimension and scantling of the Philippians duty, Paul puts them
in mind of it; that not only in his presence, when he is amongst them, then
they should walk piously and religiously, but also when he is absent and remote
from them, then also he expects to hear of their holy and orderly conversation.
Gods Church must be like a well-ordered family, every one in his proper
station, and doing his duty, though the eye of government be not always upon
them.
How does God upbraid the failing in this point, in the people of Israel? Exodus
xxxii. 7. Moses was out of their sight but forty days, and presently they fall
away.

1. How respectlessly do they speak of him? As for Moses, the man that brought
us out of Egypt, we wot not what is become of him. That Is all they care for
him; gone he is, and fare him well. A poor requital for all his pains with
them. 2. How foulely do they revolt from that Truth, which he had taught them?
Make us new gods to go before us. A new Religion presently. O, what says God
to Moses? Go get thee down, thy people have turned aside quickly out of the
way. It was the stain, and blemish, and reproach of Ioash the King of Judah;
Iehoiada the Priest lived and taught him, he walked in the ways of God, 2 Chronicles. xxiv. 2. but when Iehoiada died, Ioash his Religion died too, and he
fell to Idolatry. While S. Paul himself preached in Galatia, O they were very
forward and zealous; who but S. Paul? They esteemed him as an Angel, nay, as
Christ Jesus. But if Paul discontinues from them, how suddenly are they
bewitched into another Gospel? On the contrary, it was the Philippians honor,
and just commendation, a worthy testimony S. Paul gives of them, You have
obeyed, not only in presence, but much more in my absence, Phil. ii. 12.
This fickleness in our walking piously, and while some Paul is present; it
argues, All our piety is either,

1. Counterfeit and hypocritical, all that we do is to gain a good opinion of
S. Paul. This eye-devotion, it is like eyeservice that the Apostle speaks of, it
comes not from sincerity. Sincerity will be true in absence, as well as in
presence; Or it is, 2. Enforced Religion for awe and fear. S. Paul's presence
carried some sway, Impiety durst not confront, and outface him; but if Paul be
gone, fear will let loose the reins to disorder. Metus, haud diuturni magister
officii. Fear, it is a flincher, and will Pharaoh whilst Moses was present,
armed with judgments, then he would conform, and promise fair; but when the
judgment was over, and Moses his back turned, Pharaoh revolts again; Or, 3. If
such Piety arise out of some love, and liking of Ezekiel, his eloquence took
them, Chap. xxxiii. Son of man, l^, thou art unto them, as a very lovely song
of one that has a pleasant voice, and can play well on an instrument: for they
hear thy words, but do them not. They make no more reckoning of a Minister,
then they do of a Minstrel, 4. This kind of Religion it is partial, and with
respect to persons, and so holds no longer then those men continue with us whom
we fancy, and esteem. As it was in Corinth; they pinned all their Religion upon
their Preachers sleeves. Some were all for Paul, none to him; others for
Apollo. Thus, contrary to S. James his exhortation, They have the faith of our
Lord Jesus Christ in respect of persons; As one said of Calvin, that if Calvin
preached at one Church, and S. Paul at another, he would Calvin to hear S.
Paul. It is a good difference they put betwixt an humane and divine faith: An
humane credulity, Credit Deo propter homines, believes what God says for man's
testimony; but a true Christian faith, Credit hominibus propter Deum, believes
what the Preacher says upon Gods testimony. 'Twas a good sign the Eunuch in
the Acts was a well-grounded believer; though Philip were taken away, and he
saw him no more, yet he went on his journey rejoicing.
So much of the extension of the Charge. Now follows,

Thirdly, The Charge it self. And in it the first injunction, Let your
Conversation be, as becomes the Gospel of Christ. And herein we have two
things considerable;

1. Is the Matter, or Object of S. Paul's Direction; that is, their
Conversation. 2. Is the Rule of Direction, by which our Conversation must be
ordered; it must be, as becomes the Gospel.
First, That concerning which S. Paul gives this Charge, it is their
Conversation; the ordering of that aright is the duty of the Text. And of it,
take a threefold Consideration.

1. This Duty here enjoined, it is Officium progressivum; it is an Paul
preaching, they had already attained to the first work of Christianity, a
saving Conversion, they had embraced the faith, he had laid the foundation of
Religion among them; now he seconds his first pains with an earnest exhortation
to a 1. The Doctrine of Conversion, Repentance toward God, and Faith toward
our Lord Jesus Christ; but that is not all; we must learn, 2. The Doctrine of an
holy Conversation.
It Is to no purpose to lay the foundation of Piety, if we build not upon it;
but, as the Apostle speaks, Heb. vi. We must be carried on to perfection. As in
nature, it is not sufficient, that life is begun, or an infant born, but he must
be nourished up to growth and strength; so in the course of our spiritual
condition, it is not Paul? Gal. v. 25. If we live in the spirit, let us also
walk in the spirit. Abraham was glad when Isaac was born; but he made a feast,
when Isaac was weaned, Genesis xxi. Not only glad of his birth, but joyed at his
growth, When he was weaned from the milk, drawn from the breast, as Isaiah
speaks, Isai. xxviii. 9.

2. This Duty here enjoined, it is Officium practicum; the ordering Ars
practica, not a matter of bare knowledge, and contemplation, but of doing, and
practicing. If ye know these things, blessed are ye, if ye do them, Ioh. xiii.
It never fared well with the Church, when Religion was restrained only to the
knowing, and understanding part; He who could move most questions, and answer
them best, understand the deepest Mysteries, should Tertullian, Non magna
loquimur, sed vivimus. Christianity, is not an art of disputing learnedly, or
talking curiously, but of living holily. Thus S. Paul expresses it, Tit. iii.
8. This is a faithful saying, and these things I will that thou affirm
constantly, that they which have believed in God, may be careful to maintain
good works; these things are good and profitable to men; as if he should say,
Without it, all your believing is vain, and unprofitable. 3. This Duty here,
it is Officium comprehensivum. Conversation, it is a word of large Comprehension,
betokens not some one Act, or Performance, but extends it self. to the whole
1. Christianity enjoins him all kind of duties; duties to 2. It furnishes him
with all kind of graces; it enlightens his understanding, sanctifies his heart,
orders and composes and puts in tune all his affections. At his Conversion, the
seeds of all graces are sown into him, and then it expects from him every good
work. A good Christian, turn him to what duty you will, he has skill to
perform it: For the worship of God, he is prepared for that; he will pray
devoutly, he will hear reverently, Paul describes him, Ready to every good
work. It Is not Christianity, to hit upon some one duty, and fail in all the
rest; No, He must walk in all the commandments of God, without reproof. That Is
for the matter.
Secondly, Take notice of the Rule of Direction; according to which a Christian
must order his conversation; it must be (...), as becomes the Gospel of Christ.
The Rule, it is high and transcendent. God intends a Christian should be an
exact creature, and so propounds to him an eminent Rule. A Christian must not
order his life after every inferior square. Other Rules there be, which many
set to themselves, but they are not suitable to the state of a Christian.

1. There is the licentious Libertine's Rule; and that is, Quod libet, licet;
to live as he list, to do what is good in his own eyes; 2. There is the common
man's Rule, that is Mos humanus; that is his square, to do as his neighbors do;
live according to the custom of other men. This sways with the most. Vae
torrenti consuetudinis humanae. O, this is as a mighty stream, bears down all
before it. S. Paul calls it, A walking according to the course of this world,
Ephesians. ii. 2. 3. There is the civil man's Rule, that is Lex humana,; to be as
honest as civility, and morality, and man's law enjoins us, not to trespass
against any Law of man; more then so, is more then
No, all these Rules are short, and defective; Mensura hominis est mensura
Angeli, even in this sense also. Christianity sets us an higher pitch. We must
live answerable to the Gospel of Christ, suitable, and agreeable to that holy
Profession. Take the sum

1. A Christian must live, and order his conversation, Secundum praecepta
Evangelii, according to the doctrine and commands of the Gospel. Man's law is
too short; nay, Moses his Law, it is too dark; the Gospel does clearly lay down
the Law of holiness. The love of God, even to the loss of our lives; the love
of our neighbors, even to the loving of our enemies; these are, for their
clear propounding, Praecepta Evangelica, doctrines of the Gospel. So meekness,
and patience, and bearing of the cross, they are in a special manner,
Evangelical precepts. The two Disciples Elias did, and to seek for vengeance
upon their enemies: No, Christ tells them, they are called to another spirit;
the Spirit of the Gospel, is a spirit of meekness. 2. A Christian must live,
Secundum beneficia Evangelii, answerable to the high prerogatives, and benefits
of the Gospel. The benefit of Redemption, how should that oblige us? We are
bought with a price. What use does Paul make of that? Glorify God in your
bodies and souls which are his. Christ died for us, that they which live should
not henceforth live unto themselves, but to him which died for them; 2 Cor. iv.
15. How does Jeremiah upbraid the Jews? Ier. vii. 10. Will ye say, we are
delivered, to commit all these abominations? Do ye thus requite the Lord, ye
foolish people, and unwise? is not he thy father that has bought thee? Deuteronomy.
xxxii. Pater non tantum procreans, sed redimens. No, our Redemption, our holy
Calling, and Vocation, calls unto holiness. Our Adoption, and being made not
only servants, but Sons of God, they all require answerable conversation; it
should beget in us S. Paul's resolution, Whether we live, we live unto the Lord;
Whether we die, we die unto the Lord. 3. A Christian must live, Secundum
auxilia Evangelii; answerable ministration of the Spirit, it enables us to do
what it requires of us. And a Christian is purposely intended by God to be to
the praise of the glory of his grace, Ephesians. i. And so again, We are his
workmanship, created to good works, Ephesians. ii. We are his workmanship, his
choice masterpiece, wherein he would have the power of his grace to be most
conspicuous. And, We are created to good works, that is, purposed and intended
to abound in good works; and again, Created to them, that is, enabled, and
fitted for them; as in the creation Paul? I can do all things through Christ
that strengthens me. It Is a shame for a Christian, not to exceed the scantling
and abilities of other men. How does S. Paul check the Corinthi^ for their
backwardness this way? Are ye not carnal, and walk like men? 1 Cor. iii. 3.
whereas they should be spiritual, and walk like Christians. 4. A Christian must
live, Secundum dignitatem Evangelii; so as may make for the dignity, and
credit, and honor of the Gospel. The world judges of Religion by the lives of
those, who do profess it; as is their conversation, accordingly do they account
of their Religion. Wickedness in a Christian, it is blasphemy against God, it is
as the sin of sacrilege; he robs God of the honor due to his Name. This is
the aggravation of David's sin, in the matter of Uriah, that he gave occasion to
the enemies Sam. xiii. 14. So likewise God charges it upon the Jews, Mal. ii.
11. Judah has profaned the holiness of the Lord. So S. James lays it to the
charge of looseliving Christians, James ii. 7. Do they not blaspheme that
worthy Name by which you are called? The sins of Christians are much more
scandalous then of other men. They dishonor God, bring an evil report upon his
holy Profession, shame the whole Church, and expose it to reproach. Thus S.
Paul dissuading the Corinthians from all uncleanness, reminds them of that near
relation, that they have to God. What? know you not that your bodies are
members of Christ? And again, What, know not, that your bodies are Temples of
the Holy Ghost? The members of Christ, they must not be polluted; the Temples
of the Holy Ghost, they must not be profaned; nor must the Church of God be
dishonored by us. The lewd lives of Christians are reproaches to the whole
Church, as Chrysostom observes it in the case of the incestuous Corinthian; S.
Paul charges it upon the whole Church, 1 Cor. v. 1. It Is reported commonly that
there is fornication among you. See, says he, he burdens the whole Church
with it: As a man coming into a room, wherein is some nastysmell, says, The
whole house stinks;

The honor and credit of the Gospel, is the grand motive that the Scripture
uses, to call us to holiness, Ephesians. iv. I beseech you walk worthy of the
vocation to which you are called. Again, Ephesians. v. Walk as children of light;
and yet again, as becomes Saints, Ephesians. v. Women must behave themselves, as
becomes holiness, Tit. ii. 2. Wives must so live, that the word of God be not
blasphemed. Tit. ii. 5. Servants must show all good fidelity, that they may
adorn the doctrine of God our Savior in all things, Tit. ii. 10. S. Peter
presses this motive upon all sorts of Christians, 1 Pet. ii. 12. Have your
conversation honest among the Gentiles, that they may by your good works which
they shall behold, glorify God in the day of visitation.

5. A Christian must live, Secundum spem Evangelii; suitably to the blessed
hope, and expectation which the Gospel brings us; A Christian, as he is of an
honorable birth by his regeneration, Peter's language; What manner of persons
ought we to be in all holy conversation and godliness. The Scripture is earnest
in this enforcement: 2 Cor. vii. 1. Having these promises, dearly beloved, let
us perfect holiness in the fear of God. And as S. Paul pressed it upon others, so
himself practiced it; Our conversation is in heaven, from whence we look for a
Savior, Phil. iii. 20. Christians are to fellow-citizens with the Saints, of
the household of God, of the society of Angels; live then we must, according to
the law of our Country. When Samuel designed Saul by his anointing, to be King
over Israel, he bids him, give over seeking his fathers Asses; another heart, a
Kingly spirit was presently shed upon him. How unworthy is it for the Heirs of
Heaven, to mind nothing but earthly things? Such, says the Father, are Fidei,
and Spei suae praevaricatores; they falsify their faith, confute their hope,
renounce their expectation of their heavenly inheritance. Let S. John's
exhortation be our conclusion; He that has this hope in him, purifies himself,
even as God is pure.
Estote non solum spe, sed conversatione coelestes, Leo. (...), Just. Mart. p.
393. Quaest. 3. Respons.



A SERMON TO THE CLERGY:
1 CORINTHIANS. xiv. 1. Follow after charity, and desire spiritual gifts, but
rather that ye may prophecy.
IT is the wisdom of Gods dispensation with his Church under both the
Testaments, he founded them both, and trained them up under Promises, and
Expectations. In the former, Pater promisit Filium. The Patriarchs and
Prophets, they hoped, and longed for the Incarnation of the Son. In the
founding of the second Testament, Filius promisit Spiritum. The Apostles, and
Disciples, and the Christian Church, they expected, Chrysostom observes, and
makes this difference: Christ, at his coming, he was (...) then the law was
accomplished, and it, with old Simeon died with Christ in his arms, at the
receiving of him; the Spirit, that is (...), that is, the fulfilling and
accomplishment

Of Christians in general; but principally, and in the first place, promised,
and imparted to the Ministers, and Governors of the Church of Christ; and then
by their Ministry conveyed to others. As S. Ierom distinguishing 'twixt
Bishops, and Priests, Episcopus, Patres Ecclesiae generat; Presbyter, Filios;
so Christ, first provides and sanctifies Patres Ecclesiae, afterward by them,
he does generare filios, the common believers. Graces and gifts in a Minister,
they are virtually as much, as in multitude of auditors. Gideo^s fleece, were
moistened with this heavenly dew, when all about them were wholly dry; by them
it was derived to common Christians. S. Augustine compares this descent of the
Spirit to the first rising of the Sun; first it enlightens the Mountains, and
from them reflects into the lower Valleys; The Apostles, and Ministers, they
are these holy Mountains, reflecting their Beams upon inferior Christians. S.
Ierom likens Elim; other disciples must be planted by them, and draw moisture
from them, like the seventy Palm Trees.

Which makes S. Paul direct this passage of his Epistle touching the gifts of
the Spirit, especially to the Sons of the Prophets, that aimed at the public
Ministry, and Service of the Church of Corinth. As the Lacedaemonians, fitting
their children to some trade of life, brought them into a room full-furnished
with instruments of all Professions, that so they might choose in what trade
they might be serviceable to the Commonwealth; so the Officinam gratiarum, the
Storehouse of all Gods graces, that in the view, and consideration of them,
they may make their choice. And lest, like children, they should fancy the
gayest, omit the most useful, he gives them direction for the most serviceable
graces to the Church of God. And this he does in the representation of a most
lively, and elegant Allegory. As S. Peter in a vision being called to preach,
had a vessel let down full of the bodies of diverse beasts for his choice, and
use; (their conpora bruta, were animae humanae, the beasts signified men;) so
in these twelve, membra humana, are dona divina, for our choice and practice.

And as in the disposition, and frame of our bodies, so in this

1. Varietas m^mbrorum; A body consists of diverse parts, branches it self into
manifold members; so here is, multiplicitas donorum, the Spirit diffuses it
self into manifold gifts; Effundam Spiritum meum, not a drop, or two, but a
plentiful shower of all kind of graces; here are healings, languages, miracles,
and all comprised in my Text, (...), all kind of graces. That Is the first,
Varietas donorum, Plenty and variety. 2. A second thing remarkable in the body,
is disparitas membrorum; all are not alike useful, none equally beautiful; so
here is disparitas donorum; This holy body, herein is like to that abominable
image in Daniel; The arms of silver, the thighs of brass, the legs of clay, and
mean composure; The graces of the Spirit, though none are superfluous, yet some
are more useful, and of special Improvement; That Is included in the other
branch of my Text, in this Comparative, (...). That Is the second choice and
disparity. 3. A third thing in the body, is Excellentia unius membri; Dan. ii.
32. So here is Excellentia doni; that is in the first, and chiefest branch of my
Text, (...). Saint Paul preferrs Charity, before Faith, and Hope, and all other
Graces; That Is the third thing observable, Pre-eminence and Excellency.
The Words are the Apostle's direction, for a fitting enablement to the work of
the Ministry; and it consists upon three Particulars:

1. Here are tria objecta; the Apostle propounds and commends to them three
Objects; 1. Charity. 2. Spiritual Gifts. 3. Prophecy.
2. Here are tres actus; three acts he preswades them to, tending to these
objects: 1. (...), An act of Prosecution. 2. (...), An act of Emulation; The
next is implied in, 3. (...), And that is Eligite, an act of Choice and
Election.
3. Here are tres gradus; he orders them into three degrees answerable to their
true worth, and opposite to the erroneous esteem of these Corinthians. Amongst
these three, Charity, Spiritual Gifts, Prophecy, they did set the chiefest
price, and most Miracles and Languages; All would speak Tongues, and work
Miracles, but little account was made of Prophecy. Like those Sons of Sceva,
Acts xix. they would work miracles themselves, leave preaching to others, We
adjure you by Jesus, whom Paul preaches. And even those who did prophecy, did
it in strife, and much contention, puffing up themselves, not building up
others. All their gifts were void of Charity, no thought had of that. The
Apostle inverts this order; like the Master of the Feast, Luke xiv. displaces
those that had got the highest room; preferrs the lowest, sets Follow after
Charity: next after it, preferrs Prophecy, (...): leaves the third and last
room to Tongues and languages. Thus as Christ in the raising of Iairus his
daughter to life, so S. Paul at Corinth, in the converting of a sinner; 1. He
puts out the Minstrels, an unlikely means to recover life again; displaces
Languages, which S. Paul, Verse. 7. compares to Minstrels, a dead sound of
piping, and harping: Then, 2. He brings in Prophecy, that is a quickening word,
like Christ's word to the Damosel; that, fetches her to life again: Then, 3. He
brings in Charity, like the Parents of the Damosel, to feed and nourish her;
that, feeds, and maintains, and strengthens her.

Come we to the,

First Object, Charity; that is the principal, and the chiefest Grace; and the
Observation hence, is briefly this; that, Charity and Compassion to the Church
of Christ, above all other graces, Aaron the High Priest, in his holy attire,
and then ask David the morality of all that Ceremony; As the precious ointment
upon the head, that ran down upon the beard, even Aarons beard, that went down
to the skirts of his garment, Psalm. cxxxiii. 2. without which, it was death to
serve in the Temple; so comely, and necessary, in the office of a Minister, is
charity, and compassion to the Church of God. S. Paul preferrs it before faith,
and hope, and all other graces. Though not for personal, and private use, yet
for service, and benefit to the Church of God, it exceeds them all. It Is a
fundamental preparative, and disposition

1. Ut habeat; It fits and enables him for the receipt, and obtaining of them.
In this case, it is with the working of the Spirit, as with his Being. As
naturally he proceeds, per modum amoris; per modum charitatis. Multa remissa,
many sins forgiven, because she loved much; and so, multa concessa, many graces
infused, if we love much. This was represented in the first effusion of the
Holy Ghost. The Apostles were in one house, and in one mind, in a charitable
union; and then they received those cloven tongues. Of which S. Aug. speaks,
alluding to those two descents of the Holy Ghost: they had first Spiritum
unitum in columba, before divisum in linguis; He descended in the appearance of
a Dove; the Emblem of Charity; after that, In linguis divisis, in tongues and
languages: Origin observes of Job's children; Mark, says he, their charitable
affection! Satan could sooner kill them all together, then by any breach of
love, make them fall out, and live asunder. This Chrysostom notes in S. Paul's
Conversion, and Call to the Ministry; God observed his zealous affection to
the Synagogue, how strongly he loved his Mother Church; Christ would especially
gain him to his service: As a Captain, who sees in his enemies Camp, a valiant,
and resolute Soldier for the good of his Country, labors by all means to work
him Paul, and enables him with his richest graces. That Is the first thing
observable; Ut habeat, it fits and enables him for all other graces. 2. Ut
Ecclesiae habeat. When they are infused, Charity stirrs them up, and improves
them to the use, and advantage of the Church of Christ. Other gifts, without
charity, rest in the person into whom they are infused; charity disperses, and
conveys them to others. See this expressed in S. Paul's Similitude; The whole
body is compacted by that which every joint supplies -- and makes an increase
of the body unto the edifying of it self in love. Other graces without charity,
as meat received into the body without the natural warmth, lies clogging the
stomach; but Charity, like the vital heat, concocts, and conveys them to every
member; it makes a supply to every part, Ephesians. iv. 16. That Is the reason, that
of all other graces, God requires our charity to be bestowed on his Church; he
seems to part with his own right in it, and sets it over to his Church. If God
so loved us; What then? The inference, we should think, were more natural; Then
we must love him again: But God parts with his interest, Then ought we to love
one another, 1 Ioh. iv. 11. He requires us to exhibit it to his Church. 1. In
signum amoris; then it is best tried. Every man will love God: it is best
discovered in our love to 2. In fructum amoris; the fruit of our charity cannot
reach to him. As David, desiring to show love to Jonathan even after his death,
inquires out Mephibosheth, or any of his children, that they might enjoy what
Jonathan could not. Quod homini proficit, Deo servit, says Tertullian. Then
charity is most serviceable to God, when it is profitable to his Church.
The Church, that is commended especially to our love and charity. As S.
Bernard observes of Christ's provision for his Mother John his loving disciple,
and in terms of love, Behold thy Mother, and, Behold thy Son; so in the
disposition, that is the principal affection to which Christ commits it. Art
thou a Minister? conceive Christ's voice from his Cross to thee, Behold thy
Mother, behold thy Son. This was the Preface to S. Peter's charge; Peter,
love thou me? then, feed my flock. Of both which Speeches to S. Peter, and S.
John, Aquinas conceits, that, answerable to their affection, so was their
commission. Saint Peter loved Christum mysticum in membris, Christ in his
members; to him therefore the Church was by John loved Christum personalem,
Christ in his person; to him therefore he committed the care of his Mother.

Love is the affection that is principally required. This we see typified in
Aarons breast plate; the names of the Israelites they were engraven, and set
upon the holy Pectoral, not upon his shoulders only for care and burden, but
upon his breast, the seat of love; they must be dear and tender to him. It is a
sin in any man to be void of Charity; but it is an heinous impiety in a Priest.
It had been cruelty in any Jew, not to regard his brother's

Without this gift, all other graces they are fruitless and unprofitable, sine
hac, nihil sum, says the Apostle; not minor, or parvus, but nihil sum. Had I
all Languages, even to the tongues of Angles; had I all Miracles, to remove
Mountains; had I all Patience, even to the enduring of Martyrdom, ( Quale
crimen, says Cyprian, quod ne Mariyrio quidem potest expiari?) sine hac nihil
sum. And cum hac, omnia sum. Charity bears all, believes all, hopes all.
Strange! The act of Charity is only to love; Elicit suum actum, imperat omnem.
As a spring in a clock sets all the wheels going; or the Primum mobile in
Heaven carries all the Spheres with it. Art thou to Prophesy? Charit^ cogit,
The love of Christ constrains. Have thou Languages? they are unprofitable in
themselves divided from Charity. Charity directs and unites them together, Ex
una lingua, factae sunt multae, hoc superbia fecit; ex multis facta est una,
hoc charitas facit. Aug. Saint James speaking of malicious tongues, says, They
are set on fire of Hell, and they set on fire, the whole course of nature in
strife and confusion; so these gifts of tongues, being set on fire by charity,
as by fire from Heaven, they set on fire the whole course of nature, in grace
and conversion.

Not, as if Charity were absolutely necessary; as if none but Judas, they may
do good; but not so kindly, as when love imployes them. As S. Augustine
observes of Christ's Miracles, they prevailed the more with his Auditors,
because they were not only signa potentiae, but fructus amoris. They were
miracula salutaria, helpful, and beneficial. Had they been nociva, as Moses his
were in Egypt, they would have bred hatred and terror, driven men farther from
him; or, had they been innocua, to remove Mountains, to fly in the air, they
would have wrought wonder, and astonishment; but they were salutaria, signum
potentiae, it never fetched life; but the embracing of his arms, that was
fructus amoris, that warmed and enlivened him. Miracles, and languages, they
may do good, but not so kindly.

Much more, Prophesying, though divided from Charity, has its use and profit
for the conversion of others. To this purpose, S. Augustine, alluding to that
of S. Paul, Some preach Christ of good will, others on by-respects, Quidam,
says he, non cast praedicant Christum; tamen, his auditis, fideles nascuntur.
As in natural generation, so likewise in spiritual, Quidam ad concubitum
ingrediuntur, non voluntate generandi, sed luxuriandi libidi^e, in lust, not in
love, and desire of posterity; and yet they beget children, ex f^cunditate
seminum, non ex turpitudine vitiorum. The seed of the word, it has vim
plasticam, and prolificam, a power of regenerating, though dispensed and
applied by one not-converted. Let the seed be good that is sown in the furrows,
it skils not what the hand be that scatters it abroad. Pastores mali, says S.
Augustine against the Donatists, bad Shepherds may feed the flock in good
Pastures. Prophecy without Charity has a power of converting, but not so
kindly. As a Surgeon, or Physician, is more affectionately careful of his
own body, then of a stranger's life. The one he does Ex Art, In Affectu, in
Sympathy of affection. The one preaches, Ut lucretur famam, for credit and
ostentation; the other, Ut lucretur fratrem; Thou have gained thy brother,
says our Savior, accounting every Christian, as S. Paul did Onesi^us, his own
bowels; and esteeming S. James his reward, the best encouragement; Have thou
converted a sinner? Know thou have saved a soul from death, and have hid a
multitude of sins. That Is a second Inforcement, Ut Ecclesiae habeat. Charity
improves all his gifts for the benefit of the Church.

3. Ut Sibi habeat. Charity makes them comfortable, and Charitas, and alios,
and seipsum; He saves himself, and those that hear him. Tongues without
Prophecy, like Nimrod, they build a Babel, they confound themselves, and bring
confusion to others. Prophecy without Charity, like Noah's workmen, they build
an Ark, edify the Church, but themselves perish. Charity, with Noah, builds
for himself and his whole family, saves himself and the Church of Christ.
Prophecy without Charity, Lucem in se, Galorem in aliis, it is light only in
it self, begets heat in others: Prophecy with Charity, is like light in the
fire, Lucet, and Ardet, lightens, and enflames both himself, and others.
Prophecy without Charity, nourishes others, feeds not himself: Non gustat; as
that Samaritan Governor, provides for the people, but himself starves; or,
Tantum gustat, has some smack or relish of saving truth, but feeds not upon
it; Like Nurses, that taste only of that, their children live upon. Charity
eats, and digests, and grows by it. Prophecy without Charity, does Sua Deo, Se
Diabolo, as Saint Gregory speaks, bestows his fruits and pains upon God,
himself upon the Devil. Plus dat qui and fructum, and arborem dat, quam qui
solum fructum, says Aquinas out of Anselm. Charity consecrates both tree and
fruit, himself and his labors, to God and his Church. That Is a third
Inforcement, Ut sibi habeat. Charity is a fundamental spiritual Grace; then,
Prophecy; then other gifts, are like colors well laid. Charity is a
ground-colour, Prophecy upon it, is a lasting-tincture; then Tongues, and
Languages, like varnish upon these, are for show and ornament.
That Is the first Object propounded and commanded, Charity. Pass we on to the

Second, (...)* Spiritual gifts. And from hence observe, that the right aim,
and chiefest desire of a faithful, and worthy Minister, it is for spiritual
blessings; And this we may consider,

1. In the Kind, 2. In the Parts of them.
I. The Kind and Condition of them will appear in a double Opposition:

1. Is Spiritualia, not Naturalia. He contents not himself with natural
endowments, strength of wit, largeness of memory, quickness* of apprehension;
nay, denies them, being severed from Grace, as fruitless, and unprofitable.
Stultus fito, ut fias sapiens, is the Apostle's word. Thou, in thy Calling to
be a Minister, must S. Paul's case, struck blind, before enlightened; Lucem
occoecantem habuit, before illuminantem; (As the light of the Sun will put out
a Candle); and circumfusam before in^usam, says Saint Bernard, to make him
know how he came by it, before he received it. Natural knowledge, in S. James
his account, it is earthly, sensual, devilish; earthly in the original, sensual
in the use, devilish in the end and issue of it. The mysteries of our Calling
are above the reach of created nature. Animae creationem, intelligunt and
Daemones; the Devil is a better Naturalist, then the greatest Philosopher;
Animae conversionem, ignorant and Angeli; James terms it, the word engraffed
upon them, they continue fruitless. As S. Augustine, discoursing of Moses and
Paul, the great spirit and courage they showed before their calling; Moses his
valor in slaying the Egyptian, Paul's zeal for the Jewish Synagogue; he
compares them to rich grounds untilled, overgrown with weeds; Non virtutum
fructibus inutiles erant, quamvis vitiosa magnae fertilitatis ferebant indicia;
they might prove good, if quo meliores, eo deteriores; the greater are our
parts, the greater are our sins. And yet how ready are we to judge and account
all to be natural? Which makes S. Paul challenge these Corinthians; What have
thou that thou have not received? It Is purposely meant of Ministerial
endowments. And S. James foresees how soon we mistake; and therefore says he,
Err not, my dear brethren, they are all from above; no parts of nature, but
gifts of grace. That Is the first Opposition; Spiritualia, not Naturalia. 2.
Spiritualia, not Temporalia; and that in a double Consideration. 1. Not
Temporale, Spirituali contrarium. 2. Not Temporale, Spirituali annexum.
1. Not Spirituali contrarium; Not that it is incompatible, and cross to our
spiritual Calling: No, but the aim of a Christ taught us this Lesson in his
first Call; He chose the poorest, those who were loosest from the world, to be
his Ambassadors. Temporal Kings, Per divites ad pauperes, they publish their
Laws by rich men, to the poor; Christ, Per pauperes ad divites, he sends the
poor to preach to the rich. Temporal blessings, be they at the best, are
unworthy to be named, as the aim of a Minister; Aestimant Sor^em pretio
vilissimo, bono temporali; we abase our Calling to prize it no higher. Coelum,
Thro^s Dei; terrena, bona Scabelli. Prayest thou for spiritual graces? he
reaches we are made partakers of the divine nature, says the Apostle Saint
Peter. To neglect these for temporal good things, it is to loath Mannah, and
long for Onyons, and Garlic of Egypt. Allium and Coepe, prae Coelo spirant,
says Tertullian. That Is the first Consideration; not Temporale contrarium. 2.
Not Spirituali annexum; Even those temporals Non vestra, sed vos, is the
Apostle's profession; We seek not yours, but you; no, not Nostra, though
originally due; with Solomon, craving Wisdom in the first place, riches and
honors God will cast upon him; with Elisha, desiring of God the doubling of
Elijah's spirit upon him, the Mantle for warmth and ornament he takes up
afterward. As Christ, not only preferring his spiritual food, Verbum Dei,
before Satan's bread that is Spirituali oppositum; but Voluntatem Patris, the
doing of his Fathers will, before his Disciples bread, which they bring to him,
that is Spirituali annexum.

And indeed, it is fit they should be void of these earthly inferior
distractions, that are to mind heavenly. These fowls of heaven should be
provided for, without their sowing and reaping; these Lillies of Paradise
should not toil, nor spin, and yet grow and flourish. As S. Augustine alluding
to Gods ourse upon Cain for killing of his brother, Let the earth be barren
unto thee, when thou tillest it; Quid congruentius, says he, quam ut illum
cujus scelere frater occisus est, in terra laborantem sterilitas sequeretur;
illis, quorum ministerio salvantur, de crastino minime cogitantibus fructuosa
terra serviret? Cain, who killed his brother, even when he labors, is cursed
with barrenness; Ministers, who save their brethren, even though they labor
not, must be provided Spirituali annexum.

That Is the Kind; I come

II. To the Parts of them;

1. It is Spirituale donum; Seek, and labor for spiritual enablements. The
inclinations of nature must be strengthened, and elevated with gifts of grace.
The weightiest employments require the greatest enablements. Those three great
Callings, Kings, Priests, Prophets, they were all anointed; to signify that
large measure of grace, that those Callings required. Nay, the Paul
distinguishes.

And yet, how many run before they be sent? suing, like Ahimaaz to the Ioabs of
Israel; But what if I run? though they have no tidings. Who, if they were
questioned, whether they Act. xix. We know not whether there be any Holy Ghost,
yea, or no. No, God never employs, but he always enables; as Saul did with
David, when he sent him to fight, he put on his own Armor; he will strengthen
thee with his own Spirit, to discharge His business.

That Is the first; Spirituale donum.

2. Is Spirituale ut officium; Seek and labor for spiritual employments. And
indeed, Donum obligat ad officium; the conferring of a gift, it is the exacting
of a service: It Is like Press-money, Spirituale donum, without this second, it
is to no advantage. Donum in habitu, it is Talentum in sudario; Donum in
exercitio, it is Talentum in mensario, it gains, and increases. Donum in habitu,
it is a Candle in a bushel; exercise and employ it, it is set on a Candlestick.
Without exercise and practice, says S. Bernard, thou art Lux modii; with it,
thou art Lux mundi. Not only the mispending, but the neglecting of this gift
condemns thee. S. Paul Timothy (...); fire goes out for want of blowing, as
well as with quenching. Metal, not only wears out by use, but is eaten with
rust. And what says S. James? The rust of your gold shall witness against you,
not only the mispending. The rust of our gifts, as well as the mis-using shall
rise up, and condemn us. To be Augustine counts it like the sin of Onan,
Maledictus qui non suscitat semen in Israel; praedicando Christum, generare
Christianum. Art thou invited to preach, and yet refusest? Art thou shod with
this preparation of the Gospel, and yet refusest when the Church calls for
thine help? thou shall be discalceatus in Israel. If thou will not raise up
seed to thy elder brother Christ, the Church may pull off thy shoes, and spit
in thy face; Ne sis in eorum numero, quorum pedes sunt speciosi. It Is S.
Augustine's Allegory. That Is the second; Spirituale, ut officium. 3.
Spiritualem potestatem. Labor for, and desire only spiritual power, and
authority. As in the first, Donum obligat ad officium; so here, Officium
disponit ad potestatem. Our authority, and power is only spiritual. The
weapons of our warfare, are divinitus potentia. Thus S. Chrysostom magnifying
and preferring his spiritual power; To a King, are bodies committed; to a
Priest, souls; they fight with sensible armor, we with spiritual: They fight
against Barbarians, I fight against Devils; as he speaks elsewhere: his doctrine
is to him, as fire and sword. The censures are only spiritual, that the Church
inflicts. This thunder
And yet what a stir keeps that Priest of Rome for his temporal Power to be
joined with spiritual? Joining with his Pastoral Staff, an Imperial Sword; (as
we see some Rapiers sheathed up in Staves;) in censuring of the Church, wishing
as Balaam did in beating of his Ass, I would my staff were a sword in my hand,
for then would I kill thee.

And yet we exclude not all temporal power as utterly unlawful. It Is not a
consequent from our spiritual, but yet it is compatible Christ does not command
it, but the Prince may conferr it. Only of our selves, it is merely spiritual.
That Is the third part; Spiritualem potestatem, a spiritual authority.

I come briefly to the,

Third Object propounded to them, and that is Prophecy. And by it, I conceive,
with Expositors, not any extraordinary miraculous Revelation, but an ordinary
set course of preaching, and interpreting, and opening the Mystery of the
Gospel; in S. Paul's description, A speaking to men to edifying, to exhortation,
and comfort. And then take notice of the nature, and honor of this Preaching,
it is Prophesying.

1. It is loco Prophetiae; it is in the room and stead of Revelation and
Prophecy. As the Israelites were first fed with Mannah, afterward, that
ceasing, they fed on the fruit of the Land. Prophecy now ceasing, we must wait
for no more Visions, but Malachi, the last of the old Prophets, shuts up the
Old Testament with this Seal; Remember ye the Law of Moses my servant, which I
commanded to him in Horeb for all Israel, with the Statutes, and Judgments,
till Elias comes; there were no more Prophets till John at Christ's first
Coming. S. John, the last of the Apostles, he seals up the New Testament with
the same Closure; no more additions to the New Testament, till Christ's second
Coming. We have Moses and the Prophets, Christ and the Apostles, in stead of
Revelation: loco Prophetiae. 2. It is aequale Prophetiae; it is as good as
Prophecy, of the same nature, springing from the same Fountain, and Original:
As the fire on the Altar, though maintained, and fed with ordinary fuel; yet
is counted heavenly, because the first Original of it was from Heaven. The
Scriptures contain fully the marrow and pith of all former Prophecies in the
Old Testament. As at the first Creation, the Lord made an extraordinary light,
but after, conveyed it into the body of the Sun, and Moon, and all light now
arises from them; so in the beginnings of the Church, aequale Prophetiae. 3. It
is, melius Prophetiae; it is better then Prophecy. The ordinary Word,
especially of the Gospel, is more excellent, and useful, then extraordinary
Revelations under the Law; 1. Ratione certitudinis. Saint Peter calls the
Scripture, (...), a surer word, then a voice from Heaven. As the motion of a
star is more certain and regular then an extraordinary Comet. 2. Ratione
claritatis. The Gospel is more clear and evident then either Prophecy, or
Priesthood in the Old Testament. That was but Lucerna, says S. Peter, this is
Lucifer; that was but like a Candle, this like the Daystar springing in our
hearts.
The clearness of the Old Testament, it was but splendour vultus, the face of
Moses did only shine in his Revelations; the clearness of the New Testament,
is splendour pedum, their very feet are glorious that preach the Gospel. The
shining of the Old Testament was splendour in velamine, as S. Paul observes;
Christ's shining in the New Testament, it is far more evident, it is velamen in
splendore: his very garments are clear, and glorious as the Sun. The clear
preaching of Christ, made John the Baptist, greater then the Prophets; the
meanest of John the Baptist. This evident preaching, and pointing out Christ,
makes some of the Fathers compare Prophets to Cocks, the nearer the Sunrising,
the louder they crow: The nearest to Christ, makes the clearest preaching.

3. Ratione perpetuitatis: Preaching is better then prophesying, in the lasting
continuance and perpetuity. Prophecy, it is but temporary, as a Candle in S.
Peter's account. Lucerna, and accendi debet, and extingui potest, says S. Aug.
A Candle, it is soon put out. The everlasting Gospel, Rev. xiv. 6. Preaching,
and Baptizing have a Patent of eternity; Lo, I am with you always, even unto the
end of the world, Matthew. xxviii. 20. Thus S. Gregory compares miraculous gifts
in the Infancy of the Church, to a Child's Standing-stool; when the Child is
grown, and strong, that is taken away. God has withdrawn these extraordinary
Supportments in this grown age of his Church. That Is the melius Prophetiae.
4. Let me add one Parallel more 'twixt Preachers and Prophets, and that by way
of Exhortation. Saint Augustine, discoursing of the state of the Patriarchs,
that their whole carriage and life was full of mysteries, concludes, Primorum
patru^ dico, non tantum linguam, verum etiam and vitam fuisse propheticam,
illudque regnum Hebraeorum magnum quendam fuisse Prophetam; their Commonwealth
was a Prophet, it was so full of Mysteries. As they in Mystery, so now in
Morality, should not the lives of our Preachers, should not the state of our
Churches, Na^ianzen professes of his own endeavor. When we are silent, by
example edifying, non tantum lingua, sed etiam and vita fuit prophetica.
So much for the Objects. Now follow, Secondly, the three Acts;

1. (...), An Act of Prosecution. 2. (...), An Act of Emulation. 3. In (...),
An Act of Election.
1. (...), That inferrs these Particulars; 1. Ex part Objecti; 1. Distantiam
Objecti, Distance and Remoteness. This 2. Difficultatem Objecti; it is beset
with Difficulties, it costs much pains, and striving. (...) implies hardship,
and extremity; If by any means I may attain, says S. Paul. 3. Excellentiam
Objecti; Rareness and excellency. It must sure be some excellent thing that
deserves so much pains in prosecuting and obtaining; a precious pearl, that is
worth so much inquiring. Charity, it is a remote, it is a difficult, it is an
excellent endowment.
Consider it, 2. Ex part actus; It implies two things, 1. Intensionem actus;
Intension and vehemence, It Is an act vehement, and violent. Saint Chrysostom
observes upon these words of S. Paul, (...), and (...), persequens Ecclesiam,
justitiam, that S. Paul was as violent, and extreme for, as against, Christ; in
prosecuting, as in persecuting. It Is a vehement intension. 2. Extensionem
actus; Extension and continuance: it holds out, gives not over. S. Paul in
Philip. iii. expresses (...)

2. (...), That Is the second act; an earnest desire upon a comparative
emulation of other men's gifts. Aemulamini that implies, 1. Agnitionem profectus
alieni, an ingenuous acknowledgment of another man's Proficiency. 2.
Confessionem defectus proprii, an humble confession of his own deficiency. 3.
Desiderium imitationis, a strong endeavor to imitate, and equal them.
3. In (...), there is the third act, Eligite; an act of choice and election:
And that implies two things, 1. Non posse omnia; we are put to our choice;
ingross all gifts we cannot. God will have a necessitude, and dependency of one
another graces. S. Paul forbids those uncharitable terms of one member to
another, I have no need of thee, and I have no need of thee, arising from
conceit of self-sufficiency. That Is the first, Non posse omnia. 2. Velle
meliora; make choice of the best, the most glorious to God, the most profitable
to his Church, the most comfortable to thy self; and that is Prophecy.

Let us beseech him, who is the Father of lights, from whom proceeds every good
and perfect gift, that he would pour out his

To whom, etc.









A
I. Epist. of S. JOHN v. 3. For this is the love of God, that we keep his
Commandments, and his Commandments are not grievous.
WE Love him, because he loved us first, says the Apostle, 1 Ioh. iv. 19. Our
love to God, being but a reflection of those beams of love, which he first casts
upon us. An evident proof of this, we may see in this Apostle; He was our
Saviors beloved Disciple, the Christ; his heart was enflamed with the love of
Christ: In all his Epistles, he breathes nothing but love, he stirs up himself,
and all others, to the love of Christ. Now;

1. Because all men are ready to profess their love to Christ; no man thinks
himself to be so ungracious, as to be void of the love of God, though the
Scripture tells us expressly, even hate God, Exodus xx. 5. And our Savior tells
the Jews plainly; I know that you have not the love of God in you, S. John v.
42. Every wicked man, is Gods professed enemy. 2. Because Christian Love, it is
the chiefest trial, the clearest Gal. v. 6. It works by all other Graces; it is
Faith working by Justice, by Patience, by Temperance, but especially by Love.
3. Our love to Christ being that which he most strictly enquires into, he
speaks to us, as he did to S. Peter, Ioh. xxi. Simon Peter, Love thou me? And
again, and again, Love thou me? never gives over, till our hearts answer,
Lord, thou know that I love thee; Our love to God being a matter of so great
John gives us here, a certain description of the love of God, by which we may
assuredly know, that we love our God, indeed and in truth; This is the love of
God, that we keep his Commandments, and his Commandments are not grievous.
So then, the words I have read unto you, are a sweet description of a good
Christian; you may know, and discern him by a threesold Character:

1. How stands he affected to God and Christ? What heart The love of God is
shed abroad into his heart, Romans v. The love of God rules in his heart. I am
sick of love, says the Spouse in the Canticles, protesting the strength of her
love to our Savior. 2. What is the action that flows from this affection? What
is the fruit of our love to God? How does it testify, and manifest it self? It
shows itself in a religious obedience to what God enjoins us, it will keep his
Commandments. 3. What is the disposition, and inclination which one that loves
God, finds in himself to the obedience, and observation of Malachi, and cry
out, Oh, what a weariness it is to serve the Lord! No, S. John tells us, Gods
Commandments are not grievous to him.
Come we to the

First Particular; What is the affection that a good Christian bears to Christ?
It Is Love; yes, that is the Christian virtue, that is the Evangelical grace. It Is
the main difference 'twixt the Law Timor, and Amor. The Law, it is the
ministration of Fear; the Gospel, that is the breeder and begetter of Love. The
Law begets fear, it genders unto bondage; but the Gospel breeds love, casts out
slavish fear; The Gospel begets in us the spirit of love and liberty. The
Scripture makes it the sum of Neither circumcision, avails any thing, as the
Jews would have it, nor uncircumcision, as the converted Gentiles, But faith
that works by love, Gal. v. 6.

Indeed, it is the end both of Law, and Gospel. S. Augustine sets out the
several lincks of this chain of Salvation, and how they depend one upon
another. First, Lex adducit ad fidem; the Law, that sends us to Faith; then,
Fides fundit orationem, Faith, that pours out prayer; then, Oration impetrat
Spiritum, prayer obtains the Spirit; then, Spiritus diffundit charitatem, the
Spirit, that inspires us with love; et Charitas implet Legem, and

Not that a Christian ought to be free from all kind of fear. There is a
threefold fear to which we are liable, answerable to our threefold state and
condition;

1. The first I call, a state of Subjection; in this we were created, and in
this we stood before our fall. 2. The second, is a state of Rebellion upon our
fall. 3. The third, is a state of Adoption upon our recovery, and
reconciliation. And these three states have a suitable fear agreeing to them:
1. As we were in our primitive, original state of Subjection; so we owe to God
a fear of Loyalty, as good Subjects to their Prince, and Sovereign. 2. Our
state of Rebellion, that brought upon us the fear of Slavery; But then, 3. Our
state of Adoption, that begets in us a filial, and Sonlike

The first fear, the fear of Loyalty, looks upon God as a Lawgiver, and so
stands in awe of him. The second the fear of Slavery, looks upon him as an
enemy, and avenger, and so is dismayed with the terror of him; But The third,
Filial fear, considers him as a gracious Father, and so is affected with a
child-like duty and reverence to him. The fear of Subjection must still
continue with us. The fear of Slaverie, while we are in the state of
corruption, will still haunt us; But, Filial fear, that must grow, and increase
in us. Filial fear, it is the consequent of love. They shall fear the Lord, and
his goodness, Hos. iii. 5. Loyal fear, it is consistent with love, ( Hunc
timorem habet charitas; imo non habet, nisi charitas. Aug. de Filiali timore);
but servile, and slavish fear, it is contrary to love.

Fear then, it is not wholly excluded from the state of a Christian; but yet the
grace that the Gospel aims at, it is the grace of love. The end of the
Commandment (especially as the Gospel propounds it) is love, 1 Timothy i. 5. It Is
the aim of all Gods gracious dealings with us. He has chosen us, that we
should be holy, and without blame before him in love, Ephesians. i. 4. It Is the
sum He keeps covenant and mercy with them that love him, Deuteronomy. vii. 9.

See the excellency of this Love of God in three particulars:

1. This Love of God, gives a chief title and denomination to Christians; it is
their badge and cognizance. Thus Solomon describes an holy man; Cant. i. The
upright love thee. So David describes an holy man; Let them that love thy name,
be joyful in thee, Psalm. v. 11. David sues to God for favor and mercy under
this denomination; Psalm. cxix. 122. Look thou upon me, and be merciful unto
me, as thou usest to do to those that love thy name. If any man love God, the
same is known of God, 1 Cor. viii. 3. He sets much by such, and owns them, and
highly accounts of them. 2. This Love, it is the Title and Assurance of all his
promises. All his promises are appropriated to them that love him. I will show
mercy unto thousands of them that love me. It Is in the Second Commandment. 1.
Heavenly promises, and blessings, are passed to us upon this condition. He
shall receive the crown of Life, which the Lord has promised to them that love
him, James i. Eye has not seen, neither has ear heard, what God has provided
for them that love him, 1 Cor. ii. 9. 2. Temporal blessings are assured us with
this Proviso, Because he has set his love upon me, therefore will I deliver
him, Psalm. xci. 14. See how large a Patent God has made to such Christians;
Romans viii. We know that all things shall work together for the good of such as
love God. Whatsoever befalls them, shall turn to their good; as, on the
contrary, all shall work to the worst to them that love him not; they are
doomed by Paul with an heavy Curse; If any man love not the Lord Jesus Christ,
let him be Anathema, Maran-atha, accursed for ever: 1 Cor. xvi. 22. 3. Love,
it is the ingratiating quality of all our services; it is that which commends us
and our services to Gods acceptance; love that is the fulfilling of the Law,
Romans xiii. 10. Thus Christ shows what kind of obedience he expects at our
hands, Ioh. xiv. If ye love me, keep my commandments. It Is the labor of love,
that he expects and requites. Thus S. Paul speaks of his labor in preaching;
Necessity is laid upon me, and woe be to me, if I preach not the Gospel; for if
I do this willingly, (out of love) I have a reward, 1 Cor. ix. 16, 17.
Especially God in the Gospel invites us to his service by motives of love,
draws us to it with the cords of love. It Is not the language of the Gospel, If
ye love me.

1. All other motives are base and servile, without this willing and loving
affection. To serve out of fear only, lest we smart for it, it is the drudgery
of a slave; to serve out of love, it is the duty of a son. Si quid boni feceris
and invitus, fit de te magis, quam a te; it is done upon thee, rather then by
thee; thou rather suffer the doing, then do it thy self. No, this is the
Mark of a child of God; his delight is in the Law of God, Psalm. i. He takes a
pleasure and felicity in it. Blessed is the man that fears the Lord; he
delights greatly in his commandments, Psalm. cxii. 2. The service of love is
only accepted, because it alone is an ingenuous service, and of a right
intention. He that serves God only to escape punishment, or to gain some
reward to himself, such a service arises only out of self-love; he dares not
offend, lest he should be miserable. But he that serves God out of love to him,
such an one aims at God, not at himself. Were there no Hell to punish him, no
Heaven to reward him, the love of God would work him to all due obedience.
Parisiensis notes, He that abstains from sin for fear of punishment only,
there is no more retribution due to him, then to thieves and pilferers, that
abstain from theft for fear they should be apprehended and punished. And so he
that serves God only for a reward, serves not God but himself. Illi servit
unnsquisque, propter quem servit; he does it for his own sake, not for God's
sake? But love seeks not its own, but the honor of God to whom it is devoted.
3. This service out of love is most acceptable to God, because this kind of
service is most honorable to God. He Non colitur Deus, nisi amando, Aug. He
only honors him, that does truly love him. Whereas he that serves him for
fear only, casts a secret aspersion upon God; like the bad servant in the
Gospel, Luke xix. that told his Lord, I know thou art an hard man. No, God is a
gracious Sovereign, not a cruel Tyrant, and so desires to be served as good
Subjects serve their King, out of love; not as Bondslaves serve an usurping
Tyrant, out of dread and terror. 4. The service of love is the only service
that God sets much by; because that service which arises from love, is the
only constant, and lasting service. Love is long-breathed, and will hold out
and persevere; whereas fear is a flincher, and will soon tire, and start aside.
Thus the dissembling Israelites started aside like a broken bow. The Psalmist
gives the reason, When he slew them, then they sought to him, and returned; but
they did but flatter him with their mouth, for their hearts were not right with
him, Psalm. lxxviii. Extorted obedience is never lasting. Metus, haud diuturni
magister officii. But love is full of patience, and perseverance, thinks no
duty we do to God, tedious, or irksome; counts a perpetual service but short;
we may invert David's words, esteems a thousand days in Gods service, but as
one day: as Jacob endured fourteen years hard service for Rachel; he bore the
melting Because he loved her, Genes. xxix. 20.
That Is the first thing considerable; The affection of Love. We come,

Secondly, To that that is the fruit of this loving Affection, the action that
flows from it, that is Obedience; Herein is love, that we keep his
commandments; that is the kindly proof of our love. Probatio dilectionis, est
exhibitio operis, says Gregory; Doing and obeying, is a strong demonstration
of our inward and cordial

1. It shows, our love to God must be Amor operativus; it must be an active,
and operative, and working love. Indeed, love it is seated in the will, the
fountain of action; it rests not in our understanding, the knowing faculty.
It Is not a mere notion or speculation, swimming in the brain, but a devout
affection rooted in the heart. Bare knowledge of God makes us not the better.
Knowledge, says S. Paul, puffs up; but it is love that builds up. Bare notion,
it is not soliditas, but tumor, says Aug. like windy meats, they swell, but
they do not fill with any good nourishment. Therefore the Apostle places all in
love. If any man think that he knows any thing, he knows nothing yet as he
ought to know; but if any man loves God, the same is known of him, 1 Cor. viii.
2, 3. That Is worth something.

And as it is doing, not knowing, only; so it must be, Amor operans, not
loquens tantum; not a love that will vanish into a verbal Profession. Such
there are of whom S. John speaks; He that says he loves God; it is love, and
lip-labor, both of one value: (...), Naz. Thou say, thou love God, show me
thy love, by thy works of love, otherwise God rejects it, Isai. xxix. 13. This
people draw near me with their mouth, and with their lips do honor me, but
have removed their heart far from me. Ye know Dalilahs expostulation with
Sampson, How can thou say, that thou love me, and wilt not do this for me,
that I require. No, Gods law, it is Objectum practicum, it is the matter, not of
our knowing, or speaking only, but of our doing, and practicing. Religion,
it is a practical art, serves not to make us the wiser only, but the better
also. It Is an holy art of Living well, and not of knowing, and speaking only.
I have lifted up my hands to thy Commandments, which I have loved, Psalm. cxix.
48. ( lifted up his hands, not his eyes only) says David; and again, Verse
105. Thy word is a lamp unto my feet, not to mine eyes only to gaze and look
on it.

2. Herein is love that we keep his Commandments; It puts another
qualification on our love; it is amor reverentialis; not a love of equality, but
a love of subjection, and inferiority; such a love as the Inferior bears to
his Superior, that has a power to command him; such a love as the Israelites
Servant professes to his Master, I love my Master, and will not leave his
service. When we hear of loving God, we dream of equality, and familiarity. Oh!
God is our friend, Christ is our brother, we have fellowship with them both;
and so we think we may carry our selves fellow-like toward them. No, the Text
tells us, He is 3. Herein is love, that we keep his Commandments; This shows
that our love to God must be Amor regulatus; a love regulated and restrained to
what God commands us. The only matter of religious love and service to God,
is, what he has required, Id utique Deo dignum, quod ipse Deus sibi fatetur
acceptum; that is only accepted, which God has prescribed. Ye are my friends,
says Christ, if ye do what I command you, Ioh. xv. 14. In this case, our own
inventions, are but presumptions, and superstitions. Hence it is that Love is
called, The Royal Law, because God has appointed in Non tantum servire Deo meo
debes, sed and adulari, Tertul. But yet for the expressions and performances of
it, he has strictly bounded it within the compass of his Commandments. Saul
thought he had showed great love in reserving the fat Cattle for Sacrifice; But
what said Samuel, Has the Lord such pleasure in Sacrifices, as when the voice
of the Lord is obeyed? He has showed thee, O man, what is good, and what the
Lord requires at thine hands. Offer to him not thine Inventions, but his own
Prescriptions. 4. Herein is love, that we keep his Commandments; This shows,
our love to God must be Amor extensus, and universalis; our love to God must be
entire, and universal, of as large extent, as all Gods Commandments. As before
ye heard of a Restriction, so here we meet with an Extension. Love must be the
fulfilling of the Law, Romans xiii. We must not be partial in the Law of God, as
Malachi speaks. Quod propter Deum fit, aequaliter fit. David professes the
intireness of his obedience; I esteem all thy precepts concerning all things to
be right. The least Commandment carries a divine authority with it. A good
Christian sues not to God (...) Naaman to Elisha for a dispensation, In this,
the Lord (...) servant; this sin I must live in, this Commandment (...) make
bold with. What says S. James? He that offends in (...) is guilty of all. Not
that the same degree, and measure of love, and obedience is required in all;
there is a difference, and disproportion. There are some Commandments The
great Commandment, Matthew. xxii. It must be preferred before the love of any
creature: But yet the love of God in a due proportion extends it self to every
duty; it will make us shun every sin; 1. The smallest sins. This love will keep
us not only from outrageous impieties, but from smaller transgressions. 2. It
will make us avoid even secret sins; not only such sins as may dishonor God
by a public scandal, but 3. Love to God will make us avoid our dearest sins,
most delightful, most profitable; it will not only sindg off hairs, but cut
off our hand.

That Is the second Particular: Proceed we now, Thirdly, To the last Particular
in the Text; What is the disposition, and inclination, that he which loves God,
finds in himself to Gods Commandments? He snuffs not at them, as heavy, and
burdensome impositions; accounts not the law of God, as an His Commandments
are not grievous.

Indeed in some respects, it is most true, Gods Commandments are exceeding
heavy. There is in them not only magnum pondus, they are weighty and
ponderous; but they are also, magnum onu^, heavy and burdensome. See the truth
of this in three Particulars;

1. Take the Law of God at its full height, and pitch of perfection, so it has
a great difficulty in it; yea, in a manner, an impossibility in it to all men
since Adam. Never any but the first Adam in his Innocence could have fulfilled
it; never any but Adam, our Lord Jesus, did perfectly fulfill it. S. Paul tells
us of (...), Romans viii. an impotency* nay an impossibility in the Law, by
reason of sin. Indeed, when God first gave the Law, it was suitable to our
strength, but sin infeebled us, and so the Law proved impossible to us. Saint
Peter tells us, It was a yoke that neither we, nor our fathers could bear, Act.
xv. 10. Not only men in the state of Corruption, but the very Saints in the
state of Regeneration, come short of it. Imperfection of grace, cannot attain
to perfection of obedience. The Church of God defended this truth against the
Pelagians; That the Law 1. The first is maximum quod sic in doing of good, how
full must that be? it must be toto cord, with our whole heart. 2. The second
is, minimum quod non, in declining from sin, how much must that be? it is, Non
concupisces; not so much as to linger, or lust after it. Consider these two
Dimensions, and it will make us confess with David, I see an end of all
perfection, but thy law is exceeding large; That Is the first.
2. Take the Law in the lowest pitch of righteousness, yet an unregenerate man
cannot obey it. He is so far from fulfilling all the Law, that he cannot
perform the least part of it. Some outward Acts a mere natural man may do; S.
Paul tells us, They do by Nature the things written in the Law: but look to the
spiritual manner of performance, so no natural man can obey it in the least and
lowest degree of it. Every carnal man is reprobate to every good work, Tit. i.
10. Love is the fulfilling of the Law. Perfect Love fulfills it perfectly;
imperfect Love, does it imperfectly; but without Love there is no performance.
You may as soon gather Grapes from Thistles, as any good work from an
unregenerate man. Laudo fructum boni operis, sed in fide quaero radicem, says
S. Augustine. If the root be not good, which is Faith working by Love, the
fruit, though outwardly specious, is inwardly 3. Consider the Law in the
Evangelical mitigation and abatement of it, yet still the Saints of God find
difficulty in it. A regenerate man is two men. That which is spiritual, and
renewed in him, that readily conforms to the Law of God; The spirit is willing,
says our Savior; ey, but the flesh is weak: Nay, oftentimes wilful, stubborn,
and resisting. A Christian, indeed, is freed a morte Peccati, from the death of
sin, he has a new principle of life put into him, that disposes him to all
holy obedience; but yet he is not freed a morbo Peccati, from the disease
Primitias Spiritus, the First Fruits of the Spirit, they make him Spiritual;
and withal, he has Reliquias carnis, some dregs of flesh in him; they make him
carnal, loath and listless to any holy obedience,

Thus we see the Law,

1. In the highest pitch, is impossible to the Saints; 2. In the lowest pitch,
it is impossible to the unregenerate; 3. Even in its moderation, it is difficult
to the best in this

But yet it is most true what the Text affirms, Gods Commandments are not
grievous. His Service is no such hard service as the world accounts it; it is no
such toil and drudgery as carnal men conceive it. It Is a service indeed, (for
why should we be left to a lawless liberty?) but it is an ingenuous service;
Take my yoke upon you, says Christ, for my yoke is easy, and my burden is
light. It Is Satan's policy to stave us off from God with this conceit; O, he is
an hard Master, duram servies servitutem; farewell comfort and contentment, if
he be your Master. Nay, verily,

1. In respect of their state and condition; 2. In respect of their task and
employment; 3. In respect of their many encouragements which they meet
1. Look upon their state and condition: Gods people are not in any base
servile condition. But, 1. They are called unto a state of Liberty; and
Liberty, it is sweet in it self, and sweetens all our employments. It matters
not so much what we do, as upon what terms we do it. If as slaves and bondmen,
that embitters our work, and makes it grievous: If as free and ingenuous, it
sweetens our employment. And such are all Gods servants. You His Service is
perfect freedom. The Law they live under, it is called A Law of Liberty, Iam.
i. 25. Brethren, says S. Paul, Gal. v. 13. You are ^alled unto Liberty. Gods
servants must be no bondmen. The Israelites were not to be slaves, for they
are my servants, says God, Levit. xxv. Thus as Solomon made no bondmen of the
children of Israel, 1 Kings ix. 22. but put them into ingenuous services; so
does God with his servants. 2. As it is a free, so it is an honorable Service:
As David gloried more in this, that he was Gods servant, then that he was
Israel's King. So, Theodosius, Behold, Lord, I am thy servant, I am thy
servant, and the son of thy handmaid, Psalm. cxvi. He chose to be A doorkeeper
in Gods house. Blessed is the man whom thou choosest, and causest to approach
unto thee, that he may dwell in thy Courts, Psalm. lxv. 4. It Is an high dignity
to be Gods moenial servant.
2. Look upon their task and employment, you shall find the Service of God,
it is no such wearisome service.
1. The work which God enjoins them, it is possible to them. Gods Commandments
are made possible to a regenerate man. All things are possible to him that
believes, Mark ix. I can do all things through Christ that strengthens me,
Phil. iv. 13. Flesh and blood sees nothing in the Law of God but impossibility;
like the unbelieving Spies, O we cannot conquer the land. Caleb and Joshua,
conceive it may be done; and undertake it readily. 2. This work is easy; I
said it even now. 3. This work, it is not only possible and easy, but pleasant
and delightful. A good Christian finds exceeding great A just man (says
Solomon) delights to do justly; it is a joy to him, Prove. xxi. 15. So, a good
Christian delights in Piety. Thus David professes of himself, I delight to do
thy will, O my God; thy Law is within my heart, Psalm. xl. 8. So S. Paul, I
delight in the Law of God in the inward man, Romans vii. Thus Solomon tells us,
that the course of Piety, it is a delightful course; All her ways are ways of
pleasantness, Prove. iii. 17. If men serve and obey God, they shall spend their
days in prosperity, and their years in pleasure, Job xxxvi. 11. What Christ
says of himself, is true, in proportion, of all Gods servants, It Is their meat
and drink to do the will of God, Ioh. iv.
Look upon the several parts of Gods Service, those that are most tedious and
irksome to a carnal man, Gods servants take great delight and felicity in them:

1. Prayer, and pouring out our souls unto God, how dull a thing is it to a
carnal man? It Is as easy to make a stone mount upward, as for a carnal man to
raise up his heart in Prayer, and to make it ascend up to the Throne of God.
But Daevid tells us how delightful it was to him; O, my soul is filled as with
marrow and fatness, when he called upon 2. Reading, and Hearing, and Meditating
on Gods Word; put a carnal man upon it, O it is tedious and irksome to him; he
presently cries out, O what a weariness is it? Ey, but David counted Gods Word,
His Song in the house of his pilgrimage; esteemed Gods Word above his appointed
food; it was the very joy of his heart. 3. The Lords Day, and so the attendance
upon the public Worship, a carnal man counts it but loss of time, he has A^os
viii. When will the Sabbath be gone? But a good Christian counts it, and makes
it his delight, Isai. lviii. They rejoiced to hear the joyful sound that called
to the solemn Assemblies, Psalm. lxxxix. What comfort did David take in it, when
he went to the house of God with the voice of joy and praise, with a multitude
that kept holy day, Psalm. xlii. 4. Bounty to the poor; What says a carnal man
to it? Just as Nabal? Shall I take my bread, and my flesh, and give it He will
devise liberal things, as Isaiah describes him; He will draw out his soul to
the hungry, and satisfy the afflicted soul, Isai. lviii.
Even the most painful works of Christianity, a good Christian

1. Mortification, and suppressing our natural Lusts, and evil concupiscence.
Flesh and blood repines at that work, but a good Christian delights in it. The
Spirit that is in him, lusts against the flesh, Gal. v. 17. delights to cross
it, to curb it, and keep it under. 2. The undergoing the Cross, and bearing of
Afflictions; that says hard to flesh and blood. Carnal men may seem to be
Christians, Usque ad Crucem, as Luther speaks; they will pass for good
Christians, usque ad Crucem, til they spy the Cross. They will not suffer for
Religion. But the Saints of God take delight in persecutions. Hear what S. Paul
says, 2 Cor. xii. 10. I take pleasure in infirmities, in reproaches, in
necessities, in persecutions, in distresses for Christ's sake, And see it in the
Apostles, Acts v. They rejoiced, that they were counted worthy to suffer shame
for the Name of Christ. All these hard and difficult services, the Saints count
them high, and noble Functions, and delight in them. 3. Look upon the
Encouragements that Christians find in the service of God; they will make it
appear, that the service of God is no such irksome service. The world indeed
thinks otherwise of it, but S. Bernard gives the reason; Vident punctiones
nostras, sed non vident unctiones. This makes the world think the service of
God to be an hard service, they look upon the labors, but they are not
acquainted with the comforts, and encouragements that sweeten these labors,
and make them pleasant to us. Many Encouragements there are. 1. His gracious
Assistance. God helps, and assists his servants He answers us with strength in
our soul, Psalm. cxxxviii. 3. Till then, the faculties of our souls are like the
members of our bodies: when our shoulder is out of joint, every burden is
grievous; but put it into joint again, and the same burden will sit light upon
it. So grace sets us in a right frame, and makes the Law of God connatural to
us. That breeds delight, when we act according to nature. A carnal man, set him
to do a spiritual work, ye put him out of his element; but a spiritual man is
spiritually affected. 2. A second Encouragement, is Gods merciful connivence.
When his servants that desire to serve him, yet fail, and fall short of what is
their duty, God winks at their sailings, and passes by them. See this
graciously promised to us, Mal, iii. 17. I will spare them as a man spares his
own Son that serves him. If he should mark all that is done amiss, who may
abide it? But there is mercy with him that he may be feared, Plsal. cxxx. Thus
the Prophet Micah admires Gods gracious dealing with his children, Micah vii.
18. Who is a God like unto thee, that passes by the transgressions of his
people? 3. A third Encouragement is, the many heartnings, and secret chearings
that God vouchsafes to his servants in the course Nabal, sour and harsh to his
poor servants, but puts life and heart into them. 1. He vouchsafes his Presence
to them, as Boaz to his Reapers. The Master's eye, the cheerfulness of his
countenance, is the man's encouragement. 2. He speaks cheerfully to their
hearts. He has both his Age, and his Euge for them; Go on; and, Well done,
faithful servant. Thus he heartned Saint Paul, Acts xviii. 9. Be not afraid
Paul, for I am with thee, and no man shall hurt thee. Which made him work
Christ.
4. A fourth Encouragement is his loving acceptance of our poor services. Our
faithful endeavors, our honest desires, our sincere intentions, are
graciously accepted. 1. He will accept half-service for whole; imperfect
obedience goes for good pay. 2. He will accept endeavors for performances.
When we come short of the work, yet if we went about it, put our strength to
it, it is well, says God. 3. In some cases, the Will shall stand for the Deed,
Cor. viii. If there be a willing mind, it is accepted. He stands not upon a
full satisfaction, but makes up our defects with a gracious acceptance.
5. A fifth Encouragement is his bountiful rewarding of us; Besides the grand
payment, the weight of glory, the reward of the inheritance; a strange payment,
for servants to have the inheritance given them, Coloss. iii. Knowing that of
the Lord ye shall receive the reward of the inheritance, for ye serve the Lord
Christ; that Pay will countervail all our service, were it infinitely more;
besides that, How many encouraging blessings and favors David found it, and
acknowledges it; Thou have dealt bountifully with thy servant.

We serve a gracious Lord, such an one as delights in the prosperity

1. Our abilities to serve him, come from his assistance. 2. Our failings, are
made up by his connivence. 3. Our labors, they are sweetened by his cheerful
countenance. 4. Our unworthiness, is supplied by his gracious acceptance. 5.
Our reward, shall be given us by his bountiful goodness.
Think on these Encouragements, and thy heart will Sure, we serve a gracious
Lord, his Commandments are not grievous.







A
1 KING. xix. 4. It is enough, now, O Lord, take away my life; for I am not
better then my fathers.
THe several aspects that this passage, and Elias, gives to the meditations of
those who have considered and dwelt upon it, occasion a diverse apprehension and
judgment of the nature and purpose of it: some taking notice of some sudden
pangs and qualms of weakness and discontent: others observing the strength and
appearance of Piety. And, indeed, Tertullians Maxim holds good here, and is of
Universal truth, In optimis nonnihil est pessimi; The best, and most
sanctified, and refined Saints, have some remainders and dregs of infirmity and
imperfection; overtaken sometimes with

See this holy Prophet, of so high a pitch of Piety, that he is accounted by
some, not a mortal man, but a glorious Angel clothed with flesh; yet surprised
with humane, and blameable infirmities, and breaks forth here into an
unadvised, sudden passionate, It is enough, now, O Lord, take away my life, for
I am no better then my fathers.

So that this motion, and speech of Elijah, it is a mixed speech, made up of
two several Ingredients:

1. Here is (...), something natural, and carnal, savouring of weakness; a pang
of discontent and weariness. 2. Here is (...), something good and spiritual;
though it be somewhat tainted with unseasonable circumstances, yet separate the
precious from the vile; purge, and winnow it from the chaff of some malignant
infirmities that attend it, and
First, look upon it as natural, and carnal, and savouring of weakness. The
very carriage of the Prophet, the context of this Scripture, and the
unsuccesful event, must make us suspect it as questionable, and doubtful: He
has a little forgot his constancy and courage; and Iezabels threatenings and
persecutions have cast him into some fits and grudgings, of fear and
infidelity. And this very passage, I suppose, makes S. James, chap. v. 17. to
take notice of Elias, as of a man of weakness and imperfection. Elias, A man
subject to like passions as we are. Let Us not gaze and feed our eyes with this
nakedness of the Prophet; go we backward, rather, and cover it; and, in one
word, consider the benefit of it, and use, to our selves.

The Prophet is permitted to fail in this particular, and his failing is
registered, and the Apostle takes notice of it;

1. In honorem Eliae: It Is strange, but true; This blot of infirmity, it serves
for the honor and dignity of him. He was so eminent for Grace, in such a
splendor of Sanctity, that purposely the Holy Ghost is fain to let us know he
was a man, lest Paul and Silas, so glorious in their words and works, amongst
the Lystrians, that they took them for gods; and therefore the Apostles were
enforced to confess, they were men subject to the same passions with them, Acts
xiv. 15.

It is the glory of Religion, when it shines in its full strength;

2. Elias, and so the Saints appear in the Scripture clogged Manichees in S.
Augustines time, urged and exaggerated them, as if the God of the Old Testament
had liked and allowed them; and Moses, and the Scripture, had, by their report,
authorized and approved them. They went too far, to infer, from the relation,
the consequence of approbation. Inter puritatem fontis, and impuritatem vasis.
They have their flaws, and slips, and foyls, that Christ only may be King of
Saints, and the Holy One of Israel. 3. Elias, and the Saints appear to us in
infirmities, to teach and assure us the possibility of imitation. Naturally, we
are ready Elias? or Moses? or Paul? These were Saints; we must not think to
come near them. Thus we set them aloft, and beyond imitation, as half-gods;
whereas the Scripture presents them as men of our size. Thus the Israelites
gave over the hope of winning of Canaan; Oh! they are Giants, we are
Grass-hoppers. No such matter. Elias had his passions and weaknesses; and
though he was eminent, yet not transcendent, but within the sphere and compass
of imitation. It Is a policy of Satan, to stave us off from imitation of the
Saints, by a fond superstitious admiration
But my aim and purpose is to look upon this speech,

Secondly, as severed from passionate and unseasonable Infirmities; and to set
it in just, and due circumstances: and then it is a speech of admirable Piety.

The words are a Suit, and request, made by the Prophet for his death, and
dissolution; he made request for himself that he might dye.

In it observe two Particulars;

1. The Suit it self, O Lord, take away my life. 2. A double Meditation that
works him to this desire and request for death.
1. Is a full contentation, and present satiety; Satis est, It is enough. 2. Is
an apprehension of his natural condition and frailty, I am no better then my
fathers.
First, for his forwardness to dye, and motion he makes for it. Conceive it in
three Particulars:

1. Optat; Here is an holy Wish. 2. Orat; That Is more; he makes an holy
Supplication. 3. Resignat; He yields himself up to God in an holy Resignation.
I. Optat; He expresses his willingness, he wishes to dye. For fuller
understanding of this willingness to dye, let us consider,

1. The Nature of it. 2. The Grounds, and Occasions of it. 3. The Evidences,
and Strength, and Power of it.
1. The Nature of it. To flesh and blood it is a strange paradox; that death
should come within the compass of a Wish; whereas Nature, and Reason, and
Religion too, all seem to lead us to the preservation and maintenance of our
Life, and Being. It Is true, and yet Elias his case is here allowable, and of
ordinary use and practice too. The Saints of God may, and are willing to dye,
and wish for it; but yet with these Caveats: 1. Caveat; In these wishes for
Death, they apprehend 1. In the apprehension of Nature, as it is a state and
condition of Separation and Destruction; so we all shrink at it, and flee from
it. It Is that impression that God has planted in us, a care to preserve, and
maintain our Being. Death thus apprehended, makes David beg respit, Psalm.
xxxix. 13. O spare me, that I may recover strength, before I go hence, and be
no more. Psalm. vi. 5. In death there is no remembrance of thee. This makes S.
Paul sigh and groan. We would not be unclothed of this garment of our flesh,
but enter immediately into immortality. Nay, Christ wish escapal and
deliverance. He feared, and wished, and begged escapal. 2. In the apprehension
of Religion; as Death comes with a malediction, that makes it dreadful. Were
Death only a consequent of Nature, or a contingency of Fortune, or a
contrivance of Man, some more manly resolutions may willingly undergo it. But
as it is the stroke of Gods anger and indignation, that heads the arrow and
dart of Death; and as it is attended with that train of evils and curses that
follow Death, Rev. vi. 8. but to see Hell following after him, that is dreadful.
To look into the Grave, and see the Worm of Corruption, it is sad; but to look
lower, and to see that never-dying Worm, gnawing, and consuming, that is
unsufferable. Thus it is 3. In the apprehension of Faith, we find Death altered
and changed; nay, sanctified, and sweetened to us; made useful and advantageous;
and so it is acceptable and desirable. Death, in its own nature, is Gods
Sergeant and Officer; the appearance of such an one to a debtor, or malefactor,
is fearful, and they run from him; but to a friend, or acquaintance, he is as a
messenger of love, and we willingly admit of him. This Officer comes to a
Christian, not to arrest, or attach him, but lovingly to invite him. It Is made
an in-lett into heaven, a passage to eternity: Oh, When shall I come, and
appear before God!
2. Caveat. The Saints desires of Death are always conceived with a limitation
of submission to Gods will, and appointment. In this case, S. Bernard gives us
a good rule of conformity to Gods will and pleasure. He makes a threefold
subjection of these desires to God: 1. Is, Quod certum est Deum nolle,
execremur nos: When Gods negative is clear and express, he rejects our desires;
we must yield and give over: As it was with Moses, he begged often of God to go
into Canaan; at last, God gives his peremptory Speak no more to me of this
matter; and Moses gave over. 2. Is, Quod certum est Deum velle, velimus and
nos: When Gods will is express and absolute, then we must absolutely desire it.
When God did definitively appoint Moses to dye, Go up to the Mount, and dye;
Moses yields presently: He dyed according to the word of the Lord, Deuteronomy. xxxiv.
5. 3. Is, Quod incertum est, utrum velit, an nolit; neque velimus ex toto,
nequc non velimus, neutri parti nimis inhaereamus: When his will, for Life or
Death, is hidden, and secret, Bernard, tempers his desires and prayers for
Death; Domine, si adhuc populo tuo sum necessarius, non recuso laborem; fiat
voluntas tua; desidero requiem, non recuso laborem.
3. Caveat. The Saints desires of Death are limited, and stinted with an holy
moderation. In this case, what the Schoolmen resolve of Christ's desire of
Life, we may conclude of the Saints desire of Death; it was an act of his
(...), not of Paul expresses it, 2 Cor. v. 8. a (...), they had rather, Phil.
i. 23. a (...), it is better to dye. These desires of Death, are not so much an
(...), what they purpose, and fix upon; as an (...), what is pleasing and
acceptable. As Gerson expresses mortem in desiderio, but yet they have vitam in
patientia; they desire death, but they will with patience endure life. Ask
Saint Paul what he wishes, what is his choice, and longing? Oh! it is to die; it
is his (...). Ask him what he wills; that is to abide still, as God sees cause.

You have seen the nature of Elias his willingness to die: See now,

2. What occasions this willingness in Elias to die. Besides those main grounds
that work the hearts of Gods children to desire death, and to wish it with
comfort; as, 1. That the power and sting of death is vanquished, and swallowed
up in victory. 2. That Christ's death has freed us from the fear of it. 3.
That death puts a blessed end to all sin, and corruption. 4. That it opens unto
us a blessed entrance into glory. Besides these, the spirit of Elias is wrought
to this willingness, and desire of death, upon these Occasions,
1. Taedio afflictionum. Elias his life was beset with many vexations, and
afflictions, the hatred of the whole Kingdom was upon him; he was a man whose
life was embittered with sorrows. It Is one blessed end, and issue of
afflictions, they wean us from the desire of life. Prosperity glues us to this
life, Afflictions loosen us. O mors quam amara! How bitter is death when we are
at ease! O mors, quam jucunda! How pleasant is it when we are in torments.
These minores mortes, fit us for the great Death. S. Paul's fightings with
beasts at Ephesus, made him willing to grapple with this. When the soul of man
finds 2. Grief for the miseries of the Church; That goes nearer. In private
sufferings, a Christian can be more contented, when it goes well with the
public; but if the Church lies under misery, that makes an Elias to call for
death. Old Eli, who digested well enough his private sorrow; yet, when the Ark
was taken, He fell off from the seat backward, and he died. The Saints are loath
to see evil days, to outlive the The Lord shall make thee see Jerusalem in
prosperity all thy days. 3. Sensus impotentiae; An apprehension of an inability
to do any more good. Elias was tired and wearied-out with the gain-sayings of
Idolaters, he had conflicted with their Ahab is hardened, Iezabel enraged, Baal
restored, Gods Prophets are persecuted; he sees no success of all his pains, he
is weary of his life. As the soul in the body, if it be hindered of action, it
forsakes the body presently; so the spirit of Elias finding he could not
prevail, it desires to relinquish an ungrateful world, and to retire to Heaven.
4. Praegustus coeli; The anticipation and feeling of those joys, of that rest,
and bliss, whetts the appetite of Elias, to desire possession and fruition of
them. If there be so much comfort in lumine Prophetiae, how much more is there
in lumine Gloriae? If Mount Carmel, and the Visions there, be so ravishing,
what is Gods high and holy Mountain, and those Revelations? No question, Saint
Paul's rapture, bred in him an high measure of heavenly-mindedness. If the
assistance of one Angel, feeding the Prophet, was so ravishing, what will be
the society of innumerable Angels? If Communion with God upon Earth be so
gladsome, how unspeakable will Communion in Heaven be? Si bonus es, Domine,
animae quaerenti, quanto magis invenienti?
These were the grounds and occasions of Elias his willingness 3. What
evidences of this willingness to die will appear in Gods children, and what is
the strength and power of it? 1. It will appear in encouraging them against the
forethoughts of death; the thoughts of death are not ghastly to them. Their
frequent meditations and desires of it, make them acquainted with it, and
familiar to them. Nemo timet facere, quod se novit been didicisse. Gerson. 2.
It will free them from dismayedness at the approach Non clamores tantum, sed
susurros divinos statim percipiunt. The very beckning of Gods hand makes them
hasten to him. It was no more 'twixt Moses and God, but, Go up and die. Thus
Saint Paul, tell him of bonds, I care not for death, says he. 3. It will bear
them out in the conflict and onset of death. Makes a Christian smile at the
face of it. How peaceably died Jacob, Aaron, Moses, and Simeon? As Saint
Bernard of Christ's yielding up the Ghost, Quis tam facile, quando vult,
dormivit? 4. It makes them triumph over the most tormenting, and cruel deaths.
The three Nobles in Daniel slighted the furnace; Martyrs kissed the stake; they
would not accept of deliverance; like valiant Soldiers that are desirous to be
put upon

That Is the first, Optat; Elias wishes to dye, so willing is he to it.

II. Orat; He makes his prayer that he may die; That imports more.

1. Prayer, is a deliberate desire. Sudden wishes vanish, and die in us. Many
have some pangs of mortification, and leaving the world, as Balaam had; but
would be loath God should take them at their word, like him in the Fable. No;
Elias and a Saint goes further; it is their deliberate wish. All things Job,
groaning with S. Paul, begging with Simeon, their dissolution. 2. Prayer, it is
a religious desire, a matter of devotion, and holy supplication, tendered to
God, framed into their prayer. A natural man, or a wicked man may have wishes
to die, and deliberations. So had Achitophel, and Judas; but they presented not
these desires in prayers to God. The Saints die like Ioab, at the horns of the
Altar, by prayer sacrificing their lives to God; like old Simeon, brought by
the Spirit into the Temple, 3. Prayer, it is a restrained desire. Prayer
extends the will, but restrains the power. He is willing to die, Oh that I had
wings like a Dove! but is not the disposer of his life to part with it at
pleasure. Were our lives our own, we need not beg leave of God to lay them
aside. His Petition, it is a real Confession, that our time is in Gods hand, not
in our own. We may be waiters, and suitors, and in desires hastners, but not
executioners of our own death. As Gregory says, we must like Elias be in ore
speluncae, or in ostio Tabernaculi; with Abraham, Hastening to the coming of
our Lord Jesus, 2 Pet. iii. 12. not before his coming. That Is the second, Orat.
III. Resignat; Take away my life; it is an act of resignation. He directs, and
tenders, and resigns it up to him; and that upon diverse Reasons:

1. Ob jus dominii; He yields up his life to God, as the Lord of it. No man
lives to himself, and no man dies to himself; whether we live, we live to the
Lord, whether we die, we die to him; whether therefore we live or die, we are
the Lords, Romans xiv. 7. placed here in our stations. The issues of life belong
unto him. We are not Masters of our time, or life. David served his time
according to the counsel of God. Old Simeon begs his 2. Ob fidem depositi. He
commits his life to be kept in the hands of God. The Saints in their death, do
not utterly relinquish, and for ever depart with life, but they depositate and
entrust God with it. Thus Tertullian, Our life is, in deposito apud Deum, per
fidelissimum sequestrem Dei and hominum Iesum Christum. Those things that I
have committed to him, he will keep. Our lives, they are the pledge of our
faith we leave in Gods hand. Thus David puts his life into Gods hand; My time
is in thy hand, deliver me from the hand of mine enemies, and from them that
persecute me, Psalm. xxxi. 15. So, our Savior, Father, into thy hands I commend
my spirit. 3. Ob specialitatem modi. It is strange; being in the fear of death,
he begs death; he flies for his life, and yet he flies from it; desires to die,
to escape death. True, but this suit of his is, for the special manner of his
death, and dissolution.
1. Ut non violenta, sed placida morte. He desires to escape Iezabel's cruelty;
begs of God to dispose of him to a peaceable death, and dissolution. Deliver my
darling from the power of the Dog, Psalm. xxii. 20. An (...), it is inter
beneficia; Josiah, to die in peace; so, to Hezekiah. Job accounts it a blessing
to die in his nest, Job xxix. 18. David desires to fall into the hands of God,
rather then into the hands of men. Bless God, that we can close our brethrens
eyes in peace; that they are gathered into the barn, like ripe Corn, by the
Sickle of death, not by the Sword of an enemy. 2. Ut honesta, non probrosa
morte. Take thou my life away, let not Iezabel have her will on me. It Is an
honest, and honorable wish, Decore cadere; as Saul, That the Philistines mock
me not, Sam. xxxi. 4. Not to have the death of a Dog, or the burial of an Ass.
It Is that which the Church bewails, Psalm. lxxix. 2. The dead bodies of thy
servants have they given to be meat unto the fowls of the heaven, the flesh of
thy Saints unto the beasts of the earth. Those two Witnesses in the
Revelations, whom spiritual Iezabel slays, she suffers their dead bodies to lie
unburied, in the streets of that great City. 3. Ut non in Deum contumeliosa
morte, sed honorifica moriatur; that he might die such a death, as God be not
dishonored by it. It was the trial of Baals deity, that he could not rescue
Iezabel has sworn by her false Gods, that Elijah shall suffer. See now, it
stands God upon, in point of honor, to rescue Elias; and Elias begs such a
death, as might not make Iezabel blaspheme and insult over God. It Is the desire
of Gods children, to die for the greatest advantage That God might be magnified
in their bodies by life or death. Thus it is said of Christ's prediction of
Saint Peter's death, by what manner of death he should glorify God. Is
martyrdom the way of glorfying God? The Saints run to it. Ey, but it will make
the enemies of God insult the more: Elias prays against it; Athanasius fled
from it. They desire to die for the greatest purpose, that their deaths may be
precious, and rich.
So much for the first, Elias his willingness to die.

Now follow,

Secondly, The two Meditations that work him to this willingness. Satis est, It
is enough. Take it in these four Expressions;

1. Satis vitae meae; It is enough, Lord; I have lived long enough. The Saints
of God can set a full period, they can stint their desires of longer life. They
wish not an eternity here. A worldly man, Oh, he could part with another life,
might this life last always. No, it is Gods blessing to his children; they are
satisfied with length of days, Psalm. xcii. 16. 2. Satis mundo; They have enough
of the world too. The comforts of this life, the pleasures, profits,
preferments; Barzillai, the offers of preferment. How shameful is it for old
men, to thirst after riches and honors! like the two Tribes, content to stay
on this side Jordan, for the goodness of the Country? 3. Satis officio; He
has finished, and fulfilled his course, that makes him willing to die, he has
accomplished his Ministry. Happy they whose work is done, before their day be
done. The ability of giving a good account of our service, is the powerfullest
encouragement to be willing to die. Thus S. Chrysostom observes, in compare of
these two places; S. Paul's escapal Damascus, and his readiness to die at
Jerusalem; Then he had done no service, so he was loath to die; now Paul the
Aged, had finished his course, then he is ready for bonds, and death. So
Christ, till his work was finished, hid himself; after, he offered himself to
them. 4. Satis miraculosae providentiae; It Is enough for that too. He has been
mightily, and miraculously preserved, and delivered hitherto, he will not
thrust himself upon more miraculous ways; It Is enough, Lord, now end my life.
Non vult oneri esse misericordiae divinae, he will not be burdensome to the
mercy
For this Christian Brother of ours, whose blessed death and Euge's, that the
Author and finisher of his faith, has received him with, are the true, and
full commendation that his soul rests in. Only, in a few words, Know, that the
death of this good man, as it is in Gods eyes, so in ours it must be,
honorable, and precious.

And, because S. Bernard's Rule is true; Preciosa mors Sanctorum, quam
commendat vita pretiosa; You all witness with me, who have lived with him, that
his carriage has been such as becomes a man professing the fear of God. What
his life was from his minority, most of you know better then my self. Only I
have had always the report of it to be upright, and unblameable.

I found him at my coming, the chief credit and improvement of the worthy pains
of my reverend Predecessor; at whose feet he a long time sat as a good
proficient. And since my being

His piety, and course of godliness, has witness of all men, and of the Truth
it self. Which was,

1. Timely, and not put off with delays. He often blessed God, that called him
so timely, not suffering him to linger till the evil day. That had not been so
comfortable. 2. It was observable to his own heart; It was not wrought
secretly, but (as he imparted to me) Piety found him averse; and it was not
without some enforcement used, that he was 3. It was constant; witness his
diligence, and timely forwardness to repair to the House of God; his attention,
reverence, devotion there, observed by others who preached occasionally. 4. It
was judicious, not groundless, but intelligent; able he was to give a reason of
his Faith. He was exercised in the study of the Scriptures, and grounds of
Religion; able to speak understandingly. 5. It was substantial, not languishing
away in circumstances 6. It was diffusive; 1. Into all his life 2. Into his
family and children. 3. Into his friends and familiars. 4. In an unquestioned
honesty to all men.
7. It was solid, and strong, bearing him up in this long, tedious, and
oft-times very sharp, and violent sickness. 1. The apprehensions of his faith
were constantly quick, and comfortable; he felt not the least nibling of Satan.
2. His patience was admirable, and heroical. 3. His charity in spending himself
in fruitful conferences,
8. It was crowned with Perseverance; which God did not only secretly bestow
upon him, but with feeling and assurance; he triumphed in it. One of his last
speeches was, Satan may as well pluck God out of Heaven, as pluck my soul out
of his keeping.






FINIS.
Errata.
PAge 31. line 15. read pactional* p. 75. l. 36. r. 1 p. 132. l. 2. r. any* p.
165. l. 16. r. negative, p. 188. l. 3. r. not* p. 190. l. 34. r. loads. p. 203.
l. 25. r. she. p. 204. l. 5. r. us. p. ^06. l. 21. r. Jerem. p. 243 l. 23. r.
Hear. p. 245. l 27. r. (...). p. 289. l. 45. r. Author. p. 301. l. 41. r. of.
p. 303. l. 44. r. Bona. p. 328. l 33. r. the. l. 38. r. heart, p. 330. l. 6. r.
sacrifice. p. 351. l. 28. r. Accent. p. 353. l. 33. r. loaves. p. 377. l* 15.
r. twi^s. l. 16. r. upbraids. p. 393. l. 23. r. know ye not. p. 396. l. 41. r.
there. l. 20. r. choice, and disparity.


