JVS PRIMOGENITI. OR, THE Dignity, Right, and Privilege OF THE FIRSTBORN.
Inquisited and Defended against the Impious Practice of some Fathers, in
Disinheriting their First-Begotten Sons. In a LETTER to a Friend in the Country.
BY B. J. Esquire
Most Worthy SIR,
I Have Received and Read your Letter, wherein you are pleased to tell me, that
there is a Person (a Neighbor of yours) of good Quality, and of a very
plentiful Estate in Lands, who is a Bigamist, or one that has had two Wives: By
the former Wife he had a Son, now Living; and by the latter, another Son: And
that he has been so profuse in his Love toward this last Wife and her Son,
that he has settled all his Estate of Inheritance, after his own Decease, on
this Younger Son, to the absolute Exclusion and Exhaeredation of his Grotius
tells us, that if a Person Disinherited, did not by his Crime deserve to be put
to Death, he was to be allowed sufficient to sustain Nature. Lib. 2. 1. 7.
Sect. 7.
First Begotten Son, that has been in his Life and Conversation no way guilty
of any Filthy and Dishonest Acts, as to forfeit his Birthright and
Inheritance; yea, he has not only, you say, deprived the Eldest Son of the
Inheritance, but also denies to allow him any present Sustenance, to preserve
that Life, which his Father has given him; which kind of Behavior in a Father
you look upon as Prodigious and Unnatural; and so indeed do I, as well in
respect of the Abdication or Exhaeredation, as of the Father's Denial of
allowing the Son a present Subsistence.

As for Aliment or Sustenance, you must know, all Divines, Lawyers and Casuists
do hold, that Parents do owe it to their Children by the Law of Nature, and do
pronounce it to be a Debt, though not strictly taken, for that which by
Commutative Justice we are obliged to do; Parents nos ale^do, nepotum
nutriendorum debito alligarunt. Liberi haereditatem ut Sibi debitam exspectant.
Lib. 2. de vita Cler. and Ser. 52. adfrat. in Eremo.
(...) largely, and in a looser Sense, for that which cannot with Honor and
Honesty be left undone; in which looser Sense, it is conceived, that of Val.
Maximus is to be understood, Our Parents, by Nourishing us, have laid this
Obligation upon us to Nourish our Children. And that also of Plutarch, in his
Elegant Oration concerning the Love of Parents toward their Children, Our
Children look for our Estates as due unto them after our Death: So great was
the Equity of this, That St. Augustine would not admit that the Goods of such
as had Exhaeredated their own Children, should be received by the Church. And
as Procopius in his Persian Wars observes, Though Humane Laws do in other
things extremely differ one from another, yet all Nations, as well Romans as
Barbarians in this agree, That Children should succeed to their Parents, as the
right Owners of what they leave.

Qui, dat formam, dat quae ad formam sunt necessaria. Aristotle.
But farther yet Sir, It is an Established Maxim among Philosophers, He that
gives the Form, gives things necessary to that Form. Therefore he that gives
Man his Existence, ought as much as in him lies, to provide for him all things
necessary for a Natural and Sociable Life, for hereunto he was Born. There
needs no Law to bind us to this Duty; for all other Creatures, even by Natures
Instinct, do Instit. 1. 2. in princ. D. 1. 1. 3. Bracton. L. 1. c. 5. number. 7.
feed their Young: Hence it is, that the Ancient Civilians do refer the
Education of Children to the Law of Nature. And Euripides comprehends all
Creatures under one and the same Law; Which, says he, is common as well to Men
among themselves, as to them, with all other Sensible Creatures. For that which
Natural Instinct commends to them, Ipse Naturalis Stimulus parents ad
Liberorum Educationem hortatur. c. 5. 13. Sileat.
the same does Reason unto us. Of such force is Natural Affection, that it
easily persuades us to Nourish our Children, says the Emperor Justinian. These
two Things, says Cicero, cannot agree together, to wit, that Nature would have
Procreation, and it would not have the Creature, when it is Born, to be Beloved
and Conserved, the which appears, quoth he, evidently in Brute Beasts, whose
Labor and Care in the Conservation of Cicero Lib. 3. de Finibus.
that which is Born of them, is such, that we may acknowledge the force and
voice of Nature therein. Wherefore it is manifest, says he, that as we
Naturally shun and abhor all kind of Grief; so also we are Naturally moved to
Love the Issue of our Bodies. The same Cicero other where expresses Cicero
Offic. Lib. 1.
himself thus; Whereas it is common to all Living Creatures to have a Care of
those things which they have brought forth, Nature has given especially to Man
a Love to his Children, and a Care to provide them things necessary. To be
short, Salust Condemns that Testament as Impious and Unnatural, by which the
Son is excluded from his part of the Inheritance. And because this is a Debt
that we owe to Nature, therefore D. 25. 35. 4.
the Mother is bound to Nourish the Child that has no certain Father. These
forementioned Authorities being sufficient to prove, That Parents owe a part of
their Goods to their Children, by the Law of Nature: I shall here subjoin what
Foreign Legislators have enacted for the enforcing the Piety of Fathers toward
their Children; and I will begin with those Texts that I have met withal in
Justinians Digests, Code and Authenticks. D. 25. 3. de Agnoscendis, and alendis
Liber. etc. C. 5. 25. de Alendis Liberis, ac parentibus. D. 25. 4. de
inspiciendo ventre custodiendoque partu. Ridley's View of the Civil and
Ecclesiastical Law. Part 4. cap. 2. sect. 1 page 376. edit. 1675.


In the Digests* there is a Purveyance made, whereby both the Father is
compelled to acknowledge his Child, (if there be any Variance between the
Husband and the Wife, upon any Jealousy or Suspicion of Adultery, if the same
cannot be proved by the Woman's own Confession, by Witnesses, by the Act it
self, or some other violent Presumption) and to Nourish and Maintain the same;
but if the Fault appear against her, and it be so Sentenced by the Judge, then
may he as well refuse the one as the other; but for other Children, upon whom
there is no such doubt, the Parents may be constrained to Maintain, Cloth and
Feed them, and to set them out a Portion of their Goods, so that either the
State and Faculty of the Parents will bear it, or the Children have not
deserved to the contrary, wherefore they should not in that sort be provided
for.

L. 3. c. de secundis nuptijs.
In the Code of Justinian, there is an Ancient Law extant, made by Gratianus,
Valentin and Theodosius, to this purpose, That neither the Woman Surviving her
Husband, neither the Man Surviving his Wife, having Issue between them, during
the Matrimony, have the property of those Goods, which either of them brought
one to the other, and are left behind by the Defunct; but the property is the
Childrens of the Deceased, and the Use or Benefit his or hers only, which does
Survive, during his or her Natural Life; and for the return thereof to the
Children that are the right Owners, the Civil-Law is so scrupulous, that if the
Husband or Wife do Marry, it will have him that is to Marry the Widow, bound
with good Sureties for due Restitution of the Defuncts part, unto the Children
of the former Marriage.

In the Authenticks there are several Constitutions made for the preservation
of Childrens Properties, and Portions, whereof take these Novella Constit. 2.
de non eligendo secundo nubentes mulieres; and alienatione, and lucro ante
Nuptialis donationis; and de successionibus earum filiis suis.
following Examples.

That it shall not be lawful for a Widow, coming to a Second Marriage, after
her first Husband is Dead, to Sequester one of her Children from the rest; upon
whom she will bestow such things as her first Husband gave her before Marriage,
but that the Benefit thereof shall be common to them all: Neither that she
convey it over to her Second Husband, or his Children, and so defraud her first
Husbands Children. And that a Man in like sort Surviving his Wife, shall do the
like toward his first Wifes Children; as concerning such Dowry as the first
Wife brought to her Husband.

Novella constit. 92. de immensis donationibus in filios factis.
If Parents give profusely to one of their Children, the other notwithstanding
shall have their lawful Portions, unless they be proved unkind toward their
Parents.

A man shall not have the property of his Wifes Dowry, neither the Woman the
property of that which is given her before Marriage; Novella Constitutio 98.
but the property of either of them shall come unto their Children, yea, though
they Marry not again. From the Civil Law of the Romans let us come to other
Foreign Laws and Customs.

Grotius de jure belli and pacis lib. 2. c. 7. Sect. 8.
It was a Law among the Mexicans, to give all the Ancient Inheritance to the
Eldest Son, and nothing to the rest, but Sustenance only; And not much better
are second Marriages in Brabant, where the Children by the second Venture, have
no propriety in the Estate which the Father held at the Death of his former
Wife. The like Law we find among the Ancient Burgundians.

Hammond in his Annotation on Gal. 4. v. 30.
There is (says a Learned Divine, Doctor Hammond, I mean) a Custom of
Matrimonium Morgengabicum in some Countries, as Denmark, etc. at this day,
where the second Wife and her Children that come from her, are not taken into a
right of the Husbands Estate; she to have any part of it for her Iointure, or
they for their Inheritance, but only some Gifts or Portions, Assigned them by
Compact, which are called Morgengab, or Marriage-Gift; with which they are to
content themselves, without any part of the Inheritance. Hitherto of the
Impiety and Unnaturalness of such Parents as shall deny their Children Aliment;
as also of the Provision Foreign Laws have made for the Maintaining, Clothing,
and Feeding Children, during the Lives of their Parents; and for preserving
after their Deaths the property of either of them, for the benefit of their
Children: I come now (Sir) to vindicate the Dignity, Right, and Privilege of
Primogeniture, against that Impious and Unnatural Practice of Disinheriting
Firstborn Sons; and that the practice of your Neighbor, can be no other than
such, appears in this, that he has not Exhaeredated his Son by the former
Venture, upon the account of any horrid Crime the Son has committed, but only to
serve his own Foolish Fantacies, private Passions, and indirect Fondness: And
therefore let him hear what Philo and others say to the point of Exhaeredation;
Patres Abdicationis tristia verba pronuntiant, filiosque a domo sua et omni
cognatione abrumpunt ita demum, ubi amorem illum, quem ingentem ac super omnia
eximium natura parentibus indidit, foliorum improbitas vicit.
Fathers (says he) do sometimes pass Sentence of Exhaeredation on their own
Sons, thereby cutting them off from their own Families and Kindred, but never
until they grow Shameless and Incorrigibly Wicked, and that their Hatred of
their Childrens Vices have quite overcome that great and unparalled Love
which Nature had at first imprinted in them. Not much different is that of
Phinehas in Diodorus, no Father does willingly Punish his Sons, unless the
measure of their Wickedness do very much exceed the measure of his Natural
Affection: Nor that of Andronicus Rhodius, no Father can be so unnatural as to
cast off his Son, if he be not extremely Wicked. I cannot here pass over in
Silence, the Famous and Heroical Behavior of two Heathen Fathers toward their
Wicked Sons; but propound it to all Christian Parents, as a Pattern for their
Imitation. lib. 5. v. 9. Sanguini honorem reliquit.


Valerius Maximus, says thus of Quintus Hortentius; His Honor he bequeathed
to his Blood, for though he detested the Wicked Life of his Son, yet Dying, To
preserve the Order of Nature, be made his Son, Ne ordinem Naturae confunderet
non nepotes, sed filium haeredem scripsit.
and not his Nephews, Heir to his Estate; thinking it enough, that he had
declared his dislike of his Sons Ill Manners whilst he Lived: And therefore
Dying, he left him the Honor due to his Blood. The like he records of Fulvius,
who causing his own Son to be Apprehended for Conspiring his Death; did not
only forbear to Prosecute him whilst he Lived, but-Dying, made him Heir of all
he had, regarding his Birth Dominum omnium esse voluit, quem genuerat haeredem
instituens, non quem fuerat expertus.
and Blood, and not his Crimes. Besides what has been by me Cited, in favor of
the First Born; from the Pious Practice of mere Heathen Parents toward their
Wicked Sons; I shall endeavor for the Confutation of all Exhaeredators, to
demonstrate unto you, that the Preference and Prerogative of Primogeniture in
point of Dignity, Right, and Possessions, which the Firstborn Son Claims to
himself, is derived from the Law of Nature, Instituted by God, and highly
approved, very much Regarded and Countenanced by our most Eminent Divines.

I. The Right, and Privilege of Primogeniture, is derived from the Law of
Nature

That this Precedence, both in Honor and Right appertains to the Firstborn by
the Law of Nature, appears in this, That Primogeniture is not only preferred
where Gods Revelation of himself in the Scriptures are received, but where they
are not received; the Right therefore of Primogeniture is from the Law of
Nature: Again, If Primogeniture had not been a Sacred Thing, and Inheritance
annexed to it by the Law of Nature, then could not Esau have been pronounced a
Profane Person for Selling his Birth right, Heb. 12. 16. Although he did it to
save his Life, Genesis 25 34. But being done by the Law of Nature, I say, Esau by
his Sale could not transfer it to Jacob; yet, because Esau did despise it, Genesis
25. 34. it was just with God to transfer it to Jacob; neither can it be showed
any where in Sacred Writ, but that always Primogeniture in Descents, was a good
Title, where God did not interpose; which is consonant to that which Nicholas
Conjates utters: Natura quidem suum sequens ordinem primum natos honorat, at
deus non semper in maximis privilegiis eum ordinem insistit.
Nature indeed observing her own Order, gives the greatest Honor to the
Firstborn; but God (says he) has a Prerogative above Nature, and acts not
always by her Order: And therefore, though Primogeniture be preferred by the
Law of Nature, and D. 4. 5. 8. D. 50. 17. 8. D. 38. 7. 6. Inst. 1. 15. 3. and
3. 1. 11.
immutable by the Will of Man; yet is not God, as it is said before, subject
thereunto; but before the Flood he rejected Cain, though the Firstborn of
Adam, and made him a Vagabond, and none of the Patriarchs. So in the First Age,
after the Flood, God subjected Canaan, although the Son of Ham, Japhets Eldest
Brother, to Japhet: And so Let there be an Inquiry made, whither your Neighbor
has had any divine Revelation for what he has done.
did God prefer Jacob before Esau, and Ephraim before Manasses, and Solomon
before Adonijah: Yet where and when God did not reveal himself to Man
otherwise, was ever Primogeniture preferred.

II. The Preference, and the Prerogative of Primogeniture, in point of Dignity,
Possessions and Consecration, is of Divine Institution.

This is manifestly evidenced by several places of the Holy Scriptures.

I. In respect of Dignity and Power, as where God said to Cain of his Younger
Brother Abel, His desires shall be subject to thee, and thou shall have
Dominion over him, Genesis 4. 7. So when Old Jacob called his Sons to Bless them,
he expresses himself in this wise to his Eldest Son Reuben; Reuben, says he,
Thou art my First born, my Might, and the beginning of my Strength, the
Excellency of Dignity, and the Excellency of Power, Genesis 49. 31. Which kind of
Excellency is acknowledged by the Good King Jehoshaphat, to be annexed to
Priority in Birth; For he gave to his Younger Sons great Gifts of Silver and
Gold, with Fenced Cities in Judah; but the Kingdom gave he to Jehoram, because
he was the Firstborn, 2 Chronicles. 21. 3.

2. In respect of Possessions, As, where God forbids the Father to
Disinherit the Firstborn of his double Portion, because by Right of Birth it
is Due unto him, Deuteronomy. 21. 17.

3. In Respect of Divine Consecration, As, where God makes Choice of the
Firstborn to be Sanctined and Consecrated to himself. Exodus 13. 2. and 22. 29.
and 34. 19. Levit. 27. 26. Numb. 3. 13. and 8. 16. and 18. 15. Neh. 10. 36.
Luke 2. 23. Sir, Any Reasonable Man would think that such Respects or
Considerations as these should be enough to deter a Father from Depriving his
Eldest Son of his Prerogative of Birth, and from preferring his Younger Son,
which he has by another Wife, in Succession before him.

III. Privileges of Primogeniture are highly Approved, and very much
Countenanced, by the Divines of our Church.

What Respect and Care the Eminent Divines of our Church have had for the
Preservation of the Order of Nature, and of Divine Institution, in the Right of
Primogeniture, as to the Dignity and double Portion of the Firstborn; shall be
Apparanted (amongst many others) by a Triumvirate of Witnesses, to wit, Usher,
Tailor, and King.

I. What special Regard is to be had by Parents to the Eldest Son, hear what
Dr. Usher, Archbishop of Armagh utters, Since God (says be) has Honored him
with that Dignity, as to be their Strength, he should be also Honored by them,
(at the least) with a double Portion, as by the rest of the Brethren with
Honor, yet so as he fall not from his Honor by some Horrible Sin. Body of
Divinity, or, The Sum and Substance of the Christian Religion, Page 262. Edit.
1648.

2. Dr. Tailor, Late Bishop of Down and Connor, touching The Sickmans Practice
of Charity and Justice, speaks in this wise, Let him make his Will with great
Justice, and Piety, that is, that the Right Heirs be not defrauded, for
Collateral Respects, Fancies, or Indirect Fondness, but the Inheritance Descend
in their Legal and Due Channel, Holy Dying, Chap. 4. Sect. 9. Page 231. Edit.
1660.

3. My Third and Last Witness in Favor of the Firstborn, is Dr. King, Late
Bishop of Chichester, who expresses himself in these very words following.

There be (says he) but Two Great Rights, which you find in Scripture. 1. Jus
Primogeniturae, The Right of Primogeniture. 2. Jus Regni, The Right to a
Kingdom. In the First of these all Domination was Originally Founded; For the
Elder Brother in his Tribe, was Princips Familiae, The Prince of his Family.
And not only the Excellence of Dignity which was his Birthright, but the
Inheritance is so fastened to him, as if God intended no separation either by
the Hatred, or Affection of the Parent. The Text is most Remarkable, ( Deuteronomy.
21. 15.
and I wish all Parents would lay it to heart,) If a Man have two Wives, one
beloved, and another hated, and they have Born him Children, both the beloved
and the hated; and if the Firstborn Son be hers that was hated: ver. 16.
Then it shall be, when he makes his Sons to Inherit that which he has, that
he may not make the Son of the beloved Firstborn, before the Son of the ver.
17.
hated, which is indeed the First Born: But he shall acknowledge the Son of the
hated for the Firstborn, by giving him a double Portion of all that he has:
For he is the beginning of his Strength, the Right of the Firstborn is his.

Therefore, Though the Law has been over Curious to un-rivet this Birthright,
by God's and Man's Law Entailed upon the Elder, by bringing in Feigned Persons,
and false Vouchers, and Formal Proclamations to divest it. I must only say thus
much, Sic non fuit ab Initio, (as Christ said of Divorce) It was not so from
the Beginning; but out of the hardness of Men's Hearts did this Invention
spring. How ill an Inheritance Wrested from the Right Heir, to be placed upon
another, has Prospered, let the Example of so many Unhappy Families Ruined
upon this Account Testify, Sermon on Ezech. 21. 27. Page 19. 20. Preached at
White Hall, on the 29 of May. 1661.

Thus, Dear Sir, having offered to your View, my Sentiments of your Neighbors
unnatural Deportment, and Carriage toward his Firstborn Son, as well in point
of his Abnegation of present Sustenance, as of his Exheredation, I Humbly take
my Leave of you, with this Assurance attending on it; that I am never more
pleased, than when I have the opportunity of Subscribing my self,

Your most Affectionate Friend, and very Humble Servant.

LONDON: Printed for R. Battersby, at Staple-Inn next the Bars, in Holborne.
1699. Price 2 d.


