NON COMPOS MENTIS: OR, THE LAW RELATING TO NATURAL FOOLS, MAD-FOLKS, and
LUNATIC PERSONS, Inquisited, and Explained, for Common Benefit. By JOHN
BRYDALL, Esquire of LINCOLN'S END.

SENECA, Lib. XIV. Epistolarum, Epist. 94. Siquis furioso praecepta det,
quomodo loqui debeat, quomodo procedere, quomodo in publico se gerere, quomodo
in privato^ ^it ipso, quem monebit, insanior. LONDON: Printed by the Assigns of
Richard and Edward Atkins, Esquires; for Isaac Cleave, at the Star, next
Serjeants-Inn, in Chancery Lane. 1700.

THE AUTHOR TO THE READER.
SEeing there have been exposed to Public View, a couple of Tracts, the one
entitled, The Woman's Lawyer; and the other styled, The Infant's Lawyer; I
have been induced to (...) a Publication of this perexiguous ^iece, and have
named it, The Law of Non Compos Mentis: It being no other than a Collection
(methodically digested) of such Laws, with the Cases, Opinions, and
Resolutions, of our common Law Sages, as do properly concern the Rights of all
such, as are wholly destitute of Reason: Some whereof are become so by a
perpetual Infirmity, as Idiots, or Fools Natural: Some, who were once of good
and sound Memory, but by the Visitation of God, are deprived of it, as Persons,
in a high Degree, Distracted: Some, that have their lucid Intervals, (sometimes
in their Wits, sometimes out,) as Lunatic Persons: And some, who are made so
by their own Default; as Persons overcome with Drink, who during the time of
their Drunkenness, are compared to Mad-Folks. All which Sorts of Non Compos
Mentis, are the Subject Matter of the ensuing Sheets.

I shall no longer detain the Reader from the perusal of them, than by
tendering him the good Advice, given by an ingenious Author, touching Witless
Persons; which is as follows:

Take no Pleasure in the Folly of an Idiot, nor in the Fancy of a Lunatic, nor
in the Frenzy of a Drunkard; make them the Object of thy Pity, not of thy
Pastime. When thou beholdest them, behold, how thou art beholding to Him, that
suffered thee not to be like them. This wholesome Counsel of his, to embrace,
will be looked on as an Act of Prudence: But to reject it, will be such a piece
of Folly, as will undoubtedly bring him, that shall be guilty of it, under the
hard Sentence, of our old English Proverb, Let him be begged for a Fool.

A TABLE OF THE QUERIES, RELATING,
First, To IDIOTS.
1. IF the King commit the Body, or Estate, of an Idiot, to J. S. to do with
him as he pleases, whether this Grant be good? 26 2. Whether the King shall
have the Mean Profits, from the time of the first Seizure of the Idiot, or from
the time of the Office found? 27 3. At what time was the Prerogative in the
Custody of Idiots Lands conferred on the Crown, during the Life of an Idiot, or
Natural Fool? 29 4. Whether the Ter-Tenant shall be allowed to Traverse an
Office of Idiocy, upon a Scire Facias brought against him by the King? 32 5.
Whether there be any Diversity in the Case of the King, to answer either to the
Tenure, or the Possession? 32 6. Whether an Idiot, or Fool Natural, can be
bound by the Sale of his Goods, in Market Overt? 33 7. Whether a Stranger may
tender Money in Performance of a Condition to save the Estate of an Idiot? 33
8. If an Idiot should make his Testament wisely, and reasonably, to the Show,
whether this Testament of his be good, or not? 34 9. If an Idiot above the Age
of 21 Years, makes a Feoffment in Fee of his Inheritance, how, and in what
manner that Feoffment may be avoided during his Life? 39 10. A Fine levied by
an Idiot, what it operates? 40 11. A Fine levied by J. S. Uncle of an Idiot,
who was seized of an Inheritance, (the said J. S. dying in the Life of H. the
Idiot), whether this Fine so levied, can bar the Grandchild of J. S.? 42 12.
Whether the Custody of an Idiot, holding by Copy of Court-Roll, belongs to the
King by his Prerogative, or to the Lord of the Copyhold Manor? 44 13. Whether
there be any Difference between an Estate made in Person, or by Attorney, as to
an Idiot, or any other Non Compos Mentis? 45 14. A Man dies seized of Land, his
Heir being an Idiot, and before Office he levies a Fine, whether the King shall
have the Custody of the Lands, or not? 47 15. Idiots in the Custody of the
Prince, whether such Custody can be devised by the Testator? 47 16. Idiocy,
whether in any Case triable in the Ecclesiastical Court? 48 17. An Executor
having obtained Judgment in an Account, and having the Defendant in Execution
for Arrearages, and the Testament being afterward annulled for Idiocy in the
Testator, whether the Testament being disapproved, an Audita Querela will lie
for the Defendant? 49 18. Whether an Attornment made to a Grant by an Idiot, or
other Non Compos Mentis, can be good in Law? 50 19. Whether an Inquisition
shall bind an Idiot, without an Examination by the Council? 51 20. No
Possessions in Lands descending to an Idiot, but only a Right, whether the King
can enter, and have the Custody of it? 51
Secondly, To Persons Furious, or Distracted
1. WHether Madness, or Insanity of Mind, ought to be proved by him that
objecteth the same? 66 2. Madness, before the making of a Testament, whether it
can be presumed to continue? 67 3. Furor, or Madness, whether hard to be
proved? 68 4. Madness, whether it may be proved by singular Witness? 69 5.
Whether the Grant of a Copyhold Estate, made by the Lord of the Copyhold
Manor, that is a Madman, can be good in Law? 69 6. A Madman being seized of
Land, and granting a Rentcharge out of this same Land, dies, his Heir entering,
and the Grantee distraining for Rent-Arrears, whether the Heir may bring an
Action of Trespass? 70 7. A Man of Sane Memory, seized of Land, makes a
Feoffment; and after, when he is besides himself, or distracted, makes a Letter
of Attorney for Livery of Seisin, which is executed accordingly, the Feoffor
dies; whether the Heir may lawfully enter upon the Feoffee? 71 8. Whether the
Entry of the Heir of a Furor Man be lawful, maugre a Descent had in the Life of
his Ancestors? 71 9. What kind of Privies can disable him, who was deprived of
the Use of Reason, and Understanding? Or by whom, and what Acts done by a
Madman, can ^e avoided? 72 10. Whether a Man Distracted, or out of his Wits,
be relievable in a Court of Equity, to avoid a Deed made by himself? 73 11.
Whether this Maxim, That the Party cannot disable himself, shall hold good in
Criminal Causes, as Felony, Murder, and Petit Treason? 74 12. If a Man while
he is Non Compos Mentis, destroys himself, whether he can be said to be Felo de
se? 78 13. Whether he that is Non Compos Mentis, and totally deprived of all
Compassings, and Imaginations, can commit High Treason, by Compassing and
Imagining the Death of the King? 79 14. Whether a Madman be punishable in
Trespass? 83 15. Whether a Furor Man can be a Purchaser? 84 16. Whether the
Will of one that afterward becomes Mad, or Distracted, shall stand good in
Law? 84 17. Whether a Fine before a Judge of Non sane Memory, or a Grant of an
Office made by him, be good in Law? 86 18. A Madman makes an Exchange of his
Lands with J. S. for other Lands, and the Exchange is accordingly executed; the
Non sane Man dies, whether his Heir can avoid this Exchange? 86 19. Whether,
and in what Cases, Lachess can prejudice an Idiot, Madman, or other Non Compos
Mentis? 87 20. Whether he that is a Furor Man, can be appointed Tutor? 89 21.
Whether a King, or other Sovereign Prince, during the time of his Insanity of
Mind, be capable of making Peace? 90 22. Whether it be lawful to speak Untruth
to Madmen? 90
Thirdly, To LUNATICKS.
1. WHether the Testament made by a Lunatic, during his mad Fits, be valid in
Law, when he is come to himself? 103 2. Whether a Testament can be made by a
Lunatic Person betwixt his Fits? 103 3. If a Testament be made by a Lunatic
Person, and the time of the making unknown, whether this Testament be good or
not? 104 4. Whether the Dying seized of a Bastard Eigne, without Interruption,
shall bar the Right of a Mulier Puisne, that is a Madman, or a Lunatic? 105
5. Whether a Lunatic can be prejudiced by Laches of suing Livery? 106 6.
Whether a Lunatic be punishable for hurting a Man? 107 7. Whether a Devise by
a Lunatic, be aided by the Statute of 43 Eliz. Of charitable Uses? 107 8.
Actions touching a Lunatick's Lands, whether they must be brought in his own
Name? 108 9. Whether the Lord of a Manor can grant the Custody of a Copihold,
belonging to a Lunatic, without a special Custom? 109 10. Whether the Acts of
a Lunatic, during his Intermissions, or lucid Intervals, be binding? 110 11.
Whether the King, who is to keep the Lunatic, his Wife, and Children, with the
Profits of the Lands, can grant them over to the proper use of another Person?
110 12. Whether the Committee of a Lunatic, can grant Copyhold Estates? 111
13. If a Dean of Paul's happen to be a Lunatic, who shall have the Custody of
him? 112 14. If a Man, in Criminal Cases, be suspected to counterfeit Madness,
or Lunacy, how shall it be discerned, whether he be mad, or not? 113 15. A
Bargain by a Lunatic, before the Lunacy found, whether avoidable, by being
found a Lunatic, with a Retrospect of several Years? 115 16. Whether the View
of Land, according to the Statute of Westminster. 2. c. 48. be grantable in all Cases
to Infants, to Men in Prison, to Lunaticks, or suchlike. 117
Fourthly, To DRUNKARDS.
1. WHether a Man's Drunkenness can be any good Plea in the Courts at
Westminster, either in Criminal, or Civil Acts? 122 2. A Drunken Person,
whether he may make a Testament? 123 3. Such as violate the good Name of
others, with opprobrious Words, through Weakness of their Brain, either by
Frenzy, Drink, or other Lightness, how are they to be dealt withal? 125
The Reader is desired to Correct these Faults, before he begins: Other minuter
Faults, of literal Errors, and Pointings, it is expected his Candor will pass
over.
INstead of Does the Law, read, Does not the Law, p. 2. l. 22. Instead of Br*
4. r. Br. Idiot 4. p. 23. Instead of an Act, r. a Tract, p. 26. Instead of
Thompson's Case, r. Tourson's Case, p. 27. Instead of any Man make, r. any Man
may make. p. 34. Instead of a Man seized, r. a Man died seized, p. 47. Instead
of being seized of a Carve of Land in Fee. r. being seized of a Carve of Land,
grant a Rent issuing out of the same Land in Fee, p. 70. Instead of tuentur, r.
tenentur, p. 77. Instead of de prodictionibus, r. de actionibus, p* 72. Instead
of detus, r. vetus, p. 94.

THE LAW OF NON COMPOS MENTIS, Inquisited and Explained.
BEFORE I come to Treat of the Law relating to persons of Non Sane Memory, I
shall by way of Introduction show the Reader upon what Right the Dominion of
Infants, Idiots and Madmen is grounded. In performance whereof, I must be
beholding to Hugo Grotius (that Prodigy of Learning) whose Words are these
following:

If we respect (says he) the Laws of Nature only, no Right of Propriety can be
admitted to those, who have not the Use of Reason: But Ius Gentium, Lib. 2.
Cap. 3. Sect. 6. De jure belli and pacis.
the Law of Nations, for the Common Good, does indulge this Favor unto
Infants, Idiots and Madmen, that they may lawfully receive and retain the
propriety of things. All Mankind in the mean time sustaining their Persons. For
Humane Laws may constitute many things, that were Preternatural, but not any
thing that is against Humana jura multa constituere possunt praeter naturam
contra naturam nihil.
Nature. And therefore that right of Dominion that, in favor to such is by the
unanimous consent of all Civilized Nation thus introduced, may happily consist
with the first Ac^ of Dominion, which is a power to have and to hol^ things in
Propriety; but not with the second Act which is freely and voluntarily to
dispose of them with* out a Guardian (it being but Equal, (...) those that ca^
not govern themselves should be governed by (...) Aequum est, ut qui se regere
non potest, regatur aliunde.
there is.) For as to the righ^ of Alienation, and the like, because in their own
Nature they imply the Act (...) a Will, guided with Alienatio rerum solidum
desiderat habere judicium. Cassiodorus 11, 11.
Reason, which Infants, Id^ ots and Madmen have not: Therefore (...) (...) Law
permit these (...) unto them, as to the (...) and free Exercise of their
Rights. But here may be started a Question or two:

Quest. One whereof is this; If there be found a People that have no use of
Natural Reason at all, Wheth^ all Right and Dominion may be taken from them?

Sol. It is not sufficient (says Grotius) to justify War, to pretend, that we
were the first Discoverers (...) any place, in case it be possessed, though by
Pagans and In^dels, or by Men of dull Apprehension; for to entitle our selves
to be the first Founders, it is necessary, that the Inventio est eorum, quae
nullius sunt.
Land so found should belong to none. Neither is it necessary to Propriety or
Dominion, that a Man should be endued with Virtues Moral, or A true Maxim in
Divinity, Dominion is not founded in Grace; Bishop Brownrig 1 Vol. of Sermons,
p. 50. And Amesius in his Cases of Conscience, Lib. 5. Cap. 41. Qu. 1. Numb. 7.
Theological, or to be of a quick Understanding; yet may this seem to be
justifiable, That in case there can be found a People that have no use of
natural Reason at all, there all Right and Dominion may be taken from them: Yet
ought we in Charity to to make them such an Allowance as is necessary for their
support and maintenance, as well as to other Idiots and Madmen. For as to what
has been already said concerning the Care which the Law of Nations take to
preserve the Property of Infants and Lunaticks, it appertains to such People
with whom we have any commerce, or make any contract with, which we cannot have
with such a People, as are wholly and altogether destitute of Reason; and
therefore of these it may be very well doubted, whether they have any Property
at all. Grotius De jure Belli and Pacis, Lib. 2. Cap. 22. Sect. 9, 10.

Quest. The other Question may be this, If a King or Sovereign Prince be a
Minor, or if he be not of sound Memory, whether such a one has Right to Govern?

Sol. For the Solution of this Question, we must distinguish, as in private
Dominion, so in Empire, between the Right it self, and the exercise of that
Right, or Grotius De jure belli and pacis, Lib. 1. Cah* 3. Sect. 24.
between the first act and the second; for as a King (though an Infant) has a
Right to Govern, but is not permitted to exercise that Right; so he that is
Furiosus aut captivus, Mad, or a Prisoner, or that so lives in a Foreign
Country, that he is not permitted freely to act in such matters, as concern the
Good of that Empire, that is remote from him; for in all such cases they have
their Lieutenants, or Viceroys to act for them: Wherefore Demetrius living
under restraint with Seleucus, did forbid any Credit to be given to his
Letters, or unto his Plutarch in Demetrius, and Peter de la Primadaie, in his
French Academy, cap. 50.
Seal; but commanded, that all things should be so governed as if he were dead.
Note, Girard affirms, that it has been the Custom of the French, to honor
their Kings, whatsoever they are, whether wise or foolish, valiant or weak,
esteeming the De L'Estate de France, Lib. 1. Sir John Hayward in the Life of
King William II. p. 151. Edit. 1613.
Name of King to be Sacred, by whomsoever it be born.

And therefore they obeyed not only Charles the Simple, but Charles the sixth
also, who reigned many years in plain distraction of his Mind. So when
Alexandrides, King of Sparta, left two Sons, Cleomenes the Eldest, distracted
in his Wits, and Doricus the youngest, both able and inclined to all Actions
of Honor, the Spartans acknowledged Cleomenes for their King.

Having given the READER an Account upon what Right the Dominion or Propriety
of Infants, Idiots and Madmen is founded; I shall now proceed to treat of the
Law of England (as also to mention Sparsim, here and there, the Roman and Canon
Law) relating to such as are deprived of the Use of their Reason, Wits and
Understanding.

A Man of Non sane Memory, is termed among the ^atines Insanus, Fatuus, Amens,
Demens, Mente Captus Maniacus Furiosus, Stultus, Errore Mentis Affectus, a
Rationis usu Destitutus Lunaticus; and Non Compos Mentis; Of which several
Terms, the last of all is most ^re and legal; and according to our English
Legu^ians The several sorts of Non Com* pos Mentis in the Common Law
or Lawyers, Non Compos Mentis is of four ^orts: First, He that is an Idiot
Born. Next, He that ^y Accident afterward loses his Wits: Thirdly, A
Lu^atick, that has sometimes his Understanding, and ^ometimes not: Lastly, He,
Co. Lit. 246. b. 247. a. Co. L. 4. Beverley's Case. Cowell's Interpreter Tit.
Non Compos Mentis, and Minshew's Guide into the Tongues, 495.
which by his own act depri^eth himself of his right ^ind for a time, as a
Drun^ard.

Of these four sorts in their Order, and that by way of Description, by way of
Remark, and by way of Query.

PART the FIRST. Of him that is an Idiot Born.
SECT. I. An Idiot or Natural Fool, who.
BEfore a Description be given of an Idiot, that from his Nativity, by a
perpetual Infirmity,: is Non Compos Mentis, it will not be much amiss to give
some Account of the first Original of the Word [ Idiot]: Idiota or Idiotes, is
a Greek Word, and properly signifies a private Man, who is not employed in any
Public Office. Amongst the Latins it is taken for illiterate or foolish; and
hence in Cicero, and other good Authors, Idiota signisies commonly an unlearned
and illiterate person; In Herodian, he is said to be (...) qui rei alicujus est
imperitus, ut (...). But among the English Jurists, Idiot is a Term of Law, and
taken for one that is wholly deprived of his Reason and Understanding from his
Birth; and with us in our common Speech is called a Fool Natural; of whom there
has been given a Description by several of our Law-Authors.

Master Fitzherbert describes an Idiot thus: He who shall he said to be an
Idiot from his Birth, is such a Person, who cannot account or number twenty
pence, or cannot tell who is his Father or Mother, or how old he is, Not. Brev.
579. B. de Idiota Inquirendo.
etc. So that it may appear that he has no understanding of Reason, what shall
be for his Profit, or what shall be for his Loss.

The Author of the Exposition of the Terms of the Law, gives this Description
of him;

Idiot is he that is a Fool Natural from his Birth, and knows not how to
account or number twenty pence, or cannot name his Father or Mother, nor of
what Age Tit. Idiot. f. 201. a. b.
himself is, or such like easy and common Matters, so that it appears he has
no manner of understanding of reason or government of himself, what is for his
profit or disprofit, etc.

An Idiot by the Civilian Swinbourn, is thus described.

An Idiot, or a natural Fool is he, who notwithstanding he be of lawful Age,
yet he is so witless that he cannot number to Twenty, nor can tell what Age he
is of, nor knows Quid? Estne statim fatuus quisquis non potest demonstrare
patrem? Absit: Nam, ut concedam filium illum merito sagacem dici, suum qui
novit patrem, certe si concluderem reliquos omnes esse fatuos, vereor, ne
excluderem paucos Notum est, quod cecinit de Telemacho, insignis Homerus: Ex
illo natum matter me dicit. At ipse nescio: Nam certum quis possit scire
parentem? Quod igitur scriptum reliquit Fitzhorbert, Que tiel person serra dit
Sot and Idiote, que ne scier dire qui fuit son pere ou mere, etc. ita
exaudiendum est, si nesciat respondere, quis appellatur ipsius Pater.
who is his Father or Mother, nor is able to answer to any such easy Question;
whereby it may plainly appear that he has not reason to discern what is to his
profit or damage, though it be notorious, nor is apt to be informed or
instructed by any other: His Treatise of Testaments and last Wills, Part 2.
Sect. 4. f. 29. a. b. Edit* 1590. Vide more of an Iidot's description in
Stanford super Praerog. Regis. c. 9. f. 34. b* Edit. 1567. And M. 31. l. 3.
Tit. Saver de desault, p. 37.

SECT. II. Of the Remarks concerning Idiots.
I. REMARK.
IF a person has so much knowledge that he can read, or learn to read by
Instruction and Information of others, or can measure an Ell of Cloth, or name
the days of the Week, or beget a Child, Son or Daughter, or such like, whereby
it may appear that he has some light of Reason, then such a one is no Idiot
naturally. Exposition of Terms of the Law, f. 201. b. Tit. Idiot. Stanford
super Praerog. Regis, c. 9. Fitzherbert Natura Brevium, p. 519. B.

II. REMARK.
An Idiot or Fool Natural, is incapable of making a Testament; nor can he
dispose of his Lands or Goods: Stat. of 34 and 35 H. 8. cap. 5. Swinbourn in
his Treatise of Wills 2d Part, Sect. 4. f. 39. b. Godolphin's, Orphans Legacy,
Part 1. cap. 8. numb. 3. p. 25. Cowel's Institutes Lib. 2. Tit. 12. Sect. 2. p.
115. Edit. 1605.

III. REMARK.
If a Man be of a mean understanding (neither of the wisest sort, nor of the
foolish'st) but, indifferent as it were, betwixt a Wise man and a Fool, yea
though he rather incline to the foolish sort, so that for his dull capacity he
might worthily be termed Grossum Caput, a dull Pate, Dunce, such a one is not
prohibited to make a Testament, Swinbourn 2 part, sect. 4. Or, as Godolphin
expresses himself; He that only is of mean Capacity or understanding, or one
who is, as it were betwixt a man of ordinary Capacity and a Fool, such a one is
not prohibited from making a Testament, Orphan's Legacy, 1 part, cap. 8. numb.
3. But it is with this Proviso (says he) that he has understanding enough to
conceive what is the nature of a Testament, or last Will, being well informed
thereof, otherwise he being destitute of such understanding, is not fit to make
a Will. Simon de praet. de Interp. ult. Vol. Lib. 2. Dub. 1. f. 4. Co. Lit. 6.
The Marquess of Winchester's Case.

IV. REMARK.
If a person be so very foolish, so very simple and sottish that he may be made
believe things incredible or impossible, as that an Ass can fly, or that in
old-times Trees did walk, Beasts and Birds could speak, as it is in Aesop's
Fables; for he that is so foolish, cannot make a Testament, Testamentum facere
non possunt Impuberes, quia nullum eorum animi Iudicium est. Instit. 2. 12. 1.
Cod. 6. 22. 4.
because he has not so much wit, as a Child of ten or eleven years old, who is
therefore intestable, namely, for want of Judgment, Swinbourn 2 part, p. 4.

V. REMARK.
Although by the Laws of this Land, He that can measure a Yard of Cloth, or
rightly name the days of the Week, or beget a Child; shall not be reputed an
Idiot or a natural Fool; yet it will not be indisputably granted, that an act
so natural as the begetting of a Child, can so qualify a natural Fool, so as
to render him in the charitablest construction of Law Testable; for if he be
such a natural Fool, as that though of Lawful Age, yet cannot declare of what
Age he is, nor number twenty, nor knows his natural Parents, by their several
Names and Relations; and the like easy Questions, such an Idiot is undoubtedly
intestable. Cum Lege quis intestabilis jubetur esse, eo pertinet, ne ejus
testimonium recipiatur, and eo amplius (ut quidam putant) neve ipsi dicatur
Testimonium, D. 28. 1. 26.
Godolphin in his Tract, Entitled, The Orphan's Legacy, part 1. c. 8.

VI. REMARK.
Notwithstanding all which, if it may appear by sufficient conjectures and
circumstances, that such Idiots had the use of Reason and Understanding at such
time as they did make their Testaments, then are such Testaments good and valid
in Law. 3 Eliz. Dyer 203, 204. Swinbourn 2 part, sect. 4. Godolphin in his
Orphans Legacy, part 1. cap. 1. And yet (says the same Godolphin) if he be an
Idiot indeed, albeit he may make a wise reasonable, and sensible Testament as
to the matter of it, yet it will be void.

VII. REMARK.
To make a Promise or Contract complete and binding, the use of Reason is
required in the promiser or contracter, which renders the Promises or Contracts
of Idiots, Madmen and Infants void and of no force in the Laws of all
Countries. Grotius de jure belli and pacis, lib. 2. cap. 11. sect. 5. Briton
cap. 28. f. 61. b. 63. a. And what is said of Contracts and Promises, is true
also in the Case of Oaths, namely, That he that Swears should be of sound Mind,
and should use great deliberation before he takes an Oath; of which sound Mind
and deliberation, Idiots, Madmen and Infants are not capable, Grotius of the
Rights of War and Peace, lib. 2. cap. 13. sect. 2.

VIII. REMARK.
He that is a Fool natural, or a Madman, is incapacitated to be a Judge, for
want of Knowledge and discretion. Mirror c. 2. sect. 2. p. 115, 116. Edition,
1642.

IX. REMARK.
An Idiot, or Fool natural is incapable of being made an Arbitrator called in
Latin [ Compromissarius Iudex.] For the Law dictates, that such Persons be
elected Arbitrators as have sufficient skill of the matter submitted to them,
and have neither Legal nor natural impediment; That they be not Infants, who by
reason of their few years want discretion and knowledge; that they be neither
Madmen nor Idiots, for such are void of reason and understanding, West. Symb.
2d part, Sect. 23, 26, 27. Author of a Tract Entitled, Arbitrium Redivivum.
cap. 4. p. 19. D. 4. 8, 9.

X. REMARK.
Every one cannot make an Attorney; for an Infant within Age, a Mute, a deaf
Man, a Fool natural, Chescun ne puit mye fair Attorne: car Enfant de dens age,
ne muit, ne surd, ne fol naistre, ne home arrage, o^ autrement sans discretion,
ne puit mie fair Attornes.
a man distracted in his Wits, or otherwise without discretion, are incapable
of constituting Attorneys, Britton, cap. 126. f. 285. b. Mirror cap. 3. sect.
10. p. 194.

XI. REMARK.
All such persons are capable to be Essoigners, or Excusators, as are not
prohibited by Law; but there are some that are forbidden; among which number
are Infants, all such as are in Ward, Excommunicated persons, Madmen and Fools
natural, Mirror of Justices, cap. 2. sect. 30. p. 175.

XII. REMARK.
If a Suit be brought against another, he may say, that he ought not to answer
the Demandant or Plaintiff, for he is an Excommunicate person, a Madman, an
Infant or a Fool from his Nativity; and it shall be a good Plea or Exception to
the Demandant or Plaintiff's Suit or Action, Fleta, lib. 2. cap. 54. numb. 3.
p. 116. and lib. 6. cap. 38. numb. 1. p. 431. and cap. 40. numb. 1. p. 434.
Bracton lib. 5. tract. 5. cap. 20. numb. numb. 1. f. 420. b. Mirror des
Justices, cap. 2. sect. 3. s. 117.

XIII. REMARK.
There is required in them who contract Matrimony, a sound and whole Mind to
consent; for he that is either an Idiot or Madman, without intermission of Fury
cannot Marry. The Woman's Lawyer, lib. 2. sect. 10. p. 57. Edit. 1632. This
Consent (says Amesius) must be voluntary and free, else it is not esteemed a
humane consent; and hence the consent of such as have not the use of Reason is
no force to such a Contract, Lib. 5. cap. 35. Qu. 4.

XIV. REMARK.
A Man that is Deaf and Dumb, and yet has Understanding, may Attorn by signs;
but one that is Non compos mentis, as an Idiot, cannot attorn, for that he has
no understanding, cannot agree to the Grant, Co. Lit. f. 315. a. 26 E 3. 63. 18
E. 3. 53. 6 Co. f. 69. a. Sir Moyle Finch's Case.

XV. REMARK.
Minoribus acquiruntur possessiones, and naturaliter fatuis, and furiosis per
Tutores inde, aliter vero minime eo quod intellectum recipiendi non habent, nec
retinendi: Curatores autem sanum intellectum oportet habere, quia si minorem
fatuum a Nativitate, vel furiosum miseris ut possideas, nequaquam videris per
eos possessionem apprehendisse, quia intellectum non habent, Fleta lib. 3. c.
15. nu. 1 4. p. 203. VdeBracton, lib. 2. c. 18. nu. 6. f. 43. b.

XVI. REMARK.
It appears in the old Books of Law, that it was expedient that Idiots should
have a Curator or Tutor, or one that should take the charge of their Persons,
Lands and Goods, which Office since Bracton, lib. 5. tract. 5. c. 20. nu. 1. f.
420. b. Fleta lib. 1. c. 11. nu. 10. Cowel's Institutes, lib. 1. tit. 23. sect.
1. de Curatoribus.
is devolved to the King, and made parcel of his Prerogative, 17 E. 2. cap. 9.
As Fitzherbert very well says, in his Natura Brevium. The King is the
Protector of all his Subjects, their Goods, Lands and Tenements, and therefore
of such as cannot govern themselves, Stamford Sur Praerog. Regis, cap. 9.
Britton c. 66. f. 167. b. Sir Thomas Smith's Commonweath, lib. 2. c. 4. p. 98.
Eng. Edit. 1640.

XVII. REMARK.
The King having the custody of the Persons and Estates of Idiots, can let to
Farm, rendering Rent, all the Possessions of a Fool natural, but not that which
he has Title unto, or Action: And therefore upon an Office (finding that the
Idiot's Ancestors died seized of an Estate Tail) it is sufficient to Traverse
the dying seized, for that only entituleth the King, 31 E. 3. Saver de Fault,
37. 1 H. 7. 24. Finch's Law, lib. 2. c. 2.

XVIII. REMARK.
By the Common Law the King shall have as great protection of the Goods and
Chattels of an Idiot, as of his Lands, and that as well the scattering of his
Goods 4 Co. f. 128. Beverly's Case.
and Chattels, as the Alienation of his Lands is to be remedied and redressed
by the King, to whom the Law has given the Protection and Custody of him.

XIX. REMARK.
As after Office found, an Idiot cannot Alien, Give, etc. So Alienations,
Gifts, etc. made before Office found shall be avoided after Office thereof
found, for no Latches shall be found in the King, nor any prejudice thereby
shall accrue to the Idiot for not suing the Office before the Feoffment of
Gift, 4 Co. f. 428. Beverley's Case.

XX. REMARK.
If the Idiot dies before Office found, after his Death, no Office can be
found; for the words of the Writ are, Et ipsum viis, and modis quibus super
statu suo melius poteritis informari circumspecte examinaretis, etc. which
cannot be done when he is dead, and without Office, the King cannot be
entitled, 16 E. 3. Livery 30. 4 Co. f. 128. Beverley's Case.

XXI. REMARK.
When the King is informed, that one, who has Lands and Tenements, and is a
natural Fool from his Birth, the King may award his Writ, called Idiota
inquirendo vel examinando, which directed to the Escheator, or Sheriff of any
County, where the King has information, or understanding that there is an
Idiot naturally so Born, so weak of Understanding that he cannot govern or
manage his Inheritance, to call before him the Party suspected of Idiocy and
examine him; and also to inquire by the Oaths of twelve Men, whether he be
sufficiently witted to dispos^ (...) his own Lands with discretion or not, and
to certify accordingly into the Chancery, for the King (as has been said
before) has the Protection of his Subjects, and by his Prerogative the
Government of their Lands and Substance, that are naturally defective in their
own discretion, Doctor Cowel's Interpreter, Brevia de inquirendo de Idiota
tit. Idiota inquirendo, etc. Minshew's Guide to the Tongues 373. Note, The
several Forms of the Writs in Latin, directed either to the Escheator, or the
Sheriff are to be seen in the Register Orig. f. 266. a. b.

XXII. REMARK.
When a Man is found an Idiot from his Birth by Office, he, who is so found
Idiot (falsely as he supposes) may come personally into The manner how he that
is falsely found to be an Idiot, shall avoid the Office.
Chancery, before the Chancellor, and pray, that before him, and the Justices
and Sages of the Law, which he shall call to him (and are called the King's
Council) he may be examined, if he be an Idiot or not; or by his Friends he may
sue forth a The Writ De Idiota coram consilio ducendo ad examinandum, Reg.
Orig. f. 267.
Writ out of the Chancery, returnable in the Chancery, ibidem coram nobis, and
consilio nostro examinand. And if he be found upon examination that he is no
Idiot, the Offic found thereof, and all the Examinations which has been made
by force of the Writ, or the King's Commission, is utterly void, without any
Traverse, or Monstrans de droit, or other Suit; as appears by the Register
Orig. f. 267. and F. N. B. 233. vide 15 E. 3. in Fitz. Tit. Livery 306. 9 Co.
f. 31. The Case of the Abbot of Str^ta Marcella. Stamford super Praerog. c. 9.
f. 34. a. 36^. Edit. 1567.

XXIII. REMARK.
If a Scire Facias be awarded against the Feoffee of an Idiot, and the Feoffee
appearing, upon the Scire Facias, may traverse the Idiocy, as appears he did in
the Book of 18 E. 3.

XXIV. REMARK.
The Law gave the King but the Custody of the Lands of-the Idiot; and although
the same continued during the Life of the Idiot, yet having but the Custody,
the King has not the Freehold, or Fee, but the Freehold is in the Idiot: For
the Statute of Praerogativa Regis, c. 9. says, Quod post mortem eorum reddet
ea rectis Haeredibus: That after the Death of such Idiots, he shall render it
to the right Heirs, 17 E. 3. 11. 13 E. 3. Saver Default 37. 4 Co. f. 126. b.
Beverley's Case.

Stamford Super Praerog. c. 9. is of the same Opinion; Though the King (says he)
has the possession during the Idiot's Life, yet the King has 1 H. 7. 15.
not the Freehold thereby, but only a bare Custody, for the Freehold remains in
the Heir.

XXV. REMARK.
The King ought not to seize an Idiot's Lands, until such time as he is found
an Idiot by Office* Stamford Super Praerog. Regis, c. 9.

XXVI. REMARK.
The Office, when a Person is found to be an Idiot, shall have relation a
Nativitate, to avoid all mean Acts done by him; that is to say, Feoffments,
Releases, or the like. Fitzherbert, and Stamford, Super Praerog. c. 9.

XXVII. REMARK.
Although the Statute of Praerogativa Regis, c. 9. says, Custodiam Terrarum, yet
the King shall have as well the Custody of the Body, and of the Goods and
Chattels of Idiots, as of their Consillo and Opera Curatoris tueri debet non
solum Patrimonium, sed and corpus and salus furios^seu fatui, D. 25. 10. 7.
Lands, and other Hereditaments, as well those which they have by Purchase, as
those which they have as Heirs by the Common Law. 4 Coke, f. 127. a. Beverley's
Case.

XXVIII. REMARK.
The Person, by the Statute, ought to be* an Idiot, a Nativitate, sc. Fatuus
Naturalis, and not by Accident or Infirmity: For if he were once Wise, and
became a Fool by Misfortune, the King shall not have the Custody of him. 18 E.
3. Fitz. Tit. Scire Facias, Pl. 10. Fitzherbert's Natura Brevium, Stamford
Super Praerog. Regis, c. 9. f. 34. b. 4 Co. Beverley's Case.

XXIX. REMARK.
No Feoffment, Gift, Lease, or Release, that an Idiot can make of his
Inheritance, but it may be avoided, during his Life; which is apparented by
these words of the Prerogative Statute: Ita quod nullatenus per eosdem fatuos
alienentur, nec quod eorum H^redes exhaeredentur. So that such Idiots shall not
alien, nor their Heirs shall be disinherited, 4 Co. 127. Beverley's Case,
Stamford Super Praerog. Regis, c. 9. f. 35. b. Edit. 1567.

XXX. REMARK.
The King is to take the Profits belonging to the Idiot to his own use, finding
him Necessaries; and this is evidenced by the words of our Statute: Capiendo
necessaria sua. Stamford Super Praerog. Regis, c. 9. f. 34. b. The King (says
Wingate) shall have to his own use all the Possessions of a Fool Natural,
during his Idiocy. His Body of the Common Law of England, c. 2. of Possessions,
Nu. 3.

XXXI. REMARK.
The King is bound to Reparations of the Idiot's Lands and Tenements; for the
words of the Statute are, The King shall have the Custody of the Lands of
Natural Fools, taking the Profits of them, without waste, or destruction.
Stamford Super Praerog. Regis, cap. 9. f. 35. a.

XXXII. REMARK.
The King, by the Statute of Praerogativa Regis, is to be preferred in this
Title of Idiocy, before any other Lord which might claim the Idiot as his Ward;
and this is evidenced by the words of the said Statute, De cujuscunque feodo
Terrae illae fuerint: Of whose Fee soever the Lands be holden. Stamford Super
Praerogativam Regis, c. 9. f. 35. a. Edit. 1567.

XXXIII. REMARK.
If one be found an Idiot by Office, and before the King does make a Seizure of
the Lands, the Idiot departs this Life, yet the King shall seize the Lands,
because of these words of the Statute, Post mortem eorum eam rectis Haeredibus:
After the Death of such Idiots, he shall render it to the right Heirs. Which
the King cannot do, but upon a Seizure. Stamford Super Praerog. Regis, c. 9. f.
34, a, b.

XXXIV. REMARK.
When an Idiot does sue, or defend, he shall not appear by Guardian, or
Prochein Idiota a nativitate non recipitur, vel ad agendum, vel defendendum in
aliqua causa, per Custodem, vel proximum propinquum sed requiritur, ut ipse
semper praesens sit in propria persona. Cowell's Institutes, lib. 1. tit. 23.
sect. 6. de Curatoribus.
Amy, or Attorney, but he must be ever in Person; and whosoever will plead best
for him, shall be admitted, 33 H. 6. 18. 21. F. N. B. 27. G. Co. Lit. f. 135 b.
Stampford c. 9. 35. b. 36. a. 4 Co. 124. b. Beverley's Case. Saunders Rep. 2
Part, f. 335. Dennis, v. Dennis. But an Infant, or a Minor, shall sue by
Prochein Amy, and defend by Guardian. 27 H. 8. 11. 40 E. 3. 16. 20 E. 4. 2. F.
N. B. 27. H. Co. Litt. f. 135. b. Cro. Iac. f. 640, 641. Simpson, and Simpson,
v. Iackson. 4 Co. f. 124. b. Beverley's Case.

XXXV. REMARK.
By the Statute of Westmin. 2 c. 15. it is ordained, That if an Infant be
eloined, he may sue by Prochein Amy; but this same Statute extends not to an
Idiot. Co. Inst. f. 391.

XXXVI. REMARK.
A Descent shall not take away the Entry of an Idiot, albeit the want of
Understanding was perpetual; for Cook in his Comment on Littleton, sect. 405.
f. 247. a.
Littleton, sect. 405. speaks generally of a Man of Non sane Memory. Vide
Noy's Treatise of the Grounds of the Common Law, Cap. 16. Of Descents.

XXXVII. REMARK.
If an Idiot makes a Feoffment in Fee, he shall in Pleading never avoid it, by
saying, That he was an Idiot at the time of his Feoffment, and so had been from
his Nativity: But upon an Office found for the King, the King shall avoid the
Feoffment for the benefit of the Idiot, whose Custody the Law gives to the
King, 39 H. 6. 42. b. F. N. B. 202. 5 E. 3. 70. Britton, cap. 28. f. 66. a, b.
Coke in his Comment on Littleton, sect. 405. f. 247. a. Stamford, in his
Exposition of the Statute of 17 E. 2. cap. 9.

XXXVIII. REMARK.
A Copyholder of unsound Memory, an Idiot, or Lunatic, cannot forfeit his
Estate. Sheppard in his Treatise, entitled, The Court-Keeper's Guide* cap. 22.
p. 172. Edit. 1656.

XXXIX. REMARK.
A Grant, or Surrender of Copyhold-Land, made by an Idiot, is not valid in the
Laws of England. Sheppard's Court-Keeper's Guide, Cap. 19. Page 117, 118.

XL. REMARK.
A Surrender, or Grant of Copyhold-Land, may be made to an Idiot, or any other
Man of unsound Memory, and good in Law. Sheppard, Cap. 19. p. 118, 119.

XLI. REMARK.
By the Statute of 32 H. 8. c. 46. the Master of the Court of Wards, and
Liveries, by the Advice of the Attorney, Receiver-General, Note, This Act of 32
H. 8. for the Erecting of the Court of Wards, is taken away by the Statute of
12 Car. 2. c. 24.
and Auditors, or three of them, had Authority to survey, govern, and order all
and singular Idiots, and Natural Fools, now being in the King's Hands, or that
hereafter shall come, and be in the King's Hands; and to survey and order all
the Manors, Lands, Tenements, and other Hereditaments whatsoever; and also to
let, and set the same to the King's Use, for the time of the King's Interest,
for such Rent, and fined as by their Discretion shall be thought convenient;
the finding and keeping of the said Persons, their Wives and Children, and the
Reparations of their Houses and Lands, always to be considered in the doing
thereof, etc.

Note, Though these Officers of the Court of Wards and Liveries, had Power to let
and set the Lands of Idiots, and Natural Fools; yet, according to the Sentiment
of Stamford, they had no Power to grant the Custody of their Bodies.

XLII. REMARK.
Regularly, Conveyances, or other Acts of Record, acknowledged, or made by one
that is an Idiot, are unavoidable by him, or his Heirs, in the Laws of England.
4 Co. Beverley's Case.

XLIII. REMARK.
If an Idiot, or other Non Compos Mentis, does levy a Fine, and declare the use
thereof, this Declaration shall bind him as long as the Fine continues in
force; for inasmuch as he has been admitted by the Judges, as a Man that has
the use of Reason, the Law, as long as the Fine remains in force, permits him
to limit the use thereof, 10 Co. 42. b. Mary Portington's Case. 2 Co. f. 58.
Beckwith's Case, 12 Co. f. 123, 124. Mansfield's Case.

XLIV. REMARK.
There is a diversity taken between an Idiot, and an Unthrift, or Spendthrift;
as appears in the Case of one Brent, of the County of Somerset, who was
presented for an Idiot; but it was evidenced, That he could write Letters, and
make Acquittances, and suchlike; whereupon he was adjudged an Unthrift, but no
Idiot. Br. 4. in Fine.

Note, That as Minors have Curators, and Governors, so also mad Persons, and
Spendthrifts, Unthrifts, or prodigal Persons, are appointed by the Civil Law of
the Romans, to have Governors; for that they can no more govern their own
State, than the others can: For they, and such as know no time, nor end of
Spending, but riot, or lavish out their Estates, without all Discretion; and
for their sakes I will here subjoyn the Sentiments, that the old Roman Jurists
have had of these Prodigals, or Spendthrifts.

Note, Cicero 3 de Officiis, tells us, That there was a Law made by Laetorius,
which provided, that there should be appointed for those which were Distracted,
or did prodigally waste their Patrimony: For as it appears by the common
Adage used among the Romans, Ad Agnatos and Gentiles deducendus est: They did
account all Prodigals or Spendthrists, Mad men; they meaning no more by that,
than we do by our English Proverb, Let him be begged for a Fool. The Reason of
their Adage was, because if any were distracted, by the Roman Law his Wardship
fell Ad Agnatos and Gentiles, i. e. to the next of the Kindred. Goodwin's Roman
Antiquities, lib. 3. sect. 4. c. 24.

Qui Eversores, aut insani sunt, (says Caius) omni tempore vitae suae sub
Curatore esse jubentur: Quia substantiam suam rationabiliter gubernare non
possunt, Lib. 2. Tit. 8. de Curationibus.

Lege 12 Tabularum (says Ulpian) Prodigo interdicitur bonorum suorum
administratio. Quod moribus quidem ab initio introductum est, sed solent hodie
praetores, vel praesides, si talem hominem invenerint, qui neque tempus, neque
finem expensarum habet, sed bona sua dilacerando, and dissipando profudit,
Curatorem ei dare exemplo furiosi. Et tam diu erunt Ambo in Curatione, quam diu
vel furiosus sanitatem, vel ille sanos mores receperit; quod si evenerit, ipso
jure desinunt in potestate Curatorum. D. 28. 10. 1.

Divus pius (says the same Lawyer, Ulpian) matris querelam de filiis prodigis
admisit, ut Curatorem accipiant in haec verba: Non est novum, quosdam etsi
mentis suae videbuntur ex sermonibus Compotes esse: Tamen sic tractare bona ad
se pertinentia, ut, nisi, subveniatur his, deducantur in Egestatem. Eligendus
itaque erit, qui ^os consilio regat: Nam aequum est, prospicere nos etiam eis,
^ui quod ad bona ipsorum pertinet, furiosum faciunt exi^um. D. 25. 5. 12. 2.

Furiosi (says Pomponius) vel ejus cui bonis interdictus sit, nulla voluntas
est. D. 50. 17. 40.

Hence it is, that Spendthrifts, or Prodigals, are forbidden to make their
Testaments, or to dispose of Is cui lege bonis interdictum est, testamentum
facere non potest, and si fecerit, ipso jure non valet. Ulpian.
their Lands or Goods any other ways, Instit. 2. 12. 2. D. 28. 1. 18. Swinburn
in his Tract of Testaments, and Last Wills. 2d Part, sect. 24. Ulpianus, Tit.
20. de Testamentis.

Among the Grecians, such as were Spendthrifts, were branded with Infamy.

Decoctores paternae, aut alterius cujusvis haereditatis ignominiosi sunto: All
wild Extravagants, and Spendthrifts, who lavishly run out the Estates left them
by their Fathers, or others, shall be (...).

From the Remarks touching Idiots, or Fools Natural, we come to our Queries,
attended with Solutions, relating to them.

SECT. III. The Queries, with their Solutions, concerning Idiots, or Natural
Fools.
I. QUERY.
If the King commit the Body, or Estate, of an Idi^, (...) J. S. to do with
them as he pleases, whether this Gra^ be good?

SOLUTION.
THE Estate, and Persons of Idiots, and Lunatick^ are by Law entrusted with the
Supreme. Should the Sovereign Trustee commit the Body, or Estate, of either of
them, to I. S. to do with them as absolutely, and inordinately, as he pleases,
the Grant were void; because Breach of Trust; and the Committee punishable for
any exorbitant Usage. The Author of an Act, entitu^ led, Defensio Legis, Sect.
10. Par. 81. p. 139. Edit 1674.

The Estates and Persons of Idiots, and Lunaticks, (says the Lord Chief
Justice Hobart) are by Law entrusted to the King; if therefore the King should
grant to one that intrudeth upon the Possessions of an Idiot, or Lunatic, or
take their Persons unlawfully, that he would not meddle with them, but suffer
them to do their pleasure, these Grants were void: For these are Acts of
Justice, and Offices of a King, which he cannot put off: Cessa regnare, si non
vis judicare. And in these things the King is never supposed by Law ill
affected, but abused and deceived; for Eadem praesumitur men's Regis, ^ae est
Iuris. Hobart's Princeps jura tueri praesumitur, Princeps Custos legis, c. 3.
28, 35. D. 43. 8. 1. 10.
^eports, f. 155. Colt and ^lover, v. Bishop of Co^ntry and Litchfield.

II. QUERY.
^hether the King shall have the mean Profits, from the time of the first
Seizure of the Idiot, or from the time of the Office found?

SOLUTION.
William Tourson, an Idiot from his Birth, by force of Remainder, after the
Death of his Father, was Co. Lib. 8. f. 170. Thompson's Case.
^intly seized with his El^er Brother, for Term of ^eir Lives; the Lessor did
purchase the Estate of the El^er Brother, and took the Body of the Idiot, and
all the Profits of the Lands; and afterward, William Tourson was found Idiot
from his Birth, by Inquitision: The Question was, Whether the King shall have
the mean Profits of the Moiety from the time of the first Seizin of ^he Idiot,
or from the time of the Office? And it was ^esolved, That the King should not
have the Profits, but after the Office; and yet to some intent the Office shall
have relation from the time of the Birth, Scilicet, to avoid all mean Acts done
by the Idiot, and therewith agrees F. N. B. 202 E. and 18 E. 3. -- Scire Fac.
10. 32 E. 3. Scire Fac. 106. 50 Ass. Pl. 2. But for the mean Profits, it shall
not have relation, but from the time of the Office found; for the same
appears of Record, that the King has Right to seize the Lands: As if the
King's Tenant commit Felony, Anno 1 Iac. and afterward, Anno 3. he is
attainted for the same Felony; and afterward, Anno 4. all is found by Office:
No^ this Office shall have relation to the time of the Felony, t^ avoid all
mean Alienations and Encumbrances; but for the mean Profits, it. shall have
relation to the time o^ the Attainder, for then the King's Title appears of
Record; and there is a difference where the King shall have the Custody, by
reason of a Seigniory, as in the Case o^ Wardship, there the King after Office
found, shall have the mean Profits from the time of the Death of the Anc^stor,
for the King has Wardship by reason of his Seigniory, and he loses his Rent,
and Services in the mean time. But the King has the Custody of an Idiot, no^
in respect of any Seigniory, but in the Right of hi^ Royal Protection, because
that his Subject is not able to govern himself, nor his Lands, or Tenements
which he has; and this Protection does begin by the Office found* And the
Statute of Praerogativa Regis, c. 9. says, The King shall have the Ward of
Lands of Natural Fools, taking the Profits, etc. to find them Necessaries, etc.
By which it appears, that the King shall take the Profits from the time that
he is charged with the finding of the Idiot, and his Family, Necessaries, etc.
and that is after the Office found; so that when the King seizes in the Right
of his Regal Protection, as in the Case at Bar, or Nomine districtionis, as in
Case of Alienation of Lands in Capite, without License, or of Marriage of his
Widow, without License; there, after Office found, the King shall not have any
of the mean Profits before the Office, as it is holden in 8 E. 4. 4. 40 Ass.
Pl. 36. But when the King seizes by reason of a formed Right, or Title, there
the King shall have the mean Profits, from the time of his Right or Title first
accrued, as 18 Ass. Pl. 18. from the time of a Condition broken, 41 E. 3. 21.
from the time of the Alienation of his Tenant in Mortmain: And if the Lands
holden of others, from the time the Title came to him, 46 E. 3. Forfeiture 18.
upon the ^atute of West. 2. c. 45. which gives the Contra for^am Collationis,
from the time of the Alienation; for these Acts the King's Title and Right does
accrue: and in the principal Case, no Precedent can be found, at the King was
answered the mean Profits before the ^ffice found, but only after the Office;
and so the Quere Stamford's Praerogativa Regis, 34. is well resolved.

III. QUERY.
^t what time was the Prerogative in the Custody of Idiots Lands conferred on
the Crown, during the Life of an Idiot, or Natural Fool?

SOLUTION.
Sir Edward Cook tells us, That at the making of the ^atute of Magna Charta, c.
4. Anno nono Henrici ter^, the King had not any Prerogative in the Custody of
(...) Lands of Idiots, during the Life of the Idiot: For if (...) had had, this
Act of Magna Charta would have pro^ded against Waste, etc. committed by the
Committee, (...) Assignee of the King, to be done in their Possessions, (...)
well as in the Possessions of Wards; but at this time ^e Guardianship of
Idiots, etc. was to the Lords, and others, according to the Course of the
Common Law. and Idiots, from their Nativity, were accounted al^ays within Age;
and therefore, the Custody of them ^as perpetual, so long as they lived, for
that their Im^otency was perpetual: And the Lord of whom the ^and was holden,
had not a Tenant that was able to do ^im Service, and therefore within the
Reason of a Custo^y of a Minor, or of an Heir within Age, in Case of Wardship.
And this appears by Fleta, who attesteth, that anciently Idiots, or Natural
Fools, were in the Cu^tody of the Lords: Solent (says he) Tutores terras
Idio^rum, and Stultorum cum Corporibus eorum Custodire suo perpetuo, quod
licitum (...) Lib. 1. c. 11. nu 10. p. 6. Vide Bracton, lib. 5. tract. 5. c.
20. nu. 1. f. 420. b. Cowell's Instit. lib. 1. tit. 23., sect. 1. de
Curatoribus.
and permissum, eo quod s^ sos regere non noveru^ nam semper judicaba^ infra
aetatem, vel qu^ verum, quia plures per ^ jusmodi Custodiam Exhaeredationem
compatiebantur, ^ visum fuit and communiter concessum, quod Rex Corpor^ and
Haereditatum hujusmodi Idiotarum, and Stultorum^ perpetuis Custodiam obtineret,
dum tamen a nativi^ fuerint Idiotae, and Stulti: Secus autem si tarde a ^
cunque Domino tenuerunt, and ipsos maritaret, and ex o^ exhaeredatione
salvaret, hoc tamen adjecto, quod Do^ nis Feodorum, and aliis quorum
interfuerit, ut in Ser^ tiis, Redditibus, and Custodiis, usque ad legitimam
aeta^ secundum Conditionem Feodorum, releviis, and hujusmo^ nihil juris
deperiret.

But then it is demanded, When was this Preroga^ given to the King? Certain it
is, that the King had it ^ fore the Statute of 17 E. 2. de Praerogativa Regis,
^ it appears in our Books, that the King had this Pre^ gative, Anno 3 E: 2.
And before that, it is mani^ that the King had it before Britton wrote, in the
Reig^ E. 1. as you may read in his Book, Cap. 66. De Gard^ f. 167. b.

And it is as clear, that when Bracton wrote, (w^ wrote about the end of the
Reign of H. 3. that the Ki^ had not then this Prerogative. And therefore it
follo^ eth, that this Prerogative was given to King E. 1. befo^ that Britton
wrote, by some Act of Parliament, which not now extant. And it appears by the
Mirror of I^ stices, agreeing with Fleta, that this Prerogative w^ granted by
Common Assent, Vide Lib. 4. f. 125. Bev^ ley's Case.

Hitherto Coke; And now let us see what Stamfo^ says to this Point: 'This
Prerogative of the King (quoth he) to have the Custody of an Idiot, begun in
the time of King E. 1. as it should seem to him, because he finds none that
wrote of it before Britton; for Bracton speaks but little Competit exceptio
peremptoria tenenti ex persona petentis, si petens fuerit non sanae mentis quod
discernere nesciat, vel omnino nullam habeat discretionem. Talis enim non
multum distat a Bruto, quod Ratione caret. Sed discussio hujusmodi exceptionis,
discretioni, judicis relinquatur. Bracton, lib. 5. tract. 5. c. 20. nu. 1.
of Idiots in his Fifth Book, in the Title of Exceptions against the Plaintiff,
where he says, It is a good Exception for the Person of him that complains,
or brings any Action to say, He is a Fool Natural; because such a one
differs not much from a Beast that wants Reason: But the discussion of such a
kind of Exception is left to the discretion of the Judge. Howbeit, Britton, f.
167. b. says, That the King ought to have this Prerogative herein; for these
be his very words: Et pur ceo que ascun foitz avient que ascun Heir est Sot
^aistre par quoy il nest my able a heritage demaunder and ^arner, volons que
tielz Heirs, de qui qu'il unques te^ent malles and femelles demoergent en
nostre guard ovesque ^out autres services que a luy appendent de terre tenue de
^uy, and issint remeynent en nostre guard, taunt come ils ^urent en lour sotise.

Upon these words of Britton by the by, Stamford notes three things: 1. That
the King shall not have the Custody during their Lives, but during their
Idiocy. 2. That notwithstanding the Land is in the King's Hands, yet the Lords
shall have their Seigniories, which is by way of Petition. 3. That the other
Lord shall not have the Wardship of the Heir, nor of his Lands, but only the
King; which third thing, (says he) by the Statute of Prerogative is not so
plainly set forth.

IV. QUERY.
Whether the Ter-Tenant shall be allowed to traverse an Office of Idiocy, upon
a Scire Facias brought against him by the King?

SOLUTION.
It was found by an Inquest of Office returned into Chancery, that W. N. was
seized of certain Manors, and they were held of the King in Chief, and died 50
Ass. Pl. 2. Br. Gr. Abridgement, Tit. Idiots.
seized, and the Tenements descended to R. a Fool Natural from his Nativity, as
Son and Heir; and that N* held the Tenements: Whereupon the King sued a Scire
Facias against N. to show Cause why the King should not seize the Lands into
his Hands for the Idiocy of R. who comes and says, That R. such a Day released
all his Right to the Possession, to M. at the making of which Deed, R. was of
good Memory, which M. infeoffed him, without that R. was a Fool Natural from
his Nativity; and it was not denied, but that the Ter-Tenant may traverse the
Office in this Form.

V. QUERY.
Whether there be any Diversity in the Case of the King, to Answer either to
the Tenure, or to the Possession?

SOLUTION.
An Office was found, 1 H. 7. 18, 19. 2 H. 7. 3. Broke's Grand Abridgment, Tit.
Idiots.
that I. S. died seized of such Lands by Gift in Tail, made to him, which
descended to W. his Son and Heir, who was an Idiot; and N. comes and traverseth
the Office, making Title, Absque hoc quod dict. J. S. fuit seisie, pro^t, etc.
the Day he died, and it was found against the King. And by Hussy, and Fairfax,
the Case of Idiocy is not like to the Case of the Ward of Land, and Heir: For
there the King shall answer to the Tenure; but in the Case of an Idiot, the
King shall answer only to the possession: For if an Idiot has Title to Land,
either by Entry, or by Action, if he has it not in possession, the King shall
not have it; and so Judgment was given upon the Traverse, for the Issue was
upon the possession, and it matters not, whether the Idiot had Right or not, if
he had not the possession.

VI. QUERY.
Whether an Idiot, or Fool Natural, can be bound by the Sale of his Goods in
Market Overt?

SOLUTION*
Regularly the Sale by a Stranger in Market Overt, binds an Infant, a Feme
Covert, that has Right, Coke in his Exposition of the Stat. of 31 El. c. 12.
f. 713.
either in her own Right, or as Executor, or Administrator, Idiots, Non Compos
Mentis, Men beyond Sea, and ^n Prison, that right have to the same.

VII. QUERY.
Whether a Stranger may tender Money in performance of a Condition, to save the
Estate of an Idiot?

SOLUTION.
If an Heir be an Idiot, of what Age soever, any Man make the Tender for him,
in respect of the absolute Coke in his Comment on Littleton, 334. f. 206. b.
disability; and the Law in this Case is grounded on Charity: And so in like
Cases.

But note, It is otherwise in the Case of an Infant; for it has been adjudged,
Trin. 27 El. That where one Cro. El. f. 134. Watkins v. Ashwick.
tendered Money upon a Mortgage for an Infant* who was not Guardian, nor was to
have any Interest in the Land, that it was adjudged a void Tender. Vide Co.
Litt. f. 206. b.

VIII. QUERY.
If an Idiot, or Natural Fool, should make his Testament wisely, and reasonably
to the show, whether this Testament of his be good, or not?

SOLUTION.
If an Idiot, or Natural Fool, should make his Testament so well and wisely (in
Appearance), that the same may seem rather to be made by a reasonable Man, than
by one void of Discretion ^ some have been of Opinion, that such a Testament is
good, and available in Law Ita fuisse decisum in Senatu Romano Commemorant Io.
And. and And. Barba cum aliis in c. ad nostram de consuetud. extra.
; because Almighty God does sometimes so illuminate the Minds of the Foolish,
that for that present, in that Case, they are not much inferior to the Wise.
And to this purpose, diverse credible Writers do remember a merry Accident;
which (if they say truly) was no Fable, but an undoubted Fact Io. And. panor.
Barba and alii in C. ad nostram Hyero Franc. in L. Furiosi de Reg. Iur. D.
Boer. decis. 13. n. 58.
; and this it is:

At Paris, one Morning, a hungry poor Man, begging his Alms from Door to Door,
did at the last espy very good Cheer, at a Cook's House; whereat, by and by,
his Teeth began to water, and the Spur of his empty and eager Stomach pricking
him forwards, he made as much haste toward the place, as his feeble Feet would
give him leave; where he was no sooner come, but the pleasant Smell, partly of
the Meat, and partly of the Sauce, did catch such sure hold of the poor Man's
Nose, that (as if he had been fast holden with a Pair of Pincers) he had no
power to pass from thence, until he had (to stay the Fury of his raging
Appetite) eaten a piece of Bread, which he had of Charity gotten in another
place: In the eating whereof his Sense was so delighted with the fresh Smell of
the Cook's Cates, that albeit he did not lay his Lips to any Morsel thereof;
yet in the end, his Stomach was so well satisfied with only the Smell thereof,
that he plainly acknowledged himself thereby to have gotten as good a
Breakfast, as if he had indeed eaten his Belly-full of the best Cheer: Which
when the Cook had heard, being an egregious Wrangler, and an impudent
Companion, what does he, but all hastily steps forth to the poor Fellow, lays
fast Hand upon him, and in a hot Choleric Mood, bids him pay for his
Breakfast. The honest poor Man, half amazed at this strange Demand, wist not
well what to say: But the Cook was so much the more fierce and earnest, by how
much he perceived the good Man to be abashed at his Boldness, and did so
cunningly cloak the Matter, that in the end the poor Man was contented to refer
the deciding of the Controversy, to whatsoever Person should next pass by that
way, and without any more ado to abide his Judgment; which thing was no sooner
concluded, but by and by comes unto the place, a very Natural Fool, and such a
notorious Idiot, as in all Paris his like was not to be found. All the better
for me, thought the Cook; for more he doubted the Sentence of a wise Man, than
of a Fool. Well, Sir, to this foresaid Judge they rehearsed the whole Fact, the
Cook cruelly complaining, and the other patiently confessing as before: A great
multitude of People were gathered about them, no less desirous to know what
would follow, than wondering at that which had gone before. To conclude, this
Natural perceiving, what Money the Cook exacted, caused the poor Man to put so
much Money betwixt two Basins, and to shake it up and down in the Cook's
hearing: Which done, he did arbitrate, and award, That as the poor Man was
satisfied with only the Smell of the Cook's Meat, so the Cook should be
recompensed only with the Noise of the poor Man's Money. Which Judgment was so
commended, that who so heard the same, thought, if Cato, or Solomon, had been
there to decide the Controversy, they could not have given a more indifferent,
or just Sentence. The like Case is reported to have happened at Bononia And.
Barba in c. ad nostram de consuetud. extr. n. 8.
: There a certain covetous Man lost his Purse with 21 Ducats in it; which when
he could not recover with diligent Search, he raved like a Madman, and in the
end was ready to have hanged himself for Sorrow. Another honest Man having
found such a Purse, moved with Compassion, came and delivered the same to this
covetous Person; who never thanking the Bringer, fell forthwith to telling of
the Money; and finding but 20 Ducats therein, with great Greediness he exacted
the odd Ducat; which because the Finder denied, he is brought before the
Magistrate, a Man of very great Wealth, but of very little Wit, (but such
Magistrates are many times elected, where the Matter lies in the Mouths of the
Multitude:) The one Party swears, That there were 21 Ducats in the Purse
which he lost. The other Party swears, That there were but 20 Ducats in the
Purse which he found. The Magistrate, although a Fool, gives no foolish Sentence;
for he pronounced, 'That the Purse which was found, was not that Purse which
was lost; and therefore condemned the covetous Person to restore the 20 Ducats
to the other Party.

I may add hereunto a third Story of one, that being a Natural Fool, discovered
a Daniel's History, p. 29, 30. in vita W. 1. Edit. 1634. and Sir John Heyward's
History of W. 1. p. 14, 15. Edit. 1613.
Conspiracy; and it is thus: Guy Earl of Burgogne, who had taken to Wife Alix,
Daughter to Duke Richard the Second, and Aunt to William Duke of Normandy,
conspired with Nicellus, President of Constantine, Ranulph Viscount of Bayon,
Raimond, and diverse others, suddenly to surprise the Duke, and slay him in the
Night. A certain Fool (nothing regarded for his want of Wit) observing their
Preparations, secretly got away, and in the Dead of the Night came to Valogne,
where the Duke then lay; no less slenderly guarded with Men, than the Place it
self was slight for Defense: Here he continued rapping at the Gate, and crying
out until it was opened, and he brought to the Presence of the Duke; to whom he
declared the Conspiracy, with Circumstances of such Moment, that the Duke
forthwith took his Horse, and posted alone toward Falais, an especial Place of
Strength for Defense. Presently after his Departure, the Conspirators came to
Valogne; they beset the House, they enter by force, they search every Corner
for the Duke; and finding that the Game was start, and on foot, in hot haste
they pursued the Chase.

By these Reasons and Examples, therefore it may be reasonably inferred, that
if a Fool do make a wise and reasonable Testament, the same ought to be allowed
as lawful.

Nevertheless this is the truer Opinion, that such a Testament is not good; the
Reason is, because a Testament is an Act to be performed with Discretion and
Judgment: Swinburn in his Treatise of Testaments and Last Wills, Second Part,
Sect. 4. p. 41. b. Edit. 1590.
But a Natural Fool, by the general Presumption of Law, does not understand
what he speaks, though he seem to speak reasonably, no more than did Balaam's
Ass, when he reasoned with his Master, or does a Parrot speaking to the
Passengers. And although Almighty God does sometimes so illuminate the Minds of
very Natural Fools and Idiots, that they do well perceive, and understand what
they speak; yet because this thing happens but very seldom, the Law does not
presume the same by occasion of Words only: And therefore, unless further Proof
made thereof, by other Circumstances, the Law does not approve such Testaments.

Indeed, if it may appear by sufficient Conjectures, that they had the Use of
Reason, or Understanding, at such time as they did make their Testaments, then
does the former Opinion take place. Decius in L. Furiosi, C. qui Testa. fac.
poss. and in L. in negotiis Reg. Iur. F.

IX. QUERY.
If an Idiot above the Age of 21 Years, makes a Feoffment in Fee of his
Inheritance, how, and in what manner this Feoffment may be avoided, during his
Life?

SOLUTION.
If it be found by Office at the King's Suit, that he was Idiot a Nativitate,
and that he aliened his Lands, Co. lib. 4. f. 124. a. 127. Beverley's Case.
then upon a Scire facias against the Alienee, the Land shall be seized into
the King's Hands, and thereby the Inheritance shall be re-vested in the Idiot.
18 E. 3. Scire Facias 10. 32 E. 3. Scire Facias 106. 50. Ass. Pl. 2. For the
Statute of Proerogativa Regis says, Quod post mortem eorum reddat eam rectis
Haeredibus; which the King cannot do, nor can the King have the possession of
the Land to his own use, if not that by the Office and Seizure, such Conveyance
made by the Idiot be destroyed, and that does not impugn the Maxim at the
Common Law It is a Maxim of the Common Law of England, That the Party shall not
disable himself, Co. Lit. 247. b. 10 Lib. 4. f. 123. b. Beverley's Case, Cro
El. f. 398. Stroud v. Marshal. Co. 3. Inst. 215. Littleton, sect. 405.
: For in this Case the Idiot in no Plea that he can plead, shall disable, or
stultifie himself; but all is found by Office by the Inquisition, and Verdict
of twelve Men, at the King's Suit, who are not concluded to speak the Truth;
and such Office when it is found, shall have relation a tempore Nativitatis, to
avoid all mean Acts made by the Idiot, as Feoffments, Releases, etc. And
therewith agrees 23 E. 3. Scire Facias 106. Stamford's Praerogative 34. F. N.
B. 202. C. But notwithstanding the Words of the Statute of Praerog* Regis are
general, and emphatical, Nullatenus alienantur; yet if he Alien by Fine, or
Recovery, it shall bind him, or acknowledge a Statute or Recognisance, neither
his Heirs, nor his Executors, shall avoid it; for these are Matters of Record,
which shall not be avoided by a bare Averment of Non Compos Mentis, for the
Inconvenience which may follow thereupon. Also such Averment is against the
Office and Dignity of the Judge, for he ought not to take any Conusance of a
Fine, or Recognisance of him who is Non Compos Mentis. 18 E. 2. Fines 120. 17*
Ass. Pl. 17. 17 E. 3.

X. QUERY.
A Fine levied by an Idiot, or Natural Fool, what it operates?

SOLUTION.
Anno 23 Eliz. In the Court of Wards, the Case was this: That Henry Bushley
seized in Fee of certain Mich. 12 Iac. Regis Mansfield's Case, Co. Lib. 12. f.
123, 124.
Lands in North-Mins, in the County of Hertford, by his Will, in Writing,
demised the said Lands to Henry Bushley, his Son, in Tail; the Remainder to one
William Bushley.

And for this, that his Son was within Age, he demised the Education of him to
Thomas Harrison, whom he made his Executor. And afterward it happened, that
Henry the Son became a monstrous and deformed Cripple, and proved an Idiot, a
Nativitate: The which Idiot, by the Practice of one Nichols, and others, was
ravished and taken out of the Custody of his Guardian, and was carried upon
Men's Shoulders to a Place unknown, and there kept in secret, until he had
acknowledged a Fine of his Lands to one Botham, before Justice Southcot, Anno 9
Eliz. And by Indenture between them, the use of the said Fine was declared to
the use of the Cognizee, and his Heirs; which Botham conveyed, Anno 12 Eliz.
the said Land to one Henry Mansfield. And Anno 12 Eliz. the said Henry Bushley,
the Son, by Inquisition, was found an Idiot a Nativitate; and upon this in Anno
33. the Court of Wards took Order for the Possession of the said Lands.

And it was moved, as a Doubt in the said Court of Wards, Whether the said Fine
should be to the Use of the said Idiot, and his Heirs? For notwithstanding that
the Fine, which is of Record, binds the Idiot for the Causes aforesaid, yet the
Indentures are not sufficient to direct the Uses. But it was resolved, that
forasmuch as he was enabled by the Fine, Vide Co. Lib. 2. f 58. Beckwith's
Case, and Co. lib. 10. Portington's Case.
as to the Principal, he shall not be disabled to limit the Uses, which are but
as accessory.

And the same is the Law of an Infant, and Feme Covert. And the said Mansfield
brought an Action of Trespass in the Common Pleas, against one Trot, the Farmer
of the said Lands, and the Issue was to be tried at the Bar: And the said
deformed Idiot was sent out of the Court of Wards, to be shown to the Judges of
the Common Pleas, and to the Jurors there tried and sworn; and being brought
upon a Man's Shoulders, the Judges hearing, that the Title of Mansfield was
under the said Fine levied by that Idiot, the Lord Dyer, and the Court, by
Consent of Parties, caused a Juror to be withdrawn; and the Lord Dyer said,
That the Judge who took the Fine, was never worthy to take another: But
notwithstanding this, and although the monstrous Deformity, and Idiocy, of
Bushley, was apparent and visible, yet the Fine stood good.

XI. QUERY.
A Fine levied by J. S. Uncle of an Idiot, who was seized of the Inheritance,
(the said J. S. dying in the Life of H. the Idiot), whether this Fine so
levied, can bar the Grandchild of J. S.?

SOLUTION.
Trespass upon Not Guilty, and a special Verdict, the Case was, Tenant for
Life, Reversion to William Rogers, Cro. Car. f. 525, and 543. Edwards v. Rogers.
an Idiot in Fee; Andrew Rogers, his Uncle, levies a Fine, Come Ceo, etc. with
Proclamation to Robert Crompton; and had Issue John, who had Issue William the
Defendant, and died. William the Idiot died without Issue; William the
Defendant enters as Heir unto him, viz. Son and Heir of John, Son and Heir of
the said Andrew; And whether he may claim against this Fine of his Grandfather
(not claiming by the Grandfather, but deriving only his Pedigree from him) was
the Question? And it was argued by Rolls for the Plaintiff, That forasmuch as
William Rogers is Heir to Andrew his Grandfather, Uncle to the said William
the Idiot, he is estopped to claim against this Fine, or to say, Quod parts ad
finem nihil habuerunt. And for Proof thereof, he relied upon the Statute of 27
E. 1. of Fines, Co. lib. 3. f. 89. 10 Car. Scovel and Brastock's Case, Co lib.
3. f. 30. Sir George Brown's Case, and Saul and Clerk's Case. But it was
argued by Farrer for the Defendant, that this Fine shall not bar, because he
claims not any Interest by, or from Andrew, nor as Heir unto him, but only
makes ^ention of him in the Pedigree, Co. Litt. f. 8. 2 E. 3. 6. (...). lib. 8.
53. Symms Case, etc. And that here he is (...), Quasi, of another Title, and
Puisny to the Fine. ^erkly, and Croke, delivered their Opinions, That this ^ne
by Andrew, the Uncle of William the Idiot, who ^as seized of the Inheritance
(he dying in the Life of ^illiam, so as nothing ever attached upon him) shall
^ver bar William the Defendant, who was Grandchild (...) the said Andrew,
because he claims nothing by, or ^om him; but only from William the Nephew of
An^rew, who survived the said Andrew: And he makes ^s Title as Heir to the said
William, the Nephew who ^as last seized, not making therein any mention of
An^rew, as of one from whom he claims, but only as ^awing his Descent from him
by way of Pedigree, and ^ot by way of Title; and therefore it was compared to
^obbes Case, Litt. fol. where the Father is attainted of ^elony, having Issue
two Sons; and the one of them ^urchaseth Lands, and dies without Issue, it
shall not bar ^e other Son to claim, as Heir to his Brother: And the Corruption
of Blood in the Father shall not hurt him. and Berkley compared it to the Case,
10 Eliz. Dyer ^74. where there were two Brothers; the Eldest has good Cause
del petition de droit; the Youngest has ^ssue a Son, and is attainted of
Felony, and executed: The Eldest Son dies without Issue; the Issue of the
Younger Brother is barred of the Petition, because his Blood is corrupt, and he
cannot claim, but by mentioning his Father, and from him, etc. But here,
forasmuch as he does not claim, nor derive by him who levied the Fine; they
field, he should not be barred by the Fine.

XII. QUERY.
Whether the Custody of an Idiot holding by Copy of Cou^ Roll, belongs to the
King by his Prerogative, or to (...) Lord of the Copyhold Manor?

SOLUTION.
The King, (say the Judg^ Co. Lib. 4. f. 127. b.
in Beverley's Case) shall (...) have the Custody of the Lands of an Idiot
holden by C^py; for the same is but an Estate at Will by the Common Law: And if
the King should have the Custo^ thereof, it would be mischievous to the Lord of
the Ma^nor; but yet, an Alienation made by an Idiot of (...) Copyhold-Land,
after Office found, shall be avoide^ Vide 11 El. Dyer 302.

It is a Rule in the Court of Wards, That if an Idi^ has not any Goods or
Ch^tels, or Lands, but Copyhold-Lands, Pasch. 13 Eliz. John Roger's Case, C. W.
f. 74.
held of a common Person, the King she not have the Custody, but the Lord of
whom the Copyhold is holden; but if he has any other Land, then the
Copyhold-Land also.

In the Court of Wards it was clearly agreed by the Council of that Court That
a Copyholder, who (...) 13 and 14 El. Dyer 302. b. 303. a. 2 H. 7. 3. Noy 27.
an Idiot, ought not to b^ ordered in this Court for his Copyhold, but shall be
done in the Court of the Lord of the Manor.

Sheppard in his Court-Keeper's Guide, tells us, That ^e Lord shall retain the
^opyhold-Land of the Idi^t, Cap. 19. p. 119. The Fourth Edit. 1656.
or Lunatic, till he ^ome to himself.

Note, One Sir Edward Champernon being Committee (...) a Ward, who had a Manor
wherein were diverse Copy^olders, amongst whom ^e was Mutus, and Surdus,
Concerning such as are deaf and dumb. See Bracton, lib. 5. tract. 5. cap. 20.
n. 2. f. 421. a. Fleta l. 6. c. 40. nu. 2. Instit. 2. 12. 3. D. 28. 1. 6. 1.
Swinburn 2d Part, 10. Cod. 6. 22. 10.
^ranted the Custody of that Copyhold-Land to another, ^ho entered; the Prochein
Amie of the Copyholder ^ntred; And which of ^em should have the Custody? Or, If
none of them? ^as the Question. And it was resolved, That the Lord ^ould have
the Custody; for otherwise he should be ^rejudiced in his Rents and Services;
and his Grant was Good: Wherefore it was adjudged for the Grantee. Cro. ^ac. f.
105. Eavers v. Skinner. C.

XIII. QUERY.
Whether there be any Difference between an Estate made, or conveyed in Person,
or by Attorney, as to an Idiot, or any other Non compos mentis.

SOLUTION.
There is a diversity taken in the Books of Law, between an Estate made, or
conveyed in Person, and by Co. l. 4. f. 125. Beverley's Case of Non compos
mentis.
Attorney: For if an Idiot, or other Non compos mentis, makes a Feoffment in
Fee, in propria persona, and dies, his Heir within Age, he shall not be in
Ward; or if he dies without Heir, the Land shall not Escheat; but (...) the
Feoffment be made by Letter of Attorney, although (...) shall not avoid the same;
yet after his Death, as to (...) others in Judgment of Law, the Estate was
void, an^ therefore in such Case, if his Heir be within Age, he sha^ be in
Ward; or if he dies without Heir, the Land sha^ Escheat. And likewise, in the
Case of an Infant, if (...) makes a Feoffment in Person, if he dies without
H^ the Land shall not Escheat; but otherwise, if it were man by Letter of
Attorney; but the Infant himself shall (...) avoid it, but others shall: But
things done by matter (...) Record, as Fines, Recoveries, Judgments, Statutes,
R^ cognisances, shall bind as well the Idiot, as he who is No^ compos mentis,
31 E. 3. Saver Default 371. 1 Man Dum fuit infra aetatem 7.

A Grant of an Infant, (says Finch) under the Age (...) 21 Years, and one out
(...) his right Mind (whom (...) Lib. 2. c. 2. of Possessions, p. 102, 103.
Edit. 1627.
call, Non sane memory, (...) Non compos mentis) as (...) Idiot may be avoided
at any time, by Entry, Action* etc. or a Feoffment by Letter of Attorney, etc.
if they deliver it with their Hands, as in a Feoffment, and themselves make
Livery, or a Gift of Goods, and themselves deliver them; but if they deliver
not with their Hand, as in a Grant of a Rent, Advowson, etc. it is merely void,
and nothing at all passes, so as they may have a Trespass, or Assize, and
remain Tenant to the Lord, and therefore shall be in Ward, notwithstanding such
Feoffment.

XIV. QUERY.
A Man dies seized of Land, his Heir being an Idiot, or Sot Natural, and before
Office he levies a Fine, whether the King shall have the Lands, per
Praerogativam Regis, cap. 9. or not?

SOLUTION.
Home devie seisi de Terre, son Heir esteant sotte natural, and avaunt Office
il leva fine, le Roy navera les terres per Praerogativam Regis, Crompton, fol.
117. a. tit. Court de Gards and Liveries, Edit. 1594.
cap. 9. Car ne serra intend que fuit sotte Conuter le Fine. Car ceo va
encounter le credit del Justice que prist le fine, car serra intend que le
Justice ne voile prender fine de luy, si ust este Idiot. Englished thus: A Man
seized of Land, his Heir being an Idiot, and before any Office, this Idiot
levieth a Fine, the King shall not have the Custody of the Lands by his
Prerogative; for that it shall not be intended, or presumed, that he was a
Natural Fool against the Fine levied; because this will impeach the Reputation,
or Credit, of the Judge, before whom the Caption of the Fine was: For it shall
be presumed, that the Judge would not take the Fine, if he had not been an
Idiot.

XV. QUERY.
Idiots in the Custody of the Prince, whether the Custody of an Idiot can be
devised by the Testator?

SOLUTION.
Concerning Idiots, such is the Prerogative of the Princes of this Land, that
they shall have the Custody of all the Lands of Natural Fools, and may take the
Profits Swinburn in his Treatise of Testaments and Last Wills, 3. Part, 11. nu.
13. p. 99. a. b. Edit. 1590.
thereof without waste, o^ destruction, of whose Fee soever the same be holden,
finding to them Necessaries; and after the Death of such Idiots, the Land must
be restored to the right Heirs: But in the mean time; that is to say, during
the Life of the Idiot, the Tuition of the Idiot, or of his Lands, cannot be
devised by Testament to any other Person, contrary to the Course of the Common
Law, in prejudice of him to whom the Wardship does belong, saving the Testator
may commit the Custody of such Goods and Chattels as he does bequeath to the
Idiot, to whom he will, and during so long time as he will Si quidem unusuisque
potest rebus suis quam velit legem imponere. Mautic, l. 7. tit. 1. nu. 38. Et
Testatoris voluntas habetur pro lege L. Servus de manumiss. licet alias
videatur per Fitzherbert's Not. Br. de Idiots inquirendo quod bona quae Idiotae
obvenirent, suo Gardiano accrescunt* Quaere tamen per Stamford super
Praerogativam Regis, c. Idiot C.
.

XVI. QUERY.
Idiocy, whether in any Case triable in the Ecclesiastical Court?

SOLUTION.
If an Administrator sue for a Legacy due to the Deceased Mich. 15 Iac. B. R.
Inter Percher and Wheeble, per Curiam and Dr. Godolphin in his Repertorium
Canonicum, c. 11. p. 120. 17.
in the Ecclesiastical Court, and the Defendant plead the Release of the
Deceased, and the Plaintiff avoid it, for that the Deceased was an Idiot; that
Idiocy shall be tried there, and no Prohibition shall be granted, for that they
have Jurisdiction of the Original Matter; and that according to the old Rule,
to be found in the Register, and in the Books of Law, Non est consonum Rationi,
quod cognitio accessorii Cujus Juris, ( i. e. Jurisdictionis) est principale,
ejusdem Juris erit accessorium.
in Curia Christianitatis impediatur, ubi cognitio causae principalis ad forum
Ecclesiasticum noscitur pertinere. Register Orig. f. 58. a. Co. 2 Inst. f. 493.
Cro. Jac. f. 269. Roberts Case, Cro. Car. Netter v. Bret. Cro. Jac. f. 348.
Egerton v. Egerton. 12 Co. f. 65. Tit. Court Ecclesiastical, C. Bul^rode's
Reports, Second Part, f. 210, 211. Egerton v. Egerton.

XVII. QUERY.
An Executor having obtained Judgment in an Account, and having the Defendant
in Execution for Arrerages* and the Testament being afterward annulled for
Idiocy in the Testator, whether the Testament being disapproved, an Audita
Querela will lie for the Defendant?

SOLUTION.
Anno 35 H. 8. in the Exchequer Chamber a Case was well debated by the Justices
3 and 4 Eliz. Dyer, f. 203. b. 204. a Co. lib. 8. f. 144. Drury's Case.
of both Benches, which was ^uch: One Moyer, who was Executor of the Testament
of John Gisors, sued a Writ of Account against one Carvanel, as Receiver of the
Money of the said Gisors; the Defendant pleads, Ne unques Receiver pur Account
render: And it was found for the Plaintiff, and Judgment given, that he should
account; and upon this a Capias ad Computandum was awarded: Whereupon the
Defendant came in, and Accounts in Ward, and he was found in Arrerages, and his
Body was committed to Prison for Execution. And after the said Testament was
annulled, by Sentence in the Spiritual Court; for that the said John Gisors,
the Testator was an Idiot from his Birth, and this Record Spiritual is
certified into the Chancery by Writ, and thence sent into the King's Bench,
where the Action of Account was brought. And the said Carvanel sued forth an
Audita Querela in the same Court, containing this Matter in his Writ, and a
Venire Facia^ against Moyer, who demurred in Law upon the whole Matter: And it
was resolved, that the Audita Querel^ did lie, because the Will was disapproved
and annulled.

XVIII. QUERY.
Whether an Attornment made to a Grant by an Idiot, (...) other, Non compos
mentis, can be good in Law?

SOLUTION.
A Man that is an Idiot, or other Non compos menti^ cannot Attorn: For he who
is [ Amens,] without Understanding, cannot make an Attornment, which is an
Agreement: And yet if a Man Non compos mentis, be Less for Years, rendering
Rent, and the Lessee ejecteth him and makes a Feoffment, and afterward the
Non comp^ mentis re-entreth; this Act of Re-entry does subject himself to
Distress, and an Action of Waste, although he cann^ make an express Attornment.
Coke in his Comment o^ Littleton, sect. 566. f. 315. a. 6 Co. 69. a. Sir Moyle
Finch^ Case. 32 E. 3. Age 80. 18 E 3. 35.

XIX. QUERY.
Whether an Inquisition shall bind an Idiot, without an Examination by the
Council?

SOLUTION.
It was said by Dyer in the Case of one Brent, that the Law is, Although a Man be
found an Idiot by Inquisition, Dallison's Rep. pl. 19. f. 95.
yet he ought to be examined by the Counsel, and affirmed by them to be an
Idiot, or otherwise he shall not be bound by the Inquisition. And he said
further, That Brent was found an Idiot by Inquisition; and after being examined
by the Lords of the Star Chamber, he was adjudged to be no Idiot; whereupon he
was delivered from the Thraldom of Idiocy.

XX. QUERY.
No Possessions in Lands descending to an Idiot, but only a Right, whether the
King can enter, and have the Custody of it?

SOLUTION.
If there descend to an Idiot no Possession in Lands, but only a Right, be it
Right of Entry, or Title of Entry, or Right of Action, the King shall not
enter, and have the Custody of the same, 1 H. 7. 15. Stamford Super Praerog.
Regis, c. 9. f. 35. b. Edit. 1567.

Hitherto of the Description, Remarks, and Queries, relating to an Idiot, or
Sot Natural: I proceed now to speak of the Furor Man, that is totally bereft of
his Wits.

PART the Second. Of him who is by Accident wholly deprived of his Wits.
SECT. I. This sort of Non Compos Mentis how described.
HE is said to be one, that was of good and sound Memory, and by the Visitation
of God, through some Sickness, Grief, or other Accident, utterly loses Furor
est continuata mentis Alienatio, qua quis omni intellectu caret, D. 1. 18. 14.
and Gothofredus ad Lor.
his Memory, and Understanding; and so falls into some high, or low degree of
Fury or Madness. Co. Litt. f. 247. a. and 4 Co. f. 124. b. Beverley's Case of
Non compos mentis.

SECT. II. The Remarks concerning Mad, or Distracted Persons.
I. REMARK.
THE true Account of the Cause of Distraction is this: When the Animal Spirits,
by some Accident or other, are so overheated, that they become unserviceable
Dr Goodman's Treatise, entitled, The Penitent pardoned, under the Parable of
the Prodigal, Part 1. c. 5. p. 123, 124.
to cold and sedate Reasoning; and then Reason being thus laid aside, Fancy
gets the Ascendent, and Phaeton-like, drives on furiously, and inconsistently.
This Combustion of the Spirits happens, sometimes by overgreat Intention of
the Mind, in long and constant Study; sometimes by a Fever, which inflaming the
Blood, that communicates the Incendium to the Spirits, which take the Original
from it: But most usually by the Rage and Violence of some of the Passions,
(whether Irascible, or Concupiscible, as they are wont to be distinguished) a
Man setting his Heart vehemently upon some Madmen have always before their
Eyes, those Idea's and Shapes which work the Apprehension of their Fury, and
hold them in the Vision and inward View of that which most troubles their
diseased Brain. French Academy, c. 18. Of Intemperance.
Object or other, the Spirits are set on fire, by the Violence of their own
Motion; and in that Rage are not to be governed by Reason. This we have sad
Examples of, in Love, in Grief, in Jealousy, in Wrath, and Vexation; and
indeed, (says my Author) Bethlehem is filled with the Instances.

II. REMARK.
By the Statute of Praerogativa Regis, the King of England is to provide, that
17 E. 2. e. 10.
the Lands of the Furor Men be safely kept, without waste; and that they, and
their Families, (if they have any) shall be maintained with the Profits
thereof; and that the Residue be kept for their use, and delivered unto them,
when they come to be of right Mind: So as their Land shall not be aliened,
neither shall the King have any Profit thereof to his own use: But if they die
in such Estate, the Residue shall be distributed for their Souls, by the Advice
of the Ordinary.

III. REMARK.
The words of F. N. B. 232. That the King is bound of Right, by his Laws, to
defend his Subjects, and 4 Co. 128. Beverley's Case. of Non compos mentis.
their Goods, and Chattels, Lands, and Tenements, extend as well to one Non
compos Mentis, as a Madman, as to an Idiot a Nativitate; but in Case of Non
compos mentis, the King shall not have Interest in a Madman, that is wholly
deprived of his Understanding, as he has in the Idiot; because that a
distracted Man may recover his Memory that he has lost; and therefore, in the
Case of the Idiot, or Fool Natural, the Law says, Rex habebit Custodiam; but
in the Case of a Madman, or Non compos mentis, Rex providebit. And as to
Alienation made by a Man distracted, the words are all one, as they are in the
Case of the Idiot; and therefore, after Office found thereof, the Alienation,
Gift, etc. of him who is by Accident deprived of his Wits, are in equal Case
with the Alienation, or Gift of an Idiot a Nativitate. And the said words of
the Writ, in the Register, Quia accepimus quod J. de B. fatuus and

Idiota existit, etc. extend Register of Original and Judicial Writs, f. 266. a.
as well to another Non compos mentis, as Idiota a nativitate, a Fool Natural:
For afterward, in the same Writ it is said, Diligenter inquiras, si Idem
fatuus and Idiota, sit necne, and si sit, tum utrum a nativitate sua, Register,
f. 2668.
an ab alio tempore, tunc a quo tempore and qualiter, and quomodo, and si
lucidis gaudeat intervallis, and si Idem J. in eodem statu existens terras, aut
Tenementa aliqua alienavit necne, etc. So that it appears, that in Judgment
of Law, Fatuus, and Idiota, include as well Non compos mentis, as Idiota a
Nativitate; and therefore they are in the same Case, as to the Alienation of
their Lands, and Tenements, Goods, and Chattels.

IV. REMARK.
A Furor Man cannot appoint an Attorney, as appears by Britton; for he tells
us, Chescun ne puit mye fair attorne. Car enfant dedens Cap. 126. f. 285. b.
Age, ne muet, ne surd, ne fol naistre ne homme arrage, ou auterment sans
discretion, ne puit mye fair attornes.

V. REMARK.
There is required in them who contract Matrimony, a sound and whole Mind to
consent; and therefore, he that is mad, or distracted, without Furor, says the
Lawyer Gaius. sponsalibus impedimento sit, plus quam manifestum est. D. 23. 1.
8. Furor contrahi Matrimonium non sinit, quia consensu opus est, says Paulus,
D. 23. 2. 16. 2. Furiosus Matrimonium contrahere non potest. Decret. Greg. l.
4. tit. 1. c. 24. Innocentius 3. Versil. Episcopa. dilectus filius R.
proposuit, quod filiam suam cuidam Matrimonaliter copulavit. Cum autem eadem
mulier, cum ipso viro, qui continuo furore laborat, morari non possit, and
propter alienationem mentis non potuerit intervenire consensus: man damus,
quatenus si rem noveris ita esse, praefatas personas cures ab invicem separare.
Intermission of Fury, cannot enter into the Bonds of Wedlock: So says the
Author of the Treatises entitled, The Woman's Lawyer, l. 2. sect. 10. p. 57.
And with him concurs Amesius, in his Cases of Conscience: The Consent of
Wedlock, (says he) mus^ be voluntary and free, else it is not esteemed a Human
Consent: And hence, the Consent of such as have not use of Reason, (as Madmen)
is of no force to such a Contract, Lib. 5. c. 35. Question 4. nu. 24, 25. p.
201. Engl. Edit. 1643. Such one may not consent to Marriage, and his Issue will
not be legitimate. Trin. 3 Iac. B. Regis. Styles.

VI. REMARK.
Though Furor, or Madness, hinders the contracting of Matrimony, yet it shall not
Furor impedit Matrimonium contrahendum, sed non dirimit contractum.
take away that Marriage that is already contracted, as appears by the Civil
and Canon Laws, D. 23. 1. 8. D. 23. 2. 16. 2. Instit. Iuris Canonici Lib. 2.
Tit. 12. Arnoldus Corvinus, in his Ius Canonicum, Lib. 2. Tit. 13. de Nuptiis.

VII. REMARK.
A Furor Man ought not to be a Witness in any Cause, be it either Civil, or
Criminal, Decret. 2. a. Pars Furiosus aut mente Captus, non potest esse Testis.
cause. 3. Qu. 19. c. 14. Decret. Greg. Lib. 3. Tit. 27. c. 3. de Successionibus
ab intestato, Corvinus in his Ius Canonicum, lib. 3. tit. 27. de Testibus.
Ulpianus, tit. 20. de Testamentis. D. 28. 1. 20. 4. Swinburn in his Treatise of
Wills, Part 4. Sect. 21. f. 186. a. Edit. 1590.

VIII. REMARK.
Children, and Madmen, Lex duodecim Tabularum, furiosum, in curatione jubet
esse Agnatorum. Ulpian, tit. 12. de Curatoribus.
although they have not the next actual power of using things, yet they have a
radical power, because they are Men: Amesius in his Cases of Conscience, lib.
5. c. 41. qu. 1. sect. 6. And by the Law of Nations, Children are then capable
of inheriting Plutarch de Fort. Alex. l. 2. speaking of Children says, That
Children have a Right to the Inheritance, but not to the use of it.
an Estate, though they be justly restrained from managing of it, by reason of
their immature Judgment. Grotius de jure belli and pacis, Lib. 2. Cap. 5. Sect.
2.

IX. REMARK.
Bracton in his Treatise of the Laws and Customs of England, showing by what
Persons possession of things may be acquired, says thus of the furious Man;
Furiosus Furiosus sine tutoris auctoritate non potest incipere possidere: Quia
affectionem tenendi non habet, licet maxim corpore suo rem contingat: Sicuti
si quis dormienti aliquid in manu ponat, D. 41. 2. 1. 3.
affectum retinendi habere non poterit sine Curatore, quia non est aliud de eo,
nisi ad similitudinem ejus, qui dormienti pluviam ip manum projecerit. Et qui
accipere debet, and retinere, oportet quod habeat affectionem, and intellectum
percipiendi, and retinendi. Item qui curare debet, and Custodiam habere,
oportet eodem modo quod habeat Intellectus, quia si furiosum miseris ut
possideas, nequaquam per eos videris possessionem apprehendisse, quia
intellectum non habet.

X. REMARK.
He that is a Madman, is incapable to be a Judge, or an Arbitrator, for want
of Non omnes Iudices dari possunt, qui Iudicis dandi jus habent: Quidam enim
Lege impediuntur ne Iudices sint, quidam natura; quidam moribus, natura; ut
surdus, mutus, and perpetuo furiosus, and impubes, quia judicio carent, D. 5.
1. 12. 2.
Understanding and Discretion. Mirror of Justices, c. 2. sect. 2. p. 116. West.
Symb. part 2. sect. 23, 26, 27. Neither can be an Essoiner, or Excusator.
Mirror, c. 2. sect. 30. p. 175.

XI. REMARK.
One that is a Madman, cannot Attorn; for that he that has no Understanding,
cannot agree to the Grant. 18 E. 3. 53. 6 Co. f. 69. a. Sir Moyle Finch's Case.

XII. REMARK.
To a lawful Contract there are required Persons fit to contract: Hence Madmen
Note, That every Alienation of a Man's Right, all Contracts betwixt Man and
Man, all Leagues, etc. betwixt Princes, ought to be done with sound Judgment;
therefore the Acts of the Will, that are expressed with overt signs, are to be
understood, the Acts of a Mind endued with Reason, of which a Man distracted is
wholly deprived, and therefore incapable of performing any profitable things;
which made King Achish say to his Servants, Lo, you see the Man is mad;
Wherefore then have ye brought him to me? 1 Samuel 21. 13, 14, 15.
^re not fit to make Con^racts, or Alienations; and under that Title, by the
Civil Law of all Countries, are deservedly accounted Nullities. Amesius, l. 5.
c. 42. qu. 1. of Contracts, D. 39. 5. 23. 1. Cowel's Institutes lib. 2. tit. 8.
n. 3. p. 108. F. N. B. f. 292. C. Fleta lib. 3. c. 3. n. 10. p. 178, and lib.
2. c. 56. nu. 19. p. 122. Bracton, lib. 3. tract. 1. c. 2. n. 8. f. 100. A. and
lib. 5. tract. 5. c. 20. nu. 1. de Exceptionibus. Fleta, lib. 6. c. 40. nu. 1.
p. 434. Cowel, lib. 3. tit. 20. nu. 7. p. 161. Fleta, lib. 2. c. 60. nu. 26.
Cowel, lib. 2. tit. 7. nu. 4. de Donatibus. Britton, c. 28. f. 62. b. 63. a.
etc. 34. f. 90. a. Mirror de Justices, c. 2. sect. 27. p. 161.

XIII. REMARK.
In all Conveyance, or Purchase for Jointure, unless it be by Fine, or Common
Recovery, he which makes the Estate, must be a Person able to convey, etc. at
the time of the Jointure making; or else it is not good.

He must not therefore be Attaint of Treason, an Alien born, under Age, or Non
compos mentis, a Madman. The Woman's Lawyer, lib, 3. c. 31. p. 188.

XIV. REMARK.
It is a good Exception for the Person of him, that complains, or brings
any Action, to say, he is Furiosus, a Madman, because such a one differs not
much from a Beast, that wants Reason, Lib. 5. tract. 5. c. 20. nu. 1. f. 420.
b. Fleta, lib. 6. cap. 38. nu. 1. Stamford Super Praerogativam Regis, cap. 10.
fol. 36. b. Edit. 1567.

XV. REMARK.
He that promises, should be endued with Reason, which renders the Promises of
Madmen void, and of no force, Grotius de jure Promissio requirit usum Rationis
in promittente; ideo furiosi nulla est promissio.
bells and pacis, lib. 2. c. 11. sect. 5. And it is the same Law in case of
Oaths made by Men distracted: For they that swear, should be of sound Mind, and
should use great deliberation, before Animus rationis compos and deliberatus.
they take any Oaths. Idem, lib. 2. c. 13. sect. 2. Sheppard in his Abridgment,
tit. Idiots and Lunaticks, tells us, That a Madman cannot promise, or contract
for any thing to bind himself.

XVI. REMARK.
A Copyholder of unsound Memory, as a Furor Man, cannot make a Forfeiture of
his Estate. Sheppard's Court-Keeper's Guide, cap. 22.

XVII. REMARK.
Any Man may be a Steward of a Copyhold Manor; and therefore, if an Infant,
Lunatic, or Non compos mentis, a Man distracted, be made Steward; all Acts
that he does, according to his Office, are good. Sheppard's Court-Keeper's
Guide, cap. 19. p. 115.

XVIII. REMARK.
Every Deed, Feeoffment, or Grant, which a Furorman makes, is avoidable, and
yet shall never be avoided by himself; because it is a Maxim in Law, That no Man
of full Age, shall, by any Plea, pleaded by him, be received, to disable his
own Person, or stultifie himself: Besides, another Reason is rendered, sc.
Because that when he recovers his Memory, he cannot know what he did when he
was Non compos mentis. 4. Co. 124. b. Beverley's Case. Littleton, sect. 405.
Noy in his Treatise of the Grounds of the Laws of this Nation, cap. 28. Of
Conveyances.

XIX. REMARK.
Although Madmen themselves cannot be received to disable themselves, yet twelve
Men, upon their Oaths, may find the Truth of the Matter, in the Case of a
Feoffment, or other Transact in Pais: But if Madmen alien by Fine, or
Recovery, this shall not only bind themselves, but their Heirs also. Co. Litt.
f. 247. a. 4. Co. 124. a. Beverley's Case of Non compos mentis. Perkins, sect.
24.

XX. REMARK.
There are in our Books of Law found four several Opinions, concerning the
Alienation, or other Act of Coke in his Comment on Littleton, 405. f. 247. a. b.
a Man Non compos mentis, etc. For First, Some are of Opinion, That he may
avoid his own Act, by Entry, or Plea.

Secondly, Others are of Opinion, That he may avoid it by Writ, and not by Plea.

Thirdly, Others, That he may avoid it, either by Plea, or Writ; and of this
Opinion is Fitzherbert, in his Natura Brevium.

Fourthly, Littleton, sect* 405. is of Opinion, That neither by Plea, nor by
Writ, nor otherwise, he himself shall avoid it, but his Heir, in respect his
Ancestor was Non compos mentis, shall avoid it by Entry, Plea, or Writ: And
therewith the greatest Authorities of the Law Books agree; and so it was
resolved with Master Littleton, in Beverley's Case, where it is said, That it
is 4 Co. f. 126, 127.
a Maxim of the Common Law, That the Party shall not disable himself.

XXI. REMARK.
If a Furor Man, or a Man of Non sane Memory, make a Feoffment, etc. he
himself cannot enter, nor have a Writ, Dum non fuit compos mentis; but after
his Death, his Heir may well enter, or have the said Writ of, Dum non fuit
compos mentis, at his Choice. Littleton, sect. 406. Exposition of Terms of the
Law, f. 138. a. b. tit. Dum non fuit compos mentis. Natura Brevium, f. 128. a.
b. Edit. 1551.

XXII. REMARK.
Mad-folks, during the time of their Furor, or Insanity of Mind, cannot make a
Furiosi testamentum facere non possunt, quia mente carent. In adversa corporis
valetudine mente captus tempore testamentum facere non potest. Senium aetatis
vel aegritudinem corporis, sinceritatem mentis tenentibus, testamenti factionem
certum est non auferre.
Testament, nor dispose any thing by Will; no, not ad pias Causas; the Reason
is most forceable, because they know not what they do: For in making of
Testaments, the Integrity and Perfectness of Mind, and not Health of the Body,
is requisite; and thereupon arose that common Clause, used in every Testament
almost: Sick in Body, but of perfect Mind, and Memory. Swinburn* in his
Treatise of Testaments and Last Wills, 2d Part, sect. 3. f. 34. b. Edit. 1590.
Inst. 2. 12. 1. Cod. 6. 22. 9. Cod. 6. 36. 5. Cod. 6. 22. 3. Caius, lib. 2.
tit. 2. de Testamentis. Ulpianns. tit. 20. de Testamentis. 6 Co. 23. Marquess
of Winchester's Case.

XXIII. REMARK.
The Impediment of Furor, or Madness, is so strong, that if the Testator make
his Testament after this Furor, or Madness have overtaken him, and whiles as
yet it does possess his Mind, albeit the Furor afterward departing, or
ceasing, the Testator recover his former Understanding, yet does not the
Testament made, during his former Fit, recover any force Quod initio vitiosum
est, non potest tractu temporis convalescere D. 50. 17. 29. l 178. l. 201. l.
210. 1. 80. D. 34. 7. 1. D. 44. 7. 27. non firmatur 18, de Reg. in 6. D. 49. 1.
16. nisi duo, quae sequuntur, concurrunt vitii sc. Cessatio, and novissimus
Actus, i. e. nisi principium ipsius rei utile sequatur, verbis, vel actibus
extrinsecus declaratis, veluti Ratihabitione aliqua.
or strength thereby. Cod. 6. 22. 9. Instit. 2. 12. 1. Swinburn in his Tract of
Wills, Part 2. sect. 3. nu. 3. p. 36. b. 37. a. Edit. 1590. Godolphin's Tract,
entitled, The Orphan's Legacy, Part 1. cap. 8. nu. 2.

XXIV. REMARK.
If a Man, whilst he is mad, or in a distracted Condition, be admitted by a
Judge to levy a Fine, his Declaration Note, He that is enabled to the
Principal; that is, the Fine shall not be disabled to do the Accessory, that is
the declaring the uses.
of the Uses shall bind him and his Heirs, as long as the Fine remains in
force, 2 Co. f. 58. b. Co. lib. 12. f. 123. Mansfield's Case. 10 Co. f. 42. b.
Mary Portington's Case.

XXV. REMARK.
If a Furor Man grant a Rentcharge out of Land, his Heir may avoid it, and
hold it discharged. Sheppard in his Abridgment. Tit. Idiots.

XXVI. REMARK.
He that is not a good Grantor, cannot make a good Grant, or Surrender of
Copyhold-Land, without a special Custom to enable him thereunto: And hence it
is, that a Surrender made by a Mad man is not good, but void in Law. Sheppard
of Copyholds, c. 12. p. 117, 118.

XXVII. REMARK.
A Surrender, or Grant of Copyhold-Land, may be made to a Lunatic, and to one
that was of good and sound Memory, and by the Visitation has lost it.
Sheppard's Court-Keeper's Guide, c. 19. p. 118, 119.

XXVIII. REMARK.
If a Man of None sane M. 1. Mar. 1. Br. Dum non fuit compos mentis 7.
memory be a Judge, all Acts done by, and before him, shall stand good in Law.

XXIX. REMARK.
If a Woman being in a Frenzy, and of unsound Memory, kill her Husband, or
another Man or Woman, she shall not forfeit her Dower. 12 H. 3. Dower 183.
Perkins, sect. 365. Tit. Dower.

XXX. REMARK.
A Descent, during Minority, Marriage, Imprisonment, Non sanae mentis, or being
out of the Realm, do not take away an Entry. Noy in his Grounds of the Laws, c.
16. Of Descents.

XXXI. REMARK.
A Man becoming Non compos mentis, by Accident, is disseised, and suffers a
Descent, albeit he recover his Memory and Understanding again, yet he shall
never avoid the Descent. Coke in his Comment on Littleton, sect. 405. f. 247. a.

XXXII. REMARK.
Albeit the Eldest Son of a Sovereign Prince be unfit to bear Rule, albeit he
be unable to Govern, either others, or himself; as if he be in a high degree
furious, or foolish, or otherwise defective in Body, or in Mind, (unless he
degenerate from Humane Condition) yet he cannot therefore be excluded from
Succession; because it is due unto him, not in respect of Ability, but by
reason of his Priority of Birth. Sir John Heyward in the Life of William II. p.
147, 148. Edit. 1613.

From the Remarks come we to the Queries concerning Madmen.

SECT. III. The Queries with their Solutions, relating to Furor Men.
I. QUERY.
Whether Madness, or Insanity of Mind, ought to be proved by him, that
objecteth the same?

SOLUTION.
EVery Person is presumed to be of perfect Mind and Memory, unless the contrary
be proved: And therefore, if any Person go about Swinburn in his Treatise of
Wills, Part 2. Sect. 3. n. 5. p. 37. a. b. Edit. 1590.
to impugn, or overthrow a Testament, by reason of Madness, Insanity of Mind,
or want of Memory, he must prove that Impediment: And if it be demanded,
Wherefore then is that usual Clause, [ Of perfect Mind and Memory], so duly
observed in every Testament, if he that does prefer the Will be not charged
with the Proof thereof? It may be answered, That that which is notorious, is to
be alleged, not proved: And so this Notorium probatione non indiget. Zouch's
Elements, Pars 5. 6. de Evidentia Causae.
being accounted notorious, (because where the contrary appears not, the Law
presumes it) it need not be proved: And therefore it is supposed, that that
Clause is more usual than necessary, and yet not hurtful.

II. QUERY.
Madness before the making of a Testament, whether it can be presumed to
continue?

SOLUTION.
It may be delivered for a Rule, That it is sufficient for the Party, which
pleads the Insanity of a Testator's Swinburn, Part 2. Sect. 3. p. 37. b. 38.
a. Edit. 1590.
Mind, to prove, that the Testator was besides himself, before the making of
his Testament, although he do not prove the Testator's Madness, at the very time
of the making of the Testament, the Reason is: It being proved, that the
Testator was once mad, the Law presumes him to continue still in that Case,
Praesumptioni standum est, nisi contrarium probetur. D. 23. 3. 57. in fine. D.
4. 2. 23. D. 12. 4. 6. 10. 2 Inst. 477. 10. Litt. 373, b. Bracton, l. 1. c. 9.
n. 4. Fleta, l. 1. c. 6.
unless the contrary be proved: For like as the Law presumes every Man to be
an honest Man, unless the contrary be proved; and being proved, then he which
is evil to be evil still. So concerning Furor, the Law presumes every Man to
have the use of Reason and Understanding* unless the contrary be proved; which
being proved accordingly, then he is presumed in Law to continue still void of
the use of Reason, and Understanding; unless the Testator were besides himself,
but for a short time, and in some peculiar Actions, and not continually for a
long space, as for a Month, or more; or unless the Testator fell into some
Frenzy, upon some accidental Cause, which Cause is afterward taken away; or
unless it be a long time since the Testator was assaulted with the Malady; for
in these Cases the Testator is not presumed to continue in his former Furor, or
Frenzy.

III. QUERY.
Furor, or Madness, whether hard to be proved? And how it may be proved?

SOLUTION.
It is a hard and difficult Point, to prove, a Man not to have the use of
Reason; and therefore it is not sufficient Swinburn, Part 2. 3. f. 38. a. Edit.
1590.
for the Witnesses to depose, that the Testator was mad, or besides his Wits,
unless they yield a sufficient Reason to prove this their Deposition; as that
they did see him to do such Things, or heard speak such Words, as a Man having
Wit, or Reason, would not have done, or spoken; namely, they did see him throw
Stones against the Windows; or did see him usually to spit in Men's Faces; or
being asked a Question, they did see him hiss like a Goose, or bark like a Dog,
or play such other Parts as Mad-folks use to do. This, or the like Reason
(whereby the Judge may be induced to esteem the Testator not to be of sound
Mind) ought the Witnesses to yield, although they be not interrogated of the
Cause of their Knowledge.

IV. QUERY.
Madness, whether it may be proved by singular Witnesses?

SOLUTION.
This Furor, or Madness, may be proved by singular Witness, so that the
Witnesses be not singular in Swinburn in his Treatise of Wills, Part 2. 3. f.
38. a b.
time, (for if one Witness depose of the Madness of the Testator at one time,
and another Witness of his Madness at another time, this does not sufficiently
prove, that the Testator was mad:) But when the Witnesses agreeing in time, one
deposes of one mad Prank, another Witness of another mad Act at the same time;
these prove, that the Testator was then mad, though they do not both depose of
one and the same mad Act: But if some Witnesses do depose, That the Testator
was of perfect Mind and Memory; and others depose the contrary, their Testimony
is to be preferred, which depose he was of sound Memory; as well for that their
Testimony tends to the Favor and Validity of the Testament, as for that the
same is more agreeable to the Disposition of Nature; for every Man is a
Creature reasonable.

V. QUERY.
Whether the Grant of a Copyhold Estate, made by the Lord of the Copyhold
Manor, that is a Madman, can be good in Law?

SOLUTION.
It is to be known, That any Person who may be a Grantor in a Deed, may be a
good Grantor of a Copyhold Estate: For this any Person, Coke of Copyholds, f.
89. 4 Co. f. 23. Clerk and Penifather's Case. Sheppard's Court-Keeper's Guide,
cap. 19. p. 108, 109, 4th Edit. 1656. 8 Co. f. 63. b. Swain's Case.
Man, or Woman, that has a lawful Estate in a Manor for a time, may be a good
Lord, to grant Copyholds, take Surrenders, make Estates and Admittances,
according to the Custom of the Manor, notwithstanding the Disability of his
Person, or Exility of his Estate; and therefore it is held, that an Infant, an
Excommunicate Person, a Person Outlawed in an Action Personal, a Felon before
his Attainder by Outlawry, Verdict, or Confession, a Lunatic, or a Man
distracted, being Lord of a Manor, may grant Copyhold Estates for any time,
according to the Custom of the Manor, as another Man may do, and the Estates
made by them are unavoidable.

VI. QUERY.
A Madman being seized of Land, and granting a Rentcharge out of this same
Land, dies; his Heir entering, and the Grantee distraining for Rent-Arrear,
whether the Heir may bring an Action of Trespass?

SOLUTION.
If a Man Non Sanae Memoriae, being seized of a Carve of Land, in Fee, and die,
and his Heir enter, and the P. 12 E. 4. 8 H. 39. H. 6. Perkins, 21. Tit. Grants.
Grantee distrein for the Rent behind, the Heir shall have an Action of
Trespass; but if the Grantee had distreined, in the Life of the Grantor, for
the Rent behind, the Grantor should not have an Action of Trespass; for he
cannot avoid his own Deed by disabling of himself.

VII. QUERY.
A Man of Sane Memory, seized of Land, makes a Feoffment in Fee; and after,
when he is besides himself, or distracted, makes a Letter of Attorney for
Livery of Seizin, which is executed accordingly; the Feoffor dies, whether the
Heir may lawfully enter upon the Feoffee?

SOLUTION.
If a Letter of Attorney to make Livery of Seisin, is made of certain Land, by
a Man of unsound Memory, 17 Ass. Pl. 17. Perkins, 23. Tit. Grants.
and the Charter of Feoffment of the same Land was made before, when he was of
good Memory, and then Livery of Seisin was made by force of the Letter of
Attorney, without other Assent of the Feoffor, and the Feoffor die, now his
Heir may enter upon the Feoffee, but the Feoffor himself cannot enter.

VIII. QUERY.
Whether the Entry of the Heir of a Furor Man be lawful, maugre a Descent had
in the Life of his Ancestors?

SOLUTION.
If a Man that is bereft of his Wits, has cause to enter into his Lands and
Tenements, Littleton, Sect. 405.
which another has in Fee, etc. and suffers a Descent during the time he was
out of his Wits, and after dies, the Heir of Non Sane Memory, may well enter
upon him that is in by Descent; for the Heir in this case can well disable the
Person of his Ancestors, for his own Advantage, because no Latches can be
adjudged by the Law in him, which has no Discretion in such case: And yet his
Ancestors, which had the same Title, could not enter: For he who was out of his
Memory at the time of such Descent, if he will enter after such a Descent, if
an Action upon this be sued against him, he has nothing to plead for himself,
or to help him, but to say, that he was not of Sane Memory, at the time of
such Descent, etc. And he shall not be received to say this, for that no Man of
full Age shall be received in any Plea by the Law to disable his own Person.

IX. QUERY.
What kind of Privies can disable him, who was deprived of the use of Reason
and Understanding? Or, By whom, and what Acts done by a Madman, or one out of
his Wits, can be avoided?

SOLUTION.
It is to be known, That the Disability to disable one's self, as to some
Persons is personal, and extends only 4 Co. f. 124. a. Beverley's Case of Non
compos mentis.
to the Party himself, and as to other Persons is not personal; but shall bind
them also: And as to that it is to be observed, that there are four manner of
Privities, sc. Privity in Blood, as Heir. 2. Privity in Representation, as
Executors, or Administrators; who, as Mr. Littleton, Sect. 337.
Littleton says, represent the Person of the Testator, or Intestate, 2 Mar.
Dyer 112. Acc. 3. Privity in Estate, as Donee in Tail, the Reversion, or
Remainder in Fee, etc. 4. Privity in Tenure, as Lord by Escheat; and two of
which are Privies only may disable him who was Non compos mentis, and avoid his
Deeds, Grants, and Feoffments, and two not: For Privies in Blood may show the
disability of the Ancestor, and Privies in Representation, the Infirmity of the
Testator, or Intestate: But neither Privy in Estate, nor Privy in Tenure shall
so do. And therefore if Donee in Tail, being Non compos mentis, makes a
Feoffment in Fee, and dies without Issue, he in the Reversion, or Remainder,
shall not enter, or take advantage of the Non sane Memory of the Donee. The
same Law of Lord by Escheat, if his Tenant being Non compos mentis, makes a
Feoffment in Fee, and dies without Heir, he shall not avoid it: But there are
some Acts done by a Man of Non compos mentis, which none of them shall avoid;
and therefore, if a Furor Man levieth a Fine, suffers a Recovery, or
acknowledges a Statute, or Recognisance, neither his Heirs, nor his Executors,
shall avoid it; for these are Matters of Record, which shall not be avoided by
a bare Averment of Non compos mentis, for the Inconvenience which may ensue
thereupon. Also such Averment is against the Office and Dignity of the Judge;
18 E. 2. Fines 120. 17 Ass. Pl. 17.
For he ought not to take any Conusance of a Fine, or Recognisance of him who
is Non compos mentis.

X. QUERY.
Whether a Man distracted, or out of his Wits, be relievable in a Court of
Equity, to avoid a Deed made by himself?

SOLUTION.
A. bound himself in a Bond of 1000 l. to B. and this Bond being sued against
him, he exhibited a Bill in the Court of Requests, to be relieved against the
same, and 4 Co. f. 124. a. Beverley's Case.
set forth in his Bill, that a^ the time of the entering into the said Bond, he
was No^ compos mentis; and whether in this Case a Prohibition should be
awarded, was the Question? And in this Case it was resolved, That the same
being against an express Maxim of the Common Law, That the Party shall no^
disable himself, that he shall not have Relief in any Court of Equity; for that
shall be in Subversion of a Principle, and Ground in Law.

For the maintaining of this same Principle, I will subjoin a Judgment given by
the Judges of the King's Bench* in the Case of an Action of Debt, upon an
Obligation* and it was thus:

Debt upon an Obligation. The Defendant pleads* That at the time of the
Obligation made, he was D^ Cro. El. f. 398. Pl. 4. Stroud v. Marshal.
non sane memory. And i^ was thereupon demurre^ and adjudged to be no Plea:
For he cannot save himself by such a Plea; and the Opinion of Fitzherbert held
to be no Law. Wherefore it was adjudged for the Plaintiff.

XI. QUERY.
Whether this Maxim, That the Party cannot disable himself, shall hold good in
Criminal Causes, as Felony, Murder, and Petit Treason?

SOLUTION.
The Judges in Beverley's Case do affirm, That a Man who is deprived of the use
of Reason and Understanding, shall not lose his Life for Felony or Murder,
because the Punishment of a Felon is so grievous, sc. 1. To lose his Life. 2.
To lose his Life in such odious manner, sc. By Hanging; for he shall be hanged
between Heaven and Earth, as unworthy of both. 3. He shall lose his Blood, as
to his Ancestry: For he is a Son of the Earth, without any Ancestor; and as to
his Posterity also, for his Blood is corrupt, and he has neither Heir, nor
Posterity. 4. His Lands. 5. His Goods. And in such Case the King shall have,
Annum, and diem, and vastum; to the intent his Wife and Children shall be cast
out, his Houses pulled down, his Trees eradicated and overthrown, his Meadows
ploughed up, and all that he has for Comfort, Delight, or Sustenance, wasted
and destroyed; because that he in such felonious manner offended against the
Law; and all that was, Ut poena ad paucos, metus ad omnes perveniat. But the
Punishment of a Man, who is deprived of Reason and Understanding, cannot be an
Example to others. Secondly, No Felony, or Murder, can be committed without a
Felonious Intent, or Purpose 21 H. 7. 31. 26 Ass. 27 F. N. B. 202. Stamford's
Plea: of the Crown, 16. 8. c. 9.
: But Furiosus non intelligit quid agit and animo, and Ratione caret, and non
multum distat a Brutis, as Bracton, lib. 5. Tract. 5. c. 20. nu. 1. f. 420. b.
and Fleta lib. 6. c. 40. nu. 1.
Bracton says, and therefore he cannot have a Felonious Intent. Also for the
same Reason, Non compos mentis cannot commit Petit Treason: As if a Woman Non
compos mentis, kill her Husband, as appears, 12 H. 3. Forfeiture 33. Vide
Stamford, f. 45. Kitchen 56. Tit. Forfeiture, Edit. 1651.

Sir Edward Coke tells us, That this Maxim, That the Party shall not disable
himself; holds only in Civil Comment on Littleton, 405. f. 247. b.
Causes, but not in Criminal Causes, as Felony, etc. For in such the Act and
Wrong of a Madman shall not be imputed to him; because in those Causes, Actus
non fac^ Reum, nisi men's sit rea, and Note, The Mirror of Justices says* That
King Alfred hanged Cole, for giving Sentence of Death on one Ive, when he was
mad and distracted in his Wits, c. 5. 1. p. 297. Edit. 1642.
he is Amens (i. e.) (...) mente, without his Mind (...) Discretion, and
Furiosus sol^ furore punitur; a Madman (...) only punishd by his Madness*

Add hereunto what Plouden, and the Author in his Exposition of the Terms of
Law, say of distracted Persons in Cases Criminal.

The former expresses himself thus: If a Man (...) sanae memoriae, kill
another although he has broken the Com. fol. 19. a. Reneger and Fogassa, and f.
465. a. Eyston v. Studde.
words of the Law, yet he has not broken the Law* for that he had no Memory,
nor Understanding, but me^ Ignorance, which came to him by the Hand of God; and
therefore it is said to be involuntary Ignorance, to which the Law imputes the
Act to be done, because there was no default in him; and for this he shall be
excused, h^ being ignorant by Compulsion.

The latter speaks in this wise: When an Act of Parliament is made, that
whosoever Fol. 150. b. Tit. Equity.
does such a thing shall be a Felon, and shall suffer Death; yet if a Madman,
or an Infant of young Years, that has no Discretion, do the same, they shall
be no Felons, nor suffer Death therefore.

Having given my Reader an Account of the Common Law, relating to Non sane
memories, in the point of Criminal Matters, I will present to his View, Civil
Law ^exts, concerning such distracted Persons as are guilty of Homicidium, or
killing other Men.

Now the Civilians tell us, That such as kill, either Father, or Mother, or
those Poena Parricidii more majorum haec instituta est, ut Parricida virgis
sanguineis verberatus, deinde culleo insuatur cum Cane, Gallo Gallinaceo, and
vipera, and simia; deinde in Mare profundum culleus jactetur, D. 48. 9. 9.
Instit. 4. 18. 6.
^at are in the place of Father, or Mother, or any ^at are of next Akin, their
^unishment is Death; and (...) the Case of the Father and* Mother, the Pain of
Death, the Parricide being (...) well whipped, so that the Blood do follow in
good ^enty, he being sowed up into a Sack, together with a ^og, a Cock, a
Viper, an Ape, is thrown into the Depth ^f the Sea. But if a Madman (say they)
should kill his Father, or Mother, etc. he shall be no way punished, ^eckoning
that his own Furor, or Madness, is a sufficient ^unishment to himself.

Sane si per furorem, (says the Lawyer Modestinus) ^liquis parentem occiderit,
impunitus erit, ut divi fratres ^scripserunt super eo, qui per furorem matrem
necaverat. Nam sufficere, furore ipso eum puniri, D. 48. 9. 9. 2. D. ^. 18. 14.

Infans, vel Furiosus (says the same Lawyer) si homi^em occiderint, lege
Cornelia non tuentur: Cum alterum ^nocentia Consilii tuetur, alterum fati
infelicitas excu^t. D. 48. 8. 12. On which Text Gothofredus has this Note:
Furiosum fati infelicitas a poena excusat, ideoque (...) facere sed pati
injuriam dicitur: Citing for it the Lawyer Ulpian, whose Words are as follow:
Sane sunt quidam qui facere non possunt, utputa Furiosus, and impubes, qui doli
capax non est; namque hi pati injuriam so^ent, non facere; cum enim injuria ex
affectu facientis ^onsistat, consequens erit dicere, hos sive pulsent, sive
^onvicium dicunt injuriam fecisse non videri. D. 47. 10. ^. 1. Vide what the
Canon Law says of a Furor Man, that kills or wounds another Person. Clement.
Lib. 5. Tit. 4. de Homicidio voluntario, and casuali.

XII. QUERY.
If a Man while he is Non compos mentis, destroys himself, whether he can be
said to be Felo de se?

SOLUTION.
If a Man lose his Memory by the Rage of Sickness, or Infirmity, or otherwise,
and Co. 3 Inst. f. 54. Stanford's Pleas of the Crown, Lib. 1. c. 11. f. 19. b.
20. a. Edit. 1567.
kill himself, while he is Non compos* mentis, he is not Felo de se: For as he
cannot commit Murder upon another, so in that Case he cannot commit Murder
upon himself. If one during the time that he is Non compos mentis, gives
himself a mortal Wound, whereof he, when he has recovered his Memory, dies,
he is not Felo de se; because the Stroke, which was the Cause of his Death, was
given, when he was not Compos mentis: Et Actus non facit reus, nisi men's sit
rea.

So it is said in Shelly's Case: If a Man, who is not Compos mentis, give unto
himself a mortal Wound, and before he dies, he becomes of Sane Memory, and
afterward dies of the same Wound; in this Case, although that he dies of Sane
Memory, yet because the Original Cause of his Death, viz. the Stroke, was,
when he was Non compos mentis, he shall not be Felo de se; because the Death,
etc. has relation to the Original Act, which was the Stroke, or Wound. 1 Co.
f. 99. b. Shelly's Case, Vide 4 Co. f. 42. a. Heydon's Case, 22. E. 3. Corone
244. Plowden's Comm. f. 260* a.

Now let us hear what Resolution Bracton and Fleta, two old Authors, give of
this our Question.

The former speaks in this wise: De Furioso quid dicetur, qui rationem non
habet? Et de mente Capto, and frenetico, vel si ille qui laborat in acuta
infirmitate seipsum submerserit vel interfecerit, quaeritur an talis feloniam
faciat de se ipso? Videtur quod non, nec haereditatem forisfaciunt nec Catalla,
eo quod sensu carent, and ratione, and non magis quam Brutum animal injuriam
facere possunt, nec feloniam, cum non multum distent a Brutis, etc. Lib. 3.
Tract. 2. de Corona, c. 31. f. 150. 8.

The later, viz. Fleta, does concur with Bracton, and pronounces thus:
Similiter Furiosi, Frenetici, Infantuli and mente Capti, and in acuta febri
laborantes, quamvis seipsos interfecerint non tamen Feloniam committunt, nec
hoereditates foris faciunt, nec Catalla, eo quod sensu Carent, and Ratione.
Lib. 1. c. 36. de Infortuniis.

XIII. QUERY.
Whether he that is Non compos mentis, and totally deprived of all Compassings,
and Imaginations, can commit High Treason; by Compassing or Imagining the Death
of the King?

SOLUTION.
Though all Laws do exempt a Madman from Punishment, because their Actions C. 9.
9. 20. Toll voluntaiem and erit omnis actus indifferen^, quia affectio tua
nomen imponit operi tuo, and crimen non contrahitur nisi nocendi voluntas
intercedat. Bracton, l. a. tract. 1. De Prodictionebus, c 2. nu. 14.
are not governed by their Will, and the Will of Man being set apart, all his
Deeds are indifferent, neither can the Body offend, without a corrupt or
erroueous Mind; yet if a Madman kill, or offer to kill the King, it is
High Treason: For the King, Est Caput, and Salus Reipublicae and a Capite 4 Co.
f. 124. b. Beverley's Case.
bona valetudo transit in omnes: And for this Cause their Persons are so
sacred, that none ought to do, or offer them Violence; but he is, Reus Criminis
laesae Majestatis, and pereat unus, ne pereant omnes. Thus say the Judges in
Beverley's Case.

Sir Robert Holbourn, in his Reading upon the Statute of 25 E. 3. c. 2. De
Proditionibus, Reading, Printed Anno 1681. p. 17, 18.
says thus:

All Ages are within this Law, as in Folks which have Knowledge, or Men of Non
Sanae Memoriae, and a Madman is also within this Law, as to that part of the
Statute, which concerns more immediately the Person of the King: For if any of
them aforementioned in this Division, shall compass his Death, it is Treason
within the first Clause; but not in the Clause of levying War: But a Man that
is Surdus, coecus, and mutus, is not within this Law; for it is impossible for
him to have Understanding. And afterward he tells us, That I. S. after he
became mad, kills the Queen; this is Treason P. 31, 32, 33, 34.
within this Law: First, Because a Man may counterfeit himself to be mad; and
he may do it so cunningly, as it cannot be discerned, whether he be mad or no.
The Second is, in respect of the great Esteem that the Law gives to the Person
of the King; for he is the Fountain of Justice: And for the Proof of this
Point, that it may be understood, we ought to see what the Common Law was,
before the making of this Statute, as to this Point; and then ought to enquire,
and see how the Law is altered, since the making of the Statute; and by this
means we shall find out the Law, and the Reason thereof: It is true, that the
Law without special words, will not bind an Infant, or a Madman, as to the
Punishment of their Bodies; but yet it will extend to their Lands and Estates:
But this our Law is no new Law, but only a declarative Law; and in that Case
general words will bind an Infant, or a Madman, without any special words.
That it was Treason at the Common Law, is apparent Britton, f. 16. a. c. 8. etc
22. f. 39. a. b. Mirror, c 2. 11. etc. 1. 4. Vide Bracton, fol. 118. b.
in Britton, and the Mirror of Justice; and this Statute does not declare, who
shall be Traitors, but what shall be Treason; and therefore by this Act, it is
Treason in a Madman, or whomsoever shall commit it; for a Madman is not
excepted out of this Law: And to make this appear more fully, you may be
pleased to read the Case of Beverley: That a Man that is Non compos mentis, may
commit High Treason, although he cannot commit Petty-Treason, n^r Felony. And so
it is also in Dalton's Justice of Peace, 206. That if a Man that is Non compos
mentis, shall kill the King, this is High Treason. Nay, Beverley's Case goes
farther, and says, That if he shall offer only to kill the King, this is
High Treason. Thus much for the Opinions of the Judges in Beverley's Case, and
of Holbourn; now let us see what Sir Edward Coke says concerning Madmen, as to
the Point of committing High Treason.

A Man (says he) that is Non compos mentis, or an Infant within the Age of
Discretion, is not [ un Home] Coke in his Third Institutes, fol. 4.
within the Statute of 25 E. 3. c. 2. for the principal End of Punishment is,
That others by his Example may fear to offend Ut unius poena metus possit, esse
multorum, D. 16. 3. 31. D. 48. 3. 6. Cod. 9. 27. 1. D. 48. 19. 6. 1.
, Ut poena ad paucos, metus ad omnes perveniat. But such Punishment can be no
Example to Madmen, or Infants, that are not of the Age of Discretion. And God
forbid (quoth he) that in Cases so penal, the Law should not be certain: And if
it be certain in Case of Murder and Felony, a fortiori, it ought to be certain
in Case of Treason.

If a Man commit Treason, or Felony, and confesses the same, or be thereof
Convict; if afterward he Co. 3 Inst. f. 4.
become De non sane Memory, (qui patitur exilium mentis) he shall not be
called to answer: Or if after Judgment he become De non sane Memory, he shall
not be executed; for it cannot be an Example to others.

Add to what he said before, this which follows:

If a Madman had killed, or offered to kill the King, it was holden for
Treason; and so it appears by King Co. 3 Inst. f. 6.
Alfred's Law, before the Conquest: But now by the Statute of 25 E. 3. c. 2.
and by force of these words, Fait compasser, ou imaginer la mort, he that is
Non compos mentis, and totally deprived of all Compassings, and Imaginations,
cannot commit Treason, by Compassing or Imagining the Death of the King: For
Furiosus solo furore punitur: But it must be an absolute Madness, and a total
Deprivation of Memory. And this appears by the Statute of 33 H. 8. for
thereby it is provided, That if a Man being Compos mentis, Cap. 20.
commit Treason; and after Accusation, etc. fall to Madness, that he might be
tried in his Absence, etc. and suffer Death, as if he were of perfect Memory:
For by this Statute of 25 E. 3. a Madman could not commit Treason. It was
further provided, by the said Act of 33 H. 8. That if a Man attainted of
Treason became mad, that notwithstanding he should be executed; which cruel and
inhuman Law (says he) lived not long, but was repealed: For in that Point also
it was against the Common Law; because by Intendment of Law, the Execution of
the Offender is for Example; but so it is not, when a Madman is executed; but
should be a miserable Spectacle, both against Law, and of extreme Inhumanity,
and Cruelty, and can be no Example to others.

XIV. QUERY.
Whether a Madman be punishable in Trespass?

SOLUTION.
In Capital Causes, in favorem vitae, the Law will not punish in so high a
degree, Sir Francis Bacon in his Elements of the Common Laws of England, Reg.
7. p. 31, 32.
except the Malice of the Will, and Intention, appear: But in Civil Trespasses
and Injuries, that are of an inferior Nature, the Law does rather consider the
Damage of the Party wronged, than the Malice of him that was the Wrong-doer:
And therefore, if an Infant, within Years of Discretion, or a Madman, kill
another, he shall not be impeached thereof; but if they put out a Man's Eye, or
do him like corporal Hurt, they shall be punished in Trespass.

Concerning a Mad-man's doing a corporal Hurt, the Civil Law runs thus:
Quaerimus si Furiosus damnum dederit, an Legis Aquiliae Actio sit? Et pegasus
negavit. Quae enim in eo culpa sit, cum suae mentis non sit? Et Culpam non
admittit, qui suae mentis non est. Gothofreda. 1
hoc verissimum: Cessabit igitur Aquilia Actio, quemadmodum, si quadrupes
damnum dederit, Aquilia cessat, aut si tegula ceciderit. D. 9. 2. 5. 2.

XV. QUERY.
Whether a Furor Man can be a Purchaser?

SOLUTION.
A Man of Non sane Memory, may, without the Consent of any other, purchase
Lands; but he himself cannot wave it: But if he die in his Madness, or after
his Coke in his Comment on Littleton, 1. f. 2. b.
Memory recovered, without agreement thereunto, his Heir may wave and disagree
to the State, without any Cause showed, and so of an Idiot: But if a Man of Non
sane Memory, recovers his Memory, and agree unto it, it is unavoidable.

So it is if a Madman makes a Gift, or Grant, and then recovering his Wits,
confirms it; this Gift, or Grant is unavoidable, as appears by Bracton and
Fleta.

The former speaks thus: Convalescit Donatio facta a Furioso, si sanae mentis
effectus, donum illud confirmaverit, vel ratum habuerit. Lib. 2. cap. 5. nu. 4.
f. 11. b. 12. a.

The later says in this wise: Dare poterit Furiosus, and quand^que fatuus, dum
tamen donum ex post facto confirmaverit, cum recuperaverit sanitatem. Lib. 3.
cap. 3. nu. 8.

With which Authors does agree Dionysius Gothofredus's Note upon D. 24. 3. 22.
10. Furiosus ad suam mentem reversus ratam rem habere potest; Ratamque habendo
facit utilem.

XVI. QUERY.
Whether the Will of one that afterward becomes mad, or distracted, shall
stand good in Law?

SOLUTION.
If a Man that is of good and perfect Memory, makes his Will, and afterward by
the Visitation of God, he 4 Co* f. 61. b. Forse, and Hembling's Case.
becomes of unsound Memory, this Act of God shall not be a Revocation of his
Will, which he made, when he was of good and perfect Memory. With this
Resolution do concur our old Jurists, Bracton and Fleta, as also the Texts of
the Civil Law.

1. Bracton: Furor superveniens nihil adimit non magis quam morbus incurabilis
sicut Lepra: Secundum Lib. 5. Tract. 5. Cap. 20. nu. 1. f. 420. b.
quod dicitur, quod multa impediunt contrahendo, quae non dirimunt Contractum,
and ita sunt multa, quae impediunt promovendo, quae non dejiciunt jam promotum.
2. Fleta: Furor alienationem prius factam non perimit, and sicut multa
impediunt contrahenda quae non Lib. 6. Cap. 40. nu. 1.
dirimunt Contractum, ita sunt multa, quae impediunt promovendum, quae non
dejiciunt jam promotum. 3. Civil Texts: Neque Testamentum recte factum, neque
ullum aliud negotium recte gestum, postea furor interveniens perimit. Siquis
Instit. 2. 12. in Fine.
post testamentum factum, adversa valetudine, aut Instit. 2. 12. 3. in Fine.
quolibet alio casu mutus, aut surdus esse caeperit, ratum nihilominus manet
ejus Testamentum. Vide D. 28. 1. 20. 4.
XVII. QUERY.
Whether a Fine before a Judge, of Non sane Memory; or a Grant of an Office
made by him, be good in Law?

SOLUTION.
There is a Diversity taken between a Fine levied before a Judge of Non sane
Memory, and a Grant of an Office made by him: For Si Judge, ou Justice soit de
non sane Memory, uncore les Fines, Judgments, and auters Records, que sont
devant luy, serra bon: Mes e contra del done d'Office, vel hujusmodi per luy,
car ceo est matter en fait, and l'auters sont matters de Record, Car matters en
fait poient estre avoid per non sane Memory. Contra de matter de Record. If a
Judge, or Justice, be distracted, yet the Fines, Judgments, and other Records
that are before him shall be good: But otherwise it is, of the Grant of an
Office, or the like, by him made: For this is Matter in Fact, and the others
are Matters of Record; for Matters in Fact may be avoided by Non sane Memory;
otherwise it is in the Case of Matter of Record. Br. Dum non fuit Compos mentis
7.

XVIII. QUERY.
A Madman makes an Exchange of his Land, with J. S. for other Land, and the
Exchange is accordingly executed, the Non sane Man dies, whether his Heir can
avrid this Exchange, having first entered into the Land taken in Exchange?

SOLUTION.
If a Man of unsound Memory, being seized of Land in Fee, exchangeth the same
Land with a Stranger, for another Acre of Land in Fee, and the Exchange is
executed, and he of unsound Memory dies, and his Heir enters into the Land
taken in Exchange by his Father, he shall not avoid this Exchange. Perkin,
Sect. 298. Tit. Exchanges.

XIX. QUERY.
Whether, and in what Cases Lachesse can prejudice an Idiot, Madman, or other
Non compos mentis?

SOLUTION.
There are some who have made a Difference between Bar of Non compos mentis's
Right, and Bar of his Entry; 4 Co. fol. 125. a. b. Beverley's Case of Non
compos mentis.
for in Case of Bar of his Right, his Lachesse, or Negligence, shall not be
prejudicial to him; but in such special Case, if he become of unsound Memory,
he shall show, that he was not Compos mentis: As if a Man Non compos mentis be
disseised, and the Disseizor levieth a Fi^ in this Case at the Common Law,
although the Year (...) Day be past, yet he who was Non compos mentis, shall not
be bound thereby, but he may well enter; and that, they say, is proved by the
Statute De modo levandi Fines, made 18 E. 1. which is but a Declaration of the
Common Law, scil. That a Fine is so high a Bar, and of so great force, and of
so high nature in it self, that it barreth not only those who are Parties, and
Privies to the Fine, and their Heirs, but all other of the World, who are of
full Age. out of Prison, and of good Memory, and within the four Seas, the Day
of the Fine levied, if they put not in their Claim, by their Action, or Entry,
in the County within the Year and the Day; by which it appears, that no
Lachesse Excusatur ille ( says Flet a) cujus interfuerit quod Clamium infra
annum and diem non apposuerit multis modis, ut si fuerit infra aetatem, tempore
quo finis fuit levatus, vel furiosus, vel mente captus, and non sanae mentis
vel Idiotus vel surdus, vel mutus, vel si detentus fuerit in Prisona, etc. Lib.
6. c. 54. nu. 1. de Excusationibus.
of a Man Non compos mentis, shall bar him of his Right. Also it appears by
the Statute of 4 H. 7. c. 24. That in such Case if a Man levieth a Fine with
Proclamations, and at the time of the Fine levied, he who has Right, is Non
compos mentis, and afterward he recovers his Memory, that in this Case he ought
to sue his Action, or Entry, within five Years after he becomes of sound
Memory; and in such Case in Pleading, he shall show, that at the time of the
Fine levied, he was Non compos mentis, and all the special Matter: But if he
who has such Right be an Idiot, or Non compos mentis, and never recovereth his
Memory, the Heir may have an Action, or make his Entry when he will; for he is
excepted out of the Body of the Act, and is not tied to make any Entry, or
bring his Action within any time, but the Party himself, if he recover his
Memory. The same Law of him who is beyond Sea, at the time of the ^e levied,
and dies, there his Heir may enter, or bring (...) Action when he will: And in
such Case, the Lord by Escheat shall take Advantage of his Non sane Memory,
Infancy, Imprisonment, or being beyond Sea of his Tenant: For if Lord and
Tenant be, and the Tenant be disseized, and the Disseizor levieth a Fine, the
Disseizee being within Age, Non compos mentis, or in Prison, or beyond the Sea,
dies without Heir, the Lord, by Escheat, shall take advantage of every of
them, against the Disseizor. So if a Collateral Warranty descend upon a Non
compos mentis, which he might have avoided by Entry; but an Idiot, or Non
compos mentis, by their Lachesse, shall be barred of their Entry, because if
they be disseized, and the Disseizor dies seized, it shall take away their
Entry; but after their Death, their Heir can enter, or take advantage of the
Infirmity of their Ancestor, and his Lachesse, which shall not prejudice his
Heir of his Entry; and that appears by Littleton, Sect. 405. For Littleton
says, No Lachesse can be adjudged by the Law, in him who has not Discretion
in such Case, scil. having regard to his Heir, and so is the difference.

XX. QUERY.
Whether he that is a Furor Man, can be appointed Tutor?

SOLUTION.
He that is not 21* Years old, or is not of perfect Mind and Memory, may be
assigned Tutor: But it is to be understood, that he shall be Tutor when he is
of full Age; or when he does return to Sanity of Mind. Swinburn in his Treatise
of Testaments and Last Wills, Part 3. Sect. 10. Cowell's Institutes, Lib. 1.
Tit. 14. p. 29. Edit. 1605.

Furiosus, vel minor viginti quinque annis Tutor testamento datus, Tutor tunc
Inst. 1. 14. 2.
erit, cum Compos mentis, aut major viginti quinque annis fuerit factus, says
the Emperor Justinian.

Furiosus, (says the Lawyer Paulus) si tutor datus fuerit potest intelligi ita
dari, D. 26. 1. 11.
cum suae mentis esse caeperit.

Ulpian, Lib. 3. to Sabinus: Si Furiosus testamento tutor detur, si quidem, cum
furerere desierit: Tutorem D. 26. 2. 10. 3.
esse recte datum proculus existimat. quod si datus sit pure, negat proculus
valere dationem. Sed est verius, quod and pomponius ait, recte videri datum,
and tunc fore tutorem, cum sapere caeperit.

XXI. QUERY.
Whether a King, during the time of his Furor, or Insanity of Mind, be capable
of making Peace?

SOLUTION.
They that have Power to begin a War, have also Power by Articles of Agreement
to end it; for every Man is the best Moderator of his own Affairs; whence Suae
quisque rei moderator, atque Arbiter. Cod. 4. 35. 21.
it follows, that in a War on both sides public, the Power of making Peace
belongs to them, who are entrusted with the Supreme Authority: As in a
Government truly Monarchical, to the In regnis Regum est foedus fadus facere,
Grot. lib. 2. 1. 15. 3.
King, so as he be no ways disabled to exercise that Authority: For in Case a
King be not at Years of Discretion, or if he be not of sound Memory, he is not
capable of making Peace. Grotius of the Rights of War and Peace, Lib. 3. c. 20.
sect. 2, 3. Vide Lib. 1. c. 3. sect. 24.

XXII. QUERY.
Whether it be lawful to speak Untruth to Madmen?

SOLUTION.
In Case (says Grotius) we converse either with a Child, or a Madman, if what
we say be false, it cannot Lib. 3. c. 1. 12. de Iure Belli, and pacis.
be imputed as a Lie; because (as Quintilian says) it is universally permitted
as profitable, to instruct Infants by Tales and Fables; but the immediate Cause
is, because not having a Freedom of Judgment, Infants, and Madmen cannot be
injured about that Liberty which they have not.

Having given the Reader an Account of the Law of England, relating to Madmen;
as also here and there made mention of the Civil Law of the Romans, I shall
conclude this Second Part of my Tract, with a Synopsis of the Mad-man's Law,
framed by a very Learned Civilian.

Vere furiosi (non tempore intervalli non simulati) non tenentur Parricidii. D.
48. 9. 9. 2. Homicidii, D. 48. Dionysius Gothofredus ad D. 1. 18. 13. 1.
8. 12. Tutelae male administratae, D. 26. 7. 61. Injuriae, D. 47. 10. 3. 1.
Etiam erga principem, c. 9. 7. Lex unic. nec possunt facere Testamentum, c. 6.
22. 9. Etiam ad pias Causas. Bartolus in l. 1. c. de Sacrosanct* Eccles. nec
Codicillos, D. 29. 7. 3. nec sponsalia, D. 23. 1. 8. Nec Matrimonium, D. 23. 2.
16. 2. Nec Stipulationem, Instit. 3. 20. 8. D. 44. 7. 1. 12. D. 46. 1. 70. 4.
c. 4. 38. 2. Nec quid aliud contrahere, D. 50. 17. 40. Vel agere, cum nec velle
possint, D. 29. 7. 2. 3. D. 50. 17. 40. Cum absentium, and quiescentium loco
habeantur, D. 50. 17. 167. ( nisi ubi eorum negotia gesta sunt, D. 3. 5. 3. 5.)
Et Curator eis detur, D. 27. 10. 1. Praeterea furiosi testes esse non possunt,
D. 28. 1. 20. 4. nec Iudices D. 42. 1. 9. nec Tutores, D. 26. 1. 11. Retinent
tamen statum, Dignitatem, Magistratum, potestatum, Dominium rei suae, D. 1. 5.
20. Uxorem, and Matrimonium, and Ius Patriae potestatis, D. 1. 6. 8. Quanquam
sine eorum consensu Liberi contrahere nuptias possunt. Cod. 5. 4. 25. Et dotari
moderate a Parentum Curatoribus, C. 1. 4. 28. Observandum tamen Leonem. Novel.
111, and 112.

Hitherto of the Description, Remarks, and Questions, with their Resolutions,
appertaining to such as are wholly deprived of the use of their Reason; let us
now come to treat of the Law belonging to Lunaticks, or Moon-sick Persons.

PART the Third. Of the Lunatic having sometime his Reason, and sometimes not.
SECT. I. The Description of a Lunatic, and the Word, whence derived
AS for the Origination of the word Lunaticus, Lunatic, we are told, it comes
from Luna, the Moon; and so the Party is said to be Moon-sick: In Italian he is
called Lunatico; in Spanish, Alunado; in the Greek Language (...), a (...), i.
e. Luna; in the Teutonick he is termed, Mohn-Suchtig, a Moh, i. Luna, and
Suchtig, i. aegrotus, aeger, ut illi, qui certis Lunae temporibus insania
vexantur.

Dr. Hammond, (that learned Divine) concerning the word Lunatic, says thus:

The word (...), Annotation on Ver. 15. of Matthew, c. 17.
coming from (...), the Moon, is directly parallel to the English Lunatic,
from Luna, the Moon; also the English word Lunacy, and Lunatic, is vulgarly
taken to signify a Madman* and nothing else, viz. That Species of Madness
which comes on Meant at such a Set-time, toward the Full of the Moon, as
ordinary it is observable, in those that have any Intervals.

This Lunatic, according to the Law of England, is one, that has sometime his
Intervalla haec furoris, confinia furoris and sanitatis dicuntur, c. 5. 70. 6.
etc. 6. 22. 9.
Understanding, and sometime not: Aliquando gaud^ lucidis intervallis; and
therefore he is called, Non compos mentis, so long as he has not
Understanding. Coke in his Comment on Littleton, sect. 405. f. 247. a.

The Judges in their Resolution in the Case of Beverley, give this Description
of a Lunatic: Lunaticus, qui 4 Co. f. 124. b. Case of Non compos mentis.
gaudet lucidis intervallis; and sometimes is of sound Memory, and sometimes is
Non compos mentis.

Thus much for the Etymology, and Description of a Lunatic: Now for some
Remarks relating to him.

SECT. II. The Remarks concerning Lunaticks.
I. REMARK.
*ILLI, qui quarta Luna, seu interlunio nascuntur huic morbo sunt obnoxii, nam
ex opinione Astrologorum, si luna fuerit male collocata, Interlunium dicitur id
spatium temporis, in quo nec amplius detus Luna apparet, nec adhuc nova videtur.
aut spasticos, aut Lunaticos, aut Caducos facit: Those that are born during
the Interlune, or Conjunction of the Sun and Moon, are liable to the Disease of
Lunacy: For, according to the Opinion of Star-Gazers, if the Moon be ill set,
or placed, it causes Men to be subject, either to Convulsions, to Lunacy, or
to the Falling Sickness: And concerning the last of these, Physicians have a
Rule, viz. They who are Qui Comitialem morbum habent, ne quidem diebus quibus
motbo vacant, sani dicuntur.
troubled with the Fallingsickness, upon their good Days are not accounted
whole.

II. REMARK.
The Roman Lawyers do distinguish every where, betwixt him that is Furiosus,
and him who is Demens: C. 5. 4. 25. C. 1. 4. 28. C. 5. 37. 28.
For Furiosus est, qui omni intellectu caret. And therefore D. 50. 17. 5.
Nihil utiliter agit, nisi tempore dilucidi intervalli. C. 5. 70. 6.
Nam aliis hominibus continuum furoris infortunium accidit; alios furoris
morbus non sine laxamento aggreditur, sed in quibusdam temporibus quaedam iis
intermissio pervenit: But with them, Demens is he: Qui est mentis Errore
ductus, ea Captus non usquequaque, not continually. D 2. Zouch's Elementa
Iurisprud. Pars 2. sect. 4. de Valetudine Hominis.

III. REMARK.
The King of England, by his Prerogative, is Summus Regni Custos, and has the
Cicero, l. Tuseul. 3. says. Eum qui errore mentis affectus est, vetari XII.
Tabulis rerum suarum Esse Dominum.
Custody of the Persons and Estates of such, as for want of Reason and
Understanding, cannot govern themselves, or manage their Estates; so that the
Persons and Estates of Lunaticks, are as well in the Custody of the King, as of
Idiots; but with this difference: That of Idiots to his own use, and that of
Lunaticks to the use of the next Heir. Statute of Praerogativa Regis, c. 10. 4
Co. f. 128. Beverley's Case of Non compos mentis. Stamford Super Praerog.
Regis, c. 10. Cowell's Institutes, Lib. 1. Tit. 23. n. 2. p. 43, 44. Edit. 1605.

IV. REMARK.
Such as by Office are untruly found Lunaticks, may have their Traverse to the
same, as appears by the Statute of 2 E. 6. c. 8.

V. REMARK.
Those that are Parties to a Fine, ought to be of good Memory, as appears by
the Statute de Finibus, 18 E. 1. Vide 1 R. 3. c. 7. and 4 H. 7. c. 24.
Stat. 4. And therefore Lunaticks, and such as are not of Sane Memory, may not
be received to levy a Fine* but if they be, the Fine will be* good and
unavoidable. Fieri non debet sed factum valet. 4 Co. 124. Beverley's Case,
Sheppard's Practical Counselor, c. 2.

VI. REMARK.
If the Parties to whom a Right, or Title, comes, after a Fine levied be not of
Sane Memory, (a Lunatic being such) he, or his Heirs, have time to pursue
his, or their Right or Title, within five Years after such Imperfection
removed: So also has he in Case, he had a Right of Title at the time of the
Fine levied, 1 R. 3. c. 7. and 4 H. 7. c. 24.

VII. REMARK.
If Tenant in Tail levy a Fine, the Issue in Tail, tho'a Lunatic at the time
of the Fine levied, is barred for ever by the Fine, so levied by the Tenant in
Tail, forasmuch as he is a Privy, and out of all the Savings of 4 H. 7. c. 24.
3 Co. f. 91. The Case of Fines.

VIII. REMARK.
It is enacted by the Statute of 34 and 35 H. 8. That the Will, or Testament
made of any Manors, Lands, 34, and 35 H. 8. c. 5.
Tenements, or other Hereditaments, by any Person De non sane Memory, shall
not be taken to be good, or Furiosus testamentum facere non potest, quoniam
mentem non habet, ut testari de ea re possit. Ulpian. tit. 20. de Testamentis.
effectual in the Law: But a Lunatic in his Fits, is a Person of Insanity of
Mind, and therefore his Will or Testament, is not valid in Law.

IX. REMARK.
If a Person that becomes of Non sane memory, by Accident, be disseised, and
suffer a Descent, although he return to his former right Understanding again, yet
he shall never avoid the Descent; and so it is a Fortiori of one, that has
Lucida Intervalla, Co. Litt. 247. a.

X. REMARK.
The Act of 23 El. c. 3. does not bar a Lunatic, o^ other Non compos mentis,
of his Writ of Error, for reversing a Fine, so that he, or his Heirs, pursue
such Writ within seven Years, after such Imperfection removed; and if it
happen, that he dies, hanging the Suit, his Heir may undertake it, within one
Year after the seven Years.

XI. REMARK.
If a Man during his Lunacy make a Feoffment in Fee, though he shall in Pleading
never avoid it, by saying that Co. Litt. 247. a.
he was a Lunatic, at the time of his Feoffment, yet twelve Men, upon their
Oaths may find the Truth of the Matter; and so the Feoffment may be avoided by
the King, for the Benefit of the Lunatic.

XII. REMARK.
All Acts which a Man does during his Lunacy, are equivalent to Acts done by an
Idiot, or he who is utterly 4 Co. Beverley's Case.
Non compos mentis; but Acts done by himself, Inter lucida intervalla, when he
is of sound Memory, shall bind him: And this is agreeable to what Bracton has
pronounced in the Case of Lib. 5. tract. 5. c. 20. nu. 1.
such as enjoy their lucid Intervals; his Words are: Furiosi non multum distant
a Brutis, quae ratione carent, nec valere debet quod cum talibus agitur durante
furore, possunt enim quidam dilucidis gaudere intervallis, and quidam habent
furorem perpetuum. Quod autem actum fuerit cum talibus tempore quo dilucidis
gaudent intervallis, ratum erit ac si cum aliis ageretur, sive furorem
simulaverint, sive non. With Bracton concurs Fleta, as you may see in Lib. 6.
cap. 40. nu. 1.

XIII. REMARK.
If a Lunatic levy a Fine, and declares the Uses of it thereupon, by his Deed,
he shall be bound, as being a part of the Operation of the Fine. Hobart's
Reports 224. Needler v. Bishop of Winchester, 10 Co. 42. Mary Portington's
Case, and 2 Co. f. 58. Beckwith's Case.

XIV. REMARK.
A Copyholder that is a Lunatic, cannot forfeit his Copyhold Estate. Sheppard,
c. 22. p. 172. 4 Edit*

XV. REMARK.
A Lunatic, who is Lord of a Copyhold Manor, may grant Copyhold Estates for
any time, according to the Custom of the Manor, as any other Person may do,
and the Estates made by him are unavoidable. Sheppard p. 109. 4 Co. Clerk and
Pennifather's Case.

XVI. REMARK.
If a Lunatic be Steward of a Manor, all Acts that he does, according to his
Office, are good in Law. Sheppard's Court-Keeper's Guide, p. 115. cap. 19.

XVII. REMARK.
A Surrender, or Grant of Copyhold Land, may be made to a Lunatic. Sheppard's
Court-Keepers Guide, c. 19. p. 118; 119.

XVIII. REMARK.
A Lunatic, in his mad Fits, cannot Attorn to a Grant, for that he who has no
Understanding cannot make an Agreement to the Grant, Co. Lit. f. 315. a. 18 E.
3. 53. 6 Co. 69. a. Sir Moil Finch's Case. But a Man that is deaf and dumb,
though he has no Understanding, may Attorn by Signs. 26 E. 3. 63. Co. Lit. 315.
a.

XIX. REMARK.
If a Lunatic Man, during the time of his Furor, or Insanity of Mind, make a
Feoffment, etc. he cannot enter, nor have a Writ, called Dum non fuit compos
mentis; but after his Death, his Heir may well enter, or have the said Writ at
his choice. The same Law is, where an Infant within Age makes a Feoffment, and
dies, his Heir may enter, or have a Writ of Dum fuit infra aetatem; But with
this difference, that the Writ of Dum fuit non compos mentis, lies for the
Heir of him that was Non compos mentis, and not for himself; but a Dum fuit
infra aetatem, lies as well for the Ancestor himself, after his full Age, as
for his Heirs. Lit. sect. 406. Co. Lit. f. 247. b. Wingate in his Body of the
Common Law of England, c. 25. n. 20, 21, 22, 23.

XX. REMARK.
A Madman, or a Lunatic, may be imprisoned by another, to prevent killing 22
E. 4. 45.
of him, or burning his House, and justifiable. The Lord Hobart says, That the
necessity of avoiding greater Moor v. Hussy, f. 96.
Inconvenience, is a good Plea in Law; as where one kills a Thief, or a
Burglar, in defense of his Person, or House; so also is the binding and beating
of a Person Mad or Lunatic.

To prevent Madmen from doing Mischief to themselves, or others, hear what the
old Roman Law says concerning them:

Furiosi, si non possint per necessarios contineri, eo Remedio per praesidem
obviam eundum est; scilicet, ut Ulpianus.
Carcere contineantur, and ita divus pius rescripsit. D. 1. 18. 13. 1.

Cum autem ex literis tuis cognoverimus, tali eum loco, atque ordine esse, ut A
Rescript sent to Scapula Tertyllus, from the Emperors Marcus and Commodus,
occasioned by a Parricide, committed by one supposed mad.
a suis, vel etiam in propria villa custodiatur: Recte facturus nobis videris,
si eos a quibus illo tempore observatuus esset, vocaveris, and Causam tantae
negligentiae excusseris; and in unumquemque eorum, prout tibi levari, vel
onerari culpa, ejus videbitur constitueris. Nam Custodes furiosis non ad hoc
solum adhibentur, nequid perniciosius ipsi in se moliantur, sed ne aliis quoque
exitio sint. Quod si committatur, non immerito culpae eorum adscribendum est
qui negligentiores in officio suo fuerint. D. 1. 18. 14. Which may be Englished
thus:

Whereas we understand by your Letters, that he is kept at his Country House,
by Servants, and Friends, of his own; you shall do well to call before you,
such as at that time attended him, and to examine thoroughly how, and by what
negligence the Fact happened to be committed, as you shall find any of them
more or less faulty, to censure them accordingly: For Guards, or Keepers, are
appointed for Madmen, not only to look that they do not Mischief to
themselves; but also, that they be not destructive to others; which if it be
done, it may be well imputed to their Fault, who were more negligent than was
fit in their Employment. I cannot pass over here in Silence, the Madness of
Cleomedes, the King of the Lacedaemonians, and how he was handled to prevent his
playing mischievous Pranks.

Si opus sit (says the Physician Iacobus Wickerus) furiosi ligamentis
constringendi In his Syntaxes Medicinae, l. 2. Pars 2. p. 308. De Furoris
Curatione.
sunt* quemadmodum Cleomedi Lacedaemoniorum Regi contigit, qui cum ad Insaniam
redactus, sceptrum unicuique obvio in faciem impingeret, ligneis soleis
constrictus est a propinquis, and in Carcerem conjectus. Fit autem non solum,
ut ne aliis, sed ut nec sibi ipsis vim inferant, quam infer aliis nequeant:
Perinde ac Cleomedes, qui arrepto Custodis and Ergastularii gladio, ab ima
Corporis part ad verticem se dissecuit.

XXI. REMARK.
In a Bill brought by the Attorney General, in the Nature of an Information, on
the behalf of a Lunatic, it has been declared, That it is as needful to make
him a Party, as an Infant, where a Suit is on his behalf: But in the Case of an
Idiot it must be otherwise; but a Lunatic may recover his Understanding, and
then he is to have his Estate in his own disposing. Term Mich. 21. Car. 2.
Woolrich a Lunatic, v. in Cancellaria.

SECT. III. The Queries with their Solutions, relating to Lunaticks.
I. QUERY.
Whether the Testament made by a Lunatic, during his mad Fits, be valid in
Law, when he is come to himself?

SOLUTION.
SUch as are Lunaticks, can make no Testament, during the time of their Furor,
or Mad Fits; no, not so much as ad pios usus: Nay, the Testament made at such a
time, shall not stand good, when the Madness is past. Swinburn in his Treatise
of Testaments and Last Wills, Part 2. Sect. 3. Of Mad Folks, and Lunatic
Persons, and Dr. Godolphin in his Tract, entitled, The Orphan's Legacy, Part
1. c. 8. nu. 2. Instit. 2. 12. 1. c. 6. 22. 9.

II. QUERY.
Whether a Testament can be made by a Lunatic Person, betwixt his Fits?

SOLUTION.
If a Lunatic Person has clear, or calm Intermissions, then during the time
of Swinburn, Part 2. 3. Orphan's Legacy, Part 1. Chapter 8.
such their Quietness, and Freedom of Mind, he may make his Testament,
appointing an Executor, and disposing of his Goods at his pleasure: So that
neither the Furor, or Madness going before, nor following the making of the
Testament, does hinder the same Testament begun, and finished in the mean time.

The Lawyer Caius says thus: Hi qui furiosi, id est, mente insani fuerint, non
possunt facere testamenta. Lib. 2. tit. 2. de Testamentis.
Sed hii qui insani sunt: Si intervalla ipsius insaniae habent, per intervalla,
quibus sani sunt, possunt facere testamenta.

The Emperor Justinian speaks in this manner, both in his Institutes, and in
his Code:

Furiosi, si per id tempus fecerint testamentum, quo furor eorum intermissus
est, jure testati esse videntur. Instit. 2. 12. 1.

Sancimus tale Testamentum hominis qui in ipso actu Testamenti adversa
valetudine tentus est, pro nihilo esse. Si vero voluerit, in dilucidis
intervallis aliquod condere Testamentum, vel ultimam voluntatem, and hoc sana
mente inceperit facere, and consummaverit, nullo tali morbo interveniente stare
Testamentum, sive quamcunque ultimam voluntatem censemus, etc. c. 6. 22. 9.

III. QUERY.
If a Testament be made by a Lunatic Person, and the time of the making
unknown, whether this Testament be good, or no?

SOLUTION.
If a Lunatic Person, or one that is besides himself at some times, but not
continually, make his Testament, and it is not known, whether the same were
made whilst he was of sound Mind and Memory or no; then, in case the Testament
be so conceived, as thereby no Argument of Frenzy, or Folly, can be gathered,
it is to be presumed, that the same was made Vasq. de Success progress. lib. 1.
9. n. 90.
during the time of his Calm, and clear Intermissions; and so the Testament
shall be adjudged for a good Testament. Yea, although it cannot be proved, that
the Testator uses to have any clear and quiet Intermissions at all, yet
nevertheless it is supposed, that if the Testament be wisely, and orderly
framed, the same ought to be accepted for a lawful Testament. But if in the
Testament there be a mixture of Wisdom and Folly, it is presumed, that the same
was made, Angel. in L. Furiosum, c. qui Testa. fac. poss.
during the Testator's Frenzy; insomuch, that if there be one word sounding to
Folly, it is presumed, that the Testator was not of sound Mind and Memory when
he made the same: And therefore Idem Angel. in eadem L. Furiosum.
in this Case is the Testament void, unless it may be proved, that there was
Intermission of Furor the same time. Swinburn in his Treatise of Testaments and
Last Wills, Part 2. Sect. 3. f. 38. b. 39. a. Edit. 1590.

IV. QUERY.
Whether the Dying seized of a Bastard Eigne, without Interruption, shall bar
the Right of a Mulier Puisne, that is a Madman, or a Lunatic?

SOLUTION.
According to some: If a Man be seized of Land, and has Issue two Sons,
Bastard 8 Co. f. 101. Lechford's Case.
Eigne, and Mulier Puisne, and the Father dies seized, the Mulier being beyond
Sea, or within Age, or Imprisoned, or Non sanae Memoriae, and the Bastard Eigne
enters, and continues in peaceable possession of the Lands, and has Issue,
and dies, and the Lands descend to his Issue, the Right of the Mulier in all
the said Cases is bound for ever: And others hold the contrary.

V. QUERY.
Whether a Lunatic can be prejudiced by Laches of suing Livery?

SOLUTION.
Sir Ralph Burcher being seized of diverse Manors in the County of York, holden
in Hobart's Rep. f. 137. Burchers Case.
Chief, died seized Anno 40 Eliz. and the same descended to William Burcher;
presently after his Death, it Lunatic sueth not Livery; no mean Rates run
against him.
was found by Office before Commissioners, in the County of Middlesex, that the
said William Burcher was a Lunatic, and so had been long before the Death of
his Father, and that he was seized of the said Manors; and the Queen granted
the Custody of him, and his Lands to Sir Francis Barrington. After which 42
Eliz. there was an Office found in the County of York, of the Seisin of Sir
Ralph; his Death, and Heir, ut supra; and that he was of full Age: And it was
resolved, That the King And Livery was due to him, and the Law presumes that he
would have sued, it being for his Benefit if he had been Compos mentis.
was not to have any mean Rates in this Case for default of Livery sued, or
tendered; because no Lachess could be imputed unto the Heir, being Lunatic
before, and ever since the Death of his Ancestors, and the Lachess of his
Friends shall not hurt him; otherwise it were, if at any time he had been Sanae
Memoriae since the Death of his Ancestors. And there was showed unto the Judges
the like Decree, made Mich. 10 Iac. in the Cause of one Vaughan, which the
Attorney of the Court of Wards said, was made as a Decree of Equity; but they
resolved also, it was a good Decree in Law, upon the Reason aforesaid, not
because the King had seized and committed by force of the Lunacy, for that
would have changed with the King's better Estate; for it is better for the King
to hold for default of Livery, than for Lunacy.

VI. QUERY.
Whether a Lunatick*be punishable for hurting a Man?

SOLUTION.
If a Lunatic kill a Man, this is no Felony; because Felony must be done,
Animo Hobart's Reports, f. 134. Weaver v. Ward.
Felonico; yet in Trespass, which tends only to give Damages, according to Hurt
or Loss, it is not so: And therefore if a Lunatic hurt a Man, he shall be
answerable in Trespass, and therefore no Man shall be excused in Trespass (for
this is the Nature of an Excuse, and not of a Justification, prout ei been
licuit) except it may be judged utterly without his fault.

VII. QUERY.
Whether a Devise by a Lunatic, be aided by the Statute of 43 Eliz. Of
charitable Uses?

SOLUTION.
Collison, 15 H. 8. devised Hobart's Rep. 136. Collison's Case.
an House in Eltham, in Kent, to Lettice his Wife, for Life; and after her
Death, made one John Bricket, and others, Feoffees (as he called them) in the
said House, to keep it in Reparations, and to bestow the rest of the Profits
upon the Reparation of certain Highways there: Collison and his Wife are dead,
and the House is descended to one Oliver Rolt, an Infant. This Case being in
the Chancery between the Parishioners and Rolt, was referred by the Court to
Hobart and Tanfield; and they resolved clearly, that it was within the Relief
of the Statute of 43 Eliz. for though the Devise was utterly void, yet it was
within the Words, [ limited and appointed to charitable Uses.] Otherwise, if he
were an Infant Lunatic, or the like, that gave it, or that one appointed that
that were not his own, to charitable Uses.

VIII. QUERY.
Actions touching a Lunatick's Lands, whether they must be brought in his own
Name?

SOLUTION.
One Cocks brought an Action of Trespass of Trover, and Conversion of Beans,
against Darson, and coming to Trial at the Assizes, upon Hobart's Rep. 215.
Cocks v. Darson.
Not Guilty, because it was a small Cause, the Judge took not the Jury, but
directed to move the Court, and so it was; and the Cause was, That the Lands
whereupon the Beans grew, were a Lunatick's, and Copyhold, and the Lord had
granted unto one, the Custody of the Land, by whose Leave and Assent the
Plaintiff did sow the Land. And the Court was of Opinion, That the Action was
to be brought in the Name of the Lunatic: For there was no Interest gained in
his Land by this Commitment.

That an Action must be brought in the Name of the Lunatic, I shall subjoin
what Popham has reported in the Matter.

The Custody of a Copyholder, that was a Lunatic, was committed to I. S.
Popham's Rep. f. 141. Darcy's Case in the Common Pleas.
and for Trespass done upon his Land, it was demanded of the Court, In whose
Name I. S. should bring the Action? And their Opinion was, That it should be in
the Name of the Lunatic.

IX. QUERY.
Whether the Lord of a Manor can grant the Custody of a Copyhold, belonging to
a Lunatic, without a special Custom?

SOLUTION.
Lord Chief Justice Hobart did not agree, That the Lord has power over the
Hobart's Reports, f. 215, 216. Cocks v. Darson.
Lunatick's Land, without a special Custom; for the imitation of the King's
Power over Freeholds, makes no Consequence: For though he takes the Statute to be
but an ^ffirmance of the Common Law in the Case of the King, ^et the Collateral
Incidents of Estates, as Dower, Tenancy (...) the Courtesy, Wardships, and the
like, are not without secial Custom.

That Copyhold Estates shall not have such Qualities as ^states at Common Law,
without special Custom. See ^ore 4 Co. f. 21. Brown's Case, f. 22. b. Rivet's
Case, (...) 23, Deal and Rigden's Case, f. 23. Bullock and Dibley's Case, Cro.
Eliz. f. 391. Pl. 14. Clun v. Pease, and ^urner; and Palter v. Cornhill, f.
361. Pl. 22.

X. QUERY.
Whether the Acts of a Lunatic, during his Intermissions, or lucid Intervals,
be binding?

SOLUTION.
The Acts that Lunatic Persons do, during the time of their Lucida Intervalla,
though it be by Deed in the Country; as by Feoffment, Obligation, or the like,
shall bind them, and others concerned in it, as any other Men are by their Acts
bound. Sheppard in his Abridgment, Part 2. Tit. Idiot. 4 Co. f. ^125. a.
Beverley's Case of Non compos mentis. Bracton, lib. 5. tract. 5. de
Exceptionibus, c. 20. nu. 1. f. 420. b. Fleta, lib. 6. c. 40* n. 1.

XI. QUERY.
Whether the King, who is to keep the Lunatic, his Wife and Children, with the
Profits of the Lands, can gran^ them over to the proper use of another Person?

SOLUTION.
In Trespass Quare clausum fregit, and cutting hi^ Trees, in Paddington, in the
Country of Middlesex, b^ John Francis, against William Holms. The Defendant
Hill. 28. H. 8. Rot. 401. in the Common Pleas, Francis and Holms Case, Dyer, f.
25. b. 26. a. Pl. 164. Edit. 1688. 4 Co. 128. b. Beverley's Case.
pleaded, that it was found by Office before the Escheator of the said County
of Middlesex, that the said John Francis was a Lunatic, and that he was seize^
in Fee of the Land in which, etc. for which the King seized his Person, and his
Land, and by his Letters Patent^ granted the Rule, Government, and Custody of
the same Person, and Lands to the said Holmes, Quamdiu, that the Person was
Lunatic, to take the Profits to his own use, and so justified, and prayed in
Aid of the King, and thereupon it was demanded in Law, If he should have Aid or
not? And it was adjudged, That he should not have Aid of the King, for this
Grant was utterly void; for the King is bound to keep the Lunatic, his Wife,
Children, and Household, with the Profits of the Lands, and without taking any
thing to his own use, but all to the use of the Lunatic, and his Family, and
all to the intent, that the King may provide, that he who wants Reason,
should not alien his Lands, and waste his Goods. And the King after Office
found, has only Provision, and has not any Custody of the Body, or Lands of a
Lunatic, as he has of an Idiot, and he has nothing to grant over: But if the
King provides one to have Care, and Charge of him, who is Non compos mentis,
that his Family shall be maintained, and that nothing be wasted; or if one of
his own Head takes so much upon himself, in this Case, he is but as Bailiff of
him that is Non compos mentis, and shall be accountable to him as Bailiff, or
to his Executors, or Administrators; and he cannot cut down Trees, but for
necessary House-boot, Plough-boot, and Cart-boot, and to repair the ancient
Pales, and all that the Bailiff may do, he may do, and not otherwise.

XII. QUERY.
Whether the Committee of a Lunatic, can grant Copyhold Estates?

SOLUTION.
The Committee of a Lunatic cannot grant Copyhold Estates, but he himself may
do so by his Steward, as appears by this subsequent Resolution.

A. seized of a Manor for Life, where there were many Copyhold Estates,
grantable Trin. 9 Iac. in the Court of Wards, Blewits Case, Leonard 47, 48.
by Copy of Court-Roll for Life, in Possession, and for another in Reversion,
granted the Stewardship by Deed, under his Hand and Seal, to I. S. for Life,
with a Fee for executing thereof; and after he became a Lunatic, and Non
compos mentis, and so was found by Inquisition, who was committed to I. D.
under the Seal of the Court of Wards: The Question was, Whether the Steward, by
the Consent of the Committee, or the Committee himself, by their Steward, might
grant Copyhold Estates, according to the Custom of the Manor? It was resolved
by Hobart, Chief Justice, and Tanfield, Chief Baron, That the said Committee
could not grant any Copyhold Estate; for that they themselves, by Law, had no
Estate in the Manor, nor are Lords thereof, for the time being; but that the
said Lunatic, by his Steward, might grant Copyhold Estates, according to the
Custom of the Manor.

XIII. QUERY.
If a Dean of Paul's happen to be a Lunatic, who shall have the Custody of him?

SOLUTION.
In the Reign of H. 8. Pace, Dean of the Cathedral Church of St. Paul, was in
Vide Dyer, Edit. 1688, where this Case is cited in the Margin.
the Custody of the Archbishop of Canterbury, being ^ Lunatic, the Question
was, in the Court of Wards, Who shall have the Custody? And upon Precedents
shown, it clearly appeared, That the Archbishop ought to have him in Custody,
and not the King: Which Precedents were cited by one Master Eyres, in his
Reading at Lincoln's End.

XIV. QUERY.
If a Man, in Criminal Cases, be suspected to counterfeit Madness, or Lunacy,
how shall it be discerned, whether he be mad, or no?

SOLUTION.
Lunacy, Madness, or Frantickness, counterfeited, shall be enquired after, by
an Inquest Savil's Rep. p. 50. nu. 105.
impannelled for that purpose, as appears in the Case of one Somervile: For at
a Meeting of the Justices, it was demanded by the Queen's Council, If
Somervile, having been suspected for a Lunatic in times past, should now prove
to be of the same State, or Condition, upon his Arraignment, by Covin, or
otherwise in Verity, what shall be done in the Case? To which Demand, after
diverse Arguments, it was answered, That an Inquest should be Impannelled to
enquire, Whether it was of Malice, or no, etc.? And it was likewise resolved by
the Opinion of all, That if he should be found a Lunatic by Covin, or
Dissimulation, he shall be tried upon the principal Matter, and not condemned
to Pain Fort, and Dure* as in Cases of Felony: But if he will not answer
directly, being of Sane Memory, he shall be condemned upon a Nihil dicit; and
notwithstanding he shall have the Judgment that belongs to High Treason, and
not his Penance Fort, and Dure: And if he be found a Lunatic, his Trial must
be deferred till he be of sound Memory. But it was fully and absolutely agreed,
That if Somervile plead the General Issue, Non Culp. that if afterward he upon
Evidence shall come, and not speak directly, yet he shall not be taken for a
Madman, or Lunatic, for that he has once answered directly.

Add hereunto the Case of a Felon, reported by Judge Anderson, where the Felon
upon his Arraignment appeared Anderson 1. 107.
to be mad; and it was held, That it should be enquired of, by an Inquest of
Office; if he were made indeed, or in show only; and if it be found, that he
does dissemble, then the Judge may put him to answer, if the Felon will; and if
he will not answer, the Judge may pass Judgment against Pain Fort, and Dure.
him.

Thus much for the Law of England: Now we will see how the Civil Law runs, in
the Case of Parricide, committed by one supposed Mad, or Lunatic.

Divus Marcus, and Commodus Scapulae Tertyllo rescripserunt in haec verba: Si
tibi Macer lib. 2. de Judiciis publicis. D. 1. 18. 14.
liquido compertum est, Aelium priscum, in eo furore esse, ut continua mentis
alienatione omni intellectu careat, nec subest ulla suspitio matrem ab eo
simulatione dementiae occisam, potes de modo poenae ejus dissimulare, Simulatus
furor poena dignus D. 1. 18. 13. 1. in sine D. 27. 10. 6.
cum satis furore ipso puniatur, and tamen diligentius custodiendus erit, ac,
si putabis; etiam vinculo coercendus, quoniam tam ad poenam, quam ad Tutelam
ejus, and securitatem proximorum pertinebit. Si vero ut plerumque adsolet,
intervallis quibusdam sensu saniore, non forte eo momento scelus admiserit, nec
morbo ejus danda est venia, diligenter explorabis: Et siquid tale compereris,
consules nos, ut aestimemus, an per immanitatem facinoris, si, cum posset
videri sentire, commiserit, supplicio adficiendus sit. In English thus: Marcus,
and Commodus, the Emperors, being consulted by Scapula Tertyllus, concerning
Aelius Priscus, who had killed his Mothet, advised as follows: If it clearly
appear unto you, that Aelius Priscus was so distracted, with a total continued
Defect of Understanding, that there could be no suspicion, that in a dissembled
Madness, his Mother was killed by him, you may desist from the Punishment of
him, his Madness it self being a sufficient Punishment: Yet you are to take
care, that he be kept in more closely; because such Restraint ought to be used
for his Punishment and Preservation, and also for the Security of others. But
if, as oftentimes it happens, his Madness takes him by Fits, and at the time of
the Villainy committed he was free, he ought not to be excused by color of his
Disease; and touching this, you are to make good Enquiry, that we being
informed, may determine of the Foulness of the Fact.

XV. QUERY.
A Bargain by a Lunatic, before the Lunacy found, whether avoidable, by being
found a Lunatic, with a Retrospect of several Years?

SOLUTION.
Sir Geoffry Palmer, the De Term. Sanct. Mich. Anno Regis 20 Car. 2. in
Cancellaria, Smith a Lunatic against Sir Robert Parkhurst.
King's Attorney General, on the behalf of Jerome Smith, a Lunatic, against
Sir Robert Parkhurst, and others.

The Bill did suggest, that by Inquisition taken before the Mayor of London, by
Virtue of a Writ to him directed, the said Jerome Smith was the 23d of June,
1664, found a Lunatic, and had Lucid Intervals, and had not sufficient
Government of Himself, his Lands, and Goods; and that he was Lunatic the last
of June, 1647; and during his Lunacy he had several Sums of Money due to him,
which he had wasted, and alienated diverse Goods; but to whom, the Jurors were
ignorant. And did charge, that one Archibald owed the Lunatic, during his
Lunacy, 1300 l. by good Security; and that in 1656, the Defendant caused the
Lunatic to assign Archibald's Debt to him, and had received the same, upon
Color of a Satisfaction given to the Lunatic for the same; whereas that
pretended Satisfaction was not valuable, and was done in prejudice* of the
Lunatic: And to have an Account of 1300 l. and to be relieved, was the Scope
of the Bill.

The Defendant sets forth by Answer, That he sold the said Jerome Smith, in
1656, a Manor, which he much desired to buy, at 1200 l. it being the Place of
his Birth; Jerome Smith assigned Archibald's Debt for to satisfy himself the
Purchase-Mony, and pay the Overplus to Smith; which he did; and did convey the
said Manor to Smith, and insisted, that Smith was not a Lunatic at that time,
and did usually buy, and sell, etc.

This being the Nature of the Case, it came first to be heard before Justice
Tyrrel, who although it did appear, that the Defendant had conveyed the said
Manor to Smith, for the said 1200 l. and that Smith did at that time usually
Barter, and was not found a Lunatic till eight Years after, with a Retrospect
of seventeen Years, did order the Defendant to Account for the 1300 l. being
Archibald's Debt, and to satisfy the same with Damages, without any Provision
for the Defendant's having the Manor again, or Account for the Mesne Profits.
And though it was stood upon, at the Hearing, that in Case of a Lunatic, (where
the King has no Interest in his Estate, but as Pater Patriae, commits him to
another to manage it for him, the Lunatic, in case he recover his Senses, and
Wits, shall have his Estate again; and if not, it will go to his
Administrators) the Lunatic himself (as in the Case of an Infant) ought to
have been a Party: Yet that Opinion was overruled by the Judges, and by the
Lord Keeper, on a Rehearing: But the Lord Keeper did stay the passing that
Decree, and gave Liberty to the Defendant to traverse the Inquisition.

Out of this Decree may be collected these Notes:

1. That the Party is admittable to traverse the Inquisition, if he pleases. 2.
That generally a Lunatic ought to be made a Party. 3. That the Reason why it
was overruled, in the Case aforesaid, was, because he might stultifie himself.
XVI. QUERY.
Whether the View of Land, according to the Statute of Westminster. 2. c. 48. be
grantable in all Cases to Infants, to Men in Prison, to Lunaticks, or suchlike.

SOLUTION.
Upon these Words of the Statute of Westminster. 2. c. 48 Sc. In omnibus brevibus per
quae tenementa petuntur Ratione dimissionis, etc. Sir Edward Coke, (and that
agreeable to the Books cited in his Margent) commenteth thus: Here, as in many
places [ Demise,] is applied to an Estate, either in Fee-simple, Fee*tail, or
for Term of Life, and so commonly taken in many Writs. But this Act extends
not to every kind of Demise, or Conveyance; for if the Demise, or Conveyance,
be by Fine, or other Matter of Record, this Branch extends not to it; for,
regularly, Conveyances, or other Acts of Record, acknowledged, or made by one
that is Non compos mentis, or by Duresse of Imprisonment, are unavoidable by
him, or his Heirs, by Law; and such Conveyances, or other Acts of Record,
acknowledged, or made by an Infant, are also unavoidable, unless he does avoid
them by Writ of Error, or Audita Querela, during his Minority; and therefore
this Branch is to be understood of Alienations made in Pais, and not by Matter
of Record, Co. 2. Inst. f. 483.

Having given some Account of our Lunatic Person, and that by way of
Description, Remark, and Query, I am now to speak of the Drunken, and Cup-shot
Man, that is Non compos mentis, by his own Folly.

PART the Fourth. Of Him that is Drunken.
SECT. I. A Drunken Man, how described.
THE Fourth Sort of Non sane Memories, according to the Law of England, is he
that is Drunk; one, that (not by the Visitation of God, but) by his own vicious
Act and Folly, is so overcome with Drink, that he is deprived, for a time, of
the free Use and Exercise of his Reason and Understanding. Coke in his Comment
on Littleton, sect. 405. f. 247. a.

SECT. II. Remarks concerning Drunkenness, and him that is Drunken.
WHere Drunkenness Reigns, there Reason is an Exile; Virtue a Stranger; God an
Enemy; Blasphemy is Wit; Oaths are Rhetoric; and Secrets are Proclamations.
Noah discovered that in one Hour drunk, which sober, he kept secret Six hundred
Years. See Francis Quarles, in his Enchiridion, Cent. 3. cap. 14.

II. REMARK.
Drunkenness is the Vice of Brutish Men, and of no worth, for it leads a Man to
all unworthy Actions; witness Alexander, otherwise a great Prince, being
overcome with this Vice, killed his dearest Friend, Clitus; and being come to
himself, would have killed himself, for killing Clitus. Charron, in his
Treatise of Wisdom, Lib. 3. c. 39. and Peter de la Primandaye, in his French
Academy, cap. 20*

III. REMARK.
That which we do, being Evil, is notwithstanding by so much the more
pardonable, by how much the Exigence of so doing, or the Difficulty of doing
otherwise is greater; unless this Necessity, or Difficulty, have originally
risen from our selves; it is no Excuse therefore unto him, who being Drunk,
commits Incest, and alleges, that his Wits were not his own; inasmuch as
himself might have chosen, whether his Wits should by that means have been
taken from him. Hooker, in his Ecclesiastical Policy, Lib. 1. sect. 9. p. 69.

IV. REMARK.
Lot's Daughters made their Father drunk, and then they lay with him; but he
Inebriaverunt Loath filiae ejus, and se nescienti miscuerunt. Quapropter
culpandus est quidem: non tamen, quantum ille incestus, sed quantum illa
meretur Ebrietas. Augustinus, l. 22. contra Faustum, c. 44.
knew it not: Whereupon St. Augustine passes this Sentence on him, That he
deserved to be punished, not for Incest, but for his Drunkenness. Decreti
Secunda Pars Causa 15. Quaest. 1. c. 9. Grotius de jure belli and pacis, l. 2.
c. 20. sect. 19. in fine.

V. REMARK.
The Moralists in resolving the Quest. Whether Ebriety can excuse, or extenuate
a Fault? Windelinus's Moral Philosophy, l. 1. de Recta Vita, c. 16. qu. 1.
do make a Distinction betwixt Actual, and Habitual Drunkenness: The former is,
when any Man beside Intention, being ignorant as well of the Weakness of his
Brain, as of the Strength of the Liquor, is overcome with it. The latter is,
when a Man is delighted with it, and knowingly, and willingly, makes himself
Drunk. That of Actual Drunkenness does, they say, somewhat excuse and extenuate
the Fault; and consequently, there is allowed some mitigation of the
Punishment: But that which is termed Habitual Drunkenness, does not at all
excuse the Fault committed, nor mitigate the Punishment. And this is that which
Pittacus intended, when he enacted a Law, That such a Person as should commit a
Fault in a drunken Fit, should be liable to a double Punishment; one for his
Drunkenness, and the other for his Ignorance: For as in the Wine there is
Poison, so in a voluntary Ignorance there is a heinous Offense.

VI. REMARK.
This kind of Non compos mentis, according to our Law, shall give no
Privilege, or Benefit, to him, or his Heirs, in Civil Matters: And as for
Criminal Matters, a Drunkard, who is Voluntarius Demon, has no Privilege
thereby; but what Hurt, or Ill, soever he does, his Drunkenness does aggravate
it: Omne Crimen Ebrietas, and incendit, and detegit, Coke in his Comment on
Littleton, sect. 405. f. 247. a.

SECT. III. The Queries with their Solutions, relating to him that is Drunken.
I. QUERY.
Whether a Man's Drunkenness can be any good Plea in in the Courts at
Westminster, either in Criminal, or Civil Acts?

SOLUTION.
THE Judges, in Beverley's Case, though they have admitted a drunken Man to be,
for the time, a Non compos mentis; yet have pronounced, that his 4 Co. 125. a.
Beverley's Case of Non compos mentis.
Drunkenness shall not extenuate his Act, or Offense, nor turn to his Avail,
but it is a great Offense in it self, and therefore does aggravate his Offense,
and does not derogate from the thing he does in that time, and that in Case as
well touching his Life, as his Goods, Chattels, or Lands, or any other thing,
concerning him.

The Rule, Necessitas inducit privilegium quoad Iura privata, does vouchsafe to
The Lord Bacon, in his Collection of Maxims, Regula 5. p. 25. Edit. 1639.
admit an Exception, when the Law does intend some Fault, or Wrong, in the
Party that has brought himself into the necessity; so that is Necessitas
culpabilis; as for Example: If a Madman commit Felony, he shall not lose his
Life for it, because his Infirmity came by Co. Litt f. 247. b.
the Act of God: But if a drunken Man commit a Felony, 21 H. 7. 31.
he shall not be excused, because his Imperfection came by his own default; For
the Reason, and Loss of Deprivation of Will, and Election by Necessity, and by
Infirmity is all one, for the lack of [ Arbitrium Solutum,] is the Matter: And
therefore as Infirmitas culpabilis excuses not, no more does Necessitas
culpabilis.

So that it appears, that if one through his own fault becomes Non compos
mentis, or Mad; and that if through the Violence of the same Madness, he hurt
another, he has therein committed a Crime, and deserves to be punished.

II. QUERY.
A Drunken Person, whether he may make a Testament?

SOLUTION.
He, (says Swinburn) that is overcome with Drink, during the time of his
Drunkenness, is compared to a Treatise of Testaments, and last Wills, Part 2.
Sect. 6.
Madman; and therefore, if he make his Testament at that time, it is void in
Law: Which is to be understood, when he is so excessively drunk, that he is
utterly deprived of the use of Reason and Understanding. Otherwise, if he be
not clean spent, albeit his Understanding be obscured, and his Memory troubled,
yet may he make his Testament being in that Case.

We will subjoyn to what Swinburn has said for the Solution of our Question,
the Words of Dr. Godolphin which are to the same effect.

Such as are drunk, during the time of being drunk, can make no Testament that
shall be good in Law; Orphan's Legacy, Part 1. c. 8. 5. p. 26.
yet understand (says he) this is only when he is so excessively drunk, that he
is altogether deprived for the time, of the use of Reason and Understanding,
being, according to the Flagon-phrase, as it were, dead drunk: For if he be but
so drunk, that his Understanding is but somewhat clouded, and obscured, and his
Memory troubled, he may in that Case, make his Testament, and it may be good in
Law. He therefore that is but exhilarated with Liquor, and thereby does but
somewhat deviate from the Rule of right Reason, is not the Person whom the Law
renders at that time Intestable; but he who by a continual Custom of Toping, or
by such an Excess of Drunkenness, has so exiled his Intellects, that he has
as it were, totally lost the Rational, and reserved nothing to himself, but the
Animal.

Concerning the drunken Man's Will, see more in Vasquez de Success. Crea. lib.
2. sect. 13. Requis. 7. n. 8. and Simon de pratis de inter. ult. vol. lib. 2.
dub. 1. soluc. 4. n. 22.

III. QUERY.
Such as violate the good Name of others, with opprobrious Words, through
Weakness of their Brain, either by Frenzy, Drink, or other Lightness, how are
they to be dealt withal?

SOLUTION.
The Lawyers tell us, That defamatory Words are uttered, either upon some
Rancour and Malice, by Ridley's View of the Civil and Ecclesiastical Law, Part
3. cap. 7. sect. 1.
some that envy another, with intent to defame him, and spread abroad a Matter
of Disgrace upon him; or in some scoffing and jesting manner, so as facetious
and merry Men use to do, to make the Company merry wherein they are; or they
are spoken by some that have some Weakness, or Distemperature in their Brain,
either by Frenzy, Drink, or other Lightness, or by any Rashness in their Tongue.

1. If the Cause of such Words be Rancour, or Malice, then are they altogether
to be punished, for that there can be no just Excuse made for them.

2. If they be spoken in a jesting manner, to make the Company merry, if it be
in a fine sort delivered, it is by Aristotle held to be a Virtue*; but if it be
in homely In Greek, (...); in Latin, Urbanitas.
and gross sort delivered, then is it accounted to be a kind of Rudeness, or
Rusticity; but whether way so ever they be uttered, there is for the most part
no advantage taken against them; unless thereby there follow any Discredit to
the Party upon whom such Jests are broken; for then are they not without blame:
Neither can Lusus Noxius in Culpa est, D. 1. 2. 10. D. 47. 2. 50. 4.
that be called a Jest, or Sport, whereby a Man's good Name is hurt, or any
Crime imposed upon him.

3. The like may be pronounced of such as speak hardly of any, by the Lubricity
of their Tongue, or Weakness of their Brain, through Frenzy, or Drink, who for
that they are not thought to speak such Words maliciously, pass for the most
part unpunished Nam and personam spectandum esse, an potuerit facere, and an
ante quid fecerit, and an cogitaverit and an sanae mentis fuerit, nec lubricum
linguae ad poenam facile trahendum est. Quamquam ii temerarii digni poena fint,
tamen ut insanis parcendum est. D. 48. 4. 4. 3.
; no, though a Man in this Case speak ill of the Prince himself: And the Civil
Law is so far from taking hold of such Words in these Cases, that the Roman
Emperors themselves, viz. Theod. Arcad. and Honorius, have in an ancient
Constitution, extant in the Code of Justinian, said of them thus:

Siquis Modestiae nescius, and pudoris ignarus, improbo, C. 9. 7. Lex unic.
Siquis Imperatori malediderit.
petulantique maledicto nomina nostra trediderit lacessenda, ac temulentia
Drunkenness, Temulentus, Drunken, Cup-shot; of such see more, D. 48. 3. 12. D.
48. 19. 11. 2. D. 49. 16. 6. 2.
, turbulentus obtrectator temporum nostrorum fuerit, eum poenae nolumus
subjugari, neque durum aliquid, nec asperum volumus sustinere: Quoniam si ex
levitate processerit, contemnendum est: Si ex insania, miseratione dignissimum:
Si ab injuria, remittendum*: If any Man Note, Queen Elizabeth, after Sir John
Perot was condemned to die, was often heard to commend the Rescript of those
Emperors, p. 411. Engl. Edit. 1635.
speak ill of the Emperor, if Cambden's Eliz. Anno 1593. of Lightness, it is to
be contemned; if of Madness, to be pitied; if of Injury, to be remitted.

I shall conclude the whole Tract, with a remarkble Example that I have met
withal, and which I cannot here Peter de la Primauday, in his French Academy,
c. 36.
let go in Silence; and it is of the Prudence of Dionysius, the Elder, King of
Syracuse, in punishing evil Speakers: This King being told, That two young Men,
as they were drinking together, had spoken many outrageous Words of his
Majesty; The King invited them both to Supper, and perceiving, that one of
them, after he had taken a little Wine into his Head, uttered, and committed
much Folly; and that contrariwise, the other was very stayed, and drunk but a
little, the King punished this Fellow, as one that was malicious, and had been
his Enemy of set purpose; but forgave the other as being drunken, and moved by
the Wine to speak ill of him.

FINIS.
Books printed for, and sold by Isaac Cleave, at the Star, next Serjeants-Inn,
in Chancery Lane.
THE. Reports of William Benloe, Serjant at Law, and Will. Dallison, one of the
Judges of the Court of King's Bench. Price 12 s.

Sir Orl. Bridgman's Conveyances, being select Precedents of Deeds and
Instruments, concerning the most considerable Estates in England; drawn and
approved by that Honorable Person in the time of his Practice. 3d Edition with
Addit. Pr. 12 s.

Cowell's Interpreter of the Law-Terms. Price 10 s. Hobart's Reports. 12 s.
Bulstrode's Reports. 30 s. Cases in Parliament upon Writs of Error. 8 s. Coke's
Institutes, 2d, 3d, and 4th Parts. Plowden's Reports. 20 s.
A Book of Entries of Declarations, Pleas, Replications, Rejoinders, Issues,
Demurrers, and the other Parts of Pleading in Actions of Account against
Bailiffs and Receivers, on the Case upon Special Agreements, Contracts, and
Promises, or for Torts, General and Special, upon Breach of Statutes, and
Covenants in Debt against Sheriffs, and other Officers, or upon Awards,
Specialties, etc. in Ejectments, Assaults, Battery, False Imprisonment,
Trespass, or Trover Entry of Writs of Error, with all the Proceedings in the
same upon Judgment, in the Courts superior and inferior, in England and
Ireland. 3 s. 6 a.

A Complete Guide for Justices of Peace, according to the best approved
Authors. In Two Parts. The First containing the Common and Statute Laws
relating to the Office of a Justice of the Peace. The Second consisting of the
most Authentic and Useful Precedents, which do properly concern the same. By
I. Bond, of Greys-Inn, Esquire The Second Edition much enlarged, and continued down
to this Time. To which is added, A Table referring to all the Statutes relating
to a Justice of Peace. By E. Bohun, Esquire 6 s.

Ars Transferendi Dominium: Or, A Sure Guide to the Conveyancer. Consisting of
many Observations, and various Questions, with their Resolutions, relating to
Feoffments, Grants, Fines, Common Recoveries, Exchanges, Releases,
Confirmations, Attornments, Surrenders, Bargains, and Sales, and Devises. By I.
Brydall, of Lincoln's End, Esquire 3 s. 6 d.

The New Atlas: Or, Travels and Voyages in Europe, Asia, Africa, and America,
through the most renowned Parts of the World, viz. From England to the
Dardanelles, thence to Constantinople, Egypt, Palestine, or the Holy Land,
Syria, Mesopotamia, Chaldea, Persia, East India, China, Tartary, Muscovy; and
by Poland, the German Empire, Flanders, and Holland, to Spain, and the
West Indies: With a brief Account of Aethiopia, and the Pilgrimages to Mecha
and Medina, in Arabia, etc. By an English Gentleman, etc. 3 s.


