THE MARROW OF PHYSIC.

Or a Learned Discourse of the several parts of Man's Body.

BEING A MEDICAMENTARY Teaching the manner and way of making and compounding all
such Oils, Unguents, Sirrups, Cataplasms, Waters, Powders, Emplaisters, Pills,
etc. as shall be useful and necessary in any private House, with little
labor, small cost, and in short time.

And also an Addition of diverse experimented Medicines, which may serve against
any disease that shall happen to the Body.

Together with some rare Receipts for Beauties, and the newest and best way of
Preserving and Conserving: with diverse other secrets never before published.

Collected and experimented by the industry of T. B. Gent. Practitioner in
Physic and Chyrurgery.

LONDON, Printed by T. H. and M. H. and are to be sold by Thomas Whittaker, at
the Kings Arms in Paul's Churchyard. M.DC.XLVIII.

To the Honorable and singularly virtuous, Mris. MARGARET EVRE, The Author
consecrateth these his Labors.
Honorable Mistrisse:
IT has ever been a custom in dedicating labors to great Personages, to
present such matter as may seem (as it were) in affinity with the mind to whom
it is offered, fitting it as Comicke Poets do their enterludes, to make them be
plausibly heard of the whole auditory, and herein have I strived to shape my
subject to the affection of so Honorable a Patroness, as your self, to whom I
dedicate this rude piece; which I could have wished might have been undertaken
by a more able workman, that our nation might not be deprived of that
commodity, which other countries surfeit of; and I was the more encouraged in
this resolve, that I might show my gratitude to your self, whose many favors
(though I come far short of deserving) yet J have always been ambitious, in
endeavoring to express an acknowledgement. And though I cannot come in so
full a current as my desires would offer, yet such as my murmuring streams
produce, I here present; resolving to expose this infant to the light of your
judgment to be tried; and not hold him for legitimate till you approve him.
Vouchsafe therefore to shroud under your protection this unpollisht work,
which I offer not as a present whereby I pretend to oblige you, but as a homage
I owe you, whereby to acquit my self of the first act of veneration; as for me
I find in your favor all I seek for; and having you on my side, I care not
what malicious envy can do; having once your testimony, I can easily slight her
calumnies; and though all her tongues were joined together, yet can she say
nothing against me, having your Honorable approbation: to whom I protest so
much respect, as that I may say without flattery, (complements being below the
dignity of your style) that you want much of that J wish you, if you want any
thing of absolute felicity. And therefore the marks I herein chiefly aimed at,
was not any vain hope of praise to my self (which how little I hereby deserve
I am not so weak but to perceive) but to leave a testimony to my Country how
much I desire her benefit, and to your self how much I am bound to remain

Mistrisse Yours in all dutiful observance, THO. BRUGIS.

THE Preface to the Reader.
Gentle Reader,
THE chiefest thing that induced me to publish these collections, was (besides
the earnest entreaty of diverse intimate friends) a principal aim at my
countries good: and these I have the rather adventured to divulge, because
there are contained many receipts by me daily practiced (and therefore need no
Probatum to be annexed) with diverse varieties not published by any heretofore,
which I hope will be to the great benefit, of all such as shall have occasion
to practice any thing heerin contained; where I strive not to set forth an
eloquent and lofty style (as if it were some fancy delighting history) but a
plain way to help ^he poorer sort; Seeing therefore that I here produce a
thing serious, and for the general good; I hope the Readers hereof will
vouchsafe me such countenance, as is usual in serious weights, and most
necessary occasions: some men perhaps will think that nothing good or secret
will be put in Print, because these kind of books are very difficult to be
published in English; others again knowing such things, would be loath to
publish them and make the secrets of their science common, but I am rather of
the Grecians minds, who once a year writ in the Temple of Aesculapius all the
cures they had performed, and by what remedies; and I think with Aristotle,
that a good thing is the better, the more common it is; and as Cicero says we
are not borne to our selves, nor should we have regard to our own particular
profit, in keeping the secrets of Physic so close; for a great number of
people perish for want of means to procure the advice of a Physician; when
perhaps with a little instructions, they might have cured themselves; but we
are to consider the general good, and commodity of our country, and
commonwealth; for in Italy, France, and other countries, scarce any Physician
but has published some book in his mother tongue, and rather then in any
other language.

In this book I have for thy better instruction, first collected a short
introduction to lead thee into the method, and course that thou ought to
observe; next I have showed the manner of making and compounding all such
medicaments (as will be useful in a private house) with the nature and virtue
of every receipt, which those that have formerly published some of these have
failed to do: here also are inserted diverse secrets for Beauties, such as have
never before been published; next I have added a brief way of conserving, and
preserving, which by the Grace of God, I shall enlarge in the next impression:
and lastly I have added all such medicines, as cannot be justly brought into
the number of oiles, Unguents, Plasters, Poultisses, Waters, Powders, etc. And
that I call a Miscellanea or Hot^hpotch; neither need thou to marvel,
because I have been more curious in prescribing the sundry curations of
diseases, then in unfolding the nature of them: for if my book come amongst
the illiterate, let me make it the best ways that can be devised, yet it will
not suffice; and the learned will not be content were it never so big:
therefore I strive by diversity of medicines to fit every complexion, and make
every man cunning in his own constitution, and to know so much as will cure
many ordinary and common diseases, which often fasten upon the ignorant, and to
chase away a malady that has caught hold on their bodies; for a Physician is
not always at hand, nor Apothecary ever to be had, whereby many have perished;
but a little knowledge may prevail in the beginning of an infirmity; as for
such things as are very chargeable to be made unless a great quantity be
compounded, I think it will be better to store thy self at the Apothecaries.

I w^ll not stand to amplify my self because all that I seek in this book is
to eschew prolixity; and because heerin I would not willingly exceed the bounds
of a preface making the porch bigger then the house; the world daily produces
a sort of cri^icks, that rather will carp at a fault, then amend it, and regard
more the letter then the Authors intent; which indeed were lets sufficient to
have stayed me from publishing any thing, had not the reasons aforesaid
mightily importuned me hereto: for he that sets forth any thing to the world
must frame and fashion it just as Solon did his laws; frame them rather to the
content, and willing observation of the vulgar, then to the rule of equity; and
more to satisfy the opinions, and fantasies of men, then to serve the time.

For my own part I have not heerby sought any vain glory, and praise, by
showing the manner of compounding, and the nature of medicines, which I have
done more faithfully, and more amply, then ever any has done heertofore in
English; and this is comfort sufficient to me, though the world yield me not
their approbation, that I have done something whereby others may reap profit.
And if my book chance to come under the censure of the learned, all I demand
is, that if they cannot afford it their good wills and words, let them in like
manner adventure themselves to be judged by others as I have here done: and
thus Reader I end, only craving thy favorable acceptance: which will
encourage me, if not to hazard the like again, yet at least to amplify and
enlarge the next impression heerof; and also to consecrate all my studies only
to thy commodity.

T. B.

A Catalogue of such Authors, whose help I have used in this work.
ALbertus magnus. Aristoteles. Arnoldus de villa nova* Avicen. Aelius.
Bartholomeus. Banister. Baptista porta. Bodinus. Bayrus. Cardanus. Co Celsus
Clemens Alexandrinus. Cornelius Agrippa. Dodoneus. Fallopius. Fernelius.
Fuchius. Galenus. Guydo. Hippocrates. Jesus filius Hall. Joel. Iohannis Lebot.
Iohannitius. Iohannis Vigo. Mesue. Parreus. Paracelsus. Petrus Low. Philip
Barrow. Ptolomeus. Rasis. Reolanus. Trallianus. Weckerus.
And diverse old Manuscripts, both Greek, Latin, and English, of sundry
approved Authors, for Judgment and Practice.

Hunc Librum perlegi, in quo nihil invenio Med. Arti contrarium.

JOHANNES FRIAR.

19. May 1640.
Imprimatur.

IO: HANSLEY.

The Marrow of Physic.
THE most glorious and great Workman, who excels all Wisdom, and is beyond
all understanding, the most potent, wise, and merciful Father, who is the
uniter of all creatures, and by whom they have their being, who is the most
potent and most excellent, being before all things, and having no need of any
thing, but being sufficient in himself, and remaining in the most unsearchable
closet of his Divinity, and out of his abundant goodness willing to bring
forth things thought and determined on from all Eternity, did in the beginning
create a certain essence of things, being, as it were, scarce fashioned into
any shape, which by some is called the fountain or head from whence all other
things flowed; by others, an empty plot of earth, producing nothing at all; by
others, a Chaos; by some the mother of the world, the foundation of nature; but
certainly the first he created was four Simples, which are the four Elements of
one and the same essence or matter, but of diverse forms or qualities; and
these, as I will show hereafter more at large, are called Fire, Water, Earth,
and Air; and out of these he created all the rest that now are, both the
things that are above, and also those beneath us: and that for this reason,
because the creatures intended to be made; might be extracted from a certain
root, whereby they might multiply and increase in the world. Therefore first of
all God created the four elements, out of which he afterward created what he
pleased: to wit, diverse natures as the elements are diverse: for if the elements
had been made all of one nature, then had all creatures been so likewise. Now
of this first matter he created the Angels, which he made only of Fire, not of
firm substantial fire, for then it must have been necessary that they had
eaten, drank, and slept; but he made them of the most purest and thinnest part
of pure, thin, and simple fire: and therefore they neither eat, drink, nor
sleep. God created the Sun, Moon, and Stars of two elements, Air, and Fire:
and therefore are the Angels more bright, then either the Sun, Moon, or Stars,
because they are created of one and that the most rare element; the other of
Fire and Air compounded.

God made the Heaven of Water and Air, so it is compounded of one rare or
light element, that is Air, and of another heavy, that is Water: but he
created the Fowls and brute Beasts of three elements, and also the Vegitables,
that is to say, of Air, Water, and Earth: certain are of the Earth and Air;
others of Fire, Air, and Earth; of the last are the Fowls, and all things
wherein remains a spirit; of the first are the vegetables, but all bruit
Beasts are of Earth, Air and Fire, but the Vegetables of Earth, Water, and
Air, and they likewise partake of a kind of thin Fire, brought in with the
Air; and therefore when we say that Fire is in the Vegetables, we mean that
thin fire that being in the air is carried by it and with it into them.

God made Man of the four elements, as the most excellent piece of all his
workmanship: he made him according to his own image naturally, according to his
similitude spiritually; and from hence the Ancients gathered, that there were
four worlds: the first whereof was ultra mundanum, which the Divines call
Angelical, and the Philosophers Intellectual: The next was, the Celestial:
The third, the Sublunar, which we inhabit: The last was Man, in whom all the
rest were found: whereto the Schoolmen alluding, call Man the Microcosmos, or
lesser World, in whom there is a mixture of the four elements; a spirit
celestial, a vegetable soul, and the sense and reason of brute beasts, an
angelical mind, and finally the whole similitude of God. Now as God has made
Man in this excellency, so he has subjected all these things under him, and so
fitted them to his use, that there is no disease can happen to our bodies,
whereto the earth brings not forth a convenient medicine; and from hence sprung
the original of Physic, whereof diverse have attained to such excellency, as
that they have been worshipped for Gods: therefore for the further instructing
of those that shall practice any of these my experiments, I have thought it
convenient to publish such notes as I have in my Studies gathered from the best
Authors that have written concerning the laudable Science of Physic, and the
Practice thereof, which shall serve as a compendious Introduction to my Book.

Physic defined. Hippocrates called physic an addition, and a substraction:
an addition of things necessary, and a substraction or taking away of the
superfluous. Wherein he includes two principal offices of a Physician, for a
disease proceeds either from too much emptiness, or from too much fullness.
The first whereof is cured by adding what is wanting, end the latter by taking
away that which exceedes.

Galen calls physic a science of the healthful, unhealthfull, and neuters,
which are neither well, nor can properly be said to be sick: and this is made
good three ways; as the body, as the cause, and as the sign; that body is
counted healthful that enjoyes his perfect health, that cause is healthful
that procures health and is the means of preserving it. The healthful sign
does show or indicate the present health; the unhealthfull body is affected
with a disease, which is generated by an unhealthfull cause, and the manner and
greatness of the grief is shown by the unhealthfull sign: a body is said to
be neither healthful nor sick, when it is as it were declining and cannot be
said to be perfectly well, nor altogether sick.

But the more vulgar and common definition of physic is this; Physic is an
art which preserves health in the sound, and restores it to the sick, and
preserves the neuters that are neither well nor sick; and from hence it is
said to be an art of things natural; not natural, and against nature, the
former were according to the theory, these are according to the practique.

Things natural do agree with our nature, and are those things whereof our
body is compacted and made, and are in number seven, viz. Elements,
Temperaments, Humors, Members, Faculties, Operations, and Spirits. Things not
natural are those mean and indifferent things whereby the body is preserved
in health, and are six in number: Air, Meat and Drink, Sleep and Watching,
Labor and Rest, Fullness and Emptiness, or repletion and inanition, and
perturbations of the mind. Things against nature are those that do destroy
our health, and are of three sorts: A Disease, the cause of a Disease, and a
Symptom. Hereby you may understand the two parts, of Physic; Theoricke, and
Practique; and by the Theoricke know every disease and the quality thereof; and
by the Practique to preserve health and cure a disease, by the due
administration of things not natural, and by removing of those that are
against nature.

Things natural, and which properly belong to the constitution of our body are
(as I said before) in number seven: Elements. Temperaments. Humors. Members.
Faculties. Actions. Spirits.
whereto are annexed. Sex. Color. Composure: Time or season. Region. Vocation
of life.


CHAPTER I. Of Elements.
An Element what it is. AN Element is the most least, and simple portion
whereof any thing is made, and in the destruction thereof is lastly resolved;
which to say plainly, the four first and simple bodies which accommodate and
subject themselves to the generation of all manner of things, be the mixture
perfect or imperfect. Thus Aristotle called the Heaven an Element, counting
five parts of the world, Heaven, Fire, Air, Water, and Earth. Of Elements we
reckon four, whereof two are gross and heavy, and move downwards, as Earth
and Water; and two are light, and strive upwards, as Fire and Air. Earth is a
simple body whose natural place is the center of the universe, in which it
naturally remains solid, and still round as an apple, in the middle whereof
(as the ancient Philosopher writes) is the pit of hell, like as the black
kernels lies in the midst of the apple, and at the day of doom when all
things shall be renewed, then shall this Element be made a thousand fold more
transparent and brighter then the Crystal or any precious Stone, that they
that are in the bitter pains of hell (to their increase of torment) shall
through it behold the blisfull joys of heaven, which will be more pain to
them then all the torments of hell. Earth is of nature cold and dry.

Water is also a simple body whose natural place is to compass the earth; it is
light in respect of the earth, but heavy in respect of the fire and air:
therefore Reolanus says, that the earth holds the lowest part, because of it is
heaviness, and the fire because it is absolutely light, has the highest place:
the air and water because they are, as it were, equally heavy or light, have
the middle place: water being heavier then the air, lighter then the earth:
the nature of water is cold and moist.

Air is a simple body, whose natural place is above the Water, and under the
Fire, and is by nature hot and moist.

Fire is also a simple body, whose natural place is above all the elementary
parts, because it is a hollow superficies of the Heavens, and by its absolute
lightness, striveth upward even to Heaven* its nature is hot and dry; these
are so contrary in nature, that they cannot be joined without a mean, which is
a temperament which falls out next to be treated of.

CHAP. II.
Of Temperaments.
What is a Temperament. A Temperament therefore is a concord or mixture of the
former disagreeing elements or a mixture of hot, cold, moist, and dry.

Of these temperaments which are in number nine, eight are called distemperate,
and one temperate.

The temperate is also divided either to temperature of weight or temperature
of justice, but we call it not a temperature to weight wherein the elements are
mingled by a like heap or weight, but where it is exquisitely made temperate
by the equal mixture of the four first qualities, wherein no quality exceeds,
but wherein all equality is included, and that as if it were put in a balance
it draws down neither to this nor that part.

Secundum justitiam. A temperament to justice is that which is conveniently
temperate to the use that nature has appointed and destinated it, therefore
all those things that have taken from nature a mixture of the elements (though
unequal, yet agreeable to motion and use) are called temperaments secundum
justitiam, as if we see any living creature that performs the functions of
nature aptly and as is ought to do, we say he has a temperament secundum
justitiam, according to justice.

The distemperate temperament is double, simple and compound; the simple wherein
one only quality exceeds the other two contemperate, as hot, cold, moist, dry,
hot in which the heat has the dominion over the cold (the moist and dry,
being temperate) cold, in which the cold excels the heat (the other two being
temperate.)

The compound in which two qualities exceed, and this is hot, and moist, or hot
and dry, cold and moist or cold and dry; for the first qualities may be
joined within themselves six manner of ways, but heat cannot be joined with
cold, nor moisture with dryness, because they are in themselves contrary,
neither can they remain together in one subject.

Here may be added the temperatures of the seasons of the year, which are
four; Spring, Summer, Autumn, and Winter, and are in nature hot, cold, moist,
and dry.

Spring. The Spring is the most temperate, as being neither too cold and moist,
as the Winter, nor too hot and dry, as the Summer: from hence Hippocrates calls
the Spring the most healthfullest time of the year, and less subject to
dangerous diseases, then any other season; for it never breeds any disease, but
only produces such as have been breeding in the body all the Winter precedent.

Summer. Summer is hot and dry, and a breeder of choleric diseases, which
proceed from too much blood, generated in the Spring, and now become adust, and
these diseases are for the most part speedy in running their course.

Autumn. The Autumn is very unequal, for when it is dry it has great
inequality of heat and cold; the mornings and evenings being very cold, and the
noondaies exceeding hot, whereby many long and dangerous diseases are engendered.

Winter. The Winter is cold and moist of temper; it excites natural heat and
appetite, and augments phlegm. After this manner are we to consider the ages of
man which are agreeable to the four quarters of the year.

Of Ages.
What an age is. AN Age is the space of life, in which the constitution of our
bodies of its self does increase, stand, decrease, and utterly decline, whose
whole course has five ages or special mutations. The first whereof is
Infancy. Infancy, which is hot and moist, and lasts from the first hour of
the birth until the eighteenth year of age, and is governed by the Moon; and
this the age wherein the body by reason of the moisture continually grows and
increases, and is subject to Feavours, Fluxes, Worms in the belly, Stone,
Aposthumes, and diverse other diseases.

Youth. Youth is temperate, in which there is augmentation neither of heat,
dryness nor cold: in this age the voice begins to grow great in men, and
the paps increase in women, and this lasts until the five and twentieth
year.

Man's esate. The next is man's estate, which is hot and dry, in which moisture
cannot be said to augment nor diminish, but the body remains according to the
course of nature: it lasts not above the thirty fifth or fortieth year, this
age is subject to hot agues, fevers, frenzies, and sundry other maladies, it
is governed by Venus, and is named by Avicen, the beautiful age.

The fourth is the decreasing or declining age, which Jupiter.

humidum radicale, the radic^ll moisture is decayed: it is governed by Saturn
and is subject to Epil^psie, lithargie, numnesse and the like: this age has no
distinct period, but ends years and life together, and is called the end of
age and life, wherein the memory and senses decay, the judgment fails, and
they are as it were infants again.

But we cannot measure these ages by certain proportion of years, because
diverse seem older at forty, then others at threescore or threescore and ten.

And now because these ages are governed and altered by the influence of the
planets, therefore I will breifely show you the natures of them, and first the
natures of the twelve signs, of the Zodiac, whereby man's body is governed,
and with whom the 7 planets work by influence.

There are four triplicities of signs, three of the water Cancer, Scorpio,
Pisces; three of the earth, Taurus, Capricorn, Virgo; three of the fire, as
Aries, Leo Sagittarius; and three of the air, as Gemini, Libra, Aquarius; to
these are agreeable the seven planets in their qualities and working, in the
several ages of man's life: Jupiter and Venus are good planets: Saturn and
Mars evil: Sol and Luna indifferent: Mercury is good with the good, and evil
with the evil: and these seven superior planets do work by influence with
the seven celestial signs in the bodies of all living creatures, and are
agreeable with the four elements, and the four parts of the world, as before
I showed you, which for the better understanding I will thus devide: Cancer are
of the nature of water Scorpio are of the nature of water Pisces are of the
nature of water Gemini are of the nature of the air Libra are of the nature of
the air Aquarius are of the nature of the air Aries are of the nature of
fire. Leo are of the nature of fire. Sagittarius are of the nature of fire.
Taurus are of the nature of the earth. Capricornus are of the nature of the
earth. Virgo are of the nature of the earth.


And these twelve signs are again divided into three quaternions, or three
fours of different quality, in this sort and diversity of nature: viz. four
are moveable, four are fixed, and four are called common signs.

Aries are moveable Cancer are moveable Libra are moveable Capricorn are
moveable Taurus are fixed Leo are fixed Scorpio are fixed Aquarius are fixed
Gemini are common signs. Virgo are common signs. Sagittarius are common
signs. Pisces. are common signs.
Some of these are Oriental of the East, and some are Occidentall of the West,
some are Meridionall of the South, and some are Septentrionall of the North.

These twelve signs are also agreeable to the four cardinal winds, and some
are of the day, and some of East South West North Aries Taurus Gemini Cancer
Leo Virgo Libra Scorpio Sagitt. Capricor. Aquarius Pisces Fiery. Earthly.
Airie. Watery. the night, and some are masculine, and some are feminine.

But note, that these are not proper beasts, as they are named, but named and
likened to such beasts, by way of Philosophy, for they are only the twelve
parts of the firmament, of which each part has a certain number of Stars
assigned, and are called the proper houses of the seven Planets, in which they
rest and abide a certain time. The three quaternions of the twelve signs do
govern in diverse parts of our bodies, whereof four there be that rule the
inward parts, called spiritual members. viz.

Cancer Rule these parts in a man's body. viz. The Liver and Lunges. Leo The
Heartstrings and Back. Virgo The Stomach, and the mou^h of the Stomach,
Midriffe and Bowels. Libra The Loins and Navell.

And of these are engendered these several diseases. viz. Cancer. Leo. Virgo.
Libra.
causes the Cough, Ptisicke, and Pleurisy, Imposthumes, Iaundies, Fevers,
and Pestilence, Swelling of the Belly, Dropsy, Hardness of the Belly and
Collicke Passion, Exulceration of the Bowels, Pain in the Belly, and about the
Small of the back.

And these evil affects are chiefly engendered when the signs aforesaid are in
the houses that are evil; as the sixth house, the eight house, and the twelfe
house from the ascendant.

A Planet is a Star which is discording or differing from the lesser Stars
in forming and working, for they are greater, and of more power then those that
are less.

The Moon is said much to alter the constitution of our bodies by those signs
wherein she enters; therefore I shall first declare unto you the twelve signs,
and the parts they govern, and consequently the diseases caused by the
influence of the Moon in every one of those signs.

First, Aries has his place in the head, face, ears; and the diseases are
headache, toothach, pain in the eyes, pimples, morphew, scurfe in the face, and
such like.

Taurus governs the neck and throat; and the diseases are the King's Evil,
hoarsenesse in the throat, weakness in the neck, and black chollar or
melancholy, squinances, catarrhes, and other diseases of the neck throat.

Gemini rules the shoulders, arms, hands, and fingers, and their diseases
proceeding of blood in the said parts; as frankles and such like, and some
coming of phlegm.

Cancer has dominion in the pappes, breast, ribs, the upper part of the belly,
part of the stomach, the spleen and lungs; it rules over phlegmatic
humors, and denotes impediments in the eyes, darkness in the sight, spots
and pustles in the face, the scab, leprosy, lithargy, galling of the skin,
and evil sickenesses of the body and face coming of phlegm.

Leo governs the heart, nether part of the stomach, and ribs, backebone,
sides, small guts, and the liver, and the sickness proceeding from chollar
citrine, and others as trembling of the heart, swounding, etc.

Virgo rules the belly, intrailes, midriffe, and over melancholy, and
signifies all ill humors, proceeding of melancholy, as Iliacopassio, collica
passio and the like.

Libra has dominion in the reins, and loins, nether part of the belly,
navell, hanches, and buttockes, and over blood, and specifieth dimnes of sight,
retention of Urine, and of digestion of fluxes, and the like.

Scorpio rules the secret parts, the bladder, and parts of generation, and the
flanckes, and over phlegmatic humors, and aquosities, and shows lepry,
scabs, spots in the face, cankers, fistulaes, hemorhoids, the stone, falling of
the hair, scurfes, and deformed diseases in the face, and all the body
poisoned by medicine.

Sagittarius has his dominion in the thighs, with the apurtenances, and all
superfluous parts, as a sixth part of the fingers, etc. and over choler, and
the diseases proceeding thereof, as Fevers, Agues, falls from high places,
darkness or impediments of theeyes, and from the sixteenth degree to the
eighteenth, he signifies hurts by horses, and wounds.

Capricorn governs the knees and their diseases, leprosy, scabs, galls,
defects of the skin, loss of hearing, speech, and sight, fevers, issues of
blood in the inferior parts, and fluxes also, and diseases coming of
melancholy.

Aqaurius rules the legs and their diseases proceeding of blood, black
jaundise, quartaine fevers, inscision of the veins; and from the twentieth
degree to the five and twentieth, it notes pains in the eyes.

Pisces has dominion in the feet, and over their diseases, as the gout, scab,
leprosy, palsy, pain in the feet, galls in the skin, and ulcers, and is a
sign very sickely and phlegmatic. These are the proper significations of the
signs by themselves, or when the Moon is in them passing through all the
parts of man's body; yet notwithstanding the Moon and other Planets have diverse
and several significations in all the signs particularly appropriative to
themselves, very necessary to be observed, having special relation to the part
of the body diseased and grieved, as may appear by what is said; whereby it is
thought very evil to administer any medicine to the part which is governed of
any sign, the day that the Moon is in it, except necessity urge; nor to make
any incision in any member, least efflux of blood follow, and diverse other
inconveniences.

The Ancients also considered the twelve months of the year, with the twelve
signs, in which they are said to work according to their nature, one with
another; but each one has his several month wherein he properly reigns.

Aries.. And first reigns Aries in the month of March, for in that sign (say
they) God made the world, and to this sign the old Jewish Philosophers gave
the name of Aries: that is to say, a Ram; forasmuch as Abraham made his
offering to God of a Ram, for his son Isaac; and whosoever is borne in this
sign shall be timorous or dreadful; but he shall have grace and good
inclination.

Taurus.. The second sign Taurus, reigns in April, it has the name of Bull;
forasmuch as Jacob wrastled and strove with the Angel: Whosoever is borne in
this sign shall have good success in all manner of beasts and cattle of the
field.

Gemini.. The third sign Gemini, reigns in May; it has the name of twins,
forasmuch as Adam and Eve were formed, and made of one kind: Whosoever is borne
in this sign, poor, and feeble shall he be, and shall live in grief, because
Adam, and Eve bewailed their fall.

Cancer.. The fourth, Cancer reigns in June, and has the name Crab, or
Canker, forasmuch as Job was full of Leprosy, and Kankrous Sores, which is a
Worm that throvgh the permission of God, eats the flesh: Whosoever is borne
in this sign, he shall be feeble of body, but shall obtain grace, if he seek
it of God.

Leo.. The fifth sign, Leo reigns in July, and has the name of a Lion;
forasmuch as Daniel the Prophet was put into a Lions den: Whosoever is borne in
this sign shall be a bold, and stout man, and a hardy.

Virgo.. The sixth sign Virgo reigns in August, and has the name of a Virgin,
forasmuch as our Lady that blessed Virgin before birth, in birth, and after
birth, was a pure Virgin: Whosoever is borne under this sign, shall be wise,
and learned, and shall suffer blame for a just cause.

Libra.. The seventh sign, Libra reigns in September, and has the name of
the balance that hang in equal poise, forasmuch as Judas Iscariot took
counsel with the Jews for the betr^ying of our Savior: Whosoever is borne in
this sign, he shall be a wicked man, and a traitor: an evil death shall he
dye if the course of nature prevail, but if he seek after grace and mercy, he
may escape it.

Scorpio.. The eight sign, Scorpio reigns in October, and has the name of a
Scorpion, forasmuch as the children of Israel passed through the Red Sea:
Whosoever is borne in this sign shall have many angers, tribulations, and
vexations.

Sagittarius.. The ninth sign Sagittarius, reigns in November, and has the
name of the Archer, forasmuch as David fought with Goliath: Whosoever is borne
under this sign shall be hardy, and lecherous.

Capricornus. The tenth sign Capricornus reigns in December, and has the
name of the Goat, forasmuch as the Jews lost the blessing of our Lord Jesus
Christ: Whosoever is borne under this sign shall be rich, and loving.

Aquarius. The eleventh sign Aquarius reigns in January, and has the name
of the water-man; forasmuch as Saint John B^ptist baptized our Savior in the
flood of Jordan to begin to institute the new law of Baptism, and end the
old law of Circumcision: Whosoever is borne in this sign shall be negligent,
and lose his goods, and shall be careless in his course of life.

Pisces. The twelveth sign Pisces, reigns in February, and has the name of
fishes; forasmuch as Jonas the Prophet was cast into the sea, and three days,
and three nights lay in the belly of a Whale: Whosoever is borne in that sign
shall be gracious, and happy, if he make use of time.

But note that neither the planets, nor the signs wherein they work do
constrain any man to do good, or evil, but he may (by his own will, and the
grace of God) do good, although he be disposed to evil after the nature, and
influence of his planet, and on the contrary by his own evil inclination he
may do evil, though by his planet ha be disposed to good.

Saturnus. Saturn has the highest place of all the planets, which he
compasses once in thirty years, and is a planet wicked, and an enemy to
humane nature; a destroyer of life, cold, dry, earthly, and is masculine of
the day, he rules the right ear, spleen, bladder, and bones, melancholy
humors mixed with phlegm, he has dominion over old men, solitary, stubborn,
lean, covetous, and gluttonous persons, the greatness of his body is 91 times
so big as the earth, his character is thus.

Jupiter. Jupiter ends his course almost in twelve years, he is a planet
benevolent, good, hot and moist; he rules the liver, lights, lungs, arteries,
blood, and seed, and the left ear, humors sanguine, humble, just, honest,
true, liberal, and rich Persons, Prelates, and Bishops: his character is thus
the greatness of his body is 95. times so big as the earth.

Mars. Mars circleth his sphere once in two years almost, he is a planet hot,
and dry immoderately, governes the gall, veins, sinews, and stones, the
humor choleric, disdainefull, seditious, cruel, bold, and careless
persons: the greatness of his body is once so big as the earth, and half so
big, and an eight part, his character is thus.

The Sun. Sol the lamp of heaven, he passes through the twelve signs of the
Zodiac in three hundred threescore, and five days, he gives life natural to
all things, and is a planet moderately hot, and dry, masculine of the day, he
rules the brain, marrow, and joyntes, kings, princes, magistrates, and famous
persons, the greatness of his body is 166. times so big as the earth, his
character is thus.

Venus. Venus ends her course as does the sun, she is a planet feminine of
the night, cold, and moist temperate, she rules the throat, pappes, belly,
reins, matrix, and buttocks, and humors phlegmatic, governs persons that
are meek, pleasant, lovers, dancers, musicians, and Poets; the greatness of
her body is the 37 part of the earth; her character is thus.

Mercury. Mercury makes his course as the Sun and Venus, he is a planet
variable, unequal, good with the good, and bad, with the bad, sometimes
masculine of the day, and sometimes feminine of the night, hot with the hot,
and cold-with the cold, moist with the moist, and dry with the dry planets,
whichsoever he is configured unto; he rules the mouth, tongue, thoughts, and
memory, devisers of any subtilty, or craft, crafty, deceitful, proud,
unconstant, and lying persons; the greatness of his body is the 32000. part of
the earth; his character is this.

Luna, Luna the moon makes her passage through the Zodiac in nine and twenty
days and eight hours, and overtakes the Sun in nine and twenty days and
twelve hours, or thereabouts; she is a planet naturally cold and moist, of the
night feminine; she is the carrier of the influence of all the planets through
her orb unto us, she rules the stomach, taste, liver, and the left-side; she
governes noble women, widows, also mariners, and vagabondes, and humors
phlegmatike; the greatness of her body is the 39. part of the earth; her
character is thus.

It shall be also necessary to consider the place, country, soil, winds, and
waters; their good effects, and their bad, the temperature of the climate, and
the nature of the four cardinal winds, East, which is hot and dry: West,
which is cold and moist: North, which is cold and dry: South, which is hot and
moist.

These I have the rather insisted upon, because I find them so necessary to be
known, and duly considered in the administering of medicines.

CHAP. III. Of Humors.
AN humor is whatsoever is moist, and liquid in substance, into which the
nourishment is first converted in the body of living creatures endewed with
blood, and is called an humor, not because all of them have one, and the same
force of moistning, but because all of them have a fluent substance. For choler
and melancholy (according to Reolanus) are dry humors; humors because of
their liquid consistence, and dry because they have the natural force of
drying. The humors are the first begotten matter, out of the mixture of the
four elements; choler of fire; phlegm of water; melancholy of the earth; blood
of the air; for it is hot and moist, as the air. An humor is either
elementary, alimentary, or excrementitious: elementary, is the purest parts of
the seed; alimentary, is that which is generated of the nourishment in the
body, by the native heat, and mixed in the veins by the name of blood; but not
only blood, for it has a mixture of the three other humors although the
greatest part be blood, and of these are produced the second humors,
inominata, or without name, ros dew, gluten, which is ros condensed, and
cambion: excrementitious, which is either profitable, and necessary, as choler
in the gall, melancholy in the spleen, spittle in the jaws, and milk in the
dugs; or unprofitable as urine, sweat, excrement of the nose, and menstruous
blood.

The alimentary Humor (as I have said) which is fit to nourish the body, is
that humor which is contained in the veins, and arteries of a man, who is
temperate, and perfectly well in health, and is known by the general name of
Blood, which is let out at the opening of a vein, though it be in diverse parts
of the body unlike, and different, for the thick blood which is in the
bottom, is not an humor, but is melancholy blood; the light froth that
swimmes on the top is not Choler, but choleric blood, unless it be changed
by nature into choler, and melancholy, which often it is, and from the blood
is known, because being out of its vessels, it will congeale, but the humor
never at all; for blood otherwise taken is an humor of a certain kind,
destinguished by heat, and warmth, from the other humors comprehended with it
in the whole mass of the blood.

Blood in complexion is hot, and moist, rather temperate, incolour Red, Rosy,
or Crimson; in smell, not stinking, in taste savoury, of indifferent
consistence, neither too thick, nor too thin, and is of the nature of three
signs of the Air, Gemini, Libra, Aquarius, and has its original in the very
first minute of our creation, and is increased by the meat we eat, being
drawn into the bottom of the ventricle, and there detained until by force of
concoction it is turned into a thick substance of color according to the
meat we eat, much like in consistence to almond butter, and this is called the
Chylus which is formed round, that it may be the better sucked out, for were it
like a trough, that which was before concocted would be over much, whiles the
other is sucked out. This Chylus seeming one, and the same thing in its self,
yet consists of parts of a different nature, either by reason of the variety of
meats, or by one, and the self same meat; this being perfectly concocted, is
received by the vena porta, or gate vein, and driven from thence into the
small guts, and sucked in by the meseraick veins, and so enters the liver,
where (as some have thought) it gets no tincture, or rudiment, but it (being
before colored) gives color to the liver, which otherwise is a thing of
another kind, and of a far different color, and from thence it enters the
heart, where it is perfected; for they are much deceived, who imagine the blood
to have its original in the liver, for in Embrioes you may see the heart, and
all the vessels made before they live, and an Egg in four and twenty hours
will be blood, and then a Chicken; so the blood is the first that is made; and
of this mass of blood are all the other humors made at one, and the same
time: The blood being thus composed is divided into two parts, natural, and
unnatural. Natural which I have already showed you is either arteriall
contained in the arteries, or venall, contained in the veins, the arteriall is
more red, clear, subtle, hot, and flowing from an opened artery in a violent
manner: the venall beats not, and is less red then the other, darker of color,
thick, and not so hot. Unnatural is in quality by infection, or commixtion
with an humor, it is unnatural in quality, when it is changed from its good
complexion, and is either too hot, or too cold, too thick, or too thin, or
more subtle then it should be; by infection when that some part of the blood is
evidently infected, and putrified by commixture with another humor; that is,
when there is more of another humor then ought to be, either outwardly when
the evil humor increases outwardly on the blood, or inward when an evil
humor g^nerated within the blood is absolutely mingled with it; as when some
part of the blood being putrified, and its subtle parts turned into choler,
and the gross parts turned into melancholy, and that choler, or melancholy
become adust, and remain with the blood, it insects and putrifies it: and thus
it is alienated from the natural, either in substance, color, smell, or taste;
in substance because it is thicker, and more troubled, as when there is mingled
with it black choler, or subtler by the commixture of yellow watery choler;
in color, by either declining to white by the mixture of phlegm, or to
blacknes by the mixture of melancholy: by smell, by being of a worse savor, by
the admixture of rotten humors, or by altogether wanting savor by the mixture
of raw humors; in taste by turning either into bitterness, by mixture of
choler, or to sharpness by mixture, of melancholy, or to unsavorinesse by the
mixture of phlegm. And to conclude, blood is (no question) the first amongst
other humors, toward the beginning, and sustaining of man's lif^; toward the
beginning, as thus; the seed is nothing else but blood made white by the more
powerful concoction in the testicles, and of blood is generated the m^terial
cause of marrow; for it is not to be doubted, but all the parts of our body are
more nourished thereby, then by any other humor, which will appear by this
ex^mple; the ventricle of a child is nourished in the womb, not by any Chilus,
for there is none, but by the mothers blood which the liver draws by the
veins of the navell.

Blood is the matter containing the spirits, of which the life, and every
operation of the vegetative virtue consists, whether vital, or animal, and it
may very well challenge to its self the principal place being far more
convenient then any of the other humors toward the maintaining of life, by
reason of its heat, and moisture, and because it more nourishes the body, and
more weakens it by its loss; for it is the treasure of life through the loss
whereof follows death immediately.

Those in whom this humor abounds are beautified with a fresh and rosy
color, gentle and well natured, pleasant merry, and facetious; it is best
generated in the spring, and accordingly in youth, that is to say, from the
five and twentieth year to the thirtieth year of age.

The blood thus brought to the liver as before, must of necessity be purged
from his too excrementitious humors, whereof the bladder of the gale draws
one, which we call yellow choler, and the spleen the other which we call
melancholy; which are natural and excrementitious, but not alimentary, or
nourishing; but we will leave these for a while, and speak of phlegm, which
has the next place to blood, because it is nearer the radical moisture.

Phlegm, Natural Phlegm is twofold, natural and unnatural* Natural as it
is cold and moist, white and sweet, by an imperfect concoction in the second
digestion, taking its original from the watery, and crude parts of the Chylus
and is merely blood perfectly concocted, having neither the color nor the
aptness to nourish fleshy members that blood has; so that that part of the
Chylus that has suffered any digestion in the liver, while the blood is
perfected, and remains white, savory, and watery, and of a remiss color, is
called phlegm which has no proper receptacle as the other humors have but
runs along with the blood, that in time of necessity it may likewise be made
blood, or at least may supply its defect; but it has an improper receptacle
which is the stomach whether it often gathers, and the lungs on which it
sometimes falls.

Unnatural Phlegm. The unnatural is either changed in its quality, or in its
quantity by being mixed with other humors; for there must be a substance in
all, a just quality, and quantity; to the substance belongs the consistence; to
the quantity belongs proportion; and to the quality appertains savor, and
color: choler (for example) must be thin, malancholy thick, pituit or
phlegm in a mean almost like blood: choler in his first qualities ought to
be hot and d^y; in his second qualities bitter and yellow: phleghme in its
first qualities ought to be cold and moist, in the second white and unsavorie,
for it is made sweet before it is mingled with the blood, and it is evident
that sweetness proceeds from a moderate heat, as blood, sugar, honey, and the
like do show, which are moderately hot; but natural phlegm is cold, therefore
it may better be termed unsavorie, then sweet: melancholy in his first
qualities is cold and dry; in his second, black and sharp, or sower: blood is
hot and moist, if it be with other humors it is temperate, but in the second
qualities it is red and sweet; in all four there ought to be a proportion, of
chollar least, then melancholy, then of blood ought to be most, then phlegm;
and if this proportion fail, so that there be either more or less of one then
ought to be, or that one of them fall from its right temper, it breeds the
original of almost all diseases which is ill digestion. But to return, the
unnatural phlegm, as I showed you, is either changed in its quality or
quantity, and of these we count eight kinds (according to Avicen) whereof
four without the veins, viz. Watery, that is subtle as water, and is found
in the

Phlegm is of the nature of the three signs of the water, Cancer, Scorpio,
and Pisces, and is watery cold and moist, of consistence liquid; of color
white; of taste, sweet, or rather unsavory, fit to nourish the brain, and all
other cold, and moist parts, to make the blood temperate, and to yield
moistness to the joints: It is placed in the body either of necessity, or for
profit; of necessity two ways, whereof the first is common: the second
particular: The common is that phlegm which is nearest the members, and by
which they are nourished when at any time they shall have lost their proper
nourishment good blood; neither does it nourish, but when it is sent into the
bloody veins by the liver; the particular, is the mingling of it with the
blood, tempring it and making it fit to nourish the phlegmatic parts, as the
brain and nerves: for to nourish these a great part or portion of phlegm is
required: for profit likewise two ways, whereof the first is likewise common,
the other particular; the common whereby it makes the blood the more thin,
flowing, and penetrating, the easier to slide through the veins into the
members; the particular, that it may moisten the joints and members that are
most moved in the body, least by continual motion they become dry, because
every local motion is a straining and heating, and every heat is resolutive
and desiccative; therefore that the joints of the bones by continual motion,
which is made by the sinews and muscles, should not be over heat, dried, and
consequently made quite unfit for the natural use and motion; nature has
ordained these phlegmatic humors, which as it were distilling out of the
veins, do water and moisten them; not unlike the oyling the Axel-tree of a
Coach, without which it would (as we see by daily experience) be burned into
dust; but this office of this humor is not profitable nor necessary for every
one, for infantes, and weak impotent people, that can neither walk nor work,
but sit idle, do not need this moisture; but those that labor hard, and go
much, have extraordinary need of it.

Phlegm makes a man drowsy, dull, fat, and swollen, and hastneth gray
hairs; it abounds most in Winter, and in those that incline to old age; and is
increased by cold, and crude nourishment.

Choler. The next is Choler, which is an humor hot and dry, of thin, and
subtle substance, and is, as it were, a certain heat, and fury of humors,
which generated in the liver, together with the blood is carried by the veins
and arteries through the whole body; that of it which abounds is sent partly
into the guts, and partly into the bladder of the gall (which is its proper
receptacle, and is in the hollownesse of the liver) or is consumed by
transpiration and sweats: Choler is divided into two parts, natural, and
unnatural: Natural choler. The Natural is, as it were, the froth of the
blood, whose color is of a clear red turning toward yellow, and has its
original from the more subtle parts of the Chylus. Unnatural. Unnatural is
by infection and commixtion of another humor, or by alteration; and it is
called unnatural when it is either green, black, or dark red of color:
that kind of unnatural Choler which is made by mixture with another humor
is called Vittelline, Vittelline. because in heat and consistence it is like
the yolks of eggs; and this Avicen thinks to be made of thick phlegm
mingled with choler; but Gallen thinks it to be only by alteration, and a
stronger heat destroying the moisture; for any humor deprived of its
moisture, must needs wax thick; and this is the most received opinion; for
choler waxes pale and cold by the mixture of phlegm. These other following
are made only by alteration, viz. Leeke colored, Leeke-coloured. or resembling
the juice of a leek in greenes, tending toward black, which is generated in
the ventricle by the crudity of meats, and therefore is sometimes called green
phlegm: Aeruginous Aeruginous. of the color of Verdigreace tending toward
white; for according to Avicen, it is made of the aforesaid green being more
adust by the ventricle or liver inflamed, as bones being burned are first
black, and afterward turn white* it is so hot and biting that it burns like
to hot poison. To these we may add blew Blew. choler much like in color to
the herb Woad that our dyers use; and to this also belongs that which is
called Skie-coloured, Skie-coloured, or Sea-greene. or Sea-coloured, and is the
worst of all the humors, except black choler, for it gets so much acrimony
by reason of the heat, that it corrodes, and ulcerates; this kind is generated
in the ventricle, or near about it: Red Red. choler is improperly called Red,
being rather blood; only this is the difference, blood congeales when it is out
of its vessels, but red choler will not: it is made red by being mingled with
some bloody moisture; and it is made pale almost to the likeness of natural
choler, by the mixture of phlegm. Black Black. choler so much degenerates
from the natural, as that it acquires the name of another humor, which is
properly called melancholy, of which we will speak in his place. You shall
understand, that that part of natural choler that goes with the blood
through the veins, is sent thither for two special reasons, which we may call
necessity and profit; of necessity, because it is requisite and needful that
the choleric members be nourished by it, whereto agreat part of choler is
required: Secondly, for profit, that it may subtle the blood in the veins, and
make itth more penetrating in its passage.

Another part of natural choler is separated from the mass of humors
generated in the liver, and is sent to the bladder of the gall, of necessity,
and for profit: of necessity, that the whole body may be purged, cleansed and
mundified from choleric superfluities; for the gall either by its own
property, or by the natural attractive virtue, does draw unto it choler, as a
thing most fit and proper for it self, even after the manner of the Loadstones
drawing of iron; which kind of delight in attracting; is established in a
certain hidden sympathy, which nature has ordained between choler, and the
bladder of the gall; by whose attraction the whole body, and likewise the blood
is cleansed and mundified from all superfluous choler, which otherwise might
impair the health: secondly for profit; first that it may wash the intestines
from dregs, and viscous phlegm; secondly to prick and sting the guts, and
muskles of the belly, that they may feel that it is hurtful for them, and
therefore may endeavor to expel it; for the expulsive faculty does not
exercise it self in expelling the dregs remaining in the belly and guts,
unles it be excited by choler flowing thereunto, whereby it often happens that
the passages between the gall and the guts being stopped, the colicke ensues.

Choler is chiefly bred, and expelled in youth; and acride, and bitter meats
yield matter to it, but great labors of body and mind give the occasion. It
makes a man nimble, quick, ready for any performance, lean, and much subject
to anger, and quick of concoction.

Choler is of the nature of the three signs of the fire, Avies, Leo, and
Sagittarius, and is fiery hot and dry; of consistence thin; of color yellow,
or pale; or taste bitter: it provokes the expulsive faculty of the guts, and
attenuates the phlegm cleaving to them; but the alimentary is fit to nourish
the parts of like temper with it.

Melancholy. Melancholy or the melancholy humor being the grosser portion, and
as it were the mud and dregs of the blood, is partly sent from the liver to
the spleen to nourish it, and partly carried by the vessels into the rest of
the body, and spent in the nourishment of the parts endewed with an earthly
dryness; it is an enemy to mirth and jollity, and near kinsman to death; and
is by the ancients divided into two parts as phlegm is, that is natural,
Natural melancholy. and unnatural; the natural is cold and dry, and is
generated in the Chilus passing as aforesaid.

Unnatural melancholy. The unnatural is not like the dregs of blod, but it is
like the lees of wine burnt, hotter and lighter then natural melancholy is,
and taks its original from any of the humors adust; as from choler adust
turned into melancholy, which only amongst all the humors reserves its own
proper taste, that is bitter; from phlegm adust, which phlegm if it be watery
and very subtle, then the melancholy thereof generated will be salt; which if
it be not salt, then the melancholy will be acide, and sharp; from blood
adust, and this kind of melancholy is salt having also some little sweetness;
for blood is the treasure of nature, and most diligently preserved by the other
humors, whereby it seldom happens that it is wholly, and totally adust,
because it retains some sweetness from natural melancholy adust, from whence
it happens that if the natural melancholy from whence this unnatural
melancholy proceeds be subtle then this melancholy arising from the adustion
will be even as sharp as vinegar, and being cast on the ground turns into
bubbles; and this is the worst of all the kinds of melancholies, and is called
atra bilis; Atra bilis, or black melancholy. for it not only corrodes the
parts whereinto it is gathered, but wheresoever it touches it burns and
scaldes, as powerfully as Lime, Ashes, or burnt Lees of Wine, wherein some
relics of fire remain; hereby it happens that a disentery caused by this
humor is deadly, because it ulcerates the intestines; now blood adust,
melancholy humors, and atra bilis may easily be distinguished; for from blood
adust arise carbuncles; from melancholy schirrous tumors; and from atra bilis
is generated cancer; and of this last the smell is so contagious, that the very
flies do shun it; but if that natural melancholy be gross, then that which
proceeds from it by adustion will be of far less sharpness.

A part likewise of natural melancholy passes along with the blood, of
necessity, and for profit; of necessity that it may be mingled with the blood
in that quantity, and proportion as is necessary and requisite to nourish some
members, which are maintained by a great portion of melancholy, as the bones,
and other cold, and dry melancholy members: Secondly for profit that it may
attenuate the grossness of the blood, and strengthen, and consolidate it
until it becomes a solid part of such hard members as it ought to nourish.

A part of natural melancholy is also sent unto the spleen, the blood having
no need thereof, which is done for the aforesaid causes. The first is
universal, for it is very necessary the whole body should be purged of
superfluous melancholy; and also particular, because it ought to nourish a
particular member, that is the spleen. The second is of the melancholy that
flows to the orifice of the stomach, and by his stipticity straining, and as
it were milking out the moisture it there finds, as a woman strains and
presses out the milk from the Cowes teates with her fingers, and this profit
arises two several ways; first when melancholy binds, unites, and
strengthens the orifice of the stomach that the meat may be the better
retained therein; secondly where such melancholy by his acridnesse makes a
kind of commotion in the mouth of the stomach, whereby the desire of meat is
excited and stirred: for after the mouth of the stomach is thus moved, a kind
of griping follows (as says James de Forlivio) which presently the sensitive
faculty perceiving is excited to the desire of meat, whereby that griping is
ended

Melancholy is made of meats of gross juice, and by the perturbations of the
mind turned into fear and sadness: it is augmented in the first, and crude
old age; it makes men sad, harsh, constant, froward, envious, and fearful; it
is of the nature of the three signs of the earth, Taurus, Capricorn, and
Virgo, and is of nature earthly cold and dry; of consistence gross, and muddy;
of color blackish; of taste acide, sower, and biting; stirs up the appetite,
nourishes the spleen, and all the parts of like temper to it, as the bones,
etc.

Neither is it to be doubted but that these humors do move, and rule at
certain set hours of the day and night, as by a certain peculiar motion or
tide; for the blood flows from the ninth hour of the night to the third hour
of the day, as in the spring time: Choler to the ninth of the day, as in
summer: Melancholy to the third of the night, as in autumn; the rest of the
night that remains is under the dominion of phlegm, as in winter, whereof
manifest examples appear in the French Pox, etc. And these things thus
understood, you may know what humor reigns in the sick, and at what time he
shall he most grieved. The second humors. Next I shall show you what the
second humors are which as I told you are likewise four.

Inam humiditas. The first whereof is called the humor without a name, as
having no proper name, but is thought to be a kind of bloody moisture which
hanges ready to f^ll in little drops at the orifice of the small capillary
veins; for in the body are certain great veins which like the trunk of a
tree do spread forth their branches to the finenesse of hairs, in which
(according to Iohannitius) are situate the humors, which after the third
concoction are turned into moisture, which is called in latin inominata,
because it wants a proper name whereby to call it, or else because it
participates with the first and second humors; and after certain spongious or
porous parts begins the orifice of the veins like the mouths of small
worms, which whiles the digestion is perfecting are shut (as the matrice is
after conception) but (digestion finished) they open naturally (as the matrice
opens when the child is ready to be borne) through which thus opened distills
this aforesaid bloody moisture which entering the members agreeable is
apropriate unto them, as the first operation of the nutritive virtue.

Ros. The second is called Ros dew, which moistens the part into whose
substance it is already fallen; it is begot of the other humors, and serves
very aptly for to nourish, when the body wants nourishment, as to moisten
members that are overdryed, either by too much care or over much frequenting
the fire, or remaining under a hot climate, as the Aethiopians, etc. This
moisture is properly called Ros from the likeness it has to dew, because as
dew falls upon the earth, moistneth it, and administers nourishment to the
plants, so this moisture does at times of necessity, yield nourishment to the
desiring member; but not true substantial nourishment, because it has not in
it self solid substance sufficient to be made part of a member; but it is in a
kind of imperfect way, which is called a refreshing: Further seeing that this
moisture is partly watery, partly airy and fat, therefore when it waters the
members being by a continual resolution dry, the easier is that joined to the
members which they call Cambium, then if they had still remained dry, for moist
to moist makes an union.

Cambium. The third is called Cambium, which put into the part that is to be
nourished is there fastened, being more thickened then the other two in the
holes of the aforesaid little veins, and is a substance truly nourishing,
because it is converted into the substance of the members, according to
complexion; but yet not according to the complete essential parts, and full
likeness, which we call substantial form; for it is the object of the fourth
digestion, about which the virtue nutritive exercises its self, which is
properly termed the last virtue digestive, and of which arise three operations:
First, the adding of the Cambium to the members: Secondly the uniting, or
fastening thereof: Thirdly the assimulating, or bringing into form: therefore
while this Cambium generated of pure meats is added to the members, it is
conformable to them in complexion, neither heating, nor cooling, nor moistning,
nor drying the substance of the members qualitatively as a distemperate
medicine; but in substance and essential form, and similitude, it is not yet
assimulated to the members; yea the virtue nutritive a little working it, and
striving as it were to assimulate it, does thicken, and consolidate its
substance, that it may make it like the substance of the members.

Gluten. The fourth is called Gluten, Glue, which is only the proper and
substance-making humidity of the simular parts, not their substance; and the
first root and begi^ning of it is in the sperme or seed, as the beginning of
the seed is from the humors; neither is it as I said a substantial part of
the members, but a part of the part, as elements constituting simple members,
as it appears by the composition of the body; for this is compounded of four
several things, hot qualified by cold, and moisture diminished by drines; but
yet none of these serve toward the composition of a soul, neither are they
any integrall or substantial parts of the body of any one living.

Now that you may know what humor is most predominant in every one, I shall
briefly declare the signs which we usually observe.

To know a man of a sanguine complexion. First therefore (because the matter
and generation of flesh is chiefly from blood) a man of fleshy, dense, and
solid habit of body, and full of a sweet, and vaporous juice is of a sanguine
complexion; they have a ruddy colored, and flushing face, with red and white;
White by reason of the skin spread over it, and Red by reason of the blood
lying underneath the skin; for always such as the humor is, such is the
color of the face: they are courteous, affable, and fair spoken, of a smooth
forehead, and something given to women, seldom angry, for as the inclination
of the humor is, so also is the disposition of manners; they eat and drink
freely, have pleasant dreams, and are troubled with diseases that arise from
blood, as phlegmones, pustles, bleeding much, and menstruous fluxes; they will
endure bloodletting, and desire most those things that are cold and dry,
therefore offended by hot and moist things; they have a great and strong pulse,
great quantity of urine, but of a mild quality with substance, and color
indifferent.

Signs of a choleric complexion. As for Choleric persons you shall observe
them to be of a pale yellow color, the body lean, slender, and rough, fair
veins, and large arteries with a quick pulse, their skin feels dry, hard,
and hot with pricking, they cast forth much choler by vomit, and stool, they
are nimble witted, stout, hardy, and desirous of revenge, liberal and
ambitious, they have light sleep with sudden wakings, fiery, and furious
dreams, they most desire meats and drinks that are cold and moist, and are
subject to burning feavors, frenzy, jaundies, bloody flux, and pustulous
inflammations.

Signs of a phlegmatic complexion. You shall know phlegmatic persons by a
white face something livid, a fat body being soft, and cold to the touch; they
are subject to Oedematous tumors, catarrhes distilling down upon the lunges,
and dropsy; they are slothful, drowsy, and of a dull capacity, dreaming of
waters, drowning, floods, and the like; they cast up much phlegmatic watery
matter by vomit, and spitting, and are troubled with a doglike appetite, and
with the chollicke.

Signs of a melancholicke complexion. Those that are melancholicke are swart,
cloudy, and stern of countenance; they are subject to diverse evil

A Table of the Humors in Man's Body.
The humors in man's body are of three kinds, which are either I. Elementarie,
of the purest portion of the parents seed: as I. Blood, or the airie portion of
the seed. II. Phlegm, the watery part of the seed. Of which, as of their proper
elements are generated. I. the Flesh. the Heart. the Liver. the Lights. the
Spleen. The Reins.
II. the Brain. the spinall marrow. the Nerves. the Veins the Arteries.
III. The Bones. the Gristles of the Bones. the Ligaments. the Tendons.

III. Melancholy, the earthly part of the seed. Choler, or the hot and fiery
portion of the seed: of which no member is generated; but thereby the parts
formed are fashioned and dried in the womb.
II. Alimentary, which are generated of the nourishment taken into the body;
and are either Natural, spread in the veins, and known by the name of blood,
as Blood, Phlegm, Choler and Melancholy.
Of the natural humors before the digestion be perfected, arise the second
humors the humor innominate, or oily, Ros, or dew. Gluten, like glue, and
Cambion
Unnatural, or sickly, as Blood putrified, serous, Phlegmatic. in the
veins. choler adust, in the liver pale, in the liver vitteline in the liver
Leeke color, in the ventricle. Aeruginous, in the ventricle. Blew, in the
ventricle.

Choleric, or Melancholicke.
Phlegm, Choler, Melancholy acide or sour, salt. in the veins Melancholy
Blood. by being adust. Choler. by being adust. Melancholy. by being adust.

raw, in the brain Glassie Plaister-like. in the joints.


III. Excrementitious, which may be perceived from the alimentary; and are
either profitable Choler in the gall. Melancholy in the spleen. Spittle in the
jaws. Milk in the dugges.
unprofitable Sweat. Urine. Snot. Menstruous blood. Phlegmatic excrements in
the Brain. Belly. Guts.
gathered together.






Place this Table in page 39. at this mark

diseases, as quartaine, quintane, sextane, and septimane fevers, cancers,
simple and ulcerated, and oftentimes with a leprosy; the coldness that
reigns in them makes them have small veins, and arteries; their bodies cold
and hard, their dreams very terrible, as of devils, and monsters, of graves,
dead corpse, and in the night many black representations before their eyes;
being awake, they are for the most part froward, deceitful, covetous, of few
words, cowards, careful, and lovers of solitariness, slow to anger, but once
angered, hard to be reconciled.

But note that these humors often change the temper of man's body; for there
are diverse that are sometimes sanguine, sometimes again choleric,
melancholicke, or phlegmatic, nor happens this by the blood, but by the diet;
as hot and dry meats make a sanguine man choleric, and gross meats that
breed and increase evil blood, as Venison, Hares, etc. will bring either of
these to a melancholy; likewise cold and moist meats breed phlegm: but that I
may not exceed my intended brevity I shall add a table of humors, and so
proceed to the next, which is the members or parts of the body.

CHAP. IV. Of Members.
What a member is. THE Members are bodies engendered of the first commixtion of
elements, humors, and spirits, because they consist of a solid, fleshy, and
spirituous substance. By parts in general, I understand the head, breast,
belly, and their adjuncts; by the particular parts of those I understand the
simple similar parts, which are in number only eight, bones, gristles, fibers,
ligaments, membranes, tendones, simple flesh, and skin, some add to these,
veins, arteries, fat, marrow, nails, and hairs, others omit them as
excrements: these aforesaid are called simple rather in the judgment of sense,
then of reason, for all are nourished, have life, and sense, either manifest,
or obscure.

A bone. A bone is earthly, dry and hard, that they may the better serve in
the foundation of the whole body, and uphold it as pillars; and this ought not
to be all one bone, but divided into diverse parts that the body may with ease
bend its members, which way necessity requires; of these some are hollow, and
some solid; the first nourished by marrow, the last by a thick blood entering by
the pores, as may be perceived in broken bones which are united by a Callus,
which is generated of the relics of the alimentary blood.

A gristle. A gristle is the same in substance, that a bone is of, and is
merely a soft bone, that may be crushed; as the bones of children are but
gristles, until the heat increasing with age does harden them into bones;
gristles do differ in themselves, for some are at the ends of the bones, as in
the huckle bone, nose, sternon, and knots of the ribs; others without bones, as
in the ears, the flap of the weasell, throtle, aspera arteria, and basis of
the heart.

A ligament. As a bone is harder then a gristle, so is a gristle harder then a
ligament, which serves only to hold the bones together, which otherwise would
slip asunder; it is in color and substance very like a nerve, but harder; and
altogether without sense and feeling, excepting some few, which either receive
the nerves, or have their original from the sensible membranes.

A tendon. A tendon is the end and tail of the arbitrary muscles, and the
first instrument of motion, and is called a tendon from the latin Tendendo,
because it stretches like a cord, when the member is moved; it is so much
softer then a ligament, as it is harder then a nerve; it feeeles, and is moved
by a voluntary motion by reason of the nerves, but by reason of the ligaments,
it knits the muscles to the bones.

A fiber. A fiber is a small thread, but firm and strong, which nature has
placed in the muscles, that so the body may move every way; the right fibers do
draw, the transverse do put back, the oblique do hold, every one helps one
another, as if you should hook your fingers one within another.

A membrane. A membrane and a coat differ only in this, a membrane is a name
of substance, a coat is a name of office, for where a membrane invests any
part, it is called a coat; in some parts it has a proper name, as that which
involues the bones is called the periosteum, that which covers the brain pan
is called the pericranion, which covers the brain, is called the mevinx, that
which covers the ribs, and the contained parts as the heart, lights, and aspera
arteria is a proper coat, and is called a compassing membrane; that which
contains the natural parts, and gives to every one his proper coat, is called
peritoneum, and from these the parts have feeling; for if you scrape the
periosteum from the bone, you may cut the bone, burn it, or any thing without
any pain.

Skin. The skin is the greatest of all the membranes; it is the coat covering
all the body, except such places by which any excrements are evacuated; as the
eyes, ears, nose, privities, fundament, mouth, and ends of the fingers, where
the nails grow; it is the sluice of the whole body, through which it is purged
by sweat, from all fulginous excrements; of substance it is spermaticke, for
being once lost it cannot be restored as formerly it was, but there remains a
skar, which is nothing else but flesh dried beyond measure; it takes its feeling
from the nerves, of which (together with veins and arteries) it is composed,
and is by nature cold and dry, ordained for to keep safe and sound the
continuity of the whole body, and all the parts thereof from the violent
assault of all external dangers.

Simple flesh. Simple flesh may be seen in the gummes and ends of the fingers;
the flesh of a muscle is very like these, ^ut it is not simple: in the p^ppes
and stones, it is called gludulous flesh, and the substance of the heart and
liver is called flesh, but improperly.

Fat. Fat, and flesh proceed both from one and the same matter that is blood;
the difference is, that flesh comes of blood, heat, and overdried; the fat
from cold by a certain congealing or growing together of membranes, it is of a
middle temper between heat and cold, although it may seem cold in respect of
the efficient cause that is of cold by which it concreates; in the joints is
another sort of fat far more solid, and hard then the former, and it is mixed
with a viscid humor, tough like the whites of Eggs, that it may for a good
space moisten those parts which are subject to much drines by their continual
motion; another kind of fat is called seame, Seame. which is much dryer then
ordinary fat, and lies principally about the midriffe, where there are many
windings of arteries and veins; it lies also about the reins, loins, and
basis of the heart.

Compound members. Those parts are called compound, which are made and composed
by the mediation, or immediately of the simple, which they term otherwise
organicall, or isntrumental; as an Arm, Leg, Hand, Foot, and others of that
kind: the simple parts cannot be divided into any particles, but of the same
kind; but the compound may: they are called isntrumental and organicall,
because they perform such actions of themselves, as serves for the
preservation of themselves, and the whole body; as the eye by it self, not
assisted by any other part, sees, and by his faculty defends the whole body,
and also it self: In each isntrumental part we observe four properties; One
by which the action is properly performed, as the Christaline humor in the
eye: The Second without which the action cannot be perfomed, as the nerve and
the other humors of the eye: The Third, whereby the action is better and more
conveniently done, as the tunicles, and muscles: The Fourth, by which the
action is preserved, as the eyelid and circle of the eye: The same we say of
the hand, as First, by the muscle: Secondly, by the ligament: Thirdly, by the
bones and nails: Fourthly, by the veins, arteries, and skin.

Isntrumental parts. The isntrumental parts have a fourefold order; those
that are immediately composed of the simple, are of the first order, as the
muscles and vessels: they are of the second that consist of the first simple,
and others besides, as the fingers: they are of the third, that are composed of
the second order, and others besides, as the hand in general: The fourth order
is, the whole body the instrument of the soul. In all these parts, whether
simple or compound, we do consider nine things, Substance, Quantity, Figure,
Composition, Number, Connection, Temperature, Action, and Use.

Amongst the organicall parts, there is three principal parts, governing all
the rest, viz. the Brain, Heart, and Liver, because from them, some force,
power, or faculty proceeds and flows over the whole body, when as there is no
such sent from any other part. To these some add the testicles, not for that
they are of necessity of the individual or peculiar body, but for generation
and preservation of the species: Herein we may see the industry of nature, who
like a good Architect seeks not only to build, and furnish her fabric with
all kind of materials necessary, by which the body may live; but also she
has furnished it with the testicles, thereby to make it immortal, because
hereby every one may substitute another in his place before he depart this
world. The veins, arteries, and nerves, are the first simple isntrumental
parts: the veins Veins. spring all from the liver, the arteries Arteries.
from the heart (except only the vena arteriosa) which has its original from
the eight ventricle of the heart: it is called vena arteriosa Vena arteriosa.
compositively, and therefore is not reckoned amongst the simple isntrumental
parts: for it is called a vein, because it distributes alimentary blood to the
lungs; and arterious, because like an artery it consists of two coats, all the
rest consist but of one coat, knit together with a triple kind of fibers, and
this vein has two principal cavities, one by which the Chylus is carried to
the liver, and is called vena porta, Vena porta. or the gate vein; the other
by which the blood made out of the Chylus is dispersed amongst all the members
for nourishment, and is called vena cava, Vena cava. the hollow vein. The gate
vein has its original in the blunt end or lower end of the liver, and there
it spreads its roots: The hollow vein begins in the gibbous part of the
liver: The truncke of the gate vein is divided into two principal branches;
the one is splenicus, which is carried to the spleen, the other is
mesentericus, which goes to the mesentery; it has other small slips that
nourish the most part of the lower belly, and take their names from the parts
they nourish; as that which nourishes the ventricle, is called grastica,
intestinalis, that nourishes the intestines; cistica which brings nourishment
to the bladder of the gall; from the mesentery branch spring small slips to the
right gut, which makes the hemorroids: The truncke of the hollow vein is also
divided into two branches; one is carried upwards to nourish the superior
parts, another is carried downward to nourish the inferior.

An artery differs from a vein because it consists of two coats that the
spirits may not be exhaled, and that it may not be broken by the continual
motion and beating; a vein beats very little or not at all.

A nerve. A nerve is that which proceeding from the brain or spinall marrow
has sense and motion; some parts of the body which have nerves have feeling
also, but no voluntary motion; as the membranes, veins, arteries, guts, and
all the entrails: from the brain arise two soft nerves, which have feeling,
the hard nerves spring from the spinall marrow, and are moving; from the brain
proceed seven conjugations of nerves, from the spinall marrowe thirty pair,
that is sixty nerves, some nerves cannot be perceived to be hollow at all, it
is a simple part of our body, bred and nourished by a gross, and phlegmatic
humor.

The second instruments. Of the three first and simple instruments, veins,
nerves, and arteries, and of the eight aforesaid parts least conformable, being
knit in due quantity, number, and site, spring the second instruments; amongst
which the muscles Muscles. have the first place, as being the instruments of
voluntary motion; which is performed six manner of ways: viz. upwards,
downwards, forwards, backwards, to the right hand, and to the left hand; this
is simple motion the second voluntary motion is circularly, as when you lure a
hawk you swinge your hand round. A muscle consists of veins, nerves, and
arterious flesh, and fibers, from which they receive nourishment, life, sense,
and motion: they are reckoned amongst the second instruments, because they
consist of a coat, a tendon, and a ligament; and are divided into three
parts, the beginning, middle, and end, the head, insertion and nether part;
and these are all differing in figure, situation, perforation, and quantity,
color, and connection.

The fingers. The fingers consist not only of veins of which they are
nourished, of arteries from whence they receive spirit and vital heat, nerves
by which they feel, and muscles whereby they are moved; but also of three
bones in each finger (that is fifteen in each hand, which are hollow,
fistulous, and full of thin and liquid marrow, and not of gross and thick as
in the arm or thigh) whereby they are fortified and sustained; likewise of
ligaments whereby the bones are connexed, of flesh, and skin; by whose
conjunction is ordained, the true organicall touching, the fingers are in
number five. The nails are generated by the fibers of the ligaments, and the
excrements of the tendons, which are terminated at the bottom of the nails.

The hand. The hand consists of five fingers, the palm or hollow of the hand,
the back of the hand, and the wrest; it is the instrument of instuments, made
for to take up and hold any thing, for with the hands are all the other
instruments made; it is divided into five fingers the more easily to take up
even the least bodies of any figure or fashion soever; and to this end nature
ordained us the nails, because the fingers ends being soft flesh, might not
turn away in meeting with a hard body.

The heart. The heart is the chief mansion of the soul, the organe of the
vital faculty; and is placed in the body as the Sun in the firmament: it is
placed by nature as it were in a box, that it may have free liberty to spread
it self, and receive hurt neither from the ribs, or vertebres of the chest; it
contains a continual moisture, that by its motion and heat, it may not be
over dried; it consists of a hard and dense flesh, in which are two hollowes,
the right side is the biggest, the left side is the more corpulent, and thereby
the more strait, but it is the more solid and thick, that the vital spirits
which are worked in it may not be exhaled: In the right hollow are two vessels,
a branch of the hollow vein whereby the heart draws the blood from the liver,
and the gate vein by which it sends the blood thoroughly concocted, and
subtilized to the lunges. In the left side also are two vessels, the great
Artery Aorta, whereby it sends the vital spirits every way, and the arteria
venosa, whereby it receives the air from the lunges, which are only the
bellows of the heart to cool it. The heart has auricles or little ears on
every side, to hold up the gate vein, and branch of the hollow vein, that they
be not broken by the violent motion of the heart; the heart is one alone
situate most commonly upon the fourth vertebrae of the chest, being placed
there by nature, because it is the most sure and armed place; and is besides,
as it were, covered on every side by the hands of the lunges, and is made of a
more dense, solid, and compact substance, then any other part of the body,
because it must have a natural motion of its self.

These things I have spoken in brief, only to show you how necessary it is to
be perfect in Anatomy, whereby you shall the more easily discern the p^rts
aff^cted by the place of pain, and cure it by a fit application of remedies
without the hurting of any other part: next I shall speak of the faculties.

CHAP. V. Of Faculties.
What a faculty is. A Faculty is a certain power, and efficient cause
proceeding from the temperament of the part, and the cause whereof proceed the
actions and powers of the body.

The animal faculty. Of these are three kinds in every perfect body; that is,
the Animal, Vital, and Natural, which have a certain simpathy one with
another; for if one be hurt all the rest suffer with it. The Animal is that
which proceeds from the proper temperament of the brain, and yields knowledge,
sense, and voluntary motion; and this is of three kinds: 1. Moving, which
remains in the Muscles and Nerves, as the fit instruments of voluntary motion.
2. Sensative, which consists in the five external senses, Sight, Hearing,
Taste, Smell, and Touch. 3. and principal, which comprehends the reasonable
faculty, the memory, and fantasy. The Animal faculty being thus seated in the
brain, sends from thence sense and motion by the nerves or certain channels
into the whole body: Vital faculty. But the Vital faculty is that which
sends life to every member of the whole body, and maintains the essence of
the spirits; and this has his seat in the heart, from whence he sends heat
through the arteries to every part of the body, and is much hindered by diseases
in the breast.

Natural faculty. The natural faculty is that which carries the nourishment
into all the members of the body, and this claims his place in the liver; it
is by Avicen and most of the ancient Philosophers concluded, that this natural
faculty is divided into two parts, whereof one is the preserving of life and
health unseparable, and to nourish the body as coming from the fountain and
mint of nourishment; the other is the preserving and maintaining the form and
species made in generation: First, by drawing the seminall matter from the
humors of the body, and converting it into the humor called inominata
humiditas. Secondly, by forming this seminall matter in the vessels and
testicles. Thirdly, by reducing the seminall matter into simple members.
Fourthly, by forming it (at the command of the Creator) into his Image and
likeness: but I will only shwe you what faculties attend on these before
named; and for the rest I shall refer the desirous to Galen in libro de
Hippocrat. and Platonicis dogmat. li. 9. de curan. morb. cap. 10. and lib. de
potent. natural. It being more then my brevity will permit me to speak of.

Those faculties therefore that attend the forenamed three, are in number
four, viz. Attractive, Retentive, Digestive, and Expulsive: The Attractive
draws that juice which is most fit to nourish the body by heat, and as it
were a kind of violence, and is made three manner of ways; 1. by heat, 2.
likeness of substance, 3. and to fill up vacant places; it is said to be by
heat, as when frictions and rubbings are applied to any part of the body, hot
emplasters or vesicatories, by which the native heat is increased, and
nourishment is drawn to the part, after which manner all the other parts draw:
The likeness of substance is a certain inexplicable propriety following the
same form, and similitude, as you may perceive in the loadstone, amber, and
purgations, which draw nourishment from the part, not confusedly, and
indifferently, but definitly and with a desire even as a familiar friend; a
part therefore draws nourishment by heat, but by the similitude of substance
it draws this or that nourishment such as is most fit for it, as the brain
draws phlegmatic blood, the lunges choleric blood; after this manner the
liver draws the Chyle, the reins, the urine, for every one draws that it may
get thereby, as the bladder of the gall draws the gall, and delights in it
because of the similitude of the substance and the propriety of the matter
received to the place receiving. Now the attraction to fill up vacant places is
made by the desire the natural parts have to shun the fault of vacancy, so
that the light are carried downwards, and the heavy are raised upwards, by the
ordination of nature; to that end, and in this manner do the heart, arteries,
and lunges attract air to temper, and qualify the native heat.

But because the parts cannot enjoy their nourishment that they have acquired,
unless the attracted be somewhile stayed, for every action has his time,
therefore nature like a good and skillful workman has given every part a
faculty of holding and retaining the nourishment, until it be made perfect by
concoction into the form of Chyle, it is helped by coldness and dryness.

Digestive faculty. The digeive faculty, is that which turns the nourishment
(brought in by the attractive faculty and retained by the retentive faculty)
into a fit substance, for that part whose faculty it is, as from the stomach
the nourishment is turned into Chyle, from Chyle the digestive faculty in the
meseraicke* veins, turns it into blood, which by a third kind is brought to
the members, and assimulated to them and converted into the same substance, as
may be perceived in the paps of women, and testicles of men.

Expulsive faculty. And because from abundance of excrements proceed many
dangerous diseases, and that no nourishment whatsoever but has his faeces,
therefore has nature placed the expulsive faculty, which is only appointed to
exp^ll those superfluities, which by no action of heat can obtain the form of
the part; and thus the womb at the appointed time does send forth the infant
by a most vehement expulsive faculty. Now if any of these faculties be wanting
in a body, the health must needs decay for want of nourishment; but if these
faculties do rightly perform their duties, then the nourishment is changed
into the proper substance of the part, and truly assimulated to it.

CHAP. VI. Of the Actions.
What an action is. THE next thing we must speak of, is of the Actions which
arise from the aforesaid faculties; for as a faculty depends on a temperament,
so an Action depends on a faculty; and therefore it is called an active motion,
proceeding from a faculty; for let the faculty be removed away, and there will
be no action: These actions are three in number, Animal, Vital, and Natural,
which are called also Simple, and Compound; Simple actions. simple, to whom one
alone operative faculty with its natural instruments does concur; as,
Attraction. which is caused of the faculty. Attractive. by Heat and dryness.
Retention. which is caused of the faculty. Retentive. by Cold and dryness.
Digestion. which is caused of the faculty. Digestive. by Heat and moisture.
Expulsion. which is caused of the faculty. Expulsive. by Cold and moisture.


Compound actions. The compound is made either of two faculties, as the
natural desire of meat proceeds from the attractive, and sensative faculty, by
which the stomachs feels emptiness, for five natural motions go before the
natural desire: As First, the emptinsse of the members: Secondly, the
Attraction or sucking of the members by the veins: Thirdly, the attraction of
the veins from the liver: Fourthly, the sucking of the liver from the stomach
by the meseraicke veins: Fithly, the sense and feeling in the stomach, from
whence proceeds the natural desire of meat. This compound may be made of more
then two faculties; as the carrying, which is as much to say as the helping
forward of the nourishment in its passage to the members, and the egestion of
the excrements and urine, which is made three ways; by the sensative that
feels the burden; by the appetitive, or desiring, which desires to be eased;
and the expulsive which expels and drives the excrement to the instrument.

Natural actions. Actions are either voluntary or natural; the natural are
performed against our will, as the continual motion and pulsation of the heart
and arteries, and expulsion of excrements, and these actions flow from the
liver and veins, or from the heart and arteries; and therefore are they called
natural and vital actions. The unvoluntary vital actions be the dilatation
and contraction of the heart and arteries which we commonly call pulse, by that
they draw in, and by this they expel or drive forth. The unvoluntary vital
actions be generation, which proceeds from the generative faculty, and
growth, and nutrition, which proceeds from the growing and nourishing faculty.

Generation. Generation is a producing of matter, and introducing of a
substantial form into the said matter.

Growth. Growth is an enlarging of the solid parts retaining still both the
figure and solidity, as the bones whose increase the whole body follows.

Nutrition. Nutrition is a perfect assimulation of that nourishment which is
digested into the nature of the part which digests, and is performed by the
four aforesaid actions, Attractive, Retentive, Digestive, and Expulsive.

Voluntary motions. The voluntary motions we willingly perform, are three; the
sensative action, the moving action, and the principal: The sensative
comprehends all the five senses; sight, hearing, taste, smell, and touch, to
the performance whereof necessarily occur these three; 1. the organe, 2. the
medium, or mean, 3. the object.

The organe is the animal spirit diffused all over the body; the mean carries
the object to the instrument; the object is an external quality that can by a
medicine stir up the organe; as for example, sight is the seeing faculty,
acted by the eye which is the organe; the object is the visible quality before
the eye, the medium arrives the object at the eye.

The hearing faculty whereof the ear is the organe, every sound the object,
the medium is the air that carries the sound to the ear.

The smelling faculty comes from the mammillary processes produced from the
proper substance of the brain, and seated in the upper part of the nose, the
object is every smell; the medium by which it is carried, is to men, birds, and
beasts the air, to fishes the water.

The action of the taste is performed by the tongue; the object is the taste of
several meats and drinks; the medium is either external, as is the spittle
that does moisten the tongue, or internal, as the spongy flesh of the tongue
it self.

All parts endued with a nerve, enjoy the sense of touching, the object is
every tractable quality, as heat, cold, roughness, etc. The medium is either
the skin or the flesh endued with those nerves.

The next action is voluntary motion, and is performed by a muscle (as I showed
you in the Chapter of Parts or Members) either by extention, or contraction,
upward, downward, to the right hand, to the left hand, forward, or backward.

The principal action is threefold; 1. Imagination, 2. Reason, 3. and Memory.

Imagination is a certain distinguishing apprehension.

Reason is a certain judicial estimation of things apprehended.

Memory is the sure storer of all things, as in a magazine, which the mind often
unfolds.

CHAP. VII. Of Spirits.
What a spirit is. THE Spirit is the substance subtle, and acrious of our body,
bred of the most pure, and thin blood, and is the prime instrument whereby the
members shall perform their office, and they abide most in the heart and
arteries, in the brain, and nerves.

Division of spirits. The Spirits are divided into three parts; animal, vital,
and natural; Animal spirit. the animal is seated in the brain for there it
is prepared and made, and of which a great part is sent to the eyes by the
nerves optickes, and some to the ears, and diverse other parts: this kind is
called animal because it is the chief, and prime instrument of life.

Vital spirit. The vital spirit has his chief mansion in the left ventricle
of the heart, and in the arteries, and is made of the evaporation of the blood,
and furnished with matter from the air which we draw in breathing, and is sent
from his seat in the heart through the channels of the arteries into the
whole, for the conservation of natural heat.

Natural spirit. The natural spirit is engendered in the liver and veins, and
there remains while the blood is made, and other natural operations
perfected: the use of it is to help the concoction both of the whole body, and
of each several part, and to carry blood, and heat to them.

These spirits being dissipated, we cannot hope for life, because the flower
thereof is decayed, and wasted in their defect.

Now to these natural things which I have showed you, are associate, and
joined these four following, viz. Age, Color, Figure, or Site, and Kind, or
Composure.

Age, is a space or part of our life, in which our bodies are subject to
mutations, and of this I have sufficiently spoken before.

The Color, shows the temperament of the body, and the just proportion of
humors; as if there be a just proportion of the four humors, the color is
red; if abundance of melancholy, the color is livide and black; if
abundance of choler, the color is citrine and yellow; if phlegm, the color
is white and pale.

Site and figure, show the good composure and connection of all the parts of a
body fitly and duly compacted as they ought to be; of this kind there are
four, quadrature, crassitude, or thickenesse, extenuation, and fatness.

Sex is the distinction betwixt Male and Female, not in parts, but in
constitution; as the Male is commonly hot, the Female cold, and so are Eunuchs.

CHAP. VIII. Of things not natural, which is the second part of Physic.
What things not natural are, HAving showed you things natural, whereof man's
body is composed, and what they are, as Elements, Humors, etc. as we formerly
comprehended under the name natural; we will now proceed in the description of
things not natural, which are used to conserve and defend the body composed
and made of the things natural already spoken of: these do pertain to that
of Physic, which is for preserving health, and are the mean betwixt things
natural, and things against nature, for they do not constitute our nature as
things natural; neither do they hurt or damage it, as things against nature,
but they are indifferent good if they be well used, and bad if they be ill
used; the use whereof we consider from four conditions, quantity, quality,
occasion, and manner of using: These being observed, you may effect and cause
things doubtful of themselves to bring undoubted health; things not natural
are in number six; 1. the air that goes about us; 2. the meat and drink we
use; 3. the motion and rest of our bodies; 4. sleeping and waking; 5. repletion
and inanition, or things to be expelled, or retained, 6. and perturbations of
the mind.

CHAP. IX. Of Air.
Air. AIR is so necessary for us, that not one minute of health can be
enjoyed without the same; as we may perceive by the continual transpiration,
and breathing that all living creatures have for their refreshing, and to
regender the spirit animal, and therefore because we so often draw it in and
breath it out, it will be very necessary for our health to know what air is
wholesome, and what unwholesome, for the air does alter our bodies three
manner of ways; by quality, as if it be horter, moister, or drier; by
substance, as if it be more grosser, or more subtle then is fit; or by
mutation, which any man may prove who makes a sudden change out of a quiet
air into a stormy, and that is troubled with winds.

The most healthful Air. Therefore the most healthful and best air is that
which is clear, subtle, and pure, free, and open on every side, exempt from
evil evaporations, fennes, sinkes, clouds, rotten and carrion like smells of
dead carcasses, standing pooles and all corruption, that is, neither is too
hot, nor too cold, too dry nor too moist; and this air is the best, both for
the preserving of health, and curing of diseases.

Evil Air. The evil air is quite contrary to the good; as that which is
putride, shut, and pressed up in some narrow place, thick, rotten, near hills,
stinkes, the sea, and all such towns that stand low, and close, infected with
evil and noisome savors; that which is nebulous, and exposed to south wind,
and the moldy putrified air enclosed in unhabited dampe houses and so wants
ventulation, and it is the evil air that causes towns situate on or near
the sea coast at the end of summer, and in the autumn, to be afflicted with
the plague, and diverse other dangerous maladies.

How the air is changed. Now the air is changed five manner of ways; first
by the time of the year, secondly by the stars, thirdly by the winds,
fourthly by the earth, and fifthly by fumes and vapors.

Air is changed by the time of the year, as in spring, summer, autumn, and
winter; the spring makes the air temperate; the summer makes it hot, and
dry, which ought to be corrected by things that are cold, and moist; the
autumn cold and dry; the winter cold, and moist, and must be all corrected by
their contraries.

Air is changed by the stars, by the proximity of the sun to them, or when
the stars approach near the sun, that is when they end their course sooner
then the sun, by whose nerves the air is heat, and the further from the
sun the colder it is.

By the winds the air is changed, for those places have the healthfullest
air where the winds blow freely, as in champion countries, where the people
live longer and more free from diseases.

Air is also changed by the earth, and that is twofould, the situation and
the composure; by the situation diverse ways, as the altitude produces cold at
least so far as it is habitable, and likewise depth procures heat; latitude
either in plains or mountains for the most part causes temperate air, but
the air of the south mountains is cold, and unhabitable; but the north is
hotter, because of the reflection of the beams of the Sun, esp^cially
betwixt the north line, and Cancer: and the nearness of the sea changes the
temperature of the air, as thus: the south sea heats, and dries; the north sea
cooles, and dries: by composure of the country diverse ways also is the air
changed, as by the nature whereof it consists; as the rocky countries are cold,
and dry; the durty clayey countries are cold and moist, etc. according to the
complexion of the matter it is composed of.

Vapors and fumes of the earth alter the air, especially such as proceed from
fennes, moors, and other putride places, from which an evil savor and breath
is exhaled.

Finally, because air is so powerful in wounds and diseases; the ancient
Physicians councelled to change the air if it might possibly be, if not, then
to correct and accomodate it by art.

CAAP. X. Of meat and drink.
Meat and drink NOurishment is another part of preserving health, and is as
necessary as air is: it is either temperate, or intemperate; either of good
juice or ill, of easy or hard concoction: The temperate is such meats as
taken in due order do cause no distemper in our bodies; as is bread made of
wheat; as there are few temperate men, so there are few temperate meats:
the intemperate are almost all which by some quality do alter the state of
our bodies, as for example, wine, mustard, garlic, leekes, onyons, etc. do
heat, and so does pottage made with hot herbs, as hissop, time, etc. Bread
made of barley, grapes, and porrage made with cool herbs as sorrel,
lettuse, etc. do cool.

What diet is best. Some kind of nourishments breed phlegm, some choler, some
melancholy, and some execrments; those that generate good blood are these, viz.
red wine, milk, reere eggs, the flesh of hens and capons, the flesh of birds
is to be preferred before any flesh, either kid, or veale, because they
generate better juice; for these that are fed tame in the house cannot be so
wholesome as those that live in a free, clear air: black, and thick wines
breed ill juice, the like does oxes flesh, goats flesh, but worst of all is
the flesh of bulls, foxes, and asses: bread that is made of yellow, and sweet
wheat, well dressed and leavoned is the best for nourishment.

Pulse. All manner of pulse do breed wind, and increase melancholy: beans
that are green are cold and moist and generate crude blood and wind; dry
beans are cold and dry, the flower whereof is much used in cataplasmes that are
to dry and cool, as in hot apostumes of the pappes: Rice. Rice is a great
binder, and therefore used in clysters to stop a laske; it generates thick
juice, and obstruction of the veins, if it be much used. Fish. All fish do of
themselves yield a cold and moist nourishment, and much phlegm. But let the
quality of meats be never so good, yet too much quantity taken will cause their
nourishment to prove evil; for gluttony and intemperance is the maintainer of
Physicians; for it destroies more then the sword; but we should eat to live,
and not live to eat; therefore we find it best for any man's health to eat so
little as he may continually have an appetite, and to perform some exercise to
help concoction: likewise to keep a due order and time of eating and drinking.
Drink. As for drink, I hold that good clear wine that is of a good color
and taste moderately taken does nourish: also Beer and Ale that is old and
clean is a good drink; but with these must also be observed a moderation, for
too much drink destroys the digestion, as one very well notes; that the
first draught quenches the thirst, the second makes man joyful, the third
drunk, the fourth quite out of his senses.

CHAP. XI. Of Labor and Rest.
Labor and rest, and what it is. Labor is a vehement motion of the body
until they be (as we say) out of breath; for by the motion of the joints the
heat is increased and carried through the veins, and arteries to the heart;
from whence it is that we require a more stronger and oftener breathing, and by
this word labor or exercise is comprehended all manner of running, riding,
leaping, playing, wrestling, dancing, fencing, and carrying of burdens, and is
^ccounted very necessary for our health: for let iron lie still and it gathers
rust, the memory not exercised does decay, so does the whole body if it
continue in idleness, it gathers together much phlegm, and excrements, which
would be dissipated by exercise; for it does help the natural health, quicken
the spirits, make all the senses the better perform their several offices; it
opens the pores of our body, whereby all the excrements are consumed, and
wasted; and finally it comforteh all the spirits and members, that they may the
better undergo their functions. In exercise, consider first, the time, which
is the fittest before meat: and secondly, the manner of the exercise which is
general, or particular; general, as playing at ball, and leaping; particular,
as when one part only is exercised; as walking exercises the legs, fighting
the arms, riding stirs the belly, calling and speaking loud exercises the
lungs.

To the exercise of the body may also be added rubbings, and frictions which
have been in greater esteem then now they are, and were used in stead of
exercises to such bodies as for weakness cold use no other; they were
performed either with the hands, sponges, or hard linen clothes, which if
seldom used do harden and condensate the flesh, but if often they attenuate,
rarifie, and waste it.

Now as there are many conveniences by exercise used indue quantity, quality,
and time; so is there many inconveniences and dangers proceeding of rest and
idleness; as crudities, obstructions, stones in the reins and bladder,
goutes, apoplexy, and sundry others; and it not only dulleth the principal
instruments of our body, but also of our mind.

CHAP. XII. Of sleeping, and waking.
What sleep is. Sleep is a rest and quietness of the whole body, and the
cessation of the spirits and faculty animal from sense, and motion, fortifying
the strength, helping digestion, and correcting the passions of the mind; it
is caused when the brains are possessed with vapors that ascend, which by the
coldness of the brains are turned into humors, which close the conduits of
the nerves; for when we are waking, the animal f^culties, as sense, motion,
and all are at work; but when we are sleeping, the natural functions are
better performed, because the heat goes into the bowels where by is made
digestion, which cannot be made by sleep in the day so well; for the Sun
draws the heat and spirits into the outward part of the body; Sleep in the
day is hurtful. and therefore sleep in the day is counted hurtful, because
being wakened by noise, or by the attraction of the spirits by the Sun, the
concoction begun is not perfected, but the stomach filled with crudities,
and sower belchings, the brain filled with gross vapors and excrementitious
humidities, and is the cause of diverse sickenesses, as catarrhes, etc.

But though sleep in the night time be counted and esteemed wholesome; yet
except it be restrained within certain limits, it will prove otherwise;
therefore eight hours is sufficient, for longer time hinders the evacuation of
the excrements, both upwards and downwards; and the natural heat which is
never idle, draws from them some ill vapor into the veins and principal
parts of the body, to become some matter for a disease.

How to sleep. Also in our lying down to sleep we must observe this rule;
first to lie one our right side, that the meat may fall more easily into the
bottom of the stomach, which is hotter; about an hour after is good to turn
on the left side, that so the liver may with its lobes as with hands embrace
the ventricle, and as a fire under a Furnace may hasten digestion; lie in no
wise on your face, nor on your back, for the first causes defluxions in the
eyes, the other inflammations in the reins, and stone, palsies, convulsions,
and all diseases that proceed from the spinall marrow; neither must we lie with
our hands under our head, for that causes defluxions of humors on the lights,
nor sleep soon after meat: painful sleeping in sickness is no good
sign, but altogether dangerous; not painful is a good token.

Dreams. By dreams we often know the humor that has dominion, and is
superfluous in the body; for the sanguine dreams are of marriages, mirth,
dancings, gardens, and things pleasant, and libidinous: Choleric dreams are
fiery, bright, shining, burning, full of noise, and contention: Phlegmatic
dreams are cold, of floods, snowes, waters, showers, and falling from high
places: Melancholicke dreams are sad, of caves, prisons, thick darkness,
smoakes and dismal things.

Waking. Much waking corrupts the brain, and hurts the temperature thereof,
debilitateth the senses, alters the spirits, moves crudities, breeds
heaviness of the head, falling away, and wasting of the flesh, and dissipateth
the natural heat, and makes ulcers very rebellious, and difficult to heal.

CHAP. XIII. Of Repletion, and Inanition.
Of fullness. REpletion or fullness is made two ways; either in quantity, or
in quality; in quantity, the body being distended with too much meat, drink,
and humors, and in so great a quantity that nature cannot overcome, from
whence proceed infinite sorts of maladies: in quality, when the meat exceeds
without any defluxion or society of any humor; fullness in quantity is either
Repletio ad vasa, or ad vires fullness to the vessels: as when the stomach and
veins are so full that they are distended and stretched, that some are forced
to vomit up again that which they have taken in so great quantity; fullness to
the strength, is when the body is loaded with more meats than it can well
bear, or the virtue, force or faculty thereof digest: There is also a fullness
of humors caused sometimes by one humor, sometimes by all; when it is by one
humor, it is called cacochymia, that is an evil juice, whether it proceed
from a chollericke, phlegmatic, melancholicke, or serous humor; fullness
that is caused by all the humors is called plethora by the Greeks, in Latin,
plenitude, because it is an equal excess of all the humors.

Witness what it is. Inanition or evacuation is the expulsion of humors and
excrements which are troublesome either in quantity, or quality, and this is
either univers^lly or particularly; the universal evacuation is the cleansing
of the whole body from superfluous humors by purging, vomiting, sweating,
opening a vein, scarification, friction, bathing, etc. the particular
evacuation is only by evacuating, and purging some one part, as the brain is
discharged by the nose, pallat, eyes, and ears, the lights by spitting, the
stomach by vomiting, the intestines by stool, the liver, spleen, kidneyes,
and bladder by urine, and this is done either naturally, or artificially, the
Physicians art helping nature to perform it.

Evacuation. Evacuation is very necessary to prevent diseases, because
excrements are the original of diverse, therefore it is chiefly commanded that
the body be purged, and exonerated; some excrements are good, which are only in
quantity excrements, as seed and menstruous blood; others are altogether
unprofitable, which are excrements both in quantity and quality, as sweat,
urine, and ordure, which are (as I have showed you) general, and the
evacuation of the brain which is particular: First therefore, the retention of
the seed does acquire the force of poison in the body, as it happens in young
widows that suffer suffocation in the womb; so likewise the overmuch flowing
thereof hurts the body as much, for they had as good lose so much blood: this
you may perceive in sparrows, which scarce are known to live above two years,
and the males less; therefore whosoever desire to preserve their health,
Vener. let them not use venery but only to satisfy nature, that is for
necessity, not for pleasure: also those that are melancholicke and choleric
are more prejudiced hereby then the phlegmatic, or sanguine; for the
phlegmatic, are freed from many diseases, because the natural heat increased
expels phlegm: Age is also to be considered, for young men that are in their
flourishing age suffer more hurt then old men, that are cold and dry.

The immoderate and overmuch use of venery procures diverse discomodities, as
the faintness of the spirits, forgetfulness, loss of sight, stinking of the
mouth, diseases of the joints, as trembling, palsy, gowtes of all kinds, both
in feet, hands and fingers, crampes, running of the reins, pissing of blood,
shedding of urine unvoluntary, and diverse times the French pox, with
exulceration of the privities.

Menstruous flux. The monthly purgation, evacuates not only the humors and
ill juice of the belly, but also it cleanses the body, and whole mass of
blood, it diminishes not the blood at all, but only takes away the impurity
thereof, for the crudest, thinnest, and the most faeculent blood is purged by
the womb, which if it stayed, would generate many dangerous diseases by its
putrefaction; for blood restrained putrifies, therefore in such, that often
miss their natural purgations, it is very fit, and necessary that they take
decoctions, sirrups, or pills, such as are to provoke them.

Now for the evacuation of tumors, I have seen diverse that have dyed by the
unskilfulnesse of such as had them in cure, or else by their carelessness, by
letting the matter flow forth altogether at one time (and not by little and
little, and at several times as it should) whereby not a little quantity of the
spirits, and heat has flowed out therewith, and so consequently a dissolution
of all the powers.

CHAP. XIV. Of passions and perturbations of the mind, which are commonly
called the accidents of the mind.
Accidents of the mind. PErturbations or passions of the mind, are the
suffering of the mind, either by joy, hope, love, hatred, anger, and the like,
which bring great mutations in the body most necessary to be remarked, because
of the great chances that ensue thereupon: for by these motions the heat and
spirits are sometimes gently, sometimes violently diffused over all the body,
for enjoying of the present or future good, or by receiving any affront,
whereby many have so exceedingly been moved, that they have died.

What joy is. Joy is an affection of the mind, of a thing good, and pleasant,
which recreates and quickens all the faculties, and stirs up the spirits; for
it proceeds from the heart moved by the faculty at the thing causing mirth,
and the heart thus moved is dilated and ready to receive the exhilarating
object, and by the force of the dilatation, it sends forth much heat and
spirits together with the blood into all the body, insomuch that oftentimes
death ensues, because the heart is altogether destitute of blood.

What anger is. Anger, is a sudden revocation or calling back the spirits to
the external parts with a desire of revenge; it causes the same effusion of
heat in us as joy does, but far speedier; it inflameth the whole habitude of
the body, spirits, and humors, and also the brains, and nerves.

Grief. Sorrow, dries and wastes the body by a lingering consumption, because
by it the heart is straightened, the heat extinct, and the spirits cannot be
generated, nor if any be, yet they cannot freely pass into the members with
the blood.

Fear. Fear, is a motion which calls back and draws in the spirits to the
heart by the arteries, and not by little, and little, as sorrow, but suddenly,
and violently which suffocateth the natural heat, causes trembling, makes
the face pale, and the extreme parts cold, with an universal shaking and
pulsation of the heart.

Shame. Shame, is a motion of our body, mixed of anger, and fear; anger for
being suspected or known in a fault, and fearing the judgment of others; if
fear prevail over anger, the face w^xeth pale, the blood running back to the
heart, but if anger get the dominion, then on the contrary, the blood runs to
the face, and the eyes look red; but there is another kind of shame which we
call shamefastnes, shamefastnes. in which the blood goes, and comes forward,
and backward, but it is a gentle motion not hurting the heart, and is familiar
to young maids, who often blush by being taken with a fault unawares.

These things ought to be considered by every practitioner in the curing of any
disease; for if any accident happen that shall procure any one or more of these
perturbations and passions, you shall easily perceive a sudden alteration in
the patient: Next I shall show you the things against nature, which are such as
are apt to weaken and corrupt the state of our body.

CHAP. XV. Of things against nature, which is the third part of Physic, and
first of a disease.
What are things against nature. THings against nature are three; a disease,
the cause of a disease, and a symptom.

Distemperature. A Disease is an affect against nature, which manifestly
hurts the operations of the body; health is an effect according to nature
perfecting the actions of our body: A disease is threefold, distemperature,
evil conformation, and solution of continuity; distemperature is a disease, of
the similar parts, of it self hurtful; diseases of the similar parts are as
many as there are distemperatures, and so many distemperatures as there were at
the first, kinds of temperaments; whereof four are simple, as hot, cold,
moist, and dry; as many are compound, as hot and moist, cold and dry, cold and
moist, hot and dry; the distemperature is called hot, when the natural heat is
augmented and increased so much either in all or in part, that it hurts the
operations, and so of the rest.

Evil conformity. Evil conformity is a fault of the organick parts, and ind
is called a disease in number, as when some thing abounds, or somewhat wants
that is needful toward the undergoing of the function of the organick part;
as if a hand have four or six fingers, it cannot so well take hold on any
thing; if a man have but one testicle or more then two, he is not so fit for
generation: Also such things as grow against naure and adhere to some p^rt, as
a polypus in the nose, a caruncle in the conduit of the yard and the like;
these are diseases in number, but if a member be cut off either in part or in
all, it is a disease of defect, and of this sort are all such things as are
contrary to nature, as the stone, worms, and the like: likewise if an arm or
a leg be too long, or too short, or if any part be either bigger or lesser
then is necess^ry, it is called a disease of greatness; for nature has given to
every part a certain kind of species, and bigness, which if it exceed, or be
less, then it is not right: if the testicles, pappes, or the belly wax so big,
that the actions are thereby hindered, it is called a disease of increased
greatness in one part, as when the tongue is longer or shorter then it should
be, it hinders the speech; But besides the number of the parts, and the just
number of the parts, and the ^quall proportion, it is required, that they have
a right situation, and that they join all together as nature has appointed
in a well composed body; from hence it is that if any member be out of joint,
if the intestines fall down into the flanck or cod, if the right gut come out,
it is called a disease in situation, whereto pertains the growing together of
the lips, fingers, and secret parts of women, either from the birth, or by an
ulcer.

Besides number, magnitude, and situation is also required, a conformation of
the instrument, which consists of four things; 1 the figure, 2 the cavity, 3
the smoothness, 4 the roughness: some have their nostrils either by nature or
accident depressed and closed, some their nose either turning too much up, or
pressed too much down, which we call a disease in figure, also crooked legs
are called a disease in figure; if the pores of the skin, the veins, arteries,
nerves, or uceters, are too big and wide, or too narrow, and small, or crushed
by some neighboring part, it is called a disease in the passage, or hollownes,
the like if the guts are stopped: when the part made by nature light, becomes
heavy; as the aspera arteria, whose inner coat ought to be light, if it be made
heavier, or sharper by some acride distillation, or if the part which ought to
be rough, as the ventricle, womb, and guts, the better to contain, if they
be made light or smoth, as it happens to the guts affected with a flux, and
to women with child, who miscarry by reason of the slipperinesse of the womb,
it is called a disease of roughnes, or smoothnes.

A solution of continuity. A distemperature only hurts the actions of the
similar parts; an organicall disease hurts the instrument: but a solution of
continuity, as an ulcer, a wound, a fracture, a luxation, and tumors against
nature, do hurt both the operations of the similar parts, and trouble and
hinder the use of the instruments, and therefore are called common diseases; a
fracture in a bone is called a solution of continuity, in a nerve a convulsion,
in a ligament a divulsion, in the skin the excoriation, in the flesh a wound,
ulcer, rupture, contusion, a rupture of the fleshy part, as of a muscle, and
sometimes of a vein or artery is a solution without a wound; a wound is a
solution of continuity in the fleshy part from an outward cause, an ulcer from
an inward cause, as a sharp corroding humor.

CHAP. XVI. Of the causes of diseases.
The causes of diseases. THE cause of a disease is an affect against nature
which causes the disease, which is either external or internal: the external
is that which is outwardly and evidently upon our bodies, as strokes, falls,
shot, wounds, etc. the internal have their seat in the body, and are divided
into an antecedent, and a conjunct; the conju^ct is it which nearest and
immediately causes the disease, as the blood, which causes a phlegm: the
antecedent does not actually cause a disease but procures matter and stirs it
up almost to the making of a disease, but between it and the disease are some
causes placed, as abundance of humors, and ill digestion, and these things
must chiefly be considered, before we think of expelling the disease, because
How to remove a disease. diseases are first cured by removing the cause
antecedent, and then the causes conjunct: The external ought to be known
because they breed diseases internal and wonderfully change the body,
therefore to be sought with all diligence, that they bring us to the knowledge
of the hidden internal diseases: The external are either not to be avoided
and amended, but necessarily enter into our bodies, as air, meat, and drink,
labor, and rest, sleep, and watching, repletion, and evacuation, and
perturbations of the mind; or to be avoided, and unnecessary, as war, wounds
by swords, or stones, and the like.

The cause of a disease comes sometimes from the corrupt matter whereof they
are generated, as when either the father or mother is not sound, then needs
must the seminall matter be infected, and thus the disease is called
hereditary, some are ingendrd after our birth; as by the evil regiment of
life, by strokes, falls, etc. as you have heard.

CHAP. XVII. Of a simptome.
What a Simptome is. THere is (as I have showed you before) three affects
contrary to nature; the cause of a disease, the disease, and a simptome; the
cause goes before the disease, a simptome accompanies it, just as the shadow
goes with the body: in the general signification it is called any thing
whatsoever that chances to man contrary to nature, for whether it be cause, or
a disease, yet if they come in a disease and are over, and above nature, they
are properly called simptomes.

There be three kinds of a simptome; first when the action is hurt, which may
be done three ways, they may be abolished, diminished and weakened or depraved;
as when an eye is blind, the action of seeing is depraved, or abolished;
dullness of sight is a diminution or weakening thereof, and a suffusion which
happens in the beginning of a cataract is a deprivation of the sight.

The second is the immoderate evacuation or retention of excrements, as by
retaining such as should be evacuated, and expelling those as should be
retained; as bleeding in a sound heathfull body that is not plethoricke, and
retention of the courses in women, urine, and stone in the bladder.

The third is a simple affect of the body, or a mutation of some qualities
contrary to nature, as the scabbe of the flesh to a leprosy.

Thus I have showed you the brief introduction to the art of physic, whereof I
have only gathered together the chief and principal heads, because it is so
largely discoursed on by others, yet out of such a magazine, I thought it not
amiss to extract a small proportion, briefly to instruct the practitioner in
the chiefest things belonging and necessarily to be considered in the
administration of medicaments; for the chiefest thing that belongs to a
Physician is to know the causes of things, which the ancient Philosophers got
by admiration of the fabrique; next I shall show you the exposition of some
words difficult to be understood, and so (as breifely as I can) proceed to
the medicaments.

CHAP. XVIII.
Ill days. Critical days be such days on which there is or may be perceived
some manifest alteration in a sick body, either to health, death, or
continuance of sickness, and are very necessary to be observed; the critic day
does often happen after the beginning of the sickness, the 3. 5. 7. 9. 11. 14.
17. 21. 28. day, in which days neither medicines, nor bloudings should be
used, neither any natural, or voluntary evacuation be stopped, as flux of the
belly, bleeding at the nose, urine, sweat, vomiting, flux of the hemorrhoids
or courses in women; some follow the Egptians rule in observing certain days,
wherein if any fall sick or be hurt they shall hardly escape, which are these,
the 1. and 7. of January, the 3. and 4. of February, the 1. and 4. of March,
the 8. and 10. of April, the 2. and 7. of May, the 10. and 15. of June the 10.
and 13. of July, the 3. and 2. of August, the 3. and 10. of September, the 3.
and 10. of October, the 3. and 5. of November, the 7. and 10. of December; As
likewise the 10. of August, the 1. of December, and the 6. of April, are
observed by Philosophers as perilous to take any surfeit therein by overmuch
eating: It is likewise observed by an ancient Philosopher Arabian, that there
are three mundayes in the year very unfortunate either to let blood or begin
any work of importance viz. the first monday in April, on the which Caine was
borne, and his brother Abel slain: the first monday in August, the which day
Sodom, and Gommorha were consumed: And the last monday of December on the which
Judas Iscariot was borne, who killed his father, married his mother, and
betrayed his master, our Savior. And these three mundaies with Childermas day
which is the eight and twentieth of December, are by diverse scholars held
unfortunate to all men, and subject to diverse mishaps. Good days. Some days
there are also which are observed by old writers to be very fortunate days,
for any business to be undertaken in; also that children borne in those days
should never be poor, children put to school in those days should be rich
and the like: the days are these; the 3. and 13. of January; the 5. and 28. of
February; the 3. 22. and 30. of March; the 5. 22. and 29. of April; the the 4.
and 28. of May; the 3. and 8. of June; the 12. 13. and 15. of July; the 12. of
August; the 1. 7. 24. and 28. of September; the 4. and 15. of October; the 13.
and 19. of November; the 23. and 26. of December; and this shall suffice for
the opinions of the more curious sort of the learned. Of the fourth part of
Physic which is of the signs of diseases presaged by the urine, stool,
pulse, sweat, vomit, blood, astrologicall signs, crisis, etc. I shall treat
of in the next impression, having not so much time now as scarce to finish the
fifth part as it should be.

CHAP. XIX.
Bleeding. PHlebotomie or bloudletting is an incision artificial of a v^in
evacuating the blood with the rest of the humors: it was first invented by the
river horse inh^biting in Nilus that famous river of Eg^p^, who when he finds
himself charged with overmuch blood, by rubbing his thigh against the sh^rp
bank opens a vein, and discharges the s^perfluous blood, which he stops
likewise when he sees convenient time by rolling it in the thick mud.

Phlebotomie is not used in children before 14, nor in old men after fourscore
without great necessity; also the strength of the party must be considered that
the qu^ntity of blood evacuated may be according; and if it be only for
preserving of health, let it be neither in summer nor winter but in the spring
time, and in the morning before the day grow hot.

The vein in the forehead being opened is good for pain in the hinder part of
the head, which place first ought to be fomented with warm water: The veins
of the tongue are opened aslant in a squinancy, without any ligatures about the
neck; the inner vein of the left arm is opened for disease in the lunges; the
liver is purged by the inner vein of the right arm; the womb by the vein
under the ankle; but for the gout, or megrim, it is not amiss to open the
vein of the part affected.

Draw blood from the sanguine, the moon being in Taurus, Virgo, or Capricorn;
from the phlegmatic in Aries, or Sagittarius; from the choleric in Cancer, or
Pisces; from the melancholicke in Libra, or Aquarius, but beware you open not a
vein in that part where the sign is, because it has been often found very
dangerous, unless necessity urge, but by no means let it be upon a critical
day; for then it is not good to administer any medicine, purge, or bleed, as I
showed you before. Three days were observed of the ancients wherein they would
by no means let blood; the first of August, the fourth of September, the
eleventh of March.

Now blood is let by opening of a vein for five principal respects, the first
is to lessen the a^undance of blood as in phlethorick bodies: The second is to
divert, as when a vein in the right Arm is op^ned to stay the bleeding of the
left nostrill. The third is to allure or draw down, as when the s^phona is
opened to draw down the courses in women: The first is for al^eration or
introduction of another quality, as when in sharp fevers a vein is opened to
draw out that blood which is hot, and cool that which remains behind: The
fifth is to prevent diseases, as in the spring and autumn we open a vein in
such as are subject to spitting of blood, squinancie, plurifie, falling
sickness, apoplexy, madness, gout, or in such as are wounded to prevent
inflammation.

Arteriotomie is the incision of an Artery and is much used now a days
chiefly in the temples, and behind the ears, for catarres, and defluxions in
the eyes, breast, and maladies of the head, and inveterate headache.

CHAP. XX.
BOxing or cupping is the application of some instrument, either for the
evacuation of some humor under the skin, or to divert the course of some
humor to an other part, and to draw away such things as are hurtful to
nature; they are for the most part of glass with wide bellies, and are
sometimes applied with scarification and sometimes without: the way to apply
them is thus, put into the glass a little dry flax and stick it to the bottom
of the glass with a little wax, then light the flax with fire and apply the
glass to the place, when the flesh is swolen up, press it about the edges,
and the glass will fall off: then with an incision knife scarify the place a
little, and apply the cupping-gl^sses as before, and draw as much blood as
shall seem convenient; then dry the place with a soft cloth and anoint it
with oil of Roses and sleep a while after.

Leaches Where cupping-glasses cannot be applied there we put horseleaches as
to the gums, nose, fingers, womb, and fundament; anoint the place first with
the blood of some other creature that they take hold the more egerly, and apply
them to the place holding them in a linen cloth, for if you handle them in
your bare hand they will be stomachfull, and will not bite; when they are
filled with blood and fall off, then either apply more leaches or else
cupping-glasses; to cause them to fall off, you shall put some powder of aloes,
salt, or ashes upon their heads, also if you desire to know how much blood they
have sucked, sprinckle them with salt powdered, and they will vomit it up
again, if you cut off their railes as they are sucking they will have no end
of sucking until you put them off, if the part bleed much after the leaches
are off, you shall cleave a bean in two, and press the one half upon the
place and bind it on, or burnt cotton, applied will stay it.

What leches are the best. Note that those that have the head greater then the
rest of the body, and are green colored, glittering with blewe rays on the
back the rest of the body being black, are in no wise to be applied to any
place for they are very dangerous; but choose such as are found in clear water
in ponds, and sandy ground, that have their heads little and bodies small,
round, red bellied, the backs striped like threads of gold, and those must be
kept in a jarre glass in clean water, changing the water once in two or three
days, putting into the water a few crummes of white bread.

CHAP. XXI.
Making of issues. THat kind of potentiall cauterie which is used now adays
amongst the common sort is only to make an issue either in the legs, thighs,
or arms, to clear the blood by some disease corrupt, or to draw humors from
some place, and is done after this manner: Take the bark of an ash tree and
burn it to ashes, then immediately while they are hot bind them up, hard in a
linen cloth, the bigness of a pistol bullet, and (having marked the place) you
shall dip the cloth into warm water and so hold it very hard upon the place
with the other hand on the contrary side, that so you may hold it the harder:
hold it thus about half an hour or something more, and then it will have
mortified the place that it will look black, then take away the caustic and
apply two Ivy leaves pricked with a sharp stick, or bone, and over it brown
p^per with a compresse of linen cloth, and so bind it up, dress it twice a
day until the core come out which will be in 6. or 7. days; then put into it a
white pease or a bullet made of white w^x, and dress it as before; if it
chance to grow over with proud flesh, you may roll your pease in burnt Allome
powdered, and so put it into the issue.

To know the right place wherein to make an issue. You shall know the right
place thus; put your finger on the inside of your thigh three or four fingers
above the knee, and move the leg up and down, and if you feel no nerve nor
muscle move under your finger, there you may safely apply your cauter; and if
it be sore before the core come out, you shall anoint it with unguentum album,
or popul^on, described hereafter.

CHAP. XXII. Weights and measures used in physic are these that follow with
their marks and notes.
A Pound medicinal is 12. ounces lib. An ounce is 8 drammes. 3 Scruples or 60
grains make a dram. 20 Grains make a Scruple. 2 Oboli make a Scruple obol.
A Grain gr. A Handful m. As much as one can take up between his finger and
thumb p. As much as one can drink at a reasonable draught cyath. A quart q.
Half or semis ss. Of each one a like much ana.

Measures. Roots by these notes.. p. m. A Cochlear in sirupes contains half
an ounce in distilled waters iij. Ciathus is ^ss. Barks. Seeds.. Hemina which
is also called Cotyla x. Fruits an. p. Libra xij. Flowers p. m.. Sextarius
xviij. Pulces p.. Congius is vi. S^xtaries.

Numero n. Recipe R. Sufficient quantity q. s. Aequail portion p. ae.

CHAP. XXII. A Catalogue of such instruments as are requisite in private house:
for those that are desirous to compound medicines themselves.
FIrst a great Mortar of marble, and another of brass. A rowler to roll
lozenges. Spatulaes of all sizes. Copper pannes to make Decoctions. An iron
ladle to prepare lead. A grinding stone and mullet. Pulping sieves. H^ire sieve
covered. Hippocras bags. Little cotton blankets for straining. Scales and
weights. Presses. Raspes to raspe hearts horn, quinces, etc. A square wooden
frame with nails at each corner to hold the strainers. An incision knife. A
levatory. Probes. Siringes to make injections. Forceps to draw teeth. A lancet
and cupping-glasses. Gally pots and boxes of all sorts to keep sirups, oiles,
etc. Glasses for cordial powders. Cauteries to make issues. Pipes with
fenestells, and needles fit for futures. Ligatures, bands, swathes, of
woollen, and linen. Powder to stay blood. Pledgets, compresses, boulsters. A
bathing chair. A limbecke and small still with receivers, as for other things
you may furnish your self as need shall require.
CHAP. XXIV. For the better understanding of some hard words used in this work
you must note that,
ATtenuate, to make thin. Astringent, binding. Abstergent, to wipe.
Agglutinate, to glue or fasten together. Asthma, an inveterate cough.
Attractive, drawing, Calefie, to heat. Cicatrize, to skin a soar.
Corroborate, to strengthen. Compresse, a linen cloth often folded. Discutient,
to discuss or dissolve. Ditergent, to cleanse. Digest, to put over the meat,
Dissipate, to scatter. Decoction, the boiled licour of any thing. Detersive,
cleansing. Dilate, to open wide. Emollient, to soften. Effusion, sh^dding.
Exhillerate, to make merry. Extenuate, to make thin. Excrescent, growing up.
Exciccate, to dry. Humect, to moisten. Indurate, to wax hard. Incarnate, to
fill with flesh Lenitive, mild or gentle. Levig^te, to make light, or to ease.
Ligature, a binding of linen cloth. Refigerate, to cool. Repercusse, to beat
back. Repress, to beat down. Sextarius, a pint and a half. Suppurate, ro^t.
Vulnerary potion, a drink healing wounds.
CHAP. XXV. What a Medicine is, and the difference of Medicines.
Medicines. A Medicine is that which has power to change the body according to
one or more qualities, and that such as cannot be changed into our nature, the
contrary whereof is that nourishment which may be turned into the substance of
our bodies.

From Beasts. All sorts of Medicines may be had from Beasts, Plants, Earth,
Water, and Air; from Beasts some we take whole, of some but part, we oft-times
in Physic use whole creatures, as Foxes, Whelps, Vipers, Cantarides, Frogs,
Snailes, Worms, Serpents; We also use some parts of them, as Liver, Heart, or
Brains; also of the Bones, as a Man's Scull, Marrow, Grease, Blood; likewise of
the Excrements, as Hair, Urine, Dung, Spittle, Horns, Honey, Wax, Wool,
Swear.

From Plants. Medicines are taken from Plants sometimes whole, as Succory,
Mallows, Plantaine, and the like, we use often whole; sometimes only the
roots of Plants, the Pith, Wood, Bark, Leaves, Blossoms, Seeds, Fruits,
Juices, Gums, Oils, Mosses, Rosines, and the like.

From the Earth. Medicines taken from the Earth, are either Earths, Stones, or
Minerals; the sorts of Earth, are Bole-armenick, Terra sigillata, Fullers
earth, Chalk, Clay; Stones are the Pumix, Marchisite of Gold, Silver, Brass,
Marble, the Loadstone, Chalk, Limestone; Mettalls and Minerals are Gold,
Silver, Brass, Iron, Lead, Tin, Steel, Brimstone, Litharge of Gold and
Silver, Antimony, Cerus, Verdigreace, Allome, Vitrioll, Salts of sundry kinds.

From Water. From Fresh water, Rain water, Spring water, River water, water
Lentile, common Flags, Water Lillies, and all such creatures as live therein;
from the salt Water, Salt, Corrall, Shells, Sponges, and all Sea creatures; from
Waters mixed of salt and fresh, Asphaltum, the herb Androsace, etc.

From the Air. Medicines from the air are Manna, Honey, Dew, and the like.

Now all these sorts of Medicines are endued with one or more of the four
faculties.

The simple quality is either to
Heat, or Cool. Humect, or Dry.
The compound arising from two joined qualities, either
Heates and dries. Heates and moistens. Cooles and dries. Cooles and moistens.


The effect of these qualities is distinguished into these orders which we
term degrees, that they may resist a disease in the same measure and
proportion; The

As for an example of Heat, warm water is temperate, that which is a little
hotter is in the first degree of heat, if manifestly hot, it is in the second
degree, but if heat more vehemently, it may be thought to come to the third,
but if it scald, then it is arrived at the fourth degree of heat.

Temperate Medicines be such as do manifestly neither Heat, Cool, Moisten,
nor Dry; intemperate Medicines are those that are plainly hot or cold.

2 The second faculties of Medicines depend upon the first, as of heat to
rarifie, attract, open, attenuate, levigate, cleanse; on the contrary, as of
cold to condense, repercusse, shut up, incrassate, exasperate, constipate; of
moisture, to soften and relaxe; of dryness, to harden and stiffen.

3 The third faculty of Medicines is to agglutinate, fill with flesh, to
cicatrize, assuage pain, move or stay Urine, Milk, Seed, Courses, Sweat,
Vomits, and the like. The generation of flesh proceeds from two of the
faculties, drying, and cleansing, heat only mittigateth pain.

4 The fourth faculty of Medicines is that which causes the Medicine to work
upon one part or humor, and not upon another, as some purge the head, some the
stomach, some the gutts, some phlegm, some melancholy, and the like.

CHAP. XXVI. The form of making Medicines. Of Clisters.
Clisters. A Clister is a Medicine cast into the bowels by the fundament, and
is made of Roots, Seeds, Fruits, Flowers, flesh of Beasts, Oil, Honey, and the
like; the quantity is according to the disposition of the Patient, as half a
pound, one pound, or three quarters of a pound: As for example, Take Mallows,
Violets, Althaea, leaves of Willow, water Lillies, seethe them, and put to the
decoction Cassia fistula, Sugar, oil of Violets, and of Roses, which profits
much in Strangury. The manner of giving a Glister is thus; when it is strained
and cooled sufficiently, you shall have the pipe ready, with a bladder and a
cork fitted to the pipe, with a thread to pull it out when you have put up the
pipe, then stop the pipe with the cork, and pour the decoction into the
bladder, and tie the bladder fast, and let the Patient put it up into his
fundament, lying on his bed, on his right side, and nothing about his belly to
gird it, then pull out the cork by the thread, and with the hand by little and
little crush up the Glister, and let him retain it about half an hour if he
can.

CHAP. XXVII. Of Suppositaries.
Suppositaries. A Suppositary is a certain long round Medicament which is put
into the fundament to provoke the expulsive faculty; their form is round and
longish like a wax Candle, and are made of weak things, as the roots of
Beets, the stalks of Mallows; or of strong purging Powders, as Hiera without
salt; or sharp, as with Scamomy, or with Honey; as for example, boil Honey
until it wax thick and hard, and make thereof a Suppositary in form
aforesaid, and let the Suppositaries be four, five, or six fingers in length.

CHAP. XXVIII. Of Nodules.
Nodules. A Nodule is made up in the form of a Filbert or Bean, and is used
against clefts and swellings in the fundament; they are made of gentle
Medicines, as the yelkes of Eggs with a little Salt and Butter tied-up in Cloth
or Wool, and a thread left to draw it out by, they are used as Suppositaries
are.

CHAP. XXIX. Of Pessaries.
Pessaries. A Pessary is thicker and longer than a Suppositary, and is
appointed for the womb; it is made of Wax, or of Cloth, or Cotton, or of Lint,
first dipped in an ointment, and wound about with silk, and a thread hanging
thereat, that it may be easily drawn forth; they are used in all diseases of
the womb, and for the stopping of the monthly visits; as for example, a
Pessary against the suffocation of the Mother is made thus, R. Benioini,
Styracis, Carioph. ana i. gal. mosch. ss. moschi, gr. vi. Fiat pulvis, this
being made up with Cotton, may be put into the body.

CHAP. XXX. Of Iuleps.
Iuleps. A Iulep differs from a Sirrup only thus; a Sirrup is more boiled than
a Iulep is, and a Iulep is only simple without the permixtion of any other
decoction with it; also a Iulep is any kind of Sirrup dissolved in sodden
water, as the Sirrup of Roses, Violets, etc.

CHAP. XXXI. Of Pills.
Pills. PIlls are easily made by putting together the ingredients according as
you shall find fitting to the disease, and so with some convenient Sirrup, as
Maidenhaire, or with Hydromel, or some other Liquor, they are formed to the
bigness of a small Pease.

As for the rest, they are so easily made, as that I need not prolong my self
in treating of them, these I have only showed the meaner sort of people, and
such as I know, though they had the simples ready, yet could not tell how to
compound them as they ought to be.

Next I shall show you the making of all kinds of Unguents, Oils, Emplasters,
Sirrups, Electuaries, etc. which are necessary to be used in any private house.
And also the nature and effect of every Medicine, which many that have
published them have neglected to do, and also have failed in the true setting
of them down, which might drive the practiser into a great error.

Unguents. CHAP. XXXII.
To make Vnguentum aureum.
1 R. Yellow Wax vi. good Oil lib. ii. Turpentine ii. Rosin and Colophoni i
ss. Olibanum, Mastick, ana. i. Saffron i. make an Unguent. First dissolve the
Wax in the Oil, then put in the rest of the things finely bruised; when they
are dissolved take it from the fire, and put in your Turpentine. It does mildly
deterge wounds, agglutinate and safely cure them.

Vnguentum Enulatum.
2 R. Root of Elecampane sod in Vinegar and bruised, lib. i. Hogs grease,
Oil, ana. iii. new Wax i. Quicksilver extinct, Turpentine washed, ana. ii.
common Salt beaten, ss. Melt the grease and wax in the Oil, then add the
Enula campana, Quicksilver and Salt, lastly the Turpentine, kill the
Quicksilver with a little Grease and Turpentine. This ointment is mavelous
effectual against the Itch, or Scabs, either dry or moist.

Vnguentum Populeon.
3 R. Of the buds of Popular fresh gathered lib. i. macerate them in lib. iii.
of fresh swines grease prepared for the space of two months, then R. of the
leaves of red Poppy, leaves of Mandrake, leaves of Henbane, tender crops of
Brambles, Nightshade, Lettuce, Houseleeke, Stone crop, great Burres, Penny
grass, ana. iii. good Wine lib. i. bruise them and mix them with the buds of
Popular, then set them in a warm place for eight days, then add one pint of
strong Vinegar, and boil them till it be consumed, which may be perceived by
casting a little thereof into the fire, then strain it forth and put it up.
This Unguent asswageth Phlegmons, burning of Agues, heat of the Head, and
Kidneys, and anointed upon the Temples procures sleep.

Vnguentum Aegyptiacum.
4 R. Verdigreace v. good Honey xiiii. strong Vinegar vii. all these being
boiled together until it be thick, and of a purple color, this does forcibly
cleanse ulcers inveterate, and fistulous, and does consume proud spongious, and
dead flesh.

Vnguentum Apostolorum.
5 R. Turpentine, white Wax, Rosine, ana xvi. Opponaxe, Verdigreace, ana ii.
Ammoniacum xvi. long Aristolochia, great Incense ana vi. Myrrh and Galbanum
ana iii. Bdellium vi. Litharge ix. Oil lib. ii. make an ointment, mingle the
Litharge with two ounces of Oil, and let them stand five hours, then boil it
gently until it be thick as Honey, always stirring it, then take it from the
fire and put to the Wax and Rosin, being dissolved with the rest of the Oil;
then whiles it is cooling, put to the rest of the Gummes dissolved in Vinegar
boiled and incorporated with the Turpentine, then the Aristolochia, Myrrh, and
Frankincense are to be mingled, and lastly, the Verdigrease finely powdered,
and sprinkled in. This Unguent does by detersion purge Wounds and rebellious
Ulcers, and Fistulaes, wastes dead Flesh, and increases new.

Vnguentum Album.
6 R. Cerus iiii. Litharge ss. lay them a good space in Rosewater, then put
them into a Mortar, and by little and little pour in so much Rose oil as they
can drink up, continually stirring and tempering them, until they come to the
form of an Unguent, then add thereto a little white Vinegar, and of Camphire
i. ss. It is cooling, asswageth Pain and Inflammation, and is good for Scabs,
Itch, and Excoriation.

Vnguentum Vulpinum, or Ointment of a Fox.
7 Take a Fox, and draw out the Entrails, then take Sage, Rosemary, Juniper
leaves, and berries, Dill, wild Marjoram of the Garden, Lavender, Camomile, of
each half a pound, stamp these herbs in a Mortar of stone very finely, then
cut the Fox in pieces, and put him with the herbs into a vessel of eight
gallons, and put to four pintes of Oil Olive, Oil of Neats feet one pound,
Calves suet, Dear suet, Goose grease, Brockes grease, of each one pound and a
half, of Seawater three quarts, and as much of good Malmesey, set all
together on the fire, and boil it till the Wine and Water be consumed, and
that the flesh and bones be separated asunder; then take it from the fire and
strain it, and press it through a strong Canvasse cloth, and so reserve it to
your use as a most precious ointment against all Aches, and to restore Limms
and Joints lamed through pain of the Gout.

Unguent of Saint Cosme and Damian.
8 R. Pimpernell, Vervine, Betony, ana m. i. stamp them, and put to them of
white Wine lib. ii. ss. boil them together in a tinned vessel to the wasting
of three parts, then strain them, and set the decoction over the fire again
in a glased vessel, then R. Turpentine washed vi. Rosin washed lib. i. new
white Wax iiii. when they are melted altogether in the same glased pot, add to
them Mastick powdered i. of the Milk of a woman giving suck to a Male and a
Female Child ana ii. boil them to a perfect body, it avails for all Wounds,
and namely of the Sinews, also for Cankers, Fistulaes, and S. Anthonies fire.

A very good ointment for any Ach, or Bruise, for any Noise in the head, or to
draw out a Thorn.
9 R. Rosin, and a little red Deeres suet, and a little Camphire, and a little
white Wine, let them boil a walme or two after all the Suet is melted, then
strain it into white Wine, and beat it until it come to an ointment, then
put it up in pots, and when you use it you shall chafe the Part before the fire
very well, and then anoint it.

An Ointment of the Worms of the earth, good to strengthen the Back, to cool
it, and take away the Ache.
10 R. A great platterfull of long Worms of the earth, lay them upon Fennel,
or such like to scour, the space of four and twenty hours, then chop them
small, and put to them a quart of Neats-foot Oil, then take a platterfull of
field Daisies chopped very small, all save the roots, (let them be a
platterfull when they are chopped) and put them to the Oil and Worms, then
boil them together upon a soft fire for two hours, then strain it and keep
it for your use: it is to be made either in April, or about Michaelmas.

An Ointment for a Bruise, and Swelling, also for the Piles.
11 R. Of red Sage vii. of Rue iii. of Camomill, Bays, Wormwood, ana iiii. of
Mutton suet lib. i. bruise all these well together in a Mortar, then set them
in an earthen Pot nine days well and close stopped in the earth, then boil
them in a quart of Oil, and strain it forth and keep it for your use.

An Ointment which I used with good success to a woman who had a pain in her
Hip, without any tumor proceeding from the retention of her monthly Visits.
12 R. Camomill, Rosemary, ana m. i. twinings of Vines m. ss. Plantaine p.
stamp them together, and put them into a jarre Glass, and put on it a quart of
good Oil Olive, and let it stand a day or two in the Sun, then set a skillet
of water on the fire, and when it is scalding hot, stop the jarre Glass close,
and put it into the water, and keep the water ever scalding hot, but when it
has been in almost an hour, then let it boil a little, and then take it out,
and strain it, and anoint the place every night, and after bathing: the
manner of the Bath I shall speak of hereafter.

An ointment for the face after the Fox are dried, to cause them to fall off
without leaving any Marks.
13 R. Of Oil of bitter Almonds ii. put thereto of Parmacetae ss. and anoint
the face with a feather.

Another for the same, and which mightily cleares the skin.
14 R. Of fat Bacon lib. i. cut it in thin slices, and hang it in a string
before the fire that it may melt, and let it drop into a quarter of a pint of
Plantaine water, and when it is all melted let it cool, and then beat it out
of the water with a clean spatula, and wash it in three or four several
waters more of Plantaine, then put to it a penny weight of Parmacetae, and a
penniworth of white Rose water, and beat them well together, and anoint the
face with a feather.

An ointment for Aches and Bruises, Stitches, Gout, and Lamenesse.
15 R. Sage, Rue, ana lib. i. crops of Wormwood, Bayleaves, Rosemary ana m. i.
Sheeps suet clean picked from the skin lib. ss. Oil Olive a pottle, shred the
herbs and suet small, and then stamp and work them together very small, then
put in the Oil, and temper them well, and let them stand close stopped the
space of seven days, then set it to the fire, and as it melts stir it till
the herbs are parched, then take it off and strain it, and with this anoint
the place.

An ointment for a burn or scald.
16 R. Incontinently the white of an Egg beaten with Oil of Roses, Omphacine,
and a little juice of Plantaine, Nightshade, and Houseleeke, and with a
feather anoint the place.

Vnguentum de Calcantho, good for old Ulcers, Mundifieth evil flesh, and
Incarnateth.
17 R. Of Swines grease, Calves, and Cowes suet, ana lib. ss. Celidony,
Alleluia, Plantaine, Woodbine, Houndstongue ana m. i. Lime thrice quenched with
water lib. ss. Calcantum Pulverizatum i. Verdigrease, x. stamp them, and leave
them together seven days, then put thereto water of Plantaine, Wine of
Pomegranates, iiii. then seethe them with a soft fire till the Water and Wine
be consumed, and so strain them with a thick cloth, then put to it Litharge
Auri and Argenti iiii. Bolearm. Terr. sigillat. Minii, ana i. clear terebent
iii. let them seethe again, and make a black ointment with sufficient white
Wax.

An ointment for an Ache.
18 R. Two or three nests of quick Swallows, tendrings of Straw-berries, Rue,
Lavender-cotton, Bay Leaves, Wormwood, Horehound, Rednettle crops ana m. i. the
gall of an Ox, black Snailes, n. 6. Oil Olive half a pint, then stamp the
Swallows whole feathers and guts with all the aforesaid things very small, then
you shall melt a quantity of May-butter in a frying pan, and then put in all
the other things, and fry them well together, always stirring it that it may
not burn; Lastly, strain it through a linen Bag, and you have the ointment.

A precious Ointment against all Pains, and Griefs.
19 R. Rosemary leaves, Sage, Time, Polimountaine, Hyssope, Marigolds, Rue,
Wormwood, Marjoram, Valerian, Mouseare, Hart's-tongue, Bloodwort, Merch,
Seagreene, gather these Herbs with the Flowers, and Blowings of each m. iij.
sees them in iij quarts of Water, until the Water be consumed to a quart,
then put to them a pound and a half of Barrowes grease, Deeres Suet, lib. i.
Dogs fat lib. ss. Cats fat, lib. ss. Rosewater pint i. Aquae composita vi.
sees these a good while, stirring them well, then strain them through a rough
cloth, and take off the scumme with a Feather, and let it stand till the
morrow, then sees it once again, and strain it, and keep it for thy use.

A good Ointment to cleanse a Sore, both old, or new.
20 R. Turpentine ii. washed well in Barley water, lib. ss. put to it Yolks of
new laid Eggs, nu. vi. Honey of Roses, or, common Honey, iiii. mingle them, and
make the Tents, or Pledgets therewith.

An Ointment for Scabbes, Ring-wormes, or any other breaking out.
21 R. Oil of Roses, iiii. Wax iiii. d. weight, melt them together, then take
Litharge of Gold, Ceruse ana. ss. Powder them and mingle them with the Oil,
and Wax in a Mortar, then put thereto the white of a new laid Egg, and half
an ounce of Quicksilver mortified, and use it every Morning and Evening.

To mortify the Quicksilver you shall put it into a Violl with fasting
Spittle, and work it up and down until it become like ashes, then put it to
your stuff.

A good Ointment for the Spleen.
22 R. Bryony roots, the pith taken out, Marsh Mallow roots, or red
Holly-hocke roots, the pith taken out ana. lib. i. sees them in Water until
the Roots be soft, stamp them in a Mortar, and strain them through a
Strainer till the thickness be come through, then take of sower leavened Bread
iiii. Bores grease li. ss. mingle them altogether well in the Mortar, with
white Wine Vinegar iiii. spoonefuls.

First in the morning rub your Spleen with a course warm Cloth, until the
skin wax red, then lay upon it a piece of blue woollen cloth, wet in the Water
of a man child, as hot as may be suffered, and when the Cloth waxes cold,
take it away, and dry the Skin with a warm cloth, and anoint the place with
some of the ointment aforesaid, warmed in a Sawcer, and rub it well in, then
lay upon it a Quilt of black wool, and do thus every morning till it be well.

An Ointment for burning or scalding.
23 R. Sweet Cream q. i. Fern roots m. i. washed and cut in small pieces,
boil them in the Cream in an earthen Pot, until they jelly; when you will
use it chafe a little in your hand with a Spatula, and apply it to the Sore
until it be whole.

Vnguentum Aleblastrum.
24 R. Crops of the red Bryer stamped small, m. vi. add thereto of white Wine
one pottle, of Rue, m. i. of the flowers or leaves of Camomile, i. powder of
Aleblaster ii. Fennel seed i. Oil of Roses lib. ss. Wax ss. put all together
except the Camomill and the Wax, then put them on the fire to infuse, and when
it seethes put in the Wax and Camomill, and boil it well until the Wine be
consumed, and when it is cold, take the whites of five Eggs and mingle them
with all the aforesaid things, and then strain it through a fair linen
cloth, and put it into a clean vessel. It is good for webbs in the Eyes,
Megrim, and Headache, if a woman have pain in her Matrice let her take thereof
as an Electuary, and it will help her, also for those that are diseased in the
Stomach, let them anoint the Stomach, Hands, Feet, and Reins therewith, anoint
the Temples for the Megrim, it is also good for the Gout.

An Ointment to assuage pain, and cool.
25 R. Of white Cerate iiii. Oil of Roses x. red, and white Sanders, red
Roses, Myrrh, Olibanum, Mastick, ana ii. Camphire ss. Turpentine ii. ss. make
an Unguent in a leaden Mortar.

To make Flos Vnguentorum.
16 R. Rosin, Perosin, ana lib. ss. Virgins wax, Frankincense, ana iiii.
Mastick ss. Hearts suet, iiii. Camphite ii. melt those that are to be melted,
and pound those that are to be pounded, and searce them finely, then boil them
altogether over the fire, and strain them into a pottle of white Wine; then let
it cool, and when it is no more then blood warm, put to of Turpentine iii.
ever stirring it until it be cold, then work it well in the hands, and make
it up in rolls.

It is good for old Wounds, cleansing them, and engendring good Flesh, and
wasting evil Flesh; it is good for all manner of Impostumes in the head, or in
the body, and for strained Sinews, and it draws out any Thorn or broken
Bone, and it heals all manner of Botches, it is good for a Canker, or Noli me
tangere, it is good for Seareclothes for the Gout, Sciatica, and other Aches,
and for pestilent Botches.

Of Oils. CHAP. XXXIII.
To make Oil of Roses.
1 R. Buds of red Roses fresh gathered, the prickles taken away, and the buds
bruised, juice of Roses ana lib. i. macerate them in five pound of Oil
Omphacine which is without Salt in a vessel of glass close shut, then set
them the space of six or eight days in the Sun, after boil them three hours
in a double vessel, and strain them and cast away the Roses and put in new,
do so twice or thrice; lastly, being fairly strained, set it in the Sun,
and boil it in a double vessel until the juices be consumed, if you want
Oleum Omphacinum, you may wash Oil Olive in the juice of sour Grapes. This
Oil is cooling, and does strengthen, thicken and stay Fluxes, and help the
gnawing pain of the Guts being given in a Clister.

Oil of Violets.
2 It is made by putting in fresh purple Violets into a vessel of glass, and
Oil Omphacine, or Oil of Almonds, and to be sunned ten or twelve days,
changing the Violets every third day; lastly, put in dry Violets, it has the
same Virtue as has Oil of Roses.

Oil of Mints.
3 R. The leaves of sown Mints, bruise them, and with the juice macerate them
in Oil Omphacine, and change and boil it as you do Oil of Roses. It
corroborateth and strengthens the stomach if it be therewith anointed, and
furthereth concoction.

Oil of Wormwood.
4. R. The tops and leaves of Wormwood, bruise them and macerate them in Oil
Omphacine, as you do make Oil of Roses: it is a furtherer of concoction,
procurer of appetite, and kills the Worms.

Oil of Lillies.
5 R. Of Mastick, Calamus Aromaticus, Costus, Oil of Pellitary, Carpobalsame,
ana i. Cloves and Cinnamon, ana ss. Saffron, iii. bruise them all, and steep
them in water xxiiii. hours, then boil them a little, and taken from the fire
pour in of sweet Oil, lib. ii. leaves of Lillies, viii. set them forty days
in the Sun, and then strain it.

Oil of sweet Almonds.
6 R. Sweet Almonds, and blanch them, and bruise them, then pour upon them a
little Rose water, then put them in a vessel that they may be kept warm as it
were in hot water; lastly, put them in a little bag, and press them in a
press until you have the Oil. It does mitigate pain, comfort the
exasperated parts, especially the Lungs, and Kidneys, it mollifieth dry, and
hard matter, and is very fit for those that have the Hectic fever.

Oil of bitter Almonds.
7 R. Bitter Almonds dry, and purge them, and bruise and calefie them in hot
boiling water, and pressed as the former. This Oil does mightily attenuate and
divide, does dissipate Wind, cures the Noise in the Ears, and opens the
obstructions of the Liver, and other Intrailes, and mollifieth hardness of
Sinews.

Oil of Worms.
8 R. Of Worms of the earth washed, and prepared, lib. ss. white Wine ii.
sweet Oil lib. ii. boil them to the consumption of the Wine, and the wasting
of the Worms, then strain the Oil, and reserve it for your use. It
mollifies, asswages Pain, and is good for Bruises, and pain in the Joints.

Oil of Rue.
9 R. Of leaves of Rue, the juice of Rue, ana lib. ss. macerate them three
days in lib. iii. of sweet Oil, boil them in a double vessel until the
juice be consumed, then straining the Rue, change it three times, or four,
then press out the Oil. It is hot, and attenuateth gross Humors, dissipates
Wind being administered as a Clister alone, it avails against the Crampe,
Palsy, and coldness of the Womb and Bladder.

Oil of Baye.
10 R. The ripe berries of Laurel bruised and boiled a good space in Water,
and then strain it, and when it is cooled, gather the Salt that swimmeth above
the decoction which is the Oil, and is good to extenuate, califie, dissipate
Wind in the stomach, the Colic, and dissolveth cold diseases of the Head,
Intrailes, Womb, Kidneies, and Joints.

Oil of Scorpions.
11 R. The root of round Aristolochia, Gentian, Galingale, bark and root of
Capers, ana i. bruise them all, and macerate them in lib. i. ss. of Oil of
bitter Almonds, and sun them twenty days, then boil them in a double
vessel with a gentle fire, lastly, put in xv. Scorpions, and sun them again
thirty days, then strain the Oil, and keep it as an excellent Oil to
extenuate forcibly, and being anointed upon the loins does unlodge the Stone
in the Kidneies.

Oil of Turpentine.
12 R. Of the best Turpentine lib. iiii. put it in a large glass Cucurbite,
and set it in Sand, and distill it by art; first you shall have a thin Oil
come out with the Water, the second Oil will be of a golden color, the last
will be yellow and thick, keep every one by its self, but the last is the
best, and is good against all cold Diseases, especially of the Joints.

Oil of Mastick.
13 R. Oil of Roses, xii. odoriferous Wine, iiii. of the best Mastick, iii.
boil them according to art in a double Vessel to the consumption of the Wine.
This Oil strengthens the Brain, Nerves, Joints, Ventricle, and Liver,
mollifies Tumors, and asswages pain.

Oil of Tilestones.
14 Break an old red Tilestone in pretty small pieces, burn them in the fire
until they be red hot, then extinguish them in clear old Oil, and let them
lie in it until they be full of Oil, then take them out and beat them into
fine power, and put it into a Cucurbite of glass, and lute the joints well
together, and put under coals, and draw your Oil according to art. It is good
against all cold diseases, for it is hot and penetrative, eases the Epilepsie,
Vertigo, Palsy, Crampe, and pain in the back, and all cold affects of the
Joints and Nerves.

Oil of the Yolks of Eggs.
15 R. Of new laid Eggs one hundred, boil them until they be hard, and take
out the yolks, and cut them in pieces, and put them in a frying pan until
they turn reddish, and yield a fatty moisture, then take them and put them hot
into a hair bag, and press out the Oil. It is good to clear the skin, and
restore hair, and to cure malign and fistulous Ulcers.

Oil of Hypericon: or, S. John's Wort.
16 R. The tops of S. John's Wort that is full ripe, iii. steep them in
odoriferous Wine three days, then boil them close stopped in a double
vessel, afterward press it, then put to it a pound more of fresh S. John's
Wort, and steep, boil, and press it as before, and likewise the third time,
and if the Wine diminish add more; lastly, take of clear Turpentine iii. old
Oil vi. Saffron i. boil them in a double Vessel until the Wine be consumed,
then press it, and separate the Oil from the gross bottom. It is Hot and
Dry, Stiptick, it consolides wounds, and helps incision of the Nerves, and
burning of fire, asswageth the pain of the Thighs and Bladder, and provokes
Urine, and monthly visits.

Oil of Whelps, for wounds made by Gunshot.
17 R. Two Whelps, Earth-wormes lib. i. Oil of Lillies lib. ii. Venice
Turpentine vi. Aqua vitae i. boil the Whelps alive in the Oil, until the
flesh part from the bones, then put in the Worms being first prepared in white
Wine, and boil them in the oil till they become dry, then strain it gently
through a Towell, and lastly, add your Turpentine and Aqua-Vitae.

Oil of Vitrioll.
18 R. Of Vitrioll lib. x. and powder it, and put it into an earthen pot, and
set it upon hot coals until it be calcined, that is, when it becomes reddish;
when it is thoroughly cold break the pot, and powder it again, and calcine it
again, and thus do until it be perfectly calcined, and exactly red of
color, then powder it, and put it into an earthen retort, adding for every
pound of Vitrioll, 1. quarter of Tile sheards, or small pieces of Brick, then
set the Retort luted safely to the receiver in a reverberating Furnace, always
keeping a strong fire for the space of eight and forty hours, more or less
according to the quantity of the distilling Liquor: you shall know when the
distillation is finished by the receiver, which will recover his natural
color, and perspicuity. Your receiver must be very large lest it break, also
it must be set in a vessel of cold water, lest it break by being over hot.

This Oil comfort the belly, and stirs up the appetite, calefies the cold
stomach, consumes Phlegm, and cuts tough and viscous Humors, it helps the
Dysentery and Celiack passion, it mitigates the heat of Fevers, and destroys
the Hecocks, Nauseousnesse and Loathing of meat, it must be taken very
carefully tempered with something else, as five or six drops to 2. ounces of
conserve of Roses, so it may be safely taken, also upon whatsoever it falls it
burns it.

An Oil approved for the Sciatica.
19 R. Plantaine, Lavender-spike, Fennel, Wallwort, red Sage, red Nettles,
Camomill, Wormwood, Marigolds with the black head, Briony, ana. wash them, chop
them, seethe them in new strong Ale in an earthen pot to the consumption of the
half, then strain them, and put to the decoction black Snailes, reboile it
until it become an oil.

Oleum Benedictum.
20 R. Oil Omphacine lib. ii. of Storax, Calamite, Ladanum, Olibanum, Saffron,
Gum arabeck, Madder, Gum of Ivy tree, Aloes citrine, Mastick, Cloves,
Galingale, Cinnamon, Nutmegs, Cubebes, ana ii. Gum Elem. lib. i. Myrrh,
Bdellium, ana i. ss. Galbanum vi. Spike, Lignum Aloes, ana i. Rosin of the
Pine, Oppoponax, Armoniack ana x. powder those that are to be powdered, and
mingle them with the said Oil, and put them in a Limbeck with his head, and
receiver well stopped with Lute sapient, and distill them Secundum artem; put
the Alimbeck upon a soft fire the space of xii. hours, increasing the same
from six to six hours till all be stilled, then powder the rest of the spices
again, and so with the distilled Oil distill the^ again, and at the last you
shall have an Oil like Balm; Which is good for the Crampe, the Falling
sickness, the Coronall commissure being anointed (a Mundification with a
strong Medicine premised;) it cures great fresh Wounds, and cold Catarres; one
drop put into the Ear with Cotton amendeth the hearing, chiefly of a cold
cause; a Rose Cake moistened in the said Oil, and laid to the Temples, eases
the Megrim, and takes away the Swimming of the head; half an ounce of the
said Oil drunk with a little odoriferous Wine in the morning three days
together, comfort, and renews the Heart, and Lungs; taken with a little
odoriferous Wine it is good for quartain Fevers: the receipt must be almost one
spoonful for four days together one hour before day, upon such days as no
Paroxysme is looked for; taken the space of thirty days with a little Wine,
and a little Piony, cures the Falling sickness, and pains of the grand Pox:
it is good for stinging of venomous Beasts, and weakness of Sinews, and may
be compared to Balsamum.

The composition of Oleum Magistrale, invented by Aparice a Moriscoe living in
Spain.
21 R. A quart of the best, and oldest white Wine, of the oldest Oil Olive
lib. iii. to these add the flowers, and leaves of these herbs following,
viz. Of Hypericon lib. sem. Cardus Benedictus, Valerian, the least Sage, ana
iiii. steep these in the Wine, and Oil four and twenty hours, then boil
them in a nealed pot or Copper vessel on a gentle fire till the Wine be
consumed, always stirring it, then take it from the fire, and strain it, and
put to the straining of good Venice Turpentine lib. i. sem. then boil it
again upon a soft fire a quarter of an hour, then add thereunto Olibanum v.
Myrrh iii. Sanguis Draconis i. then boil it till the Incense, and Myrrh be
dissolved, then take it from the fire, and let it stand till it be cold, then
put it into a glass bottle, and set it 8. or 10. days in the Sun, and the
longer you keep it the better.

The true application of this Oil according to the qualities of the Wounds,
and Diseases, does consist in these points following, viz. To the Patient, to
the Preparative, to the Wound, or Diseases, to the Plaster, to the diseased
Part.
1 FIrst let the Patient eat, and drink freely what he will, he may eat to
his dinner new laid Eggs, Mutton, wild Foul of the Woods, if they have bled,
at night roast any of these; he need not forbear gross Meats, nor Wine, if
before he used them, but if his body be plethorick, or subject to a Fever he
must be careful in his diet, and if he drink any Wine it must be allayed with
Water; 2. If the Wound be great he must keep his Chamber, if not his Bed, for
fear of taking the air; 3. He must lie as well on the one side, as on the
other, and also on the wounded side, especially an hour before he be dressed,
that the Humors may descend to the Wound; 4: He must endure the Oil as hot as
can be possibly, for it is the stronger in his operation if it be applied
scalding hot; also he must abstain from women both in the time of his cure,
and for twenty days after if the wound be great.

To prepare the Wound you shall take good white Wine, and boil in it one
handful of Incense, which is only to comfort it, and herewith wash the Wound
within, and without, as hot as the Patient can suffer it, then wipe it very dry
before you apply the Oil.

If the Wound come by biting, or contusion, he shall be dressed twice a day in
Winter, at 8. in the morning, and 3. in the afternoon, in summer at 9. in the
morning, and 4. in the afternoon, but if they be green Wounds, then change not
the plaster after the first dressing until the next day.

If the wound be in the head, you shall shave away the hair 2. or 3. fingers
broad round about the wound, and then stay the blood with Lint, or Towe dipped in
the said Oil, with which you shall fill the wound, then lay on a cloth 2. or
3. doubles dipped in the prepared Wine, and rung hard out so broad as you have
cut away the hair, then roll it up. Note that at the first dressing the Wine
ought not to be used, lest a flux of blood follow; if the wound be large,
dress it but once a day for fear of bleeding for 2. or 3. dressings;
afterward you may wash the wound with the Wine as aforesaid, then fill the
wound with Oil, and cover it with Lint steeped in the same, and upon that a
compresse of Linen 3. double round about, dipped in the Oil, and upon that a
compresse dipped in the said Wine, as aforesaid: when you perceive the wound
near Cicatrizing, use only this unguent following: R. Of the aforesaid Oil,
Venice Turpentine, new Wax, ana. Set it on a fire in a pan, and always stir
it for a quarter of an hour, then let it cool, and when it is cold, put it up
for your use.

And when you use it, let it serve both for the Unguent, and Emplaister: the
Unguent you must apply with Lint, and upon it a little dry Lint, and upon that
an Emplaister of the aforesaid Unguent.

When a wound is made in the Head by contusion, and healed up so that there is
engendered an Impostume, or other accident, which may be an offense to the
brain, then you shall shave it, wash it, and wipe it as before, then anoint it
with the said Oil round about, and lay upon it compresses wet in the said
Oil, and Wine, as before: do this for the space of v. or vi. days.

If the wound be in the Legs, or any sinewy and musculous Part overthwart, it
must be stitched, or if there be any dislocation, it must be placed in due
order, and then wash the wound as before; and if you fear any Symptoms, then
wash also the whole Member, afterward anoint the whole member with the said
Oil, and lay round about it a linen cloth steeped therein, and upon that a
double cloth steeped in the said Wine, and then roll it gently; do the rest as
in wounds of the Head, if there be loose bones, or any thing against nature in
the wound, then put in a Tent to keep it open until such time as you have
taken them forth.

If the wound be made by Gunshot, Sword, or Pike, then first stay the blood,
and wash, and wipe the wound as before, and if the member be pierced through,
then Tent it on both sides, according to the depth thereof, that the bruised
blood may evacuate, and so dress it twice aday, both sides alike, both
washing, and wiping, and anointing; if the wound pierce into the body, then tie
the Tent with a thread, lest it slip into the body, and day by day you shall
shorten the Tent as occasion shall serve.

If any part where there chances any Apostumation or swelling, whether it will
maturate, or resolve, thou shall bathe the place with the said Wine warm, and
lay thereon linen clothes, steeped in the said Wine, and wrung out a good
breadth round about the place; and if it resolve, then apply the said Wine, and
Oil until it be whole; but if it come to suppuration, then use it as other
wounds.

For the Haemorroids.
First wash them with the Wine, and lay on linen clothes wet with Oil, and
upon them other clothes wet with Oil, and upon them other clothes wet in Wine,
as before.

For the Gouts.
First, anoint all the grieved place with the Oil, then apply linen clothes
upon it steeped in scalding Water, and wrung out hard, this done three or four
times will ease the pain.

For Cankers.
If the Canker be not opened, the washing with the said Wine, and the pledgets
steeped in the Oil, and applied, will open it, then perform the rest of the
Cure as aforesaid.

For pain in the Reins.
You shall anoint the Reins very well with the said Oil, from the ridge of
the back to the belly, then lay on a linen cloth steeped in seething Water,
and wrung out hard, and upon it a great Pledget of Towe, and wrap his Legs very
warm with clothes, and let him lie down on his Bed, and warm covered, let
him sweat.

For old Ulcers.
First cut the Lip thereof with a sharp Razor, then wash it, and anoint it, as
aforesaid.

To make Oil of Snailes.
22 R. A quart of garden-Snailes in the shells, wash them clean, and break the
slimie skin at the mouth of the shell, then put them in a cloth, with a
handful of Bay Salt, and hang them up with a dish underneath to receive the
Oil which drops from them. This Oil being anointed upon the hollow of the
neck, and so down the back bone, and from the throat down to the end of the
breast bone, cures a consumption, if taken in time.

To make Oil of a Dog for the Gowt.
23 R. A fat Dog, and kill him, and take out his Guts, and Bowels, and Gall,
but keep in the Heart, and Lungs, and Liver, then fill the body full of
Frogs, and black Snailes, and sow him up strongly, and roast him on a Spit,
as long as he will drop one drop, then put the Liquor in a clear Vessel, and
put thereto a pint of Oil of Bay, and black Soape i. and temper them
together, and anoint the grieved Part therewith.

An Oil for the Palsy.
24 R. A new earthen pot, and fill it full of Camomil, and stop it well, and
set it in another Pot under ground for x l. days, then take it up, and you
shall find Oil therein, and anoint the place therewith; if it be thy head,
anoint thy forehead; if thy hands, anoint thy Wrists.

To make Oil of Swallows.
25 R. Ten Swallows, beat them quick in a Mortar with Spike, Lavender Cotton,
Knot-grasse, Ribwort; Balm, Valerian, Rosemary tops, Woodbine tops, strings of
Vines, French Mallows, tops of Alehooe, Strawberry strings, Tutsane, Plantaine,
Walnut leaves, Bay tops, Hyssope, Violet leaves, Sake of Virtue, Roman
Wormwood, ana. m. i. Camomill m. ii. Red Roses, m iii. then put to them a quart
of Neats-foot Oil, or May Butter, and grind them together with an ounce, or
two of Cloves, then put them in an earthen pot, stopped close with lute
sapientiae, and set them nine days in a Cellar, then take them out and sees
them seven, or eight hours on the fire, or in a pan of water, but first open
your pot, and put in white or yellow Wax, and a pint of Oil, or Butter.

An Oil for a noise in the Head.
26 R. A Silver Eele, roste it, but baste it not, then take the dripping, and
put it into a Pipkin with some Commin seeds; infuse it all night in the
Embers, then take the Oil, and pretty warm, drop a little into the Ear that
most troubles you, and you shall find help in a short time.

An Oil for the dead Palsy.
27 R. Sheep feet, and boil them with the Wool a great while, then take the
Oil of them, and red Sage, and boil them together well, then when you use it,
take a little Aqua vitae, and Pepper, and warm them together, and anoint the
place therewith, and after with the Oil.

Because it will be a great deal of trouble, and charge in a private house to
distill, and draw Oils from Gums, Spices, Seeds, Roots, Herbs, etc. except
they had occasion for greater Quantities: and for such Portions as they shall
use, they may buy at the Chemists; I will therefore only set down the names of
the Oils, and the virtues thereof; for such as are desirous to learn the Art
of Extracting, may find diverse Authors to that purpose.

Oil of Mastick.
28 It is excellent against all cold-Diseases of the Mawe, comfort the
Liver, Lights, and all inward Parts of the Body; being drunken, it helps
those that Vomit, and Spit Blood, it consumes, and breaks all inward Sores:
this Oil being anointed on the Belly, stops the Flux, and women's Terms,
and is also good for the Mother that is fallen down, if you anoint it
therewith, and the underpart of the Belly; it is good for young Children whose
Arse gut comes forth, if you anoint it therewith, and put it up again; it is
also good for those that are Burst, if you anoint them therewith, and let them
wear a Truss; being anointed on fresh Wounds, it helps them soon, laying
thereon a Cloth wet in the same; anointing the Gums, fasteneth the Teeth and
causes a good Digestion, if you anoint the Stomach therewith.

Oil of Storax Calamite.
29 Three, or four drops of this Oil being drunk, comforts the Lungs, it
helps the pains of the Mother being drunk, and the place anointed therewith:
beware you take not too much of this Oil, for it is dangerous; if you put a
drop, or two into the Ears, it takes away the buzzing noise.

Oil of Galbanum.
30 Is good against an old Cough, and for such as are Short-winded, and cannot
easily draw their breath: this Oil being taken with Oil of Myrrh in a little
Wine, is good against Venom, drunken; likewise being thus taken, it procures
women's Natural sickness, and drives down the dead Child, if you make a
perfume thereof into the Womb: it is held very good for the rising of the
Mother, being laid to the Navell, it settles the Womb that has been
misplaced; this Oil is Mollificative, and being mixed with any convenient
Unguent, it draws forth Thorns, or cold Humors: mix this Oil with the Root
of Angelica, or the Seed, or Root of Spondilium, and if you touch any Serpent,
or Venomous Beast therewith it will die; in fine, it is so opposite to Venom,
that the Perfume of it (being burned) drives away Serpents from the place.

Oil of Myrrh.
31 This Oil preserves all things from Putrefaction, and if you anoint the
Face, and Hands therewith, it causes them to look young a great while; if you
mix it with Wine, and wash the Mouth, it will fasten the Teeth; it stops
the Laske, and helps the Stitch in the side if you drink thereof one Dram:
it helps all stinking Sores, and is good for Wounds in the Head, and Pains
in the Ears, if it be put therein; also if you put one, or two drops thereof
into the Eyes, it preserves the sight; it helps all the Pains of the
Mother, if it be anointed therewith; also it dries, and consumes all
Accidents after birth, and is marveilous good against a Fever, if the Patients
body be anointed therewith, and laid to sweat.

Oil of Sagapenum.
32 Is good for the Stitch in the side, and an old Cough; it is very good
against the Crampe, and all Pains of the Hips, and Joints, coming of Cold; if
you anoint the Nosthrills of women in Childbed therewith, it avails much, and
eases their Pain, for it drives forth the Child quickly, whether alive, or
dead, being drunk with Wine, it is good against Poison: but by any means let
women with Child take heed of this Oil.

Oil of Castoreum.
33 Being anointed on the Neck, and drunk with Wine, avails much to those
that have the Falling sickness, it is also excellent against Apoplexy; it
helps the Cholick, and suffocation of the Matrix.

Oil of Ambre.
34 It is good against the Cholick, and suffocation of the Matrix, if you
anoint the Parts therewith; if a woman drink three, or four drops thereof, it
causes her to be fairly delivered; it is good against Pains, and Fluxes of
the Head, resolution of Sinews, and Falling sickness; if ye drink thereof in
a Morning three, or four drops in Piony Water, it preserves from all poisons,
and pestiferous Airs; It drives forth the Stone in the Bladder, or Reins, if
it be drunk with Malmesey, or Parseley Water.

Oil of Ammoniacum.
35 Being taken three, or four drops in the Yolke of an Egg, it helps
Ulcers in the Breast; it dissolveth all hardness, and swellings, and takes
away the pains of the Milt, if you mix this Oil with as much Oil of
Galbanum, and a very little Oil of Wormwood, and anoint the place; also being
mixed with Oil of Wormwood, and anointed on the Navell, it kills Worms.

Oil of Wax.
36 Is good in all Wounds made by Contusion, if a cloth wet in the same be laid
thereon; being taken inwardly, it provokes Urine, and eases Stitches, the
dose is a dram at a time with white Wine; it helps the cold Gout, and
Sciatica coming of cold; in fine it is an Oil that is miraculous in his
operation, and is as it were a divine Medicine.

Oil of Butter.
37 If you anoint your hands, and face with this Oil, it will preserve them
fair; it is also good for them that have a Catarre, if they take an ounce
fasting.

The quintessence of Honey.
38 Dissolveth Gold, or any Jewel put therein; it helps the Palsy, Falling
sickness, Cough, Catarre, and pains of the Milt, and many other diseases; and
two, or three drammes thereof given to a dying man will recover him again,
like as quintessence of Wine will do; and certainly it is a divine Liquor,
because it falls like the dew from heaven upon the herbs, then which
nothing is sweeter.

Oil of Cinnamon.
39 Is very hot, and dry, and pierces through flesh, and bones; it recovereth
lost Speech in sickness; it helps all Diseases that come through cold, and
flegmaticke matter; it procures women's natural sickness, and eases them in
travel; if you give the Patient a little of this Oil, with a little Oil of
Myrrh in Wine to drink, and anoint the parts therewith; the face, and hands
being anointed therewith, it freeth from Measels, and Spots, it warmeth the
breast, and cures the old Cough, and causes sleep, and if a man take never so
little of this Oil, he shall feel the heat thereof in every member of his
Body.

Oil of Mace.
40 Is good to be taken three, or four drops fasting in a spoonful of Broth
against the Colic, and Strangury which come of cold causes: it comforts the
Heart, the stomach, and the womb, and helps all cold diseases.

Oil of Cloves.
41 One or two drops hereof taken in a morning with Wine helps a stinking
breath, it makes the heart merry, and strengthens the brain, and head; being
outwardly applied it heales wounds, and may be used in stead of Balm; being
put into the eyes it cleares the sight; it causes good digestion, and purges
Melancholy, it is good to make Manus Christi with this Oil, which have as much
virtue as the Oil it self.

Oil of Nutmegs.
42 This Oil drunk with Wine provokes women's Visits, and drives out the dead
fruit, therefore women with child ought to beware of this Oil until their
time of deliverance come, then it causes them to be fairly and easily
delivered, it is excellent against fainting and swouning, and beating of the
heart, if you drink thereof, and anoint the region of the heart therewith, it
expels phlegmatic, and gross humors, and causes alacrity; if any by a
fall catch a wound, bruise, or broken Rib, let him only drink of this Oil
with some vulnerary drink, and it helps him; it is good against uncurable
Ulcers, and for all cold diseases of the joints, and sinews; anoint the left
side therewith, and it asswages the swelling of the Spleen; it helps all
affects of the Bladder, and Reins.

Oil of Pepper.
43 Is very good against the Cholick, and other weak places filled with
phlegm; it is very hot, and piercing.

Oil of Saffron.
44 If you anoint the head with this Oil, it provokes sleep, mixed with
women's Milk it stays the fluxions of the eyes; being anointed on S. Anthonies
fire, it destroys it, and preserves the place; being drunk with Wine it
makes the heart merry; and if you anoint the Temples of a drunken man
therewith, it makes him sober.

Oil of Quince seed made by expression.
45 R. The seed of Quinces, stamp them and put them into a frying pan with a
little Wine, and stir them well together until they be so hot as you cannot
suffer your hand therein, then put it into a Canvasse bag, and press it out
in a press, and there will be both Oil and Water which you must separate.
This Oil is excellent against all pains in the Stomach, and helps digestion
much, and dissolveth Wind, it inciteth to Venery, and is good against the
Emerroids, and Fistulaes.

Oil of Rosemary flowers.
46 Take Rosemary flowers, and stamp them, and put them into a glass with
strong Wine, and stop it close, and sun it five, or six days, then distill
it with a soft fire, and there will be both Water, and Oil to be separated;
keep the Oil close in a glass.

This Oil helps against all inveterate Headache, though of seven years
standing; it comfort the memory, and preserves the eyes, if you drink now,
and then a drop, or two, and put one into the Eyes; being put into the Ears, it
helps those that are deaf, it avails in the Dropsy, and yellow Iaundise;
it helps the Cholick, and rising of the Mother; it is excellent for those
that have drunk Poison, or are infected with the Pestilence, if you drink
thereof a little, and lay you down to sweat: it comfort the Heart,
cleanses the Blood, and makes a man merry, and causes a good Color, and is
very good for those that have the Itch, or any other Scabs; in fine, it helps
all diseases that come of Cold, and Moist humors.

Oil of Time.
47 Is made as aforesaid.

It provokes Urine, and expels the Secondine, and dead Child; it procures
the Visits in women, and dissolveth clotted Blood in the body: if you take it
with Oximell, and a little Salt, it purges tough, and clammy Phlegm, and
mundifieth the Blood.

Oil of sweet Margerome.
48 Being drunk with Wine, it is good against those that are falling into a
Dropsy, and for those that piss with much difficulty drop after drop, it is
good for those that have pains, and gripings in the Belly, and provokes women's
natural sickness.

Oil of Mint.
49 It is most profitable for the Stomach, and being drunk with Vinegar it
stays the Vomiting of blood, and kills the round Worms, and causes good
digestion: being drunk with some convenient potion it avails much against
the griping pains of the Colic, and stops the overmuch Flux in Women;
being drunk with Wine, it eases women in Travel, and is singular good
against the gravel in the Kidneys, and against the Strangury.

Oil of Peneroyall.
50 Being drunk with Wine it brings the Monthly issue, sends forth the
Secundine, and expels the dead Fruit, or false Conception: it provokes the
Urine, and breaks the Stone in the Kidneys being taken with purified Honey:
being drunk with Water, and Vinegar, it stays the desire of Vomiting; the
fume or smoke of this Oil being taken into the Womb with a Funnell, is good
against Windiness, and stopping of the Mother.

Oil of Sage.
51 It is good for Wounds, and Bruises, and provokes Urine, and breaks the
Stone, it is also good for Women with child to use it now, and then, for it
closes the Matrice, and comfort the Fruit: Being drunk it helps
Conception, drunk with Wormwood Wine it stays the bloody Flux.

Oil of Isop.
52 Eaten with Honey it helps the Cough, shortness of Breath, and stoppings
of the Breast, being drunk with Sirrup of Vinegar, it purges downward tough
Phlegm, and kills Worms.

Oil of Ivy.
53 Is excellent against the Pestilence, and all manner of Poison, it stops
the bloody Flux, and helps all diseases either of the Bladder, or Reins,
and drunk with Wine it restraines women's Flux, with this Oil anoint the
Belly of a woman from her Navell to the Reins of her back, and down to the
Matrice, and it will strengthen the Mother, and dry up the Moisture therein,
and prepare it for Conception: if those that cannot make water do drink
four, or five drops of this Oil, and anoint the region of the Bladder
therewith, it helps them presently; it expels the Wind in the Guts, and
stays the running of the Reins, it is good against the Water between the
Skin and the Flesh, it kills Worms, and helps all sick Members, pain in the
Hips, Gout, and Cholick, and Chops in the Hands, or Feet.

Oil of Rue.
54 Being drunk with Wine avails much against Poisons being taken twice, or
thrice in three days; it helps all diseases of the Eyes from what cause
soever they proceed, if the apple be not perished; if you anoint the Eye twice
a day therewith; it restores Members nummed with the Palsy, if they be anointed
therewith.

Oil of Aniseeds.
55 Being drunk with Wine in a morning fasting, causes a sweet Breath, it is
good against Wind in the Guts, and Stomach, and causes the Pain to cease if
you drink three, or four drops, and anoint the Stomach therewith, it purges
Phlegm upwards, it inciteth to Venery, and drives forth Poison by sweat, it
is most excellent for shortness of Breath, and comfort the Lungs, and
breaks the Stone in the Reins, and Bladder.

Oil of Fennel seed.
56 It is most excellent for the Eyes to drink thereof once a day, and to put a
drop in the Eye morning, and evening, it helps the Dropsy, and yellow
Iaundise; in hot diseases administer it with cold Waters, and in cold diseases
with Wine: This Oil breaks the Stone in the Reins, and provokes Urine, and
Months, and breaks wind being taken in Manus Christi.

Oil of Parceley seed.
57 Opens the obstructions of the Liver, and Kidneys, and provokes the Months
if it be drunk with convenient Medicines; it causes good digestion, and
comforts the Stomach, and expells the Gravel, and Stone, and is good against
all Poisons, Blastings, and Windiness.

Oil of Radish seed is made by expression.
58 R. The seed of Radish, and stamp it small, and to every pound of seed put
two ounces of good Wine, then stamp it again until it be mixed, and put it
into a Copper, or Iron vessel, and set it over the fire, continually stirring
it until it be scalding hot, then put it into a Canvasse bag, and press it
forth, and separate the Oil from the Water. This Oil causes good Digestion,
and provokes Urine, breaks Wind in the Stomach, and also the Stone in the
Bladder it expels.

Oil of Mustardseed.
59 Is made by expression, as aforesaid. It provokes the Terms if you anoint
the Reins, and without the Matrice, and also drink it, it dissolveth the
pains in the Side, and of the Mother, and expels Gravel, and Stone.

Oil of Colewortseeds.
60 Is made as aforesaid. It is good against Worms, and all Inflammations in
the Body, and preserves Armor from rusting.

Oil of Linseed, or Flax seed.
61 Is made as before. It is good in a Pluresie, and dissolveth it if you give
four ounces thereof to drink, it is used for Painting, and to make Vernish.

Oil of Mans-skull.
62 You shall buy this Oil of the Chemists, it is good against the Falling
sickness, giving three grains at a time thereof to drink.

Oil of Saturn, and Jupiter, that is, of Lead, and Tin.
63 It is the most excellent of all Oils to heal Wounds, so as no bones be
broken, or cut.

Oil of Mercury, or Quicksilver.
64 Is marveilous good in fresh Wounds, and to be used outwardly for the Pox,
anointing the Sores therewith.

Oil of Hempseed.
65 If any one drink one ounce of this Oil at a time, it makes him pleasant,
and merry, it is profitable for Women, it makes them merry, and comely to see
to, and makes Soldiers courageous, it is made as the Oil of Linseed.

Emplaisters. CHAP. XXXIV.
Emplastrum de Ianna.
R. The Juice of Smalladge, Plantaine, and Betony, ana lib. i. Wax, Pitch,
Rosin, Turpentine, ana lib. ss. let three of the Simples be concocted in the
Juices, stirring them easily till the Juices be consumed, then take it from the
fire, and put in the Turpentine; It is marveilous effectual in Wounds, and
green Ulcers, it pacifieth Inflammation, Detergeth, Agglutinateth,
Incarnateth, and also Cicatrizeth.

Emplastrum Divinum.
2 R. Of Galbanum, Myrrh, ana i. ii. Ammoniacum iii. iii. Oppoponax, Mastick,
long Aristolochia, Verdigrease ana i. Litharge, common Oil ana lib. ss. new
Wax viii. Frankincense i. i. Bdellium ii. Loadstone iii. the Litharge by
stirring is mingled with the Oil after it is boiled, until it become thick,
then add the Wax in small pieces, and as soon as it is melted take it off the
fire, and put in the Galbanum, Oppoponax, Ammoniacum, and Bdellium, dissolved
in Vinegar, and Wine boiled, and strained, after add the powdered Myrrh,
Mastick, Incense, and Aristolochia, and Loadstone, next strew in the
Verdigrease, lest that if it should be boiled any long space, the Emplaister
become red.

This Emplaister is mavelous good against malign Ulcers, for it detergeth,
and consumes Quitture, and corruption, and ingendreth new Flesh, and brings
them to a Scar.

The black Emplaister.
3 R. Of red Lead lib. i. of white Lead lib. ss. Oil Olive lib. ii. ss. boil
them together until it look black; then take it off the fire, and make it up
in rowles. It is a very good Salve for all manner of Sores, or Aches.

To make an attractive Plaster for the Gout.
4 R. Of Wax lib. ss. iiii. Rosin lib. ss. Colophony lib. ss.. iiii. Bolearme.
iiii. Benjamin ii. Storax liquid ss. Storax calamite ii. Mastick i. Olibanum i.
Myrrh i. Assafaetida ii. Galbanum ss. Saffron ss. Oil of Roses i. Cloves i.
Deeres suet lib. ss. melt your Wax, and Dear suet upon a soft fire, then put
it to the Rosin, Colophony, and Bolearmenick, and then put in half the rest of
the Parcels, reserving the Oil of Roses, Benjamin, and Galbanum, they must be
last, stir it continually upon the fire, put it into a Canvasse bag, and
strain it with a rolling pin, then boil a good quantity of Plantaine in vi.
Gallons of Water, two hours, then strain it, and when it is cold, strain
your Plaster into it, and make it up in rowles.

An excellent Emplaister to heal any Wound, or Ache.
5 R. Valerian, Woodbine, Isope, Devils bit, Adders tongue, Hounds tongue,
Capons Feather, S. John's wort, Houseleeke, Red Sage, Brier leaves, Diasie
leaves, Tutsane leaves, Cumfrey, Selfeheale anam i. Housesnailes one Pint, chop
them, and the Herbs, and boil them according to Art in a double Vessel, in
a sufficient quantity of May Butter, and strain it; add of Frankincense ii.
Myrrh, and Sacrocole ana i. Alome, Honey, Wax, Rosin, Turpentine ana. vi.
boil it according to Art, and reserve it for your use.

Sir Philip Paris his Emplaister.
6 R. Of Oil Olive, lib. ii. red Lead, lib. i. white Lead lib. i. beat and
searse them, Spanish Soape xii. Incorporate these well together in an earthen
Pot well glazed before you put them to boil, then put them upon a gentle fire
of Coals for one hour; and a half, ever stirring it, then increase the fire
until the red turn to gray, and so continue the stirring until the matter
become of the color of Oil, and somewhat dark; dry it on a Trencher, if it
cleave not thereto, it is enough, dip your linen Clothes therein, smoothe them
with a Sleekstone, it wll last thirty years.

This Plaster, laid upon the Stomach, provokes Appetite, and takes away any
Grief from the same; laid to the belly, it eases the Cholicke speedily; laid
to the Reins, it stops the Bloody Flux, the running of the Reins, the
heat in the Kidneyes, and weakness of the Back: It heals Swellings,
Bruises, Aches: It breaks Swellings, Bruises, Apostemes, and heals them; It
draws out Humors without breaking the Skin: It heals the Diseases of the
Fundament: laid upon the Head, it heals the Headache, Uvula, and Eyes; laid to
the Belly, it brings Women's monthly Visits, and makes the Matrice apt for
Conception.

A most approved Plaster for a Rupture.
7 R. Of Aloes Citrine i. Dragons blood, i. Myrrh i. Masticke, Bole Armenicke,
Gum Dragant ana. iii. powder them all very finely, and make an Emplaister
with the Slime of Red Housesnailes.

A Plaster very excellent for the Sciatica.
8 R. Yellow Wax, Rosin, Rosin of the Pine, ana. lib. i. Colophony, lib. ss.
Masticke, Frankincense, ana ii. Myrrh, i. Sheep Suet, lib. ss. Cloves, Mace,
ana, i. Saffron, ss. Galbanum, Oppoponax, Bdellium, ana, i. Red Wine lib. ii.
running Water, lib. i. Camphire, iii. make an Emplaister.

A Plaster to heal, Cicatrize, and assuage pain.
9 R. Oil of Roses, lib. i. Cerus, red Lead, ana, ii. Litharge of Gold, and
Silver, Dragons blood, Lapis Calaminaris, Bolearmenicke, ana, ss. Camphire iii.
powder them that are to be powdered, and make a Plaster with white Wax.

To make Oxycrotium good for old Bruises, and Ache in the Limbs, and to
dissolve hard Impostumes, also for broken Bones, and Wounds that have been
healed fair without, but rankle within.
10 R. Of good Wax iiii. as much Colophonie, as much black Pitch purified,
Saffron i. ss. powdered, Masticke, Frankincense, ana. ii. Myrrh, iiii. Gum
Ammoniac, Galbanum, ana. ii. steeped all night in Vinegar, and strained and
boiled again until two parts of the Vinegar be wasted, then take the Pitch
melted, and put to the Gummes, and Vinegar, then melt the Wax, and put
thereto, and then the Colophony in Powder, next the Masticke, and lastly the
Frankincense, and Myrrh powdered, stirring all together very fast, then add
of Turpentine ii. but let the Plaster be no more then warm, and stir it
continually until all be very well mingled; but before you put in your
Turpentine, you must put in your Saffron, mingled with the Yolke of three, or
four Eggs, then strain it into warm water, and anoint your hands with Oil
of Bay, and make it up, and strike it on Cloth, or Leather.

Another Oxycrotium for any other Ache in the Body, or pain in the Breast, or
for the Sciatica.
11 R. Of the finest Olibanum searced lib. i. of Rosin beaten and searced lib.
i. of Ship Pitch strained lib. i. Sheep Tallow lib. ss. tried. Colophony
iiii. Comin iiii. Ladanum ii. Cloves, Mace, ana, i. Saffron, ss. powder all the
Spices, then take a clean Pan, and melt the Rosin on a soft fire, and let it
not sees; then put in the Olibanum by degrees, until it be all molten, then
put in the Tallow scraped small, and then the Ladanum, when all is melted, and
brayed in a hot Mortar with a hot Pestle, take your Cloves, Mace, Saffron, and
Comin all in fine Powder, and mingle them well together, and take your Pan
off the fire, and put in the Spices, stirring it well, and looking that it
sees not over; then strike your Sheep Skins finely tawed.
Skins whiles it is hot, and the rest make up in Rolls, anointing your hands
with Oil when it begins to be hard. This is the best Plaster for Gouts,
and Aches, especially if they come of cold Rhumaticke matter, or the like
cause, that is to be had, removing it after the pain, as the pain removes.

Doctor Morsus Plaster, called Oxecrotium.
12 R. Ship Pitch, Saffron, Colophony, Be Wax, an, iiii. Turpentine,
Galbanum, Ammoniacum, Myrrh, sine Frankincense, Masticke, ana i. iii. lay your
Galbanum in Vinegar all night, and the^ boil it, and strain it, and melt all
your Gummes, and mingle them by stirring them, and put in your Turpentine last,
continually stirring it, and after make it up in Rolls.

An Emplaister for an Ache.
13 R. Euforbium, mingle it with twelve times so much, of the best Oil Olive,
and a little Wax, and make an Emplaister, It is good against all Pains, and
Aches in the Ioints, sudden takings, and Lamenesse, Palsies, Crampes, and
shrinking of Sinews, and is exceeding good for benumbed, and dead Limbs, or
Members, having the Herb Agnus Castus, or Tutsane, infused in the Oil before.

A Salve to Draw, and Heal.
14 R. Of Turpentine, one peniworth, Virgins Wax, as much as a Walnut, fresh
Butter as much, Honey one spoonful, melt all these together in a Pan, then
strain it into fair Water, and keep it for your use.

A good Emplaister for old Sores, or new.
15 R. Of Rosin iiii. melt it in a Pan, then take of Wax ii. Turpentine, a
little, and a quantity of Sheep Suet, chopped small, and a spoonefull of Oil
Olive, and boil them all together, then strain it into Water, and make it up;
if there be any Core in the Sore, that may hinder the healing, take a little
Mercury, and put it into two spoonefuls of Water, and when it is melted, and
congealed together, take a Feather, and drop in two, or three drops, and so lay
on the Plaster.

An Emplaister called, Gratia Dei.
16 R. Of Rosin, lib. ss. boil it, and scumme it clean, then take of unwrought
Wax, iiii. and put it to the Rosin, and boil them together, then take of
Turpentine, Sheep Suet, ana, i. Oil Olive, a spoonefull, put them all
together to the Rosin, and Wax, and boil them, till the Scum be gone, and it
waxes black; then take it off the Fire, and cleanse it through a fair linen
cloth, into Water; then work it in your hands, and pull it out, as you do
Birdlime, a quarter of an hour, and make it up in Rolls. This Salve is good
for any old Sores, or for fresh Wounds.

An Emplaister for a Bruise in the Leg, or Arm, or elsewhere.
17 R. Water Cresses, and wash them clean, and sees them soft, and beat them
small in a Mortar, then put them in a Pan, and put thereto Sheep Suet, or
Deeres Suet, and Wine Lees, as much as shall suffice, and Wheat Branne, and fry
all together, and make a Plaster, and lay it warm to the Sore, and so use it
often, as need shall require.

To make a black Salve that cures all old Sores, and Ulcers, be they never so
foul, and stinking.
18 R. Of good strong Ale, one gallon, of Woodbine leaves, m. ii. red seeded
Nettles, m. i. Colewort seeded, with the jagged leaf m. i. red Onions lib. ss.
Garlic pill, lib. ss. unset Leekes, lib. 1. Bark dust a little dishfull,
stamp all these to Powder, very small, severally by themselves, and put them
into the Ale, with Roch Allome lib. ss. then boil them on a soft fire, until
more then half be wasted, then let them stand three or four days, and
strain them into a fair Vessel, then add to them of Wax, Rosin, Nerve
Oil, ana. lib. ss. English Honey the best one quart, then boil it again on a
soft fire, until half be consumed, then keep it in an earthen Vessel, close
stopped for your use.

A good Emplaister for an Ache.
19 R. Rosin lib. ss. powdered. Frankincense lib. ss. powdered. Ladanum,
Masticke ana. i. powdered.
Unwrought Wax, Deeres, or Sheep Suet ana. ii. Camphire ii. Turpentine ii.
melt the Rosin, Frankincense, and Wax, in a pottle of white Wine, and when
they are molten, put in your Masticke, and Ladanum, and then your Suet: when
all these are well melted together, then grind your Camphire, and put it in,
and last of all, your Turpentine; then take it from the fire, and stir it
until it wax cold, then make it up in Rolls, and keep it for your use. When
you use it for any Ache, make a Plaster of new Sheep Leather, broader then
the place you are to lay it to, then spread on your Salve as thin as you can
upon the Fleshy side, and prick it full of holes, and so lay it to, but take
it not off from the place, until it come off it self without pulling.

To make the green Salve.
20 R. In May, or June, these Herbs following, (viZ.) Plantaine, Ribwort,
Yarrow, Vrben, Betony, Egrimony, Burnet, Mugwort ana, m. i. gather them clean
without dust, for you must not wash them, then shred them small, and stamp
them till they be like a Salve, then boil them half an hour in a pottle of
good white Wine, then strain your Liquor, and wring your Herbs as hard as
you can, then after it has boiled a walme, or two, take it off the fire, and
put to it, Rosin, Turpentine ana. lib. i. Wax lib. ss. iiii. Masticke ss.
finely powdered, melt these, and strain them into the aforesaid Liquor; then
boil them all together until it be near enough, and put into it a Porrenger
full of the juice of Parseley, and stir your Pan with a Stick, so fast as
you can; then boil it a little, and take it off the fire, continually stirring
it until it be cold; then work it into Rolls, and keep it from the dust.

A very excellent Salve for Wounds, and old Sores.
21 R. Of pure Rosin lib. ss. iiii. unwrought Wax vi. Sheep Suet, and fresh
Butter clarified ana. iiii. resolve all these upon a soft fire, then put
thereto of Verdigrease beaten into fine powder, a quarter of an ounce, then
strain it into a pint of white Wine, and stir it until it be cold, then
make it up in Rolls.

A Salve for fresh Wounds.
22 R. Red Lead lib. i. boil them to the thickness of an Emplaister. white
Lead, lib. ss. boil them to the thickness of an Emplaister. Castle Soape, vi.
boil them to the thickness of an Emplaister. Oil Olive, one quart boil them
to the thickness of an Emplaister.
A Plaster to ripe an Impostume.
23 R. Of the Crummes of Bread well searsed lib. i. of the Broth of Veale, or
Mutton, or of a Hen wherein the Roots of Marshmallowes, and Holliocke, and the
roots of Lillies were sodden; put the Bread into this Decoction while it
boyleth, then strain them all very hard, and stamp them in a Mortar, and when
they are well stamped, put to them, of Oil of Camomile, Oil of Roses ana. ii.
Oil of Lillies, Hens grease, and Butter, ana vi. and of the decoction as
much as shall suffice, and set them on the fire again, stirring them until
they come to be stiff: hereof make Plasters to be laid upon the Phlegmatic
Apostems twice a day.

Another for the same.
24 R. The leaves of Mallows, and of Violets ana m. i. Roots of Langdebufe
tender, and fresh ii. Roots of Hollihock iiii. boil them perfectly, then chop
them small, stamp them, and strain them finely; then take a little Linseed,
and Fenugreeke well beaten, and put them in the decoction, with Barley flower,
and make a stiff Plaster; adding of common Oil iii. fresh Butter ii, of
fresh Swines grease ii. yolks of Eggs nu. iii. mingle them again, with the
Roots strained, and set them on the fire again, and stir them about, and make
a Plaster, and use it twice a day.

A Gratia Dei for all Wounds, and Ulcers.
25 R. Of the greater and lesser Centaury, Woodbine, Alleluia, Plantaine,
Ribwort ana m. ii. the greater, and lesser Comfrey, Mouseare, Clary, Yarrow,
ana m. i. flowers of Rosemary, Wormwood, Mugwort, ana m.ss. Roots of Madder
iiii. Grains powdered ii. flowers, and leaves of S. John's wort, Egrimony, Knot
grass, Verveine, Horse tail, ana m. i. ss. cut them, and stamp them
together, and add of fresh Swines grease melted lib. i. ss. Oil of Roses
odoriferous lib. ii. clear Turpentine, Cowes Tallow, lib. ii. ss. Sheep Suet
lib. i. stamp these again with lib. iii. of good Wine, and so leave them the
space of 9. days in the Sun, then boil them on a soft fire till the Wine be
consumed, then add of clear Turpentine viii. Mastick, Rosin of the Pine, ana
iii. Gum Elem. ii. white Wax sufficient: make a stiff Ointment, and malaxe
it in good Wine, then in Goats, or Cowes milk, lastly in Aquavitae.

An Emplaister to heal Cankers, Fistulaes, and malign Ulcers.
26 R. Of Litharge of Gold lib. i. and powder it fine, Oil of Roses qr. i.
white Wine pi. i. old Urine pi. ss. well clarified, Wine Vinegar pi. ss. Virgin
Wax two penny weight, as much Olibanum, Myrrh one penny weight; these Gummes
finely powdered and searsed, then put all over the fire, ever stirring it till
it grow black, then put in your Urine, and boil it one hour, ever stirring
it, and it will be a most excellent Plaster.

A Plaster for shrinking of Sinews.
27 R. Of Water Cresses, and Camomill ana, grind them small, and fry them with
wheaten Meal, and Honey, and lay it on a linen Cloth to the Sore, Plaster
wise, as hot as you can suffer it, and change it twice a day.

The Tobacco Salve for fresh Cuts.
28 R. Of the Juice of green English Tobacco qr. i. Sallet Oil pi. i. a
little Turpentine, a little Wax, and a little Verdigrease; boil them to a
Consistence, and make a Plaster.

Note, that the best Cloth for Plasters, is new Lockeram never used, the worst
is Calicoe, and such Cloth as has been starched.

A Salve to heal any Wound.
29 R. Virgin Wax lib. ss. sweet Butter clarified, iiii. Turpentine iiii.
yolks of Eggs nu. ii. beaten to Froth, red Rose water iiii. Sugar Candy ii.
Flower, as much as shall suffice: boil all these together with a soft fire,
stirring it well together as you put in the Flower, until it come to a perfect
Plaster.

A Plaster for the Gout, or Ache in the Ioints.
30 R. Of Wax, Rosin, ana lib. ss. Olibanum i. white Lead ix. Litharge of Gold
finely beaten, and searsed ix. Neats foot Oil pi. i. set the Oil on the fire
with the Wax, and Rosin; when they are melted put in a pint of white Wine, a
while after put in the other Powders, and stir it fast with a stick, then drop
a little, and when it is cold, if it be hard, it is enough; then take it off,
and anoint a fair board with Neates foot Oil, and when it is almost cold,
work it thereon like Wax, and make it up in great rowles: when you use it,
spread it upon linen Clothes, or Leather, and lay it warm on where the pain
is; so renew it Morning, and Evening until it be whole: beware of cold, and
hot Wines.

The black Salve good for any fresh Wound.
31 R. Of Oil Olive pi. i. red Lead ix. stir them well together, and set them
on the fire, and boil it fast until it look black, and if a drop stick to
you finger, it is enough: beware lest any spark of fire fly into it in the
boiling.

A very good Salve to heal an old inveterate Sore.
32 R. A pint of strong Ale, and set it on the fire, and put into it a quarter
of an ounce of roche Allome, and a spoonful of good Honey, and as much Dear
suet, or Sheep suet, and a Crab, and let them seethe together till the fourth
Part be consumed; then take three or four spoonfulls of wheat Flower, and
mingle them together, and after put them into the rest of the Liquor; and set
it on the fire, and stir it till it be thick; then take it from the fire, else
it will be thin again, and put it into a pot; and when you will use it, spread
it on a linen. Cloth a quarter of an inch thick, and let it lie fourteen
hours, and when you take it away, wipe away the corruption very clean; then
lay on another always warm.

A Salve for all manner of Wounds, and Sores that be curable.
33 R. Of Betony, Plantaine, Smallage, of each lib. i. of the Juice, and put it
in a pan; add to it of clean new Wax ii. of cleanest, and whitest Incense
ii. melt these by themselves with a soft fire, then put the Juices thereto, and
boil them together until all the Juices be wasted, ever stirring it; then
take it from the fire, and strain it through a Cloth; then take of Turpentine
iii. and temper them together, when it is cold put it up: when you use it,
chase a little in your hand, and spread it upon a Cloth broad and long enough
to cover the Wounds, first washing the Wounds with white Wine, and Honey sodden
together, blood warm, and dressing them Morning, and Evening, the Plasters
being warm: if you wet a Tent in the said Wine, and put into the bottom of
the VVound, it will draw out the corruption: if the VVound ache pour in a
little Oil Olive.

Powders. CHAP. XXXV.
A Powder for Hollow Ulcers.
1 R. Frankincense, Masticke, Myrrh, Sarcocoll, Bolearmenike, Dragons blood,
Barley meal, ana. mix them in fine Powder, and sprinkle upon the Wound.

A Powder to incarnate Wounds.
2 R. Of Hog Fennel, ss. Flouredeluce v. Myrrh iii. the greater, and lesser
Centory, ana ii. round Aristolochia, Tuttie, Oppoponax, Meal of Orobus ana ii.
ss. make all in fine Powder.

A Powder to stay bleeding of a Wound.
3 R. Quick Lime, Dragons blood, Aloes, Frankincense, Copperas, ana.
Incorporate them, being finely powdered with the white of an Egg, and
Cobwebbes, and apply it.

A Powder Adstrictive to be used in stitching of Wounds with Clothes.
4 R. Of Mill dust iii. Bolearmenicke, Frankincense, ana ss. Olibanum,
Masticke, myrrh, ana ii.ss. Dragons blood iii. ss. Boodstone i. make them in
fine Powder, which ye shall use with the white of an Egg, and spread it upon
a cloth, and lay it over night upon each side the Wound one, even with the
edges, and on the morrow you may join the edges by stitching the clothes, and
drawing them close.

Hollands Powder for the Cholicke.
5 R. Anniseed, ana ss. Bay Berries ss. Fennel Seed, Coriander Seed, Smalladge
Seed, Seen, the weight of all the rest: make a powder of them, and give it in
white Wine, i. ss. at a time. Parseley Seed, Commin Seed, Grain of Paradise,
Agat Stone, Milfoile, Seed of Carrawaies, Seed of Broom, Ginger, Long Pepper,
Nutmegs,

To make the Powder called Pulvis sanctus, to Purge, the Dose whereof, is, i.
ss.
6 R. Of the leaves of Seen, white Tartar ana ss. Cloves, Cinnamon ana ss.
Diagrediu^ ii gr Galingale, Ammi viii. good Rubarbe i. Salt Gemme, gr. 20.
Ginger ss. Agaricke ii. beat all into fine Powder, and mingle them.

A Powder for an Ague.
7 R. Carduus Benedictus, the Herb Mercury, Plantaine leaves, Centaury, Rue,
ana powder them, and drink it in Posset drink, two, or three nights together,
before you go to bed, and sweat upon it, the Dose is i. at a time.

Powder of Turbith to purge Phlegm for Women, Children, or old Men, or for
delicate Persons that live without labor.
8 R. White Ginger, Masticke, ana. x. Turbith, finely powdered v. Sugar, as
much as all the rest, mingle them together in fine powder.

A dredge Powder that purges Choler, Phlegm, and Melancholy.
9 R. Turbith i. Ginger, Cinnamon, Masticke, Galingale, Grains of Paradise,
Cloves, Anniseed, the Herb called Mercuries Finger, Diagredium, ana. ss.
leaves of Seen ii. Sugar iiii. mingle them, and powder them finely.

A Sneezing Powder.
10 R. Roots of Sneezing Wort, or Bartram, i. Castoreum ss. white Elebor, and
black Elebor ana i. Marjorame m. i. mingle them, and make them into Powder.

A most excellent Powder to provoke Urine, and to send forth the Gravel and
Stone.
11 R. A Flint Stone, and beat it in a Mortar to a most fine and subtle
Powder, scarce it, and keep it in a Bladder till you have occasion to use it;
then take half a Dram at once fasting at time of need in white Wine, or
^osset Ale, or such like.

To make white Damask Powder.
12 R. Of Scuttle bone in fine Powder, lib. ss. add thereto of Musk cod, ss.
or pure Musk Civet, and Amber Greece, ana. iii.

To make common sweet Powder.
13 R. Of Ireos iiii. Calamus Aromaticus, Ciprus, Sweet Marjoram, red Roses,
ana. ss. Lavender, Origanum, Nigella, ana ii. Orange, or Lemon Peeles, ii.
Clove dust ii. make all in fine Powder, and mingle them.

To make Damask Powder.
14 R. Of Orris lib. i. red Rose leaves dried, iiii. Cloves, vi. Saunders,
Citrine, sweet Marjoram, ss. Calamus Aromaticus, Ciprus Roots, Coriander, ana,
iiii. Powder them, and add of Storax, Calamint, vi. and Musk i. or of Musk
Cod iiii. beaten into small pieces.

A Powder for the Falling sickness.
15 R. A Man's Skull that has been dead but one year, bury it in the Ashes
behind the fire, and let it burn until it be very white, and easy to be
broken with your finger; then take off all the uppermost part of the Head to
the top of the Crown, and beat it as small as is possible; then grate a
Nutmeg, and put to it, and the blood of a Dog dried, and powdered; mingle them
all together, and give the sick to drink, first, and last, both when he is
sick, and also when he is well, the quantity of half a Dram at a time in white
Wine.

A Powder for the Gout.
16 R. Of fine Ginger the weight of two Groates, Elecampane Roots dried twice
as much, Licoras the weight of eight Groates, Sugar candy iii. beat all into
fine Powder, searce them, and mingle them, and drink thereof all times of the
day.

A Powder to rub the Teeth, and keep them white.
17 R. White Bread, Corrall, Hearts horn, ana ss. Allome i. Sage, and Roses ana
m. i. Oyster shells, and Egg shells ana m. ii. make them into fine Powder, and
rub the Teeth: also pieces of Cheiney dishes powdered is excellent to rub the
Teeth.

A Powder to stanch bleeding at the Nose.
18 R. Truboll iii. Dragons blood, Frankincense, Alloes, Mastick ana i. hairs
of the belly of an old Hare small cut ss. make them in Powder, and blow them
into the Nose, and make a Tent of Cotton to hold it in.

A Powder for the Green sickness.
19 R. Steel Powder i. Nutmegs nu. i. Licoras ii. powder them, and take as
much Sugar as the quantity of the Powder, and mingle them; then take thereof as
much as will lie on a shilling every Morning fasting, and an hour, and a half
after, take some water Gruell, or other thin Broth, using some exercise
presently after; do the like at Night, an hour before you go to bed, and use
some exercise until you go to bed: you must forbear Milk, and Fruits, and
Meats made of Milk.

A Powder for the Stone.
20 R. Of Hollands Powder i. a little long Pepper, and the Seeds, or Kernells
that be in Ash keys, powder them, and put them into white Wine, or stale Ale,
and drink it first and last blood-warme.

A Powder for the Falling sickness.
21 R. The Skull of a man that has been dead but one year, and bury it in the
Ashes behind the fire, and let it burn until it be mavelous white, and so
well burned that you may break it with your finger; then take off all the
uppermost part of the Head to the top of the Crown, and beat it as small as is
possible, then grate a Nutmeg, and put to it, then take Dogs blood, and dry it,
and make Powder thereof, and mingle as much with the other Powder, as the
Powder weighes, and give it the sick to drink, both when he is well, and when
he is sick, first, and last, and it will help him by Gods grace.

A Powder for the black Iaundies.
22 R. A platterfull of great Earth-wormes, and wash them very clean; then
sprinkle them with Salt to scour themselves to death; then wash them very
clean again, and lay them one by one in a Platter, then set them in an Oven
after the bread is drawn, and there let them stand until they be so dry that
they may be powdered; then powder them very fine, and put the Powder in a
Bladder, which you may keep a whole year: when you would use it, take a
spoonful thereof, and put it into a good draught of Beer, or Ale, then put in
a little Powder of English Saffron, and a little Iett powdered, and as much
Treacle as an Hasell Nut, and a raze of Turmerick grated, then warm it
Blood-warme, and give it the Patient to drink, and let him fast iii. hours
after.

A Powder for a Stitch.
23 R. For a Man, the Leaves of she Holly, for a woman, of He Holly, dry
them, and powder them, and put thereof into your drink, or broth.

Waters. CHAP. XXXVI.
A good Water for Heates, and Inflammations of the Eyes.
1 R. Of Aloes Epatick, purest Sugar, Turty stone powdered ana i. red
Rosewater, white Wine ana lib. ii. in a double Glass set them in Balneo Maria
five, or six days, often shaking it about.

A Water to cleanse a filthy cankerous Ulcer.
2 R. Plantaine water, red Rose water ana lib. i. Juice of Night shade,
Houseleeke, and Plantaine ana iiii. red Roses m. ss. Myrtles, Cypress Nuts ana
ss. of the rind of the Pomegranate iii. flowers of S. John's wort, p. ii.
flowers of Molleyn p. i. Mastick, Myrrh, Frankincense ana i. Honey of Roses
lib. i. iiii. powder that which is to be powdered, and distill them all
together, R. of this distilled Water lib. i. therein dissolve conserve of Roses
vi. and Sirrup of dry Roses i. with Oil of Brimstone xii. drops, and use it.

An excellent Water for the Vlceration of the Yard.
3 R. Water wherein Iron has been often quenched lib. ii. red Roses iiii.
Pomegranate Pills, and Flowers ana ii. Plantaine, Houseleeke ana iii. ss. Honey
of Roses, Turpentine, ana lib. ss. Allome vi. white Coperas iii. boil them in
a clean vessel until half be wasted; then strain it, and add Verdigrease
iii. boil them again, or if you will, Filter it.

A Water for a Fistula.
4 R. White Wine one pint, Juice of Sage i. Borace in Powder 3. d. weight,
Camphire powdered the weight of a Groate, boil all together a pretty while on
a gentle fire, and with this Water wash the Fistula.

A Water for the Toothache.
5 R. Red Rose leaves m. ss. Pomegranate flowers, m. ss. Galls sliced thin n.
ii. boil them all in three quarters of a pint of red Wine, and half a pint
of fair Water until the third part be wasted, then strain it, and hold a
little thereof in your mouth a good while, then spit out, and take more; also
if your Cheek swell, apply the strainings between two Clothes as hot as may
be suffered.

A Water for the Sight.
6 R. Smallage, Fennel, Rue, Egrimony, Daffadill, Pimpernell, and Sage ana,
distill them with breast Milk, and a little Frankincense, and drop of it into
your Eyes each night.

A precious Water for Sore Eyes, and to restore the Sight.
7 R. Smallage, Rue, Fennel, Verveine, Egrimony, Scabious, Avens,
Houndstongue, Eufrace, Pimpernell, Sage, ana, Distill all these together with a
little Urine of a Man child, and a little Frankincense, and drop it into the
Eyes at Night.

A Water for a Sore Mouth.
8 R. Red Fennel, red Sage, Daisie roots, Woodbine leaves ana m. i. Roche
Allome i. English Honey one spoonful: boil them together in a pint of Water,
and wash the mouth therewith.

A precious Water for Sore Legs, and for the Canker in the Mouth, or any other
place.
9 R. Of Woodbine leaves, Ribwort, Plantaine, Abinte, ana m. i. English Honey
purified, three spoonfulls, Roche Allome a quantity, put all these into a
quantity of running Water, and let it seethe to a Pottle, or less; then keep
the Water in a pure Earthen vessel well glased, and wash the Sore therewith
twice a day.

A Water for a Canker.
10 R. The Bark of an Elder tree, Sorrel, Sage, ana, beat them, and strain
them, and temper the Juice with White Wine, and wash the Sore therewith.

A Water to take away Pimples, or Heat in the Face.
11 R. A spoonful of burnt Allome, and put it into a sawcerfull of good white
Wine Vinegar, and stir it well together, and when you go to bed, dip a linen
Cloth in the Vinegar, and wet your Face therewith, and it will dry up the
Wheales, and take away Redness.

A Water for to clear the Face.
12 R. Limons n. ii. slice them, and steep them in a pint of Conduite water,
let them infuse four, or five days, close covered, then strain them, and
dissolve in the Water the quantity of a Hasell Nut of Sublimate (some hold a
Dram a good proportion) finely powdered; let the Patient wet a Cloth therein,
and rub her face every Morning, and Evening until the hew do please her: you
may make the same stronger, or weaker, as you please.

A Water for the Morphewe.
13 R. White Wine Vinegar q. i. Distill it to a pint, then put therein Eggs
with the shells, n. ii. r^d Docke roots scraped, and sliced, n. ii. three
spoonfulls of the flower of Brimstone, so let it stand three days before you
use it: you must tie a little Wheat Bran in a Cloth, and wash therewith Night,
and Morning, nine days together.

Another Water for the same.
14 First, to bring the Morphewe out, R. every Morning fasting the quantity of
a Nut of Treacle, either in Strawberry, or Fumetary water for nine, or ten
Mornings together. Then R. Sulphur vivum ss. and as much Camphire finely
beaten, and searced, infuse both in a pint of the strongest white Wine
Vinegar; shake it twice, or thrice for one day, then use it to rub the place
tainted.

A Water for heat in the Face, and to clear the Skin.
15 R. The Juice of Limons, and therein dissolve common Salt, and with a Cloth
wet your Face when you go to bed.

A Water to preserve the Face young a great while.
16 R. Of Sulphur vivum i. white Olibanum ii. Myrrh ii. Ambre vi. make them
all into fine powder, and put them into one pound of Rosewater, and distill
them in Balneo Mariae, and keep the Water in a close vessel; when you would
use it, wet a linen Cloth therein, and wash the Face before you go to bed,
and in the Morning wash it with Barley water, or Spring water. The Water of
Bean flowers, Lilly flowers, Water Lillies, distilled Milk, distilled Water
of young Whelps, are good to wash the face, and procure it lovely.

A Water to make the face Smooth, and Lovely.
17 R. Of Cowes Milk lib. ii. Oranges, and Limons ana n. iiii. of the whitest,
and purest Sugar, and Roche Allome ana i. distill them together: let the
Limons, and Oranges be cut into slices, and infused in the Milk, adding the
Sugar, and Allome; then distill them all in Balneo Mariae, and you shall have
an excellent Water to wash the Face; and about bed time you shall cover your
face with clothes dipped therein.

Another for the same.
18 R. Snails gathered in a Vineyard; Juice of Limons; the flowers of white
Mullaine, mixed together in equal proportion, with a like quantity of the
Liquor contained in the Bladders of Elm leaves distilled all together, is very
good for the same purpose.

Also this.
19 R. The crummes of white Bread lib. iiii. Bean flowers, white Roses,
flowers of water Lillies, and Flower de luce, ana lib. ii. Cowes Milk lib. vi.
Eggs nu. viii. of the purest Vinegar lib. i. distill them all in an Alimbeck
of Glass, and you shall have a most excellent Water to wash your Hands, and
Face.

Another.
20 R. A live Capon, and the Cheese newly made of Goats Milk, and Limons, n.
iiii. Eggs n. vi. Cerus washed in Rose water ii. Boras i. ss. Camphire ii.
Water of Bean flowers lib. iiii. infuse them all for the space of four, and
twenty hours, and then distill them in a Limbeck of Glass.

Also, take Mutton bones severed from the flesh by boiling, beat them, and
boil them in Water; and when they are well boiled, take them from the fire;
and when the Water is cold, gather the fat that swims upon it, and therewith
anoint your Face when you go to bed, and wash it in the Morning with the
formerly prescribed Water.

A Water for Redness, and Pimples in the Face, which for the Milky whiteness
is called Virgins Milk.
21 R. Litharge of Gold ii. Cerus, and common Salt ana ss. Vinegar, and
Plantaine water ana ii. Camphire ss. steep the Litharge, and Cerus severally
in Vinegar for three hours, and the Salt, and Camphire in what Water you
please, and like best for your purpose; then Filter them both severally, and
mix them so Filtered when as you would use them.

To make a precious Water.
22 R. Cloves, Cinnamon, ana i. Mastick, Mace, Camphire ana ii. beat all these
to fine Powder, and let them stand in six spoonful of good white Wine Vinegar
the space of four, and twenty hours, then put it into a Pottle of good Rose
water, and so let it stand two days in some warm place; then put thereto
three quarters of a pound of good hard Sugar, and distill it with a gentle
fire. This Water is pleasant, and good for the mouth, it preserves the Gums,
and scoureth the Palate, and keeps white the Teeth, and free from all
corruption; it makes sweet the breath, being gargarized in the Mouth: wash the
Face, and Hands therewith, and it will clear the skin, and add much beauty to
them; and if you sprinkle a toste of wheaten Bread with three, or four drops
of this Water, and eat it a few Nights together last to bedward, it will make
the breath very sweet.

To make Aqua mirabilis.
23 R. Galingale, Cloves, Quibibes, Ginger, Mellilot, Cardemony, Maces,
Nutmegs, ana i. of the Juice of Celandine viii. powder the Spices, and mingle
them with the Juice, and add thereto Aqua vitae one pint, and white Wine
three pintes; then put them all in a Stillatory of Glass, and let them infuse
all Night, and in the Morning distill it with an easy fire.

This Water helps much the Lungs, and heals them if they be much wounded,
or perished; it suffers not the Blood to putrify, so that there shall be no
need of Phlebotomy; it is good against Phlegm, and Melancholy, and expels
Rheum mightily, and purges the Stomach; it comfort youth in his own
estate, and gendreth a good color, and conserveth their Visage, and Memory; it
destroys the Palsy of the Liver, and Tongue; and if the said Water be given
to a man, or woman laboring toward death, one spoonful relieveth: of all
Waters artificial, this is counted the best, and in the Summer use once a
week fasting, the quantity of a spoonful, and in Winter as much more.

A Water for a Canker in the Mouth.
24 R. The inner bark of an Elder tree, and boil it with white wine Vinegar;
then strain it, and put into it a good quantity of Honey, and a race of Ginger
grated; boil them together a pretty while; then take a Cloth, and wash the
Mouth therewith, and it will heal the Canker.

A Water for sore Eyes.
25 R. A good handful of young red Fennel; as much Eyebright; Sugar candy, the
quantity of a Walnut; as much white Coperas as a Bean; boil all these in a
pint of running Water till half be consumed in a well leaded Earthen Vessel;
then strain it, and let it settle; then put the clearest into a Glass, and
drop it into your Eyes as you have need.

For sore Eyes.
26 R. An Egg, and roste it hard; then cleave it, and take out the Yolke, and
fill the hole with white Coperas, and press it hard in a clean Cloth, and
wash your Eyes with the Water.

A Water for a Webb, or Pearl in the Eye.
27 R. Strong Eysell, or Vinegar, and put it in a vessel of Brass, with black
Sloes of the hedge, Lead, and Wormwood, and let them stand well covered nine,
or ten days; then draine out the Water, and keep it to your use; and when you
have occasion, put a drop into the corner of the Eye.

To make Eysell.
28 R. A quantity of Bean flower, and knead it with Vinegar, and bake it; then
take it out of the Oven, and wash it all over with Vinegar, and bake it again;
do thus twice, or thrice, and when it is well soked with Vinegar, put it into
Wine, and it will turn it into Eysell.

A precious Water for dimnesse of Sight.
29 R. Roche Allome, and powder it small, and put it into a quantity of fair
running Water, and let it stand an hour to dissolve; then put a little Brass
pot into the Earth to the brim, and cover it with a clean linen Cloth, and
let the Water with Allome run through the Cloth into the pot; and then put to
it a little quantity of Quicksilver (to a pint of Water half an ounce) and
always keep it covered; then put another little vessel on the top of the
Cloth, and make in it a little easy fire with Coals for an hour; then put
this Water in a Glass, and put away the Quicksilver; and with this Water
anoint the Eyes.

A Water for the Humor which falls into the Eyes.
30 R. Of red Rose water vi. white Wine vi. Eyebright water vi. Lapis Tutiae
iii. Aloes Epaticke iii. fine white Sugar powdered iiii. put all these in a
Glass with a narrow mouth, and Sun them for one Month, and shake them once, or
twice a day: make it in the hottest time of the year.

A Drink to purge away Gravel breeding in the Kidneys.
31 R. Green Parseley, white Saxifrage, Pairestone herb, Ashen leaves, ana
m. i. Eringoe Roots m. ii. sliced, and pound; beat all together in a Mortar,
and boil them with six Gallons of Ale, or Beer wort, as Beer, and Ale is
boiled; then work it as Beer, and tun it up in a vessel to draw out; and
after it has stood three, or four days, drink a pint every Morning only;
if it be too sharp, sweeten it with Sugar.

A Water to be used in extremity of the Stone, when it stops the Water.
32 R. The small River fish called a Gudgin, wash them clean, and boil them
in Water with Parseley, Hearts tongue, brown Fennel, and Way-broad leaves,
till they be all to pieces; then strain it upon a Table Napkin held between
two men, rubbing it up, and down upon it till the Juice be fully out; set the
Liquor on the fire, and put therein a pennyworth of round Pepper, two
pennyworth of Sugar, and a little sweet Butter; boil it again very well, and
give the Patient to drink in extremity: or take a little thereof Mornings, and
Evenings, if the body be subject to Gravel.

A Water to destroy any Pearl, or Webb, or any Blood shotten in the Eyes.
33 R. Of Maidenhaire, Ground Ivy, ana m. i. Archangell flowers a quarter of a
handful, wash them, and swing them clean from the water, and stamp them
small, and strain them with a little strong Ale, and with a feather drop
three, or four drops into the Eye three times a day, at Morning, Evening, and
Night.

A Water for the Stone.
34 R. Half a Gallon of Milk from the Cow, then take Saxifrage, Parseley,
Pellitary of the Wall, Mothertime, green Sage, Radish roots ana m. i. steep
them over Night, and distill them in the Morning, and take hereof vi.
spoonefulls, as much white Wine, and the third part of a Nutmeg roasted, and
drink it in the Morning fasting.

Doctor Stevens his Aqua composita.
35 R. A Gallon of Gascoigne wine, Ginger, Galingale, Nutmegs, Cinnamon, Cloves,
Mace, and Grains, Aniseeds, Fennel seeds, and Carraway seeds, ana i. Sage,
red Mints, red Rose leaves, Time, Pellitary of Spain, Rosemary, wild Time,
Camomill, Lavender, ana m. i. beat the Spices small, bruise the herbs,
letting them stand in the Wine twelve hours; then distill them in a Limbeck,
and keep the first Water by it self, which will be about a pint; then take the
second Water, which is good, but not so good as the first.

This Water comfort the Vital spirits, and cures inward diseases engendered
of cold, and helps the Palsy, the Contraction of Sinews; it makes women
apt for Conception, and kills Worms in the body; sends forth the Stone in
the Bladder, cures the cold Cough, and Toothache, and calefieth a cold
Stomach; it is good against the Dropsy, Stone in the Kidneys, stinking Breath;
and preserves youth, and good color very long if it be not used too often.

To procure Beauty, and cleanse the Face, or Hands.
36 R. An old Capon, pluck him, and take out his Garbage, and make him very
clean within with a dry Cloth, but wash him not; then fill the body full of
the Juice, and Meat of Limons, then R. of Fennel m. i. Cloves nu. xii.
bruised, Camphire i. lay your Camphire in water till it be dissolved; then put
one spoonful of Water with all the rest into the Capon; then distill it in an
Earthen distillatory, and you shall have a precious Water.

A red Water to cure Ulcers.
37 R. Of the Ashes of Ash wood, one Peck; a Gallon, and a half of water;
make thereof a Gallon of Lie; put to it one Gallon of Tanowse not used with any
Leather; one pound of Madder crumbled small into the Tanowse; and roche Allome
lib. ss. boil these to the half upon a soft fire; then let it run through a
Canvasse bag; and after you have washed the Sore therewith, wet a Cloth
therein; and lay it upon the Sore; it both cleanses, and heals.

A Water to cool the Liver.
38 R. Savory, Endive, Borage, Sorrel ana m. i. Leekes, Violet leaves, Buglos,
Liverwort, ana m. ss. boil all these in running Water to the consumption of
half; then scum it, and strain; it then set it upon the fire again, and
boil it gently, and put thereto of Vinegar ii. as much Sugar as will make it
pleasant to drink; and keep it in a Violl for your use.

For sore Eyes.
39 R. Of Lapis Calaminaris the quantity of a Walnut, put it in the fire until
it be red hot, then quench it in a little white, or Rhenish Wine, and so do
for seven times; then put it into a Marble mortar, and beat it exceeding
small; then put the same into six, or eight spoonfulls of red Rose water in a
small Glass, and take a little piece of a Sponge tied to a thread, and hang it
in the Water, and when you would use it, shake it, that the thickness in the
bottom of the Glass may run unto the Sponge; then opening the Eye, drop
therein a drop or two out of the Sponge; do this two or three times a day, and
it will ease the Soreness, and cure the Blood-shot.

A Water for a Sore Mouth, to be made in May for all the year.
40 R. Vnsett Hyssope, Plantaine, Violet leaves, Cullumbine leaves, Strawberry
leaves, Cinkefoile leaves, Woodbine leaves, red Rose leaves dried, ana m. i. a
good piece of roche Allome burnt, three spoonfulls of Honey, a pottle of running
Water; bruise all the herbs, and put them into the Water, and boil them in a
Pipkin from a Pottle to a Quart; then take blew Figs sliced in the middle nu.
ii. put them into the Pipkin, and cover it with a Paper, and set it in the Sun
four, or five days, or more, and then strain it, and put it into a Glass.

A Water for a bruised Eye.
41 R. The Juice of Daisie roots being clean washed, and dried; the Juice of
Fennel, the white of an Egg well beaten ana. Rose water a little; temper all
these together; then take a little Pledget of Flax wet therein, and lay on the
Eye; but first drop a drop, or two of the Water into the Eye.

Another for dim Eyes.
42 R. Ground Ivy, Celandine, Daisies, ana Stamp them, and strain them, and
put thereto a little Rose water, and drop a little into the Eyes with a
Feather; It cures Inflammations, Spots, Webs, Itch, Smarting, or any other
grief in the Eyes.

To make Hydromell, or Honied Water.
43 R. Of Fountain water lib. xv. fine Honey lib. i. mix all in one pot,
adding a little Fennel, and a handful of Eyebright; tie all together with a
thread, and put it into the pot, and let it sees until the third part of the
Water be consumed; and in the seething, scumme it clean.

To make a good Ptisan.
44 R. A pot of Brass, or Earth, and put therein a Gallon of fair water, and
one handful of Hyssop, and two spoonfulls of Honey; then take Licoras ss. and
beat it well, and put it into the pot, and boil them all together a quarter
of an hour; then strain it, and let it stand until it be cold, and drink
thereof last when thou go to bed, and it will Cool, and Moisten, and drive
the Phlegm from thy Stomach, and profit thee very much.

A Water to heal any Sore Leg.
45 R. Running water one quart, Allome roche as much as an Egg, bay Salt a
spoonful, or somewhat more, if it be full of dead flesh, Wheat flower to the
quantity of an Egg; beat the white of an Egg, the Flower, and bay Salt
together, and put it into the Water as it boileth, with a branch of Rosemary,
stirring it continually: In using this Water do thus; three times in the day
wet Clothes, and lay on the Wound, in the Morning wet them with the Water to
loosen them from the Sore, and then dress them, and so again at Noone, and
Night.

Water of Coperas.
46 R. Coperas, grind it all to Powder, then put a little Water to it, and so
let it stand a Day, and a Night; then strain it through a Cloth: this Water is
good for sore Eyes, Canker in the Mouth, and Noli me tangere.

For the Spots of the Morphew, a Water.
47 R. Four Eggs, roste them hard, and put them all broken into a pint pot
to a pint of Vinegar, and let it stand so three Days, and three Nights well
stopped; and then cleanse it through a linen Cloth, and wash the Spots
therewith till they be away.

To take away the root of the Morphew.
48 R. Of Fumetary m. viii. Borage, Scabious ana m. iiii. bray them together in
a Mortar, and put thereto a Pottle of clean Whey; then strain them, and set
them on the fire till the scum rise, then take it off, and strain it, and then
set them over the fire again, and put thereto a good quantity of clarified
Honey, and boil them well together as long as any scumme will rise: take
hereof a good draught in a Morning.

An excellent Water to help Pimples in the Face, and it is good for sore Eyes,
and Pearls in the Eyes, or any Ache in the Head, Shoulders, or Knees.
49 R. A pint of white Wine, white Coperas ii. Allome ss. Camphire, and
Brimstone ana ii. beat all these very small in a Mortar, and then put it into
the Wine, and shake it all together half an hour, and let it stand two days
before you use it; you may keep it a whole year. When you Bathe any Ache with
it, heat a little thereof in a Sawcer, and with a Cloth bathe the Member at the
fire.

A Drink against the small Pox, or any Fever.
50 R. Of the herb Scabious m. ss. Figs dry nu. vi. Licoras ss. slice them,
and boil them in a pint of Springwater to the consumption of half, then add
a penniworth of Saffron: hereof take three spoonfulls in the Morning warm.

A Drink against the Plague, Pox, Measells, and other infectious Diseases.
51 R. Three pintes of Malmesey, and boil therein of Sage, and Rue ana m. i.
till one pint be wasted; then strain it, and set it on the fire again, and
put thereto one penniworth of long Pepper, half an ounce of Ginger, a quarter
of an ounce of Nutmegs, all beaten together; let it boil a little, and then
put to it four penniworth of Treacle, and a quarter of a pint of the best
Angelica water.

Take every Morning and Evening half a spoonful at a time for a preservative
against infection; and if you be infected, take two spoonfulls, and sweat
thereupon.

A precious Water for the Stone.
52 In May take the herb called Ramsins, and distill it; put unto your Water
the same proportion of white Wine, and distill them again together.

A Water to make the Face, and Hands white.
53 R. The leaves of Nettles, dry them, and make thereof Powder, and put that
Powder in Water, and boil it; and therewith wash your Face; and Hands: gather
your Nettles in May before the Sun rises, and you may keep them all the year.

A Water for Pimples, and heat in the Face.
54 R. A spoonful of burnt Allome, put it into a Sawcerfull of white wine
Vinegar, and stir it well together; and at Night when you go to bed, dip a
Cloth into it, and wet the Sore places.

A Water to make the Stone slip, and to provoke Urine.
55 R. Half a pint of white Wine, and boil it, and in the boiling put in
half an ounce of castle Soape sliced thin; when it is dissolved, drink thereof
blood-warme.

For a Pearl, or Web, or Blood-shotten Eye.
56 R. Of Maidenhaire, and ground Ivy m. i. Archangel flowers pu. i. wash them
clean, and swing them dry; then stamp them, and strain them with a little
good Ale; and with a feather drop a drop, or two into the sore Eye thrice in a
day: if the Eye be much Blood-shotten, take more of the Ivy.

A Water for an old Sore.
57 R. Flint stones nu. iii. vel iiii. burn them to Lime, and slake them in
Running water; then take Allome, and do the like therewith; boil them two
hours; then put thereto Bolearmenick, green Coperas, Camphire ana q.s. boil
them all one hour after they are dissolved, and then strain it, and put it up.

To make Aqua coelestis, the Celestial Water.
58 Aqua coelestis is of two kinds; if you mingle with it as much of the Water
called Mother of Balm, and distill it again, you have the Treasure of all
Medicines.

First, of the Virtues of these two Waters; the first Water is of such Virtue,
that if you put it into a fresh Wound, it heals it in four, and twenty
hours, so it be not Mortal; and it heals malign Ulcers, Cankers, Noli me
tangere, and old Wounds within the space of fifteen days, if you wash it
with the said Water every third day; and if you put a drop of it upon a
Carbuncle, it mortifieth the malignity thereof shortly; also if you put of the
same Water into the Eye that has lost his sight, if not utterly, it shall be
recovered within eight days at the uttermost; and if a Man drink a drop of it
with a little good Wine, it breaks the Stone in the space of two hours in
the Reins, or Bladder; it mollifieth hardened Sinews, if you wash them
therewith: This Water must be used from November to April, and but half a
spoonful at once, once a week.

It is thus made.
First, you must have a vessel of Glass a Cubite high, or thereabouts, and
fill it with Aqua vitae made of good Wine, and see that it be well luted, and
then cover it in Horse dung, or Doves dung, so that it be not too moist, nor
too hot, lest the Glass break: leave the neck of the Glass without in the
air; this will boil mightily; and so let it stand thirty days; then draw out
the Glass, and put these things following into the Water, and stop the mouth
close, and so leave it eight days: lastly, put the Glass in Balneo Mariae,
with Sand, setting on a head, with a receiver well luted, and make a slow fire,
and gather the first Water; whiles it seems to drop down clear; but when it
turns red, then change the receiver, for this is the second Water, which you
shall keep in a Glassewell stopped: The Spices to be put in are these, good
Cinnamon, Cloves, Ginger, Galingale, Nutmegs, Zedoary, long Pepper, and round,
roots of Citron, Spikenard, Lignum Aloes, Cubebs, Cardamomum, Calamus
Aromaticus, Germander, S. John's wort, Maces, white Frankincense, round
Turmentill, Hermodactills, the pithe of white Wallwort, Juniper, Laurel
berries, the seed of Mugwort, Smalllage, Fennel, Anise, flowers of Basile,
Rosemary, Sage leaves, Margerome, Mints, Penniroyall, Sticados, flowers of
Elder, red Roses, and white, Rue, Scabious, Lunary, Centaury the lesser,
Egrimony, Fumitary, Pimpernell, Dandelion, Eufrage, Maidenhaire, Endive, seeds
of Sorrel, yellow Sanders, Aloes Epatich, ana ii. Ambrosine, fine Rubarb, ana
ii. dry Figs, Raisons, Dates without stones, sweet Almonds, Pine kernels, ana
i. Aqua vitae made with good Wine to the quantity of them all, and four times
as much Sugar as they be all; of white Honey lib. ii. then put to the
underwritten Roots, of Gentian, flowers of Rosemary, Nigella that grows in
the Corn, Bryony, root of the herb called Panis Porcinus Hogs bread, seed
of Wormwood ana ss. before you distill the Water you must quench in it a hot
plate of Gold oftentimes, and put to it Oriental pearls, which must lie
covered with Water, else they lose their color; and so distill it.

Cataplasmes, or Poultisses. CHAP. XXXVII.
An excellent Cataplasme for any Swelling, Apostume, rankling Wound, or broken
Bone.
R. Of new Milk one pint, seethe in it, until it be thick, the crumbs of
fine white bread; then take it from the fire, and put into it the white of an
Egg, and one spoonful of Sallet Oil first well beaten together, and stir it
well, and lay it to the place as hot as can be suffered: it will serve twice.

A Poultis for a sore Breast.
2 R. Of Neats foot Oil pi. i. of Marigold leaves m. i. make it thick with
wheaten Bread, and put into it a little Saffron, and boil it to a Poultis.

A Poultis for a sore Throat.
3 R. A Swallows nest, and boil it in Water to a Poultis, and bind it to the
Neck, and Throat as hot as you can.

A Poultis for any Swelling that comes of a hot cause.
4 R. A Lapfull of wild Mallows; boil them in running Water until they be
tender, then swing them in a Cloth, and chop them small; then take a penniworth
of sweet Butter, and the crumbs of Manchet, and put the Mallows, and all, into
a quart of Milk, and boil it until it be thick, and lay it to the grief as
hot as can be suff^red.

A Poultis to be applied to the bottom of the Belly to break Wind, and move
Urine.
5 R. Figs, and the herb Grownsell, ana m. i. boil them in running Water to a
Poultis.

Another for the same.
6 R. The dung of a Stoned horse boiled in white Wine to a Poultis, and applied
to the bottom of the Belly.

Another.
7 R. Hemlock, boil it in a sufficient quantity of fresh Butter, and lay it to
the Belly.

A Poultis for the Sciatica.
8 R. Of Time m. iiii. boil it in a sufficient quantity of white Wine, unto
the thickness of a Cataplasme, and apply it hot.

A Cataplasme to suppurate a cold Tumor.
9 R. Of the root of marsh Mallows, and Lillies, ana iiii. the root of
Bryony, and wild Cucumer ana iii. Oil of Lillies lib. ss. Oil of Costus
iiii. Wine ii. boil them until the Wine be consumed, and after it is
strained, add thereto Meal of Linseed, and Fenugreek ana ii. Leaven i. ss.
Duckes, and Goose grease ana iii. mix them to the form of a Cataplasme.

A Cataplasme to assuage Pain, and suppurate Tumors.
10 R. Of the leaves of Mallows m. ii. Groundsell m. i. bind them in a linen
Cloth, and boil them in Veale broth till they be tender; then stamp them very
small, and add thereto of new Cream lib. ss. crumbs of white Bread vii.
Sheep suet shred small lib. ss. Oil of Roses iiii. boil them until they be
thick, and in the cooling, add thereto the whites of two Eggs.

A Poultis for a Plague Sore, or Carbuncle.
11 R. Of Lilly roots ii. Mallows, Marshmallowes, Violets ana m. i. Meal of
Linseed, Barley, and Wheat meal ana i. two dry Figs of equal bigness,
flowers of Camomill, and Violets ana p. i. Elder flowers ss. boil them, and
strain them through a Cloth, and add thereto Sowes grease, Hens grease, and
Calves suet ana i. ss. Oil of sweet Almonds, or Lillies ana iii. Saffron ss.
make a Poultis.

A Cataplasme for the Shingles, to be applied cold.
12 R. Of fresh Doves dung q. ss. mingle it with wheat Bran, and apply it as a
Poultis, and cover it with a Colewort leaf for three days, and it cures.

A Cataplasme for a Wrench, or Strain.
13 R. Of Brookelime, Parsely, Groundsell ana q. ss. Sheep suet as much as
shall suffice for your herbs, chop them small together, and boil them in
Urine, and so hot apply them upon a blew Cloth.

A Cataplasme for the Kings Evil, or the Tumor called Scrophula.
14 R. Of Weybroad, called also Ribwort, Plantain, Woodbine, Shepherds purse,
Betony, wild Camomill, Scabious, Nightshade, Egrimony, ana m. iii. beat them
together in a Mortar, and strain out the Juice; take as much Honey as of those
Juices, also as much Juice of Parseley as of all the rest; and again, as much
Honey as of that: boil all together, and put into it as much Barley branne as
will make it into the form of a Poultis.

A Cataplasme to stay Flux of Blood in any part.
15 R. Frankincense, Aloes, Dragons blood, Bolearmen ana. equal parts; mingle
them with the white of an Egg, and the hairs of the Belly of an old Hare a
little shred: apply it.

A Cataplasme for a sore Breast.
16 R. Frankincense, and mix it with Fullers Earth, and Oil of Roses, and
apply it; for it helps the hardness, and Inflammation of them, after the
women are delivered of Child.

A Poultis for a sore Breast.
17 R. Turnips nu. iii. or iiii. pare them pretty thick, and boil the parings
in new Milk, and make a Poultis, and lay to the breast hot; use this, and it
will cure it.

A good Poultis for an Impostume, or any sudden Swelling in any part of the
Body. Also for a sore Breast.
18 R. Of French Barley a pint, beat it fine, put to it half so much Linseed
beaten fine; then take a handful of Mallows shred small, and put all these
into a quart of new Milk, and seethe them till it be thick; then spread it on
a linen Cloth, and lay it to hot as may be suffered, and let it lie four and
twenty hours.

A Poultis for the Palsy.
19 R. A great Onyon, core it, and fill the hole with Oil Olive, and Lavender
small minced, and set the Onyon on the fire until it be soft, and tender; then
lay it as hot as may be suffered to the top of the head.

Balmes. CHAP. XXXVIII.
An excellent black Balm to agglutinate Wounds.
R. Mummy iii. Aloes Epatick ii. Ship pitch ss. Sarcocoll, Gum of Ivy tree,
Mastick, ana i. powder those which are to be powdered subtly, and mix them
with twelve ounces of Aqua vitae prepared for Wounds; let them boil in a
Glass vessel in Balneo Mariae three days: which done, add thereto Oil of
Turpentine ix. Banisters Balsame distilled iiii. then boil them again until
the Aqua vitae be wasted, and reserve it to your use.

Banisters Balsame is thus made.
2 R. Of the clearest Turpentine lib. viii. black Wine lib. ii. Juice of Comfry
lib. ss. Quinces quartered nu. x. wild Prunell lib. ss. Comfrey roots iiii.
Gum Ammoniack ii. Olibanum i. Gum Elemi i. ss. Mastick, Sarcocoll ana ii. Aloes
Epatick, Myrrh, Mummie, ana ii. ss. Cinnamon i. ss. Cassia ligna ii. Dragons
blood i. ss. Bolearmen. i. vi. Pomegranate Pills vi. flowers of Pomegranate ii.
Hypocistis, red Sanders, ana i. ss. Nutmegs, Cypress Nuts ana iii. Myrtles ss.
powder those that are to be powdered, and steep them in Balneo Mariae two
days; and then distill them.

A good Balm against contraction and stiffenesse of members, the water whereof
clears the Eyesight.
3 R. Of common Oil lib. iii. Turpentine lib. i. Gum of the Carobe rree vi.
Mastick, Myrrh, Olibanum, Sarcocoll ana ii. salt Nitre ii. ss Aqua vitae lib.
i. powder those that are to be powdered, and distill them with a gentle fire,
and receive the Water with a thin Oil swimming aloft, which separate apart by
it self; but the thickest Oil in the bottom separate by straining, which is
the Balm.

An excellent Balm of Earth worms for the speedy curing of all manner of
Wounds, especially those of the Joints, Sinews, and Tendons, and about the head
it cures pricks according to the first intention, and is good for Palsies,
Cramps, Lamenesse, or Numnesse, and such like.
4 R. Oil of Turpentine lib. v. long Earthwormes prepared lib. ii. ss. Myrrh
ii. ss. Mastick, Sarcocoll, Olibanum iii. Galbanum, Gum Ammoniack ana i.
Bdellium ii. Gum Elemi iii. Cloves iii. common Oil lib. ii. Oil of Worms
lib. i. of the purest Turpentine lib. i. put Oil together, except the Oil of
Worms and common Oil, into the Oil of Turpentine, the Gummes being first
finely minced, and the rest powdered, and so let them stand thirty days; then
pour out by it self the clearest part, but the thicker part with all the
grounds put into your boiling vessel, together with a pint of Malmesey, or
Sack, and the Oil of Worms, and common Oil; boil these together the space
of three hours, continually stirring it that it grow not to the bottom; then
when the thick parts swim above, take it off the fire, and put into it the Oil
of Turpentine that before was cleared from it, lastly strain it purely.

Vesalius his Balsame.
5 R. Of the best Turpentine lib. 1. Oil of Bay iiii. Galbanum iii. Gum
Elemi iiii. ss. Frankincense, Myrrh, Gum of Iop. great Centory, wood of
Aloes ana iii. Galingale, Cloves, Comfrey, Cinnamon, Nutmegs, Zedoary, Ginger,
white Ditanie ana i. Oil of Earth-wormes ii. Aqua vitae lib. vi. beat all
these small, and infuse them three days in Aqua vitae; then distill them in a
Retort of such largeness, that three parts thereof may remain empty; then
place the Retort in an earthen Pan filled with sifted Ashes, and set it upon
the Furnace, and to the neck thereof fit, and closely lute a Receiver: Lastly,
kindle under it a soft fire at the first; from hence will flow three Liquors,
the first waterish, and clear, the other thin, and of a pure golden color,
the third of the color of a Carbuncle, which is the true Balsame; the first
Liquor cuts phlegm, and discusses Flatulencies, is good against the weakness
of the Stomach coming of a cold cause; the second helps hot, and fresh
bleeding Wounds; the third is chiefly effectual against these same affects.

Fallopius his Balsame.
6 R. Of clear Turpentine lib. ii. Linseed Oil, lib. i. Rosin of the Pine,
vi. Frankincense, Myrrh, Aloes, Masticke, Sarcocoll, Mace, Wood of Aloes ana.
ii. Saffron ss. let them be put in a Glass retort, set in Ashes, and so
distilled; there will come forth a clear Water, and presently after a reddish
Oil, most profitable for Wounds.

A very good Balm.
7 R. Of Turpentine lib. i. ss. Galbanum ii. Aloes Cicatrine, Masticke, Cloves,
Galingale, Cinnamon, Nutmegs, Cubebs, ana. i. Gum of Iop ss. beat them all,
and mix them together, and distill them in a Glass with a slow fire first,
and receive the first Water severally by it self; then increase the fire, and
you shall have a Water more reddish; then increase your fire, and you shall
have a red Oil: your Receiver must be thrice changed.

This Oil has all the virtues of true Balm, for it burns in the Water, and
curdeth Milk; the first Liquor is called the Water of Balm, the second, Oil
of Balm, the third, Balm Artificial; the first is good against the running
of the Ears, if two drops Morning and Evening be put into them; dropped into the
Eyes, it helps the Blearednesse, and consumes the Tears; it is good to wash
the mouth against the Toothache, and Worms in the Teeth: the third Liquor is
good against Venom and poison, if two, or three drops be laid upon it; and if
you enclose any venomous thing within a Circle made herewith, the Creature will
rather die, then come out: it is good against Impostumes, Fistulaes, and Noli
me tangere, and all cold Flegmaticke humors; if a cloth be wet therein, and
laid upon it, it avails against the Palsy, and trembling of the Members.

Bathes. CHAP. XXXIX.
A Bathe for a Rupture.
1 R. Of the Bark and Flowers of Pomegranates, Cups of Acornes, Shumac, ana.
i. Larkes spur, Comfry ana. m. i. Hypocistis, Galls, Allom, ana. ii. Roses,
Camomill, anise, ana. p. ii. boil them in equal portions of Red Wine, and
Smithes Water; with the Decoction Bathe the place affected.

A Bathe for Diseases in the Legs, called Malum mortuum.
2 R. Of sour Sorrel, of Fumetary, ana. m. ii. nip, m. i. Barley Branne,
Lupines, ana. m. i. ss. Violets, Mallows, ana. m. ss. white and black Elebor,
ana. i. ss. Honey, ii. let them boil in a sufficient quantity of Water, till
the third part be consumed.

A Bathe for the Stone.
3 R. Of Hyssop, Mallows, Parseley, Pellitory of the Wall, ana. m. i. Linseed,
ss. Saxifrage, m. i. put them in a cloth, and boil them in a sufficient
quantity of Water, and make a Bathe.

A Bathe for a Consumption.
4 R. Of new Calves Heads, nu. vi. with the Gathers, and Feet, as many Sheep
Heads, all as well dressed as if they were to be eaten; boil them in Water, in
a great Vessel, or for need in two, and make a Bath, which let the Sick use
every other day at Evening, and Morning an hour at a time: thus use it every
time fresh, for nine times together.

A Bath for the retention of Women's Visits.
5 R. Of Mallows, half a Pecke, as much Plantaine, as much of Elder leaves;
Mugwort, and Motherwort, ana. m. iiii. Wormwood, Rue, Featherfew, ana. m. ii.
Camomill half a Pecke, as much Red Sage, boil them in Water until they be
soft, then put into it Bayberries ii. Cominseeds ii. make a Bath, wherein let
the Patient sit up to the Pappes.

A Bathe to soften and mollify the Skin.
6 R. The Roots of white Lillies, and Marshmallowes, ana. lib. ii. Mallows,
Pellitory of the Wall, Violets, ana. m. ss. Linseed, Fenugreeke, Marshmallowes,
ana. lib. i. Flowers of Camomill, Melilot, and anise, ana. p. vi. boil them in
a sufficient quantity of Water, after add Oil of Lillies and Flax, ana. lib.
ii. make hereof a Bath, that the Sick may swim therein a good while.

You may see the Figure of your Bathing Tub in Parreye's Surgery, with the
double Personated Bottom, to which I refer you.

Observations for those that Bathe.
7 It is not good to use Bathing too often, for it offends the Heart, causes
Sincope, takes away the Appetite, loses the Joints, resolves the Spirits,
and moves the Humors. After what manner soever your Bathes be made, they must
always be warm; for warm Water humects, and mollifies the solid parts, if at
any time they be too dry, or hard: it is good against Sunburning and
Weariness, also if we find our selves too hot, or too cold, or loathing of
Meats, we find great profit in Bathes made of sweet warm Water. Herein we
usually add Oil, because Water alone will not so long adhere to the Body:
they are good in Hecticke Fevers, and in the declension of all Fevers, and
against raving and talking idly, for they procure sleep; against
inflammation of the Lungs and Sides, for they mitigate pain. For Bathes we
choose Rain Water, rather then River Water, so it be not muddy, and then
Fountain; the Water of Lakes, and Fennes, is not to be used. First, you must
fill your Vessel with your Decoction, warm, almost full, and so let the Sick
go into it, in the Morning fasting, or six hours after Meat: cover the Tub
close with a Goverlet, or Blanket, all but the Patients Head, that he may take
breath. For the time of the year, choose the Spring, and latter end of Summer,
a clear warm day, a close quiet room, and warm. Whiles the Patient is in
the Bathe, he must abstain from all meat, unless (to comfort his heart, and
keep him from fainting) he take a little sop in Wine, or the Juice of an
Orange, or a stewed Pruine, or the like, to quench his thirst: The strength of
the Patient will show how long he may stay in the Bathe, for he must not stay
in to the resolution of his powers; coming out of the Bathe, he must be taken
up in a clean warm Sheet, and so laid in a warm bed, and clothes enough
upon him, to make him sweat easily: after he has sweat so long as he can well
endure, take the Sheet from him, and dry him well with warm Napkins, chiefly
his Head, under his Arms, Breast, and Root of his Thighs; then let him rest
in his Bed an hour, or two; and when he is well refreshed, give him a clean
Shirt, that is dry, and warm, and let him rise, and walk, but let the Chamber
be kept very warm; then let him feed upon meats of good juice, and digestion;
after Bathe use not Venery: for Bathing use such Herbs as are most convenient
for the Disease, the Patient is affected with: the Ordinary sort of Herbs,
which are used in the Spring, are these; Mallows, Marshmallowes, Violets,
Pellitory of the Wall, Fumetary, Angelica, Roses, Betony, Fennel, Barefoote,
Dragon, Plantaine, Buglosse, Agrimony, Hart's-tongue, which are sodden in Water,
and made into a Bathe: after the Bathe dry well the Head, and eat not of two
hours after.

CHAP. XL. Of Stoves and Hot-houses.
SToves are either dry or moist; dry by making a fire underneath, or moist, by
causing a moist Vapor or heat from some decoction of Leaves, Herbs,
Flowers, or Seeds, in Water, or Wine, or both together: the dry Stoves are
used in many places in London, by making a clear fire underneath, that
presently heates all the room, by reason of a vaulted Furnace, wherein the
fire plays; of this kind every one may make himself one, as he shall judge
best, and fittest: the most necessary for private uses, I shall delineate to
you in this Figure following.

The Figure of a Stove to sweat in, with a hole to put out the Head, and a
drawing Box underneath to put in Coals, or a hot Wedge of iron; it must have
a seat within for the Patient to sit on; so high that his feet touch not below
for fear of burning.

engraved schematic of body-encasing sweat-inducing stove A, shows the hole in
the top, B, the door to shut in the Drawer with Coals, and C, shows the
little door, whereat to give the Patient warm Clothes to dry off the Sweat.


The moist Stoves are made in an ordinary Bathing Tub, by putting the decoction
into a Pot, and setting it over the fire well luted, with a Pipe that shall
come into the Bathing-tub, standing near thereto; which Tub must have a double
bottom, the uppermost being full of holes, whereupon the Patient sitting, may
receive the Sudorificke Vapor; now that the heat may be mitigated, when it is
too hot, you must have a hole in the top of your Pipe, to be stopped, and
opened at your pleasure: Let the Tub be covered all but the Patients Head.

Electuaries. CHAP. XLI.
To make an Electuary of the Juice of Roses.
1 R. Of the Juice of fresh dry Roses, white Sugar, ana. lib. i. ss. boil them
into a solid Electuary with an easy fire, and in the end sprinkle powdered
Sanders, Masticke, Cinnamon, all finely powdered ana. ii. Diacridium i. ss.
Camphire, ss. make Tablets in weight iii. ss. the Dose is one Tablet, the whole
composition is xxii. the Doses be about 70. It does draw Choler very strongly,
and also thin, and watrish humors; very good for those that have the Gout,
if they have not a vehement Ague withal.

To make Diaphaenicon.
2 R. Of the Pulpe of Dates, cleansed, boiled in Hydromell, and fined in a
Sive, fresh Penids, ana. lib. ss. blancht Almonds, iii. ss. when they be
bruised, and mingled all together, put into them clarified Honey, lib. ii. boil
them a little, and then sprinkle Ginger, Pepper, Mace, Cinnamon, Leaves of dry
Rue, Fennel seed, and seed of wild Carrets, ana. ii. Turbith finely beat,
iiii. Diacridium iiii. ss. the Dose is from iii. to ss. the whole composition
is about lib. iiii. the Doses about 130. This Electuary does mildly purge
Choler, Crude and slimie Phlegm, agreeable and convenient in continual Agues,
and Diseases arising of Crudity, and also for the Cholicke.

To make the Electuary called Benedicta.
3 R. Of Turbith x. Diacridium, Hermodactills red Roses, ana v. Cloves, Ginger,
Saxifrage, Parseley, seed, Salt Gemme, Galingall, Mace, Carrawayes,
Fennell-seed, Sparagus seed, and Seed of Kneeholme, or wild Myrrh, Millet,
the four great cold seeds, Licoras, ana. i. of the best clarified Honey lib. i.
make it up according to Art; the Dose is from iii. to ss. the whole composition
is almost lib. ii. the Doses be about 50. It draws forth Phlegmatic
Humors, it purges the Rheines, and expels the Stone, and Gravel.

To make the Electuary called Confectio Hamech.
4 R. The Bark of yellow Mirabolanes, ii. little Onions, black Violets,
Coloquintida, Polipody of the Oak, ana i. ss. Woormewood, Thyme, ana ss.
Aniseed, Fennel seed, red Roses, ana iii. bruise them all, and soake them in
Whey, lib. ii. then boil them to a pound, rub them in your hand, and wring
them: to the strained decoction, add the juice of Fumetary, the Pulpe of
Pruines, and Raisins, ana lib. ss. white Sugar, clarified Honey, ana lib. i.
boil them to the thickness of Honey, sprinkling in the end, Agaricke, and
Seen beaten fine, ana ii. Rubarb beaten i. ss. Dodder that grows upon Thyme,
i. Diacridium vi. Cinnamon, ss. Ginger ii, Seed of Fumetary and Anise,
Spikenard, ana, i. the Dose is from iii. to half an ounce, the whole
composition is lib. iii. and viii. the Doses be about 80. This Electuary
purges Melancholy, and other humors adust, and is good against Madness,
Melancholy, Giddiness, Forgetfulness, and all faults of the Skin, as
Scabbes, Morphew, Canker, Tetter, and Elephantiasis.

To make an Electuary called Hiera Simplex.
5 R. Cinnamon, Mace, A sarabacca, Spikenard, Saffron, Masticke, ana. vi. Aloes
unwashed, 100, or lib. i. ss. the best clarified Honey, lib. iiii. the Powder
alone is ministered from ii. to iii. but being taken in Honey from i. to i. ss.
It is more comfortable then purging; it purges Choler, and Phlegm from the
stomach and Intrailes; it does mildely help all Diseases proceeding of
Crudity, and also the Palenesse of the Face.

An Electuary for a Cough, or Cold.
6 R. Of Germander, Hyssop, Horehound, Maidenhaire, Agrimony, Betony,
Liverwort, and Hart's-tongue ana. m. i. boil them in nine pints of water, to
the consumption of six, then let it cool, and strain it: to this decoction
put of clarified Honey, lib. ss. fine Powder of Licoras v. Enulacampana root
powdered, iii. boil them to the thickness of an Electuary; take of this at
any time, but especially in the morning fasting, and at night when you go to
bed, or two hours after Supper, the quantity of a Nutmeg.

The Electuary of an Egg, commonly called, Electuarium de ovo, against the
Plague.
7 R. A new laid Hens Egg, make a little hole in the least end of it, no
bigger then need shall require, to get out the White from the Yolke, which do
as clean as clean as may be; and if the Yolke come out, put it in again,
then with a little stick of wood ram the Egg as full of the best English
Saffron as may be, then cover the hole with the top of another Egge-shell, and
a little white of an Egg, so as nothing may breathe forth; lay the Egg in an
Oven, when the Bread is newly drawn, lay it upon a Potsheard, or such like, to
keep the shell from burning; stop the oven close, and let it lie until the
shell be brown, and that the Saffron and Yolke be so well dried, as you may
beat it to fine Powder: first pill off the shell, and cut the substance into
two parts, long ways, and if any part within it be not well dried, you may dry
it on a Chafingdish and coals in a pewter dish until it be well; Then beat the
said substance to fine Powder, weight it, and put thereto as much white Mustard
seed finely beaten, as the Egg does weigh. Then take the roots of white
Ditanie, and Turmentill, ii. the Powder of Myrrh, Harts-horne, Nux vomica ana,
i. the Powder of the roots of Angelica, wild Burnet, Juniper berries,
Setwall, and Camphire, ana.. ss. mix these all together; being finely beaten,
weigh them all together, and put them in a good large Iron or Stone Mortar,
with as much of the purest and best Triacle Andromecha, as all the said things
do weigh; then work and bray them together a good while, then put into your
Mortar, to all the said things, of the best and purest Honey clarified that you
can get, in this proportion; if your Egg weighed an Ounce, then one pound of
Honey at the least, more, or less according to the proportion of your Egg; or
you may put as much Honey as all the said things do weigh, and bray and stir
all those things together, for three hours at the least, by a good
Houreglasse. Your Electuary being thus made, put it into a Glass, or Gally
pot, close stopped: set it not where heat, or Sun comes to it, and it will
last thirty years.

Give it to the Patient infected, the quantity of a reasonable Walnut at the
most, and to a child less, as you shall think meet; give it luke warm, in
Dragon, or Cardus water distilled; for want of these, in white Wine: If the
infected brook it not thus, then in Sack; if he cast it, give it him again in
Sack, and if he brook it not then, the third time; if then he cast it, then God
have mercy upon him, few escape unless they brook it, and presently break out
in Sores: and if he brook it, give him no more that night, but the next day,
if need require, give him half the said quantity, as if the Sore be coming,
and does not readily come forth; let not the sick drink for two hours after:
let those that go to the infected, take as much as a little Hasell Nut, and
let him, if he can, drink once in a week, a good quantity of white Wine and
Sallet Oil: air Houses, and Clothes with Frankincense. This is also good for
such as are taken with some sudden fit, being taken as last before.

An Electuary to purge Melancholy.
8 R. Of Rubarbe ii. Agaricke, iii. Caraway seeds, and Coriander prepared, ii.
Cummin prepared, i. Aniseedes, i. London Treacle, i. Seen i. Musk, gr. ss.
Ambergreese, gr. i. Cinnamon, ii. Mirabolans Cebuli, Mirabolans Embici, ana. i.
Ginger, i. Nutmegs, ii. Mace, ii. Diacridium, ii. Powder Sugar, and Rosewater,
as much as will serve to make a Sirrup to compound these Powders into the form
of an Electuary.

An Electuary for the Ptisicke.
9 R. The root of Enula Campana, in May dry it, and beat it small, and put it
in Vinegar until it be soft; then dry it again, and when it is dry, boil it
to an Electuary with pure Honey, and keep it in a box, to eat now and then
the quantity of a Hasell Nut.

Sirrups. CHAP. XLII.
To make a most excellent Sirrup of Damask Roses, made by that worthy and
famous Doctor Andreas de Languina, a Spaniard, and commonly used by the Princes
of Spain, Germany, Italy, and France, and by the best learned men in those
Countries.
R. Of Damask Roses gathered in the dew, if it be possible, lib. vi. cut away
all the white in the bottom; then boil of fair Spring water, in a well
glased pot with a narrow mouth, lib. xviii. and being sodden a little, put in
your Roses, and stop them close the space of six hours; then with your hands
being clean, wring the Water from the Roses, and then sees the same water
again, and put in as many fresh Roses as you did before, and thus do nine
times, till the Water be of the color of the Roses, and the very taste and
savor of them: then take of that Decoction, lib. vi. thus prepared, and to it
put of the finest Sugar lib. iiii. and make thereof a Sirrup according to Art;
of which Sirrup you may give to a strong nature, the quantity of v. mixed with
the Broth of a Hen sodden without Salt, or else with Buglos Water; this
Sirrup purges without offending of the Stomach, with great gentleness,
better then either Rubarbe, or Manna; it will give twelve or fourteen stools
at a time of a very filthy humor, whereby it eases all the heavy pains and
loathsomeness of the joints, and of the head, and of the whole body, and is the
most precious, and wholesomest purge of all; for it comfort the stomach,
refreshes the Liver and Heart, and takes away from them their superfluous
humors. When you have done as aforesaid, you must clarify it with the white
of an Egg in this order; let it boil softly on the fire, and then beat the
whites of two or three Eggs till they foame; and put into the pot a
spoonefull; and as the skumme does rise, skumme it off a good pace, till you
have used all your Eggs, and no more skumme will rise; when you have done all
to the putting in of your Sugar, you must see that your Pan or Pot be very
clean, and let it sees, then put in your Eggs, as before, and let it sees
until it be thick.

To make Sirrup of Vinegar simple.
2 R. Of pure Spring water lib. iiii. of white Sugar lib. v. boil them until
they cast up a foame, and half the Water be consumed; then put to it of white
Wine Vinegar lib. iii. and boil them again until they come to a Sirrup. This
Sirrup is common to all humors, and does prepare them; it digesteth Choler,
Phlegm, and Melancholy, and does attenuate gross humors, by reason of the
Vinegar; it mitigateth the heat of Choler, and asswageth the burning of Agues,
and Thirst, and scoureth the passages of the Body that are stopped; it provokes
Urine, is an enemy to corruption, and penetrates into all the parts of the
Body, and also after a Purgation, it provokes sweat, and corrects the malice
of all humors.

To make Sirrup of Vinegar compound.
3 The Sirrup of Vinegar compound is made by boiling Herbs, Roots, or Seeds
in Water, and of the Decoction to make a Sirrup with Vinegar, and Sugar; the
Herbs, or Seeds, ought to be such as are fittest to prepare the humor you
intend to purge.

To make Catholicum simplex.
4 R. Of the roots of Enula Campana, Buglosse, Cichorie, or wild Endive,
Marshmallowes, Polipodie of the Oak, seed of Bastard Saffron, all beaten ana.
ii. Hyssop, Staechados, Bawme, Agrimony, Mugwort, Betony, Scolopendria, or
Stoneferne, ana m. ii. Raisins stoned iii. of the four great cold Seeds,
Aniseedes, Licoras, ana. iii. boil all these according to Art, in lib. x. of
Hydromell (which is xv. lib. of water, boiled with lib. i. of Honey skummed
clean as it boyles) till three pounds be consumed; then strain the Decoction,
and macerate therein the space of xii. hours, the cleansed leaves of Seen
beaten iiii. the Sirrup of the infusion of pale Roses, lib. i. of the best
clarified Honey, lib. ii. boil them with an easy fire unto the thickness of
Honey, putting into it last of all, of the best Rubarbe, and purest Cinnamon,
ana. i. yellow Sanders, i. Nutmegs ii. the Dose is i. the whole composition is
lib. iiii. the Doses be about 50. This does purge all humors gently from all
parts of the Body, and may be given to women with child, old folk, or
children, either with an Ague, or without.

To make Catholicum Majus.
4 R. Of the four great cold Seeds cleansed, of white Poppy seed, ana. i.
Gum Dragant, iii. red Roses, Yellow Sanders. Cinnamon, ana. ii. Ginger, i. of
the best and choicest Rubarbe, Diacridium, ana. ss. Agaricke, Turbith, ana. ii.
white Sugar dissolved in Rose water in the which ii. of the leaves of Seen have
been incocted lib. i. let Tables be compounded of weight iii. the Dose is one
Table, the whole composition is lib. i. ss. the Doses be about 50. It gathers
humors from all places of the Body more forcibly, without disturbance of the
body or strength.

To make a Sirrup of white Roses by infusion.
6 R. Of the Water of infusion of white Roses, lib. v. clarified Sugar lib.
iiii. boil them with a lent fire, to the thickness of a Sirrup; soake lib.
ii. of Fresh white Roses in lib. vi. of warm water twelve hours covered;
instead of these put in other fresh Roses; then wring those out, and put in
other fresh Roses, nine or ten times, until the water have the strength of
the Roses, in which the Sugar must be dissolved. This Sirrup draws from the
Entrails thin Choler, and waterish humors, to be given to children and old
folks, and those that are sick.

Sirrup of the Juice of Lemmons.
7 The Sirrup of the juice of Lemmons, of Citrons, of Oranges, of unripe
Grapes, of Pomegranates, of Sorrel, of Ribes, or red Gooseberries, the order
of making them is all alike; for the juice of every one of them must be purged
by running through a Woollen Strainer, freely without compulsion, and to every
vii. lib. of Juice, add of good white Sugar lib. 5. and boil them in a Tin
Vessel on a soft fire to a Sirrup. The Sirrup of the Juice of Lemmons does
assuage heat and thirst, and restrains corruption in Fevers; it defends
the Stomach, Heart, and Noble parts; it purges the Kidneyes, and provokes
Urine: Sirrup of Citrons does the like: the Sirrup of Pomegranates corroborates
the Stomach, the Spleen, Liver, and Lungs, and restrains vomiting: Sirrup
of Oranges is more pleasant: Sirrup of unripe Grapes does more quench thirst:
Sirrup of the Juice of Sorrel does allay Choler, and open obstructions: the
Sirrup of red Gooseberries is more sweet in taste, and more astringent.

Oxymel simple.
8 R. Of the clearest Water, and of the best Honey, ana. lib. iiii. boil them
until half the Water be consumed; then pour in of very sharp Vinegar lib.
ii. and let them be boiled again to a Sirrup: it does extenuate gross
humors, and scour slimy matter, and open old obstructions, and Asthma, that
is, obstructions of the Lungs, with Phlegm, whereof arises shortness of Wind.

Sirrup of Endive.
9 R. Of fresh Endive, Lettice, Agrimony, Garden Succory, Liverwort,
Sowthistle, Hawkeweed, ana. m. i. ss. of the four great cold Seeds, ana. i.
red and white Sanders, red Roses bruised ana. ii. boil them in lib. viii. of
Water to the half, then strain it, and to the decoction put of white Sugar
lib. iiii. sees them all together again, and scumme and fine them as they
boil; then add of the Juice of Endive purged by settling lib. i. afterward of
the pure Juice of Pomegranates without dregs iiii. boil them all to a Sirrup.
It cooles, purges, and corroborates the Liver, and is good after Purgations.

Sirrup of Hart's-tongue.
10 R. Of Oak Fern, Roots of both kinds of Buglosse, the bark of the root
of the Caper bush, Barks of Tamariske, ana. ii. Hart's-tongue m. iii.
Maydenhaire, Balmemint, Hoppes, Dodder, ana. m. ii. boil them in lib. ix. of
Water, until there remain v. strain it, and put to the decoction of white
Sugar lib. iiii. boil them and fine them to a Sirrup. It is good against
Melancholy, and abateth the Swelling of the Spleen.

Sirrup of dry Roses.
11 R. Of Water lib. iiii. make it warm, and infuse in it for the space of xx
iiii. hours red Roses dried lib. i. strain it, and dissolve therein white
Sugar, lib. ii. then boil them to a Sirrup. It does mitigate the hot Diseases
of the Brain, asswages thirst, strengthens the Stomach, causes Sleep, and
stays Fluxes of the Belly, agglutinates, and mundifies Ulcers.

Sirrup of Poppy.
12 R. the Heads of white Poppie, not thoroughly riped, and new viii. the Heads
of black Poppy, fresh gathered, vi. Aqua Coelestis lib. iiii. boil them to
the consumption of half, and put thereinto Sugar, and Penids ana, viii. boil
them to a Sirrup. It is good against Catarrhes and Coughes, mitigateth the
heat of the forehead, helps Frenzies, and Watchings, and so procures Sleep.

To make Diacodion.
13 R. The heads of white Poppy, neither the greatest nor ripest, nu. xii. Aqua
Coelestis, lib. ii. boil them to the thid part, and when it is strained, put
thereto of the best Sapa, that is, new Wine boiled to the third part, iiii. of
the purest Honey ii. boil all these together, and in the end of the Decoction,
put red Roses, Flowers of Pomegranates, Acatia, Sumach, ana. ii. Seed of
Purselaine, white and red Corrall, ana. i. This Sirrup procures Sleep, and
helps the Catarrhes, and stays all Fluxes of the Belly.

Sirrup of Violets compound.
14 R. The fresh gathered Flowers of Violets, ii. Seed of Quinces and Mallows,
ana. i. Iujubes, Sebestens, ana. nu. xx. Gourds boiled, or their Seed, lib. v.
boil them to them to the half, and with lib. ii. of Sugar make a Sirrup. It
mitigates the Catarrhe, and hoarsenesse, helps the Cough, and eases the
Plurisie, and quenches thirst.

Sirrup of Violets simple.
15 The Sirrup of Violets simple is made by infusing the Flowers in water, once
or twice, or thrice, as you did in making Sirrup of Roses, and with the
Decoction make a Sirrup with Sugar. It asswageth sharp humors; and Plurisie;
good for Headache, Watching, and dreaming, and against the heaviness of the
Heart; also it is good to temper other Medicines.

Sirrup of Hyssop.
16 R. Of dried Hyssop, i. ss. roots of Oak Fern, of Fennel, Licoras, Seed
of Bastard Saffron, ana i. cleansed Barley, white Venus hair, ana. ss. cleansed
Raisins, i. ss. dried Figs, fat Dates, ana. nu. x. boil them in six pound
of Water, to the consumption of half; then strain it, and add to the
Decoction of pure Honey lib. i. ss. and Sugar as much, and make a Sirrup. It
purges the Lungs gently, and does digest Phlegm by ^nuating it, and is good
against the Plurisie.

Sirrup of Horehound.
17 R. Of white fresh Horehound ii. Licoras, Polipody of the Oak, Root of
Smallage, and Fennel, ana. ss. white Venus Hair, Hyssop, Origan, Garden
Savorie, Calamint, Coltfoot ana. vi. Seed of Anise, and Cotton, ana. iii.
Raisins of the Sun stoned ii. fat Figs dry nu. x. boil them in viii. lib.
of Hydromel delayed till the half be consumed; then strain it, and boil the
Juice into a Sirrup with Honey, lib. ii. and white Sugar lib. ii. season it
with i. of the Powder of the Root of the Florentine Flower-de-luce. This
Sirrup avayleth much in Ptisickes, Coughes, and all Diseases of the Breast and
Liver; for it cutteth, attenuateth, and purges all gross and slimy Phlegm;
and because it is composed of such a confused mixture of lenitive, and cutting
simples, therefore in old inveterate Coughes and Ptisicks I usually prescribe,
with good success, a composition of this Sirrup, with others more moderate, as
thus R. of Sirrup of Horehound, Maiden-haire, Coltsfoot, Hyssop, Violets, ana.
i. mingle them, and take every morning and evening half a spoonefull, and as
much when you feel the Cough approach, or the Phlegm to rise.

Sirrup of the Juice of Buglosse.
18 R. Of the Juice of Buglosse clarified, lib. iii. white Sugar. lib. ii.
boil them to a Sirrup. Thus you shall make the Sirrup of the Juice of Violets
or Peaches, which are all Cordial. Sirrup of Buglosse is not only good to
cheer the Heart, and drive away swouning out also for Melancholy and Mad
people.

Sirrup of Mint.
19 R. The Juice of sweet Quinces, the Juice of Tarty sweet Quinces, the Juice
of sweet Pomegranates, the Juice of Tarty sweet Pomegranates, ana. lib. i. ss.
mix these together, and infuse in them for the space of xxiiii. hours lib. i.
ss. of dry Mint, and of red Roses ii. boil them until half be consumed, and
then strain it, and add thereto of white Sugar lib. iiii. and to sweeten the
Sirrup, boil therein iii. of Gallia Muscata, bound in a cloth. This Sirrup
heates the stomach moderately, and corroborates it, and helps concoction,
abateth Loathsomenesse, Vomiting, Chincough, and Lientery.

Sirrup of Coltsfoot.
20 R. Of Coltsfoot fresh gathered, m. vi. Maidenhaire, m. ii. Hyssop m. i.
Licoras ii. boil them in lib. iiii. of Rain Water, or Spring Water, until the
fourth part be consumed; then strain it, and clarify it, and with lib. iii.
of white Sugar make a Sirrup.

Sirrup of Maidenhaire.
21 R. Of Licoras ii. Maidenhaire v. infuse it in lib. iiii. of Spring Water;
then boil it, and strain it, and with lib. i. ss. of pure Sugar, boil it up
to a Sirrup.

Sirrup of Wormwood.
22 R. Roman Wormwood lib. ss. red Roses, ii. Spikenard iii. bruise them, and
infuse them xxiiii. hours in old and well smelling white Wine, and the Juice
of Quince pears lib. ii. ss. boil them with a gentle fire to the consumption
of half; then boil them again with lib. ii. of white Sugar, to the
thickenesse of a Sirrup. It purges and consumes Choler out of the stomach,
it recovereth a good and pleasant color, and helps the Iaundies.

Sirrup of Radish.
23 R. Of the Roots of Garden, and wild Raddish, ana. roots of Saxifrage,
Kneeholme, or Butchers Broom, Lovage, Sea-Holly, Pety Whin O Cammocke, or
Ground-Furze, Parseley, Fennel, ana. ss. Leaves of Betony, Pimpernell, Wild
Time, tender Crops of Nettles, Cresses, Samphire, Venus Hair ana. m. i. the
fruit of sleepy Nightshade, and Iujubes ana. nu. xx. the Seed of Basil,
Burre, Parseley of Macedonia, Carawayes, Seseli, Yellow Carrots, Grommell,
Barks of Baytree root ana. ii. Raisins stoned, Licoras ana. vi. boil them in
lib. x. of Water till four pound be consumed, then strain it, and with lib.
ii. of purified Honey, and white Sugar lib. iiii. make a clear Sirrup, season
it with Cinnamon i. and Nutmegs ss. This Sirrup expels Gravel and Stone, and
scoureth the Kidneis, and Bladder, if it be mixed with other Lenitive and
scowring things, also it provokes Urine.

Sirrup of Mugwort.
24 R. Of Mugwort m. ii. Roots of Flowerdeluce, Elecampane, Madder, Piony,
Lovage, Fennel, ana. ss. Wild Time, Origanum, Calamint, Nep, Balmemint,
Savine, sweet Marjoram, Hyssop, Horehound, Germander, Groundpine, S. John's
Wort, Featherfew, Betony, ana. m. i. Seed of Anis, Parsley, Fennel, Basil,
Yellow Carrets, Rue, Nigella, ana. iii. bruise them, and infuse them xxiiii.
hours in lib. viii. of Hydromel, till three pound be consumed: then boil it
with lib. v. of Sugar unto a Sirrup, season it with Cinnamon i. and Spike iii.
This Sirrup of Mugwort does provoke mightily the suppressed monthly Visits of
Women, which may be done by Sirrup of Maidenhaire, or Hyssop, but more mildely;
it also avayleth against the strangling of the Womb.

Sirrup of Alchachenge, or Morrell of the Hill.
25 R. Of Alchachenge i. ss. Raisins, Kernels of Pine Apples cleansed ana. vi.
of the three less Seeds, ana. iii. roots of Parseley, Fennel, Asperage,
Bruschus, and Smallage, ana. m.ss. Licoras x. Damask Pruines, Sebestens,
Iujubes, ana. nu. xii. Flowers of Violets, Heliotropion, or, milium solis.
and of Girus solis, ana. m. i. Saxifrage, m. ss. beat them and boil them a
little with Water of Endive, Buglosse, Fennel, and a little Wine of
Pomegranates, till the third part be consumed; then strain them, and make a
Sirrup with sufficient white Wax, and i. ss. of fine Rubarbe. This Sirrup
mundifieth, and cleanses the Reins from the Stone, Hairs, or Branne,
comfort the stomach, and breaks wind.

An excellent Sirrup to preserve the Lunges, and for Astma.
26 R. Of Nettle-water, and Coltsfoot water ana, pint i. Aniseed, and Licoras
powdered ana ii. spoonefuls, Raisons of Sun m. i. Figs sliced nu. iiii. boil
them until half a pint be consumed, strain it, and with one pound of white
Sugar candy powdered, make a Sirrup.

A Sirrup for the cough of the Lunges.
27 R. Leaves of Hearts tongue nu. iii. Liverwort, Lungwort, unset Hyssope,
wild Time ana m. i. boil all these in a pottle of new Wort to a quart; make a
thin Sirrup with Sugar candy, and drink of it when you go to bed, and in the
morning before you rise.

Another Sirrup for the same, and to open Obstructions, and help a short breath.
28 R. Of unset Hyssop, and Penyroyall m. iii. wash them, and stamp them; and
to the strained juice add the like proportion of English Honey; boil it in a
Pewter dish on a Chafingdish, and Coals, the space of half an hour, until
the Juice, and Honey be well incorporated: hereof let the Patient take two
spoonefulls at Morning, three of the Clock, and bed time, and use it as long
as need shall require.

A Sirrup for a Cold.
29 R. Of Cetrack one ounce, Coltsfoot, and Maidenhaire ana i. Elecampane
roots sliced lib. i. boil them in three quarts of Water till it be wasted to
one quart; then strain it, and with a pound of Sugar make a Sirrup secund.
art. take of this Sirrup every night, and morning ss. and as often as you cough.

Pills. CHAP. XLIII.
To make Pills of Aristolochia.
1 R. The root of round Aristolochia i. root of Gentian, Myrrh ana iii.
Aloes, Cinnamon ana ss. Ginger i. beat them very fine, and make them up with
new Oil of sweet Almonds, the dose is i. ss. they may be drunk, but they are
so bitter that they are more easily swallowed. These Pills are of an opening
virtue, scouring the Liver, and Reins, and are good in an old Cough, and in
the suppression of women's visits; also they expel the after birth, and dead
child.

Pills of Agaricke.
2 R. Of Agaricke, Mastick ana iii. root of Flower-de-luce, Horebound, ana i.
Turbith v. powdered, Hiera Picra ss. the pulpe of Coloquintida, Sarcocoll, ana
ii. Myrrh i. Sapa as much as shall suffice to make them into a mass. They
purge very strongly from all parts of the body, both Choler, and Slimy humors,
but especially from the head and breast; and are good against Catarrhes, and
old Coughes.

Pills called, Without which I would not be.
3 R. Of the best Aloes xiiii. yellow Mirabolanes, Mirabolanes of India,
Mirabolanes Chebules, Rubarbe, Masticke, Wormwood, Roses, Violets, Seen,
Agarick, Dodder ana i. Scammony vi. ss. dissolve the Scammony in the Juice of
Fennel, as much as shall suffice, and strain it through a Cloth, and with the
same Juice mingle the said Powders finely beat. These draw Choler, Phlegm,
and Melancholy from all parts of the body, but especially from the Head, Eyes,
and Senses; they preserve the sight, and take away the pain, and noise of the
Ears.

Stomach Pills.
4 R. Aloes vi. Mastick, red Roses, ana ii. make them up with the Sirrup of
Roses, or Wormwood. These are to be taken before meat, and do purge the
Stomach gently, and mildly, and help concoction.

Pills of Ruffus, called common Pills, or Pestilentiall.
5 R. Of the best Aloes ii. of the best Myrrh, and Saffron ana i. mingle them
with Aromatic Wine, and make a mass. They do much help the concoction, and
will not suffer the meat to putrify, and avail much against pestiferous
contagions.

Those that would purge twice, or thrice in a day, or keep their bodies
soluble, let them take two or three little Pills as big as a Pease every
morning of Aloes Rosatum, or at any time when they will; also there is a way to
wash Aloes, and so to make it into Pills; very excellent to purge the Head of
Phlegm: whereof I shall speak hereafter.

As for Antidotaries, Trochiskes, and the like, because (amongst those for whom
I intend this Book) such things are seldom used, and therefore may more
better be bought at the Apothecaries, if occasion shall serve, I have omitted
them; and considering also that so little cannot be made as sometimes is used,
the residue oftentimes corrupted, and lost the strength before they use any
again; moreover I do not find any but such as are in Print at large already,
and therefore needless to be here inserted.

Next I will show you some things that are set down in this Book, amongst
diverse Simples; which you cannot know, unless you run to the Apothecary to
buy them.

CHAP. XLIV.
First, Of the four cordial Flowers, which are
1 Roses. 2 Violets. 3 Borage. 4 Rosemary, or Bawme. 5 Buglosse.

The five Emellient herbs are
1 Marsh-mallow, Mallow. 2 Beets, Brankursine. 3 Mercury herb. 4 Violet
Plants. 5 Pellitary of the Wall.

The four great hot seeds.
1 Aniseed. 2 Fennel seed. 3 Carraway seed. 4 Cummin seed.

The four less hot seeds.
1 Ammi. 2 Our Ladies rose. 3 Smallage, or Sage. 4 Daucus, or wild Carrets,
Pimpernell.

The four great cold seeds.
1 Gourds. 2 Cucumbers. 3 Citrons. 4. Mellons.

The four less cold seeds.
1 Endive. 2 Cichory. 3 Lettuce. 4. Porcelaine.

The five great common Roots aperitive, and diuretic.
1 Smallage. 2 Asperagus. 3 Fennel. 4 Parseley. 5 Kneeholme, or Butchers
broom.

The two Roots.
1. Fennel. 2 Parseley.

The four Pleuretick Waters.
1 Our Ladies Thistle. 2 Sowthistle. 3 Holy thistle. 4 Scabious.

The five less opening Roots.
1 Grass. 2 Sea Holly. 3 Capers. 4 Cammocke, or ground Furze. 5 Madder.

The three Stomachiall Oils.
1 Wormwood. 2 Quinces. 3 Mastick.

The five Capillar herbs.
1 Adjanthus Black, or Venus hair.

2 Adjanthus White, or Wall Rue.

3 Golden Polytrichon. 4 Common Maidenhaire. 5 Scolopendria.

The four hot Ointments.
1 Agrippa. 2 Marshmallowes. 3 Arragon. 4 Martiatum.

The four cold Ointments.
1 White Ointment with Camphire. 2 Of Popular Buds. 3 Galens refrigerative. 4
Mesue his Rosate.

The common hot Flowers.
1 Camomill. 2 Melilot. 3 Flower-de-luce, or Lilly.

The four Ointments wherewith a Surgeon ought to be stored.
1 Basilicon, which digests, and ripens. 2 Green Ointment of the Apostles to
Mundifie. 3 Golden Ointment to Incarnate. 4 The White to Cicatrize.

CHAP. XLV. Notes for those that shall practice the compounding of Medicaments.
THose Sirrups that you make by infusion of Flowers, to every pint of Water
you must add four ounces of Flowers, and these must be done in Pipkins of
earth well glased, or in Vessels of Pewter, or Silver, with narrow mouths,
that may be stopped close, and not in Brass nor Copper. In making Sirrup of
Roses and Violets, etc. which are made with many infusions, it will be good
that the first infusion be made with scalding water powered on them, the rest of
the infusions with warm water. Boil your Sirrups softly upon a clear
Charcoale fire, taking it from the fire when it is boiled, and with a Spoone
full of holes scum it clean; you shall know when it is boiled enough by the
breath which comes out very strongly at first, but when it is almost enough,
the fume will scarce appear at all: also if you take a little in a Spoone, and
let it fall, if it make a thread, it is enough, else not; when it is almost
cold put it in a Pot, and cover it with a Paper perforated with a Needle; and
when it is quite cold cover it with a leather, and keep it in a temperate
place.

To make pulp of Dates.
1 R. Of Dates lib. i. part them in two, and pill off the white on the inside,
and the skin all over, put away the stones, and cut the Dates into small
pieces, and put them into a Skillet, and power on them of clear Water lib. ss.
let them infuse in some warm place the space of three days; then take them
up, and beat them into a paste in a Marble Mortar, and pulp it through a
pulping sieve. This Pulp is used in Electuaries.

To prepare and correct Seen.
2 R. Of the best Seen lib. i. cleanse it from the stalks and naughty leaves,
and to every ounce of Seen add of fennel seed or Aniseed. i. and powder them,
first your seeds, and when they are well beaten, then add your Seen, and beat
them all well together, and searse them in a covered searce; that which will
not pass beat again, and searse it till all be finely searsed: this is used
in Pills, Electuaries, Powders, etc. and is never used otherwise then with his
Correctives.

When you powder Myrrh, or Saffron, they must be done by themselves, by
dropping a drop or two of Oil Olive into the bottom of the Mortar, that it
may not stick: the same way you shall powder Rubarb, Aloes; or Assa foetida,
and also Scamonie; but Mastich must be powdered by dropping a little Rosewater
into your Mortar. Before you beat Camphire you must grind ii. or iii. sweet
Almonds in your Mortar; the like in beating Cinnamon.

Oils are boiled enough, when if you throw a drop in the fire, it burns
clear, and without cracking.

Plasters are boiled enough, when if you put a drop into fair water, it
runs not abroad, but rises whole to the top of the Vessel: those Plasters
that have Oil in them, when you make them up wet your hands in fair water, or
white wine; those that have none, wet your hands in Oil.

To wash and prepare Fats.
3 R. The cakes of Fat, and pick out the skin and bloody Veins, and wash it
in several waters, until the water run from it clear, and neither fatty
nor bloody, then cut it in pieces, and melt it in a pan with a little water;
then strain it strongly through a linen cloth, and put it in a good great
pot, and when it is cold, cover it with warm water, and beat it together
against the sides of the pot well; then power away that water, and add more:
thus do nine times, until it has lost the smell of Grease; then wash it in
Rose water, and put it up. To prepare Marrowes you must take them out of the
bones in the beginning of Autumn, and wash them, and melt them, and then use
them as you did the Fats.

To make Honey of Raisons.
4 R. Raisons of the Sun stoned lib. ii. infuse them xxiiii. hours in in
lib. vi. of warm water, then boil them to the consumption of half, and
strain it, and press it thoroughly, and boil the decoction to the thickness
of Honey; or else to lib. iii. of the decoction, add two pound of dispumed
Honey; mingle it, and boil it to the thickness of Honey.

Honey of Violets and Roses is thus made. R. of red Rose buds lib. ii. of the
best and purest Honey lib. vi. boil them as before.

To make dispumed Honey.
5 You shall boil Honey that has been clarified with the white of an Egg
until it come to the thickness of Honey again; then take it from the fire,
and when it is cool put it up.

Rose Vinegar.
6 R. Red Rose buds almost blown, the whites and stalks cut away, gathered
dry, and dried in the Sun three or four days lib. i. Vinegar See this word
in the Table of weights, and measures.
Sextaries viii. let them soake xl. days, then strain it, and add other
Roses; do thus until the savor and taste please you.

To make the decoction of flowers and fruits much used in purgations.
7 R. Dry Figs nu. v. Damask pruines nu. xv. Iujubes, Sebesten, ana. nu. xx.
Tamarindes i. Flowers of Roses, Violets, Borage, and Buglosse ana. i. Venus
hair, Hops, Endive, ana. m. ss. Licoras ii. cut them, and beat them all
together, and boil them in lib. iii. of Fountain water to the consumption of
the third part.

To make Juice of Licoras.
8 R. The Roots of Licoras full of Juice, and well cleansed, and a little
bruised, what quantity you please; macerate them three days in Spring water,
in a Vessel wherein the water may stand three or four fingers above the
Licoras; after this heat them at the fire, and strain them; then take the
decoction, and boil it gently until it come to the just consistence; then
make it up into what fashion you will.

To make Aloes Rosatum.
9 R. Of the best Aloes cicatrine and clear, powdered, iiii. Juice of Damask
Roses clarified lib. i. mingle them, and put them in the Sun, or in a Balneo,
until all the moisture be exhaled; do this four times, make it up in a
mass, and when you have occasion make small pills thereof.

To make May Butter.
10 R. Fresh Butter made in May, and without salt, put it in a broad earthen
Vessel glased, and set it in the Sun to melt: that which melts whilst the
Sun is hottest, let run through a thick Cloth without pressing, then put
it again to the Sun; do thus until it be white, then put it up in pots.

To make Salt of Cerusse, described in my receipts for Beauties.
11 R. A quantity of Cerusse, grind it into very fine Powder, and infuse lib.
i. in a pottle of distilled Vinegar for four or five days, then Filter it;
then set that you have Filtred in a glased Earthen vessel over a gentle fire,
until it concrete unto Salt.

The manner to prepare Goats blood, wonderful efficacious in Medicines for the
Stone.
12 R. A young Male Kid of a reasonable age, not too young; breed him up in the
house with Pimpernell, Smallage, Parseley, Fennel, Bays, Ivy, Lovage, and all
manner of herbs that will break the Stone, and let him eat nothing else:
kill him in the month of August, when the Sun is going into the sign Cancer;
cut his throat, and receive the blood that comes out of the Arteries, which
you may know by the thickness, let it congeale, and throw away the water that
swims on the top; the rest of the blood put into an Oven when the bread is
newly drawn, and let it dry, and then powder it.

To make Metheglin.
13 Gather these herbs following in the midst of July, and lay them to dry
in the Wind; then keep them clean, and from moulding, until Michaelmas,
that you make your Metheglin; Saxifrage, Egrimony, Sentory, Time, brown Mints,
Rosemary, Betony, ana, but of Saxifrage, and Egrimony, a greater quantity:
boil all these in Water until it look like Malmesey; then take it from the
fire, and let it cool; then take your poulst or combs wrought as it is, and
put into the Wort being blood warm, temper them well together, and let them
run through a cleansing sieve, and skumme the Wax off very clean; then put in
a new laid Hens Egg into the Wort, and if it bear not the Egg, put in more
Combs, until it bear it: then seethe it again three or four walmes, and
skumme it clean; then take it off the fire, and when it is cold, put it into a
Barrel, and when it has worked, stop it up close.

To make Cider.
14 Grind your Apples, or beat them small, and strain them: let the Liquor
stand a while, as you do Wort; then tun it up, and let not the Barrels be
stopped until it has done working, and casting out all the dregs: then stop
it up close; if you will have it compounded with Spices, you must boil such
Spices in it as you have a mind to, and then tun it as before. Perry is made
after the same manner with Pears.

An excellent way to wash Aloes.
15 R. Of the best Aloes ii. put thereto a quarter of a pint of the Juice of
damask Roses, and as much of the Sirrup of Violets, two spoonefulls of
Vinegar; then set it in a warm Oven after the bread is drawn, and let it so
remain until it be dissolved; then strain it hard through a fair Cloth, and
set it on fair Embers until it be thick like a Conserve, stirring it diverse
times; then R. Nutmegs, Cinnamon, Ginger, Cloves, Mace, Agaricke, Cubebs, ana
one Duccate weight, and as much Rubarbe: bruise all these as you would for
Ipocras, and lay them in three quarters of a pint of very good Muskadine three
days; then strain it, and after beat the Spices as small as you can, and
grind them with the said Wine again; then strain it, and wring it out as
hard as you can; then put your Wine to your Conserved Aloes, and let it stand
so long on warm Embers, till it have drunk up all the Wine, and is turned to a
Conserve again, stirring it diverse times; then put it in a close Pot, and
keep it for an excellent purging Pill, to be taken once a week, the quantity
of a Bean made in Pills, one hour before supper, it does cure the Headache,
comfort the Stomach, and has many good and approved operations.

To make Lute sapientiae, to lute the Receivers in distillations, or to lute
Pots in any decoction.
16 R. Of Potters earth two parts, Horse dung one part, a little fine powdered
Brick, and a little of the filings of Iron, quick Lime, with salt Water, and
the yolks of Eggs; temper them very well together, and use it: If you wet a
linen Cloth in salt Water, and let it dry of it self, then wet it in the
yolks of Eggs well beaten, and lay it over with a little of the former lute
thin, and cover the pot: the whites of Eggs with Lime is also good.

17 Bread and Honey eaten every Morning, cures a Consumption.

To make Honey of Roses.
18 R. Of red Rose buds lib. ii. of the best Honey lib. vi. boil them
according to art.

To know the virtues of herbs in all Seasons.
Gather herbs, and leaves in March, April, May: Flowers in May, June, July,
August: Seeds in September, October, November: Roots in December, January,
February.

Preserves, and Conserves. CHAP. XLVI.
To preserve Cherries.
1 GAther your Cherries in the morning, and let them not be too ripe, cut off
the tops of the Stalks, and lay the Cherries in a pan upon a thin bed of
Sugar; to every pound of Cherries take a pound of Sugar, and beat it very
fine, and ever as the Cherries boil up, cast Sugar on them, and scumme them
not until the scumme be ready to seethe over; let them boil with a quick
fire, for so they will be the fairer: you need not fear the breaking of them,
for as they cool they will close again; and seethe not above two pound at
once, the fewer the better, and boil them rather too little then too much;
being sodden, put them into a fair dish, and let them stand till the next day,
and if there come any Water from them, then seethe them a little more; you must
use a silver spoone about them which must be scoured very clean, for if you
use either Ladle, or knife that has been used about flesh, it will cause Mites
to breed in your Cherries.

To preserve Quinces.
2 Take Quinces, and wipe them clean, and coare them into a fair platter,
that you may save the seeds; then take clear Conduit water, and put it into a
fair Earthen pot that is somewhat broad in the bottom, that the Quinces may
lie one by one; then put in your Quinces with the Kernels, and Ielly about
them, but no part of the Coares, for it will make the Sirrup bitter; then set
them on the fire, and let them seethe gently till the Quinces be soft, and
break not; then take them out, and lay them in a fair dish, and when they are
cold pare them, but let the Kernels, and the Water seethe a while after the
Quinces are out; then take the Water, and strain it clean from the Kernels,
and to every pound of Quinces put a pint of that Water, and a pound of fine
beaten Sugar, and put the Sugar into the Liquor, and stir it well until the
Sugar be melted; then let it seethe, and when it has sodden a while, and is
scummed, put in your Quinces, and let them seethe very softly a good while till
they be red, for with long seething they will be red of themselves; you must
turn them often that they may be all of one color, and when you think they be
red enough, skin them clean, and when they be cold, put them up.

To preserve Damsons, Peareplums, or any other kind of Plummes.
3 Gather your Damsons in a fair dry day, and let them not be bruised, but let
them be ripe, or else they will not be well colored; to every pound of Damsons
take a pound of fine beaten Sugar, and one spoonful of Rosewater: you must put
your Damsons in a fair great pan one by one, and not above a pound at once;
then set them upon a Chafingdish and Coals, but let not your fire be too hot
at first: then set on your Plummes, and cast in as much Sugar as the Rosewater
will melt, before you set them on the fire; and when you feel your pan warm,
cast on half your Sugar, and let the pan be no hotter than you can suffer your
hand on it; for the space of a quarter of an hour, you must not turn them
until there be as much Sirrup as will bear them up; then turn them, and cast
on the rest of your Sugar, but you must not let them seethe when you do turn
them, because then they will break on both sides; but let them lie in hot
Sirrup a while: then turn the broken sides downwards again, and let them
seethe softly a little while, then may you turn them as often as you please;
and let them sees reasonable fast, till you think they be enough; if you let
them seethe long, they will lose their color, and will be tough; you must
skin them very clean, and when they be cold, put them up in Glasses; and put
in four, or five Cloves, and as many little slices of Cinnamon of about an inch
long: thus you may preserve any Plummes, but you must put neither Cloves, nor
Cinnamon to your white Plummes.

To make Marmalade of Quinces.
4 First take twelve quarts of fine running Water, and put to it sixteen pound
of Quinces well pared, and coared, and quartered into four parts, and put to
them eight pound of Sugar, and let all this seethe softly till it be more than
half sodden away: let them be close covered, or else they will not be red;
when you see them of a good color, break them with a spoone, and boil them
till they come to Marmalade. You may dissolve a little Musk, or a little
Ambergreece in some Rosewater, and put into it after the boiling, to give it
both a fine taste, and smell: when it begins to cleave to the spoone, then take
it from the fire, and fill your Boxes, and with a feather strike it over with
Rosewater.

To preserve Grapes, Barberies, or Gooseberries.
5 Take as much Sugar as they do weigh, and somewhat more, and beat it very
fine; then take your preserving Pan, or Skillet, and lay a bed of Sugar, and a
bed of Fruit, till you have laid all; then take five, or six spoonfulls of
fair water, as much as will wet the bottom of the Pan, and boil them as fast
as you can until they be clear; then boil the Sirrup until it will button
upon the side of a dish, and it is enough; then put them up in pots.

To keep Quinces raw all the year.
6 Take some of the worst Quinces, and cut them into small pieces, and boil
them in water until it be strong of the Quince: put in the boiling, to every
Gallon two spoonfulls of Salt, as much English Honey, half a pint of white
Wine Vinegar; then strain it, and when it is cold, put it into a wooden
vessel, and take as many of your best Quinces as will go into that Liquor;
then stop them very close, that no air get into them, and they will keep all
the year.

To make Paste of Oranges, and Lemons.
7 Take your Oranges well colored, boil them tender in water, shifting them
six, or seven times in the boiling; put into the first water a handful of
Salt: then beat them in a wooden Bowl with a wooden Pestle, strain them
through a piece of Cushion Canvasse, take the weight of them in Sugar, and
somewhat more; then boil it, and dry it, and fashion it as you please, and dry
it in a warm Oven upon a Plate all night; on the morrow turn it.

To make Paste of Genua the true way.
8 Take Quinces, and boil them in their skins, then scrape all the pulpe from
the coare, strain it through a piece of Cushion Canvasse, then take as much
Sugar as the pulpe does weigh, put to it twice so much water as will melt it,
that is, half a pint to every pound of Sugar: boil it to a candy height, dry
the pulpe upon a Chafingdish, and Coals; then put the Sugar and the pulpe hot
together, boil it with stirring until it will lie upon a Plate even as you
lay it, and run no broader; then fashion it, some like leaves, and some like
letters, so set your Plate in a warm Stove, or Oven, set it upon two billets
of Wood up from the hearth of the Oven all one night, in the morning turn it,
and so set it in the like heat again, and so every day turn, until it be
dry.

To make Paste of any tender Plummes.
9 Take any tender Plummes, and put them in an earthen Pot, and put your Pot
into a Pot of seething water, and when they are dissolved, strain all the thin
water from them through a fair Cloth, and set the Liquor by to make Quiddnie
of; then strain the pulpe through a piece of Canvasse; then take as much Sugar
as the pulpe does weigh, put to it as much water as will melt it, and boil it
to a Candy height: Then boil the pulp of the Plummes very well upon the
Coals, and put it, and the Sugar hot together, so boil them with stirring;
then lay them upon a Pie plate, and fashion it, and dry it as before; put some
pulpe of Apples amongst the the pulpe of Plummes, else it will be tough.

To make Marmalade of some of these Plummes.
10 There is no more difference, but in boiling it higher than your Paste, till
it come clean from the bottom of the Skillet, then box it.

To make conserve of any of these Fruits.
11 When you have boiled your Paste beforesaid, ready to fashion upon the
Plate, put it up in gally Pots, and never dry it; and that is all the
difference between Conserve and Paste, and so you may make Conserve of any
Fruits; this is for all hard bodyed Fruits, as Quinces, Pippins, Oranges, and
Lemons.

To make Conserve of tender Fruits, or Berries.
12 First dissolve your Plummes as you did, to make your Paste strain through
the Liquor Pulpe and all, and to every pint of that take three quarters of a
pound of Sugar, and so boil it until it be somewhat thick, that when you lay
some of it upon a cold dish it will run no broader; then put it up.

To Preserve Fruits green.
13 Take Pippins, Apricockes, Peareplummes, or Peaches, while they are green;
scald them in hot water, and pill them; the Peaches and Apricockes, scrape the
Furre off them, then boil them very tender, then take as much Sugar as they
do weigh, and as much water as will make a Sirrup to cover them in, then boil
them something leisurely, and take them up, and boil the Sirrup until it be
something thick, that it will button upon a dish side; and when they are cold,
put them up together.

To Preserve these Plummes when they are ripe.
14 Take as much Sugar as they weigh, and put not so much water to them as you
did to the green, for they will yield Liquor of themselves; boil them not
altogether so leasurely as you did the other, if you do, the Sirrup will turn
red, and so when you have boiled them, take them up, and pot them as aforesaid.

To dry Pippins as clear as Amber.
15 Take yellow Pippins, pare them, and cut them in the midst, and cut out
the Core; then put them into a Basin of Water; then take their weight of Sugar,
clarify it, boil it near to Candy height, dry your Pippins with a fair
cloth, then put them into the hot Sugar, and let them boil as fast as you can:
when they rise up, take them off the fire, and scumme them: turn them, and set
them on the fire again, and let them boil apace, and scumme them again; so
do six times: when the Sugar is Candy height, take out the Pippins, lay them
on a board, and put them into a warm oven; within three hours you may turn
them, within three days they will be dried enough.

To dry Apricocks very Orient and clear.
16 Take Apricocks which be not over ripe, take out the Stones, put them into
as much clarified Sugar as will cover them; boil them leasurely often stirring
them, then take them off the fire, and let them stand all the night in the
Sirrup, the next day warm them again in that Sirrup; when they be through
hot, set them to draine, then take another fresh Sugar, and boil it a little
higher; boil them in it leasurely, and turn them now and then, and scumme
them; so let them stand until the next day in that Sirrup; then warm them
thoroughly, and lay them again to dry: take the third fresh Sugar, boil it to a
Candy height, put in your Apricocks to that hot Sugar, boil them, now and
then taking them off to skumme them: your Sugar being boiled to a Candy height, take out your Apricocks, lay them upon a fair board: then put them
into a warm Oven, the next day turn them, and put them again into an Oven;
within one week they will be dry, and as yellow as gold.

To dry Plummes* or Cherries.
17 Gather them in the heat of the day, and prick them with a Pin; lay them
upon the bottom of a Sive, put them in an Oven after the Bread is drawn: when
they begin to wither, let not your Oven be so warm, as at the first putting
them in; within one week they will be dry, then box them up.

To dry Pears without Sugar.
18 Take the Norwich Pears, pare them, save on the stalk, and the Peep;
prick them with a knife, and put them in an earthen pot, and bake them in an
Oven, but bake them not too soft: put them into a white Plate Pan, put dry
Straw under them, and lay them into an Oven after the Bread is drawn, and
every day warm the Oven to that degree of heat, as when the bread is newly
drawn: within one week they will be dry.

To dry Peare-Plummes, or other Plummes.
19 Take Plummes, prick them, put to them as much Sugar as will cover them,
set them on the fire until they crack a little; then take them up, and put
them into fresh Sugar, added to the first Sirrup, and let them boil higher
then before; take them off the fire, now and then to skimme them, then put in
your Plummes again, and let them warm again in that Sirrup half an hour;
then put them into a Glass for three or four hours in that Sugar; then warm
them again, and set them to draine then take as much fresh Sugar, as will
cover them, and boil it to a Candy height; then put in your Plummes again
into that Sugar, and let them boil leasurely half an hour, now and then
turning them, for that will make them to take Sugar; take them up between hot
and cold, lay them on a Board to dry, box them up.

To dry Orenges or Lemmons.
20 Raspe off their outward skins, cut them into halves, take out their
meat, and lay them in Water three or four days, then take them out of that
water, and lay them into a fresh Water, and boil them tender: shift the Water
five or six times, to take away their bitterness; when they are tender, then
take them up and wipe them with a fair cloth, and put them into as much
clarified Sugar as will cover them, and let them boil leasurely two hours:
take them off the fire, put them into an earthen Pipkin for four days, then
set them on the fire until they be through hot, then set them to draine and
when they are drained, take fresh Sugar, boil it to a Candy height; then put
in your Orenges to that hot Sugar, so let them boil till they come to a Candy
height, then take them out, lay them upon a Sive, and dry them in an Oven:
within ten days they will be dry.

To dry Lettice Stalks, Arcichhcke Stalks, or Cabbage Stalks.
21 Take the Stalks, pill them to the Pith, put the Pith into a strong Brine
three or four days; then take them out of the Brine, boil them in fair
Water very tender, then dry them with a cloth, and put them into as much
clarified Sugar as will cover them, and so preserve them, as you did your
Orenges; then take them up, and set them to draine; then take another fresh
Sugar, and boil it to the height of a Candy* when it comes to a Candy
height, take them out and dry them.

To Candy Barberries, Grapes, or Gooseberries,
22 After you have preserved them, as aforesaid, dip them in warm Water very
suddenly to wash off the ropy Sirrup, then strew them over with sersed Sugar,
as you would do Flower upon Fish to fry, and so set them into a warm Oven, or
Stove, three or four times, and never let them be cold until they be dry, and
they will look like a sparkling Diamond.

To dry any fruits after they are Preserved.
23 Take Pippins, Pears, or Plummes, and wash them out in warm Water from the
Sirrup they are preserved in, and strew them over with searsed Sugar, as you
did before; then set them in a broad earthen Pan, that they may lie one by
one; then set them in a warm Oven or Stove to dry: if you will Candy them
withal, you must strew on Sugar three or four times in the drying.

To make clear Cakes.
24 Take Plummes of any sort, but Raspices are the best, put them into a stone
Judge, and put the Judge into a Pot of seething Water, and when they are
dissolved, strain them through a fair cloth, and take to every Pint of that, a
pound of Sugar, put to the Sugar as much water as will melt it, and boil it to
a Candy height; boil the Liquor likewise in another Pan by, then put them
seething hot together; boil them a little together with Stirring, then put
them in Glasses made like Marmalade boxes, and set them in a warm Oven or
Stove, in a drying heat: let them stand so a fortnight or three weeks, and
never be cold, and remove them from one place to another, while the cold places
are heating, that they may not be cold: they will turn in a week; beware you
set them not too hot, for that will make them tough, and so every day turn
them until they be dry, and they will be very well Candied without, and moist
within.

To Candy the clear Rock Candy.
25 Take Spices, or Flowers, or any dry Sucket, or any Fruits after they are
preserved and dry again; lay them upon round Wiers in an earthen Pan, the
Pan being narrow at the bottom, and broad at the top, and take as much
Sugar, refine or Brasill Powder: you must neither take Barbary Sugar nor
Maderous, they are too fat; put to it as much Water as will melt it, that is,
half a Pint to every pound, and something more, and when your Sugar is melted,
take the white of an Egg, and a dozen spoonfuls of fair Water; beat them
together in a Basen, with a Birchin Rod, till it come to a froth, then put the
froth of the Egg into the hot sirrup, set it on the fire again, and when it
boyles and rises up, drop a drop of cold Water amongst it, then set it off the
fire, and scum it; then boil ito to a Candy height, that is, when it will
draw like a thread between your finger and your thumb; then pour it seething
hot into your Pan amongst your fruits, set it upon a Cushion in a warm
Chimney corner, and cover it close with a Blanket; on the morrow pour out all
the Sirrup that will run from it, and then set your Pot in a warm place again
to dry: prick up your Wiers, take off all the Fruits, and lay them on Papers
to dry, then box them.

To Candy Eringoe Roots.
26 Take your Roots new gathered, without knots, or joints; boil them tender
in fair Water: let your Water boil before you put them in, then pill them,
slit them, and pith them, and wash them in two or three fair Waters: dry them
with a fair cloth, and plat them, then take twice so much as they weigh, and
refine your Sugar, and boil them in the one half, till they be tender and
clear; make your Sirrup first with half Rosewater, and half fair Water:
when their be clear, make a Sirrup with the other half of your Sugar, and
boil your Sugar to a Manus Christi, that is, when it will draw as fine as the
hair of your head; then put in your Roots again, and boil them, and shake
them in a Basen till they be cold, and so lay them upon Papers until they be
dry.

To Candy Suckets, Orenges, Lemmons, Pome-citrons, and Lettice Stalks.
27 Boil them tender in Water, and then Candy them, as you did the Roots
aforesaid.

To Candy Flowers after another fashion used in Spain.
28 Take what Flowers you will, and pick off the leaves from the Flower, and
make a Sirrup of Sugar, and put in the Blossoms of your Flowers, as many as
will go into the Sirrup; boil them with stirring until it be turned to Sugar
again, set them off the fire, and with the back of a Spoone, stir them, and
bruise the Sugar from them, and they will be Candied, and no Sugar seen upon
them.

To make Lozenges of any of these Flowers.
29 Make a Sirrup of Sugar, as before, and take the blossoms of what Flower
you will, and shred them on a Trencher, or beat them in a Wooden Dish; then put
in as many as will color the Sirrup of that color the Flowers are of, and
boil it with stirring, until it will come clean from the bottom of the
Pan, and so thick, that it will scarce drop out of your spoone; then pour
it upon a wet board, and with a wet Knife spread it abroad, not very thin;
when it is almost cold, cut it in square Lozenges like Diamonds.

To make a Marchpane, Ice it, garnish it, and gild it.
30 Take Almonds, and blanch them out of seething Water, and beat them in a
Stone mortar; in the beating drop in a drop or two of Rose Water to keep them
from oyling, and now and then strew a handful of searsed Sugar to bring it to
a Paste: when you have brought it to perfect Paste, roll it as thin as you
will have it, and set an edge about it, as about a Tart; then cut Flowers, and
Images to garnish it with of the same Paste; then set it on Wafers, and after
on a double Paper, and then on a Pie Plate, and so put it into an Oven hot
enough for Manchet, and bake it: when it is half baked, take it out, and with
the white of an Egg, Rose Water, and searsed Sugar beaten together as thick as
Batter for Fritters, with a Feather Ice it, by spreading it over; then set it
into the Oven again, and when the ice is risen, take it out, and whilst it is
hot, stick in your long garnishing Comfits; and when it is cold, gild it over
in this manner: beat the white of an Egg very short, and with a Pensill wet
those places you would have gold; when it is almost dry, cut your Leaf gold in
little pieces, and with a Feather lay it on.

To make Rashers of Bacon.
31 Take some of the Marchpane, and knead it in Saunders until it be red, then
roll abroad three Rolls of the red, and four of the white, and lay together a
white and a red Roll, until you have laid all; then cut them overthwart in
thin slices, and dry them, and they will look like Bacon.

To make Makeroones.
32 Take of blanched Almonds a quarter of a pound, and three ounces of searsed
Sugar; beat these in a Mortar, with a little of the white of an Egg, and Rose
water: so beat it until it be a little thicker then Batter for Fritters; then
lay it a spoonefull at once upon Wafers, and so bake it.

To make Naples Biscuit.
33 Take Almonds, and Sugar, as you did before for Makeroones; to every quarter
of a pound put one ounce of Pine apple seed: bake it as before, that is all the
difference.

To make French Biscuit.
Take half a pecke of Flower, four Eggs, half a pint of Ale Yest, an ounce
and a half of Aniseeds, make all these together in a loaf with a little
sweet Cream, and a little cold water: make it in the fashion of a Dutch
loaf, something long; when it is baked, and a day or two old, cut it in thin
slices like toasts, and strewe it over with pgwdered Sugar, and dry it in a
warm Stove: then Sugar it again when it is dry; then dry it again, and so do
three or four times, then box it.

To make Prince Biscuit.
35 Take a pound of Sugar, and a pound of fine Flower: beat your Sugar very
fine, then take eight Eggs, take out two of the Whites, and beat all these
together in a Bowl an hour; then take Coffins made of Tin, and indosse them
over with sweet butter within: put to it half an ounce of Aniseeds finely
dusted, when you are ready to fill your Coffins; for if it be put in before, it
will discolor your bread; or you may lay Wafers all within your Coffins, which
is the best way, and so bake it.

To boil Sugar to a Manus Christi height.
36 Boil it until it be almost Sugar again, and at the last drop of your
spoone there will a hair drop from it as fine as the hair of your head.

To boil Sugar to a Candy height.
37 Boil Sugar until it will draw like a thread between your Finger, and your
Thumb.

Preserve all your white Fruits in a Copper preserving Pan tinned within; for
any Metal else will change the color of your Fruits.

To make Marmalade of Oranges, or Lemmons.
38 Take fair Oranges or Lemmons, cut them, take out the meat, and boil them
tender in fair water, shifting the water seven or eight times to take away the
bitterness; then take them up, and wring all the water from them, and beat
them in a stone Mortar with the pulpe of three or four yellow Pippins; then
strain it, and boil it with stirring until it become thick; then take it
from the fire and lay it upon white Paper, and take as much refined Sugar as
that pulpe does weigh, and put it into a Pan with as much Rosewater as will
melt it: boil it to a Candy height, and then put in your pulpe into the Sugar;
and boil it until it rise from the bottom of the Pan, ever stirring it; then
box it, and put it into a Stove uncovered, and when it is dried cover it.

Miscellanea. CHAP. XLVII.
To make Ielly of Flesh.
1 TAke a red Cock, and a knuckle of Mutton, or the sinews, and knuckle of
Veale, and a little Mutton, Raisons of the Sun stoned: boil all these to
pieces; then take it from the fire, and stamp the meat and all together in a
Mortar, and let it run through a woollen strainer; and when it has stood all
night, skumme off the top, and season the rest with Sugar, and a little Nutmeg
sliced, and a stick of Cinnamon, and a blade of Mace: boil it up, and strain
it through a Ielly bag.

To make Harts-horne Ielly.
2 Put to four ounces of Harts-horne, a quarte, or three pintes of Water, and
infuse it twelve hours in a Pipkin very close, and when it is almost enough,
put to it a few Cowslip flowers, Borage, and Violet flowers, and a blade of
Mace; then let it run through the strainer, and season it with Sugar; put to it
the Juice of a Lemmon, and a little Nutmeg sliced, and boil it until it will
Ielly in a spoone; then put a sprig of Rosemary a little while into it, and so
run it through your Ielly bag.

To make the Court Ielly.
3 Take three Calves feet, water them all one night, then scald them as you
would do a Pig, and slit them, and take out the long bones; then take a young
Cockerell, and dress him, and after he has layen one night in water, boil
him and the feet together in four pintes of white Wine, and as much fair
Water, until it be enough; then let it run through a fair strainer into a
Basin, letting it stand until it be through cold; and then take a Knife, or a
Spoone, and cut or skumme off the purest from the dross in the bottom, and
put the same into a clear Pot with three quarters of a pound of Sugar, two
ounces of Cinnamon scrapt, and a little bruised, one ounce of Ginger pared, and
sliced, two Nutmegs sliced, and ten Cloves cut, all these being put together,
set them on the fire, and boil them until it be almost enough; then take the
whites of six Eggs, and beat them well together, and put them into your
Ielly on the fire, stirring them altogether, letting them boil a good walme,
and so take it off the fire, letting it stand until the heat be well off it,
and then take off the uppermost clean, and let the rest run through a Ielly
bag, with a branch of Rosemary twice or thrice, until it be very clear.

A remedy for the Flux.
4 R. The inward Rind of an Oak sapling, boil it in the milk of a red Cow,
herewith make Rice pottage, and season it with Cinnamon, and some Sugar, and use
to eat of it.

For an old Cough, or Ptisicke.
5 R. Auripigmentum made into fine Powder i. mix it with Wort, or the Yolke of
an Egg, to the thickness of a Plaster, and spread it upon Coltsfoote leaves,
or new Canvasse cut into small pieces, and burn them one after another upon a
Chafingdish, and Coals, and receive the fume into your mouth with a Funnell.

For a Consumption.
6 Boil in running Water a leg of Veale, or Beef, or a Capon cut in small
pieces; skumme away the fat, and froth as fast as it rises, boil it the space
of an hour: then R. Parseley roots, Fennel roots, Tamarisse roots,
Rosemary brances, Hartstongue leaves, ana, nu. v. Borage m. ii. Spearemints,
Sowthistle, Sorrel, Dandelion, Violet leaves, Hyssop, ana, m. i. cut the
roots, and stuff your Capon with the herbs, the residue of you herbs
bind in a bundle, and boil with your roots in the same Earthen vessel: add
thereto a few crusts of Manchet, Raisons of the Sun lib. ss. Currants iii. whole
Mace i. bound in a Cloth, Dates quartered nu. viii. boil all these together
with the flesh, until the Broth be thick, and clammy: add more Water in the
boiling, that the flesh boil not dry; then run it through a Ielly bag, after
that put it on the fire again to clarify: hereof let the Patient take four,
or five spoonfulls at a time.

To make a good Searecloth to skin, and heal.
7 R. Of Dear suet, and May butter ana lib. ss. Wax iii. when these are
molten, put to them of Lapis Calaminaris beaten, and searsed; when it has
boiled a little while, take it off the fire, and let it run through a thin
Cloth; then dip your Clothes into it, and stroke them smooth; when they be
cold sleeke them.

A Medicine for the Spleen.
8 R. White Wine Vinegar, and the Gall of an Ox ana, mingle them together, and
set them on the Embers all night to infuse: on the morrow take a blew Cloth
well woaded, and wet it in the Liquor, and apply it reasonable warm to the
Spleen, and in few days you shall have help.

For an Apostume in the Head.
9 R. Barley flower, and Cummin seeds beaten ana, make thereof a Cake with a
little Water, and bake it; then whiles it is hot, make a hole in the top, and
fill it with Treakle, and hold it to your ear that the breath may go into
your head.

For a weak Back.
10 R. The pith of an Ox back iii. Dates sliced ii. boil these in a pint of
Muscadine, and eat thereof in a morning.

For the small Pox.
11 When you perceive the Pox coming out either on the Patients Breast or
Face, make this Posset: R. Of Ale or Beer, which the Patient likes best, make
a Posset with new Milk, and take off the Curde, and boil in the drink one
spoonful of raspt Hearts horn, and as many Marigold flowers, six or eight
leaves of Sorrel, a little Licoras sliced, and scraped, a few Figs cut in
pieces: take this blood-warme, and drink no other drink for two or three
days until they come out; then have a great care to keep the Chamber warm,
but not too hot in any case; let them eat no fresh meat (if a Fever accompany
the Pox, until it be past) nor any broth with Spice, but thin thickened
broth boiled with a white Crust; when the Fever is past, and the Pox begin to
fall, let them eat Bread, and Butter, or a potcht Egg; in all this time let
their Beer be warmed with a Toste, and sweetened with Sugar, and when they have
drunk, let them eat the Toste to cleanse their mouth, and throat: if the
Pox be in the Eyes, then take red Rosewater, and woman's Milk ana, and a
little loaf Sugar finely beaten, everyday fresh, and with a feather dress
them often in a day; or you may tie a little bruised Quince seed in a cloth,
and soake it in white Rose water, and wash the Eyes, but not above thrice a
day, lest you feed the Pox, neither wash the Eyes except the Pox be in them;
deny them not drink at any time: when the Pox begin to look black on the
heads, then minge Parmacetae and Oil of sweet Almonds together to an Ointment,
and with a feather anoint the Face at night therewith being a little warmed:
this will cause them to scale; then anoint the Face every night with the
Ointment of Bacon described before in the Unguents, and in the morning wash
your Face with water of Bean flowers; when they are quite well, it is good to
give them an ounce or two of Cassia newly drawn, in some Posset drink, to
purge them: if the Pox come not out kindly at first, you shall give the
Patient of Bezoar powdered small in Posset drink, according to the strength
and age of the Patient, from three to eight grains.

For a Fellon.
12 R. Fine Malt flower m. i. Soap as much as a Wallnut, boil them together in
some Beer until it be thick; lay this to the place, and change it twice, or
thrice in a day.

For buzzing in the Ears.
13 R. A clove of Garlic, pill it, and prick three or four holes in the
midst of it, and dip it in fine English Honey, and put it into your Ear, and
stop your Ear with a little black Wool, and lie upon the contrary side; thus
let it rest seven or eight days.

To stay a Laske.
14 R. A good quantity of Burre roots, and wash them clean with running
Water; then seethe them in fair Water till half the Water be consumed; when
you go to bed wash the soales of you Feet herewith, and if that stay not
enough, then wash higher, and it will stay it.

For the Gout.
15 R. A gallon of thy own Urine, and a pound of Virginwaxe, and of houseleeke
lib. v. set those on the fire together, and let them scald until the
Houseleeke be tender; then bathe thy legs and feet therein thus; take a
dishfull of this decoction, and by the fire wash thy feet with this Liquor
very hot, and let the remnant of the Liquor stand on the fire to keep hot;
when that dishfull is cold, put it into the hot Liquor, and take another
dishfull, and bathe as you did before; do this for half an hour always with
hot broth; then take the residence in the bottom of the Pot, and lay it upon a
blew Cloth that is well Woaded, either Woollen, or Linen, and lay it to the
soar place, and wrap it well up, and let it lie a day and a night: do thus
until it be whole this will drive the pain downwards, and when it is in thy
foot, lay the Plaster all over the Foot and Toes; if the disease be in the
Hands, do as you did to the Feet.

For Earewigges, or any Worm crept into the Head.
16 R. Of the Garlic that is called S. Mary Garlic, three or four Cloves,
stamp in a Mortar, and lay them in a little clean Water a good while; then
wring out the Juice with a Cloth very hard, then put of that Liquor into the
Ear, and hold that Ear upwards, and it will kill the Worm, or else cause him
to come out at the Nose.

For a Fellon.
17 R. Smallage pu. i. wheaten Leaven, black Soap, and the white of an Egg,
and wheat Flower; stamp them together, and lay them on a Cloth to the Fellon.

For the stinging of a Waspe, or Be.
18 If the Sting stick in the flesh, pull it out, and then take an Almond, and
cut it over-thwart, and lay the one half upon the Soar, and it will cease the
swelling, and ease the pain.

For a Stitch in the Side.
19 R. A pretty big Dish, fill it full of Embers, and lay the reon a handful
of Rosemary leaves; and then lay a Cloth on the Rosemary to keep it close, and
so lay it to the grieved place as hot as can be suffered.

To stay the immoderate Flux of Women.
20 R. A good piece of Allome, and seethe it in fair Water till it be
dissolved; then take sodden Milk, and with the said decoction make a Posset,
press the Curde from the Whey, and lay the Curde to the secret place, and it
will stay it.

A special Medicine for the Gout.
21 R. A spoonful of bay Salt, and as much g^ay Soap, and the quantity of a
Wallnut of Boares grease, Rue, and the herb called Rage ana m.ss. beat all
these in a Mortar until they come to a Salve; then lay it on a Cloth to the
grief, and renew it once a day.

For the Megrim.
22 R. Of the Juice of Seagreene, Aquavitae, and the Gall of a Steer ana, put
together on the fire to warm; then take a linen Cloth, and bathe your forehead
therewith, and your Temples at night when you are going to bed; then dip a
double linen Cloth therein, as much as will cover the Forehead, and bind it
to the Patients head all night for two, or three nights together.

To stay the bloody Flux.
23 R. A great red Onyon, take out the coare, and fill the hole full of
Frankincense, and English Saffron ana: then put on the top, and set the Onyon
in the Embers, and when it is tender, spread it on a linen Cloth, and lay the
one half to the Navill, and the other to the Fundament as hot as may be.

To clear the Eyes when they are blood-shotten, or sore.
24 R. Of Lapis Calaminaris ss. Sugar Candy ss. white Wine i. heat the Stone
almost red hot in a clear fire, then beat it very fine in a clean Mortar,
and mingle it with the Wine, and strain it through a linen Cloth; then put in
the Sugar Candy very finely beaten: put this Water in a Glass, and when you
would use it, shake the Glass that it may mingle, and so drop a drop or two
into the Eye, lying upwards, Evening, and Morning, and lie so a while after.
Note that this Stone must be clear without red spots, or else it is hurtful.

For wild Fire.
25 R. Old hard Cheese, grate it, and with Honey make an Ointment, and anoint
the place till it be whole.

For to stay the humor that flows to the Teeth, and Eyes through the Temples.
26 R. Of Masticke, and Frankincense powdered ana, make a Plaster with
sufficient white Wine, and the white of an Egg, and lay it to the Temples.

To give present ease to the gout.
27 R. Milk, and boil it, and with Vinegar make a Posset, and bind the Curde
hot to the part.

For the Palsy.
28 R. A new Earthen pot, and fill it full of Camomill, and stop it well, and
set it in another pot under ground for forty days; then take it up, and you
shall find Oil there in, and anoint the place with that Oil; if it be in thy
Head, anoint thy Forehead, if the Hands, anoint thy Wrists.

To stop a Laske.
29 R. Wheaten Meal, and with the juice of Yarrow, make little Cakes, and bake
them, and eat them.

Another.
30 R. Rubarbe i. grate it, and mingle it with as much Conserve of Roses as
will make it up, hereof R. every morning ss. and presently after it drink a
good draught of warm Milk well boiled, and fast two hours after it, do thus
for three days, then R. every night before you go to bed half a dram of
Diascordium.

For one that is blasted.
31 R. A Hens Egg, and roast it hard, and put the white only into a brass
Mortar, and put to it of Copperas ii. and grind them well together to an
Ointment, and anoint the Face, and it will cool it, and allay the swelling,
and when it is almost whole, anoint it with Ointment of Popular buds described
before.

To stop women's immoderate Flux.
33 R. A Hares foot, and burn it to Powder, and drink it first, and last in
stale Ale, till you be whole.

To provoke the monthly Visits.
33 R. A piece of fresh Beef, boil it in fair Water, and skumme it clean;
when it is enough take it up, and boil in the Broth these herbs following,
being shred small, until they be soft; Hartstongue, Maidenhaire, Borage, red
Mints, Languebeufe, Alisander, and Water cresses, ana, eat these herbs next
your heart in a morning for nine days, and lie not long in bed.

For them that cannot hold their Water.
34 R. The Pissle of a red Dear that is fallen from him, as it does every
year; dry the same in an Oven after the Bread is drawn; then beat it to
powder, and give the Patient a little thereof in a draught of drink
blood-warme last at night, and first in the morning, and fast for three hours
after it.

To stay a Laske.
35 R. A Nutmeg made in Powder, mix it with a Yolke of an Egg in the shell,
the White done away; then heat a Stone hot, and drop a little hereof upon the
Stone like little Cakes, and let it bake, and eat of them morning, and evening
the quantity of one Egg, and a Nutmeg at a time.

For a Cough, or Cold.
36 R. Aniseeds i. Licoras ss. of the best dry Figs nu. x. Raisons of the Sun
nu. xx. bruise them small, and boil them in a quart of running Water till
half be consumed, and give it the sick to drink warm morning, and evening,
and fast two hours after, and it will remove the Cold from the Stomach.

For the running of the Reins.
37 R. Parsnips sliced thin, and boiled in red Cowes Milk till they be all
Pap, taken cold, morning, and evening; if you add in the boiling the water of
Oaken buds, it will be much better.

For any Carbuncle, Plague Sore, Botch, Boil, or Imposthume.
38 R. Bay Salt well beaten to powder, sifted, and incorporated well with the
yolke of an Egg, and applied, and it will draw to it self all the Venom of
the Sore, and break any Boil, and heal it.

A singular Medicine for Bone ache, in what place soever.
39 R. Of Aquavitae, and Oil of Bay ana, mix them well together, and warm it
in a Saucer, and anoint the grieved place from the fire, and keep it warm.

For all old Aches, and Pains in the Joints.
40 R. The whole Horn that a Bucke casts off, the later the better; cast away
the Scalpe, and take nothing but the Horn: then cut it in pieces, and boil it
in a Gallon of fair water until it come to a pint, or something more; then
strain it, and let it stand until it be cold; when you use it, warm some of
it in a Saucer, and anoint the grieved place by the fire, and it will cure in
nine, or ten dressings.

To cause one to void Wind.
41 R. The clear Juice of red Fennel, and make Posset Ale therewith, and
drink it.

A good Purge.
42 R. Of Seen i. Coriander seed ss. Cinnamon, Licoras, Aniseeds, Ginger, ana
ii. Sugar ii. beat them into powder, and steep them in a quart of Ale the
space of four and twenty hours; then strain it, and drink the one half at
a time: if you will you may take the other half the next day.

To stay bleeding at the Nose.
43 R. A linen Cloth, and wet it in cold water, and wrap it about the Patients
Cods, and it will stay.

For the bloody Flux.
44 R. As much linen Cloth as will make a Suppositary, make it up into the
form of a Suppositary, and soake it well in Aqua composita, and put it up into
the Fundament.

To stay women's immoderate Flux.
45 R. A pint of Milk hot from the Cow, put in as much Rennet as will serve
to turn it to Cheese, and immediately drink it up: do thus for three mornings
if need be, and it will stay.

For too much Vomiting.
46 R. Of Spear Mint water iiii. put thereto of the Sirrup of Quinces ss. and
ii. of Cinnamon Water, and take two or three spoonfulls at a time.

For Freckles in the Face.
48 R. The blood of a Hare warm from the body, and anoint the Face therewith,
and it will do them away.

For an old Joint sickness.
49 R. Ants with their Eggs, stamp them, and boil them in fair Water, and
bathe the member therein.

For a Botch, Boil, or Fellon.
50 R. The curde of a Posset, and lay to it to gather the corruption together;
remove it not in twelve hours: and if once laying will not serve, then do so
three, or four times; then take quick Lime, and quench it with fair Spring
water, and mix with it as much black Soap, and lay a little thereof to the
Sore: when it is broken, wash it with white Wine a little warmed, and then
heal it with Butter, and powder of Sugar mixed together.

To make a Juice of Licoras to stay the Cough coming of Rheum, to be made in
the beginning of May.
51 R. Of Licoras iiii. beat it small, and searce it; then R. of Hyssop m. v.
or vi. of Foales foot m. iiii. Rosemary flowers m. i. stamp all these
together in a Stone Mortar, and strain them into a fair Basin, with half a
pint of fair running Water, or Hyssope water, put in your Powder of Licoras,
and boil it, and stir it until it be as thick as good Cream; then strain
it through a fine Strainer, and set it again on the fire, and let it seethe a
good space after, ever stirring it until it be very thick; then put in of red
Sugar Candy iii. or iiii. and boil them until they puff up from the bottom
of the Basin.

For a Fellon.
52 R. Raggewort, Rue, Hyssop, ana pu. i. one clove of Garlic, a little
pieces of sour Leaven, a spoonful of Bay salt, and a piece of rusty Bacon,
beat all these together, and lay it to very thick for four and twenty hours
space.

For those that are troubled with Rheum distilling down their Throat in the
night.
53 Of Cumminseeds ii. bruised, Nutmegs sliced, nu. ii. Cloves bruised, the
same quantity, the yolks of two Eggs, or two Eggs hard roasted, mingle these
together, and quilt them in a linen bag, and sprinkle the said bag with
very good Aquavitae, and lay the said bag every night to the nape of your
Neck.

For a Bruise.
54 R. Of the blood of a Pigge iiii. of Vinegar ii. a few crummes of brown
Bread, boil all these together until they be something thick, and so warm,
lay it to the place for the space of four and twenty hours; do thus twice,
or thrice if need be.

To take away the Morphew, and other filth from the Face, and Hands, and to
make a new skin.
55 R. Of white Mercury sublimated i. Camphire ii. Lemons nu. ii. white Sugar
i. fair water one pint and a half, put all these into a Glass, and so let
it stand eight or ten days, and then strain it, and keep it in a clean
Violl; and when you will use it, wet a clean linen Cloth therein, and then
put it softly upon the Face, or Hands where the Morphew, or Filth is, and will
take it off in short time.

To make the Skin soft, and white after the said Medicine.
56 R. A black Sheep head or two, and cut off the Horns, and Skin, and throw
them away with the Brain, and eyes; then sees the Heads in fair water, and
skum off the Oil very clean, put to this Oil a little Rose Water, and anoint
the Face therewith, and it will make a smooth Skin soft, white, and fair.

To breed Blood, and bring a good fresh Color in the Face.
57 R. A new Pipkin with a Cover that will hold a pint, fill it with good old
Muscadine, and half a pound of great blew Currants, and the weight of a
Shilling of the best Rubarbe cut in slices, and three slices of Ginger: let
these stand all night upon the hot Embers, and eat every morning a spoonefull
or two of the Currants, and Sirrup.

For the Spleen.
58 R. Ashen keys, and the Greenewood, burn them, and make Lie of the Ashes:
after it has stood three days clear it; then take Barrowes grease, and wash
it in white Wine, and dry it, and beat it with a rolling pin: and when it is
well beaten, put it into the Lie, and seethe the Lie, and it to an Oil: then
put into it a spoonefull of Doctor Stephens water, and and as much Rose Water;
beat it well together, and so put it up to anoint the Side downwards: if you
use to drink Bedward Posset drink wherein the green bark of Ash is boiled,
it will much profit: it is also good to use Oil of Tamariske, and Oil of
Capers to anoint the Side with it.

An approved laxative Whey for the Spleen.
59 R. Of the inner bark of the Ash tree, Maidenhaire, Hartstongue, Licoras,
Aniseeds, Parceley roots, Seen leaves, and coddes, ana m. i. boil them in a
pottle of clean Whey, until almost the half be consumed; then strain it,
and use it first, and last, every day until you find health, forbearing to
eat or drink the space of two or three hours after; all the while you do
this, you shall anoint your Side with the aforesaid Ointment.

To stanch Blood in Vein, or Artery.
60 R. Olibanum ii. Aloes Hepaticke i. hairs of a Hare a little cut, whites of
Eggs as much as will serve to incorporate them; make a Stuphe of Flax, and dip
it in the Medicine, and apply it cold; let it lie three, or four days: then
if it stick fast, apply the white of an Egg, and Oil of Roses until the
next day.

To provoke Vomit, and to purge the Belly.
61 R. The rind of the root of Elder tree chopped in small pieces, steep it
in Wine the space of a night, and drink the Wine in the morning.

For the Dropsy.
62 R. Raisons of the Sun stoned lib. i. put them into a pint of good white
Wine, and so let them stand covered nine, or ten days; then eat thereof three
or four times a day, eight or nine at a time.

For the Ptisicke.
63 R. The tender crops of Mallows, boil them, and butter them as a Sallet
with Butter, and Vinegar, and eat them with your meat.

For women with Child that are subject to Miscarrying.
64 R. The whites of two Eggs, beat them well with clean Water, and sup them
up, when you feel any fright, or sudden alteration.

For the Cholicke.
65 R. Of the Oil of sweet Almonds drawn without fire iii. mix it with a
little white Wine, and Pellitary water, and drink it; then swallow a Leaden
Bullet besmeated with Quicksilver, and the Bullet coming presently forth at
his Fundament, will cure him.

For the Sciatica.
66 First, raise a Blister, and let out the Water in it, then R. ground Ivy,
and stamp it, and apply it to the Blister with a cloth sufficiently doubled,
then R. a Cat, and flea it, and put into the Belly (the garbage being taken
out) twenty Snailes, shells and all, and so roast it, and to the dripping, put
of Oil of Spike one pennyworth, half an Ox gall, Neats-foote Oil two
spoonefulls. Badgers grease one spoonefull, Oil of Turpentine two penniworth,
A quavitae one penniworth; mix them, and therewith anoint the grief, and
keep it warm.

FINIS.
A Table of the principal matters contained in this book.
A
TO make Aegyptiacum part 2. page 8. For an Ache, part ibidem page 10. number. 9.
page 11. number. 10 page 12 number. 15 page 13. number. 18. page 17. number. 16. page 49.
number. 6. page 51. number. 10. page ibi. number. 11. page 52. number. 13. page 55. number.
19. page 48. number. 8. page 45. number. 5. page 167. number. 41. page 84. number 49.
Actions what they are part 1. page 52. Ages, part 1. page 9. Agues cured, part
2. page 63. number. 7. page 104. number. 2. page 110. number. 2. Aloes Rosatum made,
part 2. page 133. number. 9. Aloes washed, part ibidem page 135. number. 15.
Apoplexy cured, part 2. page 36. number. 33. Apostemes cured, part ibidem page
49. number. 6. in the head, page 158. number 9. Appetite procured, part ibidem page
49 number 6. Asthma cured, part 2. page 113. number. 8. page 121. number. 26. Artichoke
stalks dried, part ibidem page 147. number. 21. Apricockes dried, part ibidem
page 145. number. 16. Air, which is best, part 1. page 59.
B
Back strengthened and cooled, part 2. page 11. number. 10. page 158. number. 10.
page 49. number. 6. Balmes to make, part ibidem page 94. Banisters balm, Vesalius
his balsome, page 96. Fallopius his balsome, page 97. Barberies preserved, part
ibidem page 141. number. 5. candied, page 148. number 22. Bathes part ibidem page 98.
Belly purged, part ibidem page 173. number 61. Blood what it is, part 1. number. 23.
Blouding part ibidem page 80. Bloody flux stopped, part 2. page 42. number. 51.
page 49. number. 6. page 163. number. 23. page 43. number. 53. Bleeding stanched, part
ibidem page 61. number. 3 page 66. number. 18. page 92. number. 15 page 173. number. 60. at
nose page 168. number. 43. Blood cleansed, part ibidem page 40. number. 46. good blood
bred page 172. number 57. Beauty procured part ibidem page 80. number 36. Blasting
helped, part 2. page 44. number. 57. page 165. number. 31. Boxing or cupping, part 1.
page 82. Bone broken to draw out, part 2. page 17 number. 16. cured, page 46. number.
64 page 51 number. 10. page 89. Bone ache, part ibidem page 167. number 39. Botches
or boiles, part ibidem page 51. number, 10. pestilent botch, page 167. number. 38
page 169. number, 49. Brain strengthened, part ibidem page 22. number 13. Breast
purged part ibidem page 123 number. 1. Breast sore, part ibidem page 89. number. 2.
page 92. number. 16, 17, 18. Breath kept sweet part ibidem p^ge 44. number. 55. page
38. number. 41. page. 74 number. 22 page 97 number, 35. Bladder and reins purged, part
ibidem page 38. number 42. naples biscuit, part ibidem page 153, number 33, frence
biscuit number 34, prince biscuit number 35. Bruises cured, part ibidem page 171, number
54 page 42, number 51, page 49, number. 6 page 51, number 10 page 54, number 17, page 38,
number 42, page 12. number 14, page number 11. page 10. number 9. Burn or scald, part 2
page 13, number 16, part 16 number 23.
C
Cabbage stalks dried part 2 page 147, number, 21. Candy rock very clear, part
ibidem page 149, number 25. Cankers cured, part ibidem page 86 number 58, page 71 number
10 page 58, number 26. page 30 number 21. page 17 nu. 16 page 70 number 9 page 105 number 4
in the mouth, page 76 number 24. Cataplasmes or poultisses part ibidem page 89.
Catarches cured, part ibidem page 25 number 20. Clear cakes, part ibid m p^ge 148
number 24. Carbuncles cured, part ibidem page 167 number 48 page 86 number 58 page 91
number 11. Cherries preserved, part ibidem page 138, number 1 dried, page 146 number 17.
Cider to make, part ibidem page 135 number 14. Clisters to make, part ibidem page
3. Collar what, part 1 page 29 purged, part 2 page 63 number 9 page 104 number 1, 2.
Good Color bred part 2 page 172, number 57. Chops in the hands or feet, part
ibidem page 43 number 53. Child dead in the womb expelled, part ibidem page 34,
number 30, page 41 number 48 page 38 number 42 page 123, number 1. Childbed pain eased,
part ibidem page 35 number 32 page 41 number 49. Collicke cured, part ibidem page 174
number 65 page 41 number 49, page 43 number 53 page 62, number 5 page 104, number 2 page 36,
number 33, page ibidem number 34, page 38 number 40 page ibidem number 43, page 40 number 46,
page 21 number 10 speedily eased, page 49, number 6. Consumption cured, part ibidem
page 157, number 6 page 99, number 4 page 31 number 22. Concoction helped, part ibidem
page 324, number 4. Conception false expelled, part ibidem page 42 number 50,
Conception helped number 51, page 43, number 53 page 49, number 6 page 79 number 35.
Conserve of Plums, part ibidem page 143, number 11 of tender fruits or berries,
page 144, number 12. Contusions part ibidem page 37 number 36. Cough cured, part
ibidem page 37, number 38, page 34, number 30 page 42 number 52 Cough or Cold, pa. 105,
n. 6 page 122 number 29 page 123 number 1 of the lungs, p ge 121, number 27 28 page 157,
number 5 page 166 number 36 page 35 number 32. Courses in women Provoked, part ibidem
page 165 number 33, page 123 number 1 page 119, number 24 page 49 number 6 page 45, number 59
page 44 number 56, page 42 number 50 page 34 number 30 page 23 number 16 page 38 number 42
page 37 number 39, page 11 number 12. Crampe part ibidem page 20 number 9. page 22 number
14. page 25 number 20 page 35 number 32 page 95 number 4. Fresh cuts, part ibidem page
58 number 28.
D.
Days good and evil, part 1 page 78. Damsons preserved, part 2 page 139 number
3. Decoction of flowers and fruits, part ibidem page 132 number 7. Drink which is
best, part 1 page 61. Disease what, part 1 page 72, cause of a disease page 75.
Disentery helped, part 2 page 24, number. 18. Dropsy cured, part ibidem page 174,
number 62. page 79, number 35, page 44, number 56 page 41 number 48, page 40, number 46.
E
Elements what, part 1 page 6. Electuaries, Diaphaenicon, part 2. page 104.
Benedicta Confectio Hamech, part 105, Heir a simplex 106, de ovo, page 107 of
the juice of roses, page 104. Eearewigs got into the head part 2 page 161, number
16. Emplaisters, part 2 page 47 de Ianua: Divinum ibi, the black emplaister
page 48, Sir Philip Paris his emplaister, page 49, Oxecrotium page 51 Doctor
Morsus Oxecrotium page 52, gratia Dei, page 53, 57 green salve 55, tobacco
salve, page 58, black salve page 59. Epilepsie curied part ibidem page 22, number
14. Emerroids cured, part ibidem page 30, page 40 number 44. Ears that run, part
ibidem page 97, number 7. Ears troubled with a buzzing, part 2 page 160, number 13.
Eringo roots candied part ibidem page 150, number 26. Eyes cleared, part ibidem
Page 163, number 24, page 123, number 3 blearednes cured page 97, number 7 page 86, number
58, page 84. number 49 dimnes cured page 82 number 42, bruised eye page 82, number 41,
sore eyes page 81, number 39, page 76, number 25, 26, 27. page 77, number 29, page 7 number
7, Eyes inflamed, page 68, number 1 page 49, number 6 p^ge 44, number 56, page 43, number
54 page 40, number 46.
F
Faculties what, part 1. page 49. Face cleared, part 2, page 71, number 12,
preserved young, page 72, number 16, made smooth, page 73, number 17, 18, 19, 20.
rednes and pimples cured page 74, number 21, face and hands made white page 85,
number 53 after the pox page 12, number 13, 14. Freckles taken off the face and
hands, part ibidem page 169 number 47. Fever cured, part ibidem page 35, number 31,
Fever hecticke page 19, number 6. Falling sickness cured, part ibidem page 25 number
10, page 36, number 34, page 37, number 38, page 46, number 62 page 65, number 15 page 66,
number 21, page 36 number 33. Faintnes and swouning, part ibidem page 38 number 42.
Fattes washed part ibidem page 131. number 3. Fellon cured, part ibidem page 170,
number 52, page 169 number 49 page 160. number 12. Saint Anthonies fire cured, part
ibidem page 38, number 44 Fistulaes cured, part ibidem page 39, number 45 page 58 number
26, page 69, number 4 page 97 number 7. Flowers candied, part ibidem page 151, number
28. Flux stayed part ibidem part 168, number 44 page 156, number 4 page 115, number 11
page 18 number 1 page 33 number 28, of the eyes, page 38, n 44, women's flux stayed,
part ibid. page 168, number 45, page 165, number 32 page 162 number 20 page 40 number 49
page 43 number 53 page 99 number 5 page 33 number 28 page 41 number 48. Forgetfulness,
part ibidem page 115 number 4. Fruits green preserved, part ibidem page 144 number
13. Fruits dried after preserving, part ibidem page 148 number 23.
G
Giddiness h^lped, part 2 page 105 number 4. Gout cured, part ibidem page 12 number
14 page 17 number 16 page 37 number 36 page 16 number 24 page 30 page 31 number 23 p^ge 104
number 2 page 65 number 16 page 59 number 30 page 48 number 4 page 43 number 53 page 101 number
15 page 164 number 27. Grapes candyed, part ibidem page 148 number 22 preserved page
141 number 5. Gravel purged away, part 2 page 78 number 31 in the kidneies, page 14
number 19. Greene-sickenesse cured part ibidem page 66 number 19. Gummes preserved,
part ibidem page 74 number 22. Goose-berries candyed, part ibidem page 148 number 22.
Preserved, page 141 number 5. Gripings in the belly, part ibidem page 41 number 48.
Goats blood prepared, part ibidem page 134 number 12. Guts pained, part ibidem
page 18 number 1.
H
Hair restored, part 2 page 22 number 15. Head purged, part ibidem page 123 number
23 from phlegm, page ibidem number 5. Headache cured, part ibidem page 16 number 24
page 40 number 46 pa 36 number 34 pa 116 number 14 pa 49 number 6. Heart beating, part
ibidem page 38 number 42 heart cheared, page 117 number 18. Hands kept fair, part
ibidem page 37 number 37. Heat in the face, part ibidem page 72 number 15. Hearing
helped, part ibidem page 25 number 20. Hecocks helped, part ibidem page 24 number 18.
Humor stayed from flowing to the teeth, part ibidem page 164 number 26. Honey of
raisons, part ibidem page 131 number 4 honey dispumed, page 132 number 5 of roses,
page 137 number 18. Humors drawn out, part 2 page 49 number 6 falling into the
eyes, page 77 number 30 humors phlegmatic purged, page 105 number 3. Humors what,
part 1 page 21 second humors, page 35 to know what humor aboundes by the
color of the face, page 37.
I
Iaundise yellow, part 2 page 44. page 40 number 56 page 118 number 22 black, page
67 number 22. Ielly of flesh, part ibidem page 115 number 1 of hearts-horne, number 2
court jelly, page 156 number 3. Impostume, part ibidem page 167 number 38 page 56 number
23 page 92 number 18 page 97 number 7 in the head, page 17 number 16 dissolved, pa 51
number 10 page 57 number 24. Ioynt-ache, part ibidem page 169 number 48 page 59 number 30
page 21 number 12. Instructions for compounding medicines, part ibidem page 129.
Itch cured, part ibidem page 40 number 46. Instruments for a private house part 1
page 86. Issues to make, part ibidem page 83. Juice of licoras to make, part 2
page 123 number 8 page 170 number 51. Iuleps, part 2 page 5.
K.
Kidneies heat, part 2 page 49 number 6. Kings evil, part ibidem page 92 number 14.
L.
Labor and rest, part 1 page 63. Lamenesse, part 2 page 12 number 14 page 95 number
4. Leeches how to use, part 1 page 82. Laske stopped, part 2 page 35 number 31
page 160 number 14. page 165 number 29 page 166 number 35. Lettuce stalks candyed, part
2 page 150 number 27 dried, page 147 number 21. Liver cooled, part ibidem page 80 number
38 obstructions opened, page 20 number 7. Lozenges of flowers, part 2 page 151 number
29. Lungs comforted, part ibidem page 34 number 29 purged, page 116 number 16. Legs
sore, part ibidem page 83 number 45 page 70 number 9.
M
Malum mortuum cured, part 2 page 98 number 2. Madness cured, part ibidem page
105 number 4. Marmalade of quinces, part ibidem page 140 number 4 of plummes, page
143 number 10 of Oranges and Lemmons, page 154 number 38. Matrix suffocated, part
ibidem page 36 number 33 34 to close it after conception, page 42 number 51.
Marchpane to make, part ibidem page 15 number 30. May butter, part ibidem page 133
number 10. Meat what is best, part 1 page 61. Mackeroones, part ibidem page 152
number 32. Measells, part ibidem page 37 number 39. Medicine what, part ibidem page
1. Members, part 1 page 40. Megrim cured, part 2 page 16 number 24 page 25 number 20
page 163 number 22. Memory helped part ibidem page 75 number 23. Metheglin to make,
part ibidem page 134 number 13. Melancholy purged, part ibidem page 63 number 9 page
75 number 23 page 105 number 4 page 38 number 42. Miscarryings in women, part ibidem
page 174 number 64. Milt pained, part ibid page 36 number 35 page 37 number 38. Morphew
cured, part ibidem page 171 number 55 page 71 number 13 page 72 number 14 page 83 number 47
page 84 number 48 page 105 number 4. Mouth sore, part ibidem page 70 number 8 page 81
number 40. Mother rising part ibi pa 40 number 46 mother fallen down page 33 number 28
rising of the mother, pa 34 number 29 30. Matrice pained, part 2 page 16 number 14.
Melancholy what, part 1 page 32.
N.
Not Natural things, part 1 page 58. Nodules, part 2 page 5. Noise in the
head, part ibidem page 10 number 9 in the ears, page 20 number 7 in the head, page
32 number 26 in the ears, page 34 number 29. Noli me tangere, part ibidem page 17
number 16 page 86. number 58 ipage 97 number 7. Numnesse, part ibidem page 95 number 4.
O.
Obstructions in the liver and kidneyes, part 2 page 44. number 57. Observations
for bathing, part ibidem pae 100 number 7. Ointment for all pains and grief,
part ibidem page 14 number 19 of worms, page 11 number 10. Oranges and Lemmons
dried, part 2 page 147 number 20 candyed, page 150 number 27. Oils to make, of
Roses, violets, part 2 page 18 of mintes, Wormwood, lillies, sweet almonds,
page 19 bitter almonds, worms, rue page 20 bays, scorpions, turpentine, page
21 masticke, tile stones, eggs, page 22 S. John's wort, whelps, vitrioll, page
23 oleum benedictum, page 25 oil magistrall, page 26 of snailes, of a dog,
page 31 swallows, page 32, masticke page 33, storax calamite, galbanum, page
34 myrrh sagapenum, page 35 castoreum, amber ammoniacum, pa. 36 wax, butter,
cinnamon page 37 mace, cloves, nutmegs, page 38, pepper, saffron quinceseed page
39, rosemary flowers page 40 time, marjerom mint page 41 penny-royall, sage,
hyssope, p. 42 ^vie, rue, page 43, of aniseed, fennelseed, parslyseed, page 44
radishseed, mustardseed, colewortseed fl^xseed, 45, of a man's skull, lead and
tin, quicksi^ver, hempseed, page 46,
P
Pain assuaged, part 2 page 50 number 9 page 91 number 10. page 19 number 6 page 17 number
25, in the stomach, page 39 number 45, in the back, page 22 number 15. Palsy cured,
part ibidem page 20 number 9 page 22 number 14 page 31 number 24 page 32 number 27 page 37
number 38 page 92 number 19 page 95 number 4 page 97 number 7 page 79 number 35, page 43 number
54 p ge 164, number 27. Palenesse of face amended part ibidem page 105 number 5.
Paste of oranges and lemmons, part 2 page 142 number 7, of Genua, number 8, of tender
plums, page 143 number 9. Passions of the mind, part 1 page 70. Pear plums
dried, part 2 page 146 number 17, Preserved, p^ge 139 number 3. Pears dried without
sugar, part ibid. page 146, number 18. Perry to make, part 2 Page 135, number 14.
Pearl or web in the eyes, part ibidem page 78, number 33 page 84 number 49, page
86, number 56. Pessaries to make, part ibidem page 5. Physic defined, part 1
page 1. Phlegm what, part 1 page 25 purged, part 2 page 42 number 52, page 44,
number 55 page 63 number 8, 9, page 75, number 23. Pills how to make, part 2 page 6 of
aristolochia, agaricke, p^ge 123 sine quibus, stomach pills, page 124. Piles
cured part ibidem page 11 number 11. Pimples in the face healed, part ibidem page
85 number 54, page 71, number 11, page 84 number 49. Pissing with difficulty, part
ibidem page 41 number 48. Pippins dried, part ibidem page 145 number 15. Plague, Part
ibidem pa. 40, number 46, page 107 number 7 page 91 number 11 page 85 number 51. page 43
number 53 page 167, number 38. Plums dried, part ibidem page 146, number 17, preserved
ripe, page 144, number 14, preserved, page 139 number 3. Plurisie cured, part 2 page
45, number 61 page 116 number 14 15 16. Poultisses, vide Cataplasmes. Poison
expelled, part ibidem page 40, number 46 page 35, number 32 pae 9, 7, n. 7, page 44,
number 57 page 44, number 55 page 43 number 54 page 43, number 53. Small Pox cured, part
ibidem page 159 number 11 page 84, number 50, great Pox, page 46, number 4. Pomecritrons
candied, part ibidem page 150 number 27. Physic cured part ibidem page 117, number
17 page 109, number 9 page 174, number 63 page 157 number 6. Ptisan to make, part 82,
number 44. Preserves and conserves, part 2 page 138. Powders of Hollands pulvis
sanctus, part ibidem page 61, of turbith, page 62, white damask powder, sweet
powder, damask powder, page 68. Pulpe of dates, part ibidem page 130. A Purge,
part ibidem page 168, number 42 page 62 number 6, page 111, number 3.
Q
Quinces preserved, part 2 page 139, number 2, kept raw all the year, page 141
number 6. Quintessence of honey, part 2 pages 38.
R
Rashers of bacon to make, part 2 Page 152 number 31. Replection and inanition
part 1 page 67. Ringworms cured, part, 2 page 15 number 21. Rose vinegar to make,
part ibidem page 132 number 6. Rhume distilling down the throat stopped, part 2
page 170, number 53 page 75 number 23. Running of the Reins, part ibidem page 167,
number 37, 49 number 6 page 43, number 53 Pain in the Reins eased, page 30. Reins
mundefied, part ibidem page 120 number 25. Ruptures helped, part ibidem page 98
number. 1 Page 50 number 7 Page 33 number 28.
S
A Searecloth to skin and heal, part 2 page 158 number 7 Salt of cerusse to make,
part ibidem page 134 number 11. Scabs cured, part ibidem page 105, number 4 page 15
number 21. Secondine expelled, part ibidem page 42 number 50 Page 41 number 48. Seen
corrected, part ibidem page 130, number 2. A Simptome what part 1 page 76.
Sciatica cured, part 2 page 17 number 16 page 37 number 36, p^ge 24 number 19 page 50,
number 8 page 51 number 11 page 90, number 8 page 175, number 66. Of Sleep and watching,
Par. 1 page 65 sleep procured part 2 page 115 number 12 13 page 38 number 44. Sirrups
to make, of roses, part 2 page 109 of vinegar simple, page 110 vinegar
compound, Catholicum simplex, page 111 Catholicum majus, of white roses, page
112, of the juice of lemmons, oximell simple, pa. 113, of endive, hartstongue,
page 114, of dry roses, poppie, diascordium, page 115, of violets, hyssope,
page 116 horehound, buglosse, pa 117, of mint coltsfoot, maidenhaire, wormwood,
page 118, of radish, mugwort, page 119, of alchakenge, page 120. Spirits what,
part 1 page 56. Spleen cured, part 2 page 172 number 58 page 173, number 59 page 158
number 8 page 114 number 10 page 38 number 42 page 15 number 22. Skin made soft, part
ibidem page 99 number 6, cleared, page 74 number 22 page 72 number 15 page 171, number 56.
Shingles cured, part ibidem page 92, number 12. Sight cleared, part ibidem page 70
number 6 page 38 number 41, page 35 number 31. Sneezing provoked, part ibidem page 63
number 10. Stitches cured, part ibid page 162, number 19 page 67 number 23 page 37 number
36 page 35 number 32 page 35 number 31, page 12 number 14. Stitching wounds with
clothes, part 2 page 61 number 4. Stifnes of members, part ibidem page 95 number 3.
Stinging of a waspe, or Be, part ibidem page 162 number 18 Stone cured, part
ibidem page 119 number 23 page 105, number 3 page 99 nu. 3 page 86, number 55 page 85
number 51 page 97 number 35 34, page 78 number 32 page 66 number 20 page 68 number 11 page 45
number 59 58 page 44 number 57 56 page 42 number 51 page 21 number 11 page 36 number 34.
Stomach purged, part 275 number 23, Strengthened, page 19 number 3 page 41 number 49
page 16 number 24. Stones, part ibidem page 102. S^bernes procured, part ibidem
page 39 number 44. Sinews shrunk, part ibidem page 58 number 27 page 20 number 7
strained, page 17 number 16. Sores old, part ibidem page 86 number 57 page 60 number 32
33 page 56 number 21 page 52 number 15 16, page 48 number 3 page 14 number 20. Speech lost
in sickness, part ibidem page 37 number 39. Spitting blood cured, part ibidem page
23 number 28. Strangury cured, part ibidem page 41, number 49, page 38 number 40.
Succkets candied part ibidem page 150, number 27. Sugar boiled, to a manus Christi
height, part ibidem page 154 number 36, to a candy height, number 37. Suppositars to
make, part ibidem page 4. Swelling coming of a hot cause, part ibidem page 90,
number 4, Swelling, page 89 number 1 page 49 number 6.
T
Teeth kept white, part 2 page 65, number 17 page 74, number 22 Teeth fastened, page
33 number 28. Thorn drawed out, part 2 page 17 number 16 page 34 number 30 page 10 number
9. Throat sore cured, part ibidem page 89 number 3. Temperaments what, part 1
page 7. Tetter healed, part 2 page 105 number 4. Toothach helped, part ibidem page
69 number 5 page 79, number 35 page 97 number 7. Tumors to suppurate, part ibidem page
91, number 9.
V
Venery excited, part 2 page 44, number 55 page 40. Venom drunk expelled part
ibidem page 34 number 30. Vertigo cured, part ibidem page 22 number 14. Vital
spirtis comforted, part ibidem page 79 number 35. Virtues of hearts to know in all
seasons, part ibidem page 137 number 19. Vomiting stayed, part ibidem page 169,
number 46 page 41 number 49 page 33, number 28, page 42 number 51, page 118, number 19. A
Vomit, part 2 page 173, number 61. Ulcers cured, part ibidem page 38, number 42 page
31, number 21 page 47 number 1, 2, page 54, number 18 page 57 number 25 page 58 number 26,
page 61, number 1 page 68, number 2 page 80 number 37, page 86 number 58 page 13 number 17.
Unguents to make, Aureum Enulatum, part 2 page 7 Populeon, Apostolorum, page 8,
Album, Vulpinum page 9 of St. Cosme, and Damian, page 10, de Calcantho, page
13, Aleblastrum, page 16, Flos Vnguentorum, page 17. Urine provoked, part
ibidem page 41, number 47 page 37 number 36, p. 23 number 16 page 42 n. 51 page 44 number
56 page 45 number 58 page 90 number 5, 6, 7, page 110, number 2. Uvula helped, Part 2
Page 49 number 6.
W
Water precious, part 2 page 74 number 22. For those that cannot hold their Water,
ibidem page 166 number 34. Waters to make, part ibidem page 68 Aqua mirabilis,
page 75 rysell, page 77, Doctor Stevens his aqua composita, page 79 Hydromell,
page 82, of copperas, page 83 Aqua coelestis, page 86. Webs in the eyes, cured,
part ibidem page 16, number 24. Weights and measures, part 1 page 85. Wild fire
cured, part 2 page 164 number 25. Wind in guts and stomach expelled, part 2 page
44 number 55, 56, page 45 number 58 page 20 number 7, 9, page 40 page 168, number 41 page
90, number 5 page 120, number 20. Womb windy, part ibidem page 42 number 50. Hard Words
expounded, part 1 page 87. Worms killed, part 2 page 42, number 52, page 43, number
53, page 45, number 60, page 19, number 4 page 79 number 35, page 41 number 49. Old Wounds
cured, part ibidem page 17, number 16 page 42, number 51 page 46, number 63, 64 page 49,
number 6 page 52 number 16 page 51 number 10 page 56, number 21 22, page 59, number 29, page
59, number 31 page 61, number 2 page 25 number 20, page 27 number 21 page 33 number 28 page 35
number 31 page 86 number 58 page 94, number 1 page 95 number 4 page 66 number 5 page 97 number 6.
Wounds made by gunshot, part ibidem page 27 number 17.
Y
Yard ulcerated cured, part 2, page 69, number 3. Youth preserved, part ibidem
page 75 number 23 page 79, number 35.
FINIS.
READER, My absence from the Press, has caused some faults, which I shall
desire thee to correct, as follows.
In the first Part.
PAge 4. line 30. for were, read are, p. 6. 15. and still, round as etc. p. 8.
16. it, p. 10. 3. and this is the age, etc. p. 14. 18. fronkles, p. 22. 13. and
from it the blood, etc. p. 25, 16. two, p. ibid. 17. for gale, gall. p. 30. 29.
for itth, it. p. 42. 6. meninx. p. ibid. 31. glandulous. p. 43. 3. heat. p. 45.
20. splenica. p. ibid 21. mesenterica. p. 51. 29. digestive. p. 60. 22. for
nerves, nearnes. p. 64. 19. for cold could, p. 70. 16 are most necessary, etc.
p. 74. 6. for uceters, ureters. p. 75. 17. for phlegm, phlegmone. p. 79. 22.
for fifth, first. p. 81. 16. saphaena.

In the second Part.
PAge 54. 6. and wheat bran as much as shall suffice, and fry it altogether,
and make a plaster, and lay it warm, etc. p. 95. 21. for oil, all. p. 140.
20. for skin, scum p. 143. 6. quiddinie. p. 147. in the last title, artichocke.
p. 149. 21. brasile powdered. p. 159. 14 chicken both. p. 171. 14, for put,
pat. p. ibid. 16. and it will take, etc.


