Tyrannicall-Government ANATOMIZED: OR, A DISCOVRSE Concerning EVIL-COUNCELLORS.

BEING The Life and Death of JOHN the Baptist.

AND Presented to the KINGS most Excellent MAJESTY by the Author.

Die Martis, 30. Januarii, 1642

IT is Ordered by the Committee of the House of Commons concerning Printing,
That this Book be forthwith printed and published: John White.

London, Printed for JOHN FIELD, 16^^.

The Collocutors and Complaynants, or, Persons speaking.
Malchus, Pharise. Gamaliel, Pharise. John the Baptist. Chorus, or a company of
Jews. King Herod. The Queen Herodias. The Queens Daughter. Nuntius, or the
Messenger.
The life and death of JOHN the BAPTIST.
The first part.
Malchus, Gamaliel, Rabines. Malchus. O This old wretched Age, the neighboring
bounds of our last breath, and you unhappy Fates, long life on us have you
bestowed for this? or for these uses: That we should behold our Temples lewdly,
cursedly defiled, our holy things profaned, our Country slav'd, the Relics
of our Fame (which none might enter) broken before me, and the sacred gold rent
from the posts: what ere the greedy will of stern Gabinius could by Rapine
gain, or Anthonies luxurious power exhaust, all is lost, and we have been a
mocking stock (which I abhor to hear, much more to speak) to Cleopatra's
gluttonous desires: and lest we should not be in every part disgraced and
vilified, we now are brought under a cruel King, the Nephews Son of half
Arabian Artipater, Iudaea serves an Idumaean Tyrant, while an Arabian Lord in
Sion Reigns, Gods people and Jerusalem, a man profane and impious: yet in this
distress, among so many wounds of raging chance, some sparks of ancient honor
did remain a pattern of our Countries Discipline: such as it is, which by our
foes themselves is to be reverenced, the furious Victor, and no small number of
his purpled Court, began to dignifie the Jewish Lawe^. We w^^h t^is h^pe
^efresht, though well near tired with misery, had hardly taken heart to
re-advance our heads, when out alas, a heinous matter which we never feared,
did suddenly arise a new Baptizer* whose Pa^entage is holy, who was bred among
strange worships, but by Nation ours, by Stock a Levite given unto God, even
from his infant cradle, being Son of an High Priest, and shortly to receive
that dignity himself, unless he choose rather to taste false glories bitter
fruit, then honors harvest in due time to reap.

He therefore keeping in the desert soil deceives, with show of sanctity
severe, the simple people, clothed in skins of beasts, his hair uncomb'd, and
feeding Savage like; by which delusions he draws the looks of all men toward
him, the common sort being poss^st with ignorant belief, that a new Prophet to
the world is sent; And now unto himself he has reduced an Army of the vulgar
following him. Him only now the people all admire, leaving their Cities,
Noblemen and Kings honor and fear him, where he past with pride through the
madness of the multitude, new laws gives like another Moses, cleansing crimes
with water, and presumes our ancient laws with new Rites to adulterate; and
rends ^he Fathers with reproaches, to enjoy the peoples mad affection with more
ease, who give him gentle hearing; but if none himself oppose against this
theifes attempts, raging and ranging with bold insolence. That sanctity
throughout the world renowned will soon expire, nay, it expireth now, or rather
has expired.


Gam. Men of our calling must do nothing rashly, mildness becomes mild
Fathers; to young men, if through temerity they go astray, a pardon may be
given, but a fault by one of us committed, no excuse to veil it can pr^vaile;
Be calm a while, this rage appease, and let your sorrow slaked.


Ma^ch. Then you Gamaliel (as it seems) approve this cursed Caitiffs actions.


Gam. Malchus, no, I neither do approve, nor yet condemn^, before I know the
matter that concerns this new-come Prophet, who is not a man (so far as I can
hear) so full of ill, nor to be so oppressed with public hate.


Malch. O Stars, O Heaven, O Earth! that wicked wretch wants not a Patron here,
that can uphold his manners to be good.


Gam. Who vice reproves, good manners teaching, leads the way himself, which
unto others plainly he directs, can you persuade me that this man is naught?


Malch. He that our Laws contemnes, new Sects does teach, besides new Ritts,
reviles our Magistrates, and our high Priests with calumny pursues, can you
persuade me that this man is good?


Gam. If we were equally against our selves Judges austere, and milder toward
others, then we are oftentimes, our heinous crimes would lie more open unto
public view and sharp reproaches, howsoever we flatter our selves and are
proclaimed bles^, reputed by the common people, Saints, chaste, pious, and
upright, but of us all, none from the greatest fault was ever free,


Malch: Gamaliel, that these things may be true, is^t lawful for a vulgar man
to rail against a Prelate? Let the people hear, yielding obedience and sober
live, refuse no reyns by him upon them cast, he can reduce the vulgar if they
are to the right way, let him be as a law unto himself, but if in ought he
chance to go astray, the wicked, God does see and sharply punish.


Gam. And do you conceive this Law is j^st?


Malch. I do indeed.


Gam. And why? blind ignorance and want of skill.


Malch. Because rashness and error commonly are found as proper and peculiar
to the vulgar.


Gam. He that to Prin^es wisdom gives not place, is often taken from the vulgar
thrung.


Malch. But give we place then in this chair to shepherds.


Gam. Moses a shepherd was, and David too.


Malch. They were taught all things by the spirit of God.


Gam. He that taught them can also tutor this.


Malch. Will God instruct him, and relinquish us?


Gam. God, neither Scepter, parents, noble stock, beauty, nor Kingly riches
does respect, but hearts that no contagion of deceit, of lust, or cruelty does
once pollute; The holy spirit in this Temple rests.


Malch. Surely Gamaliel (to confess a truth) you seem to me of ^ate by your
opinion, a plain approver of that wicked Sec^; I can no longer smother what I
think, seeing you do such things as are unworthy both of your Ancestors and of
your self, you that of all the rest ought to defend, do chiefly our authority
offend, and that in favor of a mad young man: For Gods sake tell me, What Is
your trials hope, what profit do you seek to get by this? Perhaps he will give
you honor or great wealth, who ^tterly destroys our orders, honor, and labors
to undo us.


Gam. Truly Malchus, you shoot far from the mark, that you suppose, we can
defend our dignity with pride and arrogance, or with strength of Arms, our
parents were not by such means advanced.


Malch. Our ancient Laws and Orders more bec^me us that are ancient, and let
each one live according to the manner of his time.


Gam. But rather good things good men still become.


Malch. If we had any of our fathers spirit.


Gam. Our fathers manners should our lives direct.


Malch. This wicked fellow by a speedy death not threatenings had been punished.


Gam. ^or our order, cruelty is unmeet.


Malch. What Is done for God, holy and pious is.


Gam. To put to death without desert, is impious piety.


Malch. Deserves not he to dye, that all subverts?


Gam. If he transgress, why do you not confute him in public view with
arguments and reasons? Why do you not show there your light of wit? you being
expert, learned, and so old, set upon one that's rude, unlearned, so young to
the right way perhaps you may reduce him, and glory to your self, among all
men gain.


Malch. That wound is never to be gently cur^d, but with lord, sword, and fire,
or if you know any thing more to ^ormenting.


Gam. Be he such as you express him, or worse if you will, yet one thing to
your self you ought to give: that first you freely and in gentle wise admonish
him, least any one do think, that you would rather cast him headlong down,
doubtful of heaven then extend your hand to save him falling; It concerns you
much, that all your Enemies may understand, your will is good to save all, none
destroy, but such a one as with a mind perverse precipitates himself: one
thing at least I crave ere you by wrath be further drawn, consider by this
obstinate condition what you may gain.


Malch. Why this, confound a foe, comfort the good, and terrify the
shameless, confirm the wavering mind, and with this blood our Countries Laws
establish.


Gam. Rather this you shall obtain, to be accounted one, that with all power
of tyranny has rom'd, until you did a holy man confound, one whom by reason
you could not convince.


Malch. Then let him be as holy as he will and grave, Gods spirit does not him
direct, who does neglect the Fathers ancient Rules, and seeing no redress with
you I find, I Will seek the Kings assistance against Ruin.


Chorus. Gamaliel in my judgment counsels well, obey him therefore; but I
speak in vain, since wrath, the enemy of Gods advise, darkens his minds clear
sight, who stops his ears to wholesome admonitions.


Gam. He Is gone in wrath and swelling with disdain; for my part, what was
lawful, to my power I earnestly advised him with mild words, endeavoring to
assuage his raging spirits: I gave him faithful counsel, but so far is he
ingrate from giving any thanks, that he even hates me for my good desert. Such
is the common course, and a great fault in our degree is this, that we deceive
with show of sanctity, the common sort, that safely we Gods precepts may
despise; but if against our customs ought they dare, we practice to subvert
them with our gold, or witnesses suborned, and cut them off by secret poison,
filling Herod's ears with feigned utterance, what our mind offends, revenging
with false rumors, while his breast with rage affected we the more incense, and
arm the violence of cruel wrath with calumnies. But Malchus now is gone,
unmindfull of all modesty, to Court, where he will feign the rising of new
Sects, deserting of the Fathers holy Rites, and that the Kings Prerogative and
power lies open to derision* to conclude, what ere he holds commodions to
himself, masking his wickedness with honest names, if these he finds the King
but little move, another dart more cruel he will invent, he will cry the sworn
Bands that attend the King do secretly conspire, some wicked plot preparing,
they digest: Troops meet by night, their private wealth by ^actions to augment,
these he will feign or worse into his ^ars, these poisons of his wit he will
instill. And this in Princes is a common fault, gently to hearken unto secret
Tell-tales, whereby what is most cruel, though but feigned, they easily
believe, and feign vain fears unto themselves, pursuing the light air of
moveable Report, where he that gives faithful advertisement is holden dull,
torped and ^merous: We change the name of quondam virtue now, now not adorued
with any virtue, but with glorious titles proudly preferrd the Vulgar we
beguile.

As for this Prophet, with my soul I wish our Order with more modesty and
wisdom, and would bear themselves, if hither he be sent by ^ods appointment,
there is no power of man that can withstand him, but if he devise mischief by
fraud concealed, with his sword he will soon confound himself, ^et every man
interpret as his own condition guides him: If any here my sentence do allow,
his hands he may keep clear of guiltless blood: Nor let us be profuse of holy
blood, least those examples that in cruel sort we make for others, afterward
return on our own heads* dwells not in Herod's heart immanitie enough, unless
his rage by firebrands added to his wrath, increase?


Cho: O what a night of darkness does possess the minds of mortals! what
Cymerian ^ave do we inhabit, while this brittle life does swiftly fleet away?

False mod^sty does skreen the brazen face, pieties vale the impious does
conceal, Litigious men peace in their looks do feign, and the decei^full,
verity in words: The Vissage where sad gravity did dwell, the only Symbol of
a modest life, now turns to cruelty with boiling wra^h, and healdong estautes
with furious ^its.

Even as the vapors of hot Et^a's Furnace with a swift rolling turns the
stones about or into embers, flames Vesveus burn: so the blind fury of revenge
excites this Malchus on a guiltless man to fall, and falsely to accuse poor
naked truth.

Oh thou desire of glory, swo^n with pride, mother of ^o great mischief,
glittering praise of goodness colored with a show divine; when the minds
Kingdom thou have once possessed, with flattering poison thou inchauntst our
thoughts, and (reason bani^ht) thou disturbst the Court, the Court within us;
Piety and truth, with shamefa^tnesse and faith, are fled from thee: Faith of
the better Age a common Guest, has lastly left the vice-dishonor'd earth.

If there were any Artist that could set (the foreheads clouds removed.) our
cares to sight (the breast being made transparent) and disclose our minds dark
inner parts you might perceive monsters there varied into wondrous forms, and
those all stabled in a little Cell, being more than in remote and foreign
parts Nilus and Ganges bear, or all the births that Affrick^ yields, with
furious portents, and those that hored Caucasus affords in his dark Dens; the
cruel Tigers rage would not be wanting there, nor the fierce wildness of the
deep shining yellow Lioness, nor the dire gluttony of ranging Wolves, whose
appetites no slaughter can assuage, nor the fell Basalisk with poisoning
breath, or stinging Aspe that brings long lasting ^^eepe, or Scorpion dreaded
for his hooky tail, or Crocodile whose voice with feigned tears so sound
through the seaweeds, nor the Foxes wiles, or the Hyenaes ^alse play.

Counter feit piety does often cloak merciless Tyrants, and the guarded
stol^impiou^ natures; in a homely weed under the Cottage shadow of a swain
virtue obscured, lies nor sells her self for haughty titles, laughing as in
scorn at the mad tumults of our Justice-Courts, and the applause of common
peoples breath, nor Client like sits waiting at the door of a great Patron,
but does pass away the silent Ages of her blessed life in rural privacy,
being unto none saving her self, or but few others known.


The second Part.
Queen, Herod. Queen. MY Lord, you live secure, and feel not how your Kingly
power debayes, nor yet discern like one that's blind, what snares are daily set
to ruin you; for if that vulgar Preacher breath but anoyeare bonds, prison,
cross, in vain you then may threaten, proudly now his forces he surveyes, your
persons Guard his followers obscure.


Her. What danger fear you from th'unarmed root.


Qu. If private Conventicl^s you permit, how can you sleep secure?


Her. But he instructs those that run to him of their own accord.


Qu. A wide spread Faction we should fear the more.


Her. His sanctit^ confutes that crimination.


Qu. This veil does cover detestable Acts.


Her. Of purpled Rulers we may stand in dread.


Qu. And fear the fraud of gravest hypocrites.


Her. He that is helpless, armlesse, that alayes his thirst with water takes
his food in woods, his lodging on the grass; oh what deceit can he intend a
Serpent!


Qu. His attire, his meat and drink you see, but in his breast you see not what
he bears.


Her. A Kings estate is miserable, if he stand in awe of those that are in
misery.


Qu. If a King through fond security become a prey, he is most miserable.


Her. How then may a King remain in safety?


Qu. What withstands his pleasant queit, let him soon extirp.


Her. Surely a Tyrant and a King that's good, differ in this; the one his foes
preserves, the other is a foe to them he Rules.


Qu. Either is hard, to perish or destroy; but it is better, if make choice he
must, an enemy to destroy.


Her. Where no necessity the one requires, either is miserable.


Qu. Should you in such a tumult use no rigor, the wavering vulgars fury being
raised the Princes, Laws, Religion, Power contemned, is to the base Plebeans
made a scorn; Take heed, that lenities deceitful looks draw not your mind
from equity, what seems a far off mildness, to one near at hand will be the
greatest wildness; while you spare one Factious man that's desperately bad, you
seek to ruin all: whom he to arm against your life endeavors day and night,
what needs must be at length feign to be done; that the inconstant people are
stirred up to arms, that every where they all things burn, with woeful War, and
Villages left wasted, our Virgins ravished and our Cities fire, and with
ambigous fortune Armies joined. When Liberty shall burst the reins of Laws,
that clemency too late you will then condemn. And here behold that plague and
mischiefs head, This is that high Reformer, question him, and if I do not err,
you shall hear from him much more than fame has publis^t: nor do I mervaile
that there can be some that scorn your Government, when you your self the
wicked sort through lenity provoke.


Her. When a good King is able to do much, his power he ought to moderate.


Qu. Say you so? This upstart now will moderate your Scepter, and you must rule
according to his will, but if you had the spirit of a King --


Her. But get thee gone, and leave these things to me.


Qu. And so I will, lest you rail at me as you did before: when Queens yield
much to men of basest kind, what hope of equity will cherish others.


Herod. John. Chorus. Ha. is she gone? she is, now let me tell thee; there is
nothing that may move thee, or that strange thou may conceive, if an
offended woman, rich, noble, potent, finally a Queen, do entertain more anger
then is meet. Even thou thy self may witness it the best how much thy
welfare I have still regarded; for all the people hate thee, and require thee
as guilty to be punshed, our Priests murmur, our Nobles grieve, and surely what
it is that may increase the common sorts complaint, I will relate in brief: In
thy Orations, thou all the Orders openly revilest, the vulgar sort in our old
Laws unskilled, thou cunningly receivest the deadly venime of a new Sect
dispersing, and impairest with speeches turbulent, our regal State, with the
Republic peace, prohibiting our men of War their Captain to obey, the people
Caesar, while thou promisest new Kingdoms to the vulgar, and to free them of
their newforraign yok, andstir'st them up with a vain confidence, nor do
permit this our Rebellious Nation to rest: And madmen like us, as if we had
endured but small calamity, thou reinsittest the Romans a new War against us
to make; Nor doubt I what thou dare do being absent, seeing thou openly do
me upbraid with an unlawful marriage, and would heap the peoples hate upon
me, and attempt'st all that thou can to make my brother raise unnatural War
against me: And as if thou had done little mischief: for the safety of all
alike presuming to do all things, nowagainst Heaven thou preparest to fi^ht;
those holy Rites attempting to abolish, wherewith this Kingdom hitherto has
stood: These things the people grudge at, and complain that I am flow to
vindicate and right their Countries Laws, yet have I shown my self in nothing
harsh to thee, but all the favor that a benevolent and friendly Judge can show
thee, thou shallt plenteously receive; For no Assyrian or Egyptian Father has
me begotten a blood-thirsty Tyrant, who had with you own Country, parent,
nurse, I mean the spacious Earth, so that as often as any of the meanest People
perish, I lose me thinks a member of my self even from this body torn; Nor
thou shall find of Herod an upright and gentle Judge: If thou be able falsely to
con^ute what other things are laid unto thy charge, All thou have uttered
against me and mine I freely pardon, heartily remit, and thou shall understand
that I neglect mine own and prosecute the public wrong, the people being
witness: and I wish thou may so clear thy self of other crimes, that no
occasion of severity be left me through thy innocence.


Cho: Go forwards to be gracious in this, And thou shall live renowned to thy
successors, not in Gold-ore or Military bands: And think thy Kingdom safe, as
those achieved by equity, which charity and faith do evermore defend.


John. He unto whom the Almighty does committ a Kingdoms Rule ought many things
to hear, but all things that he hears to believe, it is not necessary, envy,
fear, grief, lucre, favor, often suppress the truth. If any of the people or
the fathers think I have uttered any thing against him in rigorous manner, or
ungently rayled, It Is necessary, ere he me accuse, that he examine his own
course of life; This has been ever my care and custom public offenses to
reproove in public, nothing in private have I done or taught, Blind lurking
holes I seek not, neither tax men but their v^ces, when the soldiers asked me
how I could serve at once the King and God: To ravish ^ruse violence, abuse or
^ircu^vent the simple with deceit, I utt^rly forbad them: To compose their
sensual desires, I gave them charge, according to the measure of their means:
nor any hope of new things do I preach, but only that which you believe with
me, out of the ancient Prophets; i^h mean time, none of so many thousand is
produced, that through my doctrine has contemned his Prince. Those matters
whether by uncertain fame to you related, or by hood winkt wrath still raging
headlong with desire to hurt, falsely invented, naked verity will by it self
and easily confute. How piously I prize the holy Rites and ancient
institutions, there is no sign more certain then the impeacher of my crimes,
because he comes not forth to public view, where feigned things be easily
believed, he secretly may murmr. For my denying that your Brothers wife is
yours by right consider with your self whether you ought to serve your carnal
will, rather then your Creator, and I wish all men devoted to the love of Kings
would be in mind alike, to mention things that are both profitable, true, and
good, rather then whas are pleasant and will soon turn to their damage; Then
against how many mischiefs and molestations would the Gate or entrance be shut
up, If heretofore freely and truly I have spoken ought, do you that in your
ways are just and good, (as Equities defenders are obliged) receive it in good
part, and set these bounds to your high potency which are prescribed you by the
Laws measure: For what Law you hold here against others, God the King Supreme
against you and others of your place retains: Then whatsoever you shall judge
of me, believe that God will judge the same of you.


Her: When thou shall come to Heaven speak heavenly things, but while thou
live on earth, earths Laws abide.


John. To earthly Kingdoms reverence I bear, and Kings obey, but those eternal
Kingdoms I hold my Country and their King adore.


Her: The matter even it self i^structs thee how Kings to obey, that do
desire a King such Laws as thou ordeinest to obey.


John. If I may Laws ordeine, I would proclaim to Kings, their people should
obedience yield, and Kings to God.


Her: Thou have enough contended bear him hence, the case is doubtful, naught
can I determine, until all things more ceartainly appear.


Chor. Who does conceive that by a Tyrants words the close or hidden meaning of
his mind, he can perceive let him well underdand, he trusts into a foul
deceitful glass, God prosper and turn all things to the best, what my soul
fears, it trembles to divine.


Her. How wretched and how overwhelmed with care a Kings condition is, no
tongue of man, or politic Oration can express, nor any thoughts attain; the
vulgar hold us only free and happy, that are vexed with terror, and with
poverty besieged, with miserable servitude oppre^t: the people, whatsoever they
desire, or love or dread, they freely dare confess, and modest riches without
fear en^oy: But when we walk abroad we must assume an honest persons habit,
and are forced to promise courteously with gracious looks, our anger to defer
and hide our hate, till a fit season, chiefly then to threat, when greatest
cause of fear our minds torments: A modest Prince the people do desp^e, one
rigerous they hate, the wavering vulgar we are compelled to serve, and can
command nothing to our desire. This new-come Prophet if I cut off, I shall
offend the people, if I preserve him, for my Royal State I little do provide,
what shall I do then? I must regard my Kingdom, none so near as I am to my
self, if I must serve the people for a Scepter, what is more foolish then,
while thou seek to please the vulgar sort to cast away a Kingdom? Joy and
wrath the people rashly take, and rashly leave: it is now my resolution to
conffrm the Royal power that I hold, with blood: the vulgar will be easily
appeased. If by my sufferance this evil creep a little further, twill be past
redress, why he forsooth durst tell me to my teeth my marriage was unchaste,
and if he escape for this unpunished, his audacious will there will not rest,
but Scepters to his Laws then he will force to stoop, then he will cast his
Captives into chains, then he will seek to rule, and not be ruled, give Laws
to Kings, and turn all upside down, we must apply unto a g^owing evil speedy
cure, flames rising must be quenched ere they increase. By suffering old
injuries, we raise fresh contumelies, new reproachful terms, If with the
peoples favor I may gain some satisfaction by this pun^shment, to win their
favor I will not neglect: But if perverse against me they persist, What
Malchus of our Laws may freely babble, what curious questions he may vainly cast
with intricate debate, that, I conceive, concerns not me, and let the people
know, this one Law to be kept, that they may think, All things to me are
lawful without Law.


Chor. Oh thou Creator of this spacious Orb, whose nod makes all things
tremble, Heaven adorned with glittering stars, Earth variously decked with
flourishing Array, and Seas that swell with raging violent motions, ebbes and
floods: Has not loud flame that knew the former age, brought to our hearing
thy then famous acts? When thou by vigor of thy puissant arm, proud Kingdoms
boasting of their, gold and wealth have utterly abolished and exextirped us in
their land to plant, their land to prepared, neither by counsel, strength, nor
Arms of ours. But Heavens Almighty favor safely brought us through the fierce
Armies, art not thou the King of (...)? a^t not thou the God of the Jews
Nation, by whose guiding hand (our enemies destroyed) their treacherous Tents we
trampled under foot, con^iding not in our own strength and com^ge; but in thee
our most auspicious Leader, bringing spoils and triumph to our Countrey^ will thou now being once our Father, utterly for sake the people whom thou love?
Are we now left a f^ble for our foes? Religion lies with Piety despised; in
purpled Courts, fraud is predomanant; the holy flock yield as a sacrifice
their pious necks to the ^ell Axe, our Prophets by the sword perish; our Tyrant
enemies rejoi^e in our laments, and they they the Kingdom rule un^er pretext of
piety and zeal, though punishment descr^ing whilst they smart, whose worth
deserves a Kingdom. Ri^e, O Lord, and help thy people, To our Adversaries
show thy self such as Thee our Fathers saw in the Red Sea, confounding
Pharao^s Host; Such as the Prophets boy did thee behold, when to disperse the
flames throughout the Camp. Thou to thy fiery Horses gave the re^gns. The
must of error that obscures the light of humane understanding overwhelmed with
a dark cloud: O Lord: now drive away, let both the Land warmd with the rising
Sun, and that which. does it in down-going view, confess that only thou c^nst
all things do.


The third Part.
MALCHUS. THus truly is the state of humane things, That if God grant that we
should have our wish, we are to seek, uncertain what to choose, what to refuse;
we covet honor, we^lth, Dominion, Heritage for us and ours, which having our
desire, we often lose bondage, imprisonment, and shameful flight unto our foes
we wish, which often beget their greatest glory, to our bitter shame: And surely
I have learnd, that this is true (not go to fetch examples a far off) by mine
own dang^r; for when this Baptizer, living remote from^s on Mountain tops,
bewitched and d^ew with him the rediculous rout; I only (the rest idle) did
defend the Pharisees, Authority and worth: nor did I cease always and means to
try, until this Adversaries guilty hands were strongly bound, and in the
common Goal, his insolence allayed, and the whole Court his crimes had
knowledge of by my redort; and and yet his c^^mes imprisonment, and bonds,
naught in my thog^hts avail, the peoples hearts the horrid power of this
hellish plague has so possessed, and every one has quast the deadly poison,
that they all bewail his dangerous condition, yiedling honor unto his ^minent
noworthy death. But wherescere he can, let MALCHUS go, their curse^ h: cannot
escape, at me they point, on me they look with a Malignant eye, doing all
favors to that wicked wretch, who has berest us of all differences in our
a^^airs and orders, keeping watch before the Prison. Surely nothing now in
misery exceeds us, that devote our selves (all other business set apart) unto
the peoples profit; he that slaves himself to them, may easily perceive, that
such his favor he has ill bestowed, as upon those that being ill inclined
through ^^nate malice, ever use to bear toward the ^ad, good will, and
to-contemne the chiefest persons of a Commonweal. Oh whither shall I go? how
first complain, where shall my anger principally light? whom shall I first
assist? the ungodly crew love that false Prophet, and the Rab^^es murmr, the
King connives, the Nobles him neglect! I only with these shoulders do support,
even with these, our Countries falling Rites, none lending me a hand; why then
do I, and none but I, the common change bewail? shall I put o^f my office, and
forsake our Orders, dignity, with all our laws and sacred Rites, and suffer my
poor self to be a laughing stock to those that hate me? I Will do it, i will suffer
it, I indeed I will; for what else ^m I do? shall I alone bear that my self,
which all refuse to bear? and lay my self fo^th to the public ruin? God keep
his own, ^ith now the world is such, that every man must loc^ unto himself: I Will
do the like, and if the Commonwealth I rule amiss, then let the ruin light
upon my head; those that now while I stand, favor me most, will first when I
am fallen, assault me with their heels; if well I rule, and do ill place my
favor, I shall get nothing but envy: now too lat^ I like GAMALI^S advise,
unless perhaps, no man from error can return too late; I had rather they
should seek me constant here, than when all is done, my indiscretion punish:
what seems good to each man, let him think I Will rid my self of troubles, and
repair my favor with this Prophet; nor will he being a simple hearted man
reject me; But If I find him toward me pe^ver^e, I Will set all engines, lest
the people think he perished by my craft; if they to me be reconciled, the
business will not fall on every side, and here I think he comes, he comes
indeed, see what a company follows the wicked wretch, and we the while sit in
the Cities heart amongst our Chairs, alone and (...) but I first w^ll hear what
this grand Mr. utters.


JOHN. O thou that (...) things do make void, judge and rule what ere the
air in its loose b^some bears, what ere the (...) can precreate, ^r sea within
its waters nourish; thee there God all do acknowledge, (...); thee alone find
the^r creation; in a constant way thy laws once given, freely they ob^y; At thy
command the spring with flowers paints the sert^le fields, and fruits the
summer yields, Autumn, pure wine abundantly aff^^ds, and winter with white
frost the (...) attires, the crooked Ri^ers roll into the sea huge heaps of
waters, the sea ebs and flows, the silver Moon illuminates the night, the
golden Sun the day, and views this orb with never r^sting brightness; To
conclude, there is nothing whatsoere in heaven or earth that does not willingly
its king obey, its maker love. and toward him declare with all the service
possibly it can its good affection, but only man; Man who is bound far more
than all the rest Gods precepts to delight in and obey, only contemnes them,
and rejects the reigns of laws divine; yea, into every sin precipitates
himself, accounts all just in his own strength, and measures right by lust.


Malch. Thy fair beginnings as yet well proceed.


John Nor do I so much wonder at the Gentiles, that through the world do wander
from the way, as at this people that themselves do boast to be Gods heritage,
yet rail at others, and cry them down as impious, when no Nation on this globe
seated whersoere the sun surveys the earth, lives more licentious.


Mal. Surely as yet he has said no untruth.


John Nor is this only the light vulgars fault: The Levite in white v^sture
sh^ning far, and the Law writer of his knowledge proud, and you so reverend for
age mature by oblique error, are drawn out of the way, widows and orphans
causes where you Judge, fall to the ground, the rich oppress the poor, both
right and wrong are set at equal price.


Mal. To hear this and be mute, I burst with rage.


John But you, the Rabines, that in holy gifts and knowledge fain all oaths to
excel: And you the sacred dignity of Priests, and the chief Prelates of the
sacred Order, tyth all the herbs born of our mother earth, Dill, Mint, Rue,
Garlic, Nettles, or green Hey, does not escape you. But if you should read or
teach the Prophets oracles, and show the track or steps of your own holy life,
then your authority is stricken mute, then like dumb dogs that bark not: here
you fret and fume about your sheep-coats, but the Wolves which of you drive
away? the Wolves said I? you are the Wolves your selves that flee your flock,
clothed with their Woo^^, their milk dot slack your thirst, their flesh your
hunger: thus your selves you feed, but not your flock.


Mal. Hence Concord with a mischief, can I brook my Order any longer to be
checked so insolently, with so base reproach? if God from Heaven should send me
with this charge, that these things I should hear such his command, I rather
would decline, than hear so much: I can endure no longer, Ho sir, you master of
mis-rule, is this doctrine yours? do you instruct the silly people thus?


John If you be good, those things that I declare, nothing concern you.


Mal. To traduce a Priest, does it belong to thee?


John When I reprove a wicked man, I hold it spoken well.


Mal. A young man ought his elders to obey.


John It Is rather meet that all should God obey.


Mal. Then do thou speak these things by Gods command?


John. Truth does command all men to speak the truth.


Malch. It often profits to conceal the truth,


John. Profit with bad works joined I naught account.


Malch. Thou may call goodness what seems bad to thee.


John. To see (when I am able to reduce them into the way) so many thousands
perish, it seems too bad.


Malch. Thou able to reduce them, why are not we the feeders of the flock.


John. If it be all one both to feed and fley.


Malch. Do thine own business and let ours alone,


John. My neighbors misery is likewise mine.


Malch. I pray, who are you with such power endued? Are you that Christ unto
our Fathers promised?


John. I am not.


Malch. Are you then a Prophet?


John. Neither.


Malch. Are you Elias?


John. No.


Malch. If none of these, nor Christ our hope, no Prophet nor Elias, how dare
thou be the author of new Baptism? declare to me, whom shall we say thou art?


John. I am a voice that one the Mountain tops afar off call and cry, Prepare
the way, make strieght your paths, the Lord is near at hand, at whose first
coming shall the valleys rend, and Mountains will be levied with the plain, I
in his name the people do baptize, whose shoes I am not worthy to pull off,
whom none does know thoug^ he converse with you.


Malch. What snares does he invent, deluding me with circumstances, by what
miracle provest thou the authority which thus thou claimest?


John. And by what miracle thine can thou prove? I may on the other side thee
also ask.


Malch. How obstinate he is, be it nere so much that thou concealest, yet all
of us do know, what makes thee mad: Thou surely do desire to grow up through
our envy, thou would gain glory and mighty riches by our loss, and become
potent by flagitious Acts nor do deceive us but deceivst thy self: neither
were thou the first that did attempt thus to beguile, yet thee the last I wish,
that may be duly punished, or that thou by my advise thy mind would rather
change, that as thou have made many go astray through thee, they may into the
way return, I have seen others that have made a show of sever holiness by
outward habit, whereby more easily they might be thought of simple modest mind,
but by such art, honor, and wealth when once they had obtained, their
dispositions by degrees appeared and were discovered, for that pious course,
well clokd before they openly contemned and to their true conditions gave the
Reigns. But if this way thou aimest at honors hight, unskilful men blind
ignorance deceives: By that Cross path, to glory none attain, unless
experience that best instructs, and age that such experience does beget has
very much beguild me, for thy fame and livlyhood thou better may provide
seeking rather safty than renown.


Ioh. If I deliver truth and do what is right, wherefore should any bid me hold
my peace, but if untruth, do you that are so learned declare it to the simple.


Malch. Of these things, when thou shall suffer punishment by death, thou will
repent thee.


Ioh. Threaten that to Those, who fear to die.


Mal. But if I live, ere long, I Will make thee muorn for this perverseness, and
know what it is, the Elders to neglect the Scribes, revile and vex the Rabines
with thy saucy Tongue, and happily feel, since thou have no regard to purchase
friends, the power of old men's hate.


Cho. He that himself prepares for secret stealth avoyds the light and
Murderers do hate a burning Torch, that is conscious of their crimes: A child
refuses medicines intermixed with bitter wormwood* a cut wound abhorres the
wholesome plasters; and to him whose breast the hidden evils of his soul
torments, the truth is grievous, which does open lay his troubled heart and his
bad mind bewray. But O you Hypocrites in show severe, whom lawless gain with
rugged brow delights through error of the credulous common sort, how well so
ever you your thoughts conceal: And though the ^oule sink of your impious
minds be closely hid, your gnawing conscience argues your lurking secrets, That
tormenter enclosed within your Entrails eats you up, scourging with cruel
stripes; O three times blessed, and more is he, that being pure within, becomes
not guilty to Domestic Judges, nor by a torturer within his heart, pent up
unseene, endures perpetual smart.


The fourth part.
Malchus, Chorus, Herodias. THere is no certain trusting to the King, his and
the Common cause, he has betrayed through foul ambition, while he bends his
thoughts to please the people, and with favor hunts for ayrie applause; Me,
under show of lenity, he labors to subject unto the Co^^ons wrath, and with
my peril would vindicate his wrongs, even prepared to satisfy the people with
my head, as if he saw, they heavily did bear the Baptists death: But if to
have the chief of their new Faction flaine, they took it lightly; he subtily
by the vulgar would be thought with greatest glory to have taken revenge. Thus
to themselves Kings of their Cities blood exhibit shows by turns, and make a
sport of mutual slaughter, challenge to themselves, and publish, all by them
was only done, all whatsoever the vulgar Votes approve, and attribute our
labors industry to their own praise; but if the uncertain air of popular
^avour otherwise do turn against their expectation and desire, then on their
Officers they cast the fault, and with a vile breath, their own crime avert
from innocent blood. One only now remains a Partner of our grief, the Queen
enraged, much like a Tiger of her Whelps ^erest, for that the Baptist had
before the King accused the alliance of her former Bed to be polluted, openly
condemning the league of marriage with a Brothers wife forbidden by the Law:
now while the fire of estuating wrath is fresh and hot; I will add firebrarnds
to her troubled thoughts, and feed them with fit language: But behold, how
oppor^unely she presents her self.

Chor. Now poison comes to poison, flame to flame, now comes the uttermost
hazard.


Malch. Noble Queen, our Nations glorious honor, who alone in this so great a
Kingdom do deserve the highest place, God save you.


Qu. And thee Malchus, the most religious Rabine: but why sad?


Malch. For that which I suppose, your mind afflict.


Qu. It may be so, but tell me, what is that?


Malch. Do you, to see your dignity despised, your royal names authority so
sacred throughout the world to be accounted vile, your Crown made subject to
the vulgars sco^ne, bear it with patience?


Qu. What then shall I do? teach me a remedy.


Malch. Within your heart conceive so high a wrath, as may be worthy of your
Princely stock, your nuptial bed and bosom.


Qu. That Is done already, I am burst with ire, weep and exclaim and sharply
reprehend, but no relief by wrath or tears I gain, for all my words are
scattered by the wind.


Mal. If with your husband a meet power you had, would he have born your wrongs
thus unrevenged? Or rather (may I speak more truly) his.


Qu. Thou feast the people, how they be inclinde. Perhaps by this imprisonment
the King, The Baptists eager spirits think to ^uaile, and to allay his
boldness?


Malch. If you suppose imp^isonment and bonds, Can bridle the fierce spirit of
this thief, Your Highness erres; The rage of savage beasts, That break their
Dens and liberty regain, Is much more vehement them theirs that range, In
woods or desert Mountains: Being freed, What will not he attempt, Whose
^etters now the people reveren^e, wrath once ^rovokd is kindled not a^laid, by
taunts and scorn ^he haughty spirit is (...) f^ry bor^.


Qu. This benefit should rather quench it quite, For that by royal mildness
he is free, Who by his own perverseness might have perished.


Mal. What your esteem a benefit, he holds an injury, and will more often
remember, that you imprisoned him, then set him free.


Qu. A rough and crabbed nature, thou relat'st.


Malch. This in most men is naturally graff'd, What favor you afford is
quickly lost, but what disfavor, no man does forget, Good turns if born in
memory with bad, All men well near do hate, Think that the Baptist, as often as
he remembers your Desert, will not his crime forget, and still believe, he is
not loo^e from that, But in your thoughts, a guilty man by soul ambi^ion
freed, His pain remitted and you wrath suppressed but for a time.


Qu. Yet courtesy prevails to mitigate fierce natures.


Malch. What with long use is hardened to the worst, We much more easily may
break then bend.


Qu. What, do you then advise me in this case?


Malch. I Will show you quickly, may I be believed.


Qu. And what your counsel I will not delay.


Malch. By seeking, agitating, and providing, (not fitting still) great things
are brought to pass.


Qu. If seeking, agitating and providing naught may avail, it is better to sit
still, then to make work in vain, and be to others a mocking stock.


Malch. Where strength often cannot, labor overcomes: a tall Oak is not
suddenly born down, nor does the warring Ram at one assault overthrow the walls,
what, often you suppose cannot be finished, is in time dispatched^ And
importunity does overcome, what reason sometimes cannot; therefore seek,
solicit Herod, mingle tears with suite, wrath with monitions, flattring words
with brawles, work and entreat him by what means you can, embracing all
occasions every where; But if by such plain course you cannot speed, set
snares and use deceit, for mine own part, I am resolved until, we find
success in our desig^ments, never to desi^t.


Cho. Envy at length, and bitter grie^e incensed by impious F^ries, on this
pious Prophet have cas^ the venom of their cruelty; from thence fierce
calum^ny and false de^raction joined with fell cruelty, by cursed fraud
maintain the battle, from hence harmless truth s^pported by no guard, their
threats contemnes. So many weapons do one head assault; so many su^tle drifts
do menace death to this young man, yet like the hardy Holme, with North-east
wi^ds assaulted, or a Rock, that is ^eaten by the Seas returning flood, ^e with
no fear is moved: O power divine by all men to be hono^'d! candid Truth, whom
neither force of arms with trembling fear, nor fraud with all her projects
can depell from her firm station or unmoved estate. The grievous changes of
unstable fortune thou only fear not, and do arm thy breast, obnoxious to
no chances, with a strength insuperable, and th^^ impartial hand of the three
Ladies, both of life and death for bidst us to begriev'd at. But this Prophet I
am too slow to meet with, and relate the ruthful'st news that ever pierced his
ears; yet see he stands before the prison door. O thou more holy then thy
holy Parents, and the only ^cred it of old innocence! Now for thy safety in due
time provide: The Rabine Malchus privately intends deceit against thee, and
King Herod's wife, unwitting what to do is almost mad; The Courtiers flatter
her, the King diffembles what he conceives, and others twixt the teeth mutter,
as those that dare not speak the truth. Now is your final peril.


Ioh. And what is that?


Cho. To escape death, you shall have much to do.


Ioh. Of eminent evils, I hold that the sum.


Cho. Then which, none greater can a man befall.


Ioh. As Tyrants power and deceit may cease, Times length may bear it of its
own accord, Which evil men do f^ar, good men do wish.


Cho. But your own safety though you do neglect, consider ours, and that high
spirit of yours a while remitting, sue for Herod's mercy, and make some friends,
I hope he will not prove inexorable.


Ioh. Do not I do this?


Cho. That mind, God grant you.


Ioh. To sue there is no need, for that mind ^ath been long now with my blood
the Tyrant hasts to satisfy his wrath: Neither do I rcsist, how am I able
rather to pacify this bloody King, Then when the same things, we will not and
will.


Cho. Good words I pray.


Ioh. Why then report you thus, and thus advise me? ^^y there are two Kings,
and they on both sides two things bid me do that be repugnant, The one King is
earthly cruel and mischievous, who threatens death, and has a power my body
to destroy; The other heavenly, merciful and mild, forbids me death to fear,
and a reward proposes to my tourage, being able in flames inevitable to
torment body and soul: Now seeing these two Kings do differ in command, give
me advice. whither I ^^all obey.


Cho. If now ^ccasion offered you omir. Herod will never after be appeas's, but
God is ever easy to be pleased.


Ioh. Gods anger, the more gently it does rage, the more severely punishment
req^ires, being once moved.


Cho. So, death which God would have all mortals fear, do you disdain; the
body with the soul, he in a mutual bond of love has knit, lest unadvisedly
some cause be offered, that may their holy fellowship disjoyne.


Ioh. Death I disdain nor, but by momentany. shun that erernall, and the use of
light which God has given me, at his command I willingly surrender.


Cho. Will you then, being a Parent thus forsake your Orphans.


Ioh. He who believes that God his Father is, shall never ^eean Orphan.


Cho. Can the tears of all your friends and kindred, whom you leave unto a
spightfull Tyrant move you nothing?


Ioh. I leave them not, but they me rather leave; for truly unto death I run
the way from the beginning of the world ordained, yea all men that enjoy the
gift of life are born to die, and and we are all restrained with one
con^ition, we tend all to death, and thither every day does surely lead us; God
will have death a penance to the bad, and to the good a Port, the utmost
bounds of a long journey, and the Gate that leads to the beginning of a longer
life, that sends us rather born again then dead. unto a glorious house of
endless light; This is to man from prison a relcase and a free passage to life
wanting death; this way the whole flock of the Fathers went, and all must
follow them: what man is he, that having once begun a race to run, desires not
instantly the goal to gain? who, by night wandering in the stormy Sea,
refuses shelter in a quiet Port: What exile straying or'c the Desert Hills of
a strange Country, will be discontent into his own to make a quick return? I
therefore having overpast my way, suppose my self come to the very goal. Now
almost quitted from the sea of life, I view the Haven; from a foreign soil,
home I return to see my heavenly father, that father who with waters bounds the
earth; invested earth with Heaven, he that rules the certain courses of the
moving Sphere, who only all things made, guides and preserves; to whom all
things both quick and dead do live even as the flame it is Globes does upwards
roll, waters perpetually downw^rd^ fall, and all things do proceed to their own
foment; my (...) from heavendeso^nded, labors now, a habitation in eternal
light (...) gain with him that all things did create, whom not to see, is
death, life to behold. If Caucasus rough-growne with hoary frost, the Air with
Tempests and the Sea with storms, and the whole Region with excessive heat
should all resist me, thither I would go; to see so many Leaders, Prophers,
Kings, and pious Judges, shall I not make way, though, with a thousand deaths I
be opposed? My spirit therefore from this body freed, (this carnal prison)
thither longs to fly, Even whither all the world betimes or late shall be
dispatched; For long life I conceive, is nothing, but a gentle Servitude in a
hard painful prison; O sweet death, that art of heavy Toils the sole Release,
the Haven where all grief and trouble cease, yet unto few men profitable known:
Receive this shipwrackt body in thy bosom, and bring it where eternal peace
abides, whither no impious violence, deceit, or ealumny shall follow it.


Chor. O thou, thrice happy in this constancy of mind, O wretches that we are,
whom foolish fear debarres the sweet Society and sight of true felicity; Then
since thou hold it what is needful to be done, to thee we wish eternal health
and Farewell. How are the minds of men in ways unlike turned by discordant
strite? of no offense he that is guilty, does not fear to dye, he that
deserves to dye, if with vain threats death lightly greet him, with degenerate
fear grows pale and trembles; As the wicked wight shunnes death with heavy
heart, so he that is good, of death des^^ous, thorough flames and floods, over
deveous Rocks, all dangers and E^^^remes, freely precipitates his noble Soul;
For sundry benefits to death belong to evil men unknown, a happy life is
Fates Associate; neither do the Good totally dye, but still their better part
contemnes the greedy fire and Mounts aloft to its own Country, Heaven; Amongst
the Saints a certain Habitation does attend souls that are harmless, but the
guilty G^^ost, by snake haird Furies in a brimstone lake, with greedy C^rberus
his hungry I^ was, and Tan^alus with plenty never filled, is evermore
affrighted, gnawne and whipped; from hence comes fear to evil men; from thence
good hope to good men, even while their minds, appeating prodigal of brittle
breath, hasten to prosecute unfading life; O ^yren! potent in bewitching baits,
Life, that abhorring goodness, do affect what is fraudulent, and with thy
flattering might precludst the neighbout passage of our sins, and shutst the
Haven of perperuall peace; Where neither Martial clamor does affright, nor
Trumpets, with hoarse clangor do (...) nor pilling pi^^tes terifie by ^e^, nor
cruel theives beset the silent grove, nor my one made (...) Felix, that alone
with pleasant case he may himself besot the poor and weakeore-whelmes with
bloody flaughter, neither he, that for vain Titles may exchange the lives of
the rude Commons, but where simple virtue with fair prosperity and tranquil
rest possesses all, and day can never learn to end in darkness, nor life
ever know of any fi^erall, nor Joy of grief. O thou sweet freindship of this
carnal house, and thou too lovely prison of our life; Now, now at length free
from bewitching Bonds the heaven-borne soul of man, which too unmindefull of
her own Country joyful in the yoke of her d^generate foul nuptial bed, and
with somniferous I ethe^ poisoning sloth inebriated, in thy lapthou huggst. O
thou deceitful covering of day, into thy ashes vanishing return, That to her
country Heaven the soul reslord, may fill it self with becames of purest
light.

So from all sorrow she shall be enlargd.
And of all troubles thou by death dischargd.

The Fifth part.
The Queen. The Rabine Malchus has my hopes beguilde, and Herod has himself
with me his Queen, (fearing the rumors of the babbling crew) through his own
yanity alike betrayed. Next, for my daughter, what she may effect, I greatly
fear, the King did promise herat his great banquet, that he would reward her
danceing feats (which gave him high content) with whatsoever she of him
should ask. Now unto me the girl has past her word, that she would ask of
him none other boon, but in a dish to have the Baptists head; And she will
have it, certainly she will, If Horods mind be not to me unknown, The peoples
hatred I conceive on me he will divert, himself remaining free: And I will
bear it when the deed is done, and with willing heart: with joy of my revenge
weighing their hate, and with my gain my stain, For women to be cruel it is a
shame, a shame indeed: unless more shame it were* that of such nature there
are many Kings: But H^rod and my daughter do appear, the ncor^r my hope is,
my fear the (...) does burn.

Herod, Daughter, Queen. Her. And have thou (...) sufficiently (...)


Daught. (...) enough and royal.


Her^. Never fear, things that are (...) establish^ with my faith and before
witnesses, ask half my kingdom, it shall be thine, no power can avert him
that is willing.


Daugh. We shall shortly see what thing it i^.


Hero. It Is certain, ask it now.


Daugh. Your Kingdom Sir I need not, which I deem even as mine own while you
possess the Crown, as if I held the Scepter, but I ask a thing b^th meet and
easy.


Hero. Thou thy self (not I) art in the fault thou have it not.


Daugh. Give me the Bapists head then in this Charger.


Hero. What words are these by thee so rashly vented?


Daugh. Not rashly neither.


Hero. Thou demand'st a gift that ill become a Virgin.


Daugh. To destroy an enemy is no uncomly deed.


Hero. Is therefore he an enemy and worthy of a Kings wrath.


Daugh. He Is worthy of such wrath, who by his crimes deserves it.


Hero. What redress may I then purchase for the peoples hate?


Daugh. The people must obey, and Kings command.


Hero. It Is a Kings duty just things to command.


Daugh. Kings by commanding, may make those things just which were before
unjust.


Hero. But Kings commands, the Law does moderate.


Daugh. If that be right, which pleases Princes, then they rule the Laws, ^ot
the Laws them.


Hero. Then, for a King, a Tyrant the people will divulge me.


Daugh. But your Scepter keeps them in awe.


Hero. It does, and yet they will babble.


Daugh. Such babbling Sir, by punishment severe is brid^ed.


Hero. Kingdoms are ill kept with fear,


Daugh. And Kingdoms by impunity of crimes are easily subverted.


Hero. Yet we find, Kings are securest in the Cities faith.


Daugh. It is not needful that a King be loved, but feared.


Hero. The cruel are or^ whelmed with hate.


Daugh. A gentle King the Vulgar do^ despise.


Qu. My Lord, all you have pleaded only tends, in my opinion, that your promise
past, in vain may pass away, as yet me thinks, you do not know the duties of
a King; if th^se things which the common sort ^uppose hone^t and otherwise;
you, for a King bel^eve to be the same, King Herod erres. Brothers and sisters,
fathers, sons in law, friends, kindred, Citizens, and adverse parties, are
bonds for poor men, but vain words for Kings; Let him that on his head once
puts a Crown, put from him all degrees of Common duty; let him judge all
things honest that conduce to a Kings benefit, and hold no fact to be unseemly,
that he shall effect for his ow^e safety; on the King depends the peoples
welfare; Whosoever then to wards his Prince is pious, has regard unto the
pecples welfare: shall the blood of this base fellow be so highly prizd, that
for anxietie by day nor night you can repose? release us of this fear, of
shame, your Scepter, and of waste, your City, of rapine, Arms, and all of
civil war? It Is fit by an example new and great, you should ordein that
Kingdoms to all men be sacred and inviolably stand; he has committed an
ungracious act, and by that let him perish; if no crime he has committed let
him seek for me^: Give to your Queen her enemy, your Queen if you neglect,
yet as a King and father your promise to your daughter see performd.


Her. That Promise to perform with my best faith I am determind, but if my
advice, the ^i^le do ask more wisely she will wish.


Qu. But if she ask my counsel, yours my Lord she may not change or take.


Her. Is It even so? should I so unadvised have made a vow? thus to a foolish
girl my faith obligd? and thus committed to a woman's hands my Kingdom,
safety, treasure, life, and death?


Qu. Kings promises let certain truth confirm.


Her. Well. fith I may not, what I may deny again I do admonish and entreat;
let not wrath urge you to a bloody act, unworthy of your dignity and sex.


Qu. Grant this, and leave all other things to us.


Her. If of the Prophet you determi^e ought more rigourous, the peril, blame,
and shame is only yours.


Qu. Now shall we vindicate our royal dignity in future times to be of none
derided, now I Will force the flubborne people to speak well of Kings or learn
it to their grief, and make them hold that all their Kings commands they gladly
must bear and obey though never so unjust.


Chorus. Cho. O thou great City where King David reigned, you Towers of wealthy
Solomon and Salem, from whence against thy Prophets does arise a rage so
terrible, and cruel thrist of blood so innocent? unhappy thou, whom it becomes
to be a pattern, rule, or helm of pi^ty, art now become the only mirror of a
wicked life: Slaughter with violence, fraud, theft and rapine, are thy chief
exercise, no Godly zeal persuades the Churchman to restrain his hands from
horrible deceits, the people now forsake the Lord, that all things did create,
and worship Idols for God, stone and wood, with Calves and Lambs their Altars
are still hot, and Images the workman does adore, which he himself has
wrought, life he requires of a mere stock, and eloquence he craves of a dumb
stone, the rich intereats the poor, the Lo^^^ the Servant, ancient Rites are
lost; The guiltless Prophets blood brings thee perforce to the Tribunal of
the greatest Judge, The poor exclaim and widows fill the air with their
complaints, for which the fearful pain of just revenge attends the^, unlesses
^ be in my divination much de^eiv'd, for he^ that throws down insolence and
pride, (being the (...) of Neaven, Earth and Seas) views from above
the oppressed peoples tears, their heav^e prayers never does forget, and
speedily with a (...) arm, will punish thy unspeak^ble misdeeds: And over
(...) thy Towers, where with thou swelst in silent victor-like, The barbarou
foe, shall all thy Buildings, Farms and Lands possess; The V^neyard Keeper
shall repair his fruit to am Out (...) Master; And where now Salomons Temple
high toward Heaven do th^ise, ^ foraign ru^tick shall his harvest make: O
therefore, while Gods favor to rep^^^ affords thee respit of thy ill part life
the sins (...) a move those fruitless Images of foreigne Rites: Cu^b thy
proph^^e desire of wretched wealth, and greedy thirsting for thy Brot^^rs
blood; But thou will not repent thy ill past lif^, (...) Rites amove, nor shun
the greedy thirst of brothers blood, not one profane desire of wretched wealth:
A vicious P^ague shall therefore fe^se on thee: Famine and war, with
barrenness (...) want, shall over whelm thee, no^ to be withstood; till thou
be quitted with dese^^ed blood.


Nuncius, Cho^^s. Nun. Where may I find (O who will tell me where?) The
Prophets followers, that I may relate my heavy tidings.


Ch^. Stay your pace a while, (...) in brief, for what you bear I gladly
would partake.


Nun. O but to know, what you to know desire, 'twill not delight you.


Cho. Yet your short abode think not too long, how ere the master stands.


Nun. Know you what boon the Daughter of our King has begged of him.


Cho. To have the Prophets head given her in a Charger.


Nun. And his head, even so she has obtaind.


Cho. O horrible and most inhumane act; that heavenly vigor and comely
countenance by rigorous death is utterly decayed, and cruel force with ever
during silence has shut up those lips that did abound with sacred virtue.


Nun. why weep you? cease to pour out vain complaints.


Cho. When things to be bewaild I see and hear, why should I not bewail them?


Nun. If death be to be bewaild, let us bewail the dead, whose hopes do with
their bodies lie interrd; who do not think, their short sleep being done,
their bones must rise again, and there remains another life, Let wretched men
bewail those that are dead, and only wretched lived; None can be made by
fortune miserable, though the like and of mortal life betide the innocent and
guilty, good and bad, no man shall die ill, that has lived well: If by the
several manners of their ends you judge men miserable, you will think so many
holy fathers to be such, who dyed by fire, or water, sword or cross, for him
that dyed Defender of the truth, both for Religion and his Country Laws, in
all good things pursuing we should pray, and wish to have like end or funeral
day.


Cho. Verily you have uttered naught amiss, but we whom errors and opinion
draw, foolish by flying death with death do meet, the water drowning whom the
fire has spard; And by the power of contagious air, others are killd that
have escaped the sea, And some, that in the battle have survived, with
sickness pyning die; God does ordeine we may defer, but not our deaths
eschew;

And daily we delay our hours of death, yet with
Diseases, danger, troubles, grief:
Long life is nothing, but a brittle chain
Of diuturnall evil, which is knit
With a contiuall course, and speedy race,
Even to the bounds of death: Not do we hold,
(Bound with this bond) our selves to be inthral'd
In misery, but fear the fatal knife,
With deeper horror then a servile life.

FINIS.

