THE CLERGY Vindicated, OR THE RIGHTS AND PRIVILEGES That belong to them,
ASSERTED; According to the Laws of England.

MORE Particularly, touching the Sitting of BISHOPS in PARLIAMENT; and their
making Proxies in Capital Cases.

LONDON, Printed by E. T. and R. H. 1679.

THE RIGHTS and PRIVILEGES OF THE CLERGY, According to the Laws of England.
THe Clergy of England, or the whole number of those that are De Clero Domini,
of the Lord's Lot, or Share, as the Tribe of Levi was in Judea, is, according
to our Law, twofold; Clerus Major, and Clerus Minor; the Greater and Lesser
Clergy: The former does comprehend the Barons Spiritual, or Lords of
Parliament; that is to say, the Archbishops and Bishops. The later contains
Archdeacons, Deans, Prebends, Parsons, Vicars, and Chaplains. Of both these
kinds I will treat severally, and apart. But before I do so, I shall give the
Reader an Account in general, of the Ecclesiastical State of the Church of
England, as I find it described by Mr. Cambden, and Sir Edward Coke.

Mr. Cambden tells us, that England has two Provinces; and accordingly, two
Archbishops; to wit, the Archbishop of Canterbury, Primate and Metropolitan
of all England; and the Archbishop of York. Under these are twenty five
Bishops. To the Archbishop of Canterbury are subject, twenty two. To the
Archbishop of York, the other three.

Now, what Bishoprics these be, with the Shires and Diocesses that are at this
day under their Jurisdiction, follow thus.

In the Province of Canterbury.
The Bishopric of Canterbury, together with that of Rochester, contains
under it Kent it self.

The Bishopric of London has under it, Essex, Middlesex, and part of
Hertfordshire.

The Bishopric of Chichester has belonging to it, Sussex.

The Bishopric of Winchester compriseth Southamptonshire, Surrey, and the Isle
of Wight, Gernsey, and also Jersey; Islands lying against Normandy.

The Bishopric of Salisbury comprehends Wiltshire and Berk shire.

The Bishopric of Exeter contains Devonshire and Cornwall.

The Bishopric of Bath and Wells, joined together, has under it Somersetshire.

The Bishopric of Gloucester has belonging to it Glocestershire.

To the Bishopric of Worcester is subject Worcestershire, and part of
Warwickshire.

To the Bishopric of Hereford, Hereford, and part of Salop, or Shropshire.

The Bishopric of Coventry and Litchfield joined together, have under it
Staffordshire, Derbyshire, and the other part of Warwickshire; as also, that
part of Shropshire, which lies toward the River R^pil.

Th^n the Bishopric of (...), which of all others is the greatest, is bounded
(...), H^nting^^^shire, Bedfordshire, Buckinghamshire, and the (...).

(...) of Ely pertain Camb^^^^^shire, and the Isle of Ely it self.

(...) of Norwich is North^^^^ and Su^^olk.

(...) of O^^^^ord has under it Ox^^fordshire.

(...) of Peterborough comprizeth Northamptonshire and Rutlandshire.

(...) the Bishopric of Bristol is Do^setshire.

(...) Diocesses in England are to be added those of Wales; which are (...) o^
their own peculiar Archbishopric, and made also fewer in number; se^^^ (...)
brought s^arce to ^our: to wit, The Bishopric of M^n^^a, havin^ the Seat
(...), the Bishopric of (...), the Bishopric of Ba^^^^, and the Bishopric of
(...).

In the Province of York.
(...) of (...) comprehends Yorkshire it self and Nottinghamshire.

(...) contains (...), Richmondshire, (...), part of Cumber^^^^ (...) and of
^^^^^^shire.

The Bishopric of Durham has Durham it self under it, and Northumberland.

The Bishopric of Carl^sle contains within it part o^ Camberland and the
County of (...).

(...) there are in England Deanri^^ twenty six, whereof thirteen were ordained
by (...) in the great^^ Cath^^^al Churches, after the Monks were thrust out.
Arch-D^a^^^^ies, sixty. Dignities and Probends, five hundred forty four.
Numbered also there (...) Parish Churches under Bishoprics, nine thousand two
hundred eighty four; o^ which three thousand eight hundred forty five be
Appropriate. Now, Appropriate Churches those are called, which by the Pope's
Authority, coming between with consent of the King, and the Bishop of the
Diocese, were upon certain Conditions tied, or Instruments united annexed and
incorporated for ever, unto Monasteries Bishoprics, Colleges and Hospitals,
endowed with small Lands, either for that the said Churches were built within
their Lordships and Lands, or granted by the Lords of the said Lands. Which
Churches afterward, when the Abbeys and Monasteries were suppressed, became
Lay Fees, to the great damage of the Church. Thus much Mr. Cambden.

As for Sir Edward Coke, he informs us. That the Ecclesiastical State of
England is divided into two Provinces, or Arch-Bishop^icks; viz. Of Canterbury,
and of York.

The Archbishop of Canterbury is styled, Metropolitanus, and Primas Totius
Angliae: and the Archbishop of York, Primas Angliae.

Each Archbishop has within his Province Suffragan Bishops of several
Diocesses.

The Archbishop of Canterbury has under him within his Province, of ancient
Foundations; viz. Rochester his Principal Chaplain, London his Dean. Winchester
his Chancellor, Norwich, Lincoln, Ely, Chichester, Salisbury, Exeter, Bath and
Wells, Worcester, Coventry and Litchfield, Hereford, Land^ff, St. David's,
Bangor, and St. Asaph; and four founded by King Henry the Eighth, erected out
of the Ruins of dissolved Monasteries; that is to say, Gloucester, Bristol,
Peterborough, and Oxford.

The Archbishop of York has under him four, viz. Ths Bishop of the County
Palatine of Chester, newly erected by Henry the Eighth, and annexed by him to
the Archbishop of York; the County Palatine of Durham, Carlisle, and the Isle
of Man, annexed to the Province of York by Henry the Eighth. But a greater
number this Archbishop had, which time has taken from him.

Every Diocese is divided into Arch-Deaconries, whereof there be sixty. And
every Arch-Deaconry is divided into Deanries; and Deanries again into Parishes,
Towns and Hamlets.

Having thus given my Reader an Account, how the Ecclesiastical State of
England stands at this day; I come to speak of the Clergy, according to the
division thereof, by me before given; viz. Into the Greater and Lesser Clergy.

First, Of the Greater or Superior Clergy; comprehending the Prelates, the
Archbishops and Bishops.
THat the Law of England may be the better understood, concerning our Superior
Clergy, I shall reduce it to these Particularities following, which are not
unworthy of the Reader's Observation.

1. Who the Founder and Patron of all Bishoprics.

2. To whom the Spiritualties and Temporalties of Bishops appertain, Sede
Vacant.

3. How Bishops were anciently made.

4. Their Jurisdiction, what, and whence derived.

5. Their Courts.

6. By whom only commanded to certify.

7. Bishops Proceedings in Ecclesiastical Courts, under the Name, Style, Seal
of the Bishops, how warrantable.

8. With what Council they are assisted.

9. Their Dominion and Property relating to Temporalities.

10. What the King has after every Bishop's death.

11. Bishoprics, whether Saleable.

12. Their Right of Sitting in Parliament.

13. Their Right of making Proxies in Cases of Life and Death.

14. Statutes, where made without them.

15. Their Privileges as they are Lords of Parliament.

16. Their Precedence.

17. Their Excommunications.

1. The Founder and Patron of all Bishoprics.
IT appears by our Books, Co. Litt. f. 97. a 134. a. 344. a. Co. 2. Inst. f.
3. Stat. 25. E. 1. Carlisle.
that all Archbishops and Bishops of England have been founded by the Kings of
England; and therefore it has been declared in Parliament, that the Holy
Church of England was founded in the State of Prelacy within this Realm, by the
King and his Progenitors. But here then may be queried, who were the first
Founders of the Bishoprics in Wales?

It is answered, 10. H 4.6. b. Co. Litt. 97. ^^o. 2. Inst. f. 195. On the Stat.
of West. 1. c. 17.
That the Bishoprics in Wales were founded by the Princes of Wales; and the
Principality of Wales was holden of the King of England, as of his Crown: and
when the Prince of Wales committed Treason, Rebellion, etc. the Principality
was forfeited, and the Patronages of the Bishops annexed to the Crown of
England. So as the King is to have Pensions for his Chaplains, and Corodies for
his Vadelers, of them, as of Bishops founded by himself.

2. To whom the Custody of the Spiritualties and Temporalties of Bishops do
appertain, Sede Vacant. Co. 2. Inst. 15. West. 1. c 21. Magna Charta, 5.
Prerog Regis, c. 14. Rolls Abr. 2. p. f. 223.

THe Custody of the Temporalties of every Archbishop and Bishop (says Coke)
within the Realm, and of such. Abbeys and Priories as were of the King's
Foundation, after the same became void, belonged to the King, during the
Vacation thereof by his Prerogative. For, as the Spiritualties belonged, during
that time, to the Dean and Chapter, de Communi Jure, or to some other
Ecclesiastical Person, by Prescription or Composition; so the Temporalties came
to the King as Founder. And this does belong to the King, being Patronus and
Protector Ecclesiae, in so high a Prerogative incident to his Crown, as no
Subject can claim the Temporalties of an Archbishop, or Bishop, when they
fall, by Grant or Prescription.

3. How Bishops were, and how now made.
IT is apparented by our Books of Law and History, Co. Lit. f. 134. a. 344. a.
Co. Lib. 3 Dean and Chapt. of Norwich 's case, Rolls Rep. 2. part, f. 102.
Davy's Rep. f. 46. a. de Capitulariter congregatis
that at the first all the Bishoprics in England were Donative, per
Traditionem Baculi; i. e. the Crosier, which was the Pastoral Staff: and
Annuli, the Ring, whereby he was married to the Church. King Henry the first
being requested by the Bishop of Rome to make them elective, refused it. But
King John, by his Charter, bearing Date, Quinto Junti, Anno Decimo Septimo,
granted that the Bishoprics should be Eligible; which afterward was confirmed
by diverse Acts of Parliament. And afterward the manner and order, as well of
Election of Archbishops and Bishops, as for the Confirmation of the Election
and Consecration, is enacted and expressed in the Statute of the Twenty fifth
of Henry the Eighth. But by the Statute of the thirty first of Henry the
Eighth, and the first of Edward the Sixth, they were made Donative by the
King's Letters Patents. Both which Statutes are repealed, and the Statute of
the twenty fifth of Henry the Eighth, does yet remain in full force and effect.

4. Their Jurisdiction, what, and whence derived.
AS to the Jurisdiction and Authority that appertains to Bishops, are
considerable two Particulars.

1. Whence this Jurisdiction is derived.

2. The Extent and Subject Matters of this Jurisdiction.

1. Whence derived.
The King of England is, and of Right always was, the Fountain of all Justice
and Jurisdiction. in all Causes, as well Ecclesiastical as Civil, within his
Dominions. And this is evident our by Books.

The Right Reverend Prelate, Matthew Parker, Archbishop of Canterbury, a man
very expert in matters of Antiquity, affirms in his Book set forth in Latin,
Anno Domini, Co. lib. 9. Hensloes Case
1573. Quod Rex Angliae, olim erat Conciliorum Ecclesiasticorum praeses, vindex
temeritatis Romanae, Propugnator Religionis, nec ullam babebant Episcopi
Authoritatem praeter eam quam a Rege acceptam referebant, Jus testamenti
probandi non habebant, Administrationis potestatem cuique delegare non poterant.

It was resolved in the Trial touching Legitimation, Davy's Reports, f. 51. b.
52. a.
and Bastardy; that although all Matrimonial Causes have been a long time
determinable in the Ecclesiastical Courts, and are now properly within the
Jurisdiction and Cognizance of the Clergy. Vide Davy's Reports, Le Case de
Praemunire, 97. b. 98. a.
Yet, Ab Initio, non fuit sic. For, as well Causes of Matrimony, as Causes
Testamentary, were Civil Causes, and apertained to the Jurisdiction of the
Civil Magistrate, as it is well known to all Civilians: until the Christian
Emperors and Kings, for the honoring of Prelates of the Clergy, have granted
or allowed to them the Cognizance and Jurisdiction in those Cases.

And therefore the Kings of England, although they have allowed the Prelates of
the Church to exercise their several Jurisdictions in those Causes which
properly appertained to their Cognizance; yet, by the Rules of the Common Law,
he has a Superintendency upon their proceeding: with power of Direction, when
and how they shall proceed; and of Restraint and Correction, if they proceed
not duly and orderly in many Cases; as it is manifested by the Writs of
several natures directed to the Bishops: whereby the King commands them to
certify Bastardy, Excommunication, Profession, Accouplement in Loyal
Matrimony, Of Admitting Clerks, De Cautione Admittenda, etc. And also, by Writs
of Prohibition, Consultation, and Attachments for Prohibition.

2. What is their Jurisdiction.
For the deciding of Controversies (says Sir Edward Coke) and distribution of
Justice, there be two distinct Jurisdictions. The one Secular, and General, for
that it is guided by the common and general Law of the Realm. Co. Lit. f. 96. a.
The other Ecclesiastical, limited to certain spiritual and particular Cases;
and the Court wherein the Causes are handled, is called Forum Ecclesiasticum;
in which the Bishops are Judges, and immediate Officers to the King's Courts of
Justice in Causes Ecclesiastical.

Now, the Spiritual, or Ecclesiastical Causes, accarding to the usage and
custom of England, are Blasphemy, Apostasy from Christianity, Heresies,
Schisms, Holy Orders, Admissions, Institution of Clerks, Celebration of Divine
Service, Rights of Matrimony, Divorces, General Bastardy, Subtraction and Right
of Tithes, Oblations, Obventions, Dilapidations, Excommunication, Reparation of
Churches, Probate of Testaments, Administrations, and Accounts upon the same,
Symony, Incest, Fornications, Adulteries, Solicitation of Chastity, Pensions,
Procurations, Appeals in Ecclesiastical Cases, Commutation of Penance. All
which are determined by Ecclesiastical Judges.

That the Reader may the better know the Extent and Latitude of the Episcopal
Jurisdiction and Authority, let him take with him these Rules that I have met
withal in our Books.

1. Rule, That where the Right is Spiritual, Co. Lit. 96 a.
and the Remedy therefore only by the Ecclesiastical Law, the Cognizance
thereof does appertain to the Ecclesiastical Court.

2. When the Right of Tithes shall be tried in the Spiritual Court, Co. Lib.
13. f. 17. Case of Modus decimandi.
and the Spiritual Court has Jurisdiction thereof, that other Courts shall be
outed of their Jurisdiction.

3. Where the Common, or Statute Law, Co. Lit. 96. b.
gives Remedy in Foro Seculari (whether the matter be Spiritual or Temporal)
the Cognizance of that Cause belongs to the King's Temporal Courts only,
unless the Jurisdiction of the Ecclesiastical Court be saved, or allowed by the
Statute to proceed, according to the Ecclesiastical Laws.

4. Cujus Juris, i. e. Jurisdictionis est Principale, ejusdem Juris erit
Accessorium. Co. lib. 13. Collins and Hardinger's Case, Co. Lib. 13. Case de
Modo decimandi.
Or Consonans Rationi, quod Cognitio Accessarii, in Curia Christianitatis sit,
ubi Cognitio Causa Principalis ad forum Ecclesiasticum noscitur pertinere.

I will conclude this Section with this Remark. The Office of Episcopacy is not
from the King, but of God. The Place, Station and Power wherein that Office is
exercised, is from the King. It is the King that gives the Bishopric: It is
God that makes the Bishop. A Sovereign Prince claims not the Power of ordaining
a Pastor in the Church. On the other side; Who but Princes can take upon them
to have power to erect, and dispose of Episcopal Seas, within their own
Dominions.

5. Their Courts.
THe Courts wherein the Bishops exercise their Jurisdiction in Matters
Spiritual, or Ecclesiastical, are these following.

1. The Court of Convocation.
This Court is styled, or called the Convocation of the Clergy; who are
assembled for Consultation, upon matters Ecclesiastical in time of Parliament.

It consists of two distinct Houses. The one called the Higher Convocation
House; where the Archbishops and Bishops sit severally by themselves. The
other the Lower Convocation-House; where all the rest of the Clergy are
bestowed.

And, as there be two Houses of Convocation, so there be two Prolocutors; one
of the Higher House, the other of the Lower House: who presently, upon the
first Assembly, is, by the motion of the Bishops, chosen by the Lower House,
and presented to the Bishops for their Prolocutor; that is, the Man by whom
they mean to deliver their Resolutions to the Higher House, and to have their
own House especially, ordered and governed.

His Office is, to cause the Clerk to call the Names of such as are of the
House when he sees cause, to cause all things propounded to be read by him, to
gather the Suffrages, and such like.

Those that sit in this same Lower House are called the Procters of the Clergy;
which are chosen and appointed to appear for Cathedral, or other Collegiate
Churches; as also, for the Common Clergy of every Diocese, at the Parliament.
Whose Choice is in this sort.

First, The King directs his Writ to the Archbishop of every Province, for
the summoning of all Bishops, Deans, Archdeacons, Cathedral and Collegiate
Churches; and generally, of all the Clergy of his Province, after their best
discretion and judgment; assigning them the time and place in the said Writ.
Then the Arch Bishops proceed in their accustomed Course. One Example may serve
to show both.

The Archbishop of Canterbury, upon his Writ received, directs his Letters
to the Bishop of London, as his Dean-Provincial; first citing himself
peremptorily, and then willing him to cite, in like manner, all the Bishops,
Deans, Archdeacons, Cathedral and Collegiate Churches; and generally, all the
Clergy of his Province, to the place, and against the day fixed in the Writ.
But directs withal, that one Proctor sent for every Cathedral or Collegiate
Church, and two for the Body of the Inferior Clergy of each Diocese, may
suffice. And by virtue of these Letters, authentickly sealed, the said Bishop
of London directs his like Letters, severally, to the Bishop of every Diocese
of the Province, citing them in like sort; and commanding them, not only to
appear, but also to admonish the said Deans and Archdeacons personally to
appear; and the Cathedral and Collegiate Churches, as also the Common Clergy of
the Diocese, to send their Proctors to the place, and at the day appointed. And
also, wills them to certify the Archbishop the names of all, and every one,
so monished by them, in a Schedule annexed to their Letters Certificatory. The
Bishops proceed accordingly; and the Cathedral and Collegiate Churches, as
also, the Clergy, make choice of their Proctors: Which done, and certified to
the Bishop, he returns all, answerably to his charge, at the day.

Having given an Account how the Proctors of the Clergy are chosen, it will be
high time to show the Jurisdiction of this Court; what it was, and what now is.

1. What their Jurisdiction was.
The Jurisdiction of this Court was, Co. 4. Inst. 323.
to deal with Heresies, Schisms, and other mere Spiritual and Ecclesiastical
Causes; and therein they did proceed, Juxta Legem Divinam, and Cannones Sanctae
Ecclesiae.

And, Co. 4. Inst. f. 322.
as they could never assemble together of themselves, but were always called
together by the King's Writ; so were they oftentimes commanded by the King's
Writ, to deal with nothing that concerned the King's Laws; of the Land, his
Crown and Dignity, his Person, or the State of his Council or Kingdom.

2. What their Jurisdiction now is.
By the Statute of the twenty fifth of Henry the Eighth, C. 19. their
Jurisdiction and Power is much limited and straightened, concerning their making
of new Canons. For they must have both License to make them; and after they be
made, the King's Royal Assent to allow them, before they be put in Execution.

But note, that in the end of that Act of the twenty fifth of Henry the Eighth,
there is an express Proviso; that such Canons as were made before that Act,
which be not repugnant to the King's Prerogative, the Laws, Statutes, or
Customs of the Realm, should be still used and executed, as they were before
the making of that Act.

It may be then queried whether, before the Statute of the twenty fifth of
Henry the Eighth, a Disme granted by the Clergy could bind the Clergy, before
the Royal Assent?

It is answered, that before this Act of the twenty fifth of Henry the Eighth,
a Disime, granted by the Clergy at the Convocation, did not bind the Clergy,
before the King's Royal Assent. Co. 4. Inst. 323. 20. H. 6.13.

2. The Prerogative Court of the Archbishop.
In this Court all Testaments be proved, and all Administrations granted, where
the Party dying within the Province of the Archbishop of Canterbury, has Bona
Notabilia, in some other Diocese than where he dies; which regularly, is to be
to the value of five pound; but in the Diocese of London, it is ten pound by
Composition.

It is said, that Administration must be in two places, if the Intestate died
in a Peculiar, within the Province of York; having Chattels in both. Cro. 1
Part. f. 719.

3. The Court of the Arches.
It is called in Latin, Curia de Arcubus; which is the chiefest and ancientest
Consistory that belongs to the Archbishop of Canterbury, for the debating of
Spiritual Causes. So called of the Church in London, where they sit, and hold
this Consistory, called Bow-Church; which is in Latin, Arcuum Ecclesia, and
called Sancta Maria de Arcubus. Which Church was dedicated to our Lady, and had
that Denomination at first, of Bow-Church, by reason of building of the top of
the Steeple Bow-wise, or Arch-wise, like so many Bows bent. The Judge of this
Court is called Dean of the Arches, because with this Officialty is commonly
joined a peculiar Jurisdiction of thirteen Parishes in London (termed a Deanery)
being exempted from the Authority of the Bishop of London; and belonging to the
Archbishop of Canterbury. Of which the Parish of Bow is one; and the chief,
because the Court is there kept.

4. The Court of Audience.
The Court of Audience (says Coke) is kept by the Archbishop, in his Palace;
and medleth not with any matter, between Party and Party, of contentious
Jurisdiction, but deals with matters pro Forma: as, Confirmations of Bishops,
Elections, Consecrations, and the like. And with matters of Voluntary
Jurisdictions; as, the granting of the Guardianship of the Spiritualties, Sede
Vacant of Bishops; Admission and Institution of Benefices, dispensing with
Banes of Matrimony, and such like.

5. The Court of Faculties.
This Court belongs to the Archbishop. And, for the granting of Faculties,
there is under him an especial Officer, called Magister ad Facultates, The
Master of the Faculties.

Now, a Faculty in the Common Law, is used for a Privilege, or especial Power
granted unto a Man by Favor, Indulgence and Dispensation, to do that which by
the Common Law, he cannot do. As, to eat Flesh upon days prohibited; to marry
without Banes first asked; to hold two or more Ecclesiastical Livings; the Son
to succeed the Father in a Benefice, and such like.

6. The Court of Peculiars.
The Archbishop of Canterbury has a Peculiar Jurisdiction, in diverse Parishes
within the City of London, and other Diocesses, etc.

7. The Consistory Courts of the Archbishops, and Bishops.
Consistory (says one) is the Counsel-House of Ecclesiastical Persons; and it
is a word borrowed of the Italians; (...). f. 338.
or rather, the Lombards: and signifies as much as Tribunal. It is Vocabulum
utriusque Juris; and is used for the place of Justice, in the Courts Christian,
or Spiritual.

The Consistory Court of every Archbishop and Bishop in every Diocese in
Ecclesiastical Causes, is holden before his Chancellor, or before his
Commissary, in places of the Diocese far remote, and distant, from the Bishop's
Consistory; so as the Chancellor cannot call them to the Consistory, without
great Travels and Vexation. And he is called Commissarius Foraneus.

From these the Appeal is to the Archbishop of either Province respectively.

Official, Note.
Officialis, in the Canon Law, is especially taken for him, to whom any Bishop
does generally commit the Charge of his Spiritual Jurisdiction. And in this
sense one in every Diocese is (Officialis Principalis) whom the Statutes and
Laws of this Kingdom call Chancellor. 32. H. 8. c. 15. The rest, if there be
more, are by the Canon Law called (Officiales Foranci) but with us are termed
Commissaries.

8. The Court of the Archdeacon, or his Commissary.
This Court is to be holden where, and in what places the Archdeacon, by
Prescription or Composition, has Jurisdiction in Spiritual Causes within his
Arch-Deaconry. And from him the Appeal is to the Diocesan. He is called, Oculus
Episcopi.

9. The Court of Delegates.
This Court is so vulgarly called, because these Delegates do sit by force of
the King's Commission, under the Great Seal, upon an Appeal to the King in the
Court of Chancery in these Causes.

1. When a Sentence is given in any Ecclesiastical Cause, by the Archbishop,
and his Official.

2. When any Sentence is given in any Ecclesiastical Cause, in places exempt.

10. The Court of the Commissioners of Review, Ad Revidendum.
Albeit the Acts of 24. H. 8. c. 12. and 25. H. 8. c. 19. do, upon certain
Appeals, make the Sentence definitive, as to any Appeal; yet the King after
such a definitive Sentence, as Supreme, may grant a Commission of Review, ad
Revidendum. C. 4. Inst. 341. And so it was resolved in the King's Bench. Trin.
39. Eliz. Hollingworth's Case.

Thus much may suffice to have been spoken concerning the Episcopal, or
Ecclesiastical Courts, I proceed to the Sixth Particularity.

6. By whom only Bishops are commanded to certify.
IT is to be known, that none but the King's Courts of Record; Co. Litt. (...).
4. (...) 10^ (...) 2. (...) 325.
as the Court of Common Pleas, the King's Bench, Justices of Jail-delivery, and
the like, can write to the Bishop, to certify Bastardy, Mulierty, Loyalty of
Matrimony, and the like Ecclesiastical Matters. For, it is a Rule in Law, that
none but the King can write to the Bishop to certify: and therefore no
inferior Court, as London, Norwich, York, or any other Corporation, can write
to the Bishop to certify; but in those Cases the Plea must be removed into the
Court of Common Pleas, and that Court must write to the Bishop, and then remand
the Record again. And this was done in respect of the Honor and Reverence
which the Law gave to the Bishop, being an Ecclesiastical Judge, and a Lord of
Parliament, by reason of the Barony which every Bishop has. And this was the
reason a Quare Impedit did lie of a Church in Wales, in the County next
adjoining, for that the Lordships Marchers could not write to the Bishop;
neither shall Cognizance be granted in a Quare Impedit, because the Inferior
Court cannot write to the Bishop. And herewith agrees Antiquity; Nullus alius
praeter Regem, potest Episcopo demandare inquisitionem faciendam. Bracton.

7. Bishops Proceedings in Ecclesiastical Courts, under the Name, Style, Seal
of the Bishops, how warrantable.
At the Session of Parliament holden, Anno 4o. Jac. Co. 2. I^ (...) 685, 686.
(...) Lib. 12 (...)
upon a Branch of an Act made at the first Session, in the first Year of King
James his Reign, for Continuance and Reviving diverse Statutes, it was enacted,
that an Act made in the first Year of Queen Mary, Stat. 2. c. 2. entitled, An
Act for Repeal of certain Statutes made in the time of King Edward the sixth,
should stand repealed and void. A doubt was moved concerning the Bishops; which
was divided into two Questions.

1. Whether any Bishop made, especially since the first day of that first
Session of Parliament, were lawful or no?

2. Whether the Proceedings in the Bishops, or other Ecclesiastical Courts,
being made under the Name, Style and Seal of the Bishops, were warranted by Law?

And the reason of these two Doubts was this: By the Statute of 1 E. 6 c. 2. it
was enacted, that Bishops should not be Elective, as before that time they had
been; but Donative, by the King's Letters Patents.

Secondly, By the said Act is provided, that all Summons, Citations, and
Process in Ecclesiastical Courts should be made in the Name and Style of the
King, and that their Process should be sealed with a Seal of the King's Arms,
etc.

And it was strongly urged, that this Act of the first of Edward the Sixth was
now in force; and consequently, all Bishops made (at the least, since it became
of force) by Election, etc. and not by Donation, according to the said Act of
the first of Edward the Sixth, are unlawful; and all their Process,
Proceedings, being in their own Names, Styles and Seals (where, by the said
Act, they ought to have been in the King's Name, and under his Seal) were all
unlawful and void. And to prove that the said Act of Ann. 1. Ed. 6. was now in
force, they alleged that this Act of the first of Edward the Sixth was
repealed by the said Act of the first of Mary above mentioned; which Act of
Repeal, being repealed by the said Branch of the first of Jacobus, consequently
the said Act of the first of Edward the Sixth was thereby revived. For when an
Act of Repeal is repealed, the first Act that was repealed, is revived; and
herewith agrees the Book-Case, in the fifteenth of Edward the Third. Tit.
Petition. Pl. 2. And this is true, and cannot be denied.

The King having understanding hereof, and being informed of the Consequents
thereof, being matters tending not only to the infinite prejudice of his
Subjects in Cases of great Importance (especially, if any Diocese had no Lawful
Bishop, or Ordinary; but, to the scandal and impeachment of his Majesty's
Justice, not only in those Proceedings, but also in Administration of Justice,
in certain Cases, in his Courts of Common Law at Westminster) commanded his two
Chief Justices to consider of the said Objections, and to inform him of the
true State thereof; that either the scruple conceived might be cleared and
satisfied, or the Inconvenience (if any were) timely provided for, and
prevented: who, upon timely consideration had of the said Objection, agreed the
Law to be (as the said Case was put) as it had been taken. But upon further
search and consideration had, other manifest and direct matters were found to
satisfy and clear the said scruple and question; which afterward was agreed
and resolved accordingly, by the Chief Baron, and other Judges then attending
in the Upper House of Parliament.

For the understanding whereof it is to be observed, that the said Act of the
first of Edward the Sixth was repealed by three several Acts of Parliament; viz.

1. By the said Statute of Ann. 1. Mar. in the whole.

2. By the Act of 1. and 2. Ph. and Mar. c. 8. by sufficient words, as
concerning the Name, Style and Seal of their Process, etc.

And Lastly, By the Statute of 1. Eliz. c. 1. the whole Act of 1. E. 6. is also
repealed.

For, Leges posteriores priores contrarias abbrogant. And as a Man that is
strongly bound with three Cords, or Ligaments, albeit one or two of them be
untied, or cut asunder, remains bound notwithstanding, by and with the second
or third, which remain firm and untouched; so a Statute repealed by force of
three several Acts remains repealed so long as any of them remain in force,
albeit one or two of them be made void. And therefore, although the Act of 1.
Mar. be repealed by 1. Jac. yet the other two Acts remaining in force, the Act
of Ann. Prim. E. 6. remains repealed.

First therefore, As to the Name, Style and Seal, etc. in Ecclesiastical
Courts, it is enacted by the 1. and 2. Ph. and Mar. c. 8. in these words.

And the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction of the Archbishops, Bishops and
Ordinaries to be in the same state for Process of Suits, punishment of Crimes,
and Execution of Censures of the Church, with knowledge of Causes belonging to
the same; and as large in those points as the said Jurisdiction was in Ann. 20.
H. 8.

By which Clause, if the Act of Repeal of 1. Mar. (now repealed) had never been
made, the Act of 1. E. 6. as to the Name, Style and Seal in Ecclesiastical
Proceedings, had been repealed by this latter Act of 1. and 2. Ph. and Mar.

Secondly, But it was objected, that the Act of 1. and 2. Ph. and Mar. (which
is the second Cord or Ligament) is repealed by the Act of 1. Eliz. c. 1. To
this it was answered, and resolved, that this second Cord or Ligament remains
in force: for, true it is, that the Act of 1. Eliz. repeals the Act of 1. and
2. Ph. and Mar. Secundum quid, but not Simpliciter; for the Act of 1. Eliz.
does repeal every Branch and Article of 1. and 2. Ph. and Mar. other than for
such Branches as therein be excepted. And afterward, by another Branch of the
said Act of 1. Eliz. it is enacted, that all other Laws and Statutes repealed,
and made void by the said Act of 1. and 2. of Ph. and Mar. and not in that Act
specially mentioned and revived, should stand, remain, and be repealed and
void, as the same were before the making of that Act. But that Act of 1. Ed. 6.
(as it has been often said) is sufficiently repealed by the Act of 1. and 2.
Ph. and Mar. as to the Name, Style and Seal, etc. and the Act of 1. Ed. 6. is
not specially mentioned and revived by the Act of 1. Eliz. so the same remain
repealed, by the Act of 1. and 2. Ph. and Mar.

Thirdly, The third Act, which clearly repeals and annuls the Act of 1 Ed. 6.
as well for the making and constituting Bishops, as for the Name, Style and
Seal of Process, is the Act of 1. Eliz. c. 1. for that Act does revive the Act
of 25. H. 8. c. 20. and further enacteth, that the same shall stand in full
force and effect, to all intents, Constitutions and Purposes. By which Act of
25. H. 8. it is enacted as follows.

And that of every Avoidance of any Archbishopric or Bishopric, the Kin^*
his Heirs and Successors, may grant to the Prior and Covent, or to the Dean and
Chapter, a License under the Great Seal, as of old time has been accustomed to
proceed to an Election of an Archbishop, or Bishop; with a Letter Missive,
containing the Name of the Person which they shall elect and choose, etc. And
according to this Statute, revived by Ann. 1. Eliz. all Archbishops and
Bishops at this day be made: and if they were made according to the Act of 1.
E. 6. they were unlawful.

And further, it is enacted by the said Act of 25 H. 8. That every Person
chosen, elected, invested and consecrated Archbishop or Bishop, according to
the form and effect of this Act, etc. shall do and execute, in every thing and
things, touching the same; as any Archbishop or Bishop of this Realm, etc.
might at any time heretofore do. Which later Branch does extend to all Process
and Proceedings in Ecclesiastical Courts, and that the same shall be in such
sort as the same were before the Act of 25. H. 8. and before that Act, the
Name, Style and Seal of their Process, etc. were as now they be.

And the said Act of 1. Eliz. reviving the Act of 25. H. 8. does impliedly
repeal the Act of 1. E. 6. which had repealed the 25. H. 8. in both the said
points: For, as by repealing of a Repeal, the first Act is revived; so by
reviving of an Act repealed, the Act of Repeal is made of no force.

8. The Bishops with what Council assisted.
Every Bishop is assisted with a Council. For, Co. Lib. 3. Le cafe del Dean and
Chapter. f. 75. a.
seeing it was impossible that the Church of God should continue without Sects
and Heresies, it was in Christian Policy thought necessary, that every Bishop
should be assisted with a Council, and with a Chapter; and that for two Reasons.

1. To consult with them in matters of difficulty, and to assist the Bishop in
deciding of Controversies in point of Religion. And to this purpose every
Bishop has a Chair.

2. To consent to every grant the Bishop shall make to bind his Successors; for
the Law did not judge it reasonable to repose such Confidence in him alone. At
first all the Possessions were to the Bishop, after, a certain Portion was
assigned to the Chapter; therefore the Chapter was before they had any
Possessions. And of Common Right the Bishop is Patron of all the Prebends,
because their Possessions were derived from him. So that so long as the
Bishopric continues (the Dean and Chapter being his Counsel) remains, though
they have no Possessions, as at first they were, when the Bishopric consisted
all of Spiritualty.

Of their Dominion and Property.
HEretofore Bishops, with the Confirmation of the Dean and Chapter, Co. Litt.
44. a.
might have made Leases for Lives or Years, without Limitation or Stint. And so
might they have made Gifts in Tall, and Estates in Fee, at their Will and
Pleasure. Whereupon, not only great decay of Divine Service, but Dilapidations,
and other Inconveniences ensued: and they were disabled and restrained by
several Acts of Parliament, to make any Estate, or Conveyance to the King at
all, or to the Subject; but there is excepted out of the Restraint or
Disability, Leases for three Lives, or twenty one Years, with Reservation of
Rent, and with other Provisions and Limitations.

To be short, as the Bishops cannot utterly divest themselves of their Lands
and Revenues, so ought not their Rights to be liable to the Sacrilegious Rapine
of others; for, Quod datum est Ecclesiae, Deo datum est. Which sacred Maxim the
Roal Martyr very well understood, when he used these very words, viz.

There are ways enough to repair the Breaches of the State, without the Ruins
of the Church; as I would be a Restorer of one, so I would not be an Oppressor
of the other, under the pretense of Public Debts. The Occasions contracting
them were bad enough, but such a discharging of them would be much worse. I
pray God neither I, nor mine, may be accessory to either.

And indeed, well might this most Religious Prince thus pray; for, without
doubt, the Sin of Sacrilege is a very horrid Crime. Proximum Sacrilegio Crimen
est, quod Majestatis dicitur, Treason is a petty Sin, in respect of Sacrilege.
St. Austin seems to give the Reason; Tanto gravius est peccatum, quanto
committi non potest, nisi in Deum. Thou that abhorrest Idols, committest thou
Sacrilege? Which words of the Apostle St. Paul are specially to be noted by
them that pretend mainly against Superstition and Idolatry, yet are hotly set
for Sacrilege.

Further, As this Sin of Sacrilege in its own Nature is very abominable, so it
is dangerous more ways than one.

1. To private Men that commit it. Make them like a Wheel, as Stubble before
the Wind, fill their faces with shame, who said, Let us take the Houses of God
to our selves in possession, Psalm. 83.

2. To more public Persons, even to the Heads, and Principal Members of the
Commonwealth, the Kings and Princes thereof; see Daniel c. 5. concerning
Belshazzar.

Our own Annals tell us of King William Rufus and his Nephew, the Son of
Robert, Duke of Normandy; both slain in Hunting, in the same Forest that the
Conqueror his Father, and Grandfather to his Nephew, had made, and himself had
augmented, with the utter Ruin of many Chapels, Churches and Religious Houses.

3. To the Commonwealth it self. This Sin in Achan became not a Snare to
himself, in which he was taken; but all Israel was troubled by the sin of that
one Achan; Joshua c. 7.

But after all this, it may be demanded of me, whether this will take away the
nature of sin from the Alienation of Church Lands, that it is done by a
National Assembly of the States in Parliament?

I answer, that this will not take from Sacrilege the nature of sin, that it is
done by a National Assembly, giving their Sanction thereunto: for the
Proceedings and Sanctions of a National Council must be by Rule from God;
otherwise they become more out of measure sinful, than Actions of like Quality
in private Men. The Laws of State are not therefore just, because enacted by
the State; but when they agree with the common Rules of Justice, that God has
bestowed upon the Sons of Men.

To conclude, To do that by a Law, which should be enacted for prevention of
Sin, and not for Commission, is to make it the more sinful. Shall the Throne of
Iniquity have Fellowship with thee, that frames mischief by a Law?

10. What the King has after the Death of every Bishop.
IT appears by many Records in the Reign of Henry the Third, Co. 2. Inst.
491. 1. Co. 4. Inst. f. 388.
and Edward the Second; that, by the Law and Custom of England, no Bishop could
make his Will of his Goods or Chattels coming of his Bishopric, etc. without
the King's License.

The Bishops, that they might freely make their Wills, yielded to give to the
King, after their Deceases respectively, for ever, six things.

1. Their best Horse, or Palfrey, with Bridle and Saddle. 2. A Cloak with a
Cape. 3. One Cup with a Cover. 4. One Basin and Ewer. 5. One Ring of Gold. 6.
His Kennel of Hounds.
For these a Writ issues out of the Exchequer after the Decease of Every
Bishop.

11. Bishoprics whether Saleable.
AS, In omni re nascitur res quae ipsam rem exterminat, Co. 2. Just. f. 15.
(as the Worm in the Wood, or the Moth in the Cloth, and the like) so often
times no Profession receives a greater blow, than by one of their own Coat. For
Ranulph, an Ecclesiastical Person, and King William Rufus his Chaplain, was a
Factor for the King in making Merchandise of Church Livings; in as much as when
any Archbishopric, Bishopric, or Monastery became void,

First, He persuaded the King to keep void a long time; and converted the
Profits thereof, sometime by Letting, and sometime by Sale of the same: whereby
the Temporalties were exceedingly wasted and destroyed.

Secondly, after a long time no man was preferred to them, per Traditionem
Annuli and Baculi; by Livery of Seizan, as the old fashion was; but by Bargain
and Sale from the King, to him that would give most: by means whereof the
Church was stuffed with unworthy and insufficient Men; and many Men of lively
Wits, and towardliness in Learning, despairing of Preferment, turned their
Studies to other Professions. This Ranulph, for serving the King's Turns, was
advanced; first, To be the King's Chancellor, and after to be Bishop of Durham.
Who after his Advancement to so high Dignities, made them Servants to his
Sacrilegious and Symoniacal Designs. King Henry the First, seeing this
mischief, and foreseeing the great inconvenience that would follow thereupon,
was contented, for his own time, to bind his own hands; to the end the Church
now naked and bare, might receive some comfort, and have means to provide
things necessary for their Profession and Calling. He thereupon, at his
Coronation made a Charter to this effect. Vide Magna Charta. c. 1.
Quia Regnum oppressum erat injustis exactionibus, ego, in Respectu Dei, and
amore quem erga vos omnes habeo, Sanctam Dei Ecclesiam imprimis liberam facio,
Ita quod nec vendam, nec ad firmam ponam, nec Mortuo Archiepiscopo, sive
Episcopo, vel Abbate, aliquid accipiam de Domino Ecclesiae, vel hominibus ejus,
donec Successor eam ingrediatur, and omnes malas Consuetudines, quibus Regnum
Angliae opprimebatur, inde aufero.

He committed the said Ranulph, then Bishop of Durham, to Prison for his
intolerable Misdeeds and Injuries to the Church: where he lived without love,
and died without pity, saving of those that thought it pity he lived so long.

I will close this Section with a Sentiment of the Imperial Law, touching
buying and selling.

Non pretio, C. 1.3.31:
sed precibus ordinetur Antistes. Tantum ab ambitu debet esse sepositus, ut
quaeratur cogendus, rogatus recedat, invitatus effugiat, sola illa suffragetur
necessitas excusandi. Profecto enim indignus est Sacerdotio, nisi fuerit
ordinatus invitus. Nemo gradum Sacerdotii pretii venalitate mercetur, quantum
quisque mereatur, non quantum dare sufficiat, aestimetur.

Episcopus non pretio, sed precibus ordinandus est. Gothofredus.

12. Their Right of Sitting in Parliament.
THe Spiritual Lords do sit in the King's great Council in Parliament, by the
same Right that the Temporal Lords do; and that is by reason of their Ancient
Baronies. For, although originally, all the Possessions of Bishops, Abbots and
Priors were given and holden in Frankalmoigne; yet, shortly after the Norman
Conquest, their Tenures were altered, viz. Per Baroniam; as appears by Matthew
Paris, Anno 1070. 66. and of that Tenure have continued ever since, as shall be
apparented by the Consultations of Clarendon, in the Reign of Henry the Second;
by Glanvil, and other Authorities.

In the Constitution held at Clarendon, Co. 2. Inst. f. 6.
tempore H. 2. Ann. 1164. Certain Recapitulations of the Prerogative of the
King and his People, then sought to be infringed by the Pope and his Clergy; it
is thus expressed in the eleventh Article, Archiepiscopi and Episcopi, and
universa persona Regni, qui de Rege tenent in Capite, (...) possessiones suas
de Rege sicut Baroniam and inde respondeant Justatiarii^, (...) Regis and sicut
Caeteri Baro^^^ debeam interesse Curiae Regis cum Baronibus q^^usqu^
perveniatur ad diminutionem Membrorum, vel mortem.

2. Glanvil, the most ancient Writer of the Laws of this Realm now extant, (...)
has these words; Notandum autem, quod nec Episcopus, nec Abbas quia eorum
Baroniae sunt de Elcemesyna Regis, and Antecessoris ejus, non possunt de
Dominicis suts aliquam partem dare ad Remanentiam, sine assensu, and
Confirmatione Domini Regis.

3. My third Authority shall be a notable Record in the Reign of Henry the
Third; and it is this.

Mandatum est omnibus Episcopis qui Conventuri sunt apud Glocestriam die Sabba
thy in Crastino Sanctae Katharinae firmiter inhibendo, quod sicut Baronias
suas, Rot Pat. (...) 3.2. part. (...) de Pro^^^^^^e fact. Epi^^.
quas de Rege tenent) diligunt, nullo modo praesumant Consilium tenere de
aliquibus quae ad Coronam Regis pertinent, vel quae personam Regis, vel Statum
suum, vel Statum Concilii sui contingunt. Scituri pro certo quod si fecerint,
Rex inde se capiet ad Baronias suas.

4. Mr. Cambden in his Britannia tells us, that the two Archbishops, and all
the Bishops of England, be Barons of the Kingdom and Parliament, unto whom by
Right and Custom it appertains, as to Peers of the Kingdom, to be with the rest
of the Peers personally present at all Parliaments whatsoever; there to
consult, to handle, to ordain, decree and determine, in regard of the Baronies
which they hold of the King. For William the first a thing the Churchmen of
that time complained of, but those in the Age ensuing accounted it their
greatest Honor) ordained Bishoprics and Abbeys, which hold Baronies in pure,
and perpetual Alms, and until that time, were free from all Secular Service; to
be under Military, or Knight Service; enrolling every Bishopric and Abbey at
Will and Pleasure, and appointing how many Soldiers he would have every one of
them to find for him and his Successors, in the time of Hostility and War. From
that time, ever since (says he) those Ecclesiastical Persons enjoyed all the
Immunities that Barons of the Kingdom did, saving only they were not to be
judged by their Peers.

5. Sir Edward Coke, in several places of his Works, asserts, Co. 2. Inst. f.
3, 79 585. Co. Lit. 97. a. 94. a. C^. 4 Inst f. 361.
that the Bishops of England have been founded by the Kings of England, and do
hold of the King by Barony, and have been all called by Writ to the Court of
Parliament, and are Lords of Parliament.

To what has been said in the proof of the Bishops Right, of sitting in
Parliament, this may be added; Judge D^d^idg in his Treatise of Nobility
concerning Barons by Ten^re
That it appears by all ancient Writers of our Laws and Histories, that the
Archbishops and Bishops of the Realm, in the ancient Saxons days; as well
during the time that this Realm was divided into diverse Kingdoms, as also after
the uniting of them into one Monarchy, were called to the Parliament, or
Assembly of States or Wise Men; not so much in respect of their Tenure; for, in
those days all their Tenures were (as is said before) by Frankalmoigne: but
especially for that Laws and Counsels of Men are then most current and
commendable, and have a more blessed issue and success, when they are grounded
upon the fear of God, the Root and Beginning of all true Wisdom. And therefore
our wise and Religious Ancestors called to their General Council, or Witten
A^mote, or Court of Wisdom (as they called it) those chief and principal
Persons of the Clergy; which, by their Place and Profession, by their
Gravities, Learning and Wisdom, might best advise what was the Law of God's
acceptable Will and Pleasure, that they might frame their Humane Laws
answerable; or, at least, not contrary and repugnant thereunto.

To Second Judge Dodridge in the Probation of our Bishops sitting in the
Assembly of States, or Wise Men, before the Conquest, I shall offer these
Authorities following.

At a Parliament holden by King Inas, Anno Domini 727. the Statutes began thus;
Ego Inas Dei beneficio Rex, suasu and Instituto Cenredi patris mei, Hedda and
Erkenwaldi Episcoporum meorum, omnium Senatorum meorum etc.

The Conclusion of the Parliament holden, Ann. 940. by King Athelstan, at
Grately, was thus. All this was enacted in the great Synod; whereat was the
Archbishop Wolfehelme, with all the Noble Men, and Wise men, which King
Athelstan called together. Co. Lit. 110. a. Co. 2. Inst. 268.

King Edovard, and Phlegmond. Archbishop of Canterbury, assembled a great
Council of Bishops, and other faithful People, etc. Matthew. Westminster. Lib. 1. sub
Ann. 905.

Ingulphus, who died before 1109. says: Rex Eldvedus convocavit Magnates
Episcopos, Proceres and Optimates ad tractandum de publicis negotiis Regni: Co.
4. Inst. f. 3.

The Reader may see more of this matter in the Preface of the Ninth Part of
Coke's Reports.

13. Their Right of making Proxies, whenever Question is had of the Attainder
of any Peer.
IT appears by our Books of Law, that ever when Question is had of any
Attainder of any Peer in Parliament, they depart the Higher House, and make
their Procurators. For, by the Decrees of the Church, they may not be Judges of
Life and Death.

In the tenth Year of Edward the Fourth, 10. E. 4.6. b.
it is said by Littleton; Quantum Seignior est indict, etc. Ceo serra mand en
le Parliament, and la le Seignior, Seneschall d'Anglete'rre luy mitta as
Respons and il dirra de Rieu culpable and ceo serra try per pares suos, etc.
donques les Seignieurs Spirituels, que ne poient consent al mort de home,
ferrount un Procurator en le Parliament.

When a Lord is indicted, it shall be returned into Parliament, and there the
Steward of England shall put him to answer, and he shall say, Not Guilty; and
this shall be tried by his Peers: and then the Lords Spiritual, who may not
consent to the death of any Man, shall make their Procurators in Parliament.

Stamford, Lib. 3. f. 153. A, B.
in his Pleas of the Crown, informs us; Que Evesque ne ount lieu en
Parliament en Respect de lour nobility, mes en respect de lour Possession
(...) L'antient Baronies annexes a lour Dignities. And he further says, that a
Peer indicted of Treason or Felony, may, if the King please, be arraigned of it
in Parliament: and then the Lords Spiritual shall make a Procurator for them.
Eo que per le Canonical Leges, ils mesmes ne doint condemner asuma Mort.

Mr. Justice Dodridge, on the Constitution of Clarenden of Henry the Second,
beforementioned, tells us thus. Here we see (says he) the Presence of the
Bishops in the Parliament in respect of their Baronies: Quousque perveniatur ad
diminutionem, etc. For ever unto our times, when Question is had of any
Attainder of any Peer in Parliament, they depart the Higher House, and make
their Procurators. Vide, His Treatise of the Barons of the Realm.

A Peer of the Realm (says Coke) being indicted of Treason or Felony, Co. 3
Inst f. ^1.
or of Misprision, and duly transmitted to the Lords, may be arraigned thereof
in the Upper House of Parliament; but then there must be appointed a Steward of
England, who shall put him to answer. And if he plead, Not Guilty, he shall be
tried per Pares suos; and then the Lords Spiritual must withdraw, and make
their Proxies.

Again, says Coke, A Peer of the Realm, being indicted of Treason, Co. 4. Inst ^
or Felony, or Misprision of Treason, may be arraigned thereof in Parliament, a
Lord Steward being appointed: and then the Lords Spiritual shall make a
Procurator for them.

By these four Authors, Littleton, Stamford, Dodridge and Coke (on whose Sleeve
I should as soon pin my Faith, as upon any four Lawyers, famous in their
Profession, since my first Admittance into an Inns of Court;) It is asserted,
that the Prelates, upon their withdrawing in Capital Cases, have a Right to
make their Procurators. They depart the House, not by virtue of any Rule at the
Common Law, but in virtue of an old Ecclesiastical Canon. They make their
Proxies, not as they are Spiritual Persons, but in respect of their Temporal
Baronies. To be short, If I should hear, that the Opinion of these four most
eminent Lawyers is overruled by our Sages, by virtue of that Spell called
Error Temporis, it will cast me undoubtedly, not into an Admiration, but an
Ecstasy.

14. Statutes where made without them.
ALthough the Bishops have a Right of sitting in Parliament, and ought always
to be called to that great Council, yet Statutes have been good without their
Lordships. And that in three several Cases.

1. If they voluntarily absent themselves, then may the King, the Nobles and
Commons make an Act of Parliament without them. As, where any Offender is to be
attainted of High Treason, or Felony, and the Bishops absent themselves, and
the Act proceed, the Act is good and perfect.

2. If they be present, and refuse to give any Voices, and the Act proceed; the
Act of Parliament is good without them.

3. Where the Voices in Parliament ought to be absolute, either in the
Affirmative or Negative, and they give their Voices with Limitation or
Condition, and the Act proceeds; the Act is good, for their Conditional Voices
are no Voices. Examples for these Particulars the Reader may find in Coke's 2.
Inst. f. 585, 588.

Note, Albeit Statutes have been made without the Bishops, yet they are
accounted one of the Estates of Parliament: as it appears by my Lord Coke, in
the very beginning of the fourth Part of his Institutes. But it is pretended by
some, that they are not: for if they were, then should they discuss Matters
separately, by themselves, from the other Lords, as the Commons now do.

I deny the Consequence; for our Books tell us; That, at the first, both Houses
sat together. Pray, how many Estates were they then? if it be answered, that
there were but two; why? then this shows that two Estates may discuss Matters
together, both in one and the same House.

15. Their Privileges, as they are Lords of Parliament.
THe Bishops, in the Right of their Temporal Baronies, do enjoy all the
Immunities that the Nobility, and Peers of Parliament do; saving only, they are
not to be judged by their Peers. And the reason of this is, because the Bishops
cannot pass, in like Cases, upon the Trial of any other of the Peers; for that
they are prohibited by the Canons of the Church, to be Judges of Life and
Death. And reason would, that the other Peers should not try them: for this
Trial should be mutual, for as much as it is performed upon their Honors,
without any Oath taken.

Now, the Privileges that the Bishops claim, as Peers of the Realm are such as
these following.

1. The Person of a Bishop shall not be arrested, in Debt, or Trespass, by his
Body.

2. If a Bishop be Demandant, or Plaintiff; Tenant, or Defendant, there must be
a Knight returned of his Jury, or else the Array may be quashed.

3. Archbishops and Bishops are not bound to attend Leets, nor to take the
Oath there administered.

4. A Day of Grace is never granted, where a Bishop is Tenant or Defendant.

5. If a Bishop be Defendant in Star Chamber, or Court of Chancery, a Subpoena
shall not be awarded; but a Letter from the Lord Chancellor, or Lord Keeper, in
lieu thereof.

6. Every Arch Bishop or Bishop coming to the King at his Commandment, and
passing by any of the King's Forests, may hunt and kill one or two of the
King's Deer.

7. If a Bishop be Party to a Suit, and would be essoigned; he that casts the
Essoigne out, must put in Sureties to prove the Cause. Which is not usual in
the Case of a Common Person.

8. If a Plaintiff recover against a Bishop, in an Action of Debt, or Trespass,
upon such a Plea pleaded by him, or other Default in him; so that a Fine
thereby does grow to the King, and thereupon a Capias p^o Fine issues out
against him; this shall not prejudice the Bishop, so as the Plaintiff may
thereby take advantage by Prayer, that the Bishop shall abide in Execution. etc.

9. Whereas by a Statute made in 32. H. 8 c 16. it is enacted, that the
Subjects of the Realm shall not keep in their Families, or Houses, above the
number of four Strangers born; nevertheless, by a Proviso in the said Act,
every Lord of Parliament has his Privilege allowed unto him, to keep in his
Family the number of six Strangers born: any thing in that Act to the contrary
notwithstanding.

10. By the Statute of West. 1. c. 34. If any Person shall divulge false Tales
of any of the Lords of Parliament, by which Dissension may be betwixt the
Commons and them, the Offender is to be imprisoned until he bring forth the
Author.

In brief; My Lords, the Bishops (as it is said before) may challenge a Fruition
of all the Privileges, in virtue of their Baronies, that the Lords Temporal can
by virtue of theirs; saving only, the Bishops cannot be tried by their Peers.
Which manner of Trial was (as I am informed) brought into this Realm by William
the Conqueror, being answerable to the Norman and French Laws, and agreeable to
the Customs Feudal; where almost all the Controversies arising between the
Sovereign and his Vassal are tried, per Judicium Parium suorum.

16. Their Precedence.
SIr Edward Coke, treating on the Statute of the thirty first of Henry the
Eighth, c. 10. concerning the Precedence of the King's great Officers, has
these same words.

And first, Cok^ 4. Inst. 36^
for the Lords Spiritual (who sit in Parliament on the King's Right Hand)
amongst themselves.

1. The Archbishop of Canterbury.

2. The Archbishop of York on the same form.

3. The Bishop of London.

4. The Bishop of Durham.

5. The Bishop of Winchester.

And then all the other Bishops of both Provinces shall sit, and be placed
after their Antienties, as before this Act was accustomed.

But having regard to the Lords, and Noble Peers of the Realm, both the
Archbishops have place above all the great Officers and Nobility in
Parliament, Council and Commissions, saving in the Star Chamber, the Lord
Chancellor, or Lord Keeper has the Precedence of them. But the other Bishops
have place above all the Barons of the Realm; because they hold their
Bishoprics of the King, per Baroniam; but they give place to Viscounts, Earls,
Marquesses and Dukes.

Note, that in the penning of all Acts of Parliament, the Lords Spiritual have
the Preseance of the Lords Temporal.

And this shall suffice for the placing of the Lords Spiritual in Parliament,
etc. according to Sir Edward Coke. I will offer something out of Mr. Seagar,
the famous Herald, touching Preseance in Provincial Assemblies and elsewhere.

When the Archbishop of Canterbury sits in his Provincial Assembly, he has
on his Right Hand the Archbishop of York, and next unto him the Bishop of
Winchester; and on the Left Hand the Bishop of London. But if it fall out, that
the Archbishop of Caenterbury be not there, by the Vacation of his See; then
the Archbishop of York is to take his place: who admits the Bishop of
London on his Right Hand, and the Bishop of Winchester to his Left; the rest
sitting as they are Elders by Consecration. C. Lib. 4. c. 24. Of Honors
Military and Civil.

A Bishop must do Reverence unto his Father at home; but, being in the Church,
the Father shall follow him.

Between two Equals, he that is in his own Jurisdiction shall precede. As if an
Archbishop do come into a Diocese of a Bishop; notwithstanding he is a Person
of more Dignity, yet ought he give Honor unto the Bishop, because his Presence
does not cancel his Authority. C. Lab. 4. c. 24. Of Honor, Military and Civil.

17. Their Excommunications.
EXcommunication (that is, the greatest Judgment upon Earth, being that which
is ratified in Heaven) will be the better understood by these Particularities.

1. Its Definition.

2. Its Division.

3. The Writs that belong to it.

4. By whom it ought to be cerified.

5. The Power of it in a Christian Church.

First, Its Definition.
Excommunication is thus defined by Panormitan: Co. Lit. 133. b
Excommunicatio est nihil aliud, quam Censura a Canone, Vel Judice
Ecclesiastico prolata, and inflicta, privans legitima Communione Sacramentorum,
and quandoque Hominum.

Secondly, Its Division.
This Excommunication thus defined by the Canonist, is twofold; Co. Lit. 133 b.
it is either Lesser, or Greater.

The Lesser is, Per quam quis a Sacramentorum participatione Conscientia, vel
Sententia arcetur.

The Greater Excommunication is that which, Non solum a Sacramentorum verum
etiam fidelium Communione excludit, and ab omni actu legitimo separat and
dividit.

Either of these disableth the Party to sue any Action in the Kings Courts: And
yet our Books tell us, that every Excommunication disableth not the Party.

As for Example, If Bailiffs and Commons, 30. E. 3.15. Co. Lit. 134. a.
or any other Corporation aggregate of many, bring an Action, Excommengement in
the Bailiffs, shall not disable them, for that they sue and answer by
Attorney; otherwise it is of a sole Corporation.

But if Executors or Administrators be excommunicated, they may be disabled;
because they which converse with a Person excommunicate, are excommunicate also.

If a Bishop be Defendant, Co. Lit. 134. a. 9 A. 7.21. b.
an Excommunication by the same Bishop against the Plaintiff, shall not disable
him: and it shall be intended for the same Cause, if another be not showed.

Thirdly, The several Writs that belong to it.
There are three sorts of Writs appertaining to Excommunications.

The one is called Excommunicato Capiendo.

Another named, Excommunicato Deliberando.

The Third is styled, Excommunicato Recipiendo.

Excommunicato Capiendo, is a Writ directed to the Sheriff, for the
Apprehension of him that stands obstinately excommunicated for forty days.
For, such a one, not seeking his Absolution, has, or may have his Contempt
certified, or signified into the Chancery: whence issues this Writ, for the
laying of him up, without Bail or Mainprize, until he conform himself.

And when he is justified, and has made Agreement, then the Bishop shall send
his Letters to the King, testifying the same: and then it shall be commanded to
the Sheriff, to deliver him by a Writ called Excommunicato Deliber^^do.

But if the Person excommunicated, and for his Obstinacy being committed to
Prison, be inlawfully delivered thence, before he has given Caution to obey the
Authority of the Church; then he is commanded to be sought for, and laid up
again by a Writ, called Excommunicato Recipiendo.

My Lord Coke tells us, Co. 2. (...). ^ 23.
that if a Man be excommunicated, and offer to obey, and perform the Sentence,
and the Bishop refuses to accept it, and to assoil him; he shall have a Writ to
the Bishop, requiring him, upon performance of the Sentence, to assoil him,
etc. And also the Party grieved may have his Action, upon his Case, against the
Bishop, in like manner as he may, when the Bishop does excommunicate him for a
matter which belongs not to Ecclesiastical Cognizance. Also, the Bishop in
those Cases may be indicted at the Suit of the King.

Fourthly, By whom Excommunication ought to be certified.
It is declared in our Books, Co. Lit. 134. a. 12. ^. 4.15.20. H. 6.17.11. H.
4.14.
that none can certify Excommengement, but only the Bishop, unless the Bishop
be beyond Sea, or in Remotis, or one that has ordinary Jurisdiction, and is
Immediate Officer to the King's Courts. As the Archdeacon of Richmond, or the
Dean and Chapter in time of Vacation.

But in ancient time every Official or Commissary might testify Excommengement
in the King's Court; 11. H. 4.62.
and for the mischief that ensued thereupon, it was ordained by the King in
Parliament, that none should testify Excommengement, but the Bishop only.

If a Bishop certify, 33, E. 3. Excom. 29.
that another Bishop has certified him, that the Party which is his Diocesan,
is excommunicated; this Certificate upon another Report is not sufficient.

If the Bishop certifieth the Excommunication under Seal, ^4. E. 3. Excom. ^.
albeit he dies, yet the Certificate shall serve.

And it is to be observed, Co. 2. Inst. 623.28. E. 3.97.14. H. 4 14.
that at the Common Law, a Certificate of the Bishop, whereupon a Significavit,
that is, a Writ De Excommunicato Capiendo, was to be granted, ought to express
the Cause and the Suit against the Party, especially in the Certificate.

But it may be queried whether an Excommunication, and Certificate thereof, by
any Foreign Power, can disable the Party?

It is answered, 16. E. 3. Excom. 4.4. H. 7.15.12. E. 4.15.
that if the Bishop of Rome, or any other, having Foreign Authority, does
excommunicate any Subject of this Realm, and certifieth so much under his Seal
of Lead; this shall not disable the Party: For the Common Law disallows all
Acts done in disability of any Subject of this Realm, by any Foreign Power out
of the Realm, as things not Authentic. Whereof the Judges should give
Allowance.

Fifthly, The Power of Excommunication in a Christian Church.
A most Learned Doctor of our Church, that he may give the Church her due, and
Caesar his, asserts, and proves these Particulars.

First, That under the Gospel there is a Power in the Officers of the Church,
by virtue of Divine Institution, to exclude any Offenders out of the Christian
Society, for transgressing the Laws of it.

The Second, That this Power does remain formally in the Church, after its
being incorporated into the Commonwealth.

The Third, That after the Churches being incorporated into the Commonwealth,
the Right of Supreme Management of this Power, in an External way, does fall
into the Magistrates Hands; consisting in these four things.

1. A Right of prescribing Laws for the Management of Church Censures.

2. A Right of bounding the manner of Proceeding in Censures; that in a settled
Christian State, Matters of so great weight be not left to the Arbitrary
Pleasure of any Church Officers.

3. The Right of adding Temporal and Civil Sanctions to Church Censures, and so
enforcing the Spiritual Weapons of the Church with the more keen and sharp ones
of the Civil State.

4. To the Magistrate belongs the Right of Appeals, in case of unjust Censure.

So that the Sum of all that has been said is this; That though the Magistrate
has the main care of ordering things in the Church, yet (the Magistrates Power
being Cumulative, and not Privative) the Church and her Officers retain the
Fundamental Right of inflicting Censures on Offenders.

Thus much concerning the Superior Clergy; containing the Archbishops, and
Bishops: I come now to treat of the Inferior Clergy; under which are
comprehended, Deans, Archdeacons, Parsons, Vicars, Prebends and Chaplains.

SECONDLY, OF THE INFERIOR CLERGY.
IT is to be known, that of Spiritual Functions there be three Degrees.

1. A Function which has a Jurisdiction.

2. A Spiritual Administration with a Cure.

3. They, who have neither Cure, nor Jurisdiction.

Of these in their Order.

1. Of a Function, which has a Jurisdiction.
UNder this Rank may be placed Deans and Archdeacons.

1. Deans.
Dean, in Latin Decanus; which is derived of the Greek Word, (...), Co. Lit.
9^. a.
that signifies T^^; for that he is an Ecclesiastical Secular Governor, and
was anciently over ten Prebends, or Canons, at the least.

Howbeit, in England we use to call him a Dean, that is next under the Bishop,
and Chief of the Chapter, ordinarily in a Cathedral Church, and the rest of the
Society, or Corporation we call Capitulum, the Chapter.

Now, Co. Lit. 95. a.
Of Chapters there be in our Law two kinds, viz. The Ancient; and the Latter.

And the Latter be of two sorts.

1. Those which were translated or founded by King Henry the Eighth, in place
of Abbots and Covents, or Priors and Covents; which were Chapters whilst they
stood: and these are new Chapters to old Bishoprics.

2. Where the Bishopric was newly founded by Henry the Eighth (as Chester, and
Bristow, etc.) there the Chapters are also new.

There is a great Diversity between the coming in of the Ancient Deans and the
New.

For, the Ancient come in in much like sort as Bishops do. For they are chosen
by the Chapter, by a Cogue de Eslier, as Bishops be; and the King giving his
Royal Assent, they are confirmed by the Bishop. But they which are either newly
translated, or founded, are Donative; and by the King's Letters Patents are
installed.

Note, The Word Dean is also applied to diverse, that are the Chief of certain
peculiar Churches or Chapels. As,

The Dean of the Ring's Chapel.

The Dean of the Arches.

The Dean of St. Georges Chapel in Windsor.

The Dean of Bocking in Essex.

The Corporation, consisting of Dean and Chapter, they may jointly purchase
Lands and Tenements to the use of their Church and Successors. And every one
severally, likewise may purchase, to the use of himself, and his Heirs.

Grants at this day, Co. Lic. 342. a.
made by a Dean and Chapter, or any other, having any Spiritual or
Ecclesiastical Living, are restrained by Act of Parliament; so as they cannot
grant any Rentcharge, or make any Alienation, or any Leases, to bind their
Successors, other than for Term of twenty one Years, or three Lives in
Possession; whereupon the accustomed Rent, or more, shall be reserved.

2. Archdeacons.
Archdeacons, in Latin, Archi-Deacanus; and in Greek, (...), ex (...), i. e.
Princeps and (...), i. e. Minister) is styled, Oculus Episcopi. Whose Court is
to be holden (as is said before) where, and in what places, he either by
Prescription, or Composition, has Jurisdiction in Spiritual Causes, within his
Arch-Deaconry. And from him the Appeal is to be Diocesan.

It has been resolved, Hobart 's Reports. Hutton 's Case.
that if a Suit be before an Archdeacon, whereof, by the Statute of the twenty
third of Henry the Eighth, the Ordinary may license the Suit to an higher
Court; that the Archdeacon cannot in such Case bawlk his Ordinary, and send
the Cause immediately into the Arches. For, he has no power to give a Court,
but to remit his own Court, and to leave it to the next. For, since his Power
was derived from the Bishop, to whom he is subordinate, he must yield it to
him, of whom he received it. And it was said, that so it had been ruled
heretofore.

2. Of a Spiritual Administration with a Cure.
UNder this Form I place Parsons and Vicars.

1. Parsons.
Parson, in Legal Signification, is taken for the Rector of a Church Parochial;
and is called Persona Ecclesiae, because he assumeth, and takes upon him the
Parson of the Church; and is said to be siezed in Jure Ecclesiae. And the Law
had an excellent end herein, viz. That in his Person the Church might sue for,
and defend her Right; and also, be sued by any that had an elder and better
Right. And when the Church is full, it is said to be, Plena and Consulta, of
such a one Parson thereof; that is, full, and provided of a Parson that may,
Vicem, seu personam ejus gerere.

Persona Impersonata, Parson Impersonate, Co. Lit. 300. b.
is the Rector that is in Possession of the Church Parochial, be it
Presentative or Impropriate; and of whom the Church is full.

To every Church-Presentative there is a Patron: and it is he that has the
Advowson of a Parsonage, belonging to his Manor, or otherwise in Gross; and
thereby may or ought to give the same Benefice, or present thereto, when and as
often as it falls void. And that is in case of Death, Resignation,
Deprivation, or Session; as by taking a Benefice incompatible. And this being
Patron, had beginning, for the most part, by one of these three ways; namely,

Either, by reason of the Foundation; for that the Patron, or his Ancestors,
Co. Lit. 119. b.
or those, from whom he claims, were Founders, or Builders of the Church.

Or, By reason of Donation; for that they did endow, or give Lands to the same,
for maintenance thereof.

Or else, By reason of the Ground; because the Church was set, or builded upon
their Soil.

And many times by reason of them all three.

2. Vicars.
For the beginning of Vicaridges; the difference betwixt a Vicaridge, and an
Advowson, and the several sorts of Vicaridges, I refer my Reader to Davy's
Reports, f. 83. a. and Cro. 2. p. s. 518. and I shall only give him some little
Information concerning Vicaridges, by showing him somewhat of Impropriations.

Impropriations, or Appropriations, were (says my Author) when those Houses of
the Romish Religion, and those Religious Persons; as Abbots, Priors and such
like, had the Advowson of any Parsonage to them, and to their Successors; and
obtained License of the Pope, and of the Ordinary, and King, that they
themselves, and their Successors, from thenceforth, should be Parsons there:
and that it shall be from thenceforth a Vicaridge, and that the Vicar should
serve the Cure.

And so at the beginning, Appropriations were made only to those Persons
Spiritual that could administer the Sacraments, and say Divine Service. As,
Abbots, Priors, Deans, and such like.

After, by little and little, they were enlarged, and made to others; As
namely, to a Dean and Chapter; which is a Body Corporate, consisting of many:
which Body together could not say Divine Service.

And, which was more; To Nuns, that were Prioresses of some Nunnery: which was
a wicked thing. In so much as they could neither administer Sacraments, nor
preach, nor say Divine Service to the Parishioners.

And all this was for pretense of Hospitality, and maintenance thereof. And, to
supply these defects, a Vicar was devised; who should be Deputy to the Priors,
or to the Dean and Chapter; and also, at the last, to the said Abbots, and
others, to say Divine Service: and should have for his labor but a little
Portion; and they, to whom the Appropriations were made, should retain the
greater Revenues, and they did nothing for it. By means whereof Hospitality
decayed in the place where it ought to have been chiefly maintained; namely, in
the Parish where the Benefice was, and where the Profits did grow. And so it
continues to this day; to the great hinderance of Learning, to the
Impoverishment of the Ministry, and to the Infamy of the Gospel, and
Professors thereof.

To this Learning of Impropriations, I shall add the very words of him, that
was the Glory of his Age and Nation.

In mine Opinion, Lord Bacon.
and Sense (says he) I must confess (let me speak it with Reverence) that all
the Parliaments, since the twenty seventh and thirty first of Henry the Eighth
(who gave away Impropriations from the Church) seem to me to stand, in a sort,
obnoxious, and obliged to God, in Conscience, to do somewhat for the Church; to
reduce the Patrimony thereof to a Competency. For, since they have debarred
Christ's Wife of a great part of her Dowry, it were reason they made her a
competent Jointure.

Thus much for poor Vicars. I go on to the third degree of Spiritual F^nctions,
containing Prebendaries and Caplains.

3. Of those who have neither Cure, nor Jurisdiction.
UNder this same Order I set Probendaries, and Chaplains.

1. Prebendaries.
Prebend, and Prebendary are Terms often, used in our Books: and they come of
the Latin [Praebeo.]

Prebend is that Portion, which every Member, or Canon of a Cathedral Church
receives in the Right of his Place, for his Maintenance.

And Prebendary is he that has such a Prebend.

It is resolved, that a Layman may be presented to a Prebend; for, Co. Lib. 3.
Case del Dean and Chapter, f. 75. Cro. 1. p Bland ^ Madox s 79.
Non ha bet curam animarum. And it is said in our Books, that the Bishop is
Patron and Ordinary of every Prebend; for all the Possessions of Prebends were
at the first, the Bishops; and, De mero Jure, pertain to the Bishops.

2. Chaplains.
Chaplain is he that performs Divine Service in a Chapel; and therefore is
commonly used for him that depends upon the King, or other Man of worth, for
the Instruction of him and his Family, the Reading of Prayers, and preaching in
his private House; where usually they have a Chapel for that purpose.

And for that they are retained by Letters under the Seal of their Patron, and
thereby, by Intendment, are to be resident with them; the Law has therefore
given liberty for their Non Residence upon their Benefices.

If an Earl. or Baron retains a Chaplain, and before his Advancement, be
attainted of Treason, there the Reteiner is determined. And after the
Attainder, such Chaplain cannot take a second Benefice; because he that is
attainted, is, by his Attainder, a dead Person in Law.

The Wife of a Baron, during the Coverture, cannot retain a Chaplain; yet, when
a Baronness Widow retains one, or two, according to the Proviso of the
Statute of the twenty first of Henry the Eighth, c. 13. the Retainer is the
Principal matter: and as long as the Retainer is in force, and the Barronness
continues a Baronness, the Chaplains may well take two Benefices by the
express Letter of the Statute; for it suffices, if at the time of the
Retainer, the Baronness were a Widow. And herein this Rule is to be observed
of a Woman that attaineth Nobility by Marriage. As, by Marriage of a Duke,
Earl, or Baron, etc. For, in such case, if she afterward marry under the Degree
of Nobility, by such Marriage with one that is not Noble, she loses her
Dignity, whereunto she had attained by Marriage. And after such latter
Marriage, the power to retain a Chaplain is determined.

But otherwise it is, where a Woman is Noble by Descent: For there her
Retainer, before or after the Marriage with one that is not Noble, shall be in
force, and is not countermanded by the Marriage, nor determined by her taking
of a Husband under her Degree. Coke, lib. 4. fol. 118, 119. Acton's Case.

If a Bishop be translated to an Archbishop, or a Baron to be created an Earl,
etc. yet, within the Statute of the twenty first of Henry the Eighth, they can
have but only so many Chaplains as an Archbishop, or an Earl might have: for,
although he have diverse Dignities, yet he is still but one self-same Person, to
whom the Attendance and Service should be done. So, if a Baron be made a Knight
of the Garter, or Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports, he shall have but three
Chapplains in all. Et sic de similibus.

Thus having given my Reader a brief Account of the Superior and Inferior
Clergy, I shall conclude my Discourse, by showing some (among many) of the
Privileges and Immunities appertaining to the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy in
General.

The Immunities of the Clergy in General.
THe Kings of England, out of a zeal and desire they had, to grace and honor
their Learned and Godly Clergy, were pleased to confer on them several
Immunities: such as these following.

1. Co. 2. Inst s. 3. and 4.
The Clergy were discharged of Purveyance for their own proper Goods.

2. Coke.
No Demesne, or proper Court for the necessary use of any Ecclesiastical Person
ought to be taken for the King's Carriage, but they are exempted by the ancient
Law of England, from any such Carriage.

3. Coke.
If a Man holds Lands or Tenements, by reason whereof, upon Election to serve
in a Temporal Office: If this Man be made an Ecclesiastical Person, within Holy
Orders, he ought not to be elected to any such Office. And if he be, he may
have the King's Writ for his Discharge.

4. Co. Lit. f. 70. b. co. 2 Inst. 4.
Ecclesiasticals are not bound to serve in Person at the Wars.

5. Coke.
All Ecclesiastical Persons ought to be quit, and discharged of Tolls and
Customs, Avirage, Pontage, Paviage, and the like, for their Ecclesiastical
Goods; and if they be molested therefore, they have a Writ for their Discharge.

If any Ecclesiastical Person be in fear or doubt, that his Goods, or Chattels,
Coke.
or Beasts, or the Goods of his Farmer, etc. should be taken by the Ministers
of the King, for the business of the King, he may purchase a Protection, Cum
Clausula Nolumus.

7. Distresses shall not be taken by Sheriffs, or other of the King's
Ministers, Coke.
in the Inheritance of the Church, wherewith it was anciently endowed.

8. If any Ecclesiastical Person acknowledge a Statute-Merchant, Coke.
or Statute-Staple, or a Recognizance in the nature of a Statute-Staple; his
Body shall not be taken by force of any Process thereupon.

9. If a Person be bound in a Recognizance in Chancery, Coke.
or in any other Court, and he pay not the Sum at the day; by the Common Law,
if the Person had nothing but Ecclesiastical Goods, the Recognizee could not
have a Levari facias to the Sheriff, to levy the same of these Goods: but the
Writ ought to be directed to the Bishop of the Diocese, to leavy the same of
his Ecclesiastical Goods.

10. In Action brought against a Person (wherein a Capias lies;) For example,
Coke.
an Account the Sheriff returns, Quod Clericus est beneficiatus, nullum habens
Laicum feodum; in which he may be summoned: In this case the Plaintiff cannot
have a Capias to the Sheriff, to take the Body of the Person; but he shall have
a Writ to the Bishop, to cause the Person to come and appear.

11. Ecclesiastical Persons are not bound to appear at Tourns, Marlb. c. 10.
or Views of Frank-pledge.

12. Co. 2. Inst. f. 29.
If any Ecclesiastical Person be amerced (though Amerciaments belong to the
King) yet he shall not be amerced, in respect of his Ecclesiastical Promotion
or Benefice, but in respect of his Lay-Fee.

13. He that is within Holy Orders, has this Privilege; Co. 2. Inst. 637.
that albeit he have had the Privilege of his Clergy for a Felony, he may have
his Clergy afterward again: and so cannot a Layman.

14. No Clerk within Holy Orders, though he had a Knight's Fee, was compellable
to be Knighted, according to the Statute, De Militibus; of the first of Edward
the Second.

15. At the Common Law, at the first, Hobart 's Rep. f. 288.
the Benefit of the Clergy was not allowed but to Clerks in holy Orders,
Secular and Religious.

16. If any Laymen, with force, and strong hand, do enter upon, Co. Inst. 54.
or keep the Possession, either of the Church, or of any of the Houses or
Glebe, etc. belonging thereunto; the Incumbent, upon Certificate thereof of the
Bishop, or without Certificate, upon his own surmise, may have a Writ to the
Sheriff, De vi Laica amovenda: By which the Sheriff is commanded in these
words; Pracipimus quod omnem Vim Laicam seu armatam, quae se tenet in dictae
Ecclesiae seu domibus eidem annexis, ad pacem nostram in Com. tuo perturband.
sine dilatione amoveas, and si quos in hac part resistentes invenerts, eos per
Corpora sua attachias and in prisona nostra salvo Custodias, etc.

17. Ecclesiastical Livings are said to be in Abeyance: Co. Lit. 341. a.
and this was provided by the Providence and Wisdom of the Law. And therefore,
no Act of a Vicar-Predecessor should make a discontinuance, to take away the
Entry of his Successor, and to drive him to a real Action, whereby he should be
destitute of maintenance in the mean time.

18. A general Accusation against a Parson, or Vicar, not good: and therefore,
in a Quare Impedit against the Bishop, it is not a good Plea to allege that
the Presentee is a Schismatic in general; but he ought to express Schism in
particular. But it is otherwise for the putting a Coroner out of his Office;
for there is a general Suggestion in the Writ, that he is, Persona minus
Idonea, is enough, and not Traversable.

19. Co. Li^. 8.14. a. Lab. 11. f. 70. a.
And last, Statutes which restrain Alienation of Ecclesiastical Livings, bind
the King, though not named.

I shall conclude the whole Discourse with my hearty Prayer to God Almighty;
that he would be pleased, always to defend the Church of England against the
fierce Attempts of Halting Loyola, and Crook-back'd Hudibras.

The one would destroy her Priests: The other would devour her Patrimony.

The one would introduce the Pomp of Superstitious Tyranny: The other would
bring in the Meanness of Fantastic Anarchy.

POSTSCRIPT.
THe Highest and most binding Laws are the Statutes, which are established by
the King in Parliament; and by Authority of that highest Court, it has been
often times enacted (only to show a tender care of Holy Church:) That all
Ecclesiastical Persons shall enjoy all their Lawful Rights and Privileges,
without any Substraction, whatsoever, as appears by these Statutes after
mentioned, which were but confirmations of such Rights and Immunities, as the
Clergy had long before.

We have granted to God, and by this our present Charter, Magna Charta. c. 1.
Ann. 9. H. 3.
have confirmed for us and our Heirs for ever; that the Church of England shall
be free, and shall have all her whole Rights.

That Holy Church have her Liberties in quietness, 14 E. 3. c. 1.
without interruption or disturbance. Vide the same 25. E. 3. c. 1.50. E. 3. c.
1.

It is accorded and established, 1 R. 2. c. 1.
that Holy Church shall have and enjoy all her Rights, Liberties and
Franchises, wholly, and without blemish. Vide the same 2. R. 2. c. 1. 3. R. 2.
c. 1. 5. R. 2. c. 1. 6. R. 2. c. 1. 7. R. 2. c. 1. 8. R. 2. c. 1. 12. R. 2. c.
1.

That Holy Church have and enjoy all her Rights, Liberties, and Franchises, 1
H. 4. c. 1.
entirely, and without blemishing. Vide 2. H. 4. c. 1. 4. H. 4. c. 1. 7. H. 4.
c. 1. 9. H. 4. c. 1. 13. H. 4. c. 1.

That Holy Church have all her Liberties and Franchises. 3 H. 5. c. 1.


That Holy Church shall have and enjoy all their Liberties and Franchises. 2 H.
6. c. 1.


In a word, The Statute of Magna Charta has been confirmed (as I am told)
thirty two times, and so have therefore, say I, the Rights and Privileges that
appertain to the Church of England.

With our Kings in Parliament, does concur the Emperor Justinian in his Codes.

Privilegia, ^od. 1.2.12.
quae generalibus Constitutionibus universis sacrosanctis Ecclesia Orthodoxae
Religionis retro Principes praestiterunt, firma and illibata in perpetuum
decernimus Custodiri.

Sicut ipsa Religio, and fidei Matter est perpetua, ita ejus patrimonium jugiter
servetur illaesum.

Now God Almighty give me favor in the Eyes of the Men, that they may send
back that that is taken away already, and let that alone that yet remains.

FINIS.

