AN EXPLANATION OF SOME TRUTHS, Of the carriage of things about this great WORK.

Frustra laboramus, nisi laboris nostri Reipublicae cui omnia post Deum
debemus, ratio constet.

Pro captu Lectoris habent sua fata Libelli.

Published by Authority.

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1645.

TO THE READER.
Impartial and judicious Reader,
HEre I give thee a short and true View or Description of the present state and
condition of the Scots, in relation to this great Cause of Church and State now
in hand, for which these last years there has been and yet at this present is
such fighting and fensing with strength and skill amongst us in these
Dominions: On the one side, By the good party bestirring themselves by good and
just actions in the Field, and by right and wholesome advice in the Counsel, to
put forward and establish the Truth of Religion settled in a through Reformation
in Doctrine and Discipline, according to the Word of God, and conform to the
example of the best Reformed Neighbour-Churches, as we are all sworn to by our
solemn Covenant; to lay aside all other ties in this place, for the glory of
God, with the eternal salvation of our immortal souls; and to obtain a solid
and firm Peace, in the enjoying whereof we may lead a sober and quiet life,
serving God as we ought to do, and be in comfort one to another.

On the other side, By the adverse party, not only manifest and declared, but
also secret and counterfeited, who first did begin this strife, and still
continues it, acting by open Warfare and secret undermining what he can, to
hinder and put back this good Work of a through Reformation; and in lieu of it,
to raise up and put on, for faction and interest, with the inventions of men,
cunningly devised, and craftily disguised with the mask of Piety toward God,
and of good toward the People.

But of this, thou shall see more in the ensuing Discourse.

A SHORT VIEW OF The present condition of SCOTLAND.
THe Common Enemy, by great slight, and profound skill, having brought us all,
in a manner, insensibly and smoothly, we hardly perceiving it, to such a pass,
that we were all catched almost, when we did think our selves freest: For how
many were there amongst us, who, thinking themselves sincere professors of the
truly reformed Religion, were altogether infected with error and heresy, by
an unparalleled cunning of the Enemies of the Truth, in one way or other? He
then did judge it fit time (as in all probability it was) to dally no more,
nor deal with us by undermining any further, but in an open way, to overthrow
whatsoever should lie in his way, in case of any opposition to his main
design, which is to withdraw men from the Service of God, and from true love
one to another.

Now, when he had cast his eyes up and down among us, to see where it was
fittest for him to begin this his great and open undertaking, in the end he
resolves to begin at Scotland, where if he found compliance, he had what he
desired; for they, who were so far distant from him, having once complied,
would not only invite others by their example to submit; but also help him to
go on with the work. And in case the Scots should refuse, being not able to
resist long, as he thought, by reason of their weakness for counsel and
action; with means to support both, they should be made an example of
punishment to all others, not to dare to refuse, and against their will to
serve unto the advancement of the design.

So the Scots are gone too, and compliance is required of them, which almost
had been obtained, (the most part of the spirits of the people being kept under
by heavy pressures, and the great ones inslaved by Court-interest;) but God in
his Mercy to that Nation, did stir up the spirits of diverse of all ranks and
degrees, despiseable indeed in the eyes of the Enemy, to stand in the gap with
wisdom and resolution:

First, In a fair way to decline and put off what was unjustly required of them
by the Court, acting for the Enemy of God and his people.

Next, When no better could be, they take Arms and stop the Enemies coming unto
them, upon which a Peace is made with them, and their just demands are granted
for the most part, in words at least.

The Articles of Peace are no sooner agreed upon, but resolution is taken by
the Court to break them thus:

First, There is a Plot set afoot to catch at Berwick the chief sticklers for
the Truth. Which Plot, by Gods Providence, is discovered and disappointed.

Then shortly thereafter, at London, the Articles are burned publicly, the
Scots Commissioners put in prison, and (a second expedition) undertaken against
them.

So the Scots Reformers were put to work again by a new undergoing of War,
which they perform as formerly, with wisdom and resolution, and with success,
under Gods blessing: For, having in a very short time settled their own
Country, by subduing those who had then risen and stood out against them, they
come into England to seek out the Enemy, who was bound for their Country; unto
whom they give a repulse, and thereafter they come forward to New Castle, from
whence they send their Commissioners to treat with the King, where all the time
they stayed, they behaved themselves with such temper and moderation, that
their sworn Enemies had nothing to say against their carriage.

The Scots incoming and abode at New Castle, did embolden some of the English
Nobility, chief Gentry, and Magistracy, to petition the King openly and freely
for a Parliament, to redress all the disturbances in the Commonwealth, both
of Church and State.

The King, although he had never intended to have any Parliament (as was clear,
not only by diverse expressions of himself, and of the Court, but also by the
managing of public affairs) is necessitated by reason of the Scots to grant a
Parliament, which he does, and since he could not refuse it, his second thought
is how to make it work for his purpose, which he endeavors by causing to be
chosen diverse Members of the Commons, so far as he was able to do, what by his
own private Orders, what by the Court-dependers, Nobles, and others of credit:
but all will not do; for some of those who were chosen by his procurement are
rejected, others do not answer according to his expectation: Then he plots with
the Army he had gathered against the Scots, and by Papists, to undo the
Parliament; but the Plot, through fear of miscarriage (the Scots being so near)
is discovered, and fails.

After this, the King has his recourse to the Scots themselves, if they would
come forward and destroy the Parliament, they should have the plunder of the
City of London for their pains, with the four next adjacent Counties for their
inheritances, besides store of money.

The Scots are so far from consenting to this base act, that they reject it
with disdain, and give notice of it to the Parliament, with assurance of their
affection and faithfulness.

Upon this, the Scots are cried up to be Parliaments Army, by some, and the
Parliament to be for the Scots.

Then jealousies must be raised against the Scots, That they would never
remove, nor go home. This reproach is raised and spread abroad by the
adversaries of Church and State, and received by the simpler ones, otherwise
well-meaning and well-disposed men.

So the Scots, to take away all kind of suspicion, repair home peaceably.
Then the King must follow them home to try conclusions:

First, He essayeth again if the Scots Army could be corrupted for his design:
But he loses his pains.

Next, He goes on, and being in Scotland, he tries if he can make sure the
chief opposers of the great design, as of some also who had not served him
according to the trust he had given them therein: This Plot also fails.

By this time, the Irish break forth in Rebellion, burning and spoiling the
Country, and slaying the English Protestants there amongst them: The Villains
give out, That they have nothing to say against the Scots their old Friends,
Brethren, and near Neighbors, but against the Adherents to that wicked
Parliament of England, so displeasing to the good King.

This they did, hoping that by these fair words, and not doing harm at first to
the Scots amongst them, to make the Scots be quiet, whom they knew would be
very soon in readiness to fall upon them, if the King and Parliament of
England would allow and desire it.

The Scots make offer of their Service unto the King (while he is amongst them)
for repressing the Rebellion in Ireland: He waves the business, and puts it
off, with that he could do nothing without the Parliament of England; and so he
comes to the Parliament, where till he was constrained, he said little or
nothing of the Rebels; at last, he is made to make a Declaration against them,
and then course must be taken for repressing them. The Scots continue to offer
their assistance; but with shifts, they were put off by the Court, and by some
corrupt men fiding with the Court, for a long time.

At last, the Scots send an Army into Ireland, willing to do their best; but
not being furnished with necessaries for the prosecution of the Service, nor
supplied in their wants, they could not go on so earnestly and with such
heartinesse as they themselves wished: so after diverse of them had starved and
perished for want, some return back to their own Country, yet they leave there
a considerable body under the conduct of Major General Monro, which number had
absolutely starved if it had not been supplied from Scotland, who although it
was not able to provide for that Army in such a proportion as was needful for
a more earnest pursuance of the Service, yet they kept them alive, and
encouraged them to go still on with the Work; and although that Army there has
not done all what was expected of them, yea not so much perchance, as some men
conceive they might have done, yet one thing is acknowledged by all, That this
Army has kept alive the Protestant-businesses in that Kingdom; for without it,
the cessation and compliance with the Rebels had gone on through the whole
Country, unto the prejudice of the Common Cause, and to the damage of these
Kingdoms; for the English Army sent thither, being corrupted and drawn hither
by the King, the Protestant-Indwellers in Ireland had complied, being inclined
to the Court for the most part.

But to return unto England:

The King having left London, resolves to make War against the Parliament, and
being at Windsor he causes to gather together some men, to try what he could
do in the business; but he seeing his few gathered men to be dispersed by the
Country, finds for such an undertaking he must have a help from beyond Seas;
to this effect, he sends the Queen unto Holland: and he finds that he must go
further off from London: So after her departing, he goes to York, where he
sets afoot, and lays all the devises he can to make War against the Parliament.

The Scots hearing of this, presently send Commissioners to deal with him, and
to desire him to leave off the design of making Civil War in England, while
the Protestants were thus massacred in Ireland. He obstinatly rejects their
remonstrance, and sends them back, not suffering them to come any further
according to their order and mind, which was to repair unto the Houses of
Parliament, and to deal with them for the taking away all mistakes betwixt the
King and them.

The King having essayed all he could in Yorkshire to little purpose, at last
comes Southward to Nottingham, where seeing his bad success in his
undertaking, he sends to the Parliament for agreement. The business is
slighted (at least not so earnestly laid hold on as the Scots had done, at far
less ouverture) by some chiefly who since have made known that they had more
their own particular to heart then the public good.

So the King continuing his design of War, with the few men he had then, goes
Westward, where he gets more men, and so with open force carries on the War.

The Winter following, the Scots seeing the pursuance of the service of Ireland
slacked, yea in a kind neglected, and things come to a great hight in England,
with the loss of much blood already, and spoil of a part of the Country,
resolve to send once again unto the King* (then at Oxford) the same
Commissioners that were sent to him at York, with one or two more from the
Church and State. The King being moved for a pass to them, refuses it for a
time; but at last he grants it as they desired, which was to repair freely to
and fro betwixt him and the Parliament as the occasion should require; Upon
which, the Scots Commissioners come to Oxford, and tell their message to the
King, who slighteth them, and uses them coldly and corsely: After their abode
for diverse months, to no purpose, they give notice to those who had sent them,
that they could do no good with the King, not so much as to have liberty to go
unto the Parliament, yea not to converse with the Commissioners from the
Parliament then at Oxford. At last they are sent for to go home.

The King not being willing at that time to give such an open occasion unto the
Scots, as to make them rise then in Arms, sends their Commissiones home with
general and ambiguous words, and tells them that if they would be quiet, he
would ere it were long have reason of the Parliament of England; but if they
should stir, he would be put to it. So they go home, and give account of their
voyage.

The K. perceiving partly by the Commissioners, partly by his spies from the
Country, that since he would not be moved to agree with the Parliament, the
Scots were inclining to side with the Parliament in case of need; so underhand
and secretly he sets a Plot afoot to give them work so at home, that they
should not think of going abroad.

The Commissioners are hardly arrived, but there breaks out an undertaking by
Malignants, in the South part of Scotland, under the favor of the Garrison of
Carlisle, (then in the Enemies hands) and the Papists in the North part of
England: but by Gods blessing the business is quashed, and order is taken for
the securing of the Country from all intestine insurrections and foreign
invasions, withal to be in readiness to help their Friends in England, at a
call.

So the Summer goes on, in which the Kings party prevails so far, that they
master all England (some few places reserved) except the associated Counties
about London, and these in a very tottering condition, with a great dejection
of spirit.

Upon this exigence, the major part of the Houses of Parliament thinks it fit
time to desire the aid of the Scots; they in all appearence being the only men
they could call to for help:

First, By reason of their common interest in the Cause of Religion and Liberty
with the people of England.

Next, In respect of their neernesse and Neighborhood.

Thirdly, In respect of their bound duty to requite (according to power) the
favors their Fathers formerly, and they themselves lately, had received from
the good people of England in their own troubles.

Diverse in both Houses were against the sending to the Scots, chosing rather to
undergo the extremity, then to be beholding to their Friends.

After diverse debates and delays, at last, it is resolved upon to send
Commissioners into Scotland. None of the Peers could be persuaded to go.

The Commons send their Commissioners (Members of their House) with power from
the Peers to transact and agree for both Houses with the Scots, by whom they
are welcomed with heartinesse, as they had been for a long time expected with
devotion.

They come to treat; and in a word, The Scots tell the English Commissioners,
That since they desire their aid and help, in opposing the Common Enemy in this
Common Cause of Religion, the subversion and change whereof is mainly intended
by the Enemy* all other things being but subservient to this design, as the
Houses of Parliament did well and wisely declare in that Declaration they set
forth when they were to take Arms for the Cause; it were very fit that there
should be a solemn Oath and Covenant drawn up and taken by both Nations, to be
steadfast to the Cause of Religion, and settle it against all heresies and
errors, tyranny and confusion.

And so much the rather did the Scots move this, that they had been told by the
King ofter then once, and by diverse of high rank, yea all the papers written by
the Court against the Parliament, did tell over and over again, that the
Parliament did not intend a settled Reformation in the Church, notwithstanding
that they had called a Synod.

The English Commissioners did reply unto the Scots, That they could not but
acknowledge that the thing was fit to be done; yet they had not the power to do
it by their Commission. Upon this, the English Commissioners send hither to the
Parliam. for that purpose.

As some of the said Commissioners did say this in simpleness and sincerity of
heart, Others did what they could to delay and wave the Covenant* if it were
possible; for they had no liking to it, as we have seen since; yet it was no
time to reject the Scots so just desire.

So the Scots send Commissioners to the Parliament, who together with some
deputed from the Parliament, draw up the Covenant, and it is solemnly taken.

One of those who went unto Scotland from the Synod, followed thither the Scots
Commissioners, and did what he could to obstruct the drawing up of the
Covenant, and to wave the taking of it; yet he was constrained to take it, with
others of that mind, for it was then not season to appear otherwise.

The Covenant is no sooner taken, but the Court changes its language of the
Parliaments intending nothing but Schisms and Sects, and tells us, That
hereafter the King will have a care of tender consciences; which was, since he
could not hinder the making and taking of the Covenant by both Kingdoms, at
least he will do his best to hinder diverse particular men from taking it, and
from studying to keep it, as that which is the most contrary to his design.

The Scots Commissioners send the Covenant into Scotland, where it is generally
taken; and thereafter according to agreement, the Scots come into England for
the help of their Brethren; but it was the deep of the Winter, to wit January,
before they could be ready: So in frost and snow, they come as far as Tyne,
finding but small opposition by men to that place; their main enemies were evil
weather and want; being come to Tyne, they find an Enemy with a Body of Horse
and Foot exceeding them in number, namely in Horse, Master of all behind him to
Trente, except Hull, and of all the Country about, and strong holds.

After diverse encounters and skirmishes, the Scots pass the River in spite of
the Enemy, whom they make retire before them, and also keep together, and weary
him so with hot Service and constant alarms, that diverse of his men fell sick
with toiling and lying without in so hard a season. At one encounter near
Durham, they made 7 or 8 hundred fall to the ground of the Enemy his men. Then
they take Hartlepoole and other places upon the Sea, from whence they had all
their provisions from Scotland, for a good while, till at last some are sent to
them from the South, namely, from the City. As they were thus pressing the
Enemy, Sir Thomas Fairfax issues out from Hull, (whereinto he had retired
himself for a while, being constrained to leave the Field) assisted by Sir John
Meldrum, and falls upon Selby, which he takes with valor and success. Upon the
news hereof, the Enemy runs to York; the Scots follow upon the heels, and take
some of his men and baggage. Presently the Lord Fairfax his Forces (having
come after his Son upon this success) and the Scots Forces, join together near
York: The Enemy fearing to be enclosed, sends a party of his Horse Southward,
which is followed by a joint party of the Scots and Fairfax his men as far as
Trente; then the followers return, and resolution is taken to besiege York; but
the Scots having left some of their men in diverse places that they had reduced,
had not men enough to besiege the City, and keep the Fields in the Enemies
Country, notwithstanding the addition of Fairfax his Forces: Wherefore they
wrote to the Earl of Manchester to come and help with his Forces, which he did
willingly with all speed he could. Then some there were who were against the
joining of Manchester and his Forces with the Scots and Fairfax, as there had
been lately some who would have them to go home at the taking in of Selby, and
as some had been against their incoming, and thereafter some were employed
before York to sow the seed of dissension betwixt the joined Generals with
their Forces, and as some likewise were railing at the Scots, while they were
daily encountering and skirmishing with the Enemy. After this another sort of
men began to show themselves unto the world, seeing that by the help of the
Scots they were made able to appear again, who for their miscarriage of things
durst not show themselves, and finding in themselves that they began to stand
upon their own legs, they feel the pulse of the Scots to try if they were
pliable to their fantasies and opinions, and perceiving the Scots constant to
their principles, and firm unto their Covenant, begin to care less for those
who had raised them from the dust; yea, they begin to oppose the Scots; and, to
make the relation short, the Battle of York is fought and the Town taken.

In all such actions those new factious men, to indear themselves unto the
simple people, by their Emissaries, spread abroad that they did all; but God
knows they had little share in things.

After the business of York, Manchester returns into the associated Counties;
Fairfax stays in Yorkshire; and the Scots return toward New Castle, where
they find a new supply of six thousand men under the command of the Earl of
Calendar, to repress the Enemy, who had been for a while domineering
thereabouts in that Country, while the Scots Army was engaged at York; who
having drawn near, make their approaches, and lay a formal Siege about the
Town, which after some months pain, they take by storm, having tried all means
possible to keep things from extremity, but it could not be; yet their
moderation was such after they had taken the said Town, that it was admired by
their Enemies.

While the Scots were thus busied about the Siege of New Castle, they were ill
spoken of by those new factious men, who expressed tokens of sadness when they
heard it was taken.

Then the Scots clear all the four Northern Counties except Carlisle, (which of
late they reduced by composition) and so the Winter coming on, they kept in
their Winter Quarters.

As the Scots (making the quarrel their own) did send their Army to fight in
the Field, to help their Friends and Brethren by action; so they send
Commissioners both from Church and State, to help with their counsel the
carrying on of things in Church and State.

When the Commissioners come hither, they promise unto themselves to find
nothing ado, but to go on with the Work unanimously, for the good of Church and
State, against the Common Enemy. But since, they have found themselves hugely
mistaken; for, where they thought to have most opposition, they have found
least; and where they did look for none, there have they found most.

First, Some factious men in the Synod have stopped the conclusion of things
there; it is without example, that so few men being convinced with Scripture,
reason, antiquity, and the example of the best reformed Churches so, that they
have nothing to reply, yet in stu^^urnesse they will not give over to disturb.
It is found true in those men which is remarked, That the more mildly the
adversaries of Peace and Truth be dealt withal, the worse they are.

Then, in the Counsel of State, the Scots have a long time been crossed in a
high measure, by those who were against their incoming; and thereafter still
have been opposed by these men, and their participants, who are advers to the
settling of the Church.

The former did oppose the Scots, namely because they were not to approve their
ways in the managing the affairs of State, and thereafter perhaps in the
Church Government.

The second, Because the Scots cannot give way to their phancies and faction in
Church-businesse, and consequently in the State; but stand constantly to their
principles, and firm to the Covenant, not regarding to either the one or the
other, with temper and moderation to give offense to no body, if it were
possible unto them.

The Spring drawing on, the Scots press to have necessaries for the Field.
After much delays, things go to them in New Castle, but in a very small
proportion. Howsoever, they are no sooner ready, but they dispose themselves
for marching: till then, they were not idle, but they were busied up and down
to the settling the Northern Counties, and they did send parties to and fro unto
their Friends; namely unto Sir William Brereton they sent a party of Horse by
David Lesley, who then made the Kings Forces turn back, which at that time did
intent to go through Lancashire for Scotland.

Thereafter, as the Scots Army was moving and about to march Southward, they
have advice given them, that the King being then toward Westchester, was bound
once more for Scotland; to stop which, the Army went with great difficulties
and did so put themselves in his way, who made him change his resolution, and
(...) returned Southward again.

And at that time the Scots supplied their Friends which lay then before
Carlisle, who were there altogether unprovided. Thereafter they return
Southward; and although by agreement they were not to pass Trente, yet in
compliance to importunities, they past and went Westward toward Worcester, and
cleared the Fields there so of the Enemy, that he durst not appear before them.

Next, Against their own Maxim, which is to clear the Field and wait upon the
Enemies motion, that they may always be in readiness to hinder his courses
and pursue him; to stop the clamours of some raised against them, they lay down
before Hereford, which if they had been supplied with necessaries at first,
they had doubtless taken; and when they had the things required for the
Service in some measure, the great rains hindered them to perform what they
earnestly intended, and whereunto they were prepared. As they were thus engaged
about Hereford, the King with all his Horse, having made a great circuit, goes
Northward, where; by diverse promises made unto him, he did hope to do great
things for his design.

The Scots send their whole body of Horse (some few excepted) by David Lesley,
who by his diligence and activity, gets North before the King, and sends him
back Southward once more, and so breaks that design.

At this nick of time, comes the news to David Lesley, being then near Trente,
upon his return South in pursuance of the Kings party, and he is desired to go
into Scotland without delay, and help his own Country in distress, by an
overthrow that the Enemy had given there to the Forces of the Country. He
thinks to go only with a party into Scotland himself, and send back the rest
to the Army before Hereford: but the whole Company hearing of the straigth of
their native Country, would needs go with him. Of this he gives notice to the
Committee of both Kingdoms and to the Army before Hereford, and so goes into
Scotland.

The Army before Hereford having design to end the Work they were there for,
and seeing the Enemy his marching unto them, upon David Lesley his going into
Scotland, send unto their Friends at London for a help of some Horse to be near
by them (as in Gloucestershire) in case of need, they not having Horse enough
to encounter the Enemy, and to serve the Army to bring in the provision, which
they were constrained to do with strong hold in the Enemies Country, having
ever since their march Southward struggled with great difficulties for
necessary provisions, yea for diverse days they have been without bread. But
they could obtain no Horse, howsoever some were very willing to grant their
just desire.

Things being thus, it is put to a Counsel of War whither they should storm
the Town, or no; some that were most forward, gave their voice for the storm;
others voiced, It was fit to save the Army whole, considering how the posture
of affairs was then at home; and since some of their Friends for whom they had
undergone so much, were backward to assist them in their great extremity, they
thought it the safest course to raise the Siege, and return Northward to help
their Country; and so the plurality of voices carried it, and Northward they
went.

As the Scots were upon their march in Yorkshire, news comes to them that
David Lesley had given a great overthrow to the Enemy in Scotland; yet they
went: after this, they are desired by the Parliament to come back and besiege
Newark, and not to stay there in the North Country, for fear of burdening that
Country, so much already wasted, as was given out.

The Parliaments desire is not answered so hastily as was expected, which has
given occasion to some to irritate and do what lies in them to make ill blood,
and not to stay for an answer, nor receive any reasonable one without real
performance of what was required, whereunto the Scots are most willing; but by
reason they have so few Horse with them, they conceive it is not safe to
venture their Foot when the Enemies Forces are only in Horse: and chiefly,
because they knew that the Enemy was to send a considerable party into
Scotland, hoping to make a great faction there by the help of his Friends by
the way, and so join with the Enemy there; and the Malignants in the North of
England were to rise with the open Enemy.

And so it proved indeed; for the Enemy sends from Newark a great party of
Horse, commanded by Langdale and Digby: They were meet withal by the
Yorkshire Forces, commanded by Poyntz and Rossiter, who dealt so roughly with
them, that they were routed, diverse killed, and many taken, with a great part
of their baggage; yet they rally again, and go on in their journey to invade
Scotland: Before they were at the borders, they were a thousand strong.
General Lesley having notice of their design, sends a party under the command
of Vandruske, with express order to fight with the Enemy wheresoever he found
him. Vandruske follows so actively the Enemy, that he thinks to get into
Scotland before him, and send him back again; but he misseth him: and the Enemy
going another way, enters into Scotland, where there were diverse parties
ordered to wait for him, and fight with him; one from David Lesl^^ was sent;
another of the Earl of Balclough; the third, and the least of all, not
exceeding three hundred Horse, under the command of Sir John Brown, who seeing
the Enemy in Scotland, could not have patience till his Friends joined with
him; but by an hardy attempt with his three hundred men, falls upon the Enemy,
who was a thousand strong, (as we have said before) routs him, kills him a
hundred of his men upon the place, takes two hundred of them with bag and
baggage, diverse were drowned. All this did Sir John Brown with the loss of
about thirty or forty men; then he pursued the Enemy, seeking him up and down,
and at last upon the third day after the fight, he assisted with his Friends,
meets with the remainder of the routed Enemy, then about five hundred strong,
where he took all with little shedding of blood, only some few who were
extraordinarily well horsed did escape, among whom were Digby and Langdale,
wi^h these good Patriotes and good Christians the Earls of Nidsdale Maxwell,
and Carnewath-Daz^l.

When by treachery at diverse encounters, the Enemy did prevail against the
Forces of the good party in Scotland, some of the superficial Brethren about
Westminster Hall, jearing and gibing, could say, That the Scots could not and
durst not fight in their own Country: which at this time they find untrue; for
the Scots have shown since that they both can and dare fight, not only one to
one, but one against two, (contrary to the Proverb Ne Hercules contra duos) yea
one against three. Let the glory be to God, who is pleased to own his own
Cause, and honor despiseable men to be instruments in this his Work, to the
confusion and shame of the Haughty.

The Enemy had so laid down this Plot of invading Scotland, that he promised
unto himself (without fear) an issue according to his mind; for he thought
having once entered in Scotland, by the Papists, Atheists, and Libertins, (for
Sectaries there are none) to make up in the lower Country a great party; and
so joining with the Enemy now afoot in the hills (who is gathering what he can,
and has already betwixt three and four thousand men, although divided amongst
themselves, as we are informed) he did think no less then in a very short time
to subdue all Scotland, and presently thereafter, to come into England.

Those who have read the intercepted Letters, can tell much stuff to this
purpose; but he that compteth without his host compteth twice.

The rumor of this design was so great in Scotland, that the good party
thought fit to draw a good part of their Horse Southward, and to make sure the
chief and most commodious passages to hinder the conjunctions of the intestine
Enemy, and the invaders; so David Lesley lay with one party at Glasgo upon
Clyde, and Middleton with another at Alloway near Sterlin upon Forth.

Yea to see this enterprise repressed is the chief reason why the Scots Army in
the North of England, did not come so soon Southward to Newark as was desired:
which just and lawful delay of the Scots for a time, by factious and malicious
men, although they knew very well the reasons and the cause thereof, is
published as a denial; and so it has been believed by the simpler sort, and
laid hold on as argent contant present count; it is not enough for the
malicious and factious ones; not considering that the good party in Scotland
has made the Parliaments quarrel its own, in joining with it in Covenant for
the pursuance of the Cause it took Arms from the very first beginning, that is,
for the Truth of Religion, all things whatsoever, yea Liberty and Privilege
being subservient unto it, as it is expressed, first, in general terms in the
Declaration at the giving the Commission to the Earl of Essex; then, more
particularly in the Covenant.

This shows the forgetfulness of him who in a solemn Assembly, was so
unmindfull of the Truth as to aver that Religion was not the ground of the
quarrel betwixt us and the Common Enemy at the first, abusing the simpler
ones, and making use of the connivence of others; yea, he was put at work by
some to say so, at least, he was applauded by them, as the story runs.

This quarrel here in England has cost the Scots a great deal of pains:

First, In the Counsel both of Church and State.

Then, In the Fields, with the loss of many a gallant and brave man, which
they think all well spent and bestowed, since God has been pleased to make use
of their endeavors, to put forward in some measure his good Work in both
Church and State, and to repress the domineering of the Common Enemy, who ever
since the conjunction of the Scots with the State of England, has been
declining (if the thing be well considered with judgment) although now and
then he has had some lucida intervalla, as we have all seen.

As the Scots think their pains, labors, expenses, charges, etc. well
bestowed, so they complain not of the manifold reproaches and lies that have
been said and spread against them, what by the open Enemy, what by the false
Friends, nor of the hardship their Army has endured to this day in the Field,
no more then of the small content of their Commissioners in the Counsel, which
all they pass and lay aside, not as insensible and leprous men who have no
feeling, for in any other thing they are touchy enough; but as being resolved
to do all what they can, and suffer what they are able, for the Cause of God
and of his people, with grief of mind to see those whom at first they conceived
certainly to be right and round in this business, to have corners and by-ways
wherein they must acknowledge the shortness of their own judgment and
confess the infirmity of man: But their great grief is, (at least should be)
that their Army has not been timely nor duly furnished with conveniences and
necessaries, to make it go on with action in the Field; yea to see them kept
back from doing as if it were plotted of purpose: Then, that their counsels in
Church and State have not only not prevailed, but have been hid, yea opposed,
and so hindered to yield their due fruit unto the Cause in hand as they
intended. Besides all these things, in joining with the Parliament in action
and Counsel, and coming in when it was below a stand, they have not only
exposed themselves and their poor native Country to all kind of perils and
inconveniency, but have drawn evil upon it.

More, They have gone in the highest degree of contradiction to the King; for
they have not only in downright terms declared themselves opposite to his
design, but have quite spoiled it; which as he told them, he would easily
compass in this Kingdom, if they would be quiet: and indeed he had brought his
business to a pretty pass, before the Scots came in. Then their coming in
into England, and their going before into Ireland, did empty their native
Country much of men of Counsel and action. So for England they left their own
Country as if it were to be a prey unto the Malignants there, who since, not
being kept under by the good party by reason of its weakness, show themselves
to be in great number.

Next, The indifferent and neutrals, whereof there be but too many everywhere,
most men looking more to their convenience here upon Earth, then to the Glory
of God, or to his Kingdom; who had sided formerly with the good party, bearing
the sway; but since seeing them absent for the most part, helping their
Friends, and weakest at home, begin to have other thoughts, and fall in with
the Malignants.

All this being perceived by the King, who has his thoughts full of revenge
against the Covenanted Scots with England, bethinks himself of all means
possible to oppress and destroy that poor Country of Scotland, and, in the
first place, the Danes are invited to invade it, unto whom are promised the
Isles of Orkades for their pains, (their old pretension;) But as the Danes were
preparing to come hither, God sends them another work to do at home, which was
to defend themselves from their invaders, to wit, the Swedish; with whom after
a great struggling by Sea and by Land, they have been constrained to make their
peace almost upon any terms: Yet we hear they are now making again themselves
ready for War, and against us (as we are informed) to try perhaps if they can
make up their losses in some measure (in one way or other) upon us.

Again, The King seeing the Scots siding with the Parliam. of England, sets
afoot Plot upon Plot in the South part of Scotland: but by Gods blessing they
all fail, being no sooner discovered but repressed, and thrown in the dust.

More, By Pirates and men of War having Commission from the King, the Scots
Ships with goods and men are taken, yea diverse men are thrown overboord: Their
only quarrel is the conjunction of the Scots with the Parliament of England
in the Service of this Common Cause.

The losses the Scots have suffered by Sea since their sideing with the
Parliament, do exceed far the monthly allowance agreed upon for their Army,
although it were well and fully paid; which they are far short of; for since
these eight months, they have had but one months pay to wit, about Thirty
thousand pounds, and these from the City of London.

Last of all, The King bethinks himself, (since he is pleased to own all the
undertakings of the Juncto, although he be not always one of the number, it
taking its authority from the Pope and the Roman-Catholike Princes abroad more
then from him, although he has the name of all;) to send over out of Ireland
some of those desperate Villains, who at their first rising in Rebellion in
Ireland, did offer all kindness unto the Scots, saying that they would not
stir against them; who take a fit opportunity of the good party of the Scots
being absent out of their Country for the most part, and they enter into
Scotland by the Isles and the Hills, finding a party of Malignants, some
whereof and the chief Traitors had been sent from the Court to manage the
business, who not only privately do favor and openly do side with them, but
make a number of disguised Villains betray the trust they had from the
Country, in places of power and command, yea some in the time of action in the
Field, either slakly acting against the Enemy, or flying from before him, or
running over to him, at diverse places and times.

So the Enemy increases his party in Scotland, spoileth and destroys diverse
places of the Country, namely the Lands of those who were most deeply engaged
with England, (above all the high Lands of the Marquess of Argyle) which they
have totally depopulated and burnt, as the Lands of his Friends; some other
parts they have so depauperate and wasted, that in one County they have put
many scores of good Families to mere mendicity What did most then grieve good
men, was to see not only the good Work of Reformation at a stand and not
likely to go on, as they looked to it with carnal eyes; but also the former
abominations set up again, and also to see the poor well-meaning people (for
fear) abandoning the Truth, and imputing unto the profession thereof the cause
of their sufferings, as many men do when they suffer for the Gospel.

Now albeit the losses be great and excessive which the Scots have had by Sea,
in regard to the extent of their Country; yet their losses and damages by Land
are a hundred times greater and more.

Further, God suffered the wicked Enemy, by the miscarriage of the chief
Leaders and Directors of businesses, to give a great overthrow to the good
party of Scotland, at which, as the good party was much dejected, the Enemy in
his pride was highly puffed up, and he thought to carry all things before him,
mastering all; but in a short time, it pleased God to abate his pride by a
great Victory against him, God making use of David Lesley for that Service.

More, As Digby and his associates going to the wicked Enemy in Scotland had
first a good blow in his way thither, and then was totally defeated at the
second time, when he thought himself, as it was, at his joining with the Enemy
in Scotland: So doubtless, under Gods Mercy, ere it be long we shall hear,
that the wicked Enemy there, having had already this great blow, will have next
his fatal and total destruction.

Here let it be noted, that among the papers taken from the Enemy, when he had
this great blow given him by David Lesley, there were found instructions for
the holding of a Parliament, wherein all things settled in Church and State
since the year 1639, were to be changed and altered, the Covenant broken with
the English Rebels, so were they pleased to call all those who stand for the
Parliament; those who had been active for the Covenant, to be furnished and
deprived of a^l benefit and privilege of a Patriote or native, according to
their several ranks and stations.

All the sufferings and undergoings of the Scots for their joining with the
Parliam* are so far neglected, that not only in their distress they are not
helped nor assisted, as generosity had required, after so much undergone for
Friends at home and abroad, making other men's quarrel their own, and drawing
evil upon themselves for their sake; but diverse who have received benefit in a
high measure by their joining and incoming, have been glad heartily at their
sufferings, expressing now and then, It was well they were beaten; and when
they were droven to the greatest pinch of necessity, what by the prevailing
Enemy, what by the fault of their Leaders, which lies heavily upon some; at
last, having kept off to trouble or disquiet their Friends, going constantly on
with the Work so far as they were enabled, and could do: they required some
help of Arms, and of Money due unto them; but what comfort they received more
then a solemn Fast, and private condolance of some Friends, let them tell if
they can: Yea when they were thus low, then they were most neglected and
vilipended by some; Was it not said by some of your prudentiall men, That the
Scots would undo both themselves and this Kingdom? yet their wisdom and valor,
blessed with success in their own affairs, were not questioned before they
were joined with England in the business, and if they had not come in, England
was undone, at least a good part thereof.

Was is not said, That they had buried their honor at Hereford? Yet they have
shown since that they had both heart and hand to gain and to maintain honor.

Was it not told openly, That they should be sent home, as being troublesome to
the Country: and if they would not go with good will, they must be killed by
half-dozens?

Are not their Garrisons, and Places of retreat, (so long as they are in the
Service of the Public) which they have reduced and brought into obedience with
a great deal of pain, loss, and hazard, demanded from them, and spoken to be
put in the hands of those who are not thought to be faithful to the Cause we
have all fought for to this day?

If this smell of piety and generosity, let God and all the World judge.

Here I forbear to give answer to this; only I say, It is done, and let it
undergo the censure of understanding and indifferent men, without exception:
only we shall see how this stands with the Public Service, and with the
Treaty, to deal so with Brethren and Friends, who have put their breast betwixt
their Brethren and the stroke of the Enemy, and who did stand first in the gap
against the Enemies Plot, to teach their Brethren to be upon their guard, and
timely prevent the Enemies assault; yea, who (under God) have put their
Brethren in posture of defense, by occasioning the Assembly of Parliament, and
in protecting it by their stay here for a time, lastly, by rescuing it (as it
were) from the jaws of Death, and from the brink of perdition. Now, by
neglecting, vilifying, crossing, and opposing, to dishearten Brethren who have
been and are to this day, so useful unto the Service of the Common Cause,
cannot be but much prejudicial to the happy end intended by us all, to wit,
the settling of a true Reformation in Church and State.

If the Scots went not upon higher principles then those of human interest, of
phanaticall opinions, of self-conceit, and the like, this usage of such
Brethren could not but produce so bad effects as the hinderance of the end
intended, with the loss of all whatsoever has been done, employed, and
undergone thereabouts, and the destruction of both Nations at last. But blessed
be God who has given them wisdom and longanimity not to be so disturbed with
the forenamed occasions of miscontent, as either to be weary of the Work, or to
leave it off. And to uphold them therein, God yields the Scots the good will
and assistance of diverse well-affected men, maugre all malice and malignity,
with the earnest desires and wishes of the people for compassing the first
purposed and pursued end, which is (in few words) the Glory of God, and the
safety of his people.

Now let us see how this carriage toward the Scots stands with the Treaty and
Covenant made with them at their incoming:

Are not the Brethren of England with their Ships bound by the Treaty, to guard
the Coasts of Scotland by Sea, to save it from foreign invasion, and to secure
the Scots in their trading by Sea? But how slakely this duty has been
performed, the great losses and woeful sufferings of that poor Country can now
tell; of which inconveniences and evils they had been free, at least to this
present, if they had not joined with their Friends in England.

I know it will be said, When the Enemy had done with England, his design was
with all his power to go into Scotland.

But human reason tells you, That it is wisdom to put off an evil, if we can,
for a time; for he that has time has life, as it is commonly said; and the
mean while, God will provide some means or other to return the evil from his
people.

And so human Policy would have taught the Scots to look to themselves, and be
quiet: but their zeal to the Cause of God could not suffer them, and for it
they have undergone all this hardship, who can and will deliver them in his
appointed time. And if those for whom they undergo this Service, do not requite
faithfully their kindness, God will by some means or others not forget, but
recompense them according to the sincerity of their intentions: But if any of
the Scots (as I doubt not but there be some) who had or have some by-ends in
this Work, God will punish them for it, and show their vanity for mixing their
own interest with his Service, who requires the whole of man, which is so known
to the Enemy of God and of his people, that he cares not what good a man do,
providing he can nourish in him any little evil, being sure to catch him at
last, if he do continue in it.

Then the Brethren of England are bound not only by reason, to make the Scots
no worse then they have found them, that is, then they were before their late
conjunction; for it stands against the Laws of all human Society and
partnership, that one party being preserved from total ruin, and reaping a
seen benefit by the Society through the hazard and great losses of the other
party, not to make the party at least in the same condition he was before the
Society: far more is it against Justice, to see the party undone and perish for
us; above all, if we can afford him help or comfort; least of all, to rejoice
and make our own advantages of his losses, who has lost himself for us.

If the thing be so among particular Societies of men* Why not so betwixt State
and State, who are nothing else but a Congregation of lesser Societies? And if
Justice is to be done by the lesser, Why is not the greater far more tied to
it? For the most part, particular men are either punished, or cried out upon,
as cheaters, if they cozen or deceive their fellows. And shall States escape
free not only from censure, but be thought wise and prudent men, for their
deceits? And shall circumvening in public affairs be not only not thought
evil, but esteemed as a virtue?

Hence cunning deceitful man is called Politic, and deceit is called Policy.
To such hight of wickedness are we now come, that vice must go under the name
of virtue; for Policy is the honest, just, and prudent carriage of public
affairs, and not deceit and guile in them.

If it were only to give sin a term lessening the shame of the crime, it were
to be born withal; as for example, to call stealing, robbing, and spoiling,
plundering, as now adays we do. But to call vice virtue is intolerable.

Next, We may see if this stands with the Treaty by this sole instance, which
is here inserted as it is in the first article:

And in case that notwithstanding the monthly sum of Thirty thousand pounds
paid as aforesaid, the States of Scotland shall have just cause to demand
further satisfaction of their Brethren of England, when the Peace of both
Kingdoms is settled, for their pains, hazards, and charges they have undergone,
they shall have due recompense made unto them by the Kingdom of England.

Now if the Scots, for their pains, hazards, and charges, be not paid of their
monthly allowance, How is the Treaty observed? But the necessity of the times
may excuse, (if there be not a full payment) when there is willingness to
perform if there were capacity: But to give reproaches and injuries with
threatening and to send men home with shame and without satisfaction, who have
done and undergone so much for thy good and to save thee from perdition, is
doubtless far from gratitude.

I pray thee, What is it, and how far is it from recompense* Not to allow men
to run home and quench the fire in their own house, left having devoured the
one, it should destroy the other? which it would do, if it were not quenched in
time: Yea, so long as the fire was but burning in one end of the house (in
respect of the engagement) it was in a manner little regarded: but when it came
to shake the very foundations of the building, and deface it quite, then it was
full time to look to it: And yet it cannot be approved by some, because
forsooth There was not a formal warning given as in decency was fit: yet it
was done with such order as could be expected upon such a nick of time.

But here it may be said, What needs all this to speak of the Treaty? Has ever
been any Treaty made betwixt two Nations or States, but each have made their
best advantage of it? and ordinarily the Southern Nation has been too cunning
for the Northern; as may be seen in all the Treaties betwixt Spain and France,
Spain has outcunning'd France; and so in the Treaties betwixt France and
England, France has overreached England; and so of such others, for the most
part. But as the Southern Nation has overreached the Northern by slight and
cunning, so the Northern oftentimes has surpast by Field-action the other.

The reason of this is from the constitution of the body in the Northern
people, (vile domineerers) whereby they are inclined to do things rather by a
strong hand then otherwise. In the Southern people, melancholy reigns,
whereby they are inclined unto devises to compass things with less force and
hazard; for where there is most wisdom, there is least hazard. The more North
or South that a people be, the more or less they have the one of the other.

But since the Treaty betwixt the Parliament of England and the State of
Scotland runs upon other principles, to wit, of Religion, this human
overreaching, cunning, or surprising, is not and ought not to have any place;
but all is to be guided by conscience according to equity before God, and as
wear sworn to in our Covenant.

Wherefore, now, let us see how this agrees with the Covenant, whereby we are
all solemnly sworn to promote and advance the settling of a through Reformation
in the Church, according to the Word of God, and the example of the best
Reformed Neighbor Churches; and if these reproaches, injuries, and hard usage
of the Scots, who have contribute so much to bring this Kingdom to such a
posture, do not proroge the compassing the same end, let God and the World
judge.

And then, Are not these things flatly against the third article of the
Covenant, whereby we are all sworn to defend one another in this Common Cause?
which how do we perform, when we deny assistance to our Brethren in distress,
and will not allow them to help their own selves, yea we rejoice at our
Brethrens sufferings?

Are we not bound also by the fourth article, not only to stop and remove any
thing which may or might give any ways occasion of mistake, and consequently
of division betwixt the two Nations? Yea we are sworn to discover those who
endeavor any such action: and so according to Oath, I here declare, That it is
those incendiaries, and factious ones, who contrary the ends expressed in the
Covenant, fancy to set up their evil opinions, and invent all means they can
to hinder the settling of Government in the Church, and consequently (as appears
by all symptoms) to bring Anarchie in the State, promising to set down a
Seraphin-Modell of a Church, which they after so long forbearance will not nor
cannot agree among themselves to set down; only they are resolved to stop the
settling of the Church Government, (according as aforesaid) to the end that all
heresy, error, license, libertinisme, and corruption, may creep in the House
of God: this is their main drift, after their own interest.

Then, Is not the dealing of these factious men with the Scots against the
fifth article of the Covenant, wherein we are all sworn not only to keep a
good correspondency betwixt the two Nations; but also to keep a fair Union for
ever?

Here these factious men will say, That the Scots deserve to be thus dealt
withal, for not doing more Service then they have done this Summer, and not
following the desire of the Parliament.

To which is answered,

First, Let it be seen what the Scots have done; and if that which they have
done, be not as much important to the Common Cause as any thing done elsewhere
by any.

Then, If they have not done more, let it be seen where the fault lies,
whether in them that would not do, or in others who have stopped them from
doing, by hindering them to be furnished and provided for further action.

More, Let it be seen whether or no it were not out of good reason, and not by
chance, that they have not instantly followed the course they were desired to
do; and whether or no it had been better for the Service of the Common Cause to
have so far complied with the designs pressed by those who either would not or
did not see and foresee what is most advantageous for the Common Cause; or
whether or no there was a set Plot to undo the Scots Army.

Then, The Scots are accused To lie heavily upon the Countries where they come,
and that they have done many things against the Liberty and Right of the
Subject of England.

I answer, As for their burdening or wronging the Subject in the least kind,
it is not their intention, being come in into England for the relief and
righting of the Subject from the oppression and injury of the Common Enemy: and
if any Soldiers or Officers of theirs have exceeded in any kind, upon just
trial of their faults, they are to suffer and to be punished for it; besides,
all things taken by wrong, are to be restored, and reparation is to be made to
the full by the judgment of honest and understanding men, upon the place, to
the end that all mistakes may be taken away, and the Union kept betwixt the two
Nations, in spite of faction and malice against upright men.

Further, Let it be known, how the Scots are paid, and how they offer to repay
ten for one for any thing taken by extortion, if they could have the half pay
that others have employed in the same Service.

For this, the Scots have frequently solicited.

If the Committees of Yorkshire (set a work by some secret Enemy) had not gone
so high, and published at every Parish Church their orders against the Scots,
as the Prelates did in former times with their bloody thunderbolts of
excommunication; and if they had remembered in whose hands the Liberties and
Rights were, when the Scots came in to help, or where their Committees were
then sitting, and how far their orders had been obeyed then; they might have
thought whether or no they had ever had a Parliament given to authorize them,
if it had not been for the Scots; and the Parliament being assembled, whether
or no sitting this day.

Till these factious men did rise, (who besturre themselves so much now of
late) it was said ordinarily for any Reformation obtained either in Church or
State, and for stopping any evil to the Public, or to any private men, Gara
mercy good Scot.

As this is now forgotten by diverse private men to their shame and discredit,
so these factious men would have it to be out of memory by the Public: but
they strive in vain; for, neither Parliament nor People, Synod nor Church will
ever, nor can forget what they owe to the Scots for the good they enjoy at this
present, and hope to enjoy hereafter, in Gods Mercy.

Then, It is reproached to the Scots (to their great grief,) That they pursue
too rigidly the settling of the Church, which may be done at leisure when other
things are ended, and must be performed with ripe consideration, for fear of
mistake.

And, That they press too much for Peace, when it is apparent none can be made
but by the overthrow of the malignant party.

As also, That they stand so much for Royalty, when God knows the King
deserves but little at their hands, they being the men he has the greatest
splen against, and whom he ha^es most, as he declares himself by all his
expressions.

To all this they answer,

First, That they are obliged in the first place to see the House of the Lord
settled, and then to look to temporal things: for this they have not only Law
and reason, to begin at God; but also, example, First, out of the sacred
History, where we see that all true Reformers of the State of Israel and Judah
did begin at the Reformation of the House of God: Then we see the same in the
Ecclesiastical History practiced by the Ancients: And of late, Has not the
same been done in our Neighbour-Countreys, yea in our own, by our Fathers? And
is it not full time, after so long and so tedious a debate, since it is agreed
upon, how, and what it should be, by the full consent of Divines assembled for
that purpose, except of some few of a private spirit for self-conceit and
by-interest, who having nothing to answer unto the demonstration of the Truth
and the reasons for it, made known unto them, yet with obstinacy do oppose the
settling of the Church; and so way is given (if not countenance) to all kind of
heresy, error, and blasphemy against God, so generally and so long a time,
now these five years, since the Reformation is in hand?

As for the pressing of Peace by the Scots, Is it not full time, after so much
blood shed, devastation of the Countries, and such a deal of all kind of
wickedness committed in the War, to seek after a firm Peace, and lay hold upon
any occasion to help us to it? First, Because it is the end we make War for,
not having intention to make a Trade of it. Then, If we beg for Peace at God,
Why should we not seek earnestly after it from man, by all honest means?
Otherwise, God will not grant our demands, and will tell us that we are but
hypocrites, having a thing in our lips when our hearts are far from it.

As for standing for the King, It is true, we stand for him, and respect him,
as we do on the other part stand for the Parliament the great Counsel of the
Land, as those whom God has been pleased to set over us, not fondly and
feignedly idolizing and worshipping them as gods on Earth impeccable, one day,
(as Parasites and Sycophants do) and another day vilifying and rejecting them,
when our turn is not served by them: but sincerly, and with reason; for as we
avouch him to be our Sovereign Magistrate, so we acknowledge him and all those
of the Counsel to be but infirm and weak men, him misled and miscarried for the
most part by those who are about him, deceiving him to his own and the peoples
ruin; and them also subject to mistake and error: So as we pray God for him
to save and protect him from doing evil, and from receiving evil; we freely
admonish him both from Church and State of his errors and faults both before
God and man: This we do both in private and public, as the cause requires or
occasion will permit; and when necessity drives us to it, we take Arms to
oppose the evil courses he is ensnared in, and repress them, always with
respect to his Office and Person, which we acknowledge to be lawful, and him
lawful possessor thereof, and no further we go then to stop him from doing
evil, if we cannot gain him to do good.

Then for faults, although they be great, we must not change till we see that
we can do better. We have abolished the Prelacy, not so much for the abuses
thereof as for the unlawfulness of it, although of long continuance, it being
against the intention of God expressed in his Word, howsoever wrested by the
Prelates; but for Royalty, it is approved and ordained by God, and has so
continued with us, that we can hardly leave it; besides we find already such
inconveniences by not keeping it up in its due right and authority, that we
smart hugely for it; and if it were altogether cast off, we should be far
worse; witness the infinite disorders now adays.

Now let the English ingenuously confess, That ^^ey never have told the tenth
part of the truth of things unto the King, which he has heard of from the
Scots. Has the Parliament and Church of England spoke so home, and acquainted
him so freely with his errors as the Scots have done? or would they have so
withstood the evil courses he is cast in, had the Scots not shown them the way?

Then, we must not cast off a good accustomed and lawful office, for the
faults of a man who bears it, yea in the exercise of it, and that about main
businesses; for lawful things are not to be rejected for the abuses, but the
abuses to be taken away, and a reformation to be made; otherwise the most
things and most necessary should be cast off; for we offend almost in all
things, and abuse many things.

But it is said, The King has spoiled the three Kingdoms, and endeavored to
overthrow the Liberties and Religion.

It is true; but if he had not found Peers and Commons in the three Kingdoms to
second the evil counsels suggested unto him, he would never have attempted it;
for they caused him to set the work afoot, and they laid down the ways to go
on with it, and have served him in it. Although that other kinds of government
may be fit for other people, sure I am, Monarchy is best for us, being
regulated (according to the Law of God and right reason, with the Prerogative
and the Privilege subservient,) to the good of the people.

Then, It is reproached unto the Scots, That they are a poor weak people, and
not considerable.

Truly, They do not hold themselves either potent or considerable in regard of
greater Nations; but such as they are, God has made them very helpful to
other Nations, which think themselves very considerable:

For example;

Did they not turn the balance in the affairs of France under Charles the
seventh, when things were very low with the French? for at their going to help
that King, they found him so distressed and so under the power of his Enemy,
that he was constrained to keep himself at Bourges in Berry. Hence he was
called in derision, King of Bourges. But in a very short time, they helped him
so, that he repossessed himself of his whole Dominions, and repulsed the Enemy.

Now, Have they not done more unto their Brethren of England? Have they not
made their quarrel their own, exposing their lives and all that is dear unto
men for them? And by their help, are not their Brethren come to have the face
of affairs changed unto the better, so far, that not only they are come to
equal terms with the Enemy, but they have brought him so low that in
likelihood he will not rise again so hastily?

Howsoever the Scots be inconsiderable in the eyes of some men, yet God in his
goodness, has considered them so far, as to make them useful instruments in
this his great Work of opposing the Enemies of his Truth, both open and
declared, and secret and undermining.

And ye see both parties of open and secret Enemies to the Truth of God, have
considered the Scots so far, that each of them has by all cunning pressed to
have the Scots for and with them; but the Enemies seeing they could not
prevail, they have made their earnest study by devises and Plots underhand,
and by open violence and force, to wit, by an absolute and declared War, as far
as they can, to destroy the good party in Scotland, as the only obstacle of
hindering the one and the other Enemy to compass their designs, and to set up
their by-ends.

Hence the good party in England considers the Scots, as their only helpers;
for without their assistance they had all been undone before now: and howsoever
they are strong in appearence for the present, if the Scots should retire and
leave them, it is conceived upon just grounds, that they were to begin the play
again.

As for despicability, Howsoever the Scots be despised by some now adays, I am
sure, had it not been for these despised men, many here who are at this time
come to a great hight, had been in little consideration: and they whose valor
and wisdom are so much questioned at this time, surely in their own business,
they did show themselves to have both, to the admiration of their Neighbors;
and their valor and wisdom were never questioned till they were joined with
England: and although they have shown and do show daily both, as much as men
can do for the carrying on the Work wherein they are engaged, unto the content
of all impartial men, although not to the mind of self-conceited,
fantastical, and by-ended ones, who gave out That the Scots will destroy them
and themselves: Surely I am persuaded, had the Scots framed their courses
according to the desires altogether of some men, they had long ere now both
been destroyed; and had they not so far complied with the humors of some men,
the Public Service had been in a better estate, in all probability.

In this I blame the wisdom of the Scots, for otherwise they had not suffered
their own Country thus to be spoiled, in compliance to some, when they might
have helped it in time.

As for their means, Although in the eyes of the superabondants they be not so
considerable, yet they were such that they lived well upon them, and they could
wish with all their hearts to have no more then they had when they joined with
England for the Service of this Common Cause.

And if they reproach the barrenness of the soil in Scotland, It is the fault
of the Climate which lies so Northerly, and not of the people; and the soil,
if it be not so fertile of fruits as hotter grounds; yet it abounds in men of
valor and wisdom as much as any Country whatsoever of its compass. And these
despicable ones, of old and of late, have obtained Victories against great and
considerable Enemies, by valor. Perhaps if the Scots were more inclined to
husbandry, or improving their ground and other things which nature affords
them, by the goodness of God, they would be in a kind more plentiful of
conveniences for the life of man then they are.

As to the Garison-Towns which the Scots have rescued from the Enemy for the
good of this Church and State, with hazard, hardship, and loss of diverse brave
men, and which are still in the Scots hands for the public Service, it has
ministered one convenient occasion unto those factious ones to make a great deal
ado, yea to strive to bring things to a breach betwixt the two Kingdoms, if it
were possible; and they have proceeded so far as to cause the Towns and Places
to be demanded from the Scots betwixt such and such a day, without any
consideration unto equity, Whether or no it is just that the Scots have some
places of retreat, so long as they are in the Service of the Common Cause,
wherein they are obliged by Common Interest, and bound by Treaty to continue
till the full settling of things in Church and State.

Next, Without consideration if it be or not for the benefit of the Service now
in hand, that these Garison-Places should be left by the Scots, since we have
seen by diverse passages and occurrences of affairs that it has proved very
useful for the said Service that those places were in their hands for a time,
namely in the enterprise of Digby with his associates toward Scotland.

Then, When we cast our eyes upon those who have an aim particularly at the
having of those places, we shall find it to be fit for the Service of the
Cause which we fight for, that those Garison-Towns should remain with those who
now have them for a time, who are both constant and trusty to their true
principles of the Covenant, and the others altogether against the good of the
said Service.

Yea, It is most prejudiciable to the Cause we have now in hand, to put those
places in the hands of those who either side with the Common Enemy still in
their affections, as they have been serving him openly by their actions
formerly; or of those who underhand with cunning stop the settling of things
amongst us as we are sworn to by the Covenant, and so frustrate so far as in
them lies the intention of it.

Further, Those men who are so little faithful to the Covenant, cannot from
their heart, mind the good of the State, or people, more then they do the
welfar of the Church.

As the Scots took Arms for the public Service, they neither pretended, nor
did intend, to hold the places they have taken any longer then the said Service
shall require for the settling of the ends of the Common Cause expressed in the
Covenant, no more then they did formerly, witness their returning so quietly
home, and their refusal of those Seigneuries, Towns, and Counties adjacent,
from the King, to join with him against the Parliament; and that more then once.

Me thinks, that after all this, all rational and unprejudiciall men should
speak clearly for the Scots fair and honest intentions, since they are entered
into so solemn a League and Covenant, for which they have undergone and do to
this day undergo so much hardship, hazards, and losses.

Men may talk and babble, yea devise tricks and fancies, for a time; but it is
honesty and truth that holds out to the end; and it stands with Gods Justice to
make lies and double dealings fall to the ground.

Before I conclude, I will add this short ensuing discourse:

First, There has been a great busling raised by those factious men, who
trouble both State and Church, about the publishing of some papers given in to
the Houses of Parliament by the Scots Commissioners. Those men had prevailed so
far with some of their Friends in authority, as to make an exact scrutinie by
whom these papers were first printed, and by whose order, (as for the second
impression they had nothing to say, which the Commissioners caused to be made
upon a nicety for some faults of the Printer committed in the first
impression;) thinking themselves wronged, namely, because it was not corrected
according to their mind; and the thing to have been done without their express
order; but since it was done, it could not be ret called.

Next, Those factious men moved their Friends in authority to draw up a
Declaration against the Scots for those papers, with very tart expressions, as
we are informed: but after riper deliberation, the fume of anger being settled,
the thing was left off a time; for they did clearly perceive, that no
Declaration satisfactory to the people could be made against the Scots, or
their papers, since it could not be demonstrated that full satisfaction in
reason had been given to the Scots upon their several papers from time to time
given in.

Now, Let the Scots Commissioners confess, that they have failed by their
silence, in not making known unto the world from time to time the papers of
greatest concernment which they have given in to the Houses, and what
satisfaction they have received upon them; for if they had done so, they had
spared themselves of much drudgery, and of many sad thoughts for the small
content they have received by reason of some factious men, who have hindered due
satisfaction to be given unto their just desires; and they had stopped many
evil reproaches raised against their Nation, and against their Army: and
lastly, the public Work had gone better on; for those who have thus long time
stopped it, had not been able to carry things so under board as they have done:
and since the public is so concerned in main things, is it not fit they should
be known by the Public.

But the Scots must be warry, mild, and civil, where they should have been
plain, rightdown, and forward in the business they come for.

Wisdom and warrinesse are good, and civility is to be praised; but resolution
and forwardness carry on the two thirds of human actions, (namely when the
cause is good; for ordinarily men impute much warines to want of courage, and
great circumspection to doubtfulnesse and irresolution: there must be a
mixture, otherwise things cannot go well on;) both public, and private.

This I say for the Truths sake, and not to blame the Commissioners; for I
know, from the beginning, they have taken the way which in all sincerity they
conceive to be the best for the advancing of the Work they are come hither
about: but they have mistaken themselves, not being thoroughly acquainted with
the temper and interest of those on whom they have relied so much, that they
were said to dote upon them; no more then of some others with whom they have
ado withal.

Sed ad alia:
THe Independents in their great charity toward Church and State, and in their
zeal to the glory of God, and to the good of his people, after they had, first,
put off the calling, then, the meeting of the Assembly of Divines for a long
time, thus frustrating so far as in them lay or as they can, the good intention
of the Parliament, and the expectation that the people had of it, for a true
and through Reformation in the Church, according to the Word of God, and to the
example of the best Reformed Neighbour-Churches: then, after they had kept the
Assembly (once met by the Authority of the Parliament) for many months a
trifling about small matters; at last, being put to it by their miscarriage of
things, the Scots come in, and the Covenant is taken, the Discipline of the
Church in all earnestness is fallen to by the Assembly of Divines, the settling
whereof the Independents (notwithstanding) have opposed with all their cunning
and might, for long time; but at last, they are so convinced, what by the
sacred Scripture, what by strength of reason of judicious and knowing men, what
by the practice of the primitive Churches, and what by the example of the
modern best Reformed Churches, that they have nothing to reply, and so they are
constrained to be silent at the result of the Assembly upon the matter: but yet
they remain stubburn in their wilfulness and self-conceit, expressing
themselves to be the only wise men, and to have the best knowledge in the
ways of God

Then, in charity, and by a superabundant compliance, the Independents are by
the Synod desired to bring in it what positive Discipline they would be at, and
they have six months granted unto them for that purpose; during which time,
they gave out, That they were to produce strange things, with new lights: but
when the day of performance came, upon which they should have brought those
great and so much expected things into the Synod, they were not ready, and
demanded further time.

Upon the Independents desire, some more days are from the Synod granted unto
them, at the end of which they promised to declare what they would be at
positively: but in lieu of a positive Discipline so much looked for* they give
a paper full of reproaches and complaints of their harsh usage; when never men
have been dealt withal with so much tenderness, meekness, and longanimity,
as they have been dealt with in the Synod; for it is without example, to see a
few men having neither Scripture, reason, nor example for them, thus disturb
such a Reverend and learned Assembly so long, and stop their going on with the
Work of the Church.

At last, The Independents do declare (when by the Authority of the Parliament
there was a Committee, in compliance unto them, and upon hopes to gain and
reclaim them by fair terms if it were possible, appointed to agree the
differences betwixt the Synod and them) and say, That they would have a
toleration to all those who oppose Popery in its fundamentalls.

Now, to understand this demand of the Independents, we must enquire what is
meant by the fundamentalls of Popery.

Truly, in all probability, by the fundamentalls of Popery must be either
meant the grounds, or foundation upon which it is builded, and laid; or the
main and essential parts whereof it is composed.

The grounds and foundation whereupon Popery is builded, are ambition and
avarice, by the consent of all judicious and impartial men.

The main and essential parts of Popery, are corrupt Discipline and corrupt
Doctrine in the Church, both directly opposite and contrary to the will of God
declared in his written Word, and to the primitive times.

Now, If the Independents and their adherents, can clear themselves of the
fundamentalls of Popery, to wit, of ambition and avarice, and of corruption of
Discipline and Doctrine, I wish they may not only have toleration, but also
the hand of Brotherly Association: but their hunting after moneys and
preferments, with their self-conceits and self-love, are so manifest that they
cannot deny the two first, ambition and avarice.

As for the corruption of the Independents in their Doctrine and Discipline,
the Synod can tell enough of it, besides the writtings of many learned and
well-minded men against their Doctrine and Discipline: For all, thou may
consult Master Bailey his Book, where their beginnings and growth are set down
clearly out of their own writtings.

Then, The Independents must preach to the people, yea in presence of the
Houses of Parliament, upon a solemn day of Fasting, That it was hard measure to
stop them from preaching, and dogmatizing upon (I know not what) niceties of
Discipline.

If there be no more but niceties in dispute betwixt the Synod and the
Independents, then let the Independents tell me where is their charity, so much
vaunted of; or, where is their self-denial for a mere nicery, in troubling for
so long a time both the Parliament and the Synod, and in stopping the settling
of the Church to the glory of God, and for the comfort of his people; for
doubtless, were it not for them, the Church-affaires had been settled long ago,
and the Country had been provided with faithful Pastors to feed the Flock of
Christ long before this time: But God in his hid Providence, for Causes best
known unto himself, has suffered this settling of the Reformation to be thus
retarded, and stopped by these Sons of dissension to this day.

As in this we adore the good Providence of God, yet we cannot but accuse our
selves of manifold sins, whereby we are thus kept back from the enjoying of a
through and settled Reformation.

The Independents do here instance, Why does the Synod deal so rigidly with
them, as not to comply with them?

Now let God and the World judge, Whether or no so Reverend and learned an
Assembly, called and met together by Authority of the Magistrate to give out
the Platform of a true and through Reformation, according to the Word of God,
and conform to the purest primitive time and the best Reformed
Neighbour-Churches, having the Word of God for their Rule and Warrant, with the
example of the purest Antiquity, and of the best Reformed Churches now adays,
and that not only by practice of their settled Discipline and Doctrine; but
also their sentiments and advices concerning the points in dispute with the
Independents, with the judgment of the learned Orthodox men in this part of
the World; it be fit that the Synod should lay aside the Truth of God and the
good of the Church, and yield to the fantasy and conceit of self-witted and
by-ended men, who make Religion a cloak to their ambition and avarice, by
faction, troubling both Church and State.

Then a great stickler of the Independents moves the Houses of Parliament for a
toleration for those of his holy Society, Fraternity, and adherents, to have
Liberty of conscience in the transmarin Plantations, thinking by these means to
make a step for the same Liberty at home.

This cunning of the Independents is so easily to be seen, as white thread upon
black cloth. But how the Magistrate can condescend to it, I know not: True it
is, the Magistrate at his entry, finding men in a Country professing erroneous
Doctrine and Discipline, may forbear to press or trouble them for their
error; (so the Magistrate in Judah and Israel did not press the Canaanites
for their errors, yet did he not suffer them to dogmatize and openly commit
Idolatry, to the dishonor of God, and to the withdrawing of men from the
Truth;) but to authorize men in their error, he cannot do it in duty to God,
nor in good will toward man; for self-Worship of God is far less to be
allowed by the Magistrate, then dishonouring of parents, stealing and adultery,
etc. The reason is, The first reflects immediately upon God, who will be
worshipped according to his Rule which is set down in his Word, and not
according to the phancies of self-conceited men: Otherwise, in vain God had
established Rules, according to which he would be served in spirit, and not
justly had he punished Nations for transgressing his Rule.

Then, the Independents plead for not troubling their consciences.

It has been the observation of many remarking men, That there was never time
nor place, when and where the name of conscience has been so much used for a
covert to carriage of things, both in Church and State, as now adays, and
amongst us. And if judicious men will seriously consider the conscience this
day in every man's mouth, they shall find it to be but little more then a
s^l^-conceit misled by wilful ignorance, in some men, but for the most part,
by worldly interest of ambition and avarice; For, if you take conscience in a
right notion (to speak homely and plainly of it in this place, without
subtilizing,) it is a knowledge of the soul with God, of our carriage toward
him and toward man.

Now, Whether this carriage of ours be right or no, we are to judge of it,

First, and principally, By the Rule of Gods, Word.

Next, and consequently, By right reason, and human Laws, subservient to the
Rule of God, simply and purely, without by-respects, and merely for the glory
of God, and for the good of man.

Now, Let those who have conscience (and the tenderness thereof) so much in
their mouths, cast up their accounts, Whether or no they do set before their
eyes the glory of God and the good of man, according to the Rule of God, and to
right reason, or Laws of man, subservient to this set Rule, without any
by-respect of worldly ambition and avarice.

Further, Have not the Independents endeavored several times to dissolve, at
least to adjurn the Synod? Yea of late they went so far on as to move it in the
House of Peers; but the motion was rejected (although they had made a good
party for the business) by the wisdom of the House, and praise to that Noble
Lord Roberts who first answered.

At this time, The Independents do what they can to make a quarrel betwixt the
Parliament (with the people) of England, and the Scots, since they conceive
that they would find but small opposition in their design, if the Scots were
not in their way: This they tell in their particular discourses freely, and
perform really so far as they are able.

So, first, The Scots underhand must be stopped from all convenience for their
Army, and from every thing to go on with the Service in this Common Cause.

Next, The Scots Army must be pressed Southward, on this side of Trente, to
undo it by want of provisions.

Then, The main Committees of the Country must be forbid to supply the Scots
with any thing, yea caused underhand to obtain an Order from higher power, to
furnish the Scots with little, or nothing at all.

In the mean time, The Scots must be cried out upon as idle and lasie, not
minding the public Work, and as being burdensome to the people.

Yea, more, They must be grievously complained on, as taking exorbitantly from
the people; and men must be persuaded, induced, and forced to come unto the
Parliament, with complaints against the Scots, without reason and equity, and
further, contrary to agreement; for, by stipulation it was accorded, That no
complaint should be made unto the Parliament against the Scots, till the
business were tried by the Committee of both Kingdoms, residing upon the
place; and thereafter, if satisfaction and reparation had not been granted, the
recourse was to be had unto the Parliament. Witness this seventh Proposition,
and the Answer unto it; which I have thought fit to insert in this place
following, that every one may see the truth of things.

The seventh Proposition.
We do approve that for the preventing of Complaints to be made unto the
Parliament of England against the Scottish Army, That the Committee of both
Kingdoms residing with the Scottish Army, be desired to endeavor the redress
of them upon the place; and for the preventing of many inconveniences which
otherwise may ensue, That it may be intimated unto all such as may be concerned
therein, that they first address themselves to the Committee of both Kingdoms,
upon the place, for reparation of any injuries done to them, before they make
any complaints to the Parliament; and that no complaint be heard here, but in
such cases as wherein Justice is denied there.

Answer to the seventh Proposition.
That for the complaints that are or may be made of the Scottish Army to the
Parliament, the Committee do conceive it just, That the complaints should be
communicated to the Scots Commissioners, as is desired: And for the preventing
of such complaints to the Parliament for the future, That the Committee of both
Kingdoms residing with the Scots Army, endeavor the redress of them, if
possible, upon the place.

After all this, upon complaints made on purpose, The Scots must be sent back
in all haste without any more ado, without regard to what they have done, what
they are doing, and what they may do for the public Cause now in hand, and
without respect to the Treaty made betwixt the two Nations, and to their
mutual engagements. And this went on so far, by the artifice of the
Independents, that it was moved in public by a great stickler of that Faction,
and a Venture of their Plots.

Thereafter, The Independents have another thought, which is to have the
Garrisons (taken in by the Scots from the Enemy) in their possession, namely
Carlisle and New Castle, as places fit for their plantations; from the one, they
do think to spread their seed into Scotland, and send it over to Ireland with
facility; and from the other, to have easy commerce with London, Amsterdam,
etc. and this is because the Scots hinder their Plots.

But let the World judge whether or no it is reasonable that the Scots return
presently back into their Country, and give over those Garrisons, before the
Work be ended, that is, Religion and Peace settled, for which they have done and
suffered so much abroad and at home in their zeal to the Cause and kindness to
their Friends; and leave all to the adversaries of the Covenant: and whether or
no they should have any place of retreat in case of need, so long as they are
about the Service.

And, Is it to be thought, that the Scots should return home re infecta, they
came hither for, when they are constantly willing and in capacity to go
usefully on with the Service, to say nothing of the just thanks due unto them
for what they have suffered and done in their love to the Cause, and affection
to their Friends?

What? Must the Scots abandon the Garrisons to the adversaries of the
Reformation, who have already some sticklers in New Castle who begin to broile
and to trouble the People with their errors and fantastical dreams, leading
to Faction and division?

Last, The factious Independents (in what truth, we shall see it presently)
give out That it is by their wisdom, purses, and valor that things are brought
to so good a pass, and unto the happy condition we see them in, for the ending
of these troubles.

To this I answer;

Let no man sacrifice unto his own worth, merit, or action; for it is a great
sacrilege to take away from God his due, who is all in all, since in him we
are and move, not having either being or motion but by him originally, and by
his continued upholdig and assistance of us.

Then, It is Idolatry to put any thing whatsoever in the lieu of God. But let
this pass for this time.

As for the wisdom, purses, and valor of the Independents, Where were they
before the Scots coming in? Yea, Where were they before the raising of the
Siege of Oxford?

And to begin at their wisdom, By a great deal of cunning they have stopped the
settling of the Church to this day, and consequently the settling of the
Commonwealth, The Church being as it were the soul, and the State as the body
of the Commonwealth: except the Church, that is the soul, be in a good
posture, the Commonwealth cannot be well: And for the State, or politic part
of the Commonwealth, They are the cause of all the jarres, jealousies, and
mistakes betwixt men of both Nations, and betwixt diverse in this one Nation,
yea betwixt City and Parliament.

Next, By craft from the very beginning of this War, the Independents have
scrued themselves in employment, and got in to have a main hand in all
businesses: But by their wisdom they had brought things to such a pass that
not only they did lose their credit, but they durst hardly appear in the
streets for a time, so odious were they become unto the People. The incoming of
the Scots did put life in them again; for, the People seeing that they were so
earnest for the Scots, whose success and dexterity was known to all, with
their fidelity and honesty, could not but give occasion to think better of the
Independents then they had done formerly, by reason of the miscarriage of
things. But these sweet Birds ingrate to their restaurators, and unthankful to
the People, fall to their old tricks again, to raise up their Faction against
Church and State.

As the Scots by their assistance gave the Independents life when they were
dead, (as it were,) and raised them from the dust unto consideration, by their
seasonable help; so the late miscarriage of busine;sses by some then in power,
did furnish unto the Independents some means to thrust in businesses and favor
among the People.

All this while, the Independents are getting themselves in all Committees and
Counsels, namely where money is a handling: So by degrees they get benefit and
power into their hands, and then pleasure some whom they do affect, and put
nack others whom they do dislike.

By this means, diverse of all ranks, to get their desires either of benefit or
employment, do side with them; or to have their turn served for the present, do
cog in with them for a time.

As the Independents do dispose all things almost according to their mind in
the Southern Forces, by putting out those they do dislike, and taking in those
whom they think fit for their ends, or, at least, who do not oppose them, nor
do take any notice of their tricks and devises; So, They do study in the North
to keep the Scots idle, being not fitted with accommodations for the Service,
yet earnest they are to call them Southward, yea to make the weight of the main
Service to lie upon them; and then cry out against them, That they do not go on
as they were desired, and that, to irritate both Parliament and People.

Then, As the new molded Army was a settling, many good occasions of doing
businesses are let pass by the faults of the Independents, whereunto advice
was given namely by the Scots Commissioners, and by other judicious men upon
good intelligence, for the easy compassing of things.

At last, There must be a Siege at Oxford, at such a time, and in such a way.
How that Siege was undertaken according to the rules of wisdom, the judicious,
understanding, and indifferent men, both at home and abroad, can tell.

All this time, the Independents in their wisdom, are not only busy to stop
the settling of the Church in a true and through Reformation, as by the Covenant
we are all sworn to; but they continue and maintain diverse kind of errors and
heresies, yea, they move to have their pernicious Tenants set up by Authority,
both at home and abroad.

Further, They study to make a rent betwixt the two Nations against the good of
both, yea against the Covenant.

What more? Have they not in their wisdom raised up great factions, both in the
City and Country, by their cunning devices, under pretense of piety and
devotion?

Yea, which is worst of all, Are they not busy to make the Parliament and the
City clash and divide, if it were possible, if not, to inslave the City?

First, By underhand-dealing, to stop the City to present unto the Parliament
(with due respect) their just desires for the long expected settling of the
Church according to the Covenant.

Next, When at another time that the City did send the second Petition unto the
Parliament for the same purpose with the former, the Independents made their
Favorers snuff at it, and struggle to reject it: But the wiser part did
accept of it, and did promise to give due content* namely the Earl of Essex did
express himself worthily upon the point, and told the Company of the House,
Besides the justness of the Cities desire, the Parliament must not neglect nor
forget the Cities steadfast kindness to it, namely in its greatest need, and to
the Cause, witness among other things,

Their refusal of assisting the Court against the Scots.

Their keeping close to the Parliament, notwithstanding all the workings of the
Court-Parasites, and the offers made unto it by the Court.

Their rescuing the Parliament from violence, when with strong hand some
Members should have been taken from it.

Their free and unparallelled plentiful furnishing both men and moneys, from
the beginning of these unhappy Wars.

And their constant supplying upon all occasions of both to this present,
namely in the remarkable needs, as at Brainford business, and at the business
of Gloucester, where the Earl of Essex did so bravely relieve that Town (so
courageously kept by gallant Massey,) and thereafter did beat the Enemy.

Many such instances may any judicious man give of the Independents wisdom so
much cried up by themselves and by their hyrelings, which consists in plotting
for their interest of ambition and avarice, under the cloak of piety and
devotion, without regard to the glory of God, or to the good of man; for if
they had any respect to these two, they would not drive on such factions
against the settling of the Church, and consequently of the State.

Now, having seen how the Independents have furthered the Cause with their
wisdom, let us see what they do with their purses.

Are they not noted to be the most needy, craving, and scraping wretches that
are?

Have any of them heartily and willingly given any thing out of their hands
too? When God knows, in lieu of giving any thing of their own, that they are
deep sharers in the moneys they can lay hold on.

Are they not the nimblest to hearken after moneys? And for this end have they
thrust themselves everywhere where any benefit is to be had, and where the
fingring of money is.

Have they not received vast sums of moneys, and neither have, nor will, yea
perhaps neither can give an account? Witness some of them who refused to give
an account in the usual way unto the Committee of accounts established by the
Parliament. And thereafter the same men, after their refusal of giving
account, have obtained by the favor of the factious Fraternity, a free
discharge, without giving any account.

It is constantly and generally reported* That they have sent immense sums of
moneys beyond Seas.

Many stirring Blades and sticklers of their Faction of late had neither credit
nor means, yea hardly whole clothes, who now are great men, companions to Lords.

Yea, It is told of some of them, that they should say, They hoped to see the
day wherein they should not see this distinction of men, and so to be
Independents as well in the State as in the Church.

Is there any one of their Fraternity that has not enriched himself since
these troubles have begun, by the foolery and simplicity of others, as Rooks
and Charlatans in all professions do? And so they have increased their number.

If one should take in hand to set down in writing all the cunnings, devices,
artifices, deceits, and crafts known to many, with which these men use to catch
moneys, and give no account of, it would make a great Volume.

They have gotten the fingring of the moneys of State by gathering it, and they
distribute it for the most part among themselves: So they give out, That all is
theirs which passes through their hands.

But let us see their valor:

It is known they have drawn some men of heart and courage among them; But give
me leave to say, That their own courage does not so much as yet appear unto the
World, as other men's valor does, although they have used all the means which
they could bethink themselves of to be cried up for valor; for* Have they not
caused their names to be recorded in Pamphlets, and read in Churches? If the
meanest of their Faction had appeared the least in action, he was highly named
as the most valiant in the Army.

Yea, Is it not a strange thing, to see that gallant Sir Thomas Fairfax to be
so little mentioned, although he be General, and notwithstanding that he
constantly in all actions does carry himself as bravely as any man can do? How
gallant his carriage was at the Battle of Naseby, it is well known to all, yet
he was little spoken of, and the Independents must have the glory of the day;
but it is an easy way of these men to raise themselves, and to gain esteem and
credit with small merits of their own, by the help of good Neighbors and
Friends.

In Gods Name, let every one have his due, without taking any from others: But
such is the weakness of many infirm men, who think they cannot be well thought
or spoken of to their mind, unless they keep under and balk other men's just
praise, where there is occasion enough of praise to every one who does well in
the War, as in any other course.

In all this Discourse, I name no person but to his praise; yet I tell the
errors and faults of a Faction, which is as dangerous unto us as that of
Barnevelts in the Netherlands: But we hope that the same God who broke that
Faction there, will do the same here, as he has done the Prelates Faction here
amongst us; and will stop it to go on any further, for the dishonor done to
his Name, and the mischief done to his People, by those ambitious, coveteous,
and self-conceited men, against all Divine and human Law, without shame,
provided they serve their insatiable and fantastical desires, caring neither
for God nor for his People, as appear clearly by the whole tenor of their
carriage.

FINIS.

