THE DUKE OF Buckingham's SPEECH In a late CONFERENCE*

LONDON, Printed for M. I. 1668.

The DUKE of BUCKINGHAM'S SPEECH
Gentlemen of the House of Commons.
I Am Commanded by the House of Peers, to open to You the Matter of this
Conference; Which is a Task I could wish their Lordships had been pleased to
lay upon any Body else, both for their own sakes and mine: having observed, in
that little experience I have made in the World, there can be nothing of
greater difficulty, Then to Unite Men in their Opinions, whose Interests seem
to disagree.

This, Gentlemen, I fear is at present our Case; but yet I hope, when we have a
little better considered of it, we shall find, that a greater Interest does
oblige us at this time, rather to join in the Preservation of both our
Privileges, then to differ about the violation of either.

We acknowledge it is our Interest to defend the Right of the Commons; for,
should we suffer them to be oppressed, it would not be long before it might come
to be our own case: And I humbly conceive it will also appear to be the
Interest of the Commons, to uphold the Privilege of the Lords; that so we may
be in a Condition to stand by and support them.

All that their Lordships desire of you upon this occasion, is, That you will
proceed with them as usually Friends do, when they are in Dispute one with
another; That you will not be impatient of hearing Arguments urged against your
Opinions, but Examine the Weight of what is said, and then impartially consider
which of us two, are likeliest to be in the wrong.

If we are in the wrong, we and our Predecessors have been so for these many
hundred of years: and not only our Predecessors, but yours too; This being the
first time that ever an Appeal was made in point of Judicature, from the Lords
House to the House of Commons. Nay, those very Commons which turned the Lords
out of this House, though they took from them many other of their Privileges,
yet left them the constant practice of this till the very last day of their
Sitting* And this will be made appear by several Presidents these Noble Lords
will lay before you, much better then I can pretend to do.

Since this business has been in Agitation, their Lordships have been a little
more curious than ordinary, to Inform themselves of the true nature of these
Matters now in Question before Us; which I shall endeavor to Explain to you,
as far as my small Abillity, and my aversion to hard words will give me leave.
For howsoever the Law, to make it a Mystery and a Trade, may be wrapped up in
Terms of Art, yet it is founded in reason, and is obvious to Common Sense.

The power of Judicature does naturally descend, and not ascend; That is no
inferior Court can have any power, which is not derived to it from some power
above it.

The King is by the Laws of this Land, Supreme Judge, in all Causes
Ecclesiastical and Civil. And so there is no Court, High or Low, can Act, but
in subordination to Him: and though they do not all Issue out their writs in
the Kings Name, yet they can Issue out none but by virtue of some Power they
have received from him.

Now every particular Court has such particular power as the King has given it
and for that reason has its bounds: But, the Highest Court in which the King
can possibly Sit, that is, His Supreme Court of Lords in Parliament, has in it
all his Judicial Power, and consequently no bounds: I mean no bounds of
Jurisdiction; for the highest Court is to Govern according to the Laws, as
well as the Lowest.

I suppose none will make a question, but that every Man, and every Cause, is
to be tried according to Magna Charta; That is, by Peers, or according to the
Laws of the Land. And he that is Tried by the Ecclesiastical Courts, the Court
of Admiralty, or the High Court of Lords in Parliament, is Tried as much by the
Laws of the Land, as he that is Tried by the Kings Bench, or Common Pleas.

When these Inferior Courts happ^n to wrangle among themselves, which they must
often do, by reason of their being bound up to particular Causes, and their
having all equally and earnestly a desire to try all Causes themselves, then
the Supreme Court is forced to hear their Complaints, because there is no other
way of deciding them. And this under favor, is an Original Cause of Courts,
though not of men.

Now these Original Causes of Courts, must also of necessity induce Men, for
saving of Charges, and dispatch sake, to bring their Causes Originally before
the Supreme Court. But then the Court is not obliged to receive them; but
proceeds by Rules of Prudence, in either retaining, or dismissing them as they
think fit.

This is under favor, the sum of all that your Precedents can show us; which
is nothing but what we practice every day: That is, that very often, because we
would not be molested with hearing too many particular Causes, we referr them
back to other Courts. And all the Argument you can possibly draw from hence,
will not in any kind lessen our Power, but only show an unwillingness we have,
to trouble our selves often with matters of this Nature.

Nor will this appear strange, if you consider the constitution of our House;
it being made up, partly of such whose Employments will not give them leisure
to attend the hearing of Private Causes; and entirely of those that can receive
no profit by it,

And the truth is, the Dispute at present is not between the House of Lords,
and the House of Commons, but between us and Westminster Hall. For as we desire
to have few or no Causes brought before us, because we get nothing by them; so
they desire to have all Causes brought before them, for a reason a little of
the contrary nature.

For this very reason, it is their business to invent new ways of drawing
Causes to their Courts, which ought not to be pleaded there. As for example,
this very Cause of Skinner that is now before us, (And I do not speak this by
Roate, for I have the opinion of a Reverend Judge in the Case, who informed us
of it the other day in the House.) They have no way of bringing this Cause into
Westminster Hall, but by this form; the reason and sense of which I leave to
you to Judge of.

The Form is this, that in stead of speaking as we ordinary Men do, that have
no Art, That Mr. Skinner lost a Ship in the East Indies: to bring this into
their Courts, they must say, That Mr. Skinner lost a Ship in the East Indies,
in the Parish of Islington, in the County of Middlesex.

Now some of us Lords, that did not understand the refineness of this style,
began to examine what the reason of this should be; and so we found, that since
they ought not by right to try such Causes, they are resolved to make bold not
only with our Privileges, but the very Sense and Language of the whole Nation.

This I thought fit to mention, only to let you see, that this whole Cause, as
well as many others, could not be tried properly in any place but at our Bar;
Except Mr. Skinner would have taken a fancy, to try the Right of Jurisdictions
between Westminster Hall and the Court of Admirallity, instead of seeking
Relief for the Injuries he had received in the place only where it was to be
given him.

One thing I hear is much insisted upon, which is, the Trial without Juries; to
which I could Answer, That such Trials are allowed of, in the Chancery and
other Courts: And, that when there is occasion for them, we make use of Juries
too, both by directing them in the King's Bench, and having them brought up to
our Bar.

But I shall only crave leave to put you in mind, That if you do not allow us
in some Cases, to try Men without Juries, you will then absolutely take away
the use of Impeachments; which I humbly conceive you will not think proper to
have done at this time.

FINIS.

