Poetical Reflections ON A LATE POEM ENTITLED, Absalom and Achitophel. By a
Person of Honor.

LONDON: Printed for Richard Ianeway. 1681.

TO THE READER.
IF ever any thing, called a Poem, deserved a severe Reflection, that of
Absalom and Achitophel may justly contract it. For though Lines can never be
purged from the dross and filth they would throw on others (there being no
retraction that can expiate the conveying of persons to an unjust and public
reproach); yet the cleansing of their fames from a designed pollution, may well
become a more ingenious Pen than the Author of these few reflections will
presume to challenge.

To epitomize which scandalous Phamphlet (unworthy the denomination of Poesy)
no eye can inspect it without a prodigious amazement; the abuses being so gross
and deliberate, that it seems rather a Capital or National Libel, than personal
exposures, in order to an infamous detraction. For how does he character the
King, but as a broad figure of scandalous inclinations, or contrived unto such
irregularities, as renders him rather the property of Parasites and Vice, than
suitable to the accomplishment of so excellent a Prince? Nay, he forces on King
David such a Royal resemblance, that he darkens his sanctity in spite of
illuminations from Holy Writ.

Next (to take as near our King as he could) he calumniates the Duke of
Monmouth with that height of impudence, that his Sense is far blacker than his
Ink, exposing him to all the censures that a Murderer, a Traitor, or what a
Subject of most ambitious evil can possibly comprehend: and it is some wonder,
that his Lines also had not hanged him on a Tree, to make the intended Ahsalom
more complete.

As to my Lord Shaftsbury (in his collusive Achitophel), what does he other
than exceed Malice it self? or that the more prudent deserts of that Peer were
to be so impeached beforehand by his impious Poem, as that he might be granted
more emphatically condign of the Hangman's Ax; And which his Muse does in
effect take upon her to hasten.

And if the season be well observed, when this Adulterate Poem was spread, it
will be found purposely divulged near the time when this Lord, with his other
Noble Partner, were to be brought to their Trials. And I suppose this Poet
thought himself enough assured of their condemnation; at least, that his Genius
had not otherwise ventured to have trampled on persons of such eminent
Abilities, and Interest in the Nation. A consideration, I confess, incited my
Pen (its preceding respect being paid to the Duke of Monmouth) to vindicate
their Reputations where I thought it due.

And some are not a little mistaken in their judgments of persons, if any
Kingdom has at this time Two men of their Dignity, of more extraordinary
Understandings: Which may (if well considered) be some inducement to their
future preservation and esteem. As I have endeavored chiefly to clear their
abuse, so I have passed diverse considerable persons, under as malign
inclinations of this Author's; conceiving, that what I have said for the
Principals, may remove such smaller prejudices as are on the value of others on
the same concern.

His most select and pecuniary Favorites, I have but barely touched, in
respect his praise includes a concomitant reprehension, if well apprehended.
Besides, I was unwilling to discourage any, that for the future may desire to
be admired by him according to their liberality. A method, that perhaps may in
time set up some Merchants of Pernassus, where the Indies of Fame seem lately
discovered, and may be purchased per Centum, according to modern example.

As to the Charactet of Amiel, I confess my Lines are something pointed, the
one reason being, that it alludes much to a manner of expression of this
Writer's, as may be seen by the marginal Notes; and a second will be soon
allowed. The figure of Amiel has been so squeezed into Paint, that his soul is
seen in spite of the Varnish.

And none will deny, but it is as easy to send Truth backward, as it is to
spur Falsities egregiously forward, and might have caused any Ass, as knowing
as Balaam's, to have rebuked such a Poet as will needs prophecy against the
sense of Heaven and Men. But I have enough of this Amiell, as well as of his
Muse, unless that by his means it occasions a further account. And for what is
mine here, It will at worst contract censure, in respect it is a brief
reflection on a very large Libel. And though I believe it did not cost (though that
be not offered for an excuse) the tenth part of the time of the other. As to my
Preface, I was willing that he should find, that this smaller work has some
Nose. -- Though I am no more bound to have my Face known by it, than he is
willing to obscure his by a Nameless Preamble.

Poetical Reflections ON A POEM, CALLED Absolon and Achitophel.
WHen late Protectorship was Canon-Proof,
And Cap-a-pe had seized on Whitehall-Roof.
And next, on Israelites durst look so big,
That Tory-like, it loved not much the Whigg:
A Poet there starts up, of wondrous Fame;
Whether Scribe or Pharisee, his Race does name,
Or more t'intrigue the Metaphor of Man,
Got on a Muse by Father-Publican: A Committee-Man.

For it is not harder much, if we tax Nature,
That Lines should give a Poet such a Feature;
Than that his Verse a Hero should us show, Sir Denzill Hollis seeks annus
mirabilis.

Produced by such a Feat, as famous too.
His Mingle such, what Man presumes to think,
But he can Figures daub with Pen and Ink.
A Grace our mighty Nimrod late beheld,
When he within the Royal Palace dwell'd,
And saw 'twas of import if Lines could bring
His Greatness from Usurper, See his Poem on Cromwell.
to be King:
Or varnish so his Praise, that little odds
Should seem 'twixt him, and such called Earthly Gods.
And tho no Wit can Royal Blood infuse,
No more than melt a Mother to a Muse:
Yet much a certain Poet undertook,
That Men and Manners deals in without-Book.
And might not more to Gospel Truth belong,
Than he (if Christened) does by name of John.
This Poet, who that time much squanderd thought,
Of which some might bring Coin, whilst some none brought,
As Men that hold their Brains of powerful sense,
Will least on Poet's Tales bestow their pence,
Tho he such Dispensations to endear,
Had notch'd his Sconce just level with his Ear.
An Emblem in these days of much import,
When Crop-ear'd Wits had such a Modish Court.
Tho some from after-deeds much fear the Fate,
That such a Muse may for its Lugs create.
As Stars may without Pillories dispense,
To slit some Ears for Forgeries of sense,
Which Princes, Nobles, and the Fame of Men,
Sought to bespatter by a worthless Pen.
But leaving this to Circumstances fit,
With what thence spreads this Renegado-wit.
We'll tell you how his Court he now does make,
And what choice Things and Persons he does take,
That Lines for Guinnys might more liquorish speak.
To heigten which we'll to his Muse advance,
Which late discovered its Iudaick Trance:
Where Absalon's in English Colors di'd,
That in a Duke, a Traitor might be spied.
Or Heaven on him did Graces so bestow,
As only could confer their Pageant Show;
Giving his Glories no more fast Renown,
Than with more Honor to be taken down:
Like Victimes by some Sacrificers dressed,
Must fall adorned, which then they pity least.
But fear not Monmouth, if a Libel's quill,
Would dregs of Venom on thy Virtue spill;
Since no desert so smoothly is conveyed,
As next it is Fame, no cankered Patch is laid;
Thou did no Honor seek, but what is thy due,
And such Heaven bids thee not relinquish too.
Whilst it is Impressions so obliged thy Task,
As leave from Earth thy Soul declined to ask.
If this thy Error were, what Influ'nce can
Excuse the Duty of more wilful Man;
With such whose Figures show that squinting Paint,
Whence peeps a Mungril Babylonish Saint.
Thy Soul's Religion's Prop, and Native Grace,
Rome, (fears its onsets) looking on the place;
What Altitude can more exalt thy Praise,
Tho best Devotion should thy Trophies raise,
And it is perhaps from thy Diviner Bliss,
That some may fear their Souls are seen amiss.
As what so high does Emulation mount,
As Greatness when surpassed on Heaven's Account;
And if the Ambition would in this excel,
'Twas but to be more great in doing well;
And must rebate the worst that Fates intend,
Whilst Heaven and England is at once thy Friend.
This just Encomium, tho too brief it be
To represent thy least Epitome;
And but unto thy larger Figure joined,
As small proportions are from great designed;
Tho where a line one worth of thine can speak,
It does alone, a Poem's Greatness make;
Leaving this Hero to his spotless Fame,
(As who besides this Wretch will it blaspheme)
Or in a Libels Allegorick Way,
Men falsely figured, to the world convey,
Libels the enormous Forgery of sense,
Stamped on the brow of human Impudence;
The blackest wound of Merit, and the Dart,
That secret Envy points against Desert.
The lust of Hatred pander'd to the Eye
T'allure the World's debauching by a Lie.
Th'rancrous Favourite's masquerading Guilt,
Imbitt'ring venom where he would have it spilt.
The Courts depression in a fulsom Praise;
A Test it is Ignoramus worst conveys,
A lump of Falshood's Malice does disperse,
Or Toad when crawling on the Feet of Verse.
Fame's impious Hireling and mean Reward,
The Knave that in his Lines turns up his Card,
Who, tho no Rabby, thought in Hebrew wit,
He forced Allusions can closly fit.
To Jews or English, much unknown before,
He made a Talmud on his Muses score;
Though hoped few Critics will its Genius carp,
So purely Metaphors King David's Harp,
And by a soft Encomium, near at hand,
Shows Bathsheba Embraced throughout the Land.
But this Judaick Paraphrastick Sport
We'll leave unto the ridling Smile of Court.
Good Heaven! What timeful Pains can Rhymers take,
When they would for Crowds of Men much Penplot make?
Which long-Beak'd Tales and filch'd Allusions brings,
As much like Truth, as it is the Woodcock sings.
What else could move this Poet to purloin
So many Jews, to please the English Swine?
Or was it that his Brains might next dispense
To adapt himself a Royal Evidence?
Or that he would find for Dugdale's Wash some Spell,
In stead of once more dipped in Winifred's Well;
And open his Budget, like Pandora's Box,
Whence Overt-acts more Protestants should Pox,
Which might the Joyner's Ghost provoke to rise,
And fright such Tales with other Popish Lies?
But Starr's or Ignoramus's may not give
Those Swearers longer swinge by Oaths to live.
A Providence much English Good protects,
And sends Testees to Trade for new Effects;
Which none of the Long-Robe, it is hoped, can aid,
So well by Oaths the Devil's already paid;
And most suppose, if e're both Plots can die,
Or eat up one another Perjury,
'Twou'd Pluto strangely pose to find a Third,
Sold he in his a Popish Legion Lard.
A Policy some Poems much embrace,
As is discerned in Shaftsbury's Great Case;
Where Verse so vile an Obloquy betray,
As for a Statist- Jew they would him convey.
Tho hard it is to understand what Spell
Can conjure up in him Achitophel,
Or tax this Peer with an Abused Sense
Of his so deep and apt Intelligence:
A Promptitude by which the Nation's shown
To be in Thought concurrent with his own.
Shaftsbury! A Soul that Nature did impart
To raise her Wonder in a Brain and Heart;
Or that in him produced, the World might know,
She others did with drooping Thought bestow.
As in Man's most perspicuous Soul, we find
The nearest Draught of her Internal Mind,
Tho it appears her highest Act of State,
When Human Conducts she does most complete,
And place them so, for Mankinds good, that they
Are fit to Guide, where others miss their Way;
It being in Worldly Politiques less Great
To be a Lawmakers, than Preserve a State.
In Public Dangers Laws are unsecure,
As strongest Anchors cannot all Winds endure;
Though it is in Exigents the wisest Ease
To know who best can ply when Storms increase;
Whilst other Prospects, by mistaking Fate,
Through wrong Preventions, more its Bad dilate.
Whence some their Counter-Politicks extend*
To ruin such can Evils best amend.
A Thwarting Genius, which our Nation more
Than all its headstrong Evils does deplore;
And shows what violent Movements such inform,
That where a Calm should be, they force a Storm;
As if their Safety chiefly they must prize
In being rid of Men esteemed more Wise.
To this Great, Little Man, we'll The Other join,
Held Sufferers by one Tripartite Design.
As from a Cubick Power, or Threefold Might,
Roots much expand, as Authors prove aright;
But of such Managements we'll little say,
Or shamm'd Intrigues, for Fame left to convey;
Which may by peeping through a Gown-mans Sleeve,
Tell such grave Tales, Men cannot well believe:
With what for Plots and Trials has been done,
As Whores deposed, before away they run;
All which was well discerned by numerous Sense,
Before the Doctor's py'd Intelligence,
Who, with some Motley Lawyers, took much care
To gain the Caput of this Knowing Peer;
When after so much Noise, and nothing proved,
Heaven thanked, to Freedom he is at last removed,
Leaving a Low-Bridge Cerberus to try
In what Clerks Pate his monstrous Fee does lie;
Or by the help of Tory-Roger tell
How Sacred Gain-Prerogativ'd should spell.
But these are Thoughts may fit some Pensive Skulls,
Or Men concerned to bait their several Bulls;
Whilst on this Peer we must some Lines bestow,
Tho more he merits than best Verse can show:
Great in his Name, but greater in his Parts,
Judgment sublimed, with all its strong Deserts;
A Sense above Occasions quick surprise,
That he no Study needs to make him Wise,
Or labored Thoughts, that trains of Sinews knit,
His Judgment always twined unto his Wit;
That from his clear Discussions Men may know
He does to wonder other Brains outdo.
Whilst they for Notions search they cannot compact,
His Genius fitly stands prepared to act.
Admired of Man, that in thy Sense alone
So ready do exalt high Reason's Throne;
That Men abate Resentments to expect
Thou may rise Greater, having past Neglect.
A Sacred Method Kings receive from Heaven,
That still does Cherish, when it has Forgiven;
Which from our Princes Soul so largely flows,
That Mercy's Channel with his Greatness goes.
No Arbitrary Whispers him can guide.
To swell his Rule beyond its genuine Tide:
Whilst other Kings their rugged Scepters see
Eclipsed in his more soft Felicity;
Whose Goodness can all Stress of State remove,
So fitly owned the Subjects Fear and Love.
My Verse might here discharge its hasty Flight,
As Pencils that attempt Immortal Height
Droop in the Colors should convey its Light,
Did not this Poet's Lines upon me call
For some Reflections on a Lower Fall;
Where he by Rhyming, a Iudaick Sham,
Obtrudes for Israelites some Seeds of Cham.
And this Inspexion needs no further go
Than where his Pen does most Indulgent show*
And it is no wonder if his Types of Sense
Should stroke such Figures as give down their Pence;
A Crime for which some Poets Lines so stretch,
As on themselves they Metaphor Jack Ketch.
Tho small the Varnish is to Humane Name,
Where Cogging Measures rob the truth of Fame.
And more to do his skew'd Encomiums right,
Some Persons speak by him their motly Sight:
Or much like Hudibras, on Wits pretense,
Some Lines for Rhyme, and some to gingle Sense.
Who else would Adriel, Iotham, Hushai, fit,
With loathed Amiell, for a Court of Wit?
For, as Men Squares of Circles hardly find,
Some think these Measures are as odly joyn`d.
What else could Adriell`s sharpness more abuse,
Than headlong dubb`d, to own himself a Muse,
Unless to spread Poetic Honors so
As should a Muse give each St. George's Show?
A Mode of Glory might Parnassus fit,
Tho our Sage Prince knows few he`d Knight for Wit.
And thus this Freak is left upon the File,
Or as `tis written in this Poet`s Style.
Next, as in Course, to Iotham we`ll descend,
Thoughtful it seems which Side he`ll next befriend,
As thinking Brains can caper to and fro,
Before they jump into the Box they`d go.
And `tis a moody Age, as many guess,
When some with busy Fears still forward press;
As `tis Ambitions oft-deluding Cheat
To tempt Men's aims, secureless of defeat.
Hushai the Compass of the Exchequer guides,
Propense enough unto the North besides:
As what can steady Stations more allure,
Than such, a Princely Bed does first secure?
Whose Part none are so ignorant to ask,
And does no less employ his Ends and Task*
But quitting these, we must for Prospect pass
To gaping Amiell, as reflects our Glass.
The Him indeed of his own See his, p. 27.
Western Dome,
So near his praiseful Poet Sense may come:
For See his, p. 28.
Amiell, Amiell, who cannot endite
Of his Thin Value will not disdain to write?
The very Him with Gown and Mace did rule
The Sanedrim, when guided by a Fool.
The Him that did both Sense and Reason shift,
That he to gainful Place himself might lift.
The very Him that did adjust the Seed
Of such as did their Votes for Money breed.
The Mighty Him that frothy Notions vents,
In hope to turn them into Presidents.
The Him of Hims, although in Judgment small,
That fain would be the biggest at Whitehall.
The He that does for Justice Coin postpone,
As on Account may be hereafter shown.
If this plain English be, it is far from Trick,
Though some Lines gall, where others fawning lick;
Which fits thy Poet, Amiell, for thy Smiles,
If once more paid to blaze thy hated Toils.
Of Things and Persons might be added more,
Without Intelligence from Foreign Shore,
Or what Designs Ambassadors contrive,
Or how the Faithless French their Compass guide:
But Lines the busy World too much supply,
Besides the Effects of evil Poetry,
Which much to Tory- Writers some ascribe,
Though hoped no Furies of the Whiggish Tribe
Will on their Backs such Lines or Shapes convey,
To burn with Pope, on Great November's Day.
FINIS.

