THE Wicked Man's Plot DEFEATED:

OR, The Wicked Man, laughed out of Countenance.

As it was Represented in a SERMON, Preached in St. Mary Wool-Church, London,
May 11. 1656.

By THOMAS BAKER* Rector of St. Mary the More, in EXON.

Gal 4. 16. Am I therefore become your Enemy, because I tell you the Truth.

Aug. Vis nunquam Tristis esse? Been vive.

Printed for the Author. 1656.

The Epistle to the Reader.
COURTEOUS READER,
(FOr, with the present untoward Generation, I have not yet so far forfeited my
charity, but that I shall still proclaim thee ^or such, as far as the infirm
legs of these cripled lines shall carry them, until thou shall appear signally
to deserve the contrary) we are fallen upon an Age (thou can not but be
tenderly sensible) wherein, not only those Courtly spirits, that are exquisite
Gleekers, or Cribbagers; but even every Country Bumkin, that can but play at
plain Trump, or Noddy, cannot but clea^ly discern the Knave every day to turn;
and appear in his orient colors; yea in value to ou^vy, not the King only,
the supreme Magistrate; but all that is called God. And then the less strange
may it seem to observe, not only that all Kingly Authority is laid aside; but
that all manner exercise of the Priestly function is suspended, amongst us. So
that now, not only those his immediate Vicegerents a^e grown strangers to
their Princely thrones; but we his voices, become hoarse, not with clamor so
much as silence; yea our Tongues with standing still so long within the stables
of our Mouths, no better then resty; yea, as by the hearing of an Hiena's
voice, st^uck dumb; no marvel if we be driven (I say not with Zachary, in
sac^ed page so much to call for writing^Tables, as) with Io in the Poet, having
our Hands and Tongues; at least our Tongues, which should serve us as Hands,
for the holding of the Pens of ready Writers, cut off; and so by consequence
our Teeth knocked out, to try the extremest of conclusions of making our Feet
our Minds interpreters. And so, as they put us upon the exigence of leading
Poetical lives; so enforce they our Lines to tread the measures of Poetic
feet. Nay, the more surely to muzzle the mouths of us, that are the Analogical
oxen, for the bearing of the Ark, deny us utterly the use of these very feet of
ours, wherewith we ought to tread out the spiritual grain of the Word. Nay, now
at l^st, when, pos^ibly, with the improvements of our utmost skill, and
industry, we may have arrived to some good measure of perfection in the New,
and untroden, Path of Pedography* even in these very feet of ours, by the good
Angels of our Times (as Jacob by the Angel in his Thigh) are we rendered so
lame, that by them we are denied all manner License of giving out the sad Print
of our, though never so pressing necessity. That Liberty, under the notion of
Begging Scholars, and other vagrants, is (I know not by what law) interdicted
us. However, when for these things sake, our souls at times cannot forbear
weeping in secret places, ^or my particular Relation to thee; since my address
speaks me so charitable toward thee, thou shall give me leave to mind
thee, that even in civility as well as conscience, thou art bound to do me so
much justice, as that what ever it be, that I shall offer thee with the Right
Hand, thou be far from receiving, much more rending, with the Le^t. Which right
shall thou do me, thou shall still encourage me to go on to be, what yet no
discouragement shall ever take me ^ff from being

(...). T. B.

Psalm. 37. 13. The Lord shall laugh him to scorn; for he has seen that* his
Day is coming.
AS the whole Psalm may, not amiss, be styled a Caveat, entered in the behalf
of the righteous, and that in the nature of an Apology of Gods providence;
which (not unlikely) may be quarrelled, for his prospering of the wicked in
their enormous courses; yea, whose sharp sight, and sense, may possibly affect
the hearts of the righteous with such a sting of envy, as so far to startle
their confidence in this providence, as to justle them to a foul Apostasy from
the Kings Highway of righteousness, they may, more then probably, have proposed
unto themselves to measure: So is this verse, now read, with the preceding,
nothing else but a Prolepsis or Preoccupation, of an Objection may be framed
against the course of this providence of his. The Objection we have in the
preceding verse; strange it may not seem that the righteous man's confidence in
this Providence, at times, appear to be shaken; for that the ungodly man ceased
not to seek counsel against him; and to gnash upon him with his teeth, as if he
had him now already within the reach of his cruel mercy, and were upon the
point of tearing him in pieces. The anticipating Decision we have in the words
now read; which point out unto us, the Almighties scornful Defeasance of all
these his jewelled, but abortive, Projects, and practices. The Lord shall laugh
him to scorn, for he has seen that his day is coming.

The Text then, you cannot but clearly see, what jus^ reason I shall have to
term the Destruction of a Bibel, or the Defeasance of a Wicked Man's Plot. Yea,
whereas in the practice of our Common Law, we, every day hear distinctly of a
Judgment, and a Defeasan^, the one still voiding the other; in this branch of
Go^s Law, we here meet with a Defeasance, which is not without the At^endance
of an heavy Judgment.

Wherein (not to perplex your memories with any intricate Divisions) I shall
only charge them with the recognition of these two special Observables: The
Manner of thi^ Defea^anc^. Cause

The Manner, of all the most scornful and opprobrious; The Lord shall laugh him
to scorn.

The Cause two fold; The One, Subalternate. Other, Principal.

The Subalt^^nate, is the near approach of this day; His Day is coming.

The Principal, Gods foresight of this days near approach, He has seen it.

These the Par^s. Of these plainly, o^derly, and briefly, as I may. And first
are we to begin with the Manner of the Defeasance of this the wicked man's Plot;
which, we see here, is of all the most scornful and opprobrious. The Lord shall
laugh him to scorn.

There is a Fable, amongst the Poets, of Jupiter, that, having married Metis,
and devouring her, being with child by him, himself is at last delivered of an
armed Pallas out of his head. And such Fables may you observe more then a good
many men in the world to frame, and fashion, to themselves. They will needs
dream them into a love like omnipotency, and then must they marry Metis; wed
themselves, to a sad, and serious consultation, for the succesful
accomplishment of their, whatever, intended designs. Which, having greedily
devoured, and thoroughly digested, their Brains must now be brought a bed of an
armed Pallas; of such a well-hatched plot, as can in no wise miscarry. Hezekiah
(may Rabsakeh be heard to be his Dictator) shall now say, I have counsel and
strength for war, Esa. 36. 5. And then no marvel, if men now big-swolne with
pride, shall, with Edom, in that other Prophet, Obad. 4. Exalt themselves as
eagles, and build their nests amongst the stars; and then say in their
hearts, as it is in the preceding Verse, who shall bring us down to the ground?
And as those in that other prop^et, Amos 9. 10. No evil shall overtake, or
prevent us. And this, for that, as those in that other prophet, Esa. 28. 15. We
have made a Covenant with death, and with hell are we at an agreement; when the
overflowing scourge shall pass through, it shall not come nigh us; for we have
made Lies our refuge, and under ^alsehood have we hid our selves. And, for the
making of all cock sure indeed, resolve for for who-ever they shall find
standing in their way, as those Husbandmen for the Heyr, Luke 20. 14. To kill
all, that all their inheritances may be theirs. Whereas yet all this their
imaginary happiness shall, upon the true test of trial, appear to be no other
then a very Fable; not unlike that cloud, Ixion embraced instead of Juno; yea,
Aegri s^mnium; no other, then a sick man's Dream: as, when one dream^th (as the
Prophet wordeth it, Esaias 29. 8.) that he drinks; but, when he awaketh, his
soul is thirsty, and faint. And whatever pomp, or greatness, he may fondly
dote on, will in conclusion appear to be no better then that of the Duke of
Burgundy's Beggar: for that his shape, which for a time he has borrowed, when
it comes to be laid aside, no better a man is he at last, then at first he
was. The All-seeing Spectator, and infallible Judge, of Heaven and Earth,
laugheth at these their ridiculous Enterludes, at these their self-gulling
Scenes. And, as he only is approved, whom God commends, 2. Cor. 10. 18. --
Populus me sibilat, at mihi plaudo; however such brainsick Fancies may
transport many a weak soul into a Fools paradise; where they may honey
themselves, as did our Prophet sometimes in the like case. Psalm. 30. 6. I shall
never be cast down. Yea, and there entitle God himself to the fixing of their
stations; Thou Lord of thy goodness, have made my Hill so strong: Especially,
shall but the applause of men of their own cut, and making up, sooth them up in
this their fancied settlement; yea be it that but even their posterity (as this
same prophet of ours, Psalm. 49. 13. has it) shall praise their saying; a mere
scorn yet, at last, shall the best of such appear, when the Lord shall make him
no better then his sport, and laughing stock. The Lord shall laugh him to scorn.

It is a word of the Satyrists; Nil habet infelix, paupertas durius in se,
Quam quod ridiculos homines facit --
Much easier might want be born,
Did it not make a man a scorn.


The prophet Jeremy, speaking of impenitent sinners, says of them, Surely
these are poor, these are foolish. Ier. 5. 4. And such poor fools, that
measure all things by their present fantastic happiness, and groundlesly
promise themselves an uninterupted series, and endless succession, thereof, shall
all such in conclusion appear, when they shall come to be sensible of the
heaviest symptom of poverty upon them, of becoming the sad objects of the
Almighties laughter. The Kings of the earth stand up (says our Royal prophet,
Psalm. 2.) i. e. Herod Ascalonita (says Lyra upon the words) that makes a
bloody Inquisition after the Savior of the World, upon his first sal^^tion
thereof, Mat. (...) An^ Herod Antipas, that (...), by arraying him in a purple
Robe, now he is upon the point of giving it his last valediction, Luke 23. And
the Rulers, i. e. Pilate, and the chief priests (says the same Lyra) take
counsel together against the Lord, and this his Anointed. He that dwells in
Heaven (says the same prophet of ours, in the following verses) shall laugh
them to scorn, (as him of the same stamp here in the Text) the Lord shall have
them in derision. Then shall he speak unto them in his wrath, and vex them
in his sore displeasure. Gods laughter at the wicked has more of an imbittered
gall, then a tickling spleen, in it; as relishing more of displeasure he
conceives against sinners, then any delight he thereby finds in himself:
Nay, it is not only our prophets word of him in this case; but his own of
himself, to those that (for instance) wilfully shut up their ears against his
counsel, Prove. 1. I will laugh at your calamity, when your fear comes as a
desolation, and your destruction as a whirle wind. Nay, in this Scene God
shall not be a single Actor; but all the Saints and Angels shall join in
Consort, to make up a Merry-Angry Chorus with him. And therefore, as the
School tells us, that what ever they discern, is in speculo Trinitatis, in
the glass of the Trinity: the glass of the Divine Essence, which these
Heavenly Spirits are still, with unspeakable joy, contemplating, reflecteth
upon them, not so much the species of their own visages, as the cast of his
countenance; unto whose resemblance they are still studying, the nearest they
may, to compose themselves; mourning, as they see that darkened with a cloud;
and Rejoicing, and Laughing, as they see that fitted though but to a Scornful,
and so Angry, Laughter. So that, as there a multitude of the Heavenly Host with
the Shepherds, cha^ting out that cheerful D^x^logy, of (...) be to God on
high* on earth peace, as soon as one Angel has acquainted them with the glad
^idings of our Saviors Birth, Luke 2. No sooner does the Almighty put his
countenance into a Smiling-Frowning posture, but Regis ad exempl^^ all the
Saints, and Angels, (...) on the same semblance of countenance. The righteous
(says our prophet) even those that live still upon the earth, shall rejoice to
see such vengeance executed upon the ungodly, as that now he shall have the
advantage of washing his footsteps in his his blood (as it is Psalm. 58. 9.) as
soon as he shall discover the Almighty (as him here in the Text) to make him
the subject of his scornful, and so wrathful, laughter. The Lord shall laugh
him to scorn.

Let then the Enemies of Truth, and all Righteousness, hiss, and gnash their
teeth, at those that are not of their tune, and temper; let them triumph over
them, with a (...) have swallowed them up; this is the day that we looked for;
and now we have seen and known it, as it is Lam. 2. 16. And laugh at them with
an Aha, we have devoured them, as it is Psa. 35. 25. VV^e unto you that laugh
now (you know, is our Saviors own doom) for you shall mourn and weep, Luke 6*
25. The son of Sirach, Ecclus. 27, 29. runs a sad Descant upon this ground;
Those that rejoice at the fall of the Righteous, anguish shall consume them
before they di^. Nay, those that have afflicted the Righteous man,
self-convicted of the guilt of these their barbarous, and savage practices; and
knowing that the time is at hand, when they shall see him stand with great
confidence before their faces (as it is, Wisd. 5.) may you hear, in great
anguish of spirit, antedating their own sad Destiny, and wailing out their own
doleful Elegy: This is he whom we had sometimes in derision, and a Proverb of
reproach; we fools accounted his Life madness, and his end without Honor; now
is he numbered amongst the children of God, and his lot is amongst the Saints;
whilst we, in the mean time, have in vain wearied our selves in the ways of
wickedness, and destruction; we have erred from the way of Truth, and the Sun
of Righteousness is not Risen upon us. We say, in our ordinary proverb, that he
Laugheth well, that Laugheth at last. Indeed, the success of a wicked Man,
whilst he grows Elated with his politic, and mischievous, practices upon
the Righteous prospered, may afford him such a kind of Superficial Merriment,
(...); as may wet the Mouth; but has little of virtue in it for the warming of
the Heart. Yea and minister unto them such matter of Flickering Laughter, as
that, like that of the Preachers fool, Eccles. 7. 6. it shall make a crackling
Noise, as Thorns under a Pot. But, or ever the Pots of their Hearts be made
hot with th^se thorns, Indignation (our Prophet is peremptory, Psalm. 58. 8.)
shall vex them, and lie heavy upon them, as a thing that is Raw. Or (as our
New Translation reads it) God shall take them away from this their Joy, as
with a whirlewinde. Their Laughter shall in conclusion appear to be no other
then Risus Sardonicus; as the Laughter of those that have eaten of the Herb
Sardoa; whose forced Merriment, though it may outwardly set them a Grinning;
yet is inwardly still Griping, and Galling, them. Continua Anxiet as nec mensae
tempore cessat; to make the Poet speak the Language of Canaan. Even in the
midst of Laughter their hearts are sorr^wful; and the end of such mirth is
always heaviness, Prove. 14. 13. So that then just reason may St. James seem to
have for the Allarming of the Rich Men of his time, those that by unjust
practices have heaped them up Riches, Go to now ye Rich men, weep and howl for
the miseries that shall come upon you; you have lived in Pleasure on the Earth;
you have nourished your hearts as in the day of slaughter; you have Condemned,
and Killed, the Just; and none resisted you! Jam. 5. But Mourn you shall, and
Weep; your Laughter shall be turned into mourning; and your Joy into heavines.
Jam. 4. Yea, the Lords own word it is to those that forsake him; forget his
Holy Mountain; and prepare a Table for their Troops. Esa. 65. My Servants
shall Rejoice; but you shall be ashamed; my Servants shall Sing, and Laugh, for
joy of Heart; but you shall Howl for vexation of Spirit. And then, as the
Preacher, Eccles. 7. 3. Sorrow is better then Laughter: sarre better shall it
in conclusion appear for the Righteous to live for a time, in a sad condition
under their Enemies persecuting Hands; being fully assured that the time is at
Hand that their Hearts shall so Rejoice, as that their Joy no Man shall take
from them, as our Savior sometimes to his Discipes in the like case, Joh. 16.
22. Then with their Persecutors that may perhaps for some short space Revel in
all manner of jollity, and exercise an uncontrouled Tyranny upon them; when, at
last, yea perhaps suddenly, they shall become sensible, that the Lord all this
while Laugheth at these their unhallowed practices: clearly discovering his Day
of Sadness to be at hand.

Which fitly brings us to the view of the sec^nd Observable in this Defeat of
the Wicked Man's Plot, the Cause thereof; which we may here see to be twofold:
The One Subalternate, Other Principal.

And first are we to begin with the Subalternate, the near approach of this his
Day. His Day is commeng.

In the 19 of St. Luke's Gospel a clear intimation have we, that, what
Jerusalem there had, every sinner still has, a twofold Day; a Day of Merciful
visitation, and a Day of Drereful Vengeance. A Day of visitation; O that thou
had known in this thy Day! A Day, wherein, as God visited Jerusalem, for
three continued years, by the preaching of his Son: so does he sinners still
by the voice of his Successors; his lawfully ordained Messengers, and
Ministers. And a Day of vengeance; Behold the Day of the Lord God of Hosts, the
Day of vengeance, comes, wherein he will Avenge him of his Enemies. Jer. 46.
10. Even of those, that (as we may, not amiss, Gloss this of the Prophet by
that of the above-praised Evangelist, in the 44 of the above. praised Chapter)
that shall appear such Enemies, not to him only, but themselves, as to have
neglected the Day of their visitation. The first of these is the Day, wherein
God vouchsafed us a fair opportunity of walking; even of walking in Newness of
Life. Are there not twelve hours in the day? (says our Savior, Joh. 11. 9.)
if any Man walk in the Day, he stumbleth not; because he sees the Light of the
world. And yet who sees no^, how far even the best of us are from being such
good Husbands of this Day, as (according to that our Prophets Euloge of Man,
Psalm. 104. 23.) to go forth to our work, and Labor; even this our work, and
Labor, of Newness of Life, until the Evening: and therefore to say to our
Couches of Idleness, as the Angel sometimes to Iaob, Genesis 32. 26. Let me go; for
the Day breaks: that we are rather so far prone to turn the Day into Night,
as to trifle away every hour of this Day in stretching us upon our Ivory Beds;
in Dreaming them out in secure slumbers; in drawing down Deep Carouses; in
wantonning in Lustful Embraces; in studying of politic Contrivances, how we
may rea^iest swallow up the Estates; and so suck the Blood of our innocent
Neighbor? And yet the Light of this Day (like those Northern people, that have
the Equinoctial for their Horizon) we will needs have (as have they in their
proper seasons) still Lasting. And, as those that labor of a Vertigo, conceive
all things to Run Round, by reason of the Dizziness, that is in their Brain:
for that we are Idly disposed, we will needs have the Time of this Day so far
from passing, that we will neede^ persuade our selves, that we have a like
command upon it, as had Ioshuah sometimes upon the Sun and Moon, Josh. 10* 12.
Stand thou Sun in Gibeon, and thou Moon in the Valley of Ajjalon: so that, at
our words it shall stand at a stay, to keep us company in th^s our Idleness.
And, for any other Day, we put it far away from us (as it is Amos 6. 13.) and
cause the seat of violence to draw near; and (as it is in the verse immediately
following the Text) We draw out our Swords, and bend our Bows, to slay such as
are of an upright Co^versa^ion. Yea we scoff at the tidings of any other days
approach, as those in the Apostle, 2 Pe^. 3, 4. at the News of the coming of
the Day of Judgment; where is the Promise; or rather Menace, of its coming? Or
if, much ado, we will be drawn to hear of any such thing, we yet say, as those
in the Prophet, Esaias 56. 12. To morrow shall be as this Day, and much more
abundant. -- Cras, Cras, procrastinat -- And still every Day, that shines out
upon us, shall, in our presumptions, still be sped of a New, and Fresh, Morrow,
to attend it. The Spirit of God, in the mean time, whose peculiar office it is
to bring all things to the Remembrahce of these, he inspireth, Joh. 14. 26.
becomes every where, throughout the Sacred Volu^es, an uncessant (...) of
another Day, the wicked Man is to expect. Those, that come after him (says
Holy Job of him) shall be astonished at the coming of his Day; as they, that
went before him, were affrighted, Job 18. 20. Remember the children of Edom, O
Lord in the Day of Jerusalem (you know is our Prophets Address unto him in her
behalf, Psalm. 137. 7.) how they cried Down with it, Down with it, even to the
Ground. I saw (is the Lords own word, wherein he, no less justly then sharply,
taxes his people of Israel) that in the Day, wherein strangers carried away
the Forces of your Brother Jacob, and Foreigners entered into the Gates, and
cast Lots upon Jerusalem; that you Rejoiced ^ver the childred of Judah, in the
Day of their Destruction, and spoke proudly in the Day of their Distress. Obad.
11. 12. And it is that other Prophets just Exe^cration upon the Wicked, after
that he has capitulated with the Almighty about their prosperity; Prepare
them, O Lord, for their Day; even the Day of slaughter. Jer. 12. 3. Yea this
Day of the wickeds prosperity it pleases the same Lord oftentimes to contract;
and so to speed their Day, or rather Nights, of Vengeance, that their Sun goes
down at Noon, and the Earth is Darkened with them in the clear Day, as it is
Amos 8. 9* Yea, when God distributeth sorrows unto them in his Anger, and the
Night of their Destruction comes upon them, their Candle, that they might now
at last hope should afford them some poor, weak, Light of Comfort, is, not
seldom, put out, as it is Job 21. 17. And so, as it is, 5. 14. of the same
Book, they meet with Darkness in the Daytime. And then strange may it not
seem to hear, that the Knees of this Profligate wretch (as Baltasars) shall
appear to tremble, when he shall now find this Day, or rather this Day made
Night (as it is Amos 5. 8.) unawares to overtake him, which he had put far
away from him? Especially when he shall hear the Almighty vying an high Roar
of Laughter with his loud-yelling Accent of Anguish of Spirit, upon his clear
Foresight of this Days near Approach.

Which is the more Principal cause of the Defeasance of the the wicked Man's
Plot; and in the next Place calls for your consideration. The Lord shall
laugh him to scorn; for he has seen that his Day is coming.

The word [ Is comming] you see, is of an Indefinite Expression; and so far
from pointing out the present Minute of this Days Appearance. At which, whilst
debauched Miscreants, and to every good work Reprobate, will (not unlikely) be
ready to catch Advantage; and shall therefore, with the five Foolish Virgins,
Mat. 25. betake them to slumbrings, and sleepings; and, with that Evil servant,
in the 24 of the same Gospel, to Eating, and Drinking, and smiting his Fellow
servants; whom therefore his Master, coming in a Day, that he looks not for
him; and in an Hour, that he is not aware of, shall cut in sunder, and
appoint him his Portion with Hypocrites: He, that shall but duly poize things
in the Balance of the Sanctuary, ^n the Scales of a Religious consideration;
whose Fear is as his Faith, the Evidence of things not seen, will look upon
this Day, of whose Indefinite, and Indeterminate Advent he is here thus
cautioned, as if he saw, and felt it already come. At least, as Damocles did
upon the Pendant Sword, which may every Minute drop down about his Ears, and
make an immediate Dispatch of him. And therefore it is well worthy our best
observation, that, when the Prophet Ezekiel, 7th. of his Prophecy, gives the
Inhabitants of Jerusalem a shrill Allarum of their inevitable Destruction at
Hand, the Future, and Present, Tenses he so intortleth, and interweaveth, as
that he seems to make both of equal certainty. I will shortly pour out my
Fury, and accomplish mine Anger upon thee. verse. 8. That, you see, for the
Future. And yet, verse. 6. we hear of nothing else but the found of Present
Destruction: An End is come; the End is come; it watches for thee: Beho^a! it
is come. Nay, the Final Desolation of this very Jerusalem though it be not
Actually Accomplished until Two (...) Forty years after our Saviors (...): Yet
are the People of that Present Generation Forewarned thereof by him, as if it
were already put in Execution: Behold! your House is left unto you dese^le.
Mat. 23. 38. So that then, see I Uncleanness, Excess, Sacrilege, Barbarism,
Cruelty, Blasphemy, Hypocrisy, all manner of Iniquity, to abound in an Age?
and yet, not to escape with Impunity only; but to be sped of all manner of
successful Prosperity? shall I now conclude, that they shall finally escape
for this their wickedness? as it is Psalm. 56. 7. No; I look upon their
Destruction as undoubtedly to come upon them, as if I saw it Actually
overtaking them. Nay, Ye say, It will be Foul weather to Day, (you know, is
our Saviors words to the Pharisees) for the Sky is Red, and Lowering. Mat. 17.
3. See I Men to look with Red, and Lowering, Countenances, portending nothing
but Bloody, and Destructive, Practices? I justly conclude, that there is a
present Storm of Foul weather, that boadeth, not others only from them, but
even themselves. Nay, as the Flood comes upon the old world, and sweepeth
them all away, whilst they are Ea^ing and Drinking, Building and Planting,
Marrying, and giving in Marriage. Matthew. 24. 38. See 1 Men securely promising
themselves an happy continuance, and prosperous success, in their never-so
Irregular, Courses? upon this Security of theirs I look, as upon an undoubted
Harbinger of the Day of their Destruction hard at the Doors. But, be it, that
it shall please the Lord for a time to suspend the Execution of his Vengeance
upon these High-grain'd, and Deep died Sinners: So that the Day thereof, he yet
sees every Day nearer Aproaching, may for some short space be forborne; the
Observation may in no wise escape us, that the Hebrew word (...) Hhavar,
signifies as well to be Angry as to Forbear. When the Lord heard this, he was
wroth, says our prophet, Psalm. 78. 22. Vatablus reads, Audivit Dominus, and
Distulit: The Lord heard, and forbore, Thou have Abhorred, and Forsaken thine
Anointed, says the same prophet, Psalm. 89. 37. St. Hierome reads, (...);
Thou have Forborne him. Gods Forbearance of a Sinner in his wicked ways for a
time, is so far from being a Testimony of his Favor, that it is rather an
irr^fragable Argument of his highly incensed Displeasure. What, if God, willing
to show his wrath (says the Apostle) and to make his Power known, endured with
much Long-sufferance the vessels of wrath, fitted to Destruction? Romans 9. 22.
So that then, see I Men to despise the Riches of Gods Goodness, and
Long-sufferance, which should lead them to Repentance; whilst he is Patiently
Bearing with them in their Horrid, and Execrable, Impieties? I now assure my
self that God intends to show his Wra^h, and to make his Power eminently
known, -- (...) -- as upon vessels of wrath, that all this while have been
fitting themselves to Destruction. If a Man will not turn (says our prophet)
then will he Bend his Bow, and make ready his Arrows against the Persecutours,
Psalm. 7. For though a Sinner do Evil an hundred times, and his Days be
prolonged; yet at last (the Preacher is peremptory) it shall not go well with
him, Eccles. 8. And therefore, however you may observe the Almighty to dance
Attendance upon wicked Miscreants a long time, in a continued expectance of
their Conversion; and, no less Passionately then Compassionately, to debate
the reason of their Remissness in Turning unto him; Turn ye, turn ye from
your evil ways; for why will you Die, O ye House of Israel? Ezekiel. 33. 11. Thou
gave them place of Repentance (says the Wiseman of the People) not being
ignorant that they were a Naughty Generation, that their Malice was bred in
them; and that their Cogitation would never be changed. Wisd. 12. 10. Yet, if
now at last, after his long exercised, and so abused, patience, he can discover
no semblance of turning, then does he no longer forbear to let fly the Arrows
of his vengeance. For whose drawing up to the head though he may take some
time (as St. Hierome) to give them fair warning that they stand within the
reach of his Arm: yet, when he lets loose from the string, he strikes home
indeed, and pierces to the very heart. Sera tamen tacitis Poena venit pedibus;
God, when he comes with Leaden Heels to strike, strikes yet with Iron Hands,
when he comes. The further back a Blow is fetched, the Deeper it wounds.
And, when Gods judgments are furthest adjourned, for point of Execution, they
still leave, when they come to be executed, the most deadly Scar behind them.
He, that is of Purer eyes then to behold Iniquity, will not suffer such Iniquity
for ever to escape, as not undiscovered, so neither unpunished. But, as we say
of a skilful Fencer, that his Hand and Eye still go together; upon the sight of
the ungodlies courses, contumatiously continued, he takes the matter into his
own Hands, as it is v. 16. of this Psalm. And then wounds to the purpose the
Hairy Scalp of such an one, as goes on still in his wickedness, as it is Psalm.
68. 21. And that Dreadful Day of vengeance the Hand of his Justice will at last
be sure to bring on, which the Eye of his omniscience has foreseen, and that
perhaps for some long time, a coming. The Lord shall laugh him to scorn; for
he has seen that his Day his coming.

Indeed, as we say of the Papists, that in the Sacrament, he is, every Day,
Making his Maker: we, in semblance, will needs be making, us a God of such a
composition, both for Hands, Face, and Eyes, as best pleases us; all of
Sweetness, and Grace; but of Justice, and Rigor, nothing. Nothing of him will
sink with us, but that his Mercy is great, and that he will be pacified for the
multitude of his sins, as it is Ecclus. ^. 6. That vision in the mean time,
that Ezekiel in the first of his Prophecy, sees, of four several creatures
appearing, each having four several Faces, is well worth our best Heeding;
whereof the first is of a Man; the second of an Eagle; the third of an Ox; and
the fourth of a Lion. And to every of these Faces has the great God of Heaven
and Earth eyes suitable. He has the eyes of a Man, the eyes of his Providence;
He ^uleth all things with his Power for ever (says our Prophet) his Eyes
behold the people. Ps. 66. 6. He has the eyes of an Eagle, his eyes of simple
Intelligence (as the School speaks) wherewith he beholds all things; To his
Eyes are all things Naked, and open, says the Apostle. Heb. 4. 11. He has his
Ox Eyes; Eyes, not of compassion only; I have seen (is his own word) the
Affliction of my People, that is in Egypt, Exodus 3. 7. But of Approbation to;
The Eyes of the Lord are over the Righteous, says our Prophet, Psalm. 34. 14.
And he has his Eyes of a Lion likewise, his Eyes of Indignation. And for the
sharp edge of these to be darted out upon the Proud, the picture of Patience
cannot forbear to be instant. Job 40. 12. Look upon every one that is Proud,
(says he) and bring him L^w. And with these, by our Prophets verd^ct
(answering that Holy Man's Desire) as he beholds the Proud a far off, Psalm.
138. 6. so does he see the coming of the Wicked Man's Day. The Lord shall Laugh
him to scorn; for he has seen that his Day is coming.

It is the saying of the Lord to Samuel now, by a Commission from (...) being
to anoint one of Iesse's sons for King over his People, he is now fixing his
Eyes, and upon the point of laying his Hands, upon Eliab, The Lord sees not as
man sees, 1 Samuel, 16. 7. The Apostle, 1 Cor. 13. 12. gives us as clear a
Representation, as may be, of the different Edge of either of their Eye sights;
(...); we see (says he) as in a Glass, Darkly. A Glass; Qualia sunt
Perspicilla sinum, seu Speculum oculere, says a learned Interpreter upon the
words; such as are old Men's Spectacles; or Prospective Glasses to Old, or
Young. (...), as it follows; in a Dark, Mysterious, and Ridling,
Representation. Yea, and not only so; but, for the General, we look upon any
evil to come, as at the wrong end of a Prospective; and so (as those in the
Prophet above praised) put it far away from us. Nay, find we not what ever
Evil to make winged speed after us? We finally put off all thoughts thereof,
as those in that other Prophet above praised; Is not the Lord amongst us? None
Evil can happen unto us. Yea, whilst, through our weak Perspicils, wherewith
we look upon the Aspects and Influences of the Heavens, we will needs be
taking upon us a faculty of Divining of things to come; and hereupon cheer, and
courage, up our selves in the most Mischievous practices; as did Zedekiah,
Ahab, 1 King. 22. 12. Go on, and prosper; who sees not what just reason the
whole world shall have to cry out of us, as those in that other Prophet, Zach.
10. 2. The Diviners amongst us have seen a ^ye? and told false Dreams? It is
otherwise with this All-seeing God. In the Infallible Glass of himself he
contemplateth all things, whether Past, or Future, or Present. Yea, and when he
pleases, sees not only, but calls for t^ings that are not, as if they
were. Romans 14. 17. And therefore pregnant is that the Prophets words of him,
Esaias 7. 18. He shall hiss for the Fly, that is in the uttermost parts of
Egypt; and the Be in the Land of Assyria; and they shall come and rest in the
Desolate Valleys. The very Poet can say, (...); God has an Eye armed with
Revenge. Yea, Oculos Emissities, says the Comic; Eyes, that dart out
Dead-doing Rays. Nay Eyes as Thunderbolts, and those Right-aiming (says the
Wiseman) which discharged from the Clouds, as from a well-drawn Bow, readily
fly to the Mark. Wisd. 5. 21. Nay, as his Hand draws up these Thunderbolts
of his judgments to the H^ad, and discharges them upon the wicked: so does his
Eye, looking as at the Right End of a Prospective, draw them near home, and so
speedeth the Executi^^ of them. I will ba^^en my word (is his own word) to
p^rform it. Jer. 1. 12. And this time, of his Acceleration of vengeance upon a
^e^ple, far is he from being so reserved, but that still he preacquainteth
his Prophets therewith. Shall I hide from Abraham (is the same Lords solemn
debate with himself about the destruction of Sodom) that thing* which I intend
to do? Genesis 18. 17. No! the Prophet makes a present and positive Answer to
this the Lords Quere, Amos 3. 7. Surely the Lord will do nothing, but that he
Reveals his Secret to his Servants, the Prophets. And this you may see to be
the Ground of our Saviors own Address to his Father, after that he has
denounced Vengeance against Bethsaid^, Chorazin, and Capernaum; I thank thee
Father, Lord of Heaven and Earth, that thou have Hid these things from the
Wise, and Prudent; and have Revealed them unto B^bes, M^t. 11. 25. O! the
marc^lesse Privilege of a right Prophet of the Lord! yea, but of a Child of
God! of a very Babe in Grace! That, when Frantic Enthusiasts shall vainly,
and groundlesly, boaste them of their Brain-sicke Revelations; and Worldly
Wisemen of their full Magazines of Understanding, and Knowledge; shall only
indeed have the Honor vouchsafed them, of being Privy Counselors to the
great King of Heaven! It is one special Article of Precedence, I find given to
the Study of History, in General, beyond all other Studies; Lectores suos
vates reddit; That it rendereth its Reader^ Prophets. The observation of the
success, Designs have been sped of in Times past, may well enable the
observers to Presage how the like shall succeed for the Time to come. But then,
the Reading of Holy Histories, of Divine Records, must needs much more be of
signal virtue to inspire the Reader^ with a Prophetique Spirit. And then just
reason may St. Paul seem to have for the magnifying of his Timothy, that, from
a child he^ has studied the Holy Sciptures, which are able to make him wise
unto Salvation. 1 Timothy 3. 15. So that then, if the Jews, by the Fig trees
putting forth her Leaves, could Divine of the Summers near Approach, Matthew.
24. 32. perhaps, out of these sacred Records, some Prognostics, not
improbable, may be collected of the near approach of a Wicked Man's Day. And
upon these our parts it shall be to look, as upon Red Crosses, set on the
Doors of Infected Houses; seasonable Items that we come not near. And as upon
Boighs cast out near the Anchors of Ships, fair Monitours that we dash not
upon them. Of many, (being loath too far to exercise your Patience) I shall
only name a few. The first (as already you have had an intimation) Security.
You hear in the Gospel, how suddenly the Rich Co^morants pleasing Lullaby, he
sings to his Soul; Soul, th^n have much Goods laid up for many years, is, by
the Almighty himself, intterrupted with a Doleful Dirge; Thou Fool, this
Night shall thy Soul be required of thee, Luke 12. 20. And the Apostle takes
it for an irrefragable conclusion, that, when Men cry Peace, and Safety, then
sudden Destruction comes upon them, like as Travel upon a woman with child;
and they shall not escap^. 1 These. 5. 3 And if, when God calls to Weeping
and Mourning, to Baldness and Sack^loth, there shall be flaying of Oxen, and
killing of Sheep, eating Flesh, and drinking Wine, this Iniquity (is the Lords
own express word to his people) shall not be purged, until ye Die, and
Perish. Isa. 22. 14. A Man's secure enjoyment of himself, especially in wanton,
and Lawless, Practices, is as certain, and immediate, a Fore^^unner of
D^struction, as is the Day (...) of the Suns Appearance. The second, Pride. An
Haughty Spirit goes before a Fall, is a Maxim, the Wise man takes for
indisputable: Prove. 16. 18. So that then, where Pride shall o^ce be seen, as a
Captain, to March in the Van, little question is there to be made, but that
Destruction, as the Lieutenant, will still be sure to Bring up the Rear. And
then, if Men shall once begin to say to themselves, as Babylon, Isa. 14. 13. I
will ascend up above the Height of the Clouds; and will be like the Most
High; and so shall arrogate unto themselves a Power of being Lords Paramounts
of the whole World; and give it Laws (though as those of D^aco) written in
Blood; and shall therefore make no Bones of provoking their most Potent
Neighbors to take up Arms for their Defense; the next News to be expected is
a like Fatal Doom upon the^ with that upon Babylon; Thou shall be brought down
to Hell, and to the sides of the pit. The third Hardness of Heart. When neither
Mercies, nor Judgments, can reclaim Men from their Enormous courses; but that
they shall still resolve to go on, as if they would dare the Almighty to
execute ve^^eance upon them; it is too app^rent a symbol that they are given
up to a Reprobate sense; and are all this while treasuring up themselves wrath,
against the Day of wrath, and the Revelation of Gods Righteous judgments, Romans
2. 5. If all the plagues wherewith God visits Pharaoh; and all the
Qualifications of Long-sufferance, he sweetly tempereth with them, can at last
make no impression upon him, then justly does the same Lord take up a
Resolution, that in his Destruction he will get him Honor. Exodus 14, The
^ourth, Fain^ness of Spirit; which has commonly Destitution of Counsel for its
inseparable Companion. It is one special Presage of Aegypts Destruction at
hand, that her Spirit shall fail in the midst of her, and that her Counsel
shall be destroyed. Isa. 19. 3. When Men shall be surprised with such a Panick
Terror; or rather so pursued with Guilt of Conscience, that (what Zebul
sometimes to Gaal (...). 9. 36. Thou see the sh^^^^es of the Mountains as if
they were Men) they shall be so affrighted with Shadows, as if they saw an
Army of Resolved Men marching in Battel-array against them; and shall so, by
way of a strange kind of Antiperistasis, encourage the spoiled to come against
the Fortress, as it is Amos 5. 9. but find none the least Cordial of Counsel
in the mean time, for the chearing up their Drooping spirits in the Depth of
their Distress; it cannot now appear a matter of great difficulty, without any
great help of Art, to Divine, that the Ruin of such is closely treading upon
their Heels. If an Hideons Noise of Trembling come once to be heard in the
Camp of the Philistines, they presently melte away, beating one another. 1 Samuel 14, 15. 16. The fifth, Hy^ pocrisie. Ye Hypocrites (says our Savior to
the Pharisees, boasting of their Religious Corban Mat 15. 7.) When the the Word
of God must give place (I say not to Men's received Traditions so much as) to
their, not to be paralel^'d, Self ends; nay, when it shall be made a
stalking-Horse for the compassing of these Self Ends of theirs: such Clay (yea,
perhaps I may, not amiss, ^ say Claw) Feet cannot long keep the Head (though
it may appear all of pure Gold) long upon the Shoulders. Every Man's work shall
be made manifest (says the Apostle) for there will be a Day, that shall
declare it. 1 Cor. 3. 13. The sixth, Oppression* When Men shall be practi^-sing
to appear such Mighty Nimrods, as to Hunt every man his brother with a Net,
then is the Day of their Visitation, and Perplexity at Hand. Mic. 7. Yea, in
the same Net, which they have privily said for others, not seldom, is their
own Foot ta^ken. Psa. 9. And then, as St. Gregory, Cum sentio poenum, recogito
Culpam; When the sense of Punishent may possibly have produced, what the guilt
of Fault has hitherto been far from being able to effect, a startling you
out of your secure slumbers, the Confession of, what perhaps by deare-bought
Experience you shall then be instructed in; and though, not unlikely, --
'(...); not without some kind of Reluctance, extorted from you, as from
Adonibezek sometime: Jud. 1. 7. as I have done to others, so has God requited
me: you shall find to tend no less to the comfort of your own souls then
God^ Glory. When I heard these things (says the Prophet) my Belly trembled, my
Lips quivered, yea Rottenness entered into my very Bones, that I might find rest
in the day of Trouble. Hab. 3. 16. O well is us, and happy shall we be, if our
continual expectance of this Days Advent shall affect our souls with a
careful Anxiety; that thereby, as the Winds violence by a fair tuft of Trees
before an House, the Fury of its Breach being broken, before it break in upon
us, at this Days appearance, we may find Rest in our souls. The seventh (not
to trouble you with an Enumeration of further Particulars) the Contempt of Gods
faithful Messengers, and Ministers. When Men will be above Ordinances; and, by
a Spirit (neither I, nor they, know what) shall assume unto themselves a Gift
of Prophesying, before they are sent; and therefore, for the bringing the
Priests Function into contempt, whose Lips ought so to preserve Knowledge, as
that the People are (as at an Oracle) to seek the Law at his Mouth only, for
that he is the only true Messenger of the Lord of Hosts, as it is Mal. 2. 7.
shall practice the exposing them to the Beggarly Rudiments or Elements (as the
Apostle in another case, Gal. 4. 9.) of a Necessitous, and calamitous,
condition; that thereby they may be enforced, either to Prophecy Deceits; or
be tamely content to have their Tongues finally shut up in silence; this
Iniquity shall be unto them as a Breach, ready to fall, whose Breaking comes
suddenly in an instant. Esa. 30. 13. And therefore the Author of the Books of
Sacred Chronicles tells us of the People, that they Mocked the Messengers of
God, and mis-used his Prophets, until the wrath of the Lord arose, and there
was no Remedy. 2 Chronicles. 36. 16. And if Jerusalem shall but so stone the
Prophets, as I say not to make Bread of stones for them (a conclusion yet the
Devil would sometimes fain have persuaded our Savior, in his extremity of
Hunger, to have tried, Math. the 4. and the 3.) but (like unnatural Parents
rather, Matthew. 7. 9.) shall give them stones for Bread; yea, lest even of
these, they may chance to make an hard shift to make work for their Teeth,
shall finally shut up their Mouths; such Barbarous cruelty is immediately
followed with a sentence of Remediless Desolation; Behold! your House is left
unto you Desolate, Luke 13. 34. So that then, see I Men, with Jonah to sleep
securely in their Rebellious courses? when they have too just reason to fear,
that the Tempest of Gods too justly incensed Displeasure may speedily swallow
them up? See I them to stretch their Plumes beyond the compass of their Nests?
and, forgetting the Rock, from whence they are Hewn; and the Pit, out of which
they are Dug; to insult over those, God has placed in an Eminent Sphere
above them? See I them turning the Grace of God into wantonness? and to look
upon his judgments as no other then Scar-crowes? Bug-bears, merely made up for
the affrighting of children? See I them Machinating to make Machiavel speak the
Language of Canaan? Yea to make that Heavenly Language a Gentleman Usher to
lead in the most Hellish practices? Nay all Religion, upon the Result, to be
concluded to be nothing but the Spawn of a Poetic Brain? purposely excog^tated
to keep Men in awe? and to Broke for Politic ends? See I them eating up the
people of God daily, as if they would eat Bread? whilst they scarce leave them
crumbs of Bread to eat? but give them up, most mercilesly, to depend upon their
Prayers for Daily Bread? To say no more, see I Men practicing to leave the
Israel of God without a Right-Teaching Prophet? or at best, to propose them to
themselves for Trumpets of their own Designs? or else these Trumpets must
give, I say not as the Apostle, an uncertain, but no sound at all? So that the
People shall be rather in an imminent ^eril of a Famine of the Word, then the
Accomplishment of their whatever self ends be crossed, or obstructed? Here (as
it is 2 Chronicles. 15. 7.) no longer may a People look for continuance of Peace;
but for all manner of vexations round about them. Except you see Signs (you
know, is out Saviors word to the Nobleman of Capernaum) you will not Believe.
Joh. 4. 48. But then if Men will not Believe Signs, what can they be concluded
for other then mere Infidels? And with these Signs having labored, as your
Remembrancer, to Awake you; and as (as St. Jude in the 17. of his Epistle) to
save you with Fear; and, to pluck you out of the Fire, before the Flames of
Gods Anger grow so intense, that there be none to quench them; however some
amongst you may look with a Prejudicate Eye upon, and turn the Deaf Ear unto,
such Plain dealing Tell-Troths; Ora, Dei jussu, non unqu^m credita; and so, by
Gods just judgment, shall have your Ears heavy, and your Eye; ^hut up; lest
seeing with your Eyes, and Hearing with your Ears, you should be converted
and H^aled, as it is, Esa. 6. 10. just reason, in ^he mean time, I take up a
confidence, that (what St. Paul some^times to his Ephefian Elders, Acts 20.) I
am Pure from the Blood of all Men; for that I have not s^unned to declare unto
you the whole counself of God. And then (as our Prophet Ps. 55) O! that I have
wings like a D^ve! for then would I make haste to escape, because of the stormy
Wind, and Tempests! What great reason that our souls look out for Doves
wings? Radit iter liquidum; wherewith we be far from Hovering over out old
sensual lusts? but flying away with all possible speed? that (as the Apostle, 1
These. 5. 4.) that Dreadful Day overtake us not as a Thie^? Certainly, high
time can we not but conclude it for us to run (as the same Apostle advises
Heb. 12. 1.) with Patience, and yet with cheerfulnes too, the Race that is set
before us. At least (as is the word of him, that is the Light of the world,
Joh. 12. 35.) to walk, while we have Light, lest darkness come upon us; for
that it is but a very little while, that we are to expect this Light with us.
Yea for that (as it is Jer. 6. 4.) we cannot but clearly discover, how far the
Day, even the Day of Grace, is spent; and how the shadows of the Evening, of
the Evening of Ignorance, yea and Vengeance too, are still every Minute,
stretching them out more signally over us. And indeed, there are but two Days
(as already you have had intimated) or rather a Day and a Night, that
dichotomize the whole life of Man; the Day of Grace; and the Day, or rather
Night, of Vengeance. And now, shall we so far turn Gods Grace into
wantonness, as to spend the Day assigned unto this Grace, in worldly Lusts, in
sensual Pleasures, in the Pressures of our poor Brethren; whose cries, though
they cannot open our Ears, yet will they be sure, sooner or later, to enter
into the Ears of the Lord of Sabbath; great reason, that, in Anguish of
Spirit, we still conceive, we hear a voice speaking unto us, not unlike that in
the Prophet, Ezech. 7. The morning is come upon thee, the Day of trouble is
near; at least as that, in that other Prophet, Esaias 21. The Morning comes,
and also the Night. Let it then be our care to walk in a true, sincere, and
unfeigned Reformation of Life, whilst the Light of this Day of Grace lasts;
whilst the Sun of Righteousness therein, with the Gladsome, though but now
Gl^^mering* Beams of his countenance, shines out upon us. And, then whilst
Darkness, overshadowing the Drowsy, and secure; (...), as Diogines sometime to
his Physician, upon his Deathbed; when, after a short sleep, he demanded of
him how he did; one sleep, and so Darkness, shall prove unto them nothing else
but the Fore^runner of another; a Spiritual of an Eternal sleep, and Darkness;
the Day of Grace, shall we circumspectly walk in the Light thereof, we shall
find to be but the Prologue of another unto us; and that more Bright, and
Lightsome, Day, even the Day of Glory; a Day, which shall need neither Sun,
nor Moon, for the Enlightening it; but the Glory of God, and the Lamb, shall be
its Light; to the happy contemplation, and Fruition, whereof, in thy good time,
O LORD, bring every one of us; and to this purpose grant, that the words, which
we have this day heard with our outward Ears, etc.

FINIS.
GODS PROVIDENCE As^erted:

In another SERMON; Preached at St. Butt^lphs Aldersgate London, near about the
same time, as the former, and by the same Author.

1 PET. 5. 7. Cast all your Care upon him; for he cares for you.

AUG. Qui curam tui habuit, antequam esses, quomodo curam tui non habebit, cum
sis quod voluit ut esse^?

Printed for the Author. 1656.

To the Reader.
READER,
SHall I find thee, this in captious Age, but un-biassed, or unprejudicate, I
shall look upon thee as upon some Rare Philippian, in the midst of a crooked,
and Perverse Generation. If Capricious, and Censorious, I meet with no worse
Measure then I look for, in these Days, wherein Ignorance, and, its
inseparable companion, Impu^dence, are every Day Riding in their Triumphant
Chariots of Countenance, and Encouragement; whilst Pure, Orthodoxe, Knowledge
is still Quarelled, and Censured; and therefore is fain, as a poor Pedee, to
stand upon its weak Guard of Vindication. And this is the sole Ground of the
Publication of these Ensuing Treati^es; for that some Black Mouths, which have
none, the l^ast, appearance of Ca^dour in them, have, Eo Nomine, Traduced them;
for that they have too closely Trodden upon the Heels of Truth. However, the
observance of the wind of any Man's Breath, though never so strong, and
Poisonous, shall in no wise discourage me from sowing me Righteousness; however
an Harvest of Mercy, yea but of Justice, may not yet perhaps be expected by
me. Mean while, as I know, that the Sermons, Preached, sufficiently justify
God the Father, in his Providence; and God the Son in his Just Proceedings:
So am I confident, that Printed, they will vindicate, the Author, in the Eyes
of all Sober-Minded Men, against all calumnious Aspersions. So that, he, that
by the Malevolo's of the Time, whilst he is overshadowed with the Dark cloud
of their Black Censure, may appear a Monstrous Bug bear, shall (not unlikely
yet) in these poor Pieces, when they shall come to be exposed to the Light of
Public View, not be conceived to be of so Dread^ul a shape. Who, what ever he
may appear, is far from professing himself

Thine, longer then thou art Truths; T. B.

Psalm. 147. 9. The latter part of the Verse. And feeds the young Ravens; that
call upon him.
THis Psalm, by the consent of all Interpreters, is concluded to have (...)
Hallelujah for its Title. And (will we hear Apollinarius?) (...)* jointly, and
entirely, chanted out by the Prophets Zachary, and Haggee, at the
Re-edification of the City, and Instauration of the Temple; at least at their
clear prevision, and prediction, of this so Glorious a work, as either. Each
Verse is as a fresh Incentive to the iteration of this Hallelujah; and so to
the perpetuation of the work of Gods praise; every one containing in it a new
Arg^ment, for this Duties enforcement. Whereof this pregnant instance of his
careful Providence, for those of the Meanest, and least of Dignity in his
Family (which just reason we entertain for a strong pledge of the care, he will
still be sure to take, for the preservation of his Church, and chosen; yea
their reparation out of their Ruins, yea Dust, they may possibly be brought
unto) we have here in the Text, is not the least. And feeds the young Ravens,
that call upon him.

The Text then you cannot but see what a sovereign Cordial it has in it, for
the comforting, and supporting, the hearts of Gods People, in any, the
greatest, extremity; as having in it a strong Argument, enforcing his
Political, from the consideration of his Oec^nomical, Care; not unlike that,
our Savior, using this very instance of the Text, a Minori ad Majus, presses
upon his Disciples, Math. 6. 26. If God so feed the Fowls of the Air, are not
you much better then these? Wherein, I shall only commend unto your
Observations these two Generals; The Master, and his Care. Family, and their
Duty.

The Master we have here pointed out unto us in the Conjunction [ And] where
the Pronoun [ He] is to be resumed. And He.

His Care, in the word Feeding; And he Feeds.

The Family, whereof those of the lowest Degree only, we here meet with
specified, are the young Ravens.

And the Duty of these Servants, is to Call upon this their Master. And Feeds
the young Ravens, that Call upon him.

To begin at the Right end, with the Master of the Family, (...), you know, is
St. James his word; Every Good, and Perfect, Gift is from Above, coming down
from the Father of Lights. Jam. 1. 17. Quod dat Esse, dat conservare, is the
Old Rule. The same Cause, that gave us Being, before we were, provideth
likewise for the Maintenance of our Being, now we Are. Philosophy may suggest
unto us, that it is the exquisite Temper of the Elements in our Bodies, that
prolongeth our Days. Astrology may teach us, that they are the happy
Positions, and Aspects, of the Stars, that make us Fortunate in our Designs.
But Divinity in the mean time, upon which all other Arts, and Sciences (as the
Virgins upon the Kings Daughter, Psalm. 45. 15.) are, as Handmaids to attend;
informs us, of a (...); a God, that guides, and governs, all these second
Causes; and (with Pharaoh's Magicians, Exodus 8. 19.) puts us in Mind of
Digitus Dei; the Finger of this Great God, that points out unto us his
powerful Presence, and Presidence, in the midst of all Events. I form the
Light, and create Darknsfs, is his own word, Esa. 45. 7.) As there is no Evil
of punishment (for it is that Evil only, which, without Blaspheming his
Honor, ^ee can father upon him) so much less any Good of recompense, or
reward, that I may so speak (yea so, after his own Example, speak I may; Fear
not Abraham, says himself, for I am thine exceeding great reward. Genesis 15. 1.)
as no Misery, so much less Mercy; but has its original Being from his Hand. If
Job, in the Chaldees theft; if David, in Shemei's scurrilous language; could
look higher; the one then the plundering Fingers of the one; the other, then
the others Foul unhallowed Mouth; nay, if all the Saints of God, not in the
Blessings only, whereof they are daily sensible; but in all their Crosses and
Calamities, wherewith at times they are Afflicted; not regarding so much
subordinat Instruments, have still, principally at least, had recourse unto
this Hand; how well shall it become us, nay how necessary shall it appear for
us, in the Blessings, and Benefits, that are every Morning, renewed upon us,
whether it be in the Clouds dropping Fat^ e^s; in the Earths bringing forth her
Increase; in the raising u^ up Friends for the sustaining us with daily bread;
to look up unto the Hills from whence comes our Help? And, for wh^^ever
Benefits, or Blessings, we may stand in need, or be (...), of, to send up, both
our Prayers, and praises, unto him, from whom they orig^nally descend; as does
our Prophet here: He Feeds the young Ravens.

-- Labor improbus omnia vincit; that nothing is too hard for hard Labor to
master, as it was the position of an Heathen, so was it a mere Heathen
position. Much more of Divine Truth is there in that of that other Poet, Heu
nihil invitis, fas quenquam fidere Divis; without a Fiat from Heaven, no hope
is there of the happy Accomplishment of any Design upon Earth. And to this
true pricked Note, strange may it not seem to hear our sweet-singer tuning his
Melodious voice in Consort, Psalm. 127* 1. Except the Lord build the House, it
is but lost labor of them, that build it. It is not thy rising early that can
make thee Rich; not the barring of thy Gates, that can make thee safe: not a
League with all the Elements in the world, with the Stones of the street, with
the Beasts of the Field, yea with Death, and Hell it self, that can secure
thee; unless it shall please the Lord to take thee into his Protection; and to
safeguard thee under the shadow of his Wings. So that then, be thou Poor,
let thine eyes prevent the Morning-watch; let all things be hushed up in the
deep silence of the Night, before thou betakest thee to repose: and let the
Labor of thine Hands, during all this time, be altogether restless, for the
sustenence of thee, and thy Family: yet shall it not please the Lord to prosper
thine endeavors with a Blessing, Wages may thou earn; but put them in a
broken Bag, as it is, Hag. 1. 6. yea, thou shall be followed with a curse worse
then that of thy first Father, Adam. Genesis 3. 19. So that ^n the ex^reamest
sweat of thy Brow, thou shall not be able to eat thy Bread. If thou be Rich,
manage thine Esta^e to the best advantage; use all means possible for the
^nhaun^ing of thy Fort^nes; though ^y even raking Hell for projects, and plots,
to this purpo^e; and then this no marva^l if it shall be oftent^mes with the
B^ne o^ thy Brother; the spoil of the Church, thy Spiritual; and the Ruins of
thy Natural; Mother, thy Country: and now Fee all the Oracles of the Law, for
the fast Rivering, and Settling of whatever, by Hook, or Crook, thou have gotten
together, yea, ^ake Physic, when thou art sick, clothes, when thou art cold;
Bread, when thou art Hungry: ye^ shall all thy counsel, like that of
Achitophel, 2 Sa. 15. 31. be ^urned into Foolishness; thy Ph^s^ck prove li^e
that of As^hs, 2. Chron. 16. 12. not able to preserve thee from a lingering
Death: thy clothes like David's in his old age, 1 King. 1. 1. not able to keep
thee warm: thy Bread like that Bread of Deceit, in the Wise man. Pro. 20. 17.
which shall fill thy mouth with nothing but Gravel; unless it shall please the
Lord to quicken these, otherwise dead, Means with a virtuous efficacy. Yea, he
that is Agens Liberrimum, of all Agents the Freest, and so may indulge, or
deny, Life, when* and where he pleases, unto Means: no reason that we
distrust, but that without means, above means, against means, he is able to
provide for us. without means, He gives light the three first Days, without
the Sun, Genesis 1. 2. And causes Herbs, and Plants, to Grow, without Rain, Genesis
2. 16. notwithstanding that either of these are the ordinary means of eithers
production. Above means; He makes a little Meal, and Oil, to sustain the
Widow and the Prophet, for a long time, 1 King. 17. And the Brighthess of his
Fathers Glory Feeds no less then Five thousand Persons, with no more then
five Loaves, and two Fishes, Matt^. 14. Against means; The Israelites, when
they are stung with Fiery Serpents (notwithstanding that the sight of Brass is
naturally present death unto such, as some of the learned Rabbius have
observed) are yet healed by the bare sight of the Brazen Serpents, Number. 21. And
Spittle, and Clay, things, in themselves likely to put out the Eyes of him that
sees, are yet by our Savior, used, as a means, for the Cure of the Man* that
is born blind, Ioh. 9. So that then, just reason may this same Savior of ours
seem to have for ^is Answer to the Devil, when, (...) the satisfaction of his
Hu^^er, in his extreme necessity, he would have perswade^ him to make Bread of
stones, Mat^h 4. Man lives not by Bread only, but by every Word, that
proc^^^eth out of the mouth of God. Yea, and no less our Prophet here, for the
entituling of the Lord to the preservation of the young Ravens, when their
Parents, which should, by the Law of Nature, afford them sustenance, desert
them. And Feeds the young Ravens.

In the mean time, as the Philosopher, by his immoderate disswasion of the fear
of death, occasioned some preposterou^ly, and prematurely, to cast away their
lives: and, as some unskilful Physicians, whilst they labor to comfort the
stomach, not seldom inflame the Liver: I would not willingly have any so far
misconstrue me, as to conceive that, whilst I mind you of a necessity of Gods
Blessing upon your endeavors, I would work in you a careless neglect of the
means; as if his providence were a sufficient warrant to make you improvident:
or his working in your Actions a protection for your Oscitancy, and Idleness.
What Metellus sometimes spoke of his many False Gods, of our only True God is
most sure, and certain: I isdem Deos Propitios esse aequum est, qui fibi non
snnt Inimici: He will be a Friend to those only, that are not Enemies to
themselves. That general resolution of the Spartans therefore just reason that
every one of us, in our several Stations, take up; Admotam manu Fortunam
invocare: first to pray to God for a Blessing upon our Designs, and then to
use the Means, which God has appointed to that purpose. And as the
Israelites, do the Work with one Hand, and hold the Sword with the other,
whilst they are Repairing the Temple, Neh. 4. 18. with one of our Hands still
are we to be conversant about the works of our Calling; whilst with the
other, we are lifting up the Sword of Prayer, for a Blessing upon these works
of ours. Naaman is assured, by the Prophet, that he shall be cured of his
Leprosy; yet must he go, and wash in Jordan seven times 2. Kin. 5. Hez^kiah
that he shall recover of his sickness; yet must he apply a Bunch of Figs to
his s^re, ^^a. 38. Paul, that he shall come (...) to Rome; but then may not
any one of them, that are embarked, in a fancied hope of safety, forsake the
Ship, Act. 27. The sum is, as we are not to lie sullen in a Ditch, looking to
be drawn out by others: not so carelessly, and retchlesly, to cast our Care upon
God, as to neglect the Means, which he has appointed: so are we neither to
be such Idolaters of second-Causes, as to kiss our own Hands; to sacrifice to
our own Nets; no^ to make our own Counsels, or Endeavors, the sole Ground of
our Confidence; which, without a Blessing from the Highest, cannot in the least
measure avail us. But, as they say o^ Quail^, that, whilst one of their Wings
may perhaps be a little drenched in the Sea, the other still bears up toward
Heaven: whilst one of our Hands is solici^ously intent upon the works of our
Vocation, still is the other to be l^^ted up to Heaven for a Benediction; that
we have such respect unto second Causes, that st^ll we remember, that the due
ordering, and disposing, them comes from the First, that is here emidently
said to Feed the young Ravens, that call upon him.

To seal up this point in a word, look how some exquisite picture of a Dear
Friend, which he has left with us, still, upon sight thereof, renews in us
the Memory of him that left it: in like manner ought every Blessing, we
expect, or enjoy ( Jupiter est quodcunque vides -- as in every of these clearly
may we discern the Lineaments of such a picture) still mind us (as the
Romish Church pretends to use her pictures) of praising that God, and praying
unto him, whose pictures they are. 'Ex (...); let God still have the first
place in our Thoughts; yea, let him still, by us, be acknowledged, what he
proclaims himself to be, Apoc. 1. 8. A and (...) the Sea, from which the
Source of all Blessings is originally derived upon us; and unto whom therefore
the Rivolets of our praise are Finally to return.

Laboret Superbus, says M. Aurelius, in an Epistle of his to the King of
Sicily; Let the Proud, and Envious, travail as much as they will; and the
Ambitious sore as high as he can; yet of little avail will all Humane Diligence
at last appear, without Divine Assistance. So that then, find we our Garners
stored with plenty? Our Bags stuffed with Coin? Our Tables served with all
manner of varieties? And all things succeeding according to our h^arts desires?
Shall we now say as N^buchadnezzar, Dan. 4. 30. Are not these the great Babels,
which I have built with the strength of mine own Arm? No, rather as good old
Jacob, Genesis 32. 10. (a consideration the new upstarts of our times you may
observe studiously to banish their Memories) in Humility of Spirit, acknowledge
we, I am not worthy the least of thy Mercies; with my st^ffe, the staff of a
Despicable Fortune, came I over this Jordan; from this or that mean Beginning;
and now I am become two Bands; I am arrived to this higth of condition.
Disclaim we whatever Power, or Efficacy, Flesh and Blood may assume to it self;
and ascribe we unto God the Glory of what ever Blessings we enjoy; Non nobis,
Domine, non nobis; Not unto us, Lord, not unto us, but unto thy Name, give the
Praise. The same ( He) is the God, from whom comes salvation, Psalm. 68. 20.
The same ( He) that builds his stories in the Heavens; that has founded his
Troops in the Earth, and calls for the waters of the Sea, and powers them
out upon the Face of the Earth, Amos 9. 6. that here Feeds the young Ravens,
that call upon him

Which fi^ly brings me from the contemplation of the Person of the great
Master ( He) unto the Care of his Family; which we have in the word Feeding.
He feeds.

That, which Philosophy determines to be the Place of Virtue, that Divinity
would would have to be the Center forou^ Desires to rest in; the Middle, and
Mean betwixt two Extremes. Tutius v^ves -- is the Lyriques sage Note, and
Caution, to his Licinius: Best live we, when we launch not into the Deep;
Nor to the Shore too closely d^ we keep.
Neque Nimis, neque nihil; He, that is, neither lift up with Abundance, nor
pressed down with Want, without all question, lives in the best Estate.
Abundance is the Mother of Presumption; Want of Despair. Abundance of Envy,
want of Contempt. Abundance of prodigal Licentiousness, want of excessive
Carfulness. Abundance of Apostasy from God, want of taking Gods Name in vain;
as the Prophet Agur elegantly, Prove. 30. 9. Look we but into the exterior
Cloister of Nature, for Natural subsistences; and there shall we find Plants,
if too Little, or too Much, watered, to Die; if Indifferently, to Thrive, and
Pr^sper. Listen we to the great Ethique Master for Morals, and he will tell
us: (...); that Excess is incident to Transgression; Defect to Prevarication;
Medioc^ity the only Conduit-pipe of true Comfort and Contentation. To silence
many things, to this purpose, might be heaped up, send we but our Eyes, and
Ears, to the Experience, whether of our selves, or others; and how true shall
we prove of all, for the general, what Germanicus, in Tacitus, sometimes spoke
of the Chatti: Pavidi adversis, inter secundas, non Divini, n^n Humani, juris
Memores? That in Adversity they are Fearful; in Prosperity unmindeful of the
Laws, both of God, and Man? Nay, let me but appeal to the consciences of you,
that have too Little (as you are too prone uncessantly to co^plain) whether the
immoderate Care of compassing of the things of this Life, drive you not
sometimes to take, at least to think of, sinister, and indirect projects, and
practices: of you, that have more then enough your selves (a proportion yet,
few will be drawn to acknowledge; scarce one of a thousand can speak this
language of Canaan) whether the care of Disposing of what you have gotten,
Distract you not as much as the other care of Getting; whether an Extremity, of
either side, withdraw you not equally from the ser^ vice of God. And yet, how
true appears it of more then a good many of us, that which the Satyrist
sometimes spoke of the Romans: Prima fere vota -- The Prayers, that, most
frequently resound
Within our Temples, are that wealth abound?
We enlarge our Desires, like Hell; like the Grave, we are never satisfied:
nothing within the Orbicular compass of the World, can fill up the Dimensions
of our Triangular hearts. Some are covetous Spend-thrifts; some are covetous
Hold fasts. Some desire Abundance of this Worlds Goods, merely to Hoord it up;
dealing with their Mammon, as the two Giants sometime with Mars; first, they
lock it fast, and then they worship it. Others hearts earn after, Superfluity,
either to Riot it in Excess, and Surquedry; to Rusfle it in Bravery; to Lavish
it out profusely upon their Minions, and Servants; the most Politic, for the
purchase of what ever Accursed things. And so as David used Murder for a
Pander to his Adultery: these make their Covetise a Broker for their
Prodigality, yea all manner of Villainy. -- O Prodiga rer um
Luxuries, nunquam Parvo contenta --
O that of our Days Prodigal Luxury!
Which Natures Little cannot satisfy!
Quomodo concedet, quae Rogas, quae, si habeas, jubet ut contemnas? is a
seasonable Contemplation of St. Chrysostom, by the way: How think tho^
(says he) that God shall hear thee, when thou prayest for Superfluity, which,
when thou shall have it in thy possession, he wishes thee to contemn? How
shall it stand with his Honor to gratify thee with those things, in the use
whereof he knows that thou will Dishonor him? The Egyptians, that, like
Tongue-less men (the sad Fate of many a true Israelite, yea voice of the Lord,
in these Days of ours) delivered all by signs, which they termed
Hieroglyphiques, were wont to clap a Bushel upon the head of the Sun, to
intimate the measure, that even in the best things is to be observed. Our
Savior, in that his Absolute Form of Prayer, dictated to his Disciples,
prescribes the utmost Bounds, our Desires are in no wise to exceed; Give us
this Day our daily bread, Luke 11. 3. Certainly, that of the Apostle, 1 Timothy 6.
8. just reason we entertain for a Liberal gloss upon that our Saviors Text;
Having Food, and Raiment, let us therewith be content. Certainly, a soul
seasoned with the least moderation, cannot but highly approve of that Dimensum,
cut out by the Poet, as a very fair one: Si Ventri been, si Latere, Pedibus que
tuis, nil
Divitiae poterunt Regales addere majus:
If Belly, Sides, and Feet, be well at ^ase,
A Princes Treasure cannot better please.
Apuleius his advise, to this purpose, is no less Elegant, then Apposite;
Fortunam velut Tunicam proba* magis Concinnam, quam Longam; Conceive of thy
Fortune as of thy Coat; which is then best made up, when it is rather Decent,
for the fitting of thy Body, then overlong, for the fettering of thine Heels.
And that weltempered Affection of that other Heathen, in this case, may well
serve to prescribe to the best Christians imitation; (...). Enamored I am not
of spacious Fie^ds,
Nothing too much to me much comfort yields.


The whole scope of that our Saviors Parable of the Rich Cormorant in the
Gospel, whose preproperous jewelling of the Fruits of his field, and so
reckoning without his Host, as we say, is met with by a sharp counterblast
from the Almighty, is but Emblematically to demonstrate (as you may see) that
Man's Lise consists not in the Abundance of those things, he possesses, Luke
12. 15. Alas, my Beloved! shall we measure our Happiness merely by those
things, that are before us, how much wiser shall we approve our selves then
country people, at a Puppet-play; which stand gazing, with Admiration, upon the
strange Motion of the Puppets; but never think of the man, that moves them
from within the Engine? And so (as our Prophet of the Proud, Psalm* 10. 4.) God,
upon the Result, is not, all this while, in our Thoughts? who yet only is that
Spirit, that gives Energy, and Efficacy, unto whatever Blessings we enjoy?
That word of the Philosopher, in this sense, therefore may justly challenge our
best Attention, and consideration; Ingredimini; sunt hic quoque Dii; in every
of the Blessings, we are daily sensible of, our parts it shall be still to
contemplate his Power, and Goodness; for that in every of these it is easy to
discern the God. head. Christ, by the Apostle, is termed the Fullness of him
that fills All in All, Ephesians. 1. 23. So that then he that fills All in All*
and of whose Fullness Christ himself receives, is only God. He it is, that
can, as make Daniel look Fuller, and Fairer, with Pulse, and Water, then all
the Children, that eat of the Kings Meat, and Drink of his Wine, Dan. 1. 15.
so send an Atrophy with the choicest Viands: as he sometimes dealt with the
Israelites, Psalm. 106. 15. He gave them their Desires (says our Prophet) but
sent leanness withal into their souls. For mine own part (as I have just
reason) I shall for ever publish, and proclaim, unto the world, that I never saw
Gods Providence so clearly, as since the time I have seen least of my visible,
and Legal, Means. At least, that he h^th raised me up such Means, as I had
never the least reason to hope for. Yea, since my Afflictions has wrought in
me some weak Desires (let me be interpreted, as God knows, I speak, without
ostentation) to please him, I have found some, that formerly have been mine
enraged Enemies, not to be at Peace only with me; but to have abounded in
pregnant symboles of fast Friendship toward me. And then, as we find the case
to stand with Joseph; the bright Appearance of Gods Providence in his Eye so
darkeneth the sight of his Brethrens Malicious practices, as does the Sun that
of the Lesser Stars, that now, in conclusion, he tells them; It is not you,
that sent me hither, but God, Genesis 45. 8. Gods Hand, in the working of second
Causes (as Ezechiels Hand from under the wings of the Cherubims, Ezech. 1. 8.)
ought still so conspicuously, upon all Emergencies, to appear unto us, as that
they then still appear least in sight. So that then, as Samuel, having received
a Commission from the Lord, for the Anointing one of Iesse's ^ons King over his
People, and, for a time, not a little, perplexed about the choice of the
Person, has David at last pointed out unto him, 1 Samuel 16. 12. in the perusal
of the Range, and Series, of all second Causes, our parts it shall be still
signally to print, and pitch, upon this [ He] as the Great, wheel that sets
those Lesser a work; and here, by way of Eminence, is said to Feed the young
Ravens.

Which fitly brings me from the Contemplation of the Person of the Master,
and his Care; unto that of those of the Meanest quality in the Family, the
young Ravens. And ^eedeth the yo^ng Ravens.

It is our Prophets word of the Great Master of this his Numerous Family of the
world. Psalm. 104. 28. He opens his hand, and fills all things living with
plenteousness. So Hospital, and Magnificent, is he, that he shuts not up his
Gates against Rich, or Poor; but keeps open House to all comers. And this if
he appear careful, that the very Dogs be not barred their crumbs, as the
Canaanitish woman sometimes, in that her Pathetical Debate with our Savior,
Matthew. 15. 27. will he not much more (think we) carefully provide, that the
children be accommodated with the portions of Olive branches? And, (as this
Master himself to his Disciples, instancing in these very Ravens, in the Text
here specified, Luke 12. 24.) if he Feed them, what just reason we account our
selves of an higher Estimate with him then they? St. Chrysost^m has observed
of the Raven, that, of all Creatures, she is Notoriously (...); void of Natural
Affection; as leaving her young ones, as soon as they are Hatched; neglecting
in the least measure to provide for their sustenance. And then, well might the
same Father magnify Gods Mercy, and Loving kindeness, toward Elijah, as
Miraculous, 1 King. 17. 6. that he should Feed him by Ravens; Creatures,
Naturally so unnatural, that they neglect to Feed their own young. And that
therefore this Great Master, for the supply of their negligence of Parental
Care, Feeds them; either with certain little Flies, as the abovepraised
Chrysostom, or as Cassiodore, with the Dew of Heaven. St. Gregory lays down
the time, and withal gives the Reason, of this the Ravens unnatural
Deportment toward their young: for that (says he) as long as they are but
covered with their skin, or but spoon feathered, they are yet of a diverse
color from themselves; and so, having hitherto no Appearance but of a Bastard
Brood, he would have them to be the less Faulty, shall they all this while
prove Remiss in providing for them. And this is that, which he would have, not
obscurely, intimated by the picture of Patience, 38. of his Book 41. Who
provideth for the Raven his Food, when their young ones cry unto God? they
wander, for lack of Meat. A lively Emblem of the Black Prince of Darkness, and
his Proselytes, that will not countenance, or encourage, any, as long as they
have about them the white of Innocence; until they see upon them a Deep
Tincture of their own Native Blackness. Nay, shall any appear but of grisled
Hew, but Neutrally affected toward the Good Cause; and come not out to help
the Lord against the Mighty; as, for a long time they have had; so have they
still, a Curse ye Me^oz in store, to be Thundered out against them. If the
Daughter shall not appear, in every Lineament to resemble the Mother, as it is
Ezekiel. 16. 44. she shall utterly be disclaimed by her for her Daughter. But,
when there shall be like People, like Priest, as it is Hos. 4. 9. when both
shall consort in a cursed Harmony to bring in Anarchy, and Confusion, into a
Church, and State; this Damnable Sympathy shall so unite their Hearts, that the
Lame shall so far Direct the Blind, and the Blind support the Lame, till at
last it may be Feared, or Hoped for rather, that both may fall into the Pit of
Destruction. Nor may it escape us without special observation, that they are
young only, and not the old overgrown, Ravens, that God is here said thus
Emphatically to Feed. Those old Birds of Rapine, that are perfect in the Trade
of Preying for themselves; that make no Distinction of the Flesh of Men, of
Worms, of Flies, of Fruits, of Seeds (as the Naturallists observe of these
Birds) but pel-mell fly at all, whatever Goods, or Possessions, though even of
the Church, the Poor, yea their own Nearest Relations; to Gorge, and Glut,
their Insatiate appetite withal; they are not of this Masters Feeding; as
being no part of his Family. But when my Father, and Mother, Forsake me (says
our Prophet) the Lord Takes me up, Psalm. 27. 10. Those, that are left
Destitute of all Humane Support; and that even by those, that, by all
obligations, both of God, and Nature, are to afford them their best
Helping-hands; especially, shall they, in this their sad condition, still
appear with their white Livery of Inno^cence about them; those onel^ owneth he
for his Care, an^ Charge. Nor is it otherwis^ with this Great Master, for hi^
Occononomy, and Dispensati^ on, for Spirituals, then Tem^porals. Those, that
will be s^ far their own Carvers, as t^ Heap up unto themselves Tea^chers, as
it is 2 Timothy 4. 3. they are as little of this Great Masters Teaching, as are
the other of his Feeding. But Receive^ with Meekness (says St. James the
engra^ted Word, which is a^ble to save your Souls, Jam. 1. 2^ It is the word,
not that grow^eth up of the wild stock o^ an Irregular, B^ain-sick,
uncommissioned, Fancy; but what is Graffed by the true, and skilful,
Husbandman, lawfully called by the Master into the Orchard of his Church;
whereby this Great Master cherishes, and nurseth up, a soul unto salvation. I
lift not ^ere to fly out into Tropologi^al Excursions; as that Christ should be
this Raven; not only for that he is Black; and this, not in regard only of
the similitude of his sinful flesh; but of the Rage of Persecution, which, for
the whole time of his mortal pilgrimage here upon Earth, might justly seem to
Dis-colour him (for which cause his Spouse, the Church, is said to be Black
too, Cant. ^ 5.) but for that his voice ^ that of the Raven likewise ^ Cras,
Tomorrow; for the hereafter his servants are t^ expect their Reward. You sha^
be comforted; you shall ob^tain mercy; you shall be cal^led the children of
God; is h^^ Promise to his Disciples, hi^ Sermon upon the Mount throughout. And
therefore that word of his Father Iaco^ to Laban, Genesis 30. 33. man well seem to
become him, tha^ is Born of his Seed; My righ^teousness shall answer for me
^time to come: or (as it is in the Margent) Tomorrow. But forbear further to
enquire in^ ^o this the Masters care, in this way of his Provision for this
part of his Family. That they ^ee in some good measure Taught, as well as Fed,
I shall only, in one word, leave them a short Lesson of their Duty toward
this Master of theirs, which is their Calling upon him, and so take leave, both
of them, and you. And Feeds the young Ravens that call upon him.

They are gracious Articles of a Covenant, that the Lord is pleased to enter
with his People. Psalm. 81. 11. Open thy Mouth wide, and I shall fill it. We
justly account it an easy way of compassing a Blessing, when we may have it
for Ask^ing. Our way of being spe^^ of any Favor at the Almigh^ties hands is
no more Difficult. It is bu^ Ask, and Have; but opening our Mouth, and we shall
be sure to have it filled* If the Widow had not wanted Vessels, whose mouths
she might have opened, and so filled, she had never wanted Oil, 2 King. 4. 7.
If Ioash, with his Arrows, had smitten upon the ground six, or seven, times,
whereas he smote but thrice, he had smitten Syria until he had utterly
consumed it, 2 Kin. 13. 19. If we find our selves, at any time, destitute of
any Blessing, we would fain be provided of, none shall we have reason to
blame but our selves, that are remiss in the Duty of opening our Mouths in
Prayer. No reason that we charge the Almighty, that is still ready to do
exceeding abundantly above all, that we can Ask, or Think, Ephesians. 3. 20. And
yet would I not willingly be so far mis-interpreted, as that hereby you should
be induced to conceive, that I intend so far to elevate Prayer beyond the
proper Sphere of its Activity, as to conclude that ^here is no Mercy to be had
at Gods hands without its previous Mediation. And it shall come to pass (is his
own word to his People) that before they call, I will answer; and, whilst they
are yet speaking, I will hear, Isa. 65. 24. And our Saviors wo^d of his Father
is, that he knows what things, we have need of, before we Ask, Matthew. 6. 8.
Only, as a great Prince will not abate of the least punctilio of Homage from
the meanest of his Subjects: Beneficium propter Officium; this Great King of
Heaven ordinarily grants not any Boon to any of his Subjects, unless he has
first the Homage of Prayer duly paid him. We see here the condition, is
expected the young Ravens should perform; and that is calling upon him; or
else, in their greatest Extremity, they may miss of their feeding by him. And
Feeds the young Rivens, that call upon him.

Now God is called upon, not in the Litteral accent of Prayer only; but in a
Metaphorical likewise; and that both of Tears, and Distress. Of Tears first.
Interdum Lachrymae pondera vocis habent: Tears are not always Mutes, with the
Almighty; but Vowels rather still, as well as Liquids. For this cause the
Mourning Prophet calls our unto the people; Ne taceat pupilla oculitui: Let
not the apple of thine Eye cease, Lam. 2. 18. Upon which words Bellarmine (more
temperate in his Contemplations then Controversies) Clames assidue ad Deum; non
Lingua, sed Oculis; non Verbis, sed Lachrymis; ista enim est oration, quae Deum
placare solet: Cry aloud (says he) not with thy Tongue, but with thine Eyes;
not with thy words, but with thy tears; for that is the prayer, that makes the
most forcible entry into the Ears of the Great God of Heaven. Certainly, as
Olympias sometimes of Antipater, when he had written her a long Letter,
fraught with most unjust Aspersions upon her son, Alexander; Ignorare videtur
Antipater, quod una Matris L^chrymula centum delebit Epistolas: Antipater
(says she) seems to be ignorant, that the least tear of a Mother is able
wash out the stains of the foulest calumnies against a Son: let the Devil, in
the most malicious manner, present our Heavenly Father with the most Black, and
Liberal, Catalogue of our sins; one Tear yet of a truly penitent Soul shall be
of virtue to Bl^t out all, when the times of Refreshing shall come from his
gracious presence.

Nor yet is God less effectually called upon in the Metaphorical accent of
Distress then of Tears. Out of the Deeps have I called unto thee O Lord, says
our Prophet, Psalm. 130. 1. Nay, One Deep calls upon another, because of the
Noise of the Water pipes; all thy waves, and storms, are gone over me, Psalm.
42. 9. That portion then, that Achsah, Calebs Daughter, desires of her Father,
Upper, and Nether Springs, Jo^. 15. 19. may well seem to be the portion, that
every child of God, whilst he lives here upon earth, is to expect from his
Heavenly Father. This appears signally to be our Prophets portion here. And
therefore justly fihde we him complaining of the water pipes, issuing out of
the upper-springs of Affliction, as Rain from the Clouds, powered down, in full
Cataracts, upon him; and waves, and storms, as upon a Ship at Sea, from Below
beating upon him, and threatening his immediate swallowing up. And then no
marvel, if such a confused Noise as this, from Deeps, both Above, and Below,
call up another Deep, even the Deep of Gods Mercy (as the Disciples sometimes
their Master, in the Tempest, Matthew. 8.) for the quieting, and becalming, of
all these, whatever, Boisterous storms of Tribulation, and Persecution Be ye
Followers of God, as Dear children, you know, is the Apostles precept. Ephesians. 5.
1. If the waters of Distressed Suppliants tears, wherewith you may every where
see their Furrowed cheeks, upon the tender sense of this their Distress,
Blubbered, shall no more soften your Hearts, then the Mountains of Gilboa, 2 Samuel 1. 21. leaving them, as they found them Dry, and Barren; so that the sight
of their calamitous condition shall not, in some measure, stir up in you tender
Bowels of compassion; how dwells the love of God, nay, what the least
Resemblance of him appears there yet in you? But let the cries of tears,
wrung from them by their Distress, enter into your ears; and enlarge your
hearts, and hands, in a Magnificent Distribution to their Necessities. And
then, when the great Judge of Heaven, and Earth, you shall, at the last Day,
hear, publicly acknowledging himself for your Almes-man; in as much you have
done any Act of Mercy unto the least of these my Breth^en, you have done it
unto me: you shall hear him withal joyfully welcomming you to the Fruition of
his heavenly Kingdom; Come ye Blessed Children of my Father; receive the
Kingdom, prepared for you from the beginning of the world. Grant this, we
beseech thee, O Merciful, Father, through Jesus Christ, our Mediator and
Redeemer; to whom, with thee, O Father, and the Blessed Spirit, be all Honor,
Glory, Praise, Power, Might, Majesty, and Dominion; now, and for evermore. Amen.

FINIS.
CHRIST'S Coming to JUDGMENT Deciphered.

In a Third SERMON; Preached at Lincolnes-Inn, by the same Author.

1 IHES 4. 17. Then we, which are Alive, shall be caught up together in the
Clouds, to meet the Lord in the Air; and so shall we ever be with the Lord.

AMBROS. Nonne tibi videntur Aquilae circa Corpus, quardo veniet in illa Die,
cum Intelligibilibus Nu bibus Filius Hominis?

Prin^ed for the Author. 1656.

Matthew. 24. 28. Wheresoever the Carkas is, there will the Eagles be gathered
together.
THat, in the Latter Days (whereof I shall not need to mind you, Deterior
Posterior; that the latter the worse still) false Prophets shall Arise, that in
their Desert, and Chamber, Conventicles, shall be Actours of such Mountebank
Miracles, as thereby, if it were possible, to deceive the very Elect, as we
have our Savior himself expressly averring, V. 24. of this Chap. So have we him
withal Verse 26. sagely cautioning, not to give over hasty credit unto them. If
they shall say unto you (says he) He is in the Desert, go not forth; if in the
Chambers, believe them not. Simon Magus (it seems) was the Captain General of
this Accursed Militia; the Ringleader of this Ranting Crew. Who making himself
some Great one, as it is, Act. 8. 9. even so Great, that (will we hear St.
Augustine) he gave out, that it was he, that, in the Person of the Father,
gave the Law to the Israelites, upon Mount Sinai; he, that, in the Reign of
Tib^rius Caesar, suffered, in the Person of the Son; he, that, at the Feast of
Pentecost, in the person of the Holy Ghost, descended upon the Apostles in the
shape of Fiery cloven Tongues. Whereby he had so bewitched Nero himself, and
the people of Rome, that they erected a Statue in H^nour of him. Who yet at
last, by a Fall, whilst he attempteth a flight, has his Credit, with his Leg,
cracked. And so as ( Maximus) Qui Pennas Assumpsit, Plantus Amittit; whilst
he will needs be taking unto him the advantage of Artificial Wings, he loses
the use of his Natural Feet. Our Savior, for the invalidating of the
Authority, and Energy, any such Impostours may have upon the Faith of any of
his, which may otherwise expect the solemnity of Signs to usher in his coming
to judgment, tells them, as in the verse before the Text, that his coming
shall be as Lightning; Sicut Fulgur, non eget Praecone, aut Nuntio; sed statim
omnibus apparet, says St. Chrysostom; for that, as Lightning needs no
Harbinger, or Messenger, but breaks out in no less glorious, then sudden,
Appearance, unto every Eye: so shall he, at his coming, irradiate every Eye
with the Sudden, and Glorious, Appearance of his Divine, yea and Humane,
Presence, too: so in, the words now read, that it shall appear most eminently
conspicuous, by the thronged confluence of all the Saints unto him, as of
Eagles to a Carkas. For, wheresoever the carkas is, there will the Eagles be
gathered together.

The Text then you cannot but see what just reason I might have to say that it
is a Summary Description of the Magnetical Virtue, shall appear in our Saviors
Person, at his coming to judgment; wherein I might commend unto your
considerations these two Principal observables; The Efficacy of the Loadstone.
Compliancy of the Iron. But, for that (as the Preacher, Eccles. 10. 19. a Feast
is made for Laughter) and that, in the Day of Christ's coming to judgment,
Gods servants, as on a Feast Day, shall laugh for joy of Heart, as it is Isa.
65. 14. We shall not do amiss to take a distinct view of -- The Table Guests.

The Table furnished with nothing, but a Carkas.

The Guests Eagles: which we shall do well to contemplate First in their
general Notion of Eagles.

Secondly, in a more special consideration of their sweet inclination to
Agreement; They are gathered together.

These the Parts; of these plainly, briefly, and orderly. And of the
Substratum, the Table, first are we to take a view; which, we see yet, is set
out with nothing but a Carkas, Where the Carkas is.

We usually proportion the Entertainment of our Tables to the Quality of the
Guests, we are to entertain. And then can it not but seem extremel^ incongruous
to entertain the palates of Nobles, yea Princes (whereof these Eagles here, as
hereafter will more at large appear, may well be looked upon as proper
Emblems) with no better Fare then a Carkas. Some Interpreters I meet with,
that, for the Declination of this seeming Gross Soloecism, rea^e (...), Body.
Where the Body is, there will the Eagles be gathered together. But, be it read
(...), as here, a Dissolution; of the Primitive (...); which the Latins render
Ca^aver; and our Translation a Carkas; of Cado, to Fall: yet, as I have often
seen excellent Venison cased up in course Paste; saepe sub sordido Pallio; and a
great D^pth of Wisdom under a Russet Cloak: this Carkas yet affords such
chois^ Viands, as the choicest palates shall have no reason to disdain; as
having no worse food in it then Christ himself; whose Flesh is Meat indeed, and
his Blood Drink indeed, Joh. 6. 55. And then far juster reason shall I have to
say of this Carkas, then Sampson sometimes of the Carkas of his Lion, Judge. 14.
8. that it has Honey in it; yea that which is sweeter then Honey; or the
Honicomb. And indeed, either of these Readings, of Body, or Carkas, will suit
well enough with the Drift of the Holy Ghost in the Text; for that by the word (
Carkas) may justly seem to be pointed out unto us our Saviors Passion; wherein
his Body was reduced to a Carkas, for our Transgressions: and by the word (
Body) his Resurrection; by the which he consummated our Redemption. Who was
Delivered for our Offenses (says the Apostle) and Raised again for our
Justification. Romans 4. 25. And in the selfsame Place (says St. Hilary) where
this Body was offered up in Sacrifice, and so became a Carkas; shall the same
Carkas become a Glorified Body; wherein he shall appear to judge both Quick,
and Dead; even in the Valley of Ichoshaphat near Jerusalem: as out of Joel 3.
2. is clearly to be collected. And the pregnant reason hereof we shall not
need to go far to seek. Congruum esi (says that Father) ut Christ us ibi
just judicet omnes, ubi pro omnibus ipse injuste judicatus est; ibique
conspiciatur ejus Majestas, ubi antea visa est ejus Abj^stio, and Humilitas. It
cannot but seem to suit with the Rules of all Reason, and Justice, that Christ
in that place should judge the World in Righteousness, where himself heretofore
was unrighteously condemned; and that there his Majesty be eminently
conspicuous, where his usage had been so Reproachful, and Opprobrious.
Aristotle l. 9. de Historia Animalium, amongst diverse other sorts, reckons
up, (...), seu (...); the under, or Vul^ur, Eagle; and of this sort of Eagle,
as Ulysses Aldrovandus interprets that of Job, in the 39. of his Book: She
seeks the Prey; and, her Eyes behold afar off; her young ones suck up Blood;
and where the slain are, there is she: so of this specially, more then probable
is it that, our Savior intends this Aphorism in the Text.

And then, taking for granted (what hereafter shall more clearly appear) that
by this sort of Eagles the Saints are intended, how far shall the greatest
part of us appear from being Saints (a Title yet, we are all more prone, as is
most evident, to arrogate to our selves, then to give it to the best in Heaven)
when, though we have more then enough in us of the more Generous Eagles, whose
Guise is (says the same Naturallist) not to be pleased with any other Prey,
but such as themselves have Taken Alive, and Killed; but of these under, or
vultur, that content them with a slaughtered Carkas, nothing? The living Dog
of a New Flourishing, Conventicle, or Commonwealth, we like much better then
the Dead Lion of a Decayed Church, or what ever Decried Government. We account
it far beneath us to stoop to a slaughtered carcass; but like well, as Eagles,
to mount up with wings, as the Prophet has it, Isa. 40. 31. there to make some
Glorious Body our purchase. Oderunt Pan^os tuos Jesus, says St. Bernard:
Christ's Robes of Majesty, wherein (as upon Mount Tabor) he may appea^, we are
well pleased with; but can in no wise away with his Rags of Poverty, wherein
(as upon Mount Calvary) he may discover himself unto us. Every step of a
Christians progress to Glory may you, as in a Map, see Graphically delineated
before you, Psalm. 110. whose Rise however it be all of a Triumphant strain; The
Lord said unto my Lord, sit thou on my Right hand, until I make thine Enemies
thy Footstool: yet is its close te^pered with an intimation of a Task of
Militancy to precede; He shall drink of the Brook in the way; therefore shall
he lift up his Head. Before we may hope to have ou^ heads lifted up, for their
Glorious investiture with a Crown of Immortality, in the Life to come, with
those men that bowed down their Heads to drink water, Judge. 7. 6. we must
resolve to bow down, for the taking of a Deep, and Bitter, Draught of the
Brook of Mortification, and Tribulation, and Persecution, whilst we are here
in the way of this Life: sit down in Bochim* before we can come to Beracah; sow
in Tears, before we can reap in Joy; and (as St. Peter has it 1 Epist. cap.
4. v. 19.) suffer pa^iently, according to Gods will, committing our souls to
him, in well doing, as unto a Faithful Creator. So that then, whilst those
that will here prematurely appear to be of the temper of the more Generous
Eagles; and so to prey on Bodies, before they become Dead carcasses; and so as
Canibals, will be feeding on the living; sucking out the Hearts-bloud of
Widows, of Orphans; of the Church, their Spiritual; and their Natural Mother,
the Country; at least, Corpora corporibus jung^bat Mortua Vivis; Shall, after
the example of Mezentius, make no difference between the Living, and the Dead;
but take all for Fish, that comes to the Net; and swallow all for lawful
purchase, with their Leviathan Jaws, they can seize upon; whilst, thus
Eagle-like (what is Jacobs word of Benjamin, Genesis 49. 27.) in the Morning they
are Devouring the Prey; in the Evening of their Death, nay on the next morrow
of their Resurrection, they shall have no spoil to divide. It is an heavy
Doom, such preproperous Eagles (as these Hypocrites in the Gospel, Mat. 6. 2)
are to expect at the Last Day; you have had your reward* Delicatus est nemis,
qui and hic vult Gaudere cum saeculo, and postea Regnare cum Christo, says St.
Augustine. It sav^ureth of the Horse-leaches appetite, to affect a Frolicking
here in this Life with the world, and hereafter to reign with Christ in the
Life to come. But be ye Patient, stablish your hearts, says St. James, Jam.
5. 8. Take we up here contentedly with whatever poor, and lean, Portion of the
things of this Life, our Heavenly Father shall be pleased here to cut out for
us; yea approve we our selves patient, shall he please to lay upon our Necks
the heavy yoke of all manner of Tribulation, and Persecution; yea confine us to
the Austere Diet of Contrition, and Mortification; and let this Vultur, this
Raven. Eagles Dialect be so signally ours, that (as it is Zeph. 3. 3.) we
contentedly forbear the Gnawing of the Bones till the morrow; on the morrow, in
the morning of our Resurrection, rays of unspeakable comfort shall we find
darting out upon our souls; for that then we shall be sensible, that (as it is
2 Cor. 4. 17.) the light Afflictions of this Life, that are but for a Moment,
have all this while bin working for us a far most Excellent, and Eternal,
weight of Glory.

And thus far shall it serve to have surveyed the Table; which you have seen to
be far from being sumptuous, or luxuriant; as being furnished with nothing
but a Carcass. Come we now to take a view of the Gu^sts; whom yet we may
discern to be very Noble, as being no worse then Princes; of which Eagles, in
their General Notion of Eagles, just reason we look upon as proper Emblems.
Which is the first Notion, wherein we are to contemplate these Guests the
Notion of Eagles. Wheresoever the Cark^ss is, there the Eagls will be gathered
together.

You have already had an intimation, that by the Eagles the Saints are hee^e
intended. Now, for the Proof of this supposition, what Lineaments of
Resemblance between the one, and the others countenances are to be discovered,
will not be unworthy the Expense of some of our Time, and Pains, for a
Summary Enquiry.

First then Eagles (we know) are the Kings of Birds. You have seen (is the
Lords own word to his People) how I bare you on Eagls Wings, Exodus 19. 4. The
Pitch, the Eagle flies at, favors of a well-feathered Plume; It is Potent,
Princely, Royal. For which cause I find, that the Romans, the greatest
Potentates, the Suns Eye ever beheld, still bore the Eagle in their Standard.
And such Eagls are the Saints. The Prince of the Kings of the Earth (says St.
John) has made us Kings, Apoc. 1. 6. And therefore that Gloss of Saint Greg.
upon those words of Job, 36. of his Book 7. He withdraws not his Eyes from
the Righteous; but with Kings are they on the Throne; is well worthy our best
Observation: Reges sunt, quia Tentationum suarum Motibus, non consentiendo
succumbere, sed Regendo Praeesse noverant: They are Kings (says he) for that
they tamely lie not down, by con^ senting unto temptations; but know the way
how to master, and subdue them; Brideling the Intemperance of their Appetites;
Cooling the Heat of their Lusts; Beating down the Height of their Pride; Curing
the Itch of their Cove^i^e; Startling them from the Lees of their Surquedry;
and plucking off the Disguise of their Hypocrisy: and so, in him that has
made them such being (as the Apostle, Romans 8. 37.) in all these more then
Conquerours.

Secondly, the Eagles have a property of Renewing themselves, and Restoring
their youth. Making thee young, and lusty, as an Eagle, says the Kingly
Prophet, Psalm. 103. 5. Now, the way of this the Eagles Renovation, is, by
Interpreters, variously related. St. Augustine would have this to be the
manner: that when, by reason of their Age, the upper part of their Beaks so far
outgrow the Nether, that they are now no longer able to open their Mouths; and
so, for want of Food, begin to langu^sh; they get them to a craggy Rock;
against which striking off the excresc^cy of the upper part of their Beaks,
which hindered their Feeding, they hereby enable themselves to Feed afresh; and
so recover their Youth, and strength. Athanasius gives us an Account, as of
another Malady, they labor of; so of another Remedy, they use for their
recovery. Caligantibus occulis; when their Eyes grow Dim (says he) they
drench themselves in a cold Fountain; then expose themselves to the heat of the
Sun beams; whereby the Scales falling from their Eyes, they recover their
sight, and youth. Both these ways of Renovation we shall do well to to take
together, and to apply to the Saints of God. When the Excrescency of our
worldly Desires, and Carnal Lusts, shall so entirely have deaded our spiritual
Appetites (that as David in another case, Psalm. 102. 4.) we forget to eat our
Bread; when the Eyes of our understanding we may find too sensibly grown so
Dim, that we, neither can, nor will, any longer, discern those things that
belong to our peace; lest, seeing with our Eyes, and hearing with our Ears; we
should be converted, and Healed, as it is Isa. 6. 10. our parts it shall be to
betake us unto the Rock, Christ (for so 1 Cor. 10. 4. I find him expressly
styled) to put off all manner Dullness, and Deadness, of the Old Man, which is
corrupt according to the Deceitful Lusts: as it is Ephesians. 4. 22. to bathe our
selves thoroughly in the Laver of unfeigned Repentance; and then fix the Eyes of
them steadily upon the Sun of Righteousness, that Arises with Healing in his
Wings, as it is Mal. 4. 2. Looking unto Jesus (says the above praised Apostle)
the Author, and Finisher, ^f our Faith, Heb. 12. 2. and so become Renewed in
the Spirit of our Minds, Ephesians. 4. 23.

Lastly (not to stretch the strings of the Analogy so far, as to endanger the
cracking them) Eagles (as in part you have already had intimated) Fly a great
height from the earth; a pitch above all other Birds. Yea, as Araun^h is said
to give as a King unto the King, 2. Sam. 24. 23. these Kings of Birds get them
up near unto the King of Stars, the Sun; by the undaunted, and unmoved,
contemplation of whose Rays they try the Legitimation of their young. And this
is that, which Interpreters would have intended by that of Job 39. of his Book
above praised; The Eagle Mounteth up, and makes he^ Nest on high; and her Eyes
beh^ld a far off. The Sons of God, are still in like manner, yea in a far
Higher, manner Affected. They contemplate not only Christ the Sun of
Righteousness; but (with the woman, Apoc. 12. 1.) they are clothed with him;
trampling the Moon in the mean time, all earthly things, as the Moon
inconstant, under their Feet. And by this Test shall we do well to try our
selves, whether we be the Genuine Sons of God, or no. So that then, if our
Affections shall appear wholly, yea but principally, set upon earthly things;
if the Dunghils of this world shall appear to be the Darlings of our souls;
nay, if, when the scorching beams of Persecution shall be darting out from
the Body of this Sun of Righteousness, and so submit us to all manner
sufferings for his sake; like the children of Ephraim, Psalm. 78. 10. though
Harnessed, and carrying Bows, we shall yet turn our Backs in in the Day of
Battle; choosing rather to become Proteusses of all shapes; Came^ions of all
colors; yea, like so many R^lypusses, resolve still to be of the complexion of
the Present Times; rather then expose our Persons, or Estates, in the least
measure, to any Peril, or Hazard: we are (as the Apostle, Heb. 12. 8. in
Downright terms, censured us) Bastards, and no Sons. But, what the Poet
sometimes of Fame, Ingrediturque solo, caput inter Nubila condens: If, whilst,
as Pilgrims* we are walking; or rather, as Prsmires, crawling, up and down the
Ant-heapes of this world; our Conversation, our Burgeship, the strength of our
Affection, shall appear to be in Heaven; at least, as a Line drawn through a
Circle, touches the Center but once, but the Circumference twice; if our
hearts shall appear twice as much intent upon Heavenly, as Earthly things; nay,
if, as Houses, built upon Rocks, we shall cheerfully weather the most violent
Gusts of all manner of Tribulation, and Persecution; if neither the enchanting
sounds of whatever Musical instruments, nor the Dreadful Apprehension of the
Torments of the Ho^^est ^iery Furnace, shall be able so far to work upon us,
as to make us to fall down before any Golden Image, any Tyrannical
Nebuchadnezzar shall set up; if nothing shall be able to separate us from the
Love of God, that is in Christ Jesus; whether it be the height of hoped for
Preferment, or the depth of Dreaded Distress, as it is Romans 8. 39. but that we
steadily resolve to continue Faithful unto Death; then may we undoubtedly
assure our selves that we are our Heavenly Fathers Legitimate Sons, and so
Heirs, yea Co heirs, with our Elder Brother Christ, of the Crown of Glory.

And so, having done with the General Notion of these Guests, as Eagles; we are
now to take a short Glimpse of them, in the more special consideration of their
sweet inclination to Accord, and Agreement, at this their Table. They keep not
a Centaures Feast; washing the Tables, and Cates, and Cups, before them, in
blood; but celebrate rather a Love, at least, a Peace, Feast; Agreeing, without
any the least jar, or discord, during the whole time of their sitting. They are
gathered together. Wheresoever the Carcass is, there the Eagles will be
gathered together.

We all know the old word, Saevis inter se convenit Vrsis: Bears, though of
most savage Natures, can quietly Accord, and Agree. Yea, no less then seven
Devils can Peaceably cohabite in one Mary Magdalen, Luke 8. 2. Yea, the
Evangelical Prophets Prediction of the time of Christ's coming, Isa. 11. 6. you
may see to be, that the Wolf, shall Dwell with the Lamb; the Leopard, with the
Kid; the Lion, and the Calf; shall lie down together. And then strange may it
not seem to hear, that the little Flock of Christ's Lambs, the small Multitude
of Believers, in the Apostles Divine Actuary, Act. 4. 32. should be of one
Heart, and one Mind. We, in this Frantic Age of ours, delivered every day of
such Monsters, as Africa never bred; as if that curse from the God of Jacob
were signally fallen upon us, that fell from Jacob sometimes upon his two bloody
Sons, Genesis 49. 7. I will Divide them in Jacob, and Scatter them in Israel; and,
as if we saw that staff of the Bonds of Brotherhood between Judah, and Israel,
Zach. 11. 7. by God, for our sins, too justly, and conspicuously, Broken; nay,
as if that cursed Harvest of the Cadmus Teeth, so long since ^own, were now, in
a loathsome Plenty, come up amongst us, -- Domus catulos non alit uno du^s; like
Dogs, we snap, and sna^l, one at another; striving which shall first seize upon
the Bones of our Brothers Estate; nay, as the Spaniard (...) on the Indians, we
try co(...)ions which of us shall leave an impression of the Deepest scarre
upon those poor Innocents, we have enslaved. Nay, we whet our Tongues, our
Pens, our Swords, with as sharp an edg, as Malice can set upon them, one
against another; being, not only so far divided in opinion for point of
Government, that one cries up Monarchy, another Aristocracy, a third
Democracy; but for Religion too; a Religando, says the the Etymologist; which
should tie us; not all jointly to God only; but every one severally to
another: and so bind up all our Spoils universally in the Bundle of Life; as
the Corinthians of old professed of themselves, that they were one of Paul,
another of Cephus; every one of us, like the sticks of a broken Faggot, seems
singula^ly, and pertinaciously, to stand up in the Defense of his own Fancied
Religion; one a Socinian, another an Anabaprist, another an Antinomian, another
an Arrian; one a Separatist, another an Anti-Scripturist; one a Ranter, another
a Quaker, another a Seeker: yea indeed all, upon the matter, to seek for such a
pure Religion; as has in it any the least power of Godliness. Nay, as the
Antique French; or rather as our selves, their Apes; so prone are we, every
day, to change the Habit of our whatever pretended Religion, as that every Day
we appear in a New Mode, and Fashion. And so, what Tacitus sometimes of the
Romans; ubi Solitudinem faciunt, Pacem appellant; whilst we seem to interpret
a mere Desolation, and Annihilation, of Religion for a Peaceable, and Pure,
Settlement, and Reformation, thereof: whilst thus, I say, we assume unto our
selves an un-commissioned and unbounded, Liberty, Nunc Leo, nunc Vulpes; -- of
appearing, every Day, in a New Trim, and Dress, of Religion; Nusquam qui
ubique; we have scarce any thing indeed of true Religion left amongst us. Nay,
unto that sharpness of contention (as Paul, and Barnabas, Act. 15. 39.) are we
grown in these cases, that (what Tacitus sometimes of Segestes, and Ariminius,
the one the Father, the other the Son, in Law) Quae apud concordos vincula
charit^tis, Incitamenta Irarum apud infensos sunt; those Bonds of Christian
Affinity, which, whilst we accorded, were a sweet means to tie us close
together, now we Ravel, and Flitter, thus, we find to be sad incentives and
provocations, to keep us at the greater Distance, and Variance. I would gladly
season, perhaps some of you that are here Present, with better Principles, then
hitherto, possibly, may have been distilled into you. You know the Rise of that
old word; Divide, and Impera; Divide Affections once, and you shall suddenly
come to divide the spoil. And therefore wo^ld I have you to follow Love, and
Peace, with all Men, that call upon the Name of the Lord, 2 Timothy 2. 22. but so
as to follow this Love and Peace, in Truth, Ephesians. 4. 15. lest otherwise, like
that House in the Gospel, founded upon the sand, what ever superstruction you
may Rear thereon, come speedily to Ruin, and Confusion. Singularity, and
Humor, and Turbulency of spirit, whether in Opinion, or Affection, wherever
they are, are far from being symboles of a Christian Temper. Nay, as they say
of Bees, that, whenever there arises stir, and strife, amongst them, it is
an infallible sign that their King is about to remove, and to leave his H^ve:
however our Spiritual Can^ers may vant themselves as they please, as they if
had engrossed the great God of heaven for their own peculiar; and (as is that
just Sarcasme upon the Fathers of the Trent Council, that they had the Holy
Ghost every week sent them in a Cloak-bag) had conjured, and circumscribed, him
within the circle of their own Tribe; as long as by Schism, by Faction, by
Division, they break the Unity of the Spirit, which should tie all ^he Members
of Christ's Body together in the Bond of Peace, it is not only a clear presage
that the King of Heaven is upon the point of Leaving; but too pregnant an
evidence that he has actually left, such unquiet, and turbulent, Conclaues,
and Conventicles. The first visible shape, that the Holy Ghost ever descended
in, was the shape of a Dove. And he, that came in a Dove, will not come but
upon a Dove. Not such, as, through a singulat conceit of their Simulata
sanctitas; double-refined H^liness, separate themselves from their despised
brethren; nor such as make a great stir, and Noise, in the world with the
Lightning of Pride; the Thunder of Blasphemy; the Winds of Malediction, and
Depravation; the Storms of Oppression; and Sword of Persecution: but such as
are like himself, D^ves, Men of a Mild, a Meek, and Peaceable, Temper, and
Disposition. Nay Elect (says St. Peter to his scattered strangers) according
to the Fore knowledge of the Father, through the sanctification of the Spirit,
and the sprinkling of the Blood of Christ, ^ Pet. 2. 2. Where there is no
appearance of the descent of the Holy Ghost upon a Man, though not in the
visible shape of a Dove, yet as upon a Dove, a Creature Gentle, and Peaceable,
little Ground of Assurance shall any such have reason to take up, that (...) is
predestined. Abraham, in tha^ his sacrifice to the Lo^^, Genesis 15. divides
the Heifer, the Shee-Goat, and the Ram; but the Turtle Dove, and the Pigeon,
he divides not. Carnal Men (how spiritual soever our Novel
selfe-justiciaries, or rather New-modelled Pharisees, may cry themselves up for)
as are prone to be divided by Discords, and Separations, and Dissentions, and
so have no semblance of the Holy Ghost upon them, have no Interest, as not in
the Predestination of the Father; so neither in the Sons Redemption. But the
Birds, the Pigeon, and the Turtle Dove, Creatures, that have no Gall in them,
Spiritual Men, such as are proper Rec^pracles of the Grace of the Holy Ghost,
of the Fathers Love in Electing, and the Sons Wisdom in Redeeming, them,
have no shadow, or semblance, of the least Inclination to Division in them. The
Kingdom of Heaven, whereby, in the style of Scripture, the Holy Ghost is
intended, and wherein that ever-blessed (...)* but an uni-Triumvirate, an
undivided Trinity in an unity of Divine Essence, as a Glorious Monarch,
Reigns, the Apostle fitly minds us, that it is first Righteousness, and
then Peace. Romans 14. 17. And then just reason may the same Apostle seem to
have, for the apposing of his Corinthians with this Poinant quaere; As long as
there are st^ifes, and Divisions, amongst you, are you not Carnal? 1 Cor. 3. 4.
As long as we practice nothing but the Defrauding, the Depraving, the Spoiling,
the Murdering, one another, can we ever hope to find in our selves any
pledg^ (...), of the Holy Ghosts descent upon us? Or of the Fathers
Predestination, or the Sons Redemption, of us? I shall take leave of you, with
the same leave, that the same Apostle takes of the same Corinthians of his. 2
Cor. 13. 11. My Brethren be of one Mind, live in Peace, and the God of Love,
and Peace shall be with you. Approve we our selves, ^n the presence of God, and
Man, to be peaceable spirits; and then shall we sensibly find, that those
three, that bear record in Heaven, 1 Ioh. 5. 7. and sweetly accord in an unity
of of Divine Essence, shall jointly seal up unto us an Assurance of an
Inheritance of (...) in Light; that after the Earthly houses of our
Tabernacle's dissolved, we shall have a Building of God, an House, not made
with hands, Eternal in the Heavens: Which, O Lord, we beseech thee, in thy good
time, grant every one of us; and, to this purpurpose, grant, that (...) word,
which this Day we^ have heard with our outward Ears, may, etc.

FINIS.

