REPORT OF THE SECRETARY OF THE TREASURY, RELATIVE TO THE LOANS NEGOTIATED
UNDER THE ACTS OF THE 4th AND 12th OF AUGUST 1790.

Published by order of the House of Representatives.

PRINTED BY CHILD'S AND SWAIN.

TREASURY DEPARTMENT.
SIR,
THE next most important article of inquiry involved in the resolutions of the
House of Representatives of the twenty-third of January last; and in the
observations which have been made respecting the conduct of this department,
relates to the loans negotiated under the acts of the fourth and twelfth of
August, one thousand seven hundred and ninety.

The papers which have been transmitted to the House by order of the President,
disclose the following particulars --

1. That the immediate superintendance of the business of the loans was
confided to the department of the treasury, being naturally connected with it.
This trust, besides the original instructions for regulating the execution of
it, which have been communicated, was of course subject to such directions from
time to time, as the President should think fit to give, or as occasions should
require -- A considerable latitude of discretion, nevertheless, from the very
nature of the case, attended it; so as justly to leave on the head of this
department, a complete responsibility in all instances, where special
exceptions do not appear.

2. That the first loan which was obtained, was undertaken and completed by the
agency of Wilhem and Jan Willink, and Nicolaas and Jacob Van Staphorst and
Hubbard, who both under the former and present government, have been and are
the bankers of the United States at Amsterdam.

3. That with the single exception of the first loan, William Short, Esquire. then
charge des affairs at the court of France, now resident minister at the Hague,
was constituted the sole agent of this department, for carrying into effect the
powers confided to it; with this qualification only, that if any negotiation
with a Prince or State, to whom any part of the debt to be discharged by the
loans was due, should be requisite -- the same was to be carried on through the
person, who in capacity of minister, charge des affairs, or otherwise, then
was or thereafter might be charged, with transacting the affairs of the United
States, with such Prince or State.

4. That all payments, which have been made out of the proceeds of the loans,
have been made by the immediate and special order of Mr. Short, except those,
upon the bills of the Treasurer for the moneys drawn to this country, and those
to the money lenders in Holland; which were made in course by our bankers, at
the periods they respectively became due. -- This consequently embraces all the
payments to France; the very last of which, though agreed for by Mr. Morris, in
consequence of his having been employed for a special purpose by Mr. Short, was
not, and could not, be completed, but by the same immediate and special
direction of Mr. Short.

It moreover appears, from the same papers, and more fully from the
correspondence at large, now before the Senate, that except in the particular
instance which has been just stated, with regard to Mr. Morris, there has been
no other agency in the whole business, than that of Mr. Short, and of the
bankers at Amsterdam and Antwerp, whom he necessarily employed as instruments
in the negotiation with the money lenders, and in the receipt and disbursement
of the moneys borrowed. -- These as already mentioned, were at Amsterdam, the
two houses of Wilhem and Jan Willink, and of Nicolaas and Jacob Van Staphorst
and Hubbard; at Antwerp a Mr. G. De Wolf, was the banker.

It may not be without its uses to add, that the moneys proceeding from the
loans, have constantly remained in the hands of the respective bankers, till
they have been paid over to the creditors; namely, the French treasury, or
their bankers, the money lenders or their representatives, the holders of the
bills drawn from this country by the Treasurer. Neither Mr. Short nor Mr.
Morris, has ever had possession of a single guilder. The latter indeed has
never even had power over one, excepting merely a sum of 105,000 guilders, by
letters of mine dated the 13th September last, placed at his disposal for
paying at Paris, according to stipulation, the interest on the debt due to
foreign officers. The fact is, and it is so demonstrated by the correspondence
already referred to, that I never wrote a line to Mr. Morris on the subject of
the loans or their proceeds, but in reference to the case, just mentioned of
the interest payable to foreign officers; in respect to which local situation
governed.

One more circumstance only is necessary to be noticed in this place, with a
view to the elucidation intended: It is this -- that the last payment, though
originating prior to the change in the political position of France of the 10th
of August last, not having been consummated 'till the 6th of September
following, f^ll of course under the disposition of those then in possession of
the power of the nation.

It could not but have been unexpected to me, that exception should be taken to
the report lately made by me on the subject of foreign loans, for the omission
of details which I did not at the time, and do not yet, conceive, to have been
called for, by the terms of the resolutions upon which it was founded. The
request addressed to the President, by those resolutions, was, that he would
cause to be laid before the House, a particular account of the sums borrowed
under his authority by the United States, the terms on which each loan was
obtained, the applications, which had been made of the moneys, agreeably to
appropriations, the balances, if any, which remained unapplied, specifying also
at what times interest commenced on the several sums obtained, and at what
times it was stopped by the several payments made. It was not natural to
imagine that these expressions were designed to comprehend a specification of
the precise authorities, under which the loans were negotiated, of the names of
the persons, by whom they were negotiated, of the particular place or places,
where the balance unexpended of the sums that had been drawn for to the United
States, were deposited. Still less natural was it for me to anticipate
surmises, which could give to such particulars the shadow of importance. But as
animadversions have attended the omission of those details, I ought to regard
it as an admonition to me, to be more full and precise in my present
communication; a motive which co-operates with my desire, to throw all possible
light upon the subject.

The first general circumstance, which requires to be noticed and explained,
after the particulars that have been communicated is this -- That all the loans
which have been hitherto obtained, have been made under the authority of both
acts, without particular reference to either.

The idea originally entertained, was to conduct them on a different plan,
founding each loan upon one or the other of the acts; as will be seen by my
letter of the 28th of August, 1790, to our bankers at Amsterdam; at the same
time, that it will appear, from the same letter, that the separation did not
appear to me a matter of consequence, and that I anticipated the possibility of
a difficulty in adhering to it in the particular case. That difficulty, proved
in the opinion of the bankers, to be of sufficient moment to render the
arrangement contemplated, under the circumstances of the case unadviseable; as
they inform me in their answer to the abovementioned letter.

But prior to the receipt of that answer, further enquiry and reflection had
determined me to abandon my original idea -- as likely to produce embarrassment
and inconvenience, both in the negotiation of the loans, and in the application
of their proceeds. It was accordingly concluded to let the loans proceed
indiscriminately, upon both acts.

These loans were to have reference to two purposes -- first, the reimbursement
of the foreign debt; second, the purchase of the domestic debt at its market
price.

There were weighty reasons for carrying on both these operations concurrently.
The arrears to France had been a considerable time accumulating. It was in
every sense proper that a reimbursement of them should begin without delay, and
desirable for obvious reasons, that it should go on without any very
considerable chasms or intermissions. This manner of proceeding could not but
have the fairest chance of being the most satisfactory and convenient to
France; unless indeed the business were to have proceeded upon the principle of
an entire postponement of the domestic object, to that of the reimbursement.

But very cogent reasons rendered this course not the most eligible -- The
early commencement of purchases of the debt, was a matter of real and great
importance.

It was important in two relations; as it regarded the advantages to the
government, from redeeming a portion of the debt at low prices; and still more,
as it regarded the savings to the country from raising the price of stock on
foreign purchasers; the beneficial influence upon the credit of the nation
abroad and at home, to be expected from a quick appreciation of the public
obligations; the benefit to the public creditors in general, and to the most
meritorious classes of them in particular, which would result from the same
cause; all which objects were suggested from the treasury, as motives to the
provision respecting purchases, and are evidently contemplated in the preamble
of the act, which makes that provision.

Exclusive of the other advantages, which have been cited, and which are of a
nature truly precious and important, that of preventing foreigners from
acquiring the property of our citizens at a great undervalue is too obvious not
to be estimated, as it ought to be, at first sight. It cannot require argument
to show how great an evil it was, that foreigners should be able to acquire
with nine or ten, that for which the country would ultimately have to pay them
twenty, with full interest in the interval; nor how much it merited the
attention of the government to prevent or lessen so serious an evil.

But the influence which the purchases by the government may have had upon this
event may not be equally obvious. It is however not difficult to be traced.
Price naturally keeps pac^ with competition and demand; whatever increases the
latter, necessarily tends to an augmentation of the former. Merely then as
another purchaser, by adding to the competition and demand, the purchases of
the government, were calculated to influence a rise of price. But they had an
effect more than proportioned to their real extent. Imagination has much to do
in all such questions, and in scarcely any thing so much as in what relates to
public funds. Experience proves, that it is here exerted with uncommon effort.
The appearance of the government as a purchaser has not failed to excite the
expectation of a greater demand than was real, because the extent of the
resources to be employed, might be very great, and was unknown; which by
stimulating the zeal of those who wanted to buy, lest the price should rise
suddenly and considerably upon them, and by encouraging those who wanted to
sell, under the hope of a better price, to hold back the commodity, has in both
ways generally contributed to give a spring to the market. Prices once raised,
when founded on intrinsic value, tend to maintain themselves; because those who
have given them, are for the most part interested in keeping them up. And every
new impulse, which they receive, serves to carry them rapidly to their just
level.

Those who have been most attentive to the operation of the public purchases,
will have the least doubt that they had a material agency, in accelerating the
appreciation of the public st^ck.

An enquiry naturally arises here -- Were the moneys which were drawn from
Europe on account of the foreign loans, the instrument of the purchases, to
which these beneficial effects are ascribed?

I answer, that these purchases are to be attributed to the instrumentality of
that fund -- that had it not been for this resource, they could not have been
made at the early periods, when most of them were made. The course of the
transaction will be fully and with more propriety explained in another place.

An attention to both objects -- to the reimbursements to France, and to the
purchases of the debt, rendered expedient a subdivision even of the first loan.
Considerations of the moment seconded those of a general nature, to induce an
immediate payment to that country -- The loan had been undertaken without
previous authority from hence, with a view to such payment. This was known and
a correspondent expectation excited. The immediate situation of the French
finances, rendered a payment at the particular juncture more than ordinarily
interesting. In such a state of things, there could be no hesitation, about
applying a large part of the loan to that object. Another part of it was of
necessity applied to the payment of the sums, that were falling due on the
Dutch loans. And it is presumed, that the reasons which have been assigned,
will appear to have been sufficiently powerful to have dictated the drawing of
a part of it to the United States.

Accordingly, a million and a half of the three millions borrowed, were
appropriated to France, something more than 800,000 guilders were drawn for
here, and the remainder of the loan was left to be disbursed in Holland.

It shall not be concealed, though I am aware that the acknowledgment may be a
subject of criticism, that the conduct which was pursued, both with regard to
this and to the succeeding loan, was in some degree, influenced by a collateral
consideration. The government had but just adopted a plan for the restoration
of public credit. The periodical payment of interest was to commence on the 1st
of April 1791. A considerable part of the revenue out of which the moneys were
to arise was only to begin to accrue on the first of January preceding. This
revenue was liable to credits of four, six, and twelve months.

How far its eventual product would answer expectation -- how far the
punctuality of payments could be relied upon, were points unascertained, and
which required to their ascertainment much more experience than had been
obtained. In such a situation it was not only natural, but necessary for an
administrator of the finances to doubt -- and doubting it was his duty to call
to the aid of the public credit, every auxiliary, which it was in his power to
command -- He was bound to reflect, that a failure in any stipulated payment
would be fatal to the dawning credit of the country -- to the reputation of the
government, just beginning to rise. That a wound inflicted upon either, at so
early a stage, under all the circumstances of opposition to the constitution,
which had existed in the community, would have been deeply felt, and might
either not have admitted of a cure at all -- or not till after a length of
time, and a series of mischiefs -- that it could not but be an important
service rendered to the country, to ward off so great a misfortune, by the
temporary use of any extraordinary resource, which might be at hand, till time
was given for more effectual provision.

If in the course of such reflections, a doubt had occurred, about the strict
regularity of what was contemplated, as a possible resort, a mind sufficiently
alive to the public interest, and sufficiently firm in the pursuit of it, would
have dismissed that doubt, as an obstacle, suggested by a pusillanimous
caution, to the exercise of those higher motives, which ought ever to govern a
man, invested with a great public trust. It would have occurred, that there was
reasonable ground to rely, that the necessity of the case, and the magnitude of
the occasion, would insure a justification, and that if the contrary should
happen, there remained still the consolation of having sacrificed personal
interest and tranquillity, no matter to what extent, to an important public
interest, and of having avoided the humiliation, which would have been justly
due to an opposite, and to a feeble conduct.

The disposition which was resolved upon with regard to the first loan,
involved necessarily a decision of the point, that the loans might be placed on
the joint foundation of both acts. That loan having been undertaken, as already
mentioned, without previous authority, and consequently without a particular
eye to either act, it was probable, that it would be found too late to make an
apportionment of one part of the sum borrowed to one act, of another part to
the other act. In that case, the distributive application of the fund to the
different objects was to be relinquished or the possibility was to be admitted,
of the loan being left to stand upon the authority of both acts. The same
disposition of the first loan, will also illustrate the convenience and
expediency of the plan which was finally adopted, that is, of placing the loans
on the basis of both acts.

The idea of a concurrent execution of both the objects to which the loans were
destined, could not conveniently have been pursued, upon the plan of a
separation of the loans; which to be effectual, would include the strict
application of the proceeds of each to the purposes of the particular act, upon
which it was founded.

Amsterdam was naturally looked to, as the great scene of the intended loans.
There, as every where else, there is but a certain quantity of money floating
in the market from time to time, beyond the necessary demands of trade and
industry, seeking for employment in loans. This quantity of course varies at
different periods, from a variety of causes. Of the quantity at any time
afloat, but a certain proportion can be commanded by any one borrowing power;
owing to the competition of other borrowers, who have each their connections
through their bankers, with different sets of undertakers and money lenders.
Nor it is always that considerable loans can be had at any rate. There are
certain seasons only, when they are practicable.

To have brought two loans upon the market at one time, as an opportunity of
borrowing offered, which must have been the case in order to make concurrent
provision for both the objects in question, if the principle of a separation of
the loans had been adopted, would have been to exhibit to the money lenders a
very unusual appearance. With men known to be much influenced by precedent and
habit, such an appearance could not have failed to prove a source of
speculation and conjecture; and might have led to a confused idea that the
wants of the United States were excessive; a supposition, by no means
calculated to promote their credit. It would moreover have been a departure
from that simplicity of procedure, which where numbers are concerned is always
of moment to a right conception of the business to be accomplished, and ought
not to be abandoned, but for reasons of real utility (...) weight.

To have instituted the loans successively, ^ounding each, upon one or the
other of the acts, would have had a tendency to occasion longer intervals
between the payments to France, than was desirable. The intervention of a loan
for the purpose of purchases, would have created of course a very considerable
chasm. It may be objected that such chasms did happen on the plan which was
pursued. This is true in two instances; but the most material of the two
proceeded from casualties foreign to the plan itself; which are detailed in the
correspondence more than once alluded to.

It is possible too that a separation of the loans might have rendered it less
easy to take advantage of a state of the market, favorable to their extension
at a particular juncture. The loan to be brought on the market might relate to
the purchase of the debt. The moment might be favorable to a more considerable
loan, than was within the limits prescribed for that object, and the
opportunity might slip before a second could be instituted. In this business
moments are often of importance, and are to be embraced with promptitude and
dexterity.

Thus it appears, that in different ways the negociotion of the loans might
have been embarrassad by their separation.

But the most obvious, if not the most serious of the inconveniences which
would have attended it, respects the application of the sums borrowed. This
could not then have been molded, as the interest or policy of the government
might dictate. A loan for the purchase of the debt might have been made under
prospects, promising a ready and beneficial investment of it; but before the
investment was made, a change of the market might render it ineligible --
involving the alternative, either of a disadvantageous investment, or of
leaving perhaps a large sum of money a long time unemployed. Such a state of
things might have produced to the banks an advantage, and to the government a
loss, of magnitude, sufficient to give color to a surmise, that the public
interest had been sacrificed to the profit of those institutions. The contrary
course has essentially avoided that evil; which in this and in other instances,
would have been incident in a far greater degree, to the modes of proceeding,
contrasted with those that have been pursued, than has in reality attended them.

Or political considerations might have rendered it advisable to transfer the
application of the fund from one object to the other.

Of this the case of St. Domingo presents an example. It might have happened on
the plan of separate loans, that there was no fund in hand but for the purchase
of the debt. Then on the principle of that plan, there would have been no fund
in the disposition of the executive, applicable to the other object, which
would have embarrassed the performance of a duty toward a friendly power, and
in a way which included the positive advantage to the country of paying
directly a part of its foreign debt, in its own productions.

Such were the embarrassments avoided, and such the conveniences secured, by
the plan of making the loans indiscriminately, upon the authority of both acts.

In the opposite plan, I can discern no counterbalancing advantage not
convenience.

Consequently, if both are equally legal, there can be no doubt which of them
ought to have been preferred.

If there be any want of legality in the plan which has been pursued, I was not
at the time, and am not yet sensible of it.

I know of no rule which renders it illegal in an agent, having from the same
principal two authorities to borrow money, whether for one or different
purposes, to unite the loans he may make, upon the foundation of both
authorities: Provided the terms of them be consonant with both or either of his
commissions. If the purposes are different, it will be incumbent upon him, to
take care that the application of the moneys borrowed makes the proper
separation; and doing this he will have fulfilled his trust. To test this
position it seems only necessary to ask, whether the principal in such case
would not be fully bound to the lenders?

In reflecting originally upon the regularity of the proceeding meditated,
there was but one source of hesitation; the difference in the funds upon which
the loans were to rest. But the following reasoning satisfied the s^ruple: The
pledging of particular funds is for the security of the lenders. If they are
willing to wave the special security, by lending on the general credit of the
government, or to dispense with the preference of one fund to another, where
two are pledged, by lending indiscriminately on the credit of both, the one or
the other circumstance must be alike indifferent to the government. The
authority will have been well ex^^uted* to the extent necessary for public
purposes, and if any thing remains unexecuted, it will be in enlargement, not
in abridgement of the public rights. It is however presumed, that the practical
construction, in the present case will be, that the two funds pledged will
constitute an aggregate, for the joint security of the moneys borrowed upon
both acts.

The second general circumstance respecting the foreign loans, negotiated under
the acts of the 4th and 12th of August, which requires attention, relates to
the terms on which they have been obtained. These, it appears have been
represented, as neither honorable nor advantageous.

The following facts, witnessed by the correspondence before the Senate, more
than once referred to, and well known to all who have had opportunities of
information, demonstrate, that the terms of those loans, have been both
honorable and advantageous.

1. There is not one of them, which originated under the acts, that was not
effected upon conditions equally favorable with those attending the loans of
the cotemporary borrowing powers of the most tried resources and best
established credit, and more favorable than were obtainable by some powers of
great respectability.

2. The United States took a lead in the market, in regard to the subsequent
reductions of interest; having had either earlier or more complete success than
any other borrowing power.

3. From a rate of five per cent. interest, and four and a half per cent.
charges, which marked the level of the market when they begun their loans, they
in the course of a single year, brought down the terms to four per cent.
interest, and five per cent. charges; that is from an interest on the nett sum
received (including an indemnification for charges) of 5.5012, something more
than five and a half per cent. to an interest on the like sum of 4.4951,
something less than 4 per cent.

When this state of things is applied to a government, only in the third year
of its existence, and to a country which had so recently emerged from a total
derangement of its finances, it would seem impossible to deny that the issue is
not only honorable, but flattering; unless indeed it can be denied, that a
sound and vigorous state of credit is honorable to a nation.

I forbear a comparison between the loans of the present, and of the former
government of this country, because an immense disparity of circumstances would
render it an improper one -- further than to take notice of a very great error
which has been upon some occasions advanced. It has been alleged, to disparage
the management, under the present, that the loans of the former government, in
a situation comparatively very disadvantageous, have been effected upon equal
terms; and in proof of this an appeal has been made to the loan of 2,000,000 of
guilders at four per cent. which is that of the 9th March, 1784.

Nothing can manifest more clearly than this, the very precipitate and
superficial views, with which suggestions on important public subjects, are
sometimes made. The last four per cent. loan obtained under the existing laws,
including charges, is a real four and a half per cent. loan, or more exactly a
4.4951 per cent. loan. The four per cent. loan of March 1784, is a real 6.6468
per cent. loan. The difference which exceeds 2 per cent. arises principally
from extra premiums and gratifications which were allowed upon this loan, and
which are unknown to the other.

Much praise is no doubt due to the exertions which effected the loans under
the former government. A superiority of merit, shall readily be conceded to
them, from the circumstances under which they were made, and their signal
utility in the revolution. But it is not necessary to their eulogium to affirm,
that they were made upon equal terms with those lately obtained, or to deny the
goodness of the terms of the latter. Truth will not justify the one or the
other.

The facts which have been stated prove, that the terms of the loans are
advantageous as well as honorable. They are comparatively advantageous, because
they are as moderate as other powers in the best credit have allowed; and they
are absolutely advantageous, because the highest real not nominal rate of
interest, which has been given does not exceed 5.5012, a fraction more than 5
per cent. while the lowest real rate is 4.4951, a fraction less than 4 per cent.

If the question whether advantageous or not be tested by the purposes for
which the loans have been made, the conclusion is equally in their favor --
The payments on account of the foreign debt were an indispensable obligation.
Unless it can be shown that they might have been derived from another and more
advantageous source, it will follow that it was the interest of the government
to avail itself of the resource which has been employed, because it was its
duty to discharge its obligations.

It is sometimes urged, that foreign loans for whatever purpose are pernicious,
because they serve to drain the country of its specie for the payment of
interest, and for the final reimbursement of principal -- that it would be
preferable for that reason to procure loans at home, even at a higher rate of
interest.

To this, several answers may be given, some of a special, others of a general
nature.

In reference to the reimbursement of the foreign debt, it may be observed,
that as a debt had already been incurred abroad, upon which interest was
payable, the contracting of new loans there for the reimbursement of that debt,
would leave us, as to the demand for the exportation of our specie, just where
we originally stood.

Moreover if the money could have been borrowed at home, for that
reimbursement, the remittance of it would have been ruinous to the country. The
mere necessity of remitting could not alone have increased the foreign demand
for our commodities; so as to deduce from an extra exportation of them, the
requisite means of payment; and if our specie was to perform the office, the
country would speedily have been exhausted to a degree inconsistent with the
support of its commerce and industry. The quantity of coin in the United States
has never been considerable enough for such an operation.

But this very state of things would have rendered the procuring of the money
from domestic resources impracticable. These it may be safely affirmed are too
limited for extensive loans, of any considerable degree of permanency.

In the last place -- The expedient of domestic loans, would not prevent the
evil, which is desired to be prevented. Foreigners would either in the first
instance, bring their moneys to subscribe them to the loans, or, they would
afterward, purchase the stock arising from them; and in either case they would
equally draw away the money of the country on account of their interest and
principal. The only consequence of giving a disproportionate rate of interest
for domestic loans would be, that our specie would be carried away so much the
faster.

Experience having shown, that nations sometimes pay more regard to their
external than to their internal credit, this consideration co-operates with
reasons of convenience to induce monied men abroad, to be content with a lower
rate of interest, stipulated to be paid in their own country, than if the place
of payment be in another country; making even a greater difference, than is an
equivalent for the expense and risk of obtaining remittances.

The clear inference from these observations, is that with regard to the
reimbursement of the foreign debt, no other expedient than that of foreign
loans was practicable or eligible.

The utility of that part of the loans, which has reference to the purchase of
the debt; has already been explained in certain views. So far as their agency
has been hitherto concerned in that operation, it is a sufficient demonstration
of the advantage of the measure to state, that the sum invested in purchases up
to the period of the last report to Congress has redeemed what is equal to an
annuity of 6.15 per cent. inclu^^^g also the advantage of sinking a capital
more than 50 per cent. greater than the ^um expended.

A valuable profit will arise from the investment of the sums on hand, either
in a payment to the bank or in the purchase of stock. The liberation of an
annuity of six per cent. can be secured -- while upon a great part of the fund
which is to effect it no more than 4 per cent. is payable, and less than 5 upon
the other part. The mean of these rates being 5 per cent. an annual saving of
one per cent. may be effected, which upon 2,000,000 of dollars, interest at 5
per cent. is equal to a capital or gross sum of 400,000 dollars; an item
certainly of no inconsiderable consequence.

Against the advantages, which are claimed in favor of the loans, it is
natural to place the loss of interest incident to the delays, which have
attended their application to the purposes, for which they were obtained. This
leads to an examination of the cases of delay, their causes, the circumstances
if any, which counterbalance them.

There are three instances of material delay -- one respecting the first loan,
another the second loan, and a third, a part of the two last loans.

The first loan, it will be seen, was not applied till a considerable time
after its commencement. It has been already intimated that it was undertaken
without previous authority from this country. The motives to the measure are
detailed in a letter from our bankers of the 25th of January, 1790, a copy of
which accompanies the communications herewith made by order of the President. A
regard to those motives led to an acceptance of the loan. Nor could it have
been deemed an unfortunate circumstance, that such an auxiliary to the
operations of the treasury had been previously prepared.

The laws authorizing the loans, passed the 4th and 12th of August. As early as
the 28th of that month, the acceptance abovementioned was communicated, and
the application of 1,500,000 florins, in a payment to France directed. So far
no time was lost, more than could not have been avoided.

But the bills for the sum to be brought here were not drawn till some months
after. This proceeded from an unwillingness to risk the public credit, by
drawing before there was a certainty of funds to answer the drafts. It was not
impossible, that the great delay which had attended the passing of the law for
borrowing, might have led the bankers to come to some arrangement with the
money lenders, for surrendering the moneys paid in, and terminating the loan.
Independent of this source of apprehension, they had expressed themselves, in
their letter communicating the step they had taken, to this effect. "To spare
the United States all possible advance of interest, while the money shall
remain unappropriated, we shall issue the recipisses at the option of the
buyers to take them so late as they please, on the expectation the three
millions would be placed in a few months." This, though it announced an
expectation that the moneys would be paid in, in a few months, did not render
the event certain. And as the bankers appeared from that precaution, to have
adverted to the idea of saving the United States an advance of interest, it was
supposeable that they might have found means still further to procrastinate the
payments, or a considerable part of them, till they had received a confirmation
of the loan. This policy would have been the more natural, as they risked the
loss of interest themselves, if the transaction should not have been finally
ratified.

Under such circumstances I thought it most prudent to defer the drafts, 'till
advice was received of the actual progress of the loans. There was no room to
hesitate between the loss of a small sum in interest, and the danger of
committing the public credit by a premature operation.

The second case of delay relates to the second loan. It was occasioned by a
determination to suspend the orders for its application, till information was
received, of its having been contracted for.

One motive to this determination has been already intimated; namely, the yet
untried and immature state of our fiscal arrangements. The general reasoning on
this head, was strengthened by an occurrence altogether unlooked for, which
disclosed itself on the 23d of August 1790, eleven days after the rising of
Congress; an occurrence which they had not contemplated in their pecuniary
dispositions. I allude to the commencement of an Indian war; which was
announced in a letter from governor St. Clair, dated on the abovementioned
day; the progressive extent and consequences of which could of course not be
foreseen. Under such circumstances, I judged it for the public interest and
safety to hold the resource, which the prospect of a loan presented, under the
power of the treasury, till advice should be received of the actual institution
of the loan; with intention then to dispose of it as should appear advisable,
under a better matured view of our pecuniary situation and prospects.

Hence the delay which attended the application of the second loan; the first
in fact that originated subsequent to the laws for borrowing. But after advice
had been received of its having been set on foot, no time was lost in
converting it with due dispatch to its proper uses. There was only, not an
anticipation of its application. As early as May 24th, 1791. I wrote a letter
to Mr. Short (a copy of which is in possession of the house) empowering him to
apply the proceeds of all future loans, as they should accrue, in payments to
France; except as to such sums as therein were, or afterward should be
previously and specially reserved. This arrangement was calculated to obviate
the inconvenience of leaving the proceeds of the loans, for any considerable
time unemployed. At the period of making it, and not sooner, the public
prospects appeared to me sufficiently unfolded, to render a general and
permanent disposition free from hazard. This instruction preceded in due season
all the loans subsequent to that of March 1791.

Whatever delay, therefore may have attended succeeding investments for paying
the French debt, is not attributable to this department: And I think it will
not appear, that any has been incurred, in respect to the sums which were
destined for the public service here. In judging of this point it will be
proper to observe, that a latitude of six months, for making their payments,
has been reserved to the money lenders, though with liberty to make them
earlier. It was however necessary for the treasury to regulate it is bills
according to the possible delay, lest they should not meet adequate funds. The
general policy adopted was to let them fall upon the rear of each loan; this
giving a freer course for early payments to France, and best conciliating a
certainty of funds for answering the bills, with as little double interest as
possible.

It will appear, that notwithstanding the arrangement which was made, a
considerable time intervened between the two last payments to France, while
there were funds in hand waiting for employment. It may be expected, that the
causes of this procrastination, though as I have said not imputable to this
department, should be unfolded to the House. Particular circumstances however
induce me to confine myself to stating generally, that the delay proceeded, in
the first place, from an expectation given to Mr. Short and kept up from time
to time by the French minister of marine, that a plan would be adopted, to
which a decree of the National Assembly was requisite, for converting a large
sum into supplies for St. Domingo -- which Mr. Short concluded justly must come
out of the foreign fund, and consequently suspended its application in Europe
-- In the second place, from a desire to settle, previously to further
payments, a definitive rule, by which the moneys paid, should be liquidated and
credited to the United States.

Both the one and the other appears to have been procrastinated from period to
period, by the disordered state of French affairs, and to have finally issued
contrary to expectation. It would be an unnecessary commitment of my opinion to
declare, how far the delay appears to me to have been justified by the causes
-- But being led by the occasion to take notice of it, I think it improper to
send it abroad, liable perhaps to misconstruction, without observing, that the
inducements appear to me, to have been weighty -- that the delays naturally
grew out of the circumstances, and that I am entirely persuaded of the goodness
of the motives which governed. The correspondence before the Senate, contains
the particulars of the transaction.

Having pointed out the instances of material delay which happened, and the
causes of them, it remains to state what circumstances there are to
counterbalance the loss on that account.

These circumstances are of two kinds.

1. Gain by exchange in the sale of the bills drawn by the treasury and upon
the higher rate of interest on the credits which were given for those bills,
than was payable on the fund upon which they were drawn.

2. Gain by exchange on the payments to France.

According to my calculation, founded on the best information extant, the real
par of the metals between the United States and Amsterdam, makes a current
guilder equal to 35 89/100 ninetieths of a dollar. The lowest rate which has
been obtained for the bills has been 36 4/1^ ninetieths, with an allowance of
sixty days credit without interest. Making a deduction for the interest the
bills were still sold above the true par. In some instances they have been sold
as high as 40 cents and 7 mills per guilder, with interest for the whole term
of the credit given.

The rate of interest for the credits allowed upon the bills was 6 per cent.
the mean interest paid upon the fund 5 per cent. producing consequently a gain
of one per cent.

With regard to the payments to France, if the current rate of exchange between
Paris and Amsterdam at the moment of each remittance or payment were to govern,
a large profit would result to the United States. But certain equitable
considerations will produce deductions, which will greatly lessen this
advantage; yet making a liberal allowance for them, there is ground to
calculate that a saving may be made in this particular, more than sufficient to
indemnify for the loss of interest.

Hence any positive advantage which will have been otherwise gained, will
probably be undiminished by that circumstance.

I proceed in the next place, to state the views which prevailed respecting the
sums that have been from time to time drawn for; the purposes they have
hitherto answered, and the further advantages to be expected from the measure.

The direct object of all the sums drawn for prior to July 1792, was the
purchase of the debt. A collateral consideration which operated in the first
stages of drawing, has also been mentioned. It has likewise been stated, that
the early purchases of the debt are to be ascribed to the instrumentality of
the fund derived from the loans. This idea shall now be explained.

Two mistakes appear to have influenced the impressions which have been
entertained in relation, directly or indirectly to this subject. First, it
seems to have been all along forgotten, that a considerable part of the duties
is always outstanding, on account of the credits which are given; whence the
assertion, that the sinking fund has continually overflowed from domestic
resources. Second, it seems to have been taken for granted that the proceeds of
the loans have remained apart, distinct from the mass of the money in the
treasury; while in truth the course of the business has been to turn them over
to the Treasurer by warrants as they have been received, so as to form a part
of the aggregate, from time to time appearing in his hands and in his accounts.
The banks have been the agents employed for selling the bills. Sometimes
warrants on account have issued upon them, for the sums accruing from the
sales, at other times the warrants have been deferred till the whole proceeds
of any parcel have been received and the accounts of the banks settled at the
treasury; as the state of the treasury has happened to render the one or the
other most convenient.

The banks of North America and New York, were the agents for the sale of all
the bills, which were sold prior to April 1792, amounting to 1,006,526 dollars
and 36 cents. Of this sum 361,391 dollars and 34 cents, were passed over to the
Treasurer in 1791 -- 327,136 dollars and 22 cents in March 1792, and 140,000
dollars in June following -- the residue having remained as heretofore stated,
in deposit with the bank of North America upon a special consideration. This is
exclusive of certain bills furnished for the use of the department of State,
amounting to 78,766 dollars and 67 cents.

The remainder of the bills which have been sold beginning in April 1792, were
sold by the bank of the United States, and its branches at New York and
Baltimore. The accounts of the sales had just been made out for settlement,
when the present enquiry began, but warrants had not yet issued for placing the
proceeds in the treasury. It will be remarked that from the terms of credit
allowed, they only began to be receivable in October last; the 26th day of
which month the first return made by the bank, shows a sum of 127,225 dollars
and 53 cents received; and that the collection had not been completed when the
accounts of sales were rendered.

There are different views of the subject which will enable the House to
perceive that the possession of the fund in question was necessary to enable
the treasury to furnish the means of making all the purchases which were made
prior to July, 1792.

It is true, that there was a surplus of revenue to the end of the year 1790,
equal to 1,374,656 dollars and 40 cents, which was appropriated to purchases of
the debt; and from the credits then given upon the duties, this surplus would
naturally come into the treasury in the course of the year 1791.

But the legislature foreseeing that the revenue of 1791, from the same cause,
could not actually be in the treasury, within that year, to face the
appropriations upon it, (which it is to be observed were nearly commensurate
with the fund) inserted a clause in the law, appropriating the surplus of 1790,
to the purchase of the debt, which authorized a reservation of so much of that
surplus as might be necessary to make the payments of interest during 1791; in
case of a deficiency in the receipts into the treasury, on account of the
current revenue of the year.

It will appear to the House, upon a recurrence to the Treasurer's quarterly
account, ending the 30th of September, 1791, that the balance of cash then on
hand was 662,233 dollars and 99 cents.

At that time there had been paid into the treasury, upon warrants, from the
proceeds of the bills drawn upon the foreign fund 361,391 dollars and 34 cents.
Consequently, the balance of cash, had it not been for that auxiliary, would
have been only 300,842 dollars and 65 cents; considering the whole balance in
the treasury as representing an equal sum of the proceeds of the bills.

Even in a time of complete peace, in a country where a small extent of monied
capital forbids a reliance upon large pecuniary aids to be suddenly obtained --
a prudent administrator of the finances could not feel entirely at ease, with a
less sum at all times in the certain command of the treasury, than 500,000
dollars, for meeting current demands and extra exigencies, which in the affairs
of a nation are every moment to be expected. But with a war actually on hand,
and a possibility of its extension to a more serious length, he would be
inexcusable, in leaving himself with a less sum at command; unless from an
impracticability of doing otherwise. It would be always his duty to combine two
considerations -- the chance of extra calls for money, and a possibility of
some failure in the receipts which were expected. Derangements of various kinds
may happen in the commercial circle, capable of interrupting for a time the
punctual course of payments to the treasury. It is necessary to a certain
extent to be prepared for such casualties.

But during the year 1791, there was a circumstance, which operated as an
additional reason for keeping a respectable sum always on hand. The loans of
the domestic debt were going on till the last of September of that year; while
at the same time, the interest was in a course of payment -- It was therefore
always uncertain what sum would be payable at the end of a quarter; this
depending on the eagerness or backwardness of the public creditors in bringing
forward their subscriptions, or their claims as non-subscribers. The omissions,
at the end of a preceding quarter, might be expected to fall upon a subsequent
one -- and it was necessary to be prepared for that possibility; of course to
keep in hand a large fund for contingent demands. This necessity extended to
the termination of the period for receiving subscriptions; because the treasury
was to be prepared on the supposition, that the whole of the domestic debt
would then be in a state to receive interest either as subscribed or
unsubscribed. But this did not in fact happen -- A part of the sums which were
presented were crowded into the last days of the quarter and were too late for
a dividend. A considerable sum remained ultimately in a form, which according
to the terms of the provision did not entitle it to interest, either as
subscribed or as unsubscribed debt.

Hence the cash in the treasury on the 1st of October 1791, was by a
considerable sum greater than was to have been counted upon or than might have
happened.

The conclusion which results from the foregoing observations is this -- that
the purchases which preceded the 1st of October 1791, and which amounted to
699,984 dollars and 23 cents in specie could not have been hazarded, but for
the aid of the sums which had actually accrued from the proceeds of the bills
and the expectation of those which were to accrue from the yet uncollected
proceeds of others.

Had it not been for this aid, the treasury would have been left more bare,
than was consistent with the security of public credit and the certain
execution of the public service.

There is however a later period in the state of the treasury, which will more
completely illustrate the idea intended to be established. This is the 2d of
July, 1792.

On that day, the balance of cash in the treasury, comprehending the deposits
in all the banks, and including a sum of 200,000 dollars, received on loan of
the bank of the United States, together with a sum of 220,900 dollars in bills
drawn upon domestic funds, the proceeds of which had not been received, was
623,133 dollars and 61 cents.

Prior to this period a further sum of 545,902 dollars and 89 cents arising
from the sales of foreign bills had been placed in the treasury, by warrants,
making with the former sums placed there from the same source, 907,294 dollars
and 23 cents.

Had it not been for this auxiliary, and that of the loan from the bank, the
treasury would then have been in arrear 484,160 dollars and 62 cents. It
therefore necessarily follows, that for the purchases to that period, which
amounted in specie to 942,672 dollars and 54 cents, at least 484,160 dollars
and 62 cents must have come from the foreign fund.

But when it is considered, for the reasons which have been stated, and which
will hereafter be fortified by others, tending as I conceive, to give them
conclusive force, that the sum in the treasury at the period in question was
barely what ought to have been there for safety, and for a due supply to
current demands -- it will follow that the whole or nearly the whole of the
purchases which were made previous to July 1792, were made by the means or
instrumentality of the foreign fund.

A similar view, extended to the subsequent quarter, will exhibit this point in
a still clearer light. The balance then in the treasury, including a further
loan from the bank of 100,000 dollars, was only 420,914 dollars and 51 cents.

What then it may be asked became of the surplus of revenue to the end of 1790?
what was the office performed by that fund during the period in question?

The answer is, that it served exactly the purpose which was anticipated by the
legislature. It came in aid of the current receipt for satisfying the current
expenditure of 1791, with particular reference to the interest of the debt.
This will easily be comprehended when it is recollected that the appropriations
made during 1791, upon the revenues of that year, and some small surplusses of
antecedent appropriations, amounted to three million six hundred and
thirty-seven thousand and fifty-eight dollars and thirty-four cents; that the
revenues themselves amounted to no more than three million five hundred and
fifty-three thousand, one hundred and ninety-five dollars and eighteen cents;
and that at the end of 1791, there were outstanding in bonds for the duties on
imports, besides the chief part of the proceeds of the duties on spirits
distilled within the United States, then also uncollected, 1,828,269 dollars
and 28 cents.

On this point likewise, of the surplus of revenue to the end of 1790, it is
presumeable a misapprehension has been entertained. It seems to have been
supposed, that that surplus, as well as the proceeds of the foreign fund, have
been kept separate and distinct from the common mass of the moneys appearing
from time to time to be in the treasury. It has been already observed, that
this was not the case with regard to the foreign fund. It is now proper to add,
that it has not been the case, either, with regard to the surplus in question.
That surplus, as received by the collectors of the customs, has regularly
passed into the treasury, and appears in the quarterly accounts of the
treasurer for the periods to which they relate.

It is the course of the treasury, resulting from the constitution of the
department, for all moneys from whatever source, to be brought into it, to
constitute an aggregate; subject to the dispositions prescribed by law. The
moneys to be employed in the sinking fund, have consequently only been
separated, as they have been called for, for actual investment. The only
exception to this, relates to that part of the sinking fund, which is created
by the interest of the debt purchased. This has been included in the quarterly
dividends, and covered by the warrants, in favor of the cashiers of the banks
for paying those dividends, after which, they have passed into a distinct
account, in the books of the bank opened with Samuel Meredith, as agent to the
commissioners of the sinking fund.

To the foregoing representation, it may seem an objection that the purchases
to the end of 1791, appear to have been carried to the account of the surplus
at the end of 1790.

The ultimate form which it has been judged convenient to give to the
transaction in the accounts of the treasury, cannot change what was truly the
course of facts. The proceeds of the abovementioned surplus and of the foreign
loans formed together the fund for purchases. In the accounts of the treasury,
the thing was susceptible of various modifications at pleasure. The two parts
of the fund might have been united in one account, or divided into distinct
accounts. Being separated, moneys issued for purchases might have been legally
carried to either of them.

It was judged most advisable, in the forms of the treasury, to place the
purchases to the end of 1791, to the account of the domestic fund, because it
was calculated to give greater latitude and energy to the sinking fund. Had not
this course been pursued, the business would have taken the following shape --
the foreign fund to the extent of the purchases, would have been exhausted --
the whole, or the greater part of the surplus of 1790, would have continued
wrapped up in the expenditure of 1791, not liable to be liberated, till the
receipts into the treasury should yield a correspondent surplus beyond the
actual disbursements -- which could not have been the case, while the war with
the Indians continues to call for extraordinary expenditures.

From the form into which the thing has been thrown, the foreign fund has been
set free to be applied to further purchases; and a necessity produced of
anticipating the outstanding duties, by temporary loans for the current service.

I trust there can be no doubt, that the course pursued was regular, and within
the discretion of the department. I hope also, that it will appear to the house
to have been the most eligible. The expediency of giving the earliest and
greatest possible extent and activity to whatever concerns the sinking fund,
will, it is presumed, unite all opinions.

What has been said hitherto respecting the employment of the foreign funds is
applicable only to that part of it which was drawn for prior to April 1792; the
residue standing in a different situation and requiring a separate examination.

From the statement which has been given, it may be perceived that the fund in
question has neither been idle nor useless. A confirmation of this will be
found in the following details.

The whole sum successively received on account of Amsterdam bills up to the
17th of August 1791, was 361,391 dollars and 34 cents. The amount of the moneys
invested in purchases prior to that day was 350,000 dollars, chiefly by
anticipation of those receipts.

The whole sum successively received on account of Amsterdam bills from August
17, 1791, to March 1, 1792, was 408,722 dollars and 69 cents. The amount of the
moneys invested in purchases between those periods, was 349,984 dollars and 23
cents, chiefly in the month of September, and by anticipation of those receipts.

The whole sum successively received on account of Amsterdam bills, subsequent
to the 1st of March, and prior to July, 1792, was 235,412 dollars and 33 cents.
The amount of the moneys invested in purchases between those periods, was
242,688 dollars and 31 cents.

It was stated in my first letter, that 177,998 dollars and 80 cents, of the
proceeds of the foreign bills were left in deposit with the bank of North
America; and in a note upon statement B accompanying that letter, the occasion
of it was shown to be an advance without interest, made by that bank, for the
use of the department of war; which could not yet be covered in consequence of
a doubt still remaining, whether the fund appropriated for satisfying that
object, was adequate to it, the sufficiency of that fund depending in part on
certain unexpended residues of antecedent appropriations, which it was expected
would not be finally necessary for satisfying the purposes of those
appropriations.

It is to be remarked that the delay of the employment of this part of the
proceeds of the foreign fund, has been compensated by a saving of interest on
the sum advanced by the bank, which otherwise must have been procured upon a
loan with an allowance of interest, probably at the time of the advance, at a
rate of 6 per cent. so that even in this particular, the fund, though
temporarily suspended from its destination, has not been idle or unproductive.
I reserve for another place some additional observations and statements, which
will be calculated to show, that opportunities of investing the moneys at any
time on hand applicable to purchases of the debt, were not suffered to pass
unimproved, and that as much in this respect was done as the state of the
treasury and the state of the market would permit.

It has been said, that a distinct examination would be proper with regard to
the bills which have been drawn upon the foreign fund, subsequent to March,
1792. I proceed now to this examination.

The expediency of what has been, in this respect, done, seems to have been
called in question, under a suggestion that an application of the fund to
purchases had ceased to be advantageous.

The drawing of these bills has been at different periods influenced by various
considerations. A leading motive was always the purchase of the debt. And a
correct view of the subject will, I doubt not, satisfy the House, that the
measure was recommended by an adequate prospect of advantage.

It is to be observed that all these drafts were predicated upon the two four
per cent. loans; being as already stated real 4 per cent loans.

There was good ground to presume, that opportunities would be found of
investing the moneys drawn for in purchases which would yield at least 5 per
cent. with a possibility of doing still better. The difference of per cent. was
alone an object of importance; but it would be coupled with the further benefit
of reducing a principal sum materially exceeding the sum invested. When the
three per cents are purchased at 12s. in the pound, there is not only a
redemption of an annuity of 5 per cent. but a sinking of a capital of 20s. for
12. And though this might not be material, if the market rate of interest
should never fall below 5, because in that case the three per cents might
always be purchased at the same rate; yet if it should at any time happen, that
interest fell below five, it would be a gain to the government to have
purchased at 5, in exact proportion to the difference between 5 and the then
market rate. Add to this, that the price of 3 per cents have generally a value
in the market more than proportioned to the income they produce, which arises
from the capacity of the capital to appreciate even to par. These observations
are also for the most part applicable to the deferred, with this circumstance
in addition, that when interest begins to be payable on that species of stock,
the money invested and which in the mean time would have produced five, would
then begin to produce to the government 6 per cent. with the advantage of
having anticipated the redemption of a species of stock of right only gradually
redeemable. Combining these considerations, it appears to be clearly and even
eminently for the interest of the government to purchase within the limit
suggested, with a fund which does not cost more than 4 per cent.

That this was the view of the subject which governed, is deducible not only
from the circumstances of the fact, but from my letter of the 2d of April,
1792, to Mr. Short, announcing my intention to draw, in which I assign as the
ground of that intention, "that I considered it for the interest of the United
States to prosecute purchases of the public debt with moneys borrowed on the
terms of the last loan," meaning the loan of the 1st of January 1792, at 4 per
cent.

If the event be taken as a criterion, the anticipation will be more than
justified, the present juncture offering an opportunity for purchases
peculiarly advantageous.

But without insisting on a state of things occasioned by extraordinary
circumstances, it was morally certain, that the common course of events would
render the operation a beneficial one. And it would not argue peculiar
foresight, if a calculation was even made on the effect, which the situation
and probable progress of affairs in Europe might produce upon our market. A
pretty general war there, by extending the demand for money would naturally
divert from our stocks a portion of what might otherwise be employed upon them
and affect injuriously their prices. It is also a familiar fact, that during
the winter in this country, there is always a scarcity of money in the towns; a
circumstance calculated to damp the prices of stock.

A consideration, which collaterally influenced the drawing of the latter bills
was the situation of the French colony of St. Domingo.

This not only produced an early application for a considerable advance, which
was promised; but it was to be foreseen, that still further aids would be
indispensable.

Indeed sundry letters from Mr. Short, the first dated at Paris, the 28th
December 1791, announced the daily probability of an arrangement, requiring an
advance here of 800,000 dollars for the use of that colony. A sum of 4,000,000
of livres has in fact been successively stipulated for that object, the
greatest part of which has been actually furnished.

It is known, that these supplies could proceed from no other source than the
foreign fund.

The payment to the foreign officers of near 200,000 dollars, by which an
interest of 6 per cent. would be released, was another object for which
provision was to be made out of the same fund.

These several purposes conspired with the object of purchasing the debt to
induce the latitude of drawing, which took place.

But there was still a further inducement which came in aid of the others. The
time for reimbursing the first instalment of the two millions of dollars due to
the bank was approaching, when by positive stipulation, the government would
have to pay two hundred thousand dollars, for which there was no domestic fund,
that could be spared from the current exigencies. I thought it incumbent upon
this department to have an eye to placing within the reach of the legislature
the means of fulfilling this engagement; the object of which bore a strict
analogy to that for which the two millions authorized by the act making
provision for the reduction of the public debt were to be borrowed.

I did not even scruple to take into the calculation, that if from the extent
of the draughts upon the foreign fund, there should happen to be found on hand
a larger sum than was necessary for, or could be advantageously employed
toward, the several purposes which were the immediate and direct objects of
the operation, the surplus would facilitate to the government a measure
manifestly and unequivocally beneficial -- an additional payment to the bank,
on account of a debt, upon which an annual interest of 6 per cent. was payable;
a measure by which a certain saving of one per cent. to the extent of the
payment that might be made would be accomplished.

The possibility of this application of the fund afforded a perfect assurance,
that the public interest could in no event fail to be promoted.

I felt myself the more at liberty to do it, because it did not interfere with
a complete fulfillment of the public engagements in regard to the foreign debt.
It could be done consistently with a full reimbursement of all arrears and
instalments which had accrued on account of that debt.

The detail which has been given comprehends a full exposition of the views a^^
motives that have regulated the conduct of this department; in relation to
those parts of the proceeds of the foreign loans which have been transferred to
the United States, except as to the last sum of one million two hundred and
thirty seven thousand five hundred florins, directed to be drawn for on the
30th of November last; in regard to which, circumstances of a special nature
co-operated, as is explained in a note upon the copy of my letter of the 26th
of that month, to Mr. Short, forming a part of the communication herewith made
by order of the President of the United States.

The House will perceive, that the variety of matter comprised in this letter
has not been collected and digested into its present form, without much labor
and an unavoidable expense of time. I trust they will be sensible, that no
delay has been unnecessarily incurred. It is certain that I have made every
exertion in my power, at the hazard of my health, to comply with the
requisitions of the House as early as possible. And it has even been done with
more expedition than was desirable to secure the perfect accuracy of the
communication.

Yet I have still to regret that some part of the subject must remain to be
presented in a subsequent letter. To lessen however the inconvenience of this
further delay, I shall transmit with the present letter, the statements
required by the first and second of the resolutions of the 23d of January,
which will be found in the schedules herewith marked No. I to V; those required
by the last of the resolutions having been already forwarded.

There remain, however, some particulars to complete the information
contemplated by those resolutions, that must be reserved for another
communication. This I may venture to assure the House will not be deferred
beyond the present, or at least the first day of the ensuing week.

With perfect respect, I have the honor to be SIR, Your most obedient And most
humble servant, ALEXANDER HAMILTON. Secretary of the Treasury.
The Honorable the Speaker of the House of Representatives.
[No. 1]
A STATEMENT of the Appropriation for reducing the PUBLIC DEBT, constituted by
the Act of Congress passed on the 12th day of August, 1790.
Dols. Cts. To the surplus of the products of duties on imports and tonnage, to
the last day of December, 1790, after reserving a sufficient sum from said
products to satisfy the appropriations made during the first and second
sessions of Congress, as ascertained at the treasury 1,374,656. 40. 1790. Dec.
15. By warrant No. 776, on the Treasurer, in his favor, to be applied in
purchases of the public debt 200,000 1791. Jan. 26. By warrant No. 856, ditto
ditto ditto 50,000 Feb. 5. By do. 869, do. in favor of B. Lincoln do. 50,000
By do. 870, do. in favor of Wm. Heth do. 50,000 Sept. 30. By do. 1265, do. in
his favor do. 149,984. 23 By do. 1266, do. in favor of Wm. Seton do. 200,000
1792. March 31. By do. 1605, do. in his favor do. 28,915. 52 June 30. By do.
1864, do. do. do. 62,673. 90 By do. 1867, do. in favor of Wm. Seton do.
151,098. 89 Dec. 29. By do. 2328, do. in his favor do. 15,098. 11 957,770. 65
Balance, being the difference between the surplus of duties appropriated, and
the sum drawn therefrom 406,885. 75 Dollars 1,374,656. 40

TREASURY DEPARTMENT, February 13, 1793. A. HAMILTON, Secretary of the Treasury.

[No. II.]
A STATEMENT of the application of the FUNDS drawn on the appropriation of the
SURPLUS of duties to the end of the year 1790, for the Reduction of the PUBLIC
DEBT.
To appropriation for reducing the public debt constituted by the act of
Congress, passed on the 12th day of August 1790, for the amount drawn from said
appropriation by warrants on the Treasurer from December 15th, 1790, to
December 29th 1792, viz. Dols. Cts. 1790. Dec. 15. No. 776, in favor of Samuel
Meredith, to be applied in purchases of the public debt 200,000 1791. Jan. 26.
No. 856, do. do. do. 50,000 Feb. 5. 869, do. of Ben. Lincoln, do. 50,000 870,
do. of Wm. Heth, do. 50,000 Sep. 30. 1,265, do. of S. Meredith, do. 149,984. 23
1,266, do. of Wm. Seton, do. 200,000 1792. Mar. 31. 1,605, do. of S. Meredith,
do. 28,915. 52 June 30. 1,864, do. of do. do. 62,673. 90 1,867, do. of Wm.
Seton, do. 151,098. 89 Dec. 29. 2,328, do. of S. Meredith, do. 15,098. 11
957,770. 65 To this sum invested in purchases by Benjamin Lincoln, being in
part of a sum of interest received by him on stock purchased 5. 51 957,776. 16
By Samuel Meredith's account of purchases to the 7th day of December 1790, as
reported to Congress by the commissioners for reducing the public debt, on the
21st day of December 1790 150,239. 24 By sundry purchases reported by said
commissioners to Congress on the 7th day of November 1791, viz. By Samuel
Meredith, from the 7th Dec. 1790, to 19th Sept. 1791 248,984. 71 By William
Seton, from the 19th Aug. 1791, to 12th Sept. 1791 200,000 By William Heth,
from the 24th Feb. 1791, to 2d April, 1791 49,934. 09 By Benjamin Lincoln, from
the 22d Feb. 1791, to 3d March, 1791 50,005. 51 548,924. 31 By interest from
January 1st to July 1st 1791, on stock purchased by Samuel Meredith, in August
and September, 1791 760. 28 By sundry expenses attending purchases of public
debt, charged by William Heth, and admitted to his credit 4. 15 By sundry
purchases reported by said commissioners to Congress, on the 17th day of
November 1792, viz. By Samuel Meredith, from the 21st March to 25th April, 1792
91,589. 42 By William Seton, from 2d to the 17th April, 1792 151,098. 89
242,688. 31 By purchases by Samuel Meredith, from the 15th to the 22d December
1792, as per account settled at the treasury 15,098. 11 By balance being money
remaining in the hands of William Heth, of the sum advanced to him for making
purchases, and for which he is accountable 61. 76 Dollars, 957,776. 16

TREASURY DEPARTMENT, February 13 th, 1793. A. HAMILTON, Secretary of the
Treasury.

[No. III.]
STATEMENT of the application of the Fund constituted by the act of Congress,
passed on the 8th of May 1792, for reducing the Public Debt, arising from the
Interest on the sums of said debt purchased, redeemed, and paid into the
Treasury of the United States.
Dols. Cts. 1791. April 1. To interest due this day on the stock purchased
4,230. 63 July 1. To ditto ditto 5,013. 02 9,243. 65 To balance 9,243. 65 Oct.
1. To interest due this day on the stock purchased 8,635. 18 1792. Jan. 1. To
ditto ditto 6,989. 01 24,867. 84 To balance 24,867. 84 April 1. To interest due
this day on the stock purchased 6,989. 01 To ditto ditto on part of the stock
paid into the treasury by the state of Pennsylvania for land on lake Erie,
purchased from the United States 48. 63 (...). 1. To ditto ditto on the stock
purchased 9,388. 76 To ditto ditto on the stock paid as above, for land on lake
Erie 48. ^^ To ditto ditto on the stock paid into the treasury on account of
the commutation of Willis Wilson 127. 30 41,470. 17 To balance 41,470. 17 Oct.
1. To interest due this day on the stock purchased 9,366. 24 To ditto ditto on
the stock paid as above for land on lake Erie 48. 63 To ditto ditto on the
stock paid as above on account of the commutation of Willis Wilson 21. 21 1793.
Jan. 1. To ditto ditto on the stock purchased 9,420. 42 To ditto ditto on the
stock paid as above for land on lake Erie 48. 63 To ditto ditto on the stock
paid as above on account of the commutation of Willis Wilson 21. 21 To ditto
ditto on the stock paid into the treasury by John Hopkins, for a balance due
from him in indents of interest 159. 44 Dollars 60,555. 95 1791. July 1. By
balance to the credit of the commissioners for reducing the public debt,
deposited as follows: In the bank of North America 8,711. 97 In the hands of
the commissioner of loans for the state of Massachusetts 531. 68 9,243. 65
9,243. 65 1792. Jan. 1. By balance to the credit of the commissioners for
reducing the public debt, deposited as follows: In the bank of North America
23,830. 37 In the hands of the commissioner of loans for the state of
Massachusetts 531. 68 In the hands of the commissioner of loans for the state
of New York 505. 79 24,867. 84 24,867. 84 Dols. Cts. 1792. July 1. By balance
to the credit of the commissioners for reducing the public debt, deposited as
follows: In the bank of North America 23,830. 37 In the bank of the United
States 17,639. 80 41,470. 17 41,470. 17 By purchases made by Samuel Meredith
from the 29th to the 31st of October 1792, as reported to Congress by the
commissioners for reducing the public debt, on the 17th of November 1792
25,969. 96 By purchases made by Samuel Meredith from the 17th to the 26th of
January 1793, inclusive, agreeably to his account rendered to the treasury
34,585. 99 NOTE. -- Interest stated per contra remained in the bank of the
United States, until expended. Dollars 60,555. 95

REMARKS.
IN addition to the sums received as within stated, there remain to be received
from the following persons, balances found to be due from them on the
settlement of their accounts at the treasury -- viz.

Dols. Cts. From William Heth, for interest received on stock purchased by him
658. 83 From Benjamin Lincoln, for ditto ditto 154. 49 From ditto, for interest
struck on stock purchased by him stated in his name in dividend accounts of
commissioner of loans for the state of Massachusetts; now transferred to the
books of the treasury among unclaimed dividends 368. 56

The fund is likewise liable to receive additions of interest on the following
sums paid into the treasury, upon which no dividend has yet been struck -- viz.

On 85,032.8/100 dollars, unfunded stock, received from the state of
Pennsylvania, for land on lake Erie.

On 1,356.87/100 dollars, received from Jonathan Burrall, which had been paid
to him on a balance due in the commissary department.

These sums at present stand on the books of the treasury, in the name of
Samuel Meredith, Treasurer of the United States, in trust for the United States.

Also, for the interest on the debt due to foreign officers, now in a course of
redemption.

TREASURY DEPARTMENT, February 13, 1793. ALEXANDER HAMILTON, Secretary of the
Treasury.

[No. IV.]
Quarterly STATEMENT of CASH in the hands of the TREASURER of the United
States, for the year 1791.
Balance of cash in my hands the 30th June 1791, see below 533,638. 24 Balance
of cash in the bank of North America 428,200. 17 Ditto New York 92,680. 77
Ditto Massachusetts 2,266. 76 Cash paid on account of contingent expenses 490.
54 Theodosius Fowler, and Co.'s note 10,000 533,638. 24 From the 1st of January
to the 30th June, two quarters.
Dols. Cts. Balance of cash in my hands the 30th September 1791, see below
622,233. 99 cash in the bank of North America 136,830. 38 ditto New York
465,926. 94 ditto Maryland 31,391. 78 ditto Massachusetts 28,084. 89 622,233.
99 Balance of cash in my hands the 31st December 1791, see below. 953,862. 75
cash in the bank of the United States 133,000 ditto North America 471,972. 28
ditto New York 224,677. 35 ditto Massachusetts 65,578. 22 ditto Maryland
50,665. 29 ditto Providence 7,969. 61 953,862. 75

The previous sickness and afterward the death of Mr. Eveleigh, the late
Comptroller, which happened on the 15th of April 1791, occasioned an
accommodation between the Secretary of the Treasury and the bank of
North America, with respect to a number of warrants which were not
countersigned, the bank agreeing to pay them and retain them in its possession
till the appointment of a Comptroller, when they could be regularly
countersigned and charged to my account. This caused an agreement with the
Comptroller that the two first quarters of the year 1791, might be included in
one account, in order that the different offices in the Treasury Department
should correspond in their balances.

SAMUEL MEREDITH, Treasurer of the United States.
Treasury of the United States.
[No. V.]
STATEMENT of cash in the treasury during the year 1792, sh^wing the balance on
hand half monthly.
DATES. ^^nk of United States. Office of D. and D. Boston. Office of D. and D.
New York Office of D. and D. Baltimore. Office of D. and D. C^arlesto^. Bank of
Massachusetts. Bank of New York. Bank of North America. Bank of Providence.
Bank of Mary^^^d. Total amount. Sums in (...) p^^iod (...) returned by the Bank
U.S* (...) totals (...) said periods. 1792. Jan. 1. 133,000 65,578.22
224,677.35 471,972.28 7,969.61 50,665.29 953,862.75 15. 333,000 66,453.22
164,469.95 254,134.47 7,969.61 52,198.58 878,225.8^ Feb. 1. 456,278.90
71,215.55 128,708.21 151,516.32 7,969.61 49,583.25 865,271.84 15. 708,160.44
24,115.5^ 20,912.27 91,516.32 2,969.61 29,583.25 877,257.44 Mar. 1. 692,959. 6
31,769. 5 32,352.52 31,515.74 8,4^4.94 34,752.85 831,754.16 15. 618,5^3.69
36,286. 4 295,717.44 31,515.74 7,656.65 45,893.10 1035,^72.66 April 1.
359,643.64 37,712.58 254,930.41 31,515.74 7,156.65 60,418.32 751,3^7.34 15.
247,051.80 5^,785.24 259,099.60 31,515.74 1,156.65 60,418.32 650,027.35 May 1.
301,455.62 5^,785.24 3^5,854.35 31,515.74 1,156.65 86,618.39 7^7,^85.99 15.
388,479. 1 3,7^5.24 293,827.35 31,515.74 1,156.65 77,275.95 795,789.94 June 1.
309,186.44 24,273.9^ 3,735.24 294,527.35 31,515.74 5,856.65 85,095.97
754,191.33 157,5^8.33 596,683 15. 406,610.50 4^,257.65 8,965.63 294,527.35
31,515.74 5,356.65 27,518.66 817,75^.18 316,900 500,852.18 July 2. 212,403.89
111,343.44 63,919.54 13,805.13 11,415.6^ 62,628.46 61,601.30 18,434.65
37,581.57 623,133.61 220.^^0 4^2,2^^.61 15. 196,526.10 111,343.44 68,318.90
55,559.99 11,415.63 54,078.46 61,601.30 12,234.65 37,581.57 6^8,66^. 4 159,650
^^^,01^. 4 Aug. 1. 208,988. 3 99,538.42 83,099.63 1^,133.25 13,012. 6 5^,078.46
61,601.30 21,588.65 2,723.13 ^93,762.93 ^3,650 52^,112.9^ 15. 399,940.80
100,626.42 90,867. 4 2,530 27,682.33 13,626.39 58,141.28 61,601.30 14,916.65
9,^00. 779,732.21 174,4^0 ^^5,282.21 Sept. 1. 401,084.78 110,139.92 93,980.32
3,45^.3^ 13,661. 3 13,626.39 54,259.43 61,601.30 18,649.65 790,457.18 118,700
^^^,757.18 15. 305,786.48 137,169.59 105,280. 2 5,8^9.98 37,381.73 13,626.39
71,070.75 61,601.30 17,157.65 754,9^3.80 23,200 720,7^3.89 Oct. 1. 117,198.54
77,666. 2 14,130. 2 22,344.83 36,970.18 13,626.39 60,219.58 61,601.30 17,157.65
42^,91^.51 31,100 389,814.51 15. 110,991.29 47,666. 2 27,340.28 26,^44.83
36,970.18 13,626.39 69,019. 8 61,601.30 11,157.65 404,426. 2 99,000 30^,426. 2
Nov. 1. 172,405.89 116,686.48 64,908.82 43,644.83 51,616.98 13,626.39 69,019. 8
61,601.30 28,452.87 621,962.64 88,700 ^33,262.64 15. 216,932.31 101,763.23
133,576.23 59,051.72 51,616.98 13,626.39 69,019. 8 61,601.30 28,452.87
735,640.11 96,600 6^9,040.11 Dec. 1. 247,139.33 143,267.37 223,321.29 81,074.93
69,354.43 69,019. 8 61,601.30 45,957.87 940,735.60 58,300 ^^2,435.60 15.
371,894.62 135,052.41 189,^16.16 40,73^.12 65,287.83 69,019. 8 61,601.30
30,157.87 962,767.39 209,2^0 753,567.39 1793. Jan. 1. 109,169.45 154,860.67
224,734.51 73,653.64 62,015.85 69,019. 8 61,601.30 28,157.87 783,212.37 155,^^0
^^8,012.37 Total amount of quarter ending 31st December, 1792, brought down
763,212.37 Amount of contingencies paid for which there is no appropriation
14^.14 Ditto, paid Sam. Brook, a clerk in the office, for which there is no
appropriation 90 dollars 783,444.51

TREASURY of the UNITED STATES, SAMUEL MEREDITH, Treasurer of the United States.


