THE WORLD IN A STRING, OR MONEY TOSSED IN A BLANKET.

THERE was certainly a critical time, when the world was entirely happy, and
blessed with content; when there was no cheating, slandering, envying, nor
robbing and plundering one another, and consequently no gibbets, pillories,
whipping posts, etc. Covetousness was not known in those days, but nature was
liberal to all her sons, and gave a plentiful subsistence to every diligent
hand: Men cropped the sweets of the earth, and had it for their pains; no
Landlords then oppres'd their Tenants to fill their bags with wicked GOLD.
Priests did not sell their Faith for Lucre* nor Maids their virginity for
pride. No Son cut his Father's Throat to come at his bags; nor Mother bawded
for her Daughter, to share the reward. Such a time there was, but Historians
have been so negligent as not to transmit it to these sinful Times: However,
since we have the Liberty to guess, I shall build upon a very strong
Presumption, that it was before the invention of MONEY; and it has puzzled some
great Philosophers to find out, whether it has not destroyed more People in the
other World, than Gunpowder has done in this. As soon as this wicked Mammon
sprung up among Men they left their Maker's Image to worship Cesar's; then
sprung up Corruptions in the world, and the dark Seeds of covetousness, Usury,
Extortion, Cheating and Knavery began to grow apace. Here was one cutting his
neighbor's Throat for being richer than himself; and another selling his soul
that he may be richer than his Neighbor. Justice was bought and sold like a
pig in a market, the greatest bidder went away with it. Money made a man
righteous, and poverty made him a rogue: the sin-offering of the poor was
despised, but the fat sacrifice of the rich perfumed it with the incense of the
altar. The temple became the priest's shop, where religion was sold by retail;
according to the laudable expression of a famous author: Natural religion easy
was and plain,
(...) made it fabulous, Priests made it gain;
And next the sacrifices were prepared,
The priests eat roast meat, and the people starved.


Money was both religion and laws, no penny, no paternoster; no money, no
justice; a bad cause with a big purse, was sure to carry it from a good cause
and a light one; and to this day, if you have retained a council, it is a
thousand to one but he forgets your face, if you don't give him a second token
to remember you by. If covetousness be the root of all evil, it is money is the
root of all covetousness. No sooner was Dei Gratia stamped upon these enticing
metals, but people forgot it in their prayers, and paid all devotion to mammon,
wicked mammon. Selling and buying became so vehement among men, that for
interest they sold one another; example, Joseph was sold by his brethren; Judas
sold his master; the S -- h sold their King; and how many Judas's of our age,
have sold their contry! would you corrupt a man's honesty, or a woman's virtue,
tempt them with money; it is a charm so strong, there is no withstanding it. --
Would you have your neighbor's throat cut, money will do it. Would you lay
with your neighbor's wife, money will introduce you. -- It Is the key to a
statesman's breast, and lets out all its secrets; it will bring you to my
lady's bed, and will keep my lord's mouth shut. 'Twill make the crooked strait,
and the strait crooked. Let a woman have a good portion, and though she is as
deformed as a crooked billet, she will go off, though others both beautiful and
virtuous, for want of it, stick a hand.

Let a powdered coxcombly beau, with round shoulders, and a hatchet face, have
a gilt chariot, and a fine equipage, the people shall presently spend their
judgment, there goes a pretty Gentleman, though he is extremly like a dog in a
doublet, or a hog in armor. -- A man that has money, is qualified for any
post, while his wiser and honester neighbors are neglected and despised for
the want of it. In short, money is a bewitching thing, and they are mad that
set there hearts upon it. Riches are a perplexed state; and a little with
contentment, is better than all the wealth in the world. In my opinion, he was
a happier man that sold his flesh to a jew, than the extorting infidel that
bought it. Murder, whoredom, treason, felony, etc. are the offspring of satan;
and money is the grand parent of them all. The usurer gets over his bags, and
prays to this effect.

O Satan! I this aid implore,
That thou would yet increase my store,
For much does always covet more.
Thou first invention of all coin,
Still let thy earthly blessing shine;
Give me but gold, and I am thine.
I crave no blessings mortals prate on,
My bags are what I most debate on,
Then rid but them, and take me Satan.
In the mean time his servants pray as heartily for food, and with his neck as
long as his bags, for not keeping a better house; but it is no wonder he
neglects their bodies, when the same reason makes him forget his own soul.

A rich man is a mere ship in the tempest, always tossing and tumbling in the
perplexity of his affairs, and if he chance to meet with some dire unexpected
ill fortune, he sinks downright, and becomes miserable; he is always
accompanied with fear and concern, and even in the calmest of his business is
never truly contented; while a man in a moderate condition, that carries most
of his wealth about him, enjoys himself with a thousand times the satisfaction.
The careful father, like a true wise man, breaks his rest, discomposes his
mind, and makes his whole life uneasy; to get an estate for his son, who spends
it like a fool as soon as he is dead.

Were money a blessing, the Jews would never be so universally rich; and he
that sits with a piece of bread and cheese, and content, under a hedge, may be
a happier man, than he that revels in a palace; though there are a great many
that are happy and don't know it, and a great many wretched and will not believe
it.

There is a poet which says, That women and silver in one age were born.


I thought it could never come without bringing another plague with it: or if
it did not come in with fornication, it has debauched many a strapping jade
since. To sum up all the evils that money has been the occasion of, would swell
to a volume. O money! thou art the D -- l but the (...) on it is, thou do not
much haunt some sort of people.

Money is (...)
Men would (...);
That has (...) was understood,
More (...) do^e by half than good;
It has towns (...), and murdered kings,
With many o^^er wicked things;
It so (...) into pla^^s got,
And turned the more deserving out;
For th^^ ^^rru^ting, wicked gold,
Whole fleets and armies have been sold,
Father and son has (...) st^^fe,
And raised ^ad stir (...) man and wife,
Made match (...) cursed (...),
And sometimes has reduced the godly;
So (...) the ills about it,
The (...) had better been without it.

