Carefully to observe the signatures of Divine Providence, a mark of wisdom.

ILLUSTRATED IN A SERMON, DELIVERED IN STAFFORD, ON THE ANNIVERSARY OF AMERICAN
INDEPENDENCE, JULY 4th, A. D. 1793.

BY NATHAN WILLIAMS, A. M. PASTOR OF THE CHURCH OF CHRIST IN TOLLAND.

And now published at the desire of the HEARERS.

HARTFORD: PRINTED BY HUDSON AND GOODWIN.

MDCCXCIII.

At a meeting of a number of the Inhabitants of the Town of Stafford for the
Celebration of Independence on the 4 th of July, A. D. 1793.
VOTED, That JESSE CADY, Esquire. Capt. EBENEZER COLBURN, Doctor SAMUEL GUTHRIE,
ELEAZAR W. PHELPS, Esquire. and Doctor SAMUEL WILLARD, be a Committee to wait on
the REV. NATHAN WILLIAMS, and return him the thanks of said Inhabitants for his
elegant Discourse this day delivered, and request a Copy for publication.

Test, E. W. PHELPS, Clerk of Committee.
Stafford, July 4th, 1793.
A SERMON.
PSALM cvii. 43. Whosoever is wise and will observe these things; even they shall
understand the loving kindness of the Lord.
THESE words refer to those changes which mankind experience in this state of
trial; whether, as individuals or as members of society. And as God is pleased
sometimes, to favor men with high prosperity, so he changes the course of his
providence, and reduces them to circumstances of indigence and distress --
they are minished and brought low, through oppression, affliction and sorrow.
Those who are high and great in the world, are sometimes abased and made very
contemptible. He pours contempt upon Princes, even amongst those who had
revered them as idols. Causes them to wander in the wilderness, where there is
no way. Baffles their designs by which they thought to support themselves and
their own pomp and power, and turns them headlong, so that they know not what
course to take.

Again, Those of low degree are advanced to places of eminence. Yet sets he
the poor on high from affliction and makes him families like a flock. Thus God
in his providence sets up one and puts down another. Smiles and frowns as
pleases him, and gives no account of his matters.

When good men notice the dealings of God's providence, it will administer
satisfaction to them. The righteous shall see it and rejoice. i. e. at the
displays of God's perfections and of his sovereign dominion over the children
of men. Wicked men also shall be silenced; all iniquity shall stop her mouth.
These dealings of God's hands shall afford matter of conviction to vile
atheists and scoffing infidels. Instead of opening their mouths to deny the
government of God, they shall see reason to acknowledge that the Most High
reigns in the kingdoms of men, and does his pleasure without control. Or,
it shall tend to check the prevalence of iniquity; the judgments of heaven
shall reform the wicked, and make them more submissive to the laws of heaven.

These are some of the things, to which the Psalmist refers; and then intimates
that those who wisely attend to the dealings of God's hand, may see great
displays of his perfections, and particularly of his loving kindness.

From the words we may observe,

1. That it is desirable and useful to understand the loving kindness of the
Lord.

2. By carefully observing the signatures of Divine Providence we may arrive at
some just view of his perfections, and particularly of his loving kindness to
the children of men.

3. Duly to attend to the operations of God's hand, is an instance and evidence
of true wisdom -- whosoever is wise and will observe these things.

1. It is desirable and useful to understand the loving kindness of the Lord.
This is the result of all due inquiries into the dealings of God's hand. And
this plainly intimates that it is an object worthy our attention.

The phrase is often used in the bible; and sometimes signifies a perfection of
God's nature; and is the same with goodness. It is very expressive of a
benevolent temper of heart; and is often attributed to the Deity. It signifies
also the genuine fruits and expressions of good will. Thy loving kindness is
before my eyes, says David.

Now by knowing the works of God, we are led to a view of his goodness; for his
tender mercies are over all his works, yea the whole earth is full of his
goodness. And a good understanding in the nature and displays of divine
goodness may lead us to a sense of our duty and highest interest; to be without
this knowledge is to be at a distance from God, and to live as without him in
the world. But a just view and sense of God's perfections and especially of his
goodness, in the genuine displays of it, may lead us to repentance; excite in
us feelings of gratitude and a sense of our obligations to obey God's
commandments. David oftentimes takes occasion from the loving kindness of God,
to stir up himself and others to praise and bless his name. To speak of his
goodness; to tell of his wonderful and gracious works; and to render to God
according to his benefits. A grateful sense of God's kindness, implies some
just view of it, and also an humbling sense of our own sinfulness, unworthiness
and ill deserts. That, as sinners, we have no claim upon the loving kindness of
God, but have reason to look for the effects of his just indignation. This will
be attended with sorrow of heart for sin, and a care to turn from it unto God,
and bring forth fruits meet for repentance: yielding ourselves as living
sacrifices to God; improving all our talents in his service and for his glory.

A proper and believing view of the loving kindness of God, will help us to
make him our hope, our trust and confidence. This is often enjoined upon us; it
is our duty, our high privilege and comfort; and a piece of respect due from us
to the character of Deity. In short, if we have no just view and apprehension
of the perfections and particularly of the goodness of God, we can have no
proper exercises of heart toward him.

But, by carefully searching out the perfections of God, as manifested in his
providential dealings, which is a mirror constantly before our eyes, we may
find ourselves sweetly and powerfully drawn toward God as the source of all
felicity, and the fountain of all blessedness and perfection. -- We therefore
observe,

2. That in order to obtain some just knowledge of God and particularly of his
loving kindness, we do well to observe the signatures of his Providence. Whosoever
will observe these things; i. e. such wonderful works, as he had referred to,
shall understand the loving kindness of God. It is with this view and for this
end, that we are often called upon, to look into the works of God, viz. -- That
we may be led to him. The apostle Paul observes, that the invisible things of
him, i. e. God, from the creation of the world, are clearly seen, being
understood by the things that are made, even his eternal power and godhead.
Romans i. 26.
There is no part of created nature, where the voice of the creature may not be
heard, proclaiming an infinitely wise, powerful, just and good God, who made,
upholds, disposes and governs all things in righteous sovereignty and infinite
perfection. Tho there are mysteries in the works of creation and providence,
which are above our comprehension, yet what is needful for us to know, is
contained in plain lessons, and, it is our fault, if we do not understand,
especially the goodness and loving kindness to God. Here,

1. We observe that God does govern the universe. He who made, has a right to
order and dispose all things as pleases him. And creatures are as dependent
for their continued support and preservation, as for their existence at first
-- and this continuance in being must depend upon him who made us. It Is a law
of nature imprinted upon all creatures, to provide for their offspring. We are
all the offspring of God, and he our common parent. No part of created nature
is independent of ^^m, or out of the reach of his governing hand. Whatsoever
the Lord pleased, that did he in heaven and earth, in the seas and all deep
places. Psalm cxxxv 6.


But the providential government of God, as it respects this world, is what
most nearly concerns us, and is matter of high consolation to mankind. The Lord
reigns, let the earth rejoice; let the multitude of the isles be glad
thereof. Psalm xcvii. 1.


But in speaking of this divine government, we may observe,

1. It is of a moral nature, suited to the state of moral agents; and respects
men only, so far as relates to this our world: Because they only are capable of
seeing into the reason and nature of things in a moral view. The laws, by which
God governs mankind, respect their duty to him and one another. The sum of them
is this, that we love God supremely and our neighbor sincerely. They are
enforced by the most interesting sanctions; promises and threatenings of the
greatest good; the joys of heaven and the pains of hell: The first draws by the
sweet allurements of hope; the latter impels by the fear of evil. These laws
are very expressive of God's authority as the great governor of the world. We
may observe further; not only does God govern mankind by known laws, but he has
access to their hearts, and can move and restrain them, as pleases him, by
some secret influence. The kings heart is in the hand of the Lord, as the
rivers of water: He turns it whithersoever he will. Prove. xxi. 1.
He draws the reins of government, and keeps them from that evil to which their
wicked hearts would lead them; and many times out of particular respect to his
own children. God tells Abimelech, I withheld thee from sinning against me;
therefore suffered I thee not to touch her. Genesis xx. 6.
. Jacob experienced the protection of heaven in this way. When he was on his
way from Haram with his family, his brother Esau, retaining a former grudge,
was coming against him with an armed force to cut him off; but God was pleased
effectually to turn his heart, giving him the tender feelings of a brother; so
that instead of setting upon him to destroy him, he ran to meet him, and
embraced him and fell on his neck and kissed him and wept. Genesis xxxii^^. 4


2. We observe that God expresses his governing providence in the care he is
taking of his creatures, and in ordering all their circumstances in life and in
death.

Revelation teaches us, what our own feelings and experience confirm, that in
God we live and move and have our being. His eye is constantly upon us; his
watchful providence guards us; he feeds and clothes us and carries us as in his
arms; continues us in life till we have completed the number of months allotted
us here; and when our days are numbered and finished, he calls us to his bar,
to give account of the improvement we have made of the time and other talents
committed to us here.

The circumstances of men are constantly shifting and varying. He raises up
one and puts down another. He pours contempt upon princes, yet sets be
the poor on high from affliction, and makes him families like a flock.

And, as individuals, so states and kingdoms are under the governing providence
of God. They are formed under his inspection, and by his influence or with his
sufferance; and when they are formed upon rules and maxims which approve
themselves to reason and justice, God may be said, in a special sense, to be
their sovereign.

Every society of men is under the divine control. We are expressly told, that
the Most High rules in the kingdom of men, and gives it to whomsoever he
will, and sets up over it the basest of men. D^^. iv. 17.
This is often the case for the punishment of mankind. Nebuchadnezzar, that
haughty monarch, was forced to confess, that God was able to abase those who
walk in pride: That he sets up kings and dethroneth princes at his pleasure.
It is very manifest that God does raise up kingdoms and states to high degrees
of earthly perfection, and then pulls them down and scatters the materials of
which they were formed and leaves no traces of their riches and greatness. This
is verified in many nations which once made a figure on the field of the world.
Nothing remains, excepting their names and some imperfect history of them. And,
of many, once large and famous societies, we believe no memorials are left.
These risings and fallings of men and states and kingdoms, are so many
monuments of divine sovereignty, and witness that God orders and disposes
all the affairs of the children of men: That all nature is in his hand, and
whatever seems good to him that does he, as well amongst the inhabitants of
the earth as in the armies of heaven.

Now the general plan of the divine government, and the particular displays of
it, are matter of observation; and by searching into them we may acquire useful
knowledge. Whosoever will observe these things; shall understand the loving
kindness of the Lord.

But what is it to observe those things? We answer, 1st. It may intend, that we
make a careful enquiry and diligent search aiming to become acquainted with the
works of God: That we lay ourselves out like persons engaged and who have some
sense of the usefulness and importance of this knowledge. That we pry into
them, with a view to gain as just a view of them, as our capacities and the
nature of the subject will admit. This may be expected of those, whose hearts
are right with God. David observes, that the works of the Lord are great, and
sought out of all them that have pleasure therein. Psalm cxi. 2.


2. We should observe these things seriously, viewing them as the signatures of
divine providence, and with a desire to become better acquainted with the
character and perfections of God; and more suitably (...) toward him, and
better able to order our conversation in the world, as becomes the servants of
God, made by him and for him. If we attend to the signatures of divine
providence with these views, it will tend to check all levity and vanity.

3. We should inquire with persevering care and diligence. Then shall we know,
says the prophet, if we follow on to know the Lord. Hos. vi. 3.
The works of the Lord are many, great and mavelous, and worthy to be made
the constant continued search of all rational creatures; and to observe them
with a careless indifference, or give over our inquiry concerning them, shows
that we have no proper reverence for God, or for the works of his hand.

We cant expect to be thoroughly acquainted, at once, with any, much less with
all the signatures of divine providence, which fall within our notice. Here is
a field of enquiry, sufficient to employ the inquisitive mind forever. In this
our world and in every part of it, God has been displaying his perfections for
near six thousand years. He has not been an idle spectator of the things which
have come to pass. They have been under his inspection and control; and have
taken place by his influence or under his permission. We know, as yet, but
little of the things which have been done under the sun; and without doubt, in
the immensity of space, there have been and still are, worlds on worlds
innumerable, in which the providence of God has been constantly at work, and
has brought to pass countless events. These will be discovered to the glorified
soul, and lead it to a more clear perception of the nature and perfections of
God, and supply it with increasing reasons, to admire, love and adore him.

But our enquiry is now limited to things which fall within the compass of
present information. And as these are hinted to raise our minds up to God, we
ought to continue in a careful and serious search, aiming to gain as clear a
view as we can of his mavelous and interesting works.

Our last observation was this, viz.

3. To attend duly to the operations of God's hand, is an instance and evidence
of wisdom.

1. Because it is a piece of respect due to the author of these works. Hereby
we give him the honor which he deserves. We reproach the artist, if we
carelessly pass by his works; the productions of his skill. Hereby we declare
that no ingenuity or skill is displayed in them; or that the artist is a mean
and worthless person. Thus, to overlook the works of God; or not to see and own
his hand in them, is to reproach him.

It also carries in it a reflection on ourselves; shows that we are not judges
of true merit; cant see the beauty and excellence of God's works; or will not
improve them to lead us to admire, and love and reverence him, who does all
these things; or, that we have a perverse disposition which leads us away from
God.

It is a mark of wisdom to be sensible of our own defects. A wise man therefore
will carefully improve the means of information; and especially those which
tend most directly to lead him up to God; and give him a better acquaintance
with his nature and will. 'He therefore presses forward, that he may increase
in learning; may know more and know it better, more clearly and distinctly, and
better how to use it.'

2. It Is a mark of wisdom, because hereby we may be led to glorify God, which is
the highest end a creature can be influenced by. It also subserves our own
interest, as it tends to make us wiser and better; and to bring us to a greater
likeness to God. In the nature of it, it is a transforming knowledge. If we
discern true beauty and excellence, it may be expected that we shall aim after
it. If we do not see the works of God, or do not regard them as his, we shall
not give him the glory due to his name. But, if we have a right frame of heart,
the more we see of God, the more shall we love, admire and serve him. We shall
the better answer the ends of our being in this world; be better fitted for the
enjoyments and employments of heaven; and be raised to higher degrees of honor
and happiness in the kingdom of glory above.

These few observations are all that we propose under the doctrinal part of our
subject. The improvement is now before us.

1. From what has been said we infer, that many deserve a sharp reproof, for
not duly observing the operations of God's hand. There are those who
professedly deny God's providential government. Who say, how does God know? can
be judge through the dark cloud? thick clouds are a covering to him, that he sees
not. The Lord shall not see; neither shall the God of Jacob regard it. For this
atheistical impiety, the psalmist sharply reproves them; understand ye brutish
amongst the people; and ye fools, when will ye be wise? he that planted the ear
shall he not hear? he that formed the eye, shall be not see? Psalm xciv. 7. 8.
9.


To suppose that any of the affairs of the world, are either above or below the
notice of God is a great reproach to him; as if he would bring a numerous
family into existence, and then leave them to the events of casualty.

But there are more, who, through inattention, overlook the signatures of divine
providence; regard not the works of the Lord nor consider the operations of his
hand. These ascribe great and notable events to mere chance, which is no cause,
or to human wisdom and power, vaunting like Nebuchadnezzar, when he said, is
not this great Babylon which I have built for the house of the kingdom, by the
might of my power, and for the honor of my majesty. Dan. iv. 10.
For such impiety men deserve severer punishment than that haughty monarch met
with, when he was driven from men and made to herd with the beasts of the
field, till he was taught to acknowledge that the Most High rules in the
kingdoms of men; and does according to his will in the army of heaven and among
the inhabitants of the earth.

It is a reproach to human reason as well as to the infinite Jehovah, for men,
and those especially who are favored with revelation, not to be led through second
causes to the great first cause and disposer of events. But how many alas! live
as without God in the world; not knowing or not considering that in God they
live and move and have their beings; or not giving him the glory due to his
name for his wonderful works to the children of men.

2. We infer it is matter of great rejoicing to the inhabitants of the earth that
the Lord reigns. He is qualified for it, inasmuch as he is possessed of
infinite perfection. He is infinite in knowledge, his eye pervades all nature.
Nothing is hid from him, whose eyes are in every place beholding the evil and
the good. He is also infinitely wise and knows what is best and fittest to be
done: can be at no loss as to ways and means to effect every purpose. His
infinite power enables him to carry into effect the counsels of his wisdom. All
nations are before him, as a drop of the bucket, or the small dust of the
balance. Whatever he pleases that does he, with the greatest ease.

God is also holy and righteous merciful and gracious. Natural perfections may
enable a being to do great and worthy things, but do not secure him from wrong
measures. He may be an object of fear, but not to be relied on. But under the
direction of justice goodness and truth, he is secured from all error, whatever
he does is well done; and for the best. We have reason therefore to rejoice and
be exceeding glad, that the Lord reigns, who is righteous in all his ways and
holy in all his works.

3. It Is our duty carefully to observe the works of the Lord. He is not an idle
spectator of the things which take place under our observation. And if his
providence regards and orders the little concernments of the world, then those,
which are the more considerable and important occurrences are all guided and
governed by his hand. This agrees with our Savior's reasoning: And from hence
he encourages his children to put their trust in God. Not a sparrow falls to
the ground without your father: Fear not ye therefore, you are of more value
than many sparrows. Yea not a hair of your head falls to the ground without a
providence, much less shall the head. This is the ground of that question, does
God take care for oxen? Yes surely. And from hence the apostle infers, that his
care is much more particular concerning us.

But if we ought carefully to observe the signature of divine Providence
respecting us individually, much more ought we to notice those which respect us
as a people. And on the present occasion we might with great propriety, remark
some of those events which have attended the late American revolution. It will
not however be expected that I should remind you very particularly, of those
memorable events which took place in the late war, and led to a peace, so
happily calculated to promote the true interest of this infant rising empire.
In that period we should find many instances of the loving kindness of God,
which ought to be kept in perpetual grateful remembrance.

It was evidently the will of Heaven that the connection between Great Britain
and these American Colonies should be dissolved, after it had continued for
more than a century and half. This connection had been, for the most part to
the mutual advantage of both countries: and until the year 1764 nothing had
openly taken place leading to a separation. I now refer to the memorable era
of the stamp act. From that time these countries beheld each other with mutual
jealousy. At length the British Parliament passed this resolve, viz. -- That
she had a right to make laws binding upon the colonies in all cases whatever.
From that time the colonies considered themselves devoted to slavery by the
ruling part of the nation, and could no longer place any confidence in them.
This resolve, with others of the like tenor, and a series of violent measures
at length, led to open hostilities. Then the appeal was made to Heaven; and,
whether we should be a free people or a body of slaves, referred to the
decision of the sword.

Thus, we were compelled to enter into a war with a nation, which had been a
terror to the nations of the world; especially by her naval force, by which she
rode mistress of the seas. At the same time we were destitute of an army:
Without money, the sinews of war, and without military stores.

But we had no alternative, excepting unconditional submission, the essence of
slavery, or a defensive war. We chose the latter, humbly trusting our righteous
cause to the great arbiter of disputes and disposer of events.

The British nation haughtily refused every proposal of accommodation short of
such submission; and declared the colonies in a state of open rebellion, and
strained every nerve to bring America to her feet. Congress therefore in the
name of their constituents renounced allegiance to the King of Great Britain,
and declared these colonies free and Independent states. This resolve passed in
Congress then sitting in the city of Philadelphia, on the 4th day July, A. D.
1776. The British Parliament always talked in the highest strain of haughty
superiority: They were nevertheless, by the smiles of Heaven upon this Country,
brought in the course of an eight years war, to give up the contest; and to
acknowledge the thirteen United States of America, to be free, sovereign and
independent states.

We ought to ascribe it to the overruling providence of God, in whose hands all
hearts are, that the British ministry were inclined to accede to terms of
peace, greatly to our advantage. We have been told that the minister should say
that since America must be independent of Great Britain, he would leave her
under such circumstances, that she should be independent of all the world. We
have an extent of country superior to most kingdoms in Europe, and sufficient
to support an immense number of Inhabitants, and with all the advantages of a
free fishery.

That this revolution, so favorable to America, should be brought about in so
short a period, is truly mavelous. And although the signatures of divine
providence leading to this very memorable event, are not altogether so
miraculous, as those which attended the ancient Israelites, when they were
brought out of Egypt and conducted to the promised land, yet they were as
visible and as deserving of warmest gratitude. We are now at peace with all the
world, excepting in some parts of our interior frontiers -- It is our devout
wish that a gracious and sovereign God would so influence the hearts of men,
and order all concurring events, that a righteous and permanent peace may soon
be established.

Further. We ought to observe with sentiments of warmest gratitude, the loving
kindness of the Lord, favoring us with a national constitution, so happily
calculated to secure to us our invaluable civil and sacred rights. When God had
caused our unnatural invaders to be at peace with us, we had reason to fear
that internal jars and divisions would take place. We had no efficient
government. The recommendations of Congress were readily complied with, whilst
internal union and a prompt submission to order were deemed necessary for our
salvation and defense. But when we had no foreign enemy to unite us amongst
ourselves, we soon found that those recommendations had but small influence,
unless they fell in with our particular detached interest, or local prejudices.

For a season public credit was low. It became a question with the more
considerate part of mankind abroad and amongst ourselves, whether there was
virtue enough in the people to submit to a free, republican form of government.
Such were the increasing jealousies and dissentions amongst ourselves; and such
the deranged state of our public affairs, that we found it necessary to have
some energy in government. Accordingly the several states met in convention, by
their delegates; and these, under the gracious guidance and direction of
heaven, formed a national constitution, which has been adopted by the whole
union: And, by the trial of several years, its influence is found to be safe
and beneficial. Perhaps no people since the days of Moses, have been favored
with a constitution better calculated to secure, to evey individual, his
invaluable civil and sacred rights.

At present we appear to be the favorites of heaven, tho most unworthy. And if
we are not wanting to ourselves, shall continue the happiest people on earth.
The eye of God will still be upon us for good, if we fear him and keep his
commandments. Well may we prize our privileges, especially at this day, when
the nations of the world are in such tumult and uproar.

I should tire your patience and waste my own strength, should I attempt, tho
in a brief manner, to point out the state of society only in Europe for an age
or two past. It is long since mankind have lost even the shadow of liberty in
the eastern world; and but little more, has been enjoyed by most of the nations
of Europe, now for ages.

We have already observed, that a series of events had concurred to rouse
America from her lethargy; and, with becoming fortitude, to assert her rights.
Tho the prospect was unfavorable and the issue doubtful, yet heaven has been
pleased to espouse our cause and establish our independence. The world stood
by, and with anxious expectation marked every memorable event, as it took
place, and were astonished at the issue. From hence the idea of human liberty
and some views of the rights of man, have been disseminated amongst the nations
of Europe; and particularly in that nation, which lent us their friendly aid in
our late struggles for liberty. In consequence of this, they have attempted to
free themselves from that yoke of bondage and load of oppression, under which
they have groaned for ages past. Although their general aim has been right, yet it
would be a task to vindicate all their measures; and, that particularly, of
beheading their late king, Louis the XVI. America will ever remember him with
grateful feelings, as her great patron and friend; and sincerely grieve for his
hard fate; especially, when she considers that his friendship for her, might be
the accidental occasion of those disastrous events which have befallen him.
Whether the French king had forfeited his life to his subjects, is a question
which does and perhaps always will, divide mankind. What the author has said in
the sermon above, expresses his own feelings for that unhappy prince, rather
than any decided opinion on the question (...) right.


The present state of that nation is very lamentable: They are involved in all
the horrors of a civil war; attended with a war with all the nations around
them. How these violent struggles will terminate, God only knows, To him, as
the great disposer of events, we ought devoutly to recommend the cause of
liberty; beseeching him to quiet the turbulent spirits of mankind; to break the
powers of oppression; and overrule the present tumults and wars in the nations
of Europe, in subserviency to his own glory; the advancement of the cause and
kingdom of the Divine Redeemer; and the establishment of the rights of man.

When we compare the present calamitous state of the French nation, with the
state of America, in the late war, we see great reason to bless God that he was
pleased to order circumstances so favorably for us. That with a gentle hand he
carried us through an eight years war, to the establishment of that liberty and
independence which are the wonder and the envy of the world: We enjoy the
rights of man in high perfection. We have free liberty to worship God according
to the dictates of conscience; and have our persons and properties protected by
a wise, impartial and efficient government. The liberal arts and sciences have
all needful encouragement. Commerce, agriculture and manufactures, are in a
prosperous state. In a word, we are exalted as to heaven in respect to
privileges. God has not dealt so favorably with any other nation as with us.
And now, with great reason, he expects that we render to him according to his
benefits, by being a peculiar people to him zealous of good works.

But it is time we come to a close. We are now convened in the house of God, with
a professed design to celebrate his praises, for his loving kindness, displayed
in that series of events which have tended to bring about the American
revolution and independence. So far as we have been influenced hereto by the
feelings of true gratitude, and a regard to the glory of God, will not fail of
his gracious acceptance. And tho this is the first convention of the kind in
this part of the country, yet no year has passed, since the declaration of
American independence, without a celebration of that memorable event in some
parts of this new empire, at the annual return of the 4th of July.

But it has given pain to every serious mind, to observe that such
anniversaries have been clouded by noisy disorder, riot and sinful excess.
These indecencies are a reproach to men of reason; and especially to those who
profess to believe in revelation and to reverence the character of Deity.

Since the speaker, by particular desire, appears as the preacher of the day,
he will be allowed seriously to recommend to this assembly, that they observe
that sobriety, decency and good order, which become gentlemen and especially
christians. That their whole conduct be such as will bear critical inspection,
and give no occasion to the tongue of malevolence to make an invidious remark.

As the celebration of this anniversary is new in this part of the country, it
excites general inquiry, and will be a subject of free remark, especially with
the less informed. And it may be expected that they will form their opinion
concerning such anniversaries, very much by the conduct of this convention.
This circumstance, I doubt not, will have due weight with all present.

Let all be concerned to cultivate sentiments of warmest gratitude to the great
author of all good, for those many favors, which we enjoy as individuals and as
members of this highly favored empire; and make it our great concern to render
to God according to the benefits done unto us; hoping for his final acceptance
through Jesus Christ -- AMEN.

ODE for INDEPENDENCE, 1793.
Composed and set to Music by Dr. WILLARD.
BEHOLD! the glorious day appears! --
A blissful sound salutes our ears --
"This happy morn gave Independence birth:
Columbia, rouse! with joy supreme
Dwell on the blessed delightful theme.
Proclaim your joy to all the wondering Earth.
All hail! thou highly favored land!
See freedoms blessings wide expand --
See smiling plenty crown thy fertile fields:
For thee shall blow the gentle gales --
For thee shall swell the whitening sails --
To thee old Ocean his rich treasure yields.
As Arteries and Veins convey
The purple tide of life, and stray
In numerous windings through the human frame;
So thy fair rivers prove the source
Of joyous plenty through their course,
And are the lifeblood of thy wealth and fame.
Lo! meek-ey'd peace, with lenient hand,
Waves over thy plains her olive wand,
And mildly bids War's rude commotions cease:
While Europe's guilt-stain'd barbarous realms
A mighty sea of blood o'erwhelms,
And death's vast Empire finds a swift increase.
May gratitude to Heaven inspire
Each heart with pure devotions fire,
While Independence rises to the view;
Columbia, venerate that power,
Which cheered thee in thy darkest hour,
And with thy joy thy songs of praise renew.
Behold! the glorious day appears --
The Birthday of revolving years --
The day that gave to Independence birth:
Columbians, rouse! with joy supreme
Think over the blessed, enchanting theme,
And shout your transports through the listening Earth.

