THE ARTISTS ASSISTANT IN DRAWING, PERSPECTIVE, ETCHING, ENGRAVING,
MEZZOTINTO-SCRAPING, PAINTING on GLASS, in CRAYONS, in WATERCOLORS, and on
SILKS and SATTINS. The ART of JAPANNING, etc.


CONTAINING (...) Easiest and most Comprehensive Rules For the attainment of
those truly USEFUL and POLITE ARTS, Methodically digested, and adapted to the
Capacities of YOUNG BEGINNERS. ILLUSTRATED WITH (...) EXAMPLES engraved on
Copper.

THE SIXTH EDITION improved.

PHILADELPHIA: (...) by Benjamin Johnson, No 147, for Benjamin Davies, No 68,
MARKET-STREET. M, DCC, XCIV.

PREFACE.
IT has ever been the misfortune of those who have professed to lay down rules
for the attainment of any art or science, to leave them enveloped with
difficulties, which, if not utterly insuperable, at least discourage the
learner from proceeding in a study which he can have little hopes will ever
reward his pursuit.

From hence we may reasonably infer, that the said professors were totally
unacquainted, if not with the theory at least with the practical part of what
they undertook to teach others; and that the instructions they have given were
founded rather upon a bare supposition of their efficacy, than upon the surer
basis of long and repeated experience, which alone could have insured their
success, and from which, with all due deference to the judicious (whose
sanction we shall at all times be ambitious to deserve,) we may venture to
answer for the practicability of our own.

To obviate every objection, and to remove all those difficulties which had so
long blocked up the path of science, and retarded, if not wholly impeded the
pupil in his progress to the temple of fame, was the chief veiw in compiling
the subsequent little treatise.

Over and above the improvements made in illustrating the several arts hitherto
so imperfectly and unintelligibly explained we have introduced directions for
scraping in mezzotinto, which in this edition, are still further enlarged, and
which, as they have never been before attempted in any book of this kind we
flatter ourselves will be the more acceptable; especially when it shall appear
from the rules laid down for the performance of this art, that it is so easy to
be attained, that a tolerable proficiency in drawing will enable any one to
unkertake it with all imaginable prospect of success.

The reader will also find, in this impression, the addition of a very useful
problem, in the article of perspective illustrated by a new plate, and one
additional plate of flowers and sprigs, for the instruction of young Ladies who
have a taste for drawing.

As this book is chiefly intended for the use of young practitioners, we have
purposely avoided all abstruse expressions and obsolete terms, contenting
ourselves with such a familiar style as we judged most likely to inform those
minds we should wish to i^prove: yet as the ideas of an artist are not wholly
to be conveyed without some necessary terms peculiar to each branch, we have
taken care to explain such as could not be omitted without a manifest injury to
the work, by familiar words of a synonymous tendency, wherever they occur; so
that we apprehend we have not left the least stumbling block for the reader to
encounter

INDEX.
CHAP. I. OF DRAWING Page 8 General Rules for Drawing Page 9 Of Copying of
Draughts Page 11 Of Enlarging and Contracting Page 12 Of Imitation of Life Page
13 Of Drapery Page 14 Of Landscape Page 15 Of Light and Shade Page 16 Of
History Page 18 A Method of Drawing after nature ibid.
CHAP. II. Of PERSPECTIVE Page 20 Explanation of (...) Terms used in
Perspective ibid. To (...) a perp^^dicular Page 2^ Anoth^^ (...) Page 24 To
draw (...) Line ibid. To divide a given Line into two equal parts ibid. To
raise a Perpendicular at the End of a line Page 25 To turn a Circle through
Three given Points ibid. To draw an Oval ibid. Another Method for an Oval Page
26 To draw a square pavement ibid. To find the Proportion of objects above the
Horizon Page 27 The same exemplified in Objects below the Horizon Page 28 To
draw a direct view Page 29 To draw an oblique view Page 30 To draw a View with
accidental points Page 31 To find the Center of the roof of a house Page 32
CHAP. III. Page Of ETCHING Page 33 Directions for laying the Ground ibid.
Direction for Tracing Page 34 Di^^ctions for Etching Page 35 Of Biting, or
eating in the Work with Aqua Fortis Page 36
CHAP. IV. Of ENGRAVING Page 38 Of whetting and tempering the Graver ibid. Of
holding the Graver Page 40 Directions for Engraving ibid.
CHAP. V. Of MEZZOTINTO-SCRAPING Page 43 Directions for laying the
Mezzotinto-Ground ibid. Directions for whetting the Grounding-tool Page 44
Directions for scraping the Picture ibid.
CHAP. VI. Of PAINTING upon GLASS Page 47 Colo^^^ proper for painting upon
Glass Page 48 Method of using the colors Page 50
CHAP. VII. Of PAINTING in CRAYONS Page 52 Directions for using them ibid.
CHAP VIII. Of PAINTING in WATERCOLORS Page 54 Names of the simple Colors
ibid. Directions for mixed colors Page 55 Directions for using them Page 57 To
make Gum-water Page 60 Another way Page 61 To keep the flies from your work
ibid. To make Liquid Gold ibid. To make liquid Silver ibid. To make the glare
of eggs Page 62 To recover Liquid Silver from rust ibid. To keep colors from
sinking ibid. To make size for candlelight pieces ibid. To recover Colors
when decayed Page 63 Pink ibid.
CHAP. IX. Of PAINTING on SILKS, SATTINS, etc. Page 63 CHAP. X. The Art of
JAPANNING Page 65
THE ARTIST'S ASSISTANT etc.
CHAP. I. OF DRAWING.
DRAWING is the Art of representing by outlines and shadows the various
productions of nature and art, and of enlarging and contracting objects in the
most exact proportion.

This art recalls to our memory things long since past, and rescues from
oblivion the deeds of our illustrious ancestors, at the same time it revives
their image in our mind, by preserving their ^eatur^ (...) many generations. In
a word it may be said to be the silent but most expressive language of nature,
which speaks to the eye, is understood by all nations, and conveys an idea
where even words themselves would prove deficient.

After giving some general directions for the attainment of that truly polite
and rational amusement, which is the basis on which all the rest of the Arts
depend, we shall consider it more particularly under the following heads, and
lay down the most copious and intelligible rules for each respectively, viz.

Copying of Draughts, Enlarging and Contracting, Imitation of Life, Drapery,
Landscape, Light and Shadow, History.
The implements necessary for drawing are, A Ruler, Compasses, Charcoal, a
Black-lead Pencil, Penknife, Porte-Crayons, Black, White, and Red Chalk,
Crayons, Indian Ink, Crow-Quill Pens, Camel's Hair Pencils, Fitches, Paper of
several Sorts, and Porte-Folios.

General Rules for DRAWING,
EVERY young beginner should edeavour to improve his memory with the beauties
of the most excellent paintings and prints, taking notice of the harmony of
their different parts, as well as the reasons for the disposition of the lights
and shades: by this means the hand will be more ready to execute those objects
the mind has so clearly conceived.

Having provided the original intended to be drawn from, begin with the
outlines of the several features, as the eyes, nose, mouth, ears etc. as they
occur in the book. Practice these often over, till you are quite master of
them; then proceed to a profile or side-face, after that to an oval or full
face; always remembering that each of these must be perfectly attained before
you venture to proceed further.

When you can copy a face correctly, the next thing is, to draw the several
limbs or parts of the body, as the hands, arms, feet, legs, etc. then go on to
the body it self; which having done* you will be able to undertake a whole
figure, observing carefully the exact P^oportion and ^earings of one part with
respect to the other.

The learner ought to be particularly cautious that he do not attempt a whole
figure before he has made himself master of the several parts; for this is
beginning the work at the wrong end and is indeed the same thing as if a man
should attempt to climb to the top of a house without the help of the stairs.

As for beasts, birds, fruit, plants, etc. we deem it useless to give
directions for drawing them, as it is well known, that he who has so far
improved his ideas as to ^e able to draw a human figure correctly, will find it
no difficulty to perform every other branch of this art.

Sketch or draw the outlines faintly, with a piece of soft charcoal (which may
be known by the pith in the middle) cut to a point like a pencil and when you
see any thing amiss, whisk it out with a handkerchief or feather, correct your
errors with a black lead pencil, and compare your work with the original, till
every part of them perfectly correspond. This done finish your outlines with
black lead or Indian ink. This advice properly attended to, will save you an
infinite deal of trouble, in drawing over and over again, to your no small
discouragement.

If you prefer Indian ink, rub it with water upon a marble, and with a
crow-quill pen perfect your outlines; then rub out the marks of the pencil with
bread. -- Keep three or four different shades of ink in the hollows of your
stone, to distinguish your distances, reserving one of the holes for water.

When ^ou are t^oroughly versed in the outlines your next (...) will be to
learn to shadow: But of (...) hereafter, under the articles of light and shade.

Be not too hasty at first setting out, which will but impede your progress,
and hinder your improvement; whereas by bestowing a little more time, you will
attain pefection sooner than you can well imagine, and expedition will come of
it self as you become more experienced.

Of Copying of Draughts.
WHEN you would copy a print or drawing exactly of the same size, rub the back
of it with the dust of red chalk or black lead; lay this upon your paper, and
pin it down at the four corners; then with a blunt point trace the outlines and
breadths of the shadows; which done, having carefully examined it, to see that
nothing be omitted, take it off and finish it with a pencil or pen.

Another way to make an exact copy, and at the same time to preserve the
Original, is to lay a piece of transparent paper upon it, and draw the outlines
thereon with a black-lead pencil; then between that and the paper you intend to
draw upon, place a piece of thin post-paper, reddened or blackened at the back;
after which proceed to trace and finish it according to the foregoing rule.

There is another way to take off the outlines DRAWING-PLATE. Part 1.
from the oiled paper. Lay it on a sheet of white, and prick over the drawing
with a pin. Then lay the white paper on the article you would draw on, and dust
it over with fine charchoal dust tied loosely in a rag, and it will leave a
true copy: where incorrect it may be helped by the pencil or pen. The pricked
paper will be more complete if varnished, and will last longer.

If you would reverse the original, you need only turn the transparent paper,
with the drawing you have made upon it, downwards upon the post-paper, and
trace it as above directed.

Of Enlarging and Contracting.
DIVIDE your original with a pair of compasses into any ^umber of squares, and
rule them across with a black lead pencil from side to side and from top to
bo^tom.

Then having your paper of the size you intend divide it into the same number
of Squares, either bigger or less, as you would enlarge or contract it.

Place your original before you, and draw ^quare by square the several parts;
observing to make the part you are drawing fall into the same ^art of the
square as it does in your original. To prevent mistakes number the squares both
^f the original and copy as in figure I and II of ^he Drawing-Plate.

Then outline it with Indian ink, rub out the ^arks of the pencil with bread,
and shade it at ^easure.

Of Imitation of Life.
LET the Person you draw after be of a proportionable size, and well shaped;
place him in the easiest and most natural attitude; then sketch faintly with
your charcoal the head, or any of the limbs separately; which having carefully
done, proceed to finish with your pencil.

When you have sufficiently practiced the several parts or limbs, you may draw
the whole figure, in whatever attitude you may think proper to place it;
beginning with the easiest, and proceeding by degrees to the more difficult
postures, as time and experience shall enable you.

Be sure to finish your ^utlines so correctly, (marking all the muscles as they
occur) that, even before you give it any shadow, it may have some resemblance
of the person.

The true proportion which one part of the human figure bears to another, may
be seen in Fig. II. which will serve as a standard to examine your drawing by;
except where the figure is to be fore-shortened, in which case nature will be
the best guide.

In drawing a likeness care must be taken to express the passions in the most
lively manner; which is to be done by observing the peculiar cast and
disposition of every feature with the exacte^^ nicety: And as this is, of all
the parts of drawing, by far the most difficult, it will require a more
ordinary attention, and should be last attempted.

Of Drapery.
DRAPERY is the Art of clothing your figures with elegance and propriety.

When your naked figure is outlined, first draw the outlines of the drapery
lightly, then the greater folds, and afterward the lesser; observing never to
let them cross each other.

Particular regard is to be had to the quality of the drapery; as the folds of
stuff or woollen cloth are more abrupt and harsh, and those of silk more
flowing and easy. Linen, cambrick, gauze, etc. as their substance is lighter
than either, require a still greater delicacy in expressing the waving of the
folds, by the faintness of their shadows.

The drapery should not stick too close to the body but must seem to flow round
as it were; yet in such a manner, as that the motion of the figure may be free
and easy. A great lightness and motion of the drapery should only be used, when
the figures are supposed to be in much agitation, or exposed to the wind; but
in a calm place and free from violent action, their drapery should be large and
flowing, in order to give them a more graceful appearance.

Let the loose parts of the drapery blown by the wind all flow one way; and
draw that part which lies closest to the body, before you draw those that fly
off.

Suit your garments to the body, and make them bend with it; The close^ ^he
garment sticks to the body, the narrower and smaller must be the folds; and if
it fits quite close, there will be no folds at all, but must only have a faint
shadow to represent the part of the body which lies under it.

By observing diligently in what manner the drapery flows upon any person
standing or sitting before you for that purpose, you will see in what manner to
dispose your folds and shadows according to the unerring rule of nature.

Of Landscape.
LANDSCAPE represents the face of the Country as it appears to our view with
all the various objects analogous thereto; as towns, castles, churches, houses,
trees, hills, cattle, rivers, rocks, ruins, etc.

Be careful to augment or lessen every object according to its distance, making
the most remote objects fainter and less distinct, as they appear to the eye,
and enlarging them proportionably as they advance nearer.

Show the sky cloudy, or clear, as occasion requires; and if you introduce the
sun, let it be rising or setting; either of which representations will give an
additional grace to your picture, as they represent nature in its liveliest and
most agreeable appearance.

Adapt every part of your landscape to the ^eason of the year, and the time of
the day, you intend it to represent; and dispose your ^ights and shades with
consistent propriety.

Lastly, we would recommend it to practitioners ^n this noble art, to rise
early in a fine morning, that they may have a better idea of the harmony and
beauty of the works of the great Creator? which would wonderfully replenish
their minds, as to color and effect.

Of Light and Shade.
THE true distribution of light and shade in a Picture is absolutely necessary
to be (...); as it not only determines the proper distance of one object from
another, without which the whole would be an undistinguishable mass of
confusion; but it gives likewise to each respective object its substance,
roundness, and effect.

Shadowing is performed with the pen or pencil; in either of which great
judgment is required.

Having made your outlines correct, the first thing is to observe from which
side of the original the light comes in; which, if natural, is either from the
right hand or left; for when ever the light appears in the middle of a picture,
and seems to glare more than ordinary, it is caused by a candle, a lamp, or
some other luminous body, and is called an artificial light.

Lay on your little tints first, disposing them as you see they are done in the
original; and then proceed to the deeper ones, till you come to the darkest
parts of all: For you may at any time darken your shadows, when you cannot
lighten them.

Let all your shadows in the same piece fall on the same side; that is, if the
right-side of a man's face be dark, so must be the right-side of his body, arm,
leg, thigh, etc. But if the light side be darkened by the opposition of some
other body intercepting the light, it must receive a contrary shadow.

Make your shadows fainter as they grow toward the light, breaking them
gradually, that they may not appear too sudden or harsh.

If you shade with black lead or with crayons, you may blend your shadows, and
soften them one into another as you require, with a stump made of paper or
glove-leather rolled and tied hard, and cut almost to the point, with which you
may also weaken your shades where they are too strong.

When one part of the body projects over or before another, the part projecting
must receive a stronger light: Those parts that b^nd inward must be made so
much the darker, and shadowed deepest next the light.

Two equal lights must never be made in the same picture: The strongest light
should fall upon the middle of the piece, (where the principal figures ought to
stand) diminishing gradually toward the extremities.

By frequently examining into nature, you ^ill have an opportunity of improving
your ideas ^f light and shade, and will be enabled to ^orm a proper judgment of
the effect which the ^ifferent rays or degrees of light will produce ^n a
picture; for which reason you should never ^et slip an opportunity of remarking
the va^ious appearances you meet with.

Of History.
THIS (...) of drawing presents to (...) view things past, present, and future.

An historical picture must describe the trans^ction represented, in a manner
so clear and con^picuous, as to convey an idea of it to our minds, as fully as
could be done by a verbal description: And care must be taken to preserve such
an analogy or connection between the figures, that not one may seem to be
introduced but for some end or purpose. And as in Dramatic writing, (...) is
essential to make every person speak consistently with the part he represents,
so here it will be equally necessary to observe the same propriety of
character, and make every figure look the sentiment it is intended to express.

A Method of Drawing after Nature by Means of a Transparent Plane.
FRAME a piece of tiffany or sine lawn of the like you intend your picture: fix
it so that the whole object may be seen through it. A sight-board, that is, a
flat piece of wood with a hole in it must be placed parallel to the tiffany or
lawn. The outlines of the object, as they appear through the hole, must be
traced on the tiffany by a crayon of white or red chalk, charcoal or any other
proper substance. To take these outlines off on paper or vellum, lay the
tiffany in an horizontal position on the paper or vellum, so as to touch in
every part.

When well fixed, it must be struck with some flat substance in every part. The
figure, by this means, will be transferred, and where imperfect may be
corrected by a black-lead pencil from the natural view through the sight-board.
Paper may be used for the same purpose as the tiffany, being made transparent
by the oil of turpentine or glass, by drawing the out lines with a black
color, mixed with a drying oil. Then lay the paper gently without rubbing on
the glass; moisten the paper a little with water before you lay it on.

DRAWING PLATE Part 2d.


CHAP. II. Of PERSPECTIVE.
PERSPECTIVE is the art of delineating objects (as they-appear in nature upon a
plain surface) according to their distance and height perpendicular to the
horizon, between the object and the eye.

This art is of great consequence to those who would excel in drawing, etching,
engraving, carving in bas-relief, or painting; for being well understood, the
artist will be enabled to know when to adhere to the strict rules, and when to
depart from them with propriety.

Explanation of the Terms used in perspective.
1. BASE or fundamental line, is the bottom-line of the drawing on which the
person is supposed to stand, with his face toward the po^nt of sight.

2. PERPENDICULAR is a line drawn upright with respect to any part of the base.

3. PARALLEL LINES are lines equidistant from each other, as the horizon to the
base.

4. HORIZON is the most distant part of a plain, where the clouds, seeming to
touch the earth, limit the sight. The horizontal line gives the height of the
eye; for we cannot see any thing above the horizon which does not exceed this
height: Yet the summit of a mountain may be above the horizon, though its foot
be far beneath it.

5. POINT of SIGHT is that part of the horizontal line where all the visual
rays center in a point.

6. VISUAL RAYS are beams of light conveying the likeness of any object to the
eye or sight, and the knowledge thereof to the mind or understanding.

7. POINT of DISTANCE are supposed points set off on the horizontal line, at
equal distances on each side the point of sight.

8. DIAGONAL LINES are those drawn from the points of distance to the
extremities of the base line.

9. Abridgement of the Square is the line where the diagonals intersect or
cross the visual rays, and must always run parallel to the base. It is only
made where the sight is limited by a perpendicular, as the farther end of a
church, hall, room, etc. And supposing a person to stand thereon, a parallel
line drawn through the point of sight will seem to pass through the eyes, and
will consequently show what height that person ought to be.

The nine foregoing definitions are illustrated in fig I. of the perspective
plate.

10. POINT OF DIRECT VIEW. This is nothing more than the front view of a house,
church, etc. or in other words, a geometrical elevation raised from a plan or
ground plot, and comprehending an equal space on both sides of the point of
sight. See fig. XIV.

11. POINT OF OBLIQUE VIEW is when we see the object sideways or aslant.
Example: suppose a person was to draw a view of a canal with some remarkable
building he is desirous to show more distinct, he must place himself (on the
base or fundamental line) opposite to that building, that the ray of light may
be more oblique; by which means the admired building will be less
fore-shortened, and appear to greater advantage, the points of sight being
still before him, though not in the middle of the picture. See fig. XV.

12. ACCIDENTAL POINTS are those where objects end in the horizontal line, but
neither in the points of sight or distance, and serve for streets, houses,
chairs, roads, etc. which take different directions. As for example: suppose a
street leading to the point of sight, and from it two others branch, the one on
the right hand, the other on the left, and take a different direction; these
two last streets make what we call accidental points, terminating in some part
of the horizontal line, on each side of the point of sight. See fig. XVI. The
same is to be observed in a grove, park, etc. where the walk you are in directs
immediately to the point of sight, and the avenues branching out on either side
terminate also in different parts of the horizon.

ICHNOGRAPHY is the plan or ground-plot of any object that is to be raised in
perspective.

SCENOGRAPHY is the art of bringing any thing raised in perspective from an
ichnographic plan to its due proportion, according to the distance in which it
is placed; that all objects may be diminished according to their distance in a
picture, in the same degree as they are diminished by distance in a natural
prospect. A scenographic view may be either direct, as in fig. XIV. or oblique,
as in fig. XV.

AS the Art of perspective is constructed upon geometrical principles, it will
be necessary previous to the rules themselves, to learn the following
introductary operations.

1. From a Point in a given line AB, to raise a Perpendicular. See fig. II.

Draw with the ruler the given line AB; then set one foot of your compasses in
B, and extending them to rather more than half the length of the line AB, sweep
the arch cd; and with the same extent of compasses, set one point in c, and
sweep the arch of; then, without altering the compasses, set one foot in g, and
describe the arch hi; next rule through the points eg, to intersect the arch hi
in k, and draw the line from k to B, which is the perpendicular required.

2. Another way. See fig. III.

From the point A take the equal distances AB and AC on each side of it; then
stretch the compasses to any distance greater than AB or AC, and with one foot
of them in B sweep the arch de; then, with the same extent of the compasses,
set one point in C, sweep the arch fg; and these two arches will intersect each
other in the point ^, from which a line drawn to the point A, is the
perpendicular required.

3. To draw one line parallel (or equidistant) to another given line AB. See
fig. IV.

Extend your compasses to the distance of the Parallel you require; then with
one foot in any point of the given line as in c, describe the arch de. Again
without altering the compasses, fix one foot in any other point, as in f, and
sweep the arch g^; then rule the line IK, touching the outward parts of the two
arches, and that will be the parallel to the given line.

4. To bisect or divide a given Line AB, into two equal parts. See Fig. V.

Take with your compasses any distance greater than half the given line; then,
with one foot of them in B, sweep the arch cc; and with the same distance,
setting one foot in A. sweep the arch dd; and these arches will intersect each
other in the points gh; which joined by a perpendicular* will intersect AB in
the middle point i.

5. Upon the End A of a given Line AB, to raise a Perpendicular. See Fig. VI.

Place one foot of the compasses in A, and extend them to any point c without
the given line; then set one foot of them in c, and turn the circle de and A,
and through dc draw the diameter dce, meeting the circle in c, join A e, and
that right line is the perpendicular required.

6. To turn the Circle through any three given Points not in a right Line. See
Fig. VII.

Fix three points at any distance you think proper, as at AB and C, and join
them by the right lines AB and BC; then by fig. V. bisect the line AB with the
line d^; which done, bisect the line BC with the line fe; and from the center
e, where these lines meet, extend your compasses to A, and describe the circle
ABCG.

7. To draw an Oval. See fig. VIII.

Draw a given line AB, which divide into four equal parts; set one foot of the
compasses at C, and from that center describe a circle ee; with the same extent
of compasses place one foot in the center D, and turn the circle ff; then with
one foot still in D, extend your compasses, and turn the arch gg; and with the
same extent, placing one foot in C, describe the arch hh; join the
intersections with a perpendicular from i to k; next, place one foot of the
compasses in i, sweep the arch LL, and without altering them, set one foot in
k, and describe the arch MM.

8. Another Method for an Oval. See Fig. IX.

Draw a given line AD, and with the compasses extended, placing one foot in B,
with the other turn the circle ee; then, without altering your compasses, on
the line AD, in the supposed point C, sweep the circle ff, and through the
points gg, where the two circles intersect, draw the perpendicular h^; then fix
your compasses with one foot in h, and extend them so as to describe the arch
kk to the lower extremities of the circles; then with the same extent, with one
foot in i, sweep the arch ll, to join the upper extremities.

By these examples it will appear, that an oval of any form or size may be
constructed at pleasure, only taking care always to fix the compasses
equidistant from the given line AD in the perpendicular hi.

Practical Examples in Perspective.
1 To draw a square Pavement in Perspective See Fig. X. and XI.

SUPPOSE your piece of pavement to consist of 64 pieces of marble, each a foot
square. Your first business is, to draw an ichnographical plan or ground-plot
of it, which is thus performed. Having made an exact square of the size you
intend your plan, divide the base and horizon into eight equal parts, and from
every division in the base to its opposite point in the horizon, rule
perpendicular lines; then divide the sides into the same number, ruling
parallel lines across from point to point; so will your pavement be divided
into 64 square feet; because the eight feet in length, multiplied by the same
in breadth, give the number of square feet or pieces of marble contained in the
whole: then rule diagonals from corner to corner; and thus will your
ground-plot appear as in fig. X.

Now, to lay this in perspective, draw another square to your intended size,
and divide the base line AB into eight equal parts, as before; then fix your
point of sight C, in the middle of the horizon DE, and from the same point rule
lines to every division in the base AB; after which, rule diagonal lines from D
to B, and from E to A, answerable to those in the ground-plot, and your square
will be reduced to the triangle ABC; then from the point F, where the Diagonal
DB intersects the line AC, to the opposite intersection G, where the diagonal
EA crosses the line CB, rule a parallel line, which is the abridgement of the
square.

Then through the points where the diagonals cross the rest of the lines, which
go from the base to the point of sight, rule parallel lines, and your square
pavement will be laid in perspective, as in fig. XI.

2. To find the Height and Proportion of any Objects, as they appear above the
Horizon, on a supposed Plane. See Fi. XII.

First, rule your horizontal line NO, and fix your point of sight, as at M;
then mark the place of your nearest pillar, by making a dot for the base or
bottom, as at A; and another for the summit or top, as at B: Rule a line from A
to the point of sight M, and another from B to M and these two lines will give
the height of any number of pillars. As for example: Suppose you would have a
pillar at C, fix your dot for the base, and rule from thence a parallel line to
meet the diagonal AM at D. then rule the perpendicular DE to the diagonal BM:
which perpendicular is the height of your figure required at C. Or, if you
would place pillars at F and I, observe the same method, ruling the parallels
FG and IK, and the perpendiculars GH and KL will give their heights at the
distances required.

To find the diameter or thickness of pillars at any particular distances, you
are also to be guided by that nearest the base. For instance: Suppose your
nearest pillar AB to be ten feet high, and one foot in diameter; divide it from
top to bottom into ten equal parts, and set off one of them upon the base of
the pillar: Then rule a line from the point of sight M to the diameter P, and
you will have the thickness of all your pillars on their respective parallels
or bases.

3. The same Rule exemplified in Objects below the Horizon. See Fig. XIII.

If you would know the heights of a number of figures below the horizon, rule
your horizontal line QR, and fix your point of sight, as at P; then place your
nearest figure, or mark the dots for the head and feet, by the points of A and
B, which answers the same purpose; and rule from these dots to the point of
sight the lines AP and BP^ And if you would find the height of a figure to be
drawn at c, rule from thence the parallel cd to the diagonal BP, and the
perpendicular de will give the height required. The same directions will show
the height of a figure at any other distance you have a mind to place it, as at
f, i, and m, by ruling the parallels fg, ik, and mn; and from each of these
their respective perpendiculars gh, kl, and no; which perpendiculars will show
the height of the figures at f, i, and m.

4. Draw a direct View. See Fig. XIV.

To illustrate this example, suppose you were to draw the inside of a church,
as represented in this figure: First, take your station at the point A, in the
center of the base line BC; from which you have a front view of the whole body
of the church, with all the pillars, etc. on each side: Then ^ix your horizon
at any height you think proper, as at DE; besect it by the perpendicular EA;
and where these two lines intersect, is the point of sight F. (This
perpendicular will pass through the centers of all the arches in the dome or
cupola; which centers may be found by any three given points, as in fig. VII.)
Next divide your base line into any given number of feet; and the visual lines
ruled from these divisions to the point of sight, will reduce all your objects
to their just proportion, by setting off their height upon ^ perpendicular
raised at their respective distances. The base, in the example here given, is
divided into twelve equal parts, of five feet each; from which (supposing your
front column to be 35 feet high) take seven d^^isions from the base line of
your drawing, and set them off upon the perpendicular G H; then (supposing this
column to be five feet thick at the base) set off one of those divisions upon
the parallel IK, which is the breadth required. So that, by proportioning this
scale to any distance by the foregoing directions, you may not only find the
dimensions of all your columns, but also of every distinct part of them, as
well as of all the doors, windows, and other objects that ^ccur. For instance:
Having found the height and breadth of your first or nearest column G, draw
from the top and bottom of the said column to the point of sight the lines HF
and KF; after which, rule the line IF from the base of the column to the point
of sight, and you have the height and breadth of all the rest of the columns,
as has been already shown in Fig. XII.

By ruling lines from the points a, b, c, d, etc. to the point of sight, you
will see that all the summits and bases of your columns, doors, windows, etc.
must tend immediately to that point; and by lines drawn from the points 1, 2,
3, 4, etc. on each side, to the correspondent points on the opposite side, may
be seen all the part of your building lying under the same parallel.

5. To draw an Oblique View. See Fig. XV.

First, draw your horizontal line AB; then, if your favorite object be on the
right hand, as at C, place yourself on the left hand upon the base line, as at
D; then from that station erect a perpendicular DE, which will pass through the
horizon at the point of sight F; to which rule the diagonals GF and HF, which
will show the roof and base of your principal building C, and will also, as
before directed, serve as a standard for all the rest.

Observe also, either in direct or oblique views, whether the prospect before
you make a curve; for, if it does, you must be careful to make the same curve
in your drawing.

6. To draw a Perspective View, wherein are Accidental points. See Fig. XVI.

Rule your horizontal line ab, and on one part of it fix your point of sight,
as at c, from which rule the diagonal cd and ce on the one side, and cf and cq
on the other; which will show the roofs and bases of all the houses in the
street directly facing you; (supposing yourself placed at A in the center of
the base line:) Then fix your accidental points g and h upon the horizontal
line, and rule from them to the angles ik and lm, (where the streets on each
side take a different direction, toward ^he accidental points g and h) and the
lines gi and gk give the roofs and bases of all the buildings on one side, as
lh and mh do on the other.

Accidental points seldom intervene where the distance is small, as in
noblemen's seats, groves, canals, etc. which may be drawn by the strict rules
of perspective: But where the prospect is extensive and varied, including
mountains, bridges, castles, rivers, precipices, woods, cities, etc. it will
require such an infinite number of accidental points, that it will be better to
do them as nature shall dictate, and your ripened judgment approve.

PERSPECTIVE PLATE.


7. To find the center for the roof of a house, in an Oblique View. See Plate
IV.

Suppose from the point of sight A, the visual lines BA and AC be drawn, BC
being one perpendicular given, and DE the other; rule the diagonals from D to
C, and from E to B; and the perpendicular FG, raised through the point of their
intersection, will show the true center of the roof, as will appear by ruling
the lines GE and GC.

For want of being acquainted with this necessary rule, many who have been well
versed in other parts of perspective, have spoiled the look of their picture,
by drawing the roofs of their houses out of their true perpendicular.

CHAP. III. Of ETCHING.
ETCHING is a method of working on copper wherein the lines or strokes, instead
of being cut with a graver, are eaten with aqua fortis.

This art being executed with greater ease and freedom than engraving,
represents curious subjects better, and more agreeably to nature, as
landscapes, ruins, and small, faint, or remote objects, buildings, etc.

The principal materials for this art are, the plate, hard and soft ground (the
first for winter and the other for summer), a dabber, turpentine-varnish,
lamp-black, soft wax, and aqua fortis.

The tools are, an oil-rubber, a burnisher, a scraper, a hand^ice,
etching-boards, etching-needles, an oil-stone, and a parallel ruler.

The plate may be had of any size and well polished, fit for use, of the
coppersmiths.

Directions for laying the ground.
HAVING provided yourself with a plate of the size of the print or drawing you
intend to copy, rub it well with an oil-rubber made of Swan skin flannel, till
all the marks of the charcoal used in polishing it, entirely disappear; then,
wiping off the dirty oil with a linen rag, dip your finger in some clean oil,
and touch it over every part of the plate; after which, with your burnisher
polish the plate, till you can see your face in it: And in case any sand-holes
or flaws appear, the scraper will assist you in taking them out. The marks left
by the scraper are to be taken out by the burnisher, till nothing appear.
Having fixed your hand-vice at one end of the plate, with a rag and whiting
clear the plate carefully from grease; then heat it over a charcoal fire, or
lighted paper, till it will melt the ground, which is to be laid on thinly, and
da^bed all over with the dabber, till it is perfectly smooth and even; then
warm the plate again, and holding it up with the ground downwards, smoke it all
over with a large candle, taking care that the snuff of it do not touch the
ground, and waving the candle continually over every part, so that the ground
may not be burnt by heating it more in one place than another. If the plate be
large, you may bind four penny candles together.

Directions for Tracing.
THE first thing to be done, (while the plate is cooling, after the ground is
laid) is to rub the back of your print or drawing all over with a bit of rag or
cotton, dipped in the scrapings of red chalk, and shake off the loose dust, or
wipe it off gently with a clean rag. Place the ^ed side upon the plate, making
it fast at each corner with a little bit of soft wax. Lay your Etching-board
under your hand, to prevent bruising the ground; then with a blunt
etching-needle trace lightly the out-lines and breadths of the shadows, till
the marks of them appear upon the ground, which you must take care not to
penetrate by tracing too hard.

As great nicety is required in this part of your work, it will be necessary
now and then to lift up one corner of your original, and examine whether every
part be traced before you take it off, as it will be extremely difficult to lay
it down again in its former position.

Directions for Etching.
HAVING carefully traced your original, take it off, and lay a silk or linen
handkerchief next the plate, and over that your etching-board; then proceed to
the etching; for which observe the following directions, which are adapted to
every particular branch, as Landscapes, Shipping, Portraits, History,
Architecture, etc.

Distances in landscapes, or the faint parts of any other picture, are the
first to be done; and these are to be worked closer, and with a sharper-pointed
needle: The darker parts must be etched wider, and with a blunter needle; but,
to prevent mistakes, the needles may be marked, according to their different
degrees, and the uses for which they are intended. As for the very faintest
parts of all, they are to be left for the graver, or dry needle; of which
hereafter.

In building, and all architecture in general, use a parallel ruler, till
frequent practice enables you to do them well enough without.

The needles may, when necessary, be whetted upon your oil-stone, keeping them
turning in your hand, so as to whet them equally all round. The oil-stone will
be further useful in whetting the scraper, which is to be rubbed flat upon the
stone, and with a steady hand, keeping oil constantly upon the stone.

Of Biting, or Eating in the Work with Aqua Fortis.
FIRST examine your work carefully, to s^e that nothing be omitted; and if any
scratches appear upon the ground, or mistakes be committed in the etchings, they
are to be stopped out, which is done by covering them with mixture of
lamp-black and varnish, laid on thinly with a hair pencil, which when dry, will
resist the aqua fortis. But it will be best to stop out these, as they occur to
you in the course of your work; for by this means they will be less liable to
escape your notice; and when the varnish is dry, you may etch over it again, if
required.

The next thing is, to enclose the work with a rim or border of soft green, or
other colored wax, about half an inch high, bending the wax in the form of a
spout at one corner, to pour off the aqua fortis: And that it may not run out
at any other part, take care to lay your wax so close to the plate, that no
vacancies be left.

Your aqua fortis must be single; and if too strong, as will be seen in the
biting, take it off, and mix it with a little water, shaking them together in a
bottle; and when, by often using, it becomes too weak, it may be strengthened
by mixing it in a bottle with a little double aqua fortis. The bottle which
contains the aqua fortis should have a large mouth, and a glass stopple.

Let the aqua fortis lie on the plate a short time, wiping off the bubbles, as
they arise, with a feather, which may remain upon the plate while it is biting;
after which, take it off, and wash the plate with water* then let it dry; and
by scraping off part of the ground from the faintest part of the work, try if
it be bit enough; and if not, stop out the part you have tried with the
lamp-black and varnish; and when that is dry, pour on the aqua fortis again.

When the faint parts of your work are bit enough, stop them out, and proceed
to bite the stronger parts, stopping them out as occasion requires, till the
whole work is sufficiently bit: Then warm the plate, and take off the soft wax;
after which, heat the plate till the ground melts, pour on a little oil, and
wipe the whole off with a rag. When the ground is taken off, rub the work well
with the oil-rubber, and wipe the plate clean; then proceed to finish it with
the graver, according to the following directions.

CHAP. IV. OF ENGRAVING.
THE tools necessary for engraving are, the oil-rubber, burnisher, scraper,
oil-stone, needles, and ruler, already mentioned to be used in etching; also
gravers, compasses, and a sand-bag.

Gravers are of two sorts, square and lozenge. Three of each sort should be
provided. The first is used in cutting the broader strokes, the other for the
fainter and more delicate. No graver should exceed the length of five inches
and a half, the handle included, excepting for straight lines.

The sand-bag or cushion, is used to lay the plate on, for the convenience of
turning it about. The oil-stone must be of the Turkey sort.

Of whetting and tempering the Graver.
AS great pains are required to whet the graver nicely, particularly the belly
of it, care must be taken to lay the two angles of the graver, which are to be
held next the plate, flat upon the stone, and rub them steadily till they are
polished like a mirror, and till the belly rises gradually above the plate, so
as that, when you lay the graver flat upon it, you may just perceive the light
under the point; otherwise it will dig into the copper, and it will be
impossible to keep a point, or execute the work with freedom. In order to this,
keep your right arm close to your side, and place the forefinger of your left
hand upon that part of the graver which lies uppermost on the stone. When this
is done, in order to whet the face, place the flat part of the handle in the
hollow of your hand, with the belly of the graver upwards, upon a moderate
slope, and rub the extremity or face upon the stone, till it has an exceeding
sharp point, which you may try upon your thumb-nail. The oil stone, while in
use, must never be kept without oil.

When the graver is too hard, as is usually the case when first bought, and may
be known by the frequent breaking of the point, the method of tempering the
steel is as follows:

Heat a poker red hot, and hold the graver upon it within half an inch of the
point, waving it to and fro till the steel changes to a light straw-colour;
then put the point into oil to cool; or hold the graver close to the flame of a
candle, till it be of the same color, and cool it in the tallow: But be
careful either way not to hold it too long, for then it will be too soft; and
in this case the point, which will then turn blue, must be broken off, and
whetted afresh, and tempered again, if required. But be not too hasty in
tempering; for sometimes a little whetting will bring it to a good condition.

Of holding the Graver.
CUT off that part of the handle which is upon the same line with the belly, or
sharp edge of the graver, making that side flat, that it may be no obstruction.

Hold the handle in the hollow of your hand; and extending your forefinger
toward the point, let it rest upon the back of the graver, that you may guide
it flat, and parallel with the plate.

Take care that your fingers do not interpose between the plate and the graver;
for they will prevent you from carrying the graver level with the plate, and
from cutting your strokes so clean as they ought to be.

Directions for Engraving.
LET the table or board you work at be firm and steady; upon which place your
sand-bag, with the plate upon it; and holding the graver as above directed,
proceed to business in the following manner.

For strait strokes, hold your plate firm upon the sand-bag with your left
hand, moving your right hand forwards; leaning lighter where the stroke should
be fine, and harder where you would have it broader.

For circular or crooked strokes, hold the graver steadfast, moving your hand or
the plate, as you see convenient.

Learn to carry your hand with such a slight that you may end your stroke as
finely as you began it; and, if you have occasion to make one part deeper or
blacker than another, do it by degrees: and that you may do it with greater
exactness, take care that your strokes be not too close, nor too wide.

In the course of your work, scrape off the barb or roughness which arises,
with the belly of your graver; but be careful, in doing this, not to scratch
the plate: and that you may see your work properly as you go on, rub it with
the oil-rubber, and wipe the plate clean, which will take off the glare of the
copper, and show what you have done to the best advantage.

Any mistakes or scratches in the plate may be rubbed out with the burnisher,
and the part levelled with the scraper, polishing it again afterward lightly
with the burnisher,

Having thus attained the use of the graver, according to the foregoing rules,
you will be able to finish the piece you had etched, by graving up the several
parts to the color of the original, beginning, as in the etching, with the
fainter parts, and advancing gradually with the stronger, till the whole is
completed.

The dry needle (so called because not used till the ground is taken off the
plate) is principally employed in the extreme light parts of water, sky,
drapery, architecture, etc.

For your first practice, copy such prints as are openly shaded; the more
finished ones being too difficult, till you have gained farther experience.

Great choice of prints of every kind, fit for young beginners, may be had
where this book is published.

N. B. To prevent any obstruction from too great a degree of light, we would
recommend the use of a Sash, made of transparent or fan paper, pasted on a
frame, and placed sloping at a convenient distance between your work and the
light. This will not only preserve the sight, but, when the sun shines, cannot
possibly be dispensed with.

CHAP. V. OF MEZZOTINTO-SCRAPING.
THIS art, which is of late date, is recommended to the practice of the
ingenious reader, for the amazing ease with which it is executed, especially by
those who have any notion of drawing.

Mezzotinto prints are those which have no hatching or strokes of the graver,
but whose lights and shades are blended together, and appear like a drawing of
Indian ink.

The tools used in this art are,

The copper-plate, oil-stone, grounding-tools, scrapers, burnisher, and needles.

Directions for laying the Mezzotinto-Ground.
MARK off upon the bottom of the plate the distance you intend to leave for the
writing, coat of arms, etc. then laying your plate, with a piece of swanskin
flannel under it, upon your table, hold the grounding-tool in your hand
perpendicularly, lean upon it moderately hard, continually rocking your hand in
a right line from end to end, till you have wholly covered the plate in one
direction: Next cross the strokes from side to side, afterward from corner to
corner, working the tool each time all over the plate, in every direction,
almost like the points of a compass; taking all possible care not to let the
tool cut (in one direction) twice in a place. This done, the plate will be
full, or, in other words, all over rough alike, and would, if it were printed,
appear completely black.

Having laid the ground, take scrapings of black chalk, and with a piece of rag
rub it over the plate: or you may, with two or three candles smoke it, as
before directed for etching.

Now, take your print or drawing, and having rubbed the back with red-chalk
dust, mixed with white lake, proceed to trace it as directed page 34.

Directions for whetting the Grounding-Tool.
IF a tooth of the tool should break, it may be perceived in the working by a
particular streak or gap, which will appear in the ground in a strait line; in
which case the tool must be whetted on the back, holding it sloping, and in a
circular manner, like the bottom of the tool.

Directions for scraping the Picture.
TAKE a blunt needle, and mark the outline^ only; then with a scraper scrape
off the lights in every part of the plate, as clean and smooth as possible, in
proportion to the strength of the lights in your picture, taking care not to
hurt your outlines; and that you may the better see what you do, with the thumb
and forefinger of the left hand hold a piece of transparent paper, sloping,
just over your right hand, and you will soon be a judge of the different tints
of the work you are doing; scraping off more or less of the ground, as the
different strengths of light and tints require.

The use of (...) burnisher is* to soften or rub down ^he extreme ^ight parts
^f^er the scraper is done with, such as the tip of the nose, forehead, linen,
etc. which might otherwise, when proved, appear rather misty than clear.

Another method used by mezzotinto-scrapers, is, to etch the outlines of the
original, as also of the folds in drapery, marking the breadth of the shadows
by dots, which having bit of a proper color with aqua fortis, according to the
directions given page 35 and 36, take off the ground used in etching, and
having laid the mezzotinto-ground as in page 44, proceed to scrape the picture
as above.

Four or five days before you think the plate will be ready for proving, notice
must be given to the rolling-press printer to wet some French paper, as no
other will do for this work, and as that time is necessary for it to lie in
wet. When the proof is dry, touch it with white chalk, where it should be
lighter; and with black chalk, where it should be darker: and when the print is
retouched, proceed as before for the lights, and for shades use a small
grounding-tool, as much as you judge necessary to bring it to the proper
color; and when you have done as much as you think expedient, prove it again,
and so proceed to prove and touch, till it is^entirely to your mind. When the
plate tarnishes in the part where you are at work, a little vinegar and salt
kept by you in a phial will take it off, wiping it dry with a clean rag.

Avoid as much as possible over-scraping any part before the first proving, as
by this caution the work will appear the more elegant.

CHAP. VI. OF PAINTING upon GLASS.
PAINTING upon glass is an art which has generally appeared difficult; yet
there is no representation can be more elegant than that of a picture done well
in this manner: for it gives all the softness that can be desired in a picture,
and is easy to work; as there are no outlines to draw, nor any shade to make,
but the colors are put on without the trouble of either.

The pictures are those done in mezzotinto; for their shades being rubbed down
on the glass, the several lines which represent the shady part of any common
print, are by this means blended together, and apear as soft and united as in
any drawing of Indian ink.

Provide such metzotintos as you like; cut off the margin, then get a piece of
fine crown glass, the size of your print (as flat and free from knots or
scratches as possible), clean the glass, and lay some venice turpentine, quite
thin and smooth, on one side thereof, with a brush of hog's hair. Lay the print
flat in the water, and let it remain on the surface till it sinks; it is then
enough: take it carefully out, and dab it between some papers, that no water
may be seen, yet so as to be damp.

Next, lay the damp print, with its face uppermost* upon a flat table; then,
holding the glass over it, without touching the turpentine till it is exactly
even with the print, let it fall gently on it. Press the glass down carefully
with your fingers in several parts, so that the turpentine may stick to the
print; after which, take it up; then, holding the glass toward you, press the
print with your fingers, from the center toward the edges, till there be no
blisters remaining.

When this is done, wet the back of your print with a sponge, till the paper
will rub off with your fingers; then rub it gently, and the white paper (...)
roll off, leaving the impression only upon the glass: Then let it dry, and with
a camel's-hair pencil, dipped in oil of turpentine, wet it all over, and it will
be perfectly transparent, and fit for painting.

Colors proper for Painting upon Glass.
THE several sorts of colors ground in oil for this purpose, and tied up in
little bladders, may be had at all the capital colour-shops in Philadelphia.

Whites.
Flake white. Podium.
Blacks.
Lamp-black. Ivory-black.
Reds.
Rose-pink. Vermillion. Red-lead. Indian red. Lake cinnabar.
Browns.
Spanish brown. Umber. Spruce oker. Dutch pink. Orpiment.
Blues.
Blue bice. Prussian blue.
Yellows.
English pink. Masticot. English oker. Saundersblue. Smalt.
Greens.
Verdigris. Terra vert. Verditer.
The ultramarine (for blue,) and the carmine (for red), are rather to bought in
powders, as in that case they are less apt to dry, or be lost: and as the least
touch of these will give the picture a cast, mix up what you want for present
use with a drop or two of nut-oil upon your pallet, with your pallet-knife.

The pallets and knives may be had at most of the colour-shops and
ivory-turners.

To get the color out of the bladders, prick a hole at the bottom of each, and
press it till you have enough upon your pallet for present use; because the
colors are apt to dry and skin over.

Then lay a sheet of white paper on the table, and taking the picture in your
left hand, with the turpentine side next you, hold it sloping (the bottom
resting on the white paper), and all the outlines and tints of the print will
be seen on the glass; and nothing remains but to lay on the colors proper for
the different parts, as follows.

The method of using the Colors.
AS the lights and shades of your picture open, lay the lighter colors first
on the lighter parts of your print, and the darker over the shaded parts; and
having once laid on the brighter colors, it is not material if the darker
sorts are laid a little over them; for the first color will hide those laid on
afterward. As for example,

Reds.
Lay on first the red lead, and shade with lake or carmine.

Yellows.
The lightest yellow laid on first, may be shaded with Dutch pink.

Blues.
Blue-bice or ultramarine, used for the lights may be shaded with indigo.

Greens.
Lay on verdigris first, and then a mixture of that and Dutch pink. This green
may be lightened by an addition of Dutch pink.

When any of these colors are too strong, they may be lightened to any degree,
by mixing white with them upon your pallet; or you may darken them as much as
you please, by mixing them with a deeper shade of the same color.

The colors must not be laid on too thick: but if troublesome, thin them,
before you use them, with a little turpentine-oil.

Take care to have a pencil for each color; and never use that which you have
used for green with any other color, without first washing it well with
turpentine-oil, as that color is apt to appear predominant when the colors
are dry.

Wash all the pencils, after using, in turpentine-oil.

Your glass, when painted, must stand three or four days free from dust, before
it be framed.

All sorts of metzotinto and other prints proper for painting on glass, may be
had at the place where this book is published.

CHAP. VII. OF PAINTING IN CRAYONS.
CRAYONS are to be had in boxes, every color partitioned off seperately, to
prevent mixing.

The best are those of Switzerland.

The different colors are white, black, yellow, orange, red, purple, blue,
green, and brown; and each of these have their several shades, excepting the
two first.

Directions for using them.
THE paper to be used on this occasion is rough Venice paper, of a whited brown
color, and the stiffer the better. That sort called Cape-paper is found to be
the best, because upon that the colors best distribute themselves. By this
method, figures may be drawn in their proper colors as they appear to the eye,
because the colors may be matched with the crayons, and the crayons being dry,
will not alter their color; but the colors, when wet, appear deeper than when
they are dry, which is apt to deceive a young beginner.

Another way to make the necessary preparations, is to (...) some of the
thickest and smoothest light blue or other paper, and get a training, frame
from a frame-maker's, or carpenter's, on which strain some coarse Scotch or
Irish cloth, drawing and fastening it with small tacks round the edges, till it
be quite smooth; after which, with a sponge and fair water, gently wet the
blue-paper, and then with a brush or rag paste the paper all over, and lay it
carefully on the cloth, exactly even with the straining-frame: after which take
it up, and laying white paper on the table, place the blue paper downwards,
with one hand keep the straining-frame steady, and with the other rub the cloth
close to the paper: do this very carefully, and taking it up, lay it on the
table with the blue paper upwards, and a piece of paper under your hand, and
rub it close to the straining-frame, without tou^hing any other part; then let
it stand to dry; after which set it on an easel, which may be had at the
colour-shops, and proceed as follows.

Make the first sketch or rough draught with charcoal, then with black, white,
or red ch^lk, correct what you see amiss. The outline being thus completed, rub
in your crayons according to their proper colors, and then with your finger or
fitch soften and blend them together.

CHAP. VIII. Of PAINTING in WATERCOLORS.
THE materials necessary for this art are, gum, colors, hair-pencils, fitches,
a pallet, and pen-kn^fe.

The colors in general are, white, black, brown, red, yellow, blue, and green.

The several species of each are as follow: Whites.
Flake white. Spanish white. White lead.
Blacks.
Burnt cherry-stones. Ivory-black. Lamp-black.
Browns.
Spanish brown. Spanish liquorice. Umber.
Reds.
Burnt Oker, Carmine. Cinnabar lake. Indian lake. Indian red. Red ink. Red
lead. Vermillion.
Yellows.
English oker. Gall-stone. Gamboge. Masticot, dark and light. Oker de luce.
Orpiment. Pink-yellow, dark and light. Roman oker. Saffron.
Blues.
Blue bice. Blue verditer. Indigo. Smalt. Ultramarine.
Greens.
Green bice. Green pink. Sap-green. Verdigris. Verditer.


Most of these colors may be had ready pr^pared in shells, as also the
hair-pencils, at the color shops, in powders. If you use the latter* a
grind-stone and muller must be provided, which are to be of pebble, and may be
had at any stone^cutter's.

Directions for making the following mixed colors.
Ash color. WHITE and lamb-black* or indigo and black; o^ cherry-stone and
white, shaded with ivory black. Bay color. Vermillion, with a little Spanis^
brown and black. Bright red. Indian lake and native cinnabar. Carnation. Lake
and white, shaded with lake. Changeable silk. Red lead and water of masticot*
shaded with sap green. Cloud color. White; light masticot; or lake and white,
shaded with blue-verditer; or blue verditer alone. Crimson. Cinnabar-lake and
white, shaded with lake. Flame color. Vermillion and orpiment; or red lead and
masticot, heightened with white. Flesh color. White, with a little lake, and
red lead; add yellow oker for a swarthy complexion. French green. Light pink
and Dutch bice, shaded with green pink. Glass gray. Ceruse, with a little blue
of any kind. Hair color. Masticot, umber, yellow oker, ceruse, oker de luce,
and cherry-stone bl^^k. Lead color Indigo and White. Light blue. Blue bice
heightened with ceruse or spodium, Light green. Pink and smalt, with white, if
need require. Lion tawney. Red lead and masticot, shaded with umber. Murry.
Cinnaber lake and white lead. Orange. Red led and a little fine masticot,
shaded with Gall-stone and lake. Orange tawney. Cinnabar, light pink, and a
little masticot, shaded with gall-stone, and lake. Pearl color. Carmine, with
a little white, shaded with lake. Popinjay green. Green and masticot, or pink
and a little indigo, shaded with indigo. Purple. Indigo, spanish brown and
white; or blue bice, with red and white lead; or blue bice and lake. Russet.
Cherry-stone black and white. Scarlet. Red lead lake, with or without
vermillion; or carmine and indian lake; or native cinnabar and red lead, shaded
with indian lake. Sea green. Bice, pink and white, shaded with green pink. Sky
color. Light masticot and white, for the lowest and lightest parts; red ink
and white for the next; blue bice and white for a third degree; and blue bice
alone for the highest part of all. These are to be all softened into one
another at the edges, so as not to appear harsh. Sky color for Drapery. Blue
bice and Venice ceruse; or ultramine and white, shaded with indigo. Straw
color. Yellow masticot, and a very little cinnabar, shaded with dark pink.
Violet color. Indigo, white and cinnabar lake; or fine Dutch bice and lake,
shaded with indigo; or litmose, smalt, and blue bice; the latter most
predominant. Water. Blue and white, shaded with blue, and heightened with
white.
Directions for using the Colors.
YOUR pencils must be fast in their quils, and sharp-pointed after you have
drawn them through your mouth.

Before you begin have all your colors read, before you, and a pallet for the
convenience of mixing them; a paper to lay under your hand, and to keep your
work clean, as well to try your colors upon; also a large brush called a
fitch, to wipe off the dust when your colors are dry.

Lay your colors on but thinly at first, deepening and mellowing them by
degrees as you see occasion. The quicker you lay them on, the ^^ener and
cleaner your drawing will appear.

Take care to preserve all your colors from dust; and before you use them,
wipe your ^^^lls and pallet every time with a fitch.

When you have done your work, or would lay it aside, be careful to wash out
your pencils in warm water.

For face-painting, mix up a little light carnation or flesh color with gum
water in a shell by itself. If it be for a fair complexion, mix vermillion and
white slake together: and for a swarthy one, add to the former a little
masticot or English oker, or both.

Let your flesh-colors be always lighter than the complexion you would paint;
for, by working on it, you may bring it to its true color.

In a large shell, or upon your pallet, lay your different shades of
flesh-colors at a convenient distance from each other: and always have ready a
sufficient quantity of white to lighten your shadows.

For the cheeks and lips use a mixture of lake and red lead, or carmine, as
occasion requires; and for blue tints (as under the eyes, and in veins), indigo
or ultramarine and white.

For gray feint shadows, use white, English oker, umber; for darker shadows,
lake and pink* which make a good fleshy shadow.

In coloring landscapes, at first only lay dead colors smooth all over the
piece, leaving no part uncovered; and be not over curious in this part of the
performance, but rather use a masterly freedom; and the work, though seemingly
rough to the eye, will have a good effect when placed at a distance.

Let not the roughness of the color discourage you; for it is easily to be
softened by degrees with the other shadows, observing only to sweeten and
heighten them according as the light falls.

In some places lay on strong touches, and in those places bring your work up
together to an equal roundness and strength; tempering and sweetening your
colors with a sharper pencil than the first, that no lumps or harsh edges be
left, but that all your shadows may lie dispersed, soft and smooth, gliding
gently, as it were, into one another.

You are not to finish any part before the others but work up all the parts
gradually alike, till you see nothing wanting to complete your picture.

Having laid your dead colors, begin first with the lightest parts, as the
sky, sunbeams, etc. then the yellowish beams (which are to be done with
masticot and white); next the blueness of the sky, with ultramarine or smalt
alone. For purple clouds, only mix lake and white, making your colors deeper
as they go upwards from the horizon, except in tempestuous skies. The tops of
distant mountains must be worked so faint, that they may seem to lose
themselves in air.

Bring your colors forward as your distance decreases; painting your first
ground next the horison downwards of a blueish seagreen, and as you advance
forwards, of a reddish or darker green, till you come to the fore-ground
itself, which, as it is to be the darkest part of all, do with dark green,
shaded with a dark brown or yellow; which rule of shadow will also serve for
the trees on each respective ground.

All distant objects are to be made imperfect as they appear to the eye, as has
been already observed under the article of light and shade.

In coloring trees, boughs, and branches, touch in all the dark shades first,
raising the lighter leaves above the darker by adding masticot to the dark
green, which may be made with bice, pink, and indigo, for the uppermost of all,
which are to be done last, touch lightly the extremities of the leaves with a
little green, masticot, and white, and set off the darkest shadows with
sap-green and indigo.

These rules are adapted to general appearances; but the learner may deviate
from them as nature shall dictate.

With regard to drapery, fruit, flowers, and other branches of painting, the
best observations are to be taken from the objects themselves, or the most
curious and exact representations of them.

Receipts for those who paint in watercolors.

To make Gum-Water.
DISSOLVE one ounce of pure white gum-arabic, and half an ounce of
double-refined sugar, in a quart of spring water; strain it through a fine
sieve or a pie^e of mussin, and bottle it off for use, keeping it free from
dust.

Another way.
Take some gum-arabic of the whitest sort, bruise it, and tie it up in a piece
of woolen cloth, and steep it in spring water in a glass or earthen vessel,
till it be dissolved. If it be too stiff, add more water; and if too thin, more
gum.

With this water you may temper most of your colors; using such a quantity,
that being touched when dry, the color will not come off. If the color shine,
there is too much gum in it.

To keep the flies from your work.
When you have made your gum-water according to either of the foregoing
directions, add thereto a little coloquintida, which will preserve your work,
when exposed, from being spoiled by the flies.

To make liquid gold for vellum-painting, fans, etc.
Grind the finest leaf gold with strong gum-water very fine, adding as you
grind it more gum-water as you see necessary. When you have ground it as fine
as you can, wash it in a large shell; then temper it with a little
mercury-sublimate, bind it in the shell with a little dissolved gum, shake and
spread it equally all over the shell, and use it with fair water only.

To make liquid silver for the same purpose.
The process for this is the same with that of liquid gold, only observing in
the using it to temper it with glare of eggs instead of water.

To make the glare of eggs.
Take the whites, and beat them with a spoon till they rise all in a foam; let
them stand all night, and they will be clarified into good glare.

To recover liquid silver that has contracted rust.
If your silver, by length of time or damp weather, become rusty, cover that
part of your work with juice of garlic, which will effectually recover it.

To keep the colors from sinking.
Boil four ounces of roch-allum in a pint of spring water, till it is
thoroughly dissolved; then filter it through brown paper, and keep it for use.

Before you lay on your colors, take a sponge, and wet the back of your paper
with this water while it is hot. This will not only prevent the colors from
sinking, but will likewise give them an additional beauty and luster, and
preserve them from fading. If your paper is not good, it must be washed three
or four times with this water, drying it every time.

If your prints are to be varnished, wash them all over with white starch
before you begin to lay on your colors.

To make size for painting scenes, and other candlelight pieces.
Steep a quarter of a pound of the cuttings of white glove-leather in water for
some time; then take them out, and boil them in three quarts of water till it
wastes to a pint, and strain it through a cloth into an earthan pan. When the
size is cold, if it feel firm under your hand, it is strong enough. You may
prepare any colors in this size while it is warm, and it will take off the
glare which would appear upon them by candlelight, if mixed with gum-water.

To recover colors when decayed.
Take rosemary-water double distilled, or pure spirit of rosemary, and with a
few drops of it temper your colors, which, however dead and faded, will
recover their bloom and brilliance.

This water or spirit will prevent the bubbles in white and umber, which are
troublesome in grinding.

PINK.
THE single pink does not admit of so great a variety as the carnation; but is
nevertheless so variegated as to make it an agreeable flower for sattins,
silks, etc. The most common are either white or crimson; others are striped
white and red; others are white spotted with red, others edged with red; all
which may be worked according to the rules for the other flowers so diversified
with the same colors. The leaves and stalk are a blueish green; only at the
joints there is for the most part a yellowish tinge, which is also at the
bottom of the cup and scales.

CHAP. IX. PAINTING on SILKS, SATTINS, etc.
WHEN the outline is made according to the artist's fancy, a wash of isinglass
should with care be laid on, to take away the glare and sleekliness of the
satin, otherwise the colors will not work freely: the isinglass to be melted
in very clear water, over the fire, so as not to be very glutinous; otherwise
it will discolor the satin, and consequently spoil the colors.

In the foregoing rules we have recommended, for the most part, the leaving the
paper for the light parts of a flower, and working with colors mostly
transparent; but here the lights are to be made by a small tincture of the
intended flower mixed with the flake-white, so much as just make a degree from
the color of the satin; if white, or of any other color, to be mixed
proportionably to the color of the flower: For instance, if a blue flower, the
bice of verditer, a very small quantity of it with the white, using less of it
proportionally as the shades grow darker; and in the most dark, indigo alone
may be used, it being by that time rendered opaque enough; but great care must
be used not to lay the colors on too thick, otherwise they will crack: A
little white sugar candy will be found necessary, when mixed with gum-water, as
preventitive to that inconveniency. If a flower happens to be of so deep a
color as not to admit of any pure white in the lightest of the parts, a sort
of priming of white should be laid on; after which, when dry, begin with the
ground color of the flower, proceeding gradually with the shades, as in the
directions, which, with the selected examples we have annexed, pecurliarly
chosen from nature for the purpose, we hope will be sufficient for our
ingenious students in this most delightful amusement.

CHAP. X. THE ART of JAPPANNING MADE EASY. etc.
THE art of japanning, and decorating with various designs, has prevailed so
much of late from the superb cabinet, to the smallest article of the toilet;
that it is needless to apologize for the publication of a work which seems
calculated at once to serve every purpose of compositions for this use, it
being scarce possible to suggest a design, but what may be easily and elegantly
accomplished, by a well chosen selection from the foregoing prints. The variety
of objects admitted almosts infinite combinations and and being likewise singly
agreeable.

The first intention or subject being mere matter of choice, in this the fancy
alone must direct; but when once fixed on, care must be taken to preserve a
propriety: for instance if the scene be European, in the body of your design
place no exotic preposterous object, but carefully observing to keep the small
and faintest hills, trees, figures, etc. at the greatest distance, ever placing
on the bottom or front ground, some grand or striking feature. Thus will a
perspective and due keeping be infused through your work without the labor of
obtaining it by rules of art.



With Indian and Chinese subjects greater liberties may be taken, because
luxuriance of fancy recommends their productions more than propriety, for in
them is often seen a butterfly supporting an elephant, or things equally
absurd: yet from their gay coloring and airy disposition seldom fail to please.

The grotesque is a taste which at present much prevails and seems particularly
calculated for this work, which consists in a wild connection of beasts with
flowers, and shells with birds, etc. It is easy to succeed in this by being
careful to avoid a similarity of objects and colors, for contrast in
disposition, and opposition in coloring is its chief gout, still spreading the
surface pretty equal.

The ornamental or bordering is not the least worth notice in this art, seeing
there is scarce any object, whether figure, bird, plant, or insect, which may
not with propriety, by making partitions, where room will admit with the
borders, and in which pannels and spaces, may be introduced a great and
pleasing variety.

So much for design, in carrying of which into execution, it is necessary to be
very particular and careful in each operation; and the following directions
well attended to, will not only furnish (...) agreeable amusement, but enable
any one (though unacquainted with this design) to embellish a plain surface
with ornaments superior to those we purchase at so great an expense from India
and elsewhere.

To avoid confusion, I shall distinguish the art of japanning under three
heeds, viz. ground, figure, and varnish: And first of the ground. The material
to be ornamented, if wood, must be well seasoned, or the heat used in
varnishing will shrink the wood, and produce cracks and irregular Shades in
your ground, in the smoothness of which consists its chief excellence, and is
effected by first striking over with a large brush your whole surface with
melted clear size; into one pint of which has been put a table spoonful of
bullock's gall. The size may be bought in most places, or made by boiling
shreds of white leather, parchment, or vellum in water, until two gallons are
reduced to one; then strained off, and kept in a cool place for use.

The colors most apt to stand, and appear smooth, are for black, that of
Frankfort, lamp, and ivory black; the last is preferable. For white, the flake
is generally used, but I would recommend the finest plaster of Paris, mixed in
equal quantities with well washed whiting; the other being apt in time to wear
black. Verditer is a fine pale blue, and Prussian blue is proper for deep
colors. Dutch or English pink are good yellows, which mixed with blue makes
green. For reds use lake, vermillion, and red lead, which mixed with blue makes
purple, and with yellow and orange color: Umber is a good brown; and any of
these colors by adding white become paler, and are deepened with black, the
color or ground intended is first to be ground in water, till it is extremely
fine, and of the consistance of treacle, to which put an equal quantity of
melted size; mix them well, and prime your work over with it three or four
times, as smooth as possible, letting it dry between each priming. And if when
it is dry no color will come off on rubbing with your finger, it is fit for
use. The figures are to be first painted in proper colors mixed to a due
consistence with water, in which gum-arabic has been dissolved* or instead of
that, take quince-kernels (which are to be had at the druggists) one ounce, on
which pour of boiling water four ounces, letting it stand twelve hours; then
filter it through a piece of new flannel, and keep it close stopped for use. This
is far preferable to any other gum for painting with water colors. The colors
for this purpose ought chiefly to be transparent, and the lights left as much
as possible in the paper; because white laid on, will not long retain its
color. The principal colors are ultramarine, Prussian blue, indigo, carmine,
lake, gumboge, sapgreen, verdigrease, bisti^, umber, gall-stone, Indian-ink,
etc. Use your colors of such a consistence, by tempering them with water, that
they may flow free from the pencil. -- The several objects you intend for use
must be neatly cut round with scissars, or the small point of a knife; those
figures must be brushed over on the back with strong gum-water, or thin paste,
made by boiling flour in water: then take objects singly, and with a pair of
small pliars, fix them on the place intended, being careful to let no figure
seem tumbling, and let the buildings preserve an exact upright, for which
purpose some perpendicular lines may be drawn, gently with black lead on the
ground; and when properly p^aced, lay over your prints a piece of clean paper,
and with your hand gently press them even, and when dry, rub^out the black-lead
li^es from the ground with a piece of clean bread; then proceed to varnish as
follows -- The room where this is to be done must be kept constantly warm; then
take of the best white or seedlac varnish, which must be a little warm, kept in
a glazed vessel, and with a large fine camel's-hair brush, go with a light,
swift, and steady hand carefully over the whole work, give if possible a
sufficient quantity of varnish the first stroke to cover equally, because on a
repetition it is apt to become streaky and uneven, which done, the work must
have time to harden, and it is enough, when by laying on your finger, it does
not adhere; then varnish again, repeating this operation at least seven times,
though if you varnish it twelve it will be still better. It must then stand for
hardening several days, in a constant warmth; then take a flat piece of cork
and tripoli mixed with water, and rub the work till it comes to a flat surface,
after which let it stand three days, and repeat your polishing with fine
tripoli; lastly, take some rottenstone, which by rubbing well over with the
palm of your hand, the whole will receive a most excellent polish. Every
material for this purpose may be had ready prepared, at the colour-shops in
Philadelphia and elsewhere; yet, for the satisfaction of those who choose to
prepare it, is subjoined the following process for making varnish.

1st. Take of the best gum sandrach sixteen ounces, sarcocolla one ounce and a
half, white rosin half an ounce: which powder, and put in a large phial.

2d. Benzoin half an ounce, gum animae one ounce and a half, venice turpentine
three ounces, let the the gums be well powdered, and put these three together
in another large phial, or glazed earthen vessel.

3d. Gum mastic one ounce, powder, in another glass.

4th. Gum elemi two ounces also in powder, in a phial by itself, on all which
pour as much of the best rectified spirit of wine as will cover them about an
inch, they must be kept warm, and often shook till the gums are dissolved:
strain them off through linen, mix them all together, and keep the whole close
for use.

FINIS.

