THE CONSPIRACY OF KINGS.

THE CONSPIRACY OF KINGS; A POEM: ADDRESSED TO THE INHABITANTS OF EUROPE, FROM
ANOTHER QUARTER OF THE WORLD.

BY JOEL BARLOW, Author of the VISION of COLUMBUS, ADVICE to the PRIVILEGED
ORDERS, etc. etc.

"But they, in sooth, must reason. Curses light
"On the proud talent! 'twill at last undo us.
"When men are gorged with each absurdity
"Their subtle wits can frame, or we adopt,
"For very novelty they will fly to sense,
"And we must fall before the idol, Fashion."
PRINTED AND SOLD BY ROBINSON and TUCKER: NEWBURYPORT -- 1794.

PREFACE.
THE following little Poem was published in London, in February 1792. It
happened that two of the principal conspirators, the emperor Leopold, and the
king of Sweden, died in a few weeks after. The opposite effects, produced by
the death of these two persons, are very remarkable. From a view of the general
character of the king of Sweden, and of the particular transactions of the last
year of his life, there can be no doubt but he has determined to go any lengths
with the powers which were then confederating against the liberty of France;
and it is a consolation to human nature, that the violent death of one sceptred
madman has saved the people of Sweden from those horrid scenes of slaughter
which now involve most of the neighboring nations.

The character of Leopold, in some of its leading traits, was directly the
reverse of that of Gustavus. The latter was prodigal of wealth, and excessively
eager for what is called military fame, without the capacity or the means of
acquiring it; the former was affectedly pacific, moderate in most of his vices,
and remarkable for nothing but his avarice. He had sense enough to see that
nothing was to be gained by a war with France; his avarice, had he lived, would
have been a sufficient guarantee against that event; and his death may be
considered as the immediate cause of the war.

The treaty of Pilnitz was doubtless fabricated in the court of Paris. The
emperor agreed to it, for the purpose of duping the king of Prussia into
measures which might secure the obedience of the people of Brabant, whom he had
pacified the year before by a cruel deception. His design was likewise to
deceive the emigrant princes, who were then deceiving him; and to exhibit such
a menacing appearance, as, according to his calculation, would induce the
French people to set down quietly under a limited monarchy; well knowing that,
if they did this, their government would soon degenerate into a despotism,
which would continue to give countenance to the general principle that had so
long enslaved the nations of Europe.

That he never intended, or had relinquished the intention, of executing the
conditions of the treaty of Pilnitz by going to war with France, is evident
from the following considerations: the French constitution was ratified, and
the revolution supposed to be finished, in September 1791. A war, to overturn
that constitution, certainly ought not to have been deferred beyond the ensuing
spring; and as it would require an army of two or three hundred thousand men,
the winter must have been occupied in making the preparations. Leopold died
suddenly, about the first of March. At that time no preparations had been made
for offensive hostilities. The number of troops sent from Austria into the Low
Countries, during the autumn and winter, was not more than was stipulated to be
maintained there, and were scarcely sufficient to enforce the despotism to
which he had destined that unhappy people. Before the death of Leopold, the
French emigrants at Coblentz began to despair. The hopes they had built on the
treaty of Pilnitz had nearly vanished; the princes had an army of forty
thousand gentlemen to maintain; Louis was carrying on too great a system of
corruption at home, to be able to supply them with money from his civil list;
they had exhausted their credit in all the mercantile towns in Europe; and
Leopold, considering them in the character of beggars, began to treat them as
troublesome guests; for none of the objects of their demands could be
flattering to his favorite passion. At last, to their great satisfaction, the
emperor died; and his system with regard to France was either never understood
by his own ministers; or it was laid aside, in compliance with the predominant
passions of his son; which happened to be for war, expense, and unqualified
despotism.

This young man began his career by a solemn declaration to all the powers of
Europe, that he should follow precisely the system of his father, with respect
to the affairs of France. This declaration might be understood to mean the open
and avowed system, prescribed by the treaty of Pilnitz, or the secret and
unexplained system, which was to avoid the war. It was universally understood,
as it was doubtless meant, in favor of the avowed system; whose object,
announced in the treaty, was " to support the rights of crowns."

From this moment, a spirit of hostility was provoked by the Court of Vienna,
and encouraged by the French ambassador there, who, like their other
ambassadors, was betraying the nation, to serve the king; till, on the 20th of
April, war was declared by the National Assembly. In this war the despots of
Europe will try their strength, and will probably soon be exhausted.

Paris, 12th July 1793.
THE CONSPIRACY OF KINGS.
ETERNAL Truth, thy trump undaunted lend,
People and priests and courts and kings, attend;
While, borne on western gales from that far shore
Where Justice reigns, and tyrants tread no more,
The untainted voice, that no dissuasion awes,
That fears no frown, and seeks no blind applause,
Shall tell the bliss that Freedom sheds abroad,
The rights of Nature and the gift of God.
Think not, ye knaves, whom meanness styles the Great,
Drones of the Church and harpies of the State, --
Ye, whose cursed sires, for blood and plunder famed,
Sultans or kings or czars or emp'rors named,
Taught the deluded world their claims to own,
And raise the crested reptiles to a throne, --
Ye, who pretend to your dark host was given
The lamp of life, the mystic keys of heaven;
Whose impious arts with magic spells began,
When shades of ignorance veiled the race of man;
Who change, from age to age the sly deceit,
As Science beams, and Virtue learns the cheat;
Tyrants of double powers, the souls that blind,
To rob, to scourge, and brutalize mankind, --
Think not I come to croak with omen'd yell
The dire damnations of your future hell,
To bend a bigot or reform a knave,
By opening all the scenes beyond the grave.
I know your crusted souls: while one defies
In skeptic scorn the vengeance of the skies,
The other boasts, -- "I ken thee, Power divine,
"But fear thee not; the avenging bolt is mine."
No! it is the present world that prompts the song,
The world we see, the world that feels the wrong,
The world of men, whose arguments ye know,
Of men, long curbed to servitude and woe*
Men, roused from sloth; by indignation stung,
Their strong hands loosed, and found their fearless tongue;
Whose voice of thunder, whose descending steel,
Shall speak to souls, and teach dull nerves to feel.
Think not (ah no! the weak delusion shun,
Burke leads you wrong, the world is not his own)
Indulge not once the thought, the vap'ry dream,
The fool's repast, the mad-man's threadbare theme,
That nations, rising in the light of truth,
Strong with new life and pure regenerate youth,
Will shrink from toils so splendidly begun,
Their bliss abandon and their glory shun,
Betray the trust by Heaven's own hand consigned,
The great concentred stake, the intrest of mankind.
Ye speak of kings combined, some league that draws
Europe's whole force, to save your sinking cause;
Of fancied hosts by myriads that advance
To crush the untried power of newborn France.
Misguided men! these idle tales despise;
Let one bright ray of reason strike your eyes;
Show me your kings, the sceptred horde parade, --
See their pomp vanish! see your visions fade!
Indignant MAN resumes the shaft he gave,
Disarms the tyrant and unbinds the slave,
Displays the unclad skeletons of kings Ossa vides regum vacuis exhasta
medullis.

JUVENAL, Sat. 8.
,
Specter of power, and serpents without stings.
And shall mankind, -- shall France, whose giant might
Rent the dark veil, and dragged them forth to light,
Heed now their threats in dying anguish tossed?
And She who felled the monster, fear the ghost?
Bid young Alcides, in his grasp who takes,
And gripes with naked hand the twisting snakes,
Their force exhausted, bid him prostrate fall,
And dread their shadows trembling on the wall.
But grant to kings and courts their ancient play,
Recall their splendour and revive their sway;
Can all your cant and all your cries persuade
One power to join you in your wild crusade?
In vain ye search to earth's remotest end;
No court can aid you, and no king defend.
Not the mad knave who Sweden's scepter stole,
Nor She, whose thunder shakes the northern pole;
Nor Frederic's widowed sword, that scorns to tell
On whose weak brow his crown reluctant fell.
Not the tri-sceptred prince, of Austrian mould,
The ape of wisdom and the slave of gold,
Theresa's son, who, with a feeble grace,
Just mimics all the vices of his race;
For him no charm can foreign strife afford,
Too mean to spend his wealth, too wise to trust his sword.
Glance over the Pyrenees, -- but you will disdain
To break the dream that sooths the Monk of Spain.
He counts his beads, and spends his holy zeal
To raise once more the inquisitorial wheel,
Prepares the faggot and the flame renews,
To roast the French, as once the Moors and Jews;
While abler hands the busy task divide,
His Queen to dandle and his State to guide,
Ye ask great Pit to join your desperate work, --
See how his annual aid confounds the Turk!
Like a war-elephant his bulk he shows,
And treads down friends, when frightened by his foes.
Where then, forsaken villains, will ye turn?
Of France the outcast, and of earth the scorn;
What new-made charm can dissipate your fears?
Can Burke's mad foam, or Calonne's house of Peers M. de Calonne, at an immense
labor, and by the aid of his friends in England, has framed a Constitution for
France, after the English model; the chief ornament of which is, that
"Corinthian capital of polished society," a House of Peers. It is said that
after debates and altercations which lasted six months, he has persuaded the
emigrant princes to agree to it. It only remains now for him and them to try on
this new livery upon the French nation.
?
Can Artois' sword, that erst near Calpe's wall,
Where Crillon sought and Elliott was to fall,
Burned with the fire of fame, but harmless burned,
For sheathed the sword remained, and in its sheath returned? Among the (...)
attending the lives of Princes, must be reckoned the singular difficulties with
which they have to struggle in acquiring a military reputation. A Duke of
Cumberland, in order to become an Alexander, had to ride all the way to
Culloden, and back again to London. Louis the Fourteenth was obliged to submit
to the fatigue of being carried on board of a splendid barge, and rowed across
the Rhine, about the same time that the French army crosed it; and all this for
the simple privilege of being placed above the Macedonian in the temple of
Fame, and of causing this achievement to be celebrated, as more glorious than
the passing of the Granicus; as may be seen on that modest monument in the
Place vendome in Paris.

The Count d'Artois has purchased, at a still dearer rate, the fame of being
styled " le digne rejeton du grand Henri," and of being destined to command all
the armies of Europe in re-establishing the Monarchy of France. This champion
of Christendom set out at the age of twenty-five, and traveled by land with a
princely equipage, from Paris to Gibralter; where he arrived just in time to
see, at a convenient distance, Elliot's famous bonfire of the floating
batteries. He then returned, covered with glory, by the way of Madrid; and
arrived at Versailles, amidst the caresses of the court and the applauses of
all Europe. The accomplishment of this arduous enterprise has deservedly placed
him, in point of military fame, at the head of all the present branches of the
illustrious house of Bourbon.



Oh Burke, degenerate slave! with grief and shame
The Muse indignant must repeat thy name.
Strange man, declare, -- since at creation's birth,
From crumbling Chaos sprang this heaven and earth,
Since wrecks and outcast relics still remain,
Whirled ceaseless round confusion's dreary reign,
Declare, from all these fragments, whence you stole
That genius wild, that monstrous mass of soul;
Where spreads the widest waste of all extremes,
Full darkness frowns, and heaven's own splendour beams;
Truth, Error, Falsehood, Rhetoric's raging tide,
And Pomp and meanness, Prejudice and Pride,
Strain to an endless clang thy voice of fire,
Thy thoughts bewilder and thy audience tire.
Like Phoebus' son, we see thee wing thy way,
Snatch the loose reins, and mount the car of day,
To earth now plunging plough thy wasting course,
The great Sublime of weakness and of force.
But while the world's keen eye, with generous glance,
Thy faults could pardon and thy worth enhance,
When foes were hushed, when Justice dared commend,
And even fond Freedom claimed thee as a friend,
Why, in a gulf of baseness, sink forlorn,
And change pure praise for infamy and scorn?
And did thou hope, by thy infuriate quill
To rouse mankind the blood of realms to spill?
Then to restore, on death-devoted plains,
Their scourge to tyrants, and to man his chains?
To swell their souls with thy own bigot rage,
And blot the glories of so bright an age?
First stretch thy arm, and, with less impious might,
Wipe out the stars, and quench the solar light:
" For heaven and earth," the voice of God ordains,
"Shall pass and perish, but my word remains,"
The eternal WORD, which gave in spite of thee,
REASON to man, that bids the man be free.
Thou could not hope: 'twas Heaven's returning grace,
In kind compassion to our injured race,
Which stripped that soul, ere it should flee from hence,
Of the last garp of decency or sense,
Left thee its own foul horrors to display,
In all the blackness of its native day,
To sink at last, from earth's glad surface hurled,
The sordid sovereign of the lettered world.
In some sad hour, ere death's dim terrors spread,
Ere seas of dark oblivion whelm thy head,
Reflect, lost man, -- If those, thy kindred knaves,
Over the broad Rhine whose flag rebellious waves,
Once draw the sword; its burning point shall bring
To thy quick nerves a never-ending sting;
The blood they shed thy weight of woes shall swell,
And their grim ghosts for ever with thee dwell. See note at the end.

Learn hence, ye tyrants, ere ye learn too late,
Of all your craft the inevitable fate.
The hour is come, the world's unclosing eyes
Discern with rapture where its wisdom lies;
From western heavens the inverted Orient springs,
The morn of man, the dreadful night of kings.
Dim, like the day-struck owl, ye grope in light,
No arm for combat, no resource in flight;
If on your guards your lingering hopes repose,
Your guards are men, and men youv'e made your foes;
If to your rocky ramparts ye repair,
De Launay was the last governor of the Bastile. His well-known exit, serving
as a warning to others, saved the lives of many commanders of fortresses in
different parts of France during the first stages of the revolution. It may
probably have the same salutary effect in other countries. Whenever the agents
of despotism in those countries find the people are determined to be free.
De Launay's fate can tell your fortune there.
No turn, no shift, no courtly arts avail,
Each mask is broken, all illusions fail;
Driven to your last retreat of shame and fear,
One counsel waits you, one relief is near:
By worth internal, rise to self-wrought fame,
Your equal rank, your human kindred claim;
It Is reason's choice, it is Wisdom's final plan,
To drop the monarch and assume the man.
Hail MAN, exalted title! first and best,
On God's own image by his hand impressed,
To which at last the reasoning race is driven,
And seeks anew what first it gained from Heaven.
O MAN, my brother, how the cordial flame
Of all endearments kindles at the name!
In every clime, thy visage greets my eyes,
In every tongue thy kindred accents rise;
The thought expanding swells my heart with glee,
It finds a friend, and loves itself in thee*
Say then, fraternal family divine,
Whom mutual wants and mutual aids combine,
Say from what source the dire delusion rose,
That souls like ours were ever made for foes;
Why earth's maternal bosom, where we tread,
To rear our mansions and receive our bread,
Should blush so often for the race she bore,
So long be drenched with floods of filial gore;
Why to small realms forever rest confined
Our great affections, meant for all mankind.
Though climes divide us; shall the stream or sea,
That forms a barrier 'twixt my friend and me,
Inspire the wish his peaceful state to mar,
And meet his falchion in the ranks of war?
Not seas, nor climes, nor wild ambition's fire
In nations' minds could ever the wish inspire;
Where equal rights each sober voice should guide,
No blood would stain them, and no war divide.
It Is dark deception, it is the glare of state,
Man sunk in titles, lost in Small and Great;
It Is Rank, Distinction, all the hell that springs
From those prolific monsters, Courts and Kings.
These are the vampires nursed on nature's spoils;
For these with pangs the starving peasant toils,
For these the earth's broad surface teems with grain,
Their's the dread labors of the devious main;
And when the wasted world but dares refuse
The gifts oppressive and extorted dues,
They bid wild slaughter spread the gory plains,
The lifeblood gushing from a thousand veins,
Erect their thrones amid the sanguine flood,
And dip their purple in the nation's blood.
The gazing crowd, of glittering State afraid,
Adore the power their coward meanness made;
In war's short intervals, while regal shows
Still blind their reason and insult their woes.
What strange events for proud Processions call!
See kingdoms crouding to a Birth-night Ball!
See the long pomp in gorgeous glare displayed,
The tinsel'd guards, the squadron'd horse parade;
See heralds gay, with emblems on their vest,
In tissu'd robes, tall, beauteous pages dressed,
Amid superior ranks of splendid slaves,
Lords, Dukes and Princes, titulary knaves,
Confusedly shine their crosses, gems and stars,
Sceptres and globes and crowns and spoils of wars.
On gilded orbs see thundering chariots rolled,
Steeds snorting fire, and champing bitts of gold,
Prance to the trumpet's voice; while each assumes
A loftier gait, and lifts his neck of plumes.
High on a moving throne, and near the van,
The tyrant rides, the chosen scourge of man;
Clarions and flutes and drums his way prepare,
And shouting millions rend the troubled air;
Millions, whose ceaseless toils the pomp sustain,
Whose hour of stupid joy repays an age of pain*
Of these no more. From Orders, Slaves and Kings,
To thee, O MAN, my heart rebounding springs,
Behold the ascending bliss that waits your call,
Heaven's own bequest, the heritage of all.
Awake to wisdom, seize the proffered prize;
From shade to light, from grief to glory rise.
Freedom at last, with reason in her train,
Extends over earth her everlasting reign;
See Gallia's sons, so late the tyrant's sport,
Machines in war and sycophants at court,
Start into men, expand their well-taught mind,
Lords of themselves and leaders of Mankind.
On equal rights their base of empire lies,
On walls of wisdom see the structure rise;
Wide over the gazing world it towers sublime,
A modeled form for each surrounding clime.
To useful toils they bend their noblest aim,
Make patriot views and moral views the same,
Renounce the wish of war, bid conquest cease,
Invite all men to happiness and peace,
To faith and justice rear the youthful race,
With strength exalt them and with science grace,
Till truth's blessed banners, over the regions hurled,
Shake tyrants from their thrones, and cheer the waking world.
In nothern climes, where feudal shades of late
Chilled every heart and palsied every State,
Behold illumined by the instructive age,
That great phenomenon, a Sceptered Sage.
There Stanislaus unfolds his prudent plan,
Tears the strong bandage from the eyes of man,
Points the progressive march, and shapes the way,
That leads a realm from darkness into day.
And deign, for once, to turn a transient eye
To that wide world that skirts the western sky;
Hail the mild morning, where the dawn began,
The full fruition of the hopes of Man:
Where sage experience seals the sacred cause;
And that rare union, liberty and laws,
Speaks to the reasoning race; to freedom rise
Like them be equal, and like them be wise.
FINIS
Note on Mr. Burke, referring to page 17.
* Some of the author's friends in England, although they join with him in
censuring the writings of Mr. Burke on the French Revolution, are of opinion
that the picture here drawn of that writer is too highly colored; or at least,
that the censure is so severe as to lose the effect that it might otherwise
produce. It is impossible to say what effect, and whether any, has or will be
produced by this poem; but, out of respect to the opinion above stated, it may
be proper to make some observations on the effect that has already followed
from the writings of Mr. Burke. I speak not of what has taken place in England;
where it is supposed that, contrary to his intentions and those of the
government that set him at work, his malicious attack upon liberty has opened a
discussion which cannot be closed until the whole system of despotism, which he
meant to support, shall be overturned in that country. The present war with
France is doubtless the last piece of delusion that a set of hereditary tyrants
will ever be able to impose upon the people of England.

But this subject opens a field of contemplation far more serious and extensive
on the continent of Europe; where if Mr. Burke can view without horror the
immensity of the mischiefs he has done, he will show himself worthy of much
higher attributes of wickedness than have yet been ascribed to him. It is a
painful task to traverse such a wide scene of slaughter and desolation as now
involves the nations of Europe, and then to lay it all to the charge of a
single individual; especially when we consider that individual as having for a
long time before, enjoyed the confidence of all good men, and having at last
betrayed it from the worst and vilest motives; as he had established his
previous reputation by speaking the language of liberty, and professing himself
to be the friend of national felicity. But it is not from a transitory disgust
at his detestible principles, it is from deliberate observation and mature
conviction, that I state it as an historical fact, That the present war, with
all its train of calamities, must be attributed almost exclusively to the pen
of Mr. Burke.

There is a peculiar combination of circumstances which threw this power into
his hands, and which ought to be duly considered, before we come to a decision
on the subject. The people of England had enjoyed for several ages a much
greater portion of liberty than any other people in Europe. This had raised
them to a great degree of eminence in many respects. At the same time that it
rendered them powerful as a nation, it made them sober, industrious and
persevering, as individuals; it taught them to think and speak with a certain
air of dignity, independence and precision, which was unknown in other
countries. This circumstance could not fail to gain the admiration of
foreigners and to excite a perpetual emulation among themselves. England has
therefore produced more than her proportion of the illustrious men of modern
times, especially in politics and legislation, as these affairs came within the
reach of a larger class of men in that country than in any other.

In a nation where there is an enormous civil list at the disposal of the
crown, and a constitutional spirit of liberty kept alive in the people we must
necessarily expect to find two parties in the government. In such a case, as
the king is sure to carry all the measures that he dares to propose, the party
in favor of the people are called the opposition; and it being always a
minority, it gives occasion for great exertion of talents, and is supposed to
be the nurse of every public virtue. Such has been the composition of the
English government ever since the last revolution. The opposition has been the
school of great men; its principle disciples have been the apostles of liberty;
and their exertions have made the British name respectable in every part of the
world. Mr. Burke had been for many years at the head of this school; and from
the brilliant talents he ^^covered in that conspicuous station, he rendered
himself universally respected. His eloquence was of that flowery and figurative
kind, which attracted great admiration in foreign countries; where it was
viewed, for the most part, through the medium of a translation; so that he was
considered, at least in every country out of England, as the ablest advocate of
liberty that then existed in Europe. Even kings and tyrants, who hated the
cause, could not withhold their veneration from the man.

Under these impressions, their attention was called to the great event of the
French revolution. It was a subject which they did not understand, a business
in which they had no intention to interfere; as it was evidently no concern of
theirs. But viewed as a speculative point, it is as natural for kings as for
other persons to wait till they learn what great men have said, before they
form their opinion. Mr. Burke did not suffer them to remain long in suspense;
but, to enlighten their understandings and teach them how to judge, he came
forward with his " Reflections on the Revolution in France;" where, in his
quality of the political schoolmaster of his age, in his quality of the
professed enemy of tyrants, the friend of the people, the most enlightened
leader of the most enlightened nation in Europe, he tells them that this
Revolution is an abominable usurpation of a gang of beggarly tyrants; that its
principle is atheism and anarchy; that its instruments are murders, rapes, and
plunders; that its object is to hunt down religion, overturn society, and
deluge the world in blood. -- Then, in the whining cant of state-piety, and in
the cowardly insolence of personal safety, he calls upon the principal
sovereigns of Europe to unite in a general confederation, to march into France,
to interfere in the affairs of an independent power* to make war with the
principles which he himself had long labored to support, to overturn the
noblest monument of human wisdom, and blast the fairest hopes of public
happiness that the world had ever seen.

Copies of his book were sent in great profusion by the courts of London and
Paris to the other courts of Europe; it was read by all men of letters, and by
all men of state, with an avidity inspired by the celebrity of the author and
the magnitude of the subject; and it produced an effect which, in other
circumstances would have appeared almost miraculous; especially when we
consider the intrinsic character of the work. M. de Calonne, about the same
time, published a book of much more internal merit; a book in which falsehood is
clothed in a more decent covering; and in which there is more energy and
argument, to excite the champions of despotism to begin the work of desolation.
But Calonne wrote and appeared in his true character. It was known that he had
been a robber in France, and was now an exile in England; and, while he herded
with the English robbers at St. James's, he wrote to revenge himself upon the
country whose justice he had escaped. His writings, therefore, had but little
weight; perhaps as little as Mr. Burke's would have had, if his real object had
been known.

But this illustrious hypocrite possessed every advantage for deception. He
palmed himself upon the world as a volunteer in the general cause of
philanthropy. Giving himself up to the frenzy of an unbridled imagination, he
conceives himself writing tragedy, without being confined to the obvious laws
of fiction; and taking advantage of the recency of the events, and of the
ignorance of those who were to read his rhapsodies, he peoples France with
assassins, for the sake of raising a hue-and-cry against its peaceable
inhabitants; he paints ideal murders, that they may be avenged by the reality
of a wide extended slaughter; he transforms the mildest and most generous
people in Europe into a nation of monsters and atheists, "heaping mountains
upon mountains, and waging war with heaven," that he may interest the
consciences of one part of his readers, and cloak the hypocrisy of another, to
induce them both to renounce the character of men, while they avenge the cause
of God.

Such was the first picture of the French Revolution presented at once to the
eyes of all the men who held the reins of government in the several states of
Europe; and such was the authority of the author by whom it was presented, that
we are not to be astonished at the effect. The emigrant princes, and the agents
of the court of the Thu^^leries, who were then besieging the anti-chambers of
ministers in every country, found a new source of impudence in this
extraordinary work. They found their own invented fictions confirmed in their
fullest latitude, and a rich variety of superadded falsehood, of which the most
shameless sycophant of Louis or of Conde would hare blushed to have been the
author. With this book in their hands it was easy to gain the ear of men
already predisposed to listen to any project which might rivet the chains of
their fellow creatures.

These arguments, detailed by proper agents, induced some of the principal
sovereigns of Europe to agree to the treaty of Pilnitz; then the death of
Leopold, as I have stated in the preface, unhappily removed the great obstacle
to the execution of that treaty, and the war of Mr. Burke was let loose, with
all the horrors he intended to excite. And what is the language proper to be
used in describing the character of a man, who, in his situation, at his time
of life, and for a pension of only fifteen hundred pounds a year, could sit
down deliberately in his closet and call upon the powers of earth and hell to
inflict such a weight of misery on the human race? When we see Alexander
depopulating kingdoms and reducing great cities to ashes, we transport
ourselves to the age in which he lived, when human slaughter was human glory;
and we make some allowance for the ravings of ambition. If we contemplate the
frightful cruelties of Cortez and Pizarro, we view their characters as a
composition of avarice and fanaticism; we see them insatiable of wealth, and
mad with the idea of extending the knowledge of their religion. But here is a
man who calls himself a philosopher, not remarkable for his avarice, the
delight and ornament of a numerous society of valuable friends, respected by
all enlightened men as a friend of peace and a preacher of humanity, living in
an age when military madness has lost its charms, and men begin to unite in
searching the means of avoiding the horrors of war; this man, wearied with the
happiness that surrounds him, and disgusted at the glory that awaits him,
renounces all his friends, belies the doctrines of his former life, bewails
that the military savageness of the fourteenth century is past away, and, to
gratify his barbarous wishes to call it back, conjures up a war, in which at
least two millions of his fellow creatures must be sacrificed to his
unaccountable passion. Such is the condition of human nature, that the greatest
crimes have usually gone unpunished. It appears to me, that history does not
furnish a greater one than this of Mr. Burke; and yet all the consolation that
we can draw from the detection, is to leave the man to his own reflections, and
expose his conduct to the execration of posterity.


