AMERICAN BIOGRAPHY: OR, AN HISTORICAL ACCOUNT OF THOSE PERSONS WHO HAVE BEEN
DISTINGUISHED IN AMERICA, AS ADVENTURERS, STATESMEN, PHILOSOPHERS, DIVINES,
WARRIORS, AUTHORS,
AND OTHER REMARKABLE CHARACTERS.

Comprehending a Recital of The EVENTS connected with their LIVES and ACTIONS.

VOL. I.

BY JEREMY BELKNAP, D. D.

Hic manus ob patriam pugnando vulnera passi:
Quique sacerdotes casti, cum vita manebat:
Quique pii vates, et Phoebo digna locuti:
Inventas aut qui vitam excoluere per arts:
Quique sui memores alios fecere merendo:
VIRGIL, Aen. vi.660. Published according to Act of Congress.

PRINTED at BOSTON, BY ISAIAH THOMAS AND EBENEZER T. ANDREWS. FAUST's STATUE,
No 45, NEWBURY STREET. MDCCXCIV.

ADVERTISEMENT.
NO apology is necessary for the appearance of this work, if its utility be
admitted.

My first intention was to place the names in alphabetical order; but, on
farther consideration, it was found to be impracticable, unless the whole work
were before me at one view. A chronological arrangement appeared, on the whole,
equally proper, and more in my power. Should any deviation from the exact order
take place, it must be ascribed to a deficiency of materials; which however, it
is hoped, will be supplied, at some future time.

BOSTON, JANUARY, 1794.
A PRELIMINARY DISSERTATION. On the Circumnavigation of AFRICA by the ANCIENTS;
and its probable Consequence, the Population of some Part of AMERICA.
THE first navigators, of whom we have any account, were the Phenicians, who
were scattered along the coasts of the Mediterranean and of the Red Sea. As
early as the days of Moses, they had extended their navigation beyond the
pillars of Hercules, on the western coast of Africa, toward the south; and as
far northward as the island of Britain, whence they imported tin and lead, See
Numbers, chap. xxxi, ver. 22.
which according to the universal testimony of the ancients, were not then
found in any other country.

From the accounts given in ancient history of the expeditions of Sesostris,
King of Egypt, some have been led to conclude, that he made a discovery of all
the coasts of Africa. Forster's History of Voyages and Discoveries, page 7.
However this might be, there is no doubt that he opened, or revived a
commercial intercourse with India and Ethiopia, by way of the Red Sea. It has
also been thought that the voyages of the Phenicians and Hebrews to Ophir, in
the time of Solomon, were nothing more nor less than circumnavigations of
Africa. Ibid.


But, leaving these, for the present, in the region of conjecture; the earliest
regular account which we have, of any voyage round the continent of Africa, is
that performed by order of Necho, King of Egypt, and recorded by Herodotus; the
most ancient historian, except the sacred writers, whose works have come down
to our time. His character as a historian is, "candid in his acknowledgment of
what is uncertain, and absolute when he speaks of what he knows.' The date of
Necho's reign is fixed by Rollin 616 years before Christ. The date of Herodotus
history is placed by Dufresnoy in the third year of the 83d Olympiad, answering
to 446 years before Christ. So that he must have penned his narration of this
voyage, in less than two centuries after it was performed. I shall give his
account at large, in a literal translation, from the Geneva edition of his
work, in Greek and Latin, by Stephanus. Lib. iv, chap. 42.
In describing the several great divisions of the earth, he speaks thus:

"I wonder at those who have divided and distinguished Lybia, Lybia is the name
by which the whole continent of Africa was called by the Greeks.
Asia and Europe, between which there is not a little difference. If indeed
Europe agrees with the others in length, yet in breadth it does not seem, to
me, worthy to be compared. For, Lybia shows itself to be surrounded by the sea,
except where it joins to Asia. Necos, King of the Egyptians, being the first of
those, whom we know, to demonstrate it. After he had desisted from digging a
ditch from the Nile to the Arabian gulf (in which work above twenty thousand
Egyptians perished; he betook himself to raising armies and building ships,
partly in the north sea By the north sea is meant the Mediterranean, which lies
north of Egypt.
and partly in the Arabian gulf, at the Red Sea, of which they yet show some
remains. Lib. ii, chap. 48.
) He sent certain Phenicians in ships, commanding them, that having passed the
pillars of Hercules, they should penetrate the north sea, and so return to
Egypt. The Phenicians therefore loosing from the Red Sea, went away into the
southern sea, and, directing their ships to land, made a seed time, at the end
of autumn, that they might expect a harvest, and might assiduously coast Lybia.
Then, having gathered the harvest, they sailed. "Into whatever part of Lybia
seamen came, they waited for harvest, and when they had reaped, they loosed
from the shore." Note of Stephanus.
Thus, two years being consumed; in the third year, coming round the pillars of
Hercules, they returned to Egypt; reporting things which with me have no
credit, but may perhaps with others, that in sailing round Lybia they had the
Sun on the right hand. i. e. They being in the southern hemisphere and sailing
northward, saw the Sun rise on the right hand.
In this manner it was first known.

"In the second place, the Carthaginians, have said, that a certain Sataspes,
son of of Teaspis, a man of the Achamenides did not sail round Lybia, when he
was sent; but being deterred by the length of the navigation and the solitude
of the country, returned home, having not fulfilled the labor which his mother
enjoined him. For he had violated a virgin, daughter of Zopyrus, the son of
Megabysus; and for that cause, being by Xerxes condemned to be crucified, his
mother, who was sister to Darius, liberated him; because, she said, she would
impose on him a punishment greater than the King's command. Wherefore it became
necessary for him to sail round all Lybia, till he should come to the Arabian
gulf. Xerxes consenting to this, Sataspes went into Egypt, and, having there
taken a ship and companions, sailed to the pillars of Hercules. Having passed
them, and having doubled the promontory of Lybia called Syloes, Now called Cape
Bojador in the 26th degree of north latitude.
he kept a southern course. Having traversed much of the sea in many months,
and finding much more time necessary, he turned about and came back to Egypt.
Returning to Xerxes, he reported, that in visiting the remotest coasts, he had
seen small men, clothed in Phenician garments; who, at the approach of his
ship, fled to the mountains and left their villages; which he entered, and took
nothing from them but cattle. He gave this reason for not having sailed round
Lybia, that his ship could sail no farther; but was stopped. Xerxes did not
believe him, and because he had not performed his engagement, ordered him to
undergo his destined punishment."

To the authenticity of this circumnavigation of the African continent, the
following objections have been made:

First, it is said that "the vessels which the ancients employed, were so small
as not to afford stowage for provisions, sufficient to subsist a crew during a
long voyage."

Secondly, "their construction was such that they could seldom venture to
depart far from land, and their mode of steering along the coast was so
circuitous and slow, that we may pronounce a voyage from the Mediterranean to
India, by the Cape of Good Hope, to have been an undertaking beyond their power
to accomplish; in such a manner as to render it in any degree subservient to
commerce. To this decision, the account preserved by Herodotus of a voyage
performed by some Phenician ships employed by the King of Egypt, can hardly be
considered as repugnant." Robertson's India, p. 175, American edition. The
objections taken from this learned author were not made directly against the
voyage mentioned by Herodotus; but rather against the possibility of a passage
to India by way of the Atlantic Ocean, and round the African continent.
However, as he brings this voyage into view in the same argument, and speaks of
it dubiously, it is conceived that his sentiments are not misrepresented in the
above quotations.


I have chosen to consider both these objections together, because that each
one helps to destroy the other. For if the vessels were so small, as not to
contain provisions for a long voyage, this was one reason for the navigators to
keep their course near the land; that they might find water, fruits, game and
cattle, on the shore, as well as fish, on the shoals and rocks near the coast,
for their subsistence. And if it was their design to keep near the land, for
the sake of discovery, small vessels were best adapted to the purpose; because
they could pass over shoals, through small openings, between islands and rocks,
which are generally situate near the coasts of great continents. Besides, if
the vessels were small, they could carry but small crews, who would not require
very large quantities of provision.

But Herodotus has helped us to solve the difficulty respecting provisions, in
a manner perfectly agreeable to the practice of antiquity, though unknown to
modern navigators. They went on shore and sowed corn, and when it was ripe
gathered the harvest. This enables us to account for two circumstances
attending the voyage of Necho; the length of time employed, and the supply of
provision, at least of bread, consumed in it.

Nor was the sowing and reaping any loss of time; for the monsoons in the
Indian ocean would not permit them to proceed any faster. A ship sailing from
the Red Sea with the N. E. monsoon, in the summer or autumn, would meet with
the S. W. monsoon, in the beginning of December, which must have detained her
in some of the harbors, on the eastern coast of Africa, till the next April.
During this time, in that warm climate, corn might be sown and reaped; and any
other articles, either of provision or merchandise, might be taken on board.
Then the N. E. monsoon would carry her to the southern parts of Africa, into
the region of variable winds. This regular course and changing of the monsoons
was familiarly known to the navigators of Solomon's ships, and was the cause of
their spending three years, in the voyage to and from Ophir. "In going and
returning, they changed the monsoon six times, which made thirty six months.
They needed no longer time to complete the voyage, and they could not perform
it in less." Bruce's travels -- B. ii, chap. 4.


It is not pleaded, that the voyage of Necho was undertaken for the sake of
commerce; or, if the authenticity of it were established, that it would prove
the practicability of a voyage from the Mediterranean to India, round the Cape
of Good Hope, by the vessels then in use, and the nautical skill then acquired.
The voyage of which Herodotus speaks might have been a voyage of discovery;
such an one as was perfectly agreeable to the genius of the people by whom it
was performed, and of the prince, by whose order and at whose expense it was
undertaken. "The progress of the Phenicians and Carthaginians, in their
knowledge of the globe, was not owing entirely to the desire of extending their
trade from one country to another. Commerce was followed by its usual effects,
among both those people. It awakened curiosity, enlarged the ideas and desires
of men, and incited them to bold enterprises. Voyages were undertaken, the sole
object of which was to " discover new countries and to explore unknown seas."
Robertson's America -- Vol. I, p. 11, 4th edit.
The knowledge acquired in these voyages of discovery might afterward be
subservient to commerce; and though the Phenicians might not think it
convenient, to circumnavigate Africa, more than once, yet that they carried on
a commercial intercourse with different parts of that country, and particularly
with places situate on the eastern coast, in the Indian ocean, we have evidence
from the sacred writings. In the reign of Solomon "the king's ships with the
servants of Hiram and the navy of Tharshish every three years brought ivory, 2 Chronicles. viii.18, ix.21.
apes and peacocks, besides silver and the gold of Ophir," which is with great
reason supposed to be the country now called Sofala on the eastern coast of
Africa, in the southern hemisphere; as the learned Bruce, in his late book of
travels, has satisfactorily proved.

The prophet Ezekiel, who was contemporary with Necho, King of Egypt, in the
account which he gives of the merchandise of Tire, enumerates several
commodities, which it is well known belong to Africa, "horns of ivory and
ebony, and the persons of men." Ezekiel, chap. xxvii, ver. 13, 15.
We may form some idea of the strength and materials of the ships of the
Tyrians, and of their skill in navigation, from the following passages in his
apostrophe to Tyrus. "They have made all thy ship-boards of fir trees of Senir;
they have taken cedars of Lebanon to make masts for thee; of the oaks of Bashan
have they made thine oars. Thy wise men, O Tyrus, were thy pilots. The ancients
of Gebal, the wise men thereof were thy calkers. The ships of Tharshish did
sing of thee; thou wast replenished and made very glorious in the midst of the
seas; thy rowers have brought thee into great waters." Though we have no
particular description of the size or model of their ships; yet they certainly
had masts, sails and oars; their pilots and calkers were wise men, and they
were not afraid to sail in great waters, by which is probably meant the Ocean,
in distinction from the Mediterranean.

Of the form and structure of the Grecian vessels we have a more particular
knowledge. "They were of inconsiderable burden, and mostly without decks. They
had only one mast, and were strangers to the use of anchors." Robertson's
America -- Vol. I, p. 15.
But then it must be remembered, that "the Phenicians, who instructed the
Greeks in other useful arts, did not communicate to them that extensive
knowledge of navigation, which they themselves possessed." Ibid. p. 14.
We may hence conclude that the ships of the Phenicians were superior to the
Grecian vessels; and we have no evidence from the structure of their vessels or
their mode of sailing, to warrant a doubt of the ability of their ships or
seamen, to perform a voyage round the continent of Africa in three years.

To an European theorist such a voyage may seem less practicable than to an
American. The Europeans have usually employed none but ships of great burden,
in their trade to India and China; but since the Americans have visited those
countries, sloops of fifty or sixty tons have sailed round the Cape of Good
Hope to China, and round Cape Horn to the northwest coast of America, and
across the north Pacific Ocean. If any doubt can yet remain, it may be entirely
removed by the recollection of a voyage performed in the year 1789, by
Lieutenant Bligh of the British navy; who, being turned adrift by his mutinous
crew, traversed the south Pacific Ocean, above twelve hundred leagues, in a
boat of twenty three feet long, without a deck, in much stormy weather, with
scanty provisions; and having passed many dangerous rocks and shoals, among
unknown islands, arrived in forty one days at a Dutch settlement in Timor, one
of the Moluccas. See the printed narrative by Lieut. Bligh.
The objections then against the reality of Necho's voyage, from the size and
structure of the Phenician vessels, and the want of provision, are not so
formidable on examination, as at the first appearance. Since this dissertation
was sent to the press I have met with the following account of an adventure
which adds to the credibility of the circumnavigation of Africa in small and
(...).

In 1534 when the Portuguese had established a government in India; Badur King
of Kambaya being at war with the great Mogul sought assistance from the
Portuguese and offered them the liberty of building a fort at Diu. As soon as
this liberty was granted and the plan of the fort was drawn, James Botello a
person skilful in the affairs of India, having been in disgrace with John King
of Portugal, and being anxious to recover the favor of that Prince resolved to
carry the first news of it to him. Having obtained a copy of the plan he set
out from India in a bark of sixteen feet and a half long, nine broad and four
and a half deep; with three Portuguese, two others, and his own slaves. He
pretended that he was going to Kambaya, but when he was out at sea, made known
his design to go to Lisbon; at which they were all astonished. Being overcome
by fair words they proceeded on their way, till finding themselves reduced to
distress, the slaves agreed to kill Botello; but after killing a servant they
were put to death themselves. With the four who remained, Botello held on his
course, doubled the southern cape of Africa and at length arrived at Lisbon;
where the bark was immediately burnt; that no man might see it was possible to
perform that voyage in so small a vessel. The King was greatly pleased with the
news, and restored Botello to his favor, without any other reward for so
daring an adventure.

See a collection of Voyages and Travels, in quarto, printed at London, 1745,
by Thomas Astley. Vol. 1. p. 82.




A third objection against the credibility of this early circumnavigation is,
that several writers of the greatest eminence among the ancients, and most
distinguished for their knowledge of geography, regarded this account rather as
an amusing tale, than the history of a real transaction; and, either
entertained doubts concerning the possibility of sailing round Africa, or
absolutely denied it." Robertson's India, p. 175.
That the Roman geographers and historians did doubt and disbelieve the story
is very evident; and the causes are not far to be sought.

The first was the jealousy of the Phenicians "Whatever acquaintance with the
remote regions of the earth the Phenicians or Carthaginians acquired, was
concealed from the rest of mankind with a mercantile jealousy. Every thing
relative to the course of navigation was a secret of state, as well as a
mystery of trade. Extraordinary facts are recorded concerning their solicitude
to prevent other nations from penetrating into what they wished should remain
undivulged." Robertson's America, vol. i, p. 13.
One of these extraordinary facts is thus related by Strabo. The Romans, being
desirous to discover the places, whence the Carthaginians fetched tin and
amber, "sent a vessel, with orders to sail in the wake of a Phenician vessel.
This being observed by the Carthaginian, he purposely ran his vessel among
rocks and sand banks; so that it was lost, together with that of the
inquisitive Roman. The patriotic commander of the former was indemnified for
his loss by his country." Forster's History of Voyages and Discoveries, chap.
^^.


A second reason was the pride of the Romans. If, as Pope tells us, "With
honest scorn, the first famed Cato viewed
Rome, learning arts from Greece whom she subdued;"
the same pride would make their wise men scorn to learn geography or
navigation, theoretically, from those who were best able to teach them. It is
acknowledged that the Romans "did not imbibe that commercial spirit and ardor
for discovery which distinguished their rivals." Robertson's America, vol. i,
p. 14.
It must also be observed, that there was but little intercourse between them;
and that the Carthaginians were deficient in those sciences for which the
Romans were famous. Among the Phenicians and Carthaginians, the study and
knowledge of their youth were confined to writing, arithmetic, and mercantile
accounts; whilst polite literature, history and philosophy were in little
repute; and by a law of Carthage, the study of the Greek language was
prohibited; lest any communication should be carried on with their enemies.
Rollin's Ancient History, book ii, part i. sect. 7.


A third reason was the opinion which the wisest men among the Romans had
formed, and to which they obstinately adhered, concerning the five zones, and
the impossibility of passing from one hemisphere to the other, because of the
torrid zone lying between. This doctrine of the zones is so fully represented
by Dr. Robertson, Robertson's America, vol. i, note 8.
that I need only refer the reader to what he has written on the subject.

But notwithstanding the doubts and the infidelity of the Roman philosophers,
and the great deference paid to them by this learned and cautious inquirer;
there is one circumstance which almost convinced him of the reality of Necho's
voyage, as related by Herodotus. It is this, that the Phenicians, in sailling
round Africa, "had the Sun on their right hand;" which Herodotus, with his
usual modesty and candor says, "with me has no credit, though it may with
others." On this the Doctor, judiciously remarks, "The science of astronomy was
in that early period so imperfect, that it was by experience only, that the
Phenicians could come at the knowledge of this fact; they durst not, without
this, have ventured to assert what would have appeared to be an improbable
fiction." (...) India, note 54.
Indeed if they had not known it by experience, there is not the least
conceivable reason for their inventing such a report; nor even for the entrance
of such an idea into their imagination. The modest doubt of Herodotus is
another argument in favor of the truth and genuineness of it; for as he had no
experience to guide him, and the idea was new, it was very proper for him to
hesitate in admitting it, though he showed his impartiality by inserting it in
his relation.

So much for the voyage performed by the Phenicians under the orders of Necho,
which is the first proof produced by Herodotus, of his position, that "Lybia is
surrounded by the sea, except where it joins Asia."

His second proof is not so conclusive, nor is the design of his introducing it
so obvious. It is the relation of a voyage undertaken by Sataspes a Persian,
whose punishment was commuted from crucifixion to sailing round Lybia; which
voyage he began, but returned by the same route, not having completed it. The
reason which he gave for returning was, that "his ship was stopped and could
sail no farther," which his sovereign did not believe, and therefore put him to
death, to which he had before been condemned.

The only evidence which this story can afford is, that the circumnavigation of
the African continent was, at that time, thought practicable The mother of
Sataspes thought so, or she would not have proposed it; and Xerxes thought so,
or he would not have disbelieved the story of the ship being stopped; by which
expression was meant that the sea was no farther navigable, by reason of land.

The exact date of this voyage is not ascertained; but as Xerxes reigned twelve
years, and died in the year 473 before Christ, it could not have been much more
than thirty years, preceding the time when Herodotus published his history.

The voyage of Hanno, the Carthaginian, is thus briefly mentioned by Pliny: "In
the flourishing state of Carthage, Hanno having sailed round from Gades [Cadiz]
to the border of Arabia, committed to writing an account of his voyage; as did
Himilco, who was at the same time sent to discover the extreme parts of
Europe." Pliny's Natural History, lib. 2. cap. 67.
The character of Pliny, as a historian, is, that "he collected from all
authors, good and bad, who had written before him; and that his work is a
mixture of truth and error, which it is difficult to separate." An instance, in
confirmation of this remark, occurs in this very chapter; where he speaks of
some merchants, sailing from India, and thrown by a tempest, on the coast of
Germany. He also mentions a voyage, made by Eudoxus, from the Arabian gulf to
Gades; and another of Coelius Antipater, from Spain to Ethiopia.

Of these voyages, that of Hanno is best authenticated. He sailed from Carthage
with sixty galleys, each carrying fifty oars, having on board thirty thousand
men and women, with provisions and articles of traffic. The design of this
equipment was to plant colonies along the western shore of Africa, which the
Carthaginians, from priority of discovery, and from its contiguity to their
territory, considered as their own dominion. Hanno was absent five years, on
this colonizing expedition; but there is no certainty of his having proceeded
any farther southward, than the bay of Benin, in the eighth degree of north
latitude. A fragment of his journal, which, at his return, he deposited in the
temple of Saturn, at Carthage, is now extant; and though it has been treated as
fabulous by several authors, ancient and modern, yet, its authenticity has been
vindicated by M. Bougainville, in the 26th volume of the Memoirs of the Royal
Academy of Inscriptions and Belles Lettres; where a French translation of it is
given from the Greek, into which language it was rendered from the original
Punie.

Concerning the voyage of Eudoxus, the following account is given by Bruce.
Travels, book ii. chap. 5. The voyage of Eudoxus was (...) but I have not met
with that author
He was sent by Ptolomy Euergetes, as an ambassador to India, to remove the bad
effects of the King's conduct in the beginning of his reign, who had extorted
contributions from merchants of that and other trading countries. Eudoxus
returned after the King's death, and was wrecked on the coast of Ethiopia;
where he discovered the prow of a ship, which had suffered the same fate. It
was the figure of a horse; and a sailor, who had been employed in European
voyages, knew this to have been part of one of those vessels, which traded on
the Atlantic ocean; of which trade Gades was the principal port. This
circumstance amounted to a proof, that there was a passage round Africa, from
the Indian to the Atlantic ocean. The discovery was of no greater importance to
any person, than to Eudoxus himself; for, sometime afterward, falling under the
displeasure of Ptolemy Lathyrus, and being in danger of his life, he fled; and
embarking on the Red Sea, sailed round Africa and came to Gades.

This voyage of Eudoxus was treated as a fable by Strabo, the Roman geographer,
who wrote about a century and a half after the time when it is said to have
been performed. The true cause of the incredulity of him and of other Roman
authors in respect to these voyages and discoveries, was the doctrine of the
zones; to which they inflexibly adhered, and which entirely precluded all
conviction.

These are all the evidences which I have had opportunity to examine respecting
the question of the circumnavigation of Africa, Dr. Forster, in his history of
voyages and discoveries (chap. i) refers to three German authors, Gesner,
Schlozer and Michaelis, who have written on this subject, and observes, that
"the circumnavigation of Africa by the Phenicians and Egyptians is proved
almost to a demonstration."
and, upon the whole, there appears to be this peculiarity attending the
subject, that it was believed by those who lived nearest to the time when the
voyage of Necho is said to have been made; and, that in proportion to the
distance of time afterward, it was doubted, disbelieved and denied; till its
credibility was established beyond all doubt by the Portuguese adventurers in
the fifteenth century.

The credibility of the Egyptian or Phenician voyages, round the continent of
Africa, being admitted, and the certainty of the Carthaginian voyages and
colonies on the western shore of Africa being established; we may extend our
inquiry to the probability of what has been advanced by some writers, and
doubted or denied by others, the population of some part of America from beyond
the Atlantic.

The discovery of the Canary islands by the Carthaginians is a fact well
attested. Pliny speaks of them as then destitute of inhabitants, but containing
(vestigia aedificiorum) the remains of buildings. From this circumstance, it
must appear, that they had been inhabited before the Carthaginian discovery. In
Plutarch's time, the Fortunate Islands were not only inhabited, but were so
celebrated for their fertility, that they were supposed to be the seat of the
blessed.

When Madeira and Porto Santo were discovered by the Normans and Portuguese,
both were uninhabited. A question then arises, if these islands were sometimes
inhabited and at other times deserted, what became of their inhabitants? It
must have been some uncommon event which could induce them to abandon so
pleasant and fruitful a country without leaving a single family behind. If they
perished in the islands, it is still more extraordinary; for it is a most
singular circumstance that all the inhabitants of any place should be destroyed
and yet the place itself remain. George Glass, who published a history of these
islands in 1764, attempts to solve the inquiry thus. Page 167, 4^^.


"Almost two thirds of the Canary islands are covered with calcined rocks,
pumice stones, and black ashes, which have been formerly thrown out from
volcanos; the remains of which are still to be seen, in every one of these
islands. Many of the natives might have been destroyed by these violent
eruptions, and the remainder being terrified, might abandon their country, and
go in quest of new habitations: but, where they went, is a question not easily
solved; though some assert, that they passed over to America." An event exactly
similar is said by the same author to have happened about thirty years before
he wrote. Page ^00.
"A volcano broke out in the S. W. part of the island of Lancerotta, near the
sea, but remote from habitation; which threw out such an immense quantity of
ashes and stones, with so dreadful a noise, that many of the natives deserted
their houses, and fled to Fuertaventura, another island, for the preservation
of their lives."

But, whether we admit the conjecture, that, being thus obliged to quit the
islands, they "passed over to America," or not; yet it is extremely probable,
that, in some of the ancient circumnavigations of Africa, or in passing to and
from these islands, or even in coasting the continent from the straights of
Gibraltar, some vessels might be drawn by currents or driven by tempests,
within the verge of the trade wind; "which begins not far to the southward of
the straights, and blows nine months of the year, on the coast of Morocco." In
this case, it would be next to impossible, for those who had met with any
considerable damage in their masts, sails, or rigging, to run in any other
direction, than before the wind to the westward; and this course must bring
them to the continent, or islands of America.

In confirmation of this remark, several facts have been adduced by way of
proof. One is thus related by Glass; Introduction, page 5.
"A few years ago, a small bark laden with corn and passengers, bound from
Lancerotta to Teneriffe, met with some disaster at sea, by which she was
rendered incapable of getting to any of the Canary islands; and was obliged to
run many days before the wind, till she came within two days sail of the coast
of Caraccas, in South America; where she met an English ship, which supplied
the surviving passengers with water, and directed her to the port of La Guiara,
on that coast." La Guiara is one of the ports to which the trade from the
Canaries is restricted by the King of Spain; and the run thither from Teneriffe
is generally performed in less than thirty days, with the trade wind. ibid.
page 329, 333.


Another fact is taken from Gumilla Cited by Edwards, in his history of the W.
Indies, vol. i, p. ^^^.
who says; "In December 1731, whilst I was at the town of St. Joseph in the
island of Trinidad, a small vessel of Teneriffe, with six seamen, was driven
into that island by stress of weather. She was laden with wine, and bound for
one other of the Canary islands; she had provision only for a few days, which,
notwithstanding the utmost care, had been expended, and the crew subsisted
wholly on wine. They were reduced to the last extremity; and were received with
astonishment by the inhabitants, who ran in crowds to see them. Their emaciated
appearance would have sufficiently confirmed the truth of their story, if the
papers, which they produced, had not put the matter beyond all doubt."

A third fact is related by Herrera, the royal Spanish historian. Decad. i,
book ii, chap. 7.
Columbus in his second voyage to America, having discovered the island of
Guadaloupe, "found a piece of timber belonging to a ship, which the seamen call
the stern post; which they much admired, not knowing which way it should come
thither, unless carried by tempestuous weather, from the Canaries, or from the
island Hispaniola," where the Admiral's ship was cast away in his former
voyage. Ferdinand Columbus, in the life of his father, Chapter 47, in
Churchill's collections, vol. ii.
does not directly assert this; but speaks of their finding "an iron pan;" and
endeavors to account for it, by saying that the stones there being of the
color of iron, a person of an indifferent judgment might mistake the one for
the other." Not content with this solution he goes on thus; "though it were of
iron, it was not to be admired, because the Indians of the island of
Guadaloupe, being Carribbees, and making their excursions to rob, as far as
Hispaniola; perhaps they had that pan, of the Christians, or of the other
Indians of Hispaniola; and it is possible they might carry the body of the ship
the Admiral lost, to make use of the iron; and though it were not the hulk of
that ship; it might be the remainder of some other wreck, carried thither by
the wind and current from our parts."

The improbability of the Indians having carried "the body or hulk of the ship,
which the Admiral lost," from the northern side of Hispaniola, to the eastern
side of Guadaloupe, will appear from the distance; which is not less than two
hundred leagues, in a direction opposite to the constant blowing of the wind.
Nor will Herrera's conjecture, that the stern post of the Admiral's ship was
carried thither by a tempest, be readily admitted, by any who are acquainted
with the navigation of the West Indies; for it must have passed through a
multitude of islands and rocks; and, without a miracle, could scarcely have
come entire, from so great a distance in such foul seas. But the difficulty is
farther increased, by considering what Don Ferdinand and Herrera have both
asserted; that when Columbus had lost his ship, "he built a fort with the
timber, whereof he lost no part, but made use of it all;" Life of Columbus,
chap. xxxiv. Herrera, book i, chap. 18.
and this fort was afterward burnt by the natives. If therefore there be any
truth in the story of the stern post found at Guadaloupe; it must have belonged
to some other vessel, either foundered at sea, or wrecked on the shore.

Under the head of fortuitous visits to the American continent, may be included
a circumstance mentioned by Peter Martyr; De orb novo, Decad. iii, chap. 1.
that not far from a place called Quarequa in the gulf of Darien, Vasco Nunez
met with a colony of negroes. From the smallness of their number it was
supposed they had not been long arrived on that coast. Edwards' hist. West
Indies, vol. i, p. 110.
These negroes could have come in no other vessels but canoes; a circumstance
by no means incredible, to those who have read the accounts of Cook, and other
navigators of the tropical seas.

To these facts may be added, the casual discovery of Brazil, by the
Portuguesae commander, Pedro Alvarez Cabral, in his voyage to India in the year
1500; an account of which is preserved by Dr. Robertson. Hist. America, vol. i.
p. 151.
"In order to avoid the calms near the coast of Africa, he stood out to sea;
and kept so far to the west, that, to his surprise, he found himself on the
shore of an unknown country, in the tenth degree of south latitude. He imagined
at first, that it was some island in the Atlantic Ocean; but proceeding along
its coast for several days, he was gradually led to believe, that a country so
extensive formed a part of some great continent."

These instances may serve as so many specimens of the manner, in which America
might have proved an asylum, to some of the ancient navigators of the African
coasts, or of the Canary islands; and being arrived, it would be impossible for
them to return. The same winds which brought them hither, continuing to blow
from the eastward, would either discourage them from making the attempt, or
oblige them to put back if they had made it. No argument then can be drawn from
hence, in favor of a mutual intercourse, between this and the old continent.
Those who would prove, that America was known to the ancients, must produce
better evidence, than they have yet produced, if they contend for any other
knowledge, than what was acquired by casual discoverers, who never returned.

The opinion that America was peopled, in part, by the Phenicians, was long
since maintained by Hornius; and, though rejected by many succeeding writers,
has been lately revived by Bryan Edwards, Hist. W. Indies, vol. i, p. 103.410.
a well informed merchant of the island of Jamaica. He extends the argument no
farther, than to the Charaibe nation; who inhabited the Windward Islands, and
some part of the southern continent; "whose manners and characteristic features
denote a different ancestry, from the generality of the American nations." In
support of this opinion, he has produced, perhaps, as much evidence from a
similarity of manners and language, as a subject of such remote antiquity can
admit.

To this elegant work I must refer the reader, and shall add one only remark,
arising from the preceding observations; that if any accession of inhabitants
was made to America, by the desultory migration of the Phenician or
Carthaginian navigators, it is most rational to look for them between the
tropics; the very place where the Charaibes were found.

A Chronological Detail of Adventures and Discoveries, made by the EUROPEAN
Nations, in AMERICA, before the Establishment of the Council of PLYMOUTH, in
1620.
Those marked with are more particularly enlarged upon in the Lives of the
Adventurers.
Winland;
and is supposed to be a part of the island of Newfoundland. Crantz.
Pontoppidan.
it is thought, discovered a new country in the west. Hakluyt. An island called
Estotiland, was discovered Frisland; as related by ZENO.
Hakluyt. Spain,
discovered Guanahani and other islands, called Bahamas and Antilles. Ferd.
Columbus. Dominica and other islands, called Caribbees. ibid.
in the service of HENRY VII, of England, discovered the island of Newfoundland
and some parts of a western Continent; as far northward as lat. 45, and as far
southward as lat. 38. Hakluyt. Ferd. Col. Robertson. accident, the continent of
America, in lat. 10 south; which was called Brasil. ibid. Ferd. Col. Spain,
discovered the new continent, in the latitude of 30 N, and called it Florida.
Herrera. Darien, and from a mountain, discovered on the other side of the
continent an Ocean, which, from the direction in which he saw it, took the name
of the South Sea. Robertson. Spain, entered the city of Mexico; and in the
space of two years reduced the whole country under the dominion of the King of
Spain. ibid. Pacific. He discovered the Philippine islands, and was there
killed in a skirmish with the natives. The ship, under the command of SEBASTIAN
DEL CANO, returned to Spain by way of the Cape of Good Hope, and thus performed
the first circumnavigation of the Globe. Life of Magellanes. New-France.
Hakluyt Spain, sailed to Florida, and thence to Cape Race in lat. 46 N. in
search of a N. W. passage to India. Herrera. Peru and began the conquest of
that rich and populous country. Purchase. Florida. His purpose was defeated by a
tempest, in which he was wrecked on the coast. Herrera. Purchase. Bay de Chaleur
and the gulf of St. Lawrence. Hakluyt. Hochelaga, which he named Montreal. He
wintered in a little harbor near the west end of the isle of Orleans, Port de
St. Croix. The next summer he returned to France, carrying some of the natives.
Hakluyt.
with 900 men, to conquer Florida. He traversed the country in various Herrera.
Purchase. Charleburg, 4 leagues above the Port de St. Croix. He broke up the
settlement and sailed to Newfoundland. Hakluyt. ROBERVAL, with three ships and
200 persons, going to recruit the settlement in Canada, met Cartier at
Newfoundland, and would have obliged him to return; but he gave him the slip
and sailed for France. ROBERVAL proceeded up the river St. Lawrence 4 leagues
above the island of Orleans, where he found a convenient harbor and place for
a fortification. Here he built a fort, and remained over the winter. The next
year he returned to France with his colony. ibid. During the succeeding thirty
years the passion for discovery took another direction. Adventurers from Europe
were seeking a passage to India and China by the N. E. but were prevented from
accomplishing their views, by the cold and ice of those inhospitable regions.
Forster. In this interval, the French of Brittany, the Spaniards of Biscay, and
the Portuguese, enjoyed the fishery on the banks of Newfoundland, without
interruption. Purchase. Florida. He entered a river, in lat 32, on the first of
May; which, from that circumstance, he named the River May, and the entrance he
called Port Royal. Here he built a fort, which in honor of CHARLES IX, of
France, he called Fort Charles. After his departure, the people mutinied and
returned to France. Hakluyt and Purchase. Carolina, after the reigning monarch
of France. This colony was on good terms with the natives; but suffered by
famine. They were relieved by Sir JOHN HAWKINS, an Englishman, who offered to
carry them to France; but the hope of finding silver induced them to stay, till
RIBALT arrived PEDRO MELENDES, in the service of Spain, came with a superior
force, killed Ribalt and most of his company, and took possession of the
country, building three forts. ibid. ibid. These voyages were made to
Greenland, and produced no material discovery. He sailed through a strait which
still bears his name, but is now impassable by reason of fixed ice. Hakluyt and
Crantz. SIR FRANCIS DRAKE being on a cruise against the Spaniards in the South
Sea, landed on the continent of America, northward of California, took
possession of a harbor, and called the circumjacent country between lat. 38
and 42, New-Albion. Hakluyt.
Purchase. Newfoundland; took formal possession of it and of the continent of
North America, for the Crown of England. In his return his ship foundered, and
he was lost. ibid. SIR ADRIAN GILBERT, obtained of QUEEN ELIZABETH, a patent
for the discovery of a N. W. passage; to remain in force five years. Hakluyt.
See life of John Smith.
obtained of QUEEN ELIZABETH, a patent for lands not possessed by any Christian
Prince; by virtue of which he sent PHILIP AMADAS and ARTHUR BARLOW to explore
the country called by the Spaniards Florida. ibid. DAVIS explored the western
coast of Greenland, and part of the opposite coast of the continent of America;
the strait between them bears his name. He also discovered another strait which
he called Cumberland. Hakluyt. Roanoak, and returned. ibid. ibid. SIR RICHARD
GRENVILLE arrived after their departure and landed another smaller colony.
ibid. Virginia, in honor of her own Virginity. The second colony were not to
be found. One hundred and fifteen persons were landed to make a third colony,
and the governor returned to England for supplies. Purchase. third colony
living, returned to England. ibid.
was sent by the Viceroy of Mexico to discover a N. W. passage, by exploring
the western side of the American continent. He discovered a strait which bears
his name in the 48th degree of N. latitude, and supposed it to be the long
desired passage. Purchase. Bermuda, where he found swine; from which
circumstance, it appeared, that some other vessel had been there before. The
company built a boat of cedar, caulked it, and paid the seams with lime mixed
with turtles' fat, and sailed to Newfoundland; whence they got a passage to
England. Hakluyt. Labrador, and sailed 30 miles up an inlet in the latitude of
56; but made no material discovery. Forster. Canada, and other countries not
possessed by any Christian Prince. He sailed from France with a colony of
convicts from the prisons; landed 40 on the isle of Sable. After seven years,
the survivors, being 12 in number, were taken off, and carried home to France;
where HENRY pardoned them, and gave them 50 crowns each, as a recompense for
their sufferings. Purchase. Forster. Tablet of Memory.
discovered a promontory on the American coast, in lat. 42, to which he gave
the name of Cape Cod. He landed on an island which he called Elizabeth, and
built a small sort; but the same summer returned to England. Purchase. L'Acadia
and Canada, from lat. 40 to 46. ibid.
SAMUEL CHAMPLAIN sailed up the Great River of Canada, and returned to France
the same year. ibid. Port Royal, St. John's and St. Croix, in the Bay of Funda.
POURTRINCOURT introduced two Jesuits into Port Royal; but some controversy
arising, the Jesuits went to Mount Desert and began a plantation there. ibid.
Kenebeck or Penobscot; took on board five of the natives and returned to
England. He put in at Plymouth; and delivered three of them to SIR FERDINANDO
GORGES,
then Governor of Plymouth. Gorges. Virginia into two districts, called North
and South Virginia. The southern part, situate between 34 and 41, he granted to
a London Company; the northern part, situate between 38 and 45, he granted to a
Plymouth Company. Neither of them were to plant within 100 miles of the other.
Purchase. Quebec, the name of a strait in the river. ibid.
HENRY HUDSON, in the service of the English East India Company, sailed in quest
of a N. W. passage. He attempted to pass to the E. of Greenland, and discovered
Spitzbergen. He sailed as far N. as 82; but, finding the sea obstructed by ice,
returned. Forster. CHRISTOPHER NEWPORT sailed to South Virginia, and began a
colony at James town. EDWARD WINGFIELD was President,
but JOHN SMITH was the life and soul of the colony. Smith. Purchase. GEORGE
POPHAM See the Life of F. Gorges.
sailed to North Virginia and began a plantation at Sagadahock, of which he was
President. In the winter, the ships returned to England, leaving 45 persons
behind. Their President plantation and went back to England. This winter was
remarkably severe both in America and England. Purchase. Nova Zembla; but the
ice being impenetrable, he returned. Purchase. NELSON reinforced the colony of
South Virginia with 120 people. ibid. ibid. HUDSON, in the service of the
DUTCH, made a third voyage, and discovered the river which bears his name in
lat. 41.
SIR GEORGE SUMMERS bound to South Virginia, was wrecked on Bermuda, whence those
islands took the name Somer Islands. Smith. Purchase. Quebec and took the
command there. Purchase. HUDSON, in the service of the English East India
Company, discovered the strait and bay which bear his name; and passed the
winter there, intending to pursue his discoveries in the ensuing spring; but
his crew mutinied and turned him adrift in his boat with seven others, who were
never more heard of. Purchase. Campbell. Purchase. JOHN GUY with a company of 40
persons began a colony at the bay of Conception, in Newfoundland. ibid.
and Sir THOMAS GATES with 300 more, furnishing them with cattle and swine; and
thus that colony was established. ibid. Purchase. Oldmixon. The South Virginia
Company having sold the islands of Bermuda to a part of their own number, they
obtained a distinct charter, and sent a colony of 90 persons thither; their
first governor was RICHARD MOOR. Purchase. ibid. SIR THOMAS DALE, Governor of
Virginia, hearing that the French had settled within the limits of the northern
patent, sent Sir SAMUEL ARGALL with a sufficient force to dislodge them; which
he did, from Mount Mansel (Desert) St. Croix and Port Royal in the Bay of
Funda. These Frenchmen retired to Quebec and strengthened the settlement there.
Smith. Purchase. Keith.
sailed for North Virginia, on a fishing and whaling voyage; he ranged the
coast from Penobscot to Cape Cod; and made a map of the country, which he first
called New England. Smith. Purchase. Forster. Gorges. See the life of F. Corges.
sailed to New England; found many places, before populous, almost desolate,
and the few remaining inhabitants either sick or but scarcely recovered. In
this voyage he sailed through the whole passage between the main land and Long
Island and first determined its insular situation. Gorges. See life of W.
Bradford.
,
who had resided twelve years in Holland, began a colony in New England, which
they called New Plymouth. Morton.
KING JAMES I See life of F. Gorges.
, established at Plymouth, in Devonshire, a Council, for the planting, ruling
and ordering of New England; and thus the business of colonization was formed
into a system. Gorges.
AMERICAN BIOGRAPHY.
I. BIRON.
THE ancient inhabitants of Norway and Denmark, collectively taken, were
distinguished by the name of NORMANS. Their situation near the coast of the
sea, and the advantages which that element presented to them beyond all which
they could expect, from a rough soil, in a cold climate, led them at an early
period to the science and practice of navigation. They built their vessels with
the best of oak, and constructed them in such a manner as to encounter the
storms and billows of the northern ocean. They covered them with decks and
furnished them with high forecastles and sterns. They made use of sails as well
as oars, and had learned to trim their sails to the wind, in almost any
direction. In these arts, of building ships and of navigation, they were
superior to the people bordering on the Mediterranean sea, who depended chiefly
on their oars, and used sails only with a fair wind.

About the end of the eighth and beginning of the ninth century, the Normans
made themselves famous by their predatory excursions. England, Scotland,
Ireland, the Orkney and Shetland islands, were objects of their depredations;
and, in one of their piratical expeditions, (A. D. 861) they discovered an
island, which from its lofty mountains, covered with ice and snow, obtained the
name of Iceland. In a few years after they planted a colony there, which was
continually augmented by migrations from the neighboring countries. Within the
space of thirty years (889) a new country, situate on the west, was discovered,
and from its verdure during the summer months received the name of Greenland.
This was deemed so important an acquisition, that, under the conduct of ERIC
RAUDE, or REDHEAD, a Danish chief, it was soon peopled.

The emigrants to these new regions were still inflamed with the passion for
adventure and discovery. An Icelander of the name HERIOLF and his son BIRON His
name is spelled by different authors BIRON, BIORN, BIOERN, and B^^^EN.
made a voyage every year to different countries, for the sake of traffic.
About the beginning of the eleventh century (1001) their ships were separated
by a storm. When Biron arrived in Norway, he heard that his father was gone to
Greenland, and he resolved to follow him; but another storm drove him to the
southwest, where he discovered a flat country, free from rocks, but covered
with thick woods; and an island near the coast.

He made no longer stay at either of these places than till the storm abated;
when by a northeast course he hasted to Greenland. The discovery was no sooner
known there, than LEIF the son of Eric, who, like his father, had a strong
desire to acquire glory by adventures, equipped a vessel, carrying twenty five
men; and, taking Biron for his pilot, sailed (1002) in search of the new
country.

His course was southwest. On the first land which he saw, he found nothing but
flat rocks and ice, without any verdure. He therefore gave it the name of
Helleland, which signifies rocky. Afterward he came to a level shore, without
any rocks, but overgrown with woods, and the sand was remarkably white. This he
named Markland, or woody. Two days after, he saw land again, and an island
lying before the northern coast of it. Here he first landed; and thence sailing
westward, round a point of land, found a creek or river into which the ship
entered.

On the banks of this river, were bushes bearing sweet berries; the air was
mild, the soil fertile, and the river well stored with fish, among which were
very fine salmon. At the head of this river was a lake, on the shore of which
they resolved to pass the winter, and erected huts for their accommodation. One
of their company, a German named Tyrker, having straggled into the woods, found
grapes; from which, he told them that in his country, they made wine. From this
circumstance Leif, the commander of the party, called the place Winland dat
good, the good wine country.

An intercourse being thus opened between Greenland and Winland, several
voyages were made, and the new country was further explored. Many islands were
found near the coast, but not a human creature was seen till the third summer
(1004) when three boats constructed with ribs of bone, fastened with thongs or
twigs and covered with skins, each boat containing three men, made their
appearance. From the diminutive size of these people the Normans denominated
them Skraelings, Cut sticks, chips -- Dwarfs.
and inhumanly killed them all but one; who escaped and collected a larger
number of his countrymen, to make an attack on their invaders. The Normans
defended their ships with so much spirit, that the assailants were obliged to
retire.

After this, a colony of Normans went and settled at Winland, carrying on a
barter trade with the Skraelings for furs; but a controversy arose in the
colony, which induced some to return to Greenland. The others dispersed and
mixed with the Skraelings.

In the next century (1121) Eric, Bishop of Greenland, went to Winland, with a
benevolent design to recover and convert his countrymen who had degenerated
into savages. This prelate never returned to Greenland; nor was any thing more
heard of Winland, for several centuries.

This account of the discovery of Winland is taken from Pontoppidan's history
of Norway, Crantz's history of Greenland, and a late history of northern
voyages by Dr. John Reinhold Forster. The facts are said to have been collected
from "a great number of Icelandic manuscripts by Thormond Thorfoeus, Adam von
Bremen, Arngrim Jonas and many other writers, so that it is hardly possible to
entertain the least doubt concerning the authenticity of the relation."

Pontoppidan says that "they could see the sun full six hours in the shortest
day;" but Crantz tells us that "the sun rose on the shortest day at eight of
the clock," and Forster that "the sun was eight hours above the horizon," from
which he concludes, that Winland must be found in the 49th degree of northern
latitude; and from its being in a southwesterly direction from Greenland, he
supposes that it is either a part of Newfoundland or some place on the northern
coast of the gulf of St. Lawrence; but whether grapes are found in either of
those countries he cannot say. However, he seems so fully persuaded of the
facts, that he gives it as his opinion, that the Normans were, strictly
speaking, the first discoverers of America, nearly five centuries before
Columbus.

From a careful perusal of the first accounts of Newfoundland, preserved by
those painful collectors Hakluyt and Purchase, and of other memoirs respecting
that island and the coast of Labrador; and from inspecting the most approved
maps of those regions, particularly one, in the American Atlas, delineated
agreeably to the actual surveys of the late celebrated navigator Capt. James
Cook, the following observations occur.

On the N. E. part of Newfoundland, which is most directly accessible from
Greenland, there is a long range of coast, in which are two bays, the one
called Gander Bay, and the other the Bay of Exploits. Before the mouth of the
former, among many smaller, there lies one large island called Fogo; and before
the mouth of the latter, another, called The New World. Either of these will
sufficiently answer to the situation described in the account of Biron's second
voyage. Into each of these bays, runs a river, which has its head in a lake,
and both these lakes lie in the 49th degree of north latitude.

The earliest accounts of Newfoundland after its discovery and the
establishment of a fishery on its coasts, have respect chiefly to the lands
about Trinity and Conception bays, between the parallels of 48 and 49. These
lands are represented as producing strawberries, whortleberries, raspberries,
gooseberries, pears, wild cherries, and hazle nuts, in very great plenty. The
rivers are said to have been well stored with salmon and trouts. The natives,
who inhabited a bay lying to the northward of Trinity and came occasionally
thither in their canoes, are described as broad breasted and upright, with
black eyes, and without beards; the hair on their heads was of different
colors; some had black, some brown and others yellow. In this variety they
differed from the other savages of North America, who have uniformly black
hair, unless it be grown gray with age.

The climate is represented as more mild in the winter than that of England;
but much colder in the spring, by reason of the vast islands of ice which are
driven into the bays or grounded on the banks.

On the north eastern coast of Labrador, between the latitudes of 53 and 56,
are many excellent harbors and islands. The seas are full of cod, the rivers
abound with salmon; and the climate is said to be more mild than in the Gulf of
St. Lawrence.

Nothing is said in any of these accounts of vines or grapes, excepting that
some which were brought from England had thriven well. If any evidence can be
drawn from a comparison between the countries of Newfoundland and New England
it may be observed; that all the above mentioned fruits and berries are found
in the northern and eastern parts of New England as far as Nova Scotia, in the
latitudes of 44 and 45; and that grapes, (vitis vulpina, vitis labrusca) are
known to grow wherever these fruits are found.

Du Monts in his voyage to Acadia, in 1608, speaks of grapes in several places;
and they were in such plenty on the isle of Orleans in lat. 47 that it was
first called the island of Bacchus. It is also said that Mr. Ellis met with the
vine about the English settlements at Hudson's Bay; and compares the fruit of
it to the currants of the Levant. Morse's Un. Geo. vol. i, p. 64.
Though there is no direct and positive testimony of grapes in the island of
Newfoundland, it is by no means to be concluded that there were none. Nor is it
improbable that grapes, though once found there, might have been so scarce, as
not to merit notice, in such general descriptions, as were given by the first
English adventurers.

The distance between Greenland and Newfoundland is not greater than between
Iceland and Norway; and there could be no more difficulty in navigating the
western than the eastern parts of the northern Ocean, with such vessels as were
then in use, and by such seamen as the Normans are said to have been; though
they knew nothing of the magnetic needle.

Upon the whole, though we can come to no positive conclusion in a question of
such remote antiquity; yet there are many circumstances to confirm, and none to
disprove the relation given of the voyages of Biron. At my request, Governor
WENTWORTH, of Nova Scotia, has employed a proper person, to make inquiry into
any vestiges of this ancient colony, which may yet be subsisting. I am sorry
that the result could not be had, before the publication of this volume; but
when it comes to hand, it shall be communicated.
But if it be allowed that he is entitled to the honor of having discovered
America before Columbus, yet this discovery cannot in the least detract from
the merit of that celebrated navigator. For there is no reason to suppose that
Columbus had any knowledge of the Norman discoveries; which long before his
time were forgotten, and would perhaps never have been recollected, if he had
not, by the astonishing exertions of his genius and his persevering industry,
effected a discovery of this continent, in a climate more friendly to the views
of commercial adventurers.

Even Greenland itself, in the fifteenth century, was known to the Danes and
Normans only by the name of lost Greenland; and they did not recover their
knowledge of it, till after the English had ascertained its existence by their
voyages to discover a N. W. passage to the Pacific Ocean, and the Dutch had
coasted it in pursuit of whales.

II. MADOC
THIS person is supposed to have discovered America, and brought a colony of
his countrymen hither, before the discovery made by Columbus. The story of his
emigration from Wales is thus related by Hakluyt, whose book was first
published in 1589; and a second edition of it in 1600.

"The voyage of Madoc, the son of Owen Gwynneth, Prince of North Wales, to the
West Indies in the year 1170; taken out of the history of Wales lately
published by M. David Powel Doctor of Divinity."

"After the death of Owen Gwynneth, his sons fell at debate who should inherit
after him. For the eldest son born in matrimony Edward or Iorweth Drwydion was
counted unmeet to govern, because of the maime upon his face; and Howel, that
took upon him all the rule, was a base son begotten of an Irish woman.
Therefore David gathered all the power he could and came against Howel, and
fighting with him, slew him; and afterward enjoyed quietly the whole land of
North Wales, until his brother Iorweth's son came to age.

"MADOC, another of Owen Gwynneth his sons left the land in contention between
his brethren and prepared certain ships with men and munition, and sought
adventures by sea, sailing west, and leaving the coast of Ireland so far north
that he came to a land unknown, where he saw many strange things.

"This land must needs be some part of that country of which the Spaniards
affirm themselves to be the first finders, since Hanno's time. [ The words
included in crotchets [] are omitted in the second edition of Hakluyt's voyages.
For by reason and order of cosmographie, this land to the which Madoc came,
must needs be some part of Nova Hispania or Florida.] Whereupon it is manifest
that that country was long [before] by Britains discovered, before [either]
Columbus [or Americus Vesputius] led any Spaniards thither.

"Of the voyage and return of that Madoc there be many fables feigned, as the
common people do use, in distance of place and length of time, rather to
augment than diminish, but sure it is that there he was. And after he had
returned home and declared the pleasant and fruitful countries that he had seen
without inhabitants; and upon the contrary part, for what wild and barren
ground his brethren and nephews did murder one another, he prepared a number
of ships and got with him such men and women as were desirous to live in
quietness; and taking leave of his friends, took his journey thitherwards again.

"Therefore it is to be presupposed, that he and his people inhabited part of
those countries; for it appears, by Francis Lopez de Gomara, that in
Acuzamil, and other places, the people honored the cross. Whereby it may be
gathered, that Christians had been there before the coming of the Spaniards.
But because this people were not many, they followed the manners of the land
they came to, and used the language they found there.

"This Madoc arriving in that western country unto the which he came in the
year 1170, left most of his people there, and returning back for more of his
own nation, acquaintance and friends, to inhabit that fair and large country,
went thither again, with ten sails, as I find noted by Gutyn Owen. I am of
opinion that the land whereto he came, was some part of [Mexico; In the second
Edition, the word Mexico is changed for the West Indies; and the two following
paragraphs are omitted.
the causes which make me think so be these.

"1. The common report of the inhabitants of that country, which affirm that
their rulers descended from a strange nation, that came thither from a far
country; which thing is confessed by Mutezuma King of that country, in an
oration made for quieting of his people at his submission to the King of
Castile; Hernando Cortez being then present, which is laid down in the Spanish
chronicles of the conquest of the West Indies.

"2. The British words and names of places used in that country even to this
day do argue the same; as when they talk together, they use the word Gwrando,
which is hearken or listen. Also they have a certain bird with a white head,
which they call penguin, that is white head. But the island of Corroeso, the
river of Guyndor, and the white rock of Penguyn, which be all British or Welsh
words, do manifestly show that it was that country, which Madoc and his people
inhabited."]

" Carmina Meredith filii Rhesi mentionem facientia de Madoco filio Oweni
Gwynnedd et de sua navigatione in terras incognitas. Vixit hic Meredith
circiter annum Domini 1477.

Madoc wife, mwyedie wedd
Iawn geneu, Owen Guynned
Ni fynnum dir, fie enaid oedd
Na da mawr, and y moroedd.
These verses I received of my learned friend, M. William Camden.

The same in English.

"Madoc I am the son of Owen Gwynnedd,
With stature large and comely grace adorned.
No lands at home, nor store of wealth me please,
My mind was whole to search the Ocean seas."
In this extract from Hakluyt is contained all the original information which I
have been able to find respecting the supposed discovery of America by the
Welsh. The account itself is confused and contradictory. The country discovered
by Madoc is said to be "without inhabitants;" and yet the people whom he
carried thither "followed the manners of the land, and used the language they
found there." Though the Welsh emigrants lost their language, yet the author
attempts to prove the truth of his story by the preservation of several Welsh
words in the American tongues. Among these he is unfortunate in the choice of "
penguin a bird with a white head;" all the birds of that name on the American
shores having black or dark brown heads, and the name penguin is said to have
been originally pinguedine, from their excessive fatness. See the new
Encyclopedia, under the article AMERICA.


Among the proofs which some late writers have adduced in support of the
discovery of America by Madoc is this, that a language resembling the Welsh was
spoken by a tribe of Indians in North Carolina, and that it is still used by a
nation situate on some of the western waters of the Missisippi. If that part of
the account preserved by Hakluyt be true, that the language was lost, it is
vain to offer an argument of this kind in support of the truth of the story;
but a question may here arise, How could any report of the loss of their
language have been transmitted to Europe at so early a period?

An attempt has lately been made to ascertain the truth of this piece of
history by Dr. John Williams. I have not seen the book itself, but if the
Critical Reviewers may be credited, Critical Review for 1791, page 357.
no new facts have been adduced. It is remarked by them, that "if Madoc once
reached America, it is difficult to explain how he could return home, and it
would be more improbable that he should arrive in America a second time; of
which there is not the slightest evidence." They also observe, that "if Madoc
sailed westward from Wales, the currents would rather have carried him to Nova
Scotia than to the southward."

The mentioning of Nova Scotia reminds me of some words in the native language
of that country which begin with two syllables resembling the name of Madoc.
See Gyles memoirs of his Captivity in 1689.
A sachem of the Penobscot tribe who lived in the end of the last and in the
beginning of the present century bore the name of Madokawando. A village on
Penobscot river was called Madawankee. One branch of the river St. John which
runs into the bay of Funda is Medoctack and another is Medocscenecasis. The
advocates of this opinion may avail themselves as far as they can of this
coincidence, but in my apprehension it is too precarious to be the basis of any
just conclusion.

After all that has been, or can be said on the subject, we must observe with
the Critical Reviewers, that, "if Madoc left Wales and discovered any other
country it must always remain uncertain where that country is." Dr. Robertson
thinks, if he made any discovery at all, it might be Madeira or one of the
Azores. Hist. Amer. vol. i, p. 374.


The book of Hakluyt, in which the original story is preserved, was written in
the reign of Queen Elizabeth, and in the time of her controversy with Spain.
The design of his bringing forward the voyage of Madoc appears, from what he
says of Columbus, to have been, the asserting of a discovery prior to his, and
consequently the right of the Crown of England to the sovereignty of America; a
point at that time warmly contested between the two nations. The remarks which
the same author makes on several other voyages, evidently tend to the
establishment of that claim. But if the story of Biron be true, which (though
Hakluyt has said nothing of it) is better authenticated than this of Madoc, the
right of the Crown of Denmark is, on the principle of prior discovery, superior
to either of them.

Perhaps the whole mystery may be unveiled, if we advert to this one
circumstance, the time when Hakluyt's book was first published. National
prejudice might prevail even with so honest a writer, to convert a Welsh fable
into a political argument, to support, against a powerful rival, the claim of
his sovereign to the dominion of this continent.

III. ZENO.
IT is well known that the Venetians were reckoned among the most expert and
adventurous of the maritime nations. In that republic, the family of ZENO or
ZENI is not only very ancient, and of high rank; but celebrated for illustrious
achievements. Nicolo Zeno, having exhibited great valor in a war with the
Genoese, conceived an ardent desire, agreeably to the genius of his nation, to
travel; that he might, by his acquaintance with foreign nations and languages,
render himself more illustrious and more useful. With this view he equipped a
vessel at his own expense, and sailed through the straits of Gibraltar to the
northward, [A. D. 1380] with an intention to visit Britain and Flanders; but by
a storm which lasted many days, he was cast away on the coast of Frisland.

The Prince of the country Zichmni (or as Purchase spells it Zichmui) finding
Zeno an expert seaman, gave him the command of his fleet, consisting of
thirteen vessels, of which two only were rowed with oars; one was a ship, and
the rest were small barks. With this fleet, he made conquests and depredations
in Ledovo and Ilofo and other small islands; several barks laden with fish
being a part of his capture.

Nicolo wrote to his brother Antonio Zeno at Venice, inviting him to Frisland,
whither he went, and being taken into the service of Zichmni, continued with
him fourteen years. The fleet sailed on an expedition to Estland, where they
committed great ravages; but hearing that the King of Norway was coming against
them with a superior fleet, they departed; and were driven by a storm on
shoals, where part of the fleet was wrecked, and the rest were saved on
Grisland, "a great island but not inhabited."

Zichmni then determined to attack Iceland, which belonged to the King of
Norway; but finding it well fortified and defended, and his fleet being
diminished, he retired and built a fort in Bress, one of seven small islands,
where he left Nicolo and returned to Frisland.

In the next spring Zeno, with three small barks, sailed to the northward on
discovery, and arrived at Engroenland; where he found a monastery of Friars,
and a Church dedicated to St. Thomas, situate near a volcano, and heated by
warm springs flowing from the mountain.

After the death of Nicolo, which happened in about four years, Antonio
succeeded him in the command of the fleet; and the prince Zichmni, aiming at
the sovereignty of the sea, undertoook an expedition westward, because that
some fishermen had discovered rich and populous islands in that quarter.

The report of the fishermen was, that above a thousand miles westward from
Frisland, to which distance they had been driven by a tempest, there was an
island call Estotiland, which they had discovered twenty six years before; that
six men in one boat were driven upon the island, and being taken by the
inhabitants were brought into a fair and populous city; that the King of the
place sent for many interpreters, but none was found who could understand the
language of the fishermen, except one who could speak Latin, and he had
formerly been cast ashore on the island; that on his reporting their case to
the King, he detained them five years, in which time they learned the language;
that one of them visited diverse parts of the island, and reported, that it was
a very rich country, abounding with all the commodities of the world; that it
was less than Iceland, but far more fruitful, having in the middle a very high
mountain, from which originated four rivers.

The inhabitants were described as very ingenious, having all mechanic arts.
They had a peculiar kind of language and letters; and in the King's library
were preserved Latin books, which they did not understand. They had all kinds
of metals (but especially gold, with which they mightily abounded. This passage
is in Hakluyt's translation and the abridgment by Ortelius; but Dr. Forster
could not find it in the Italian original (...). Northern voyages, p. 189.
) They held traffic with the people of Engroenland, from whence they brought
furs, pitch and brimstone. They had many great forests, which supplied them
with timber for the building of ships, houses and fortifications. The use of
the loadstone was not known; but these fishermen having the mariner's compass,
were held in so high estimation, that the King sent them with twelve barks to a
country at the southward, called Drogio; where the most of them were killed and
devoured by cannibals; but one of them saved himself by showing the savages a
way of taking fish by nets, in much greater plenty than by any other mode
before known among them. This fisherman was in so great demand with the princes
of the country, that they frequently made war on each other for the sake of
gaining him. In this manner he passed from one to another, till in the space of
thirteen years, he had lived with twenty five different princes; to whom he
communicated his "miraculous" art of fishing with nets.

He thus became acquainted with every part of the country, which he described
to be so extensive as to merit the name of a new world. The people were rude
and ignorant of the use of clothing, though their climate was cold, and
afforded beasts for the chase. In their hunting and wars they used the bow and
the lance; but they knew not the use of metal.

Farther to the southwest the air was said to be more temperate and the people
more civil. They dwelt in cities, built temples, and worshipped idols to whom
they offered human victims; and they had plenty of gold and silver.

The fisherman having become fully acquainted with the country meditated a
return. Having fled through the woods to Drogio, after three years some boats
arrived from Estotiland in one of which he embarked for that country; and
having acquired considerable property he fitted out a bark of his own and
returned to Frisland.

Such was the report of the fisherman; upon hearing of which Zichmni resolved
to equip his fleet and go in search of the new country; Antonio Zeno being the
second in command. But "the preparation for the voyage to Estotiland was begun
in an evil hour; the fisherman who was to have been the pilot died three days
before their departure."

However, taking certain mariners who had sailed with the fisherman, Zichmni
began the intended voyage. When he had sailed a small distance to the westward,
he was overtaken by a storm which lasted eight days, at the end of which they
discovered land, which the natives called Icaria. They were numerous and
formidable and would not permit him to come on shore. From this place they
sailed six days to the westward with a fair wind; but a heavy gale from the
southward drove them four days before it, when they discovered land, in which
was a volcano. The air was mild and temperate, it being the height of summer.
They took a great quantity of fish, of sea fowl and their eggs. A party who
penetrated the country as far as the foot of the volcano, found a spring, from
which issued "a certain water, like pitch, which ran into the sea." They
discovered some of the inhabitants who were of small stature and wild; and who,
at the approach of the strangers, hid themselves in their caves. Having found a
good harbor; Zichmni intended to make a settlement; but his people opposing
it, he dismissed part of the fleet under Zeno who returned to Frisland.

The particulars of this narrative were first written by Antonio Zeno, in
letters to his brother Carlo, at Venice; from some fragments of which, a
compilation was made by Francisco Marcolini, and preserved by Ramusio. It was
translated by Richard Hakluyt, and printed in the third volume of the second
edition of his collections, page 121, etc. From it Ortelius has made an extract
in his Theatrum orbis.

Dr. Forster has taken much pains to examine the whole account, both
geographically and historically. The result of his inquiry is, that Frisland is
one of the Orkneys; that Porland is the cluster of islands called Faro; and
that Estland is Shetland.

At first indeed he was of opinion that "the countries described by the Zenos
actually existed at that time, but had since been swallowed up by the sea, in a
great earthquake." Northern voyages, Dublin edition, p. 200.
This opinion he founded on the probability that all the high islands in the
middle of the sea are of volcanic original; as is evident with respect to
Iceland and the Faro islands in the North Sea; the Azores, Teneriffe, Madeira,
the Cape de Verds, St. Helena and Ascension in the Atlantic; the Society
Islands, Otaheite, Easter, the Marquesas, and other islands in the Pacific.
This opinion he was induced to relinquish, partly because "so great a
revolution must have left behind it some historical vestiges or traditions;"
but, principally, because his knowledge of the Runic language suggested to him
a resemblance between the names mentioned by Zeno and those which are given to
some of the islands of Orkney, Shetland, Faro and the Hebrides.

However presumptuous it may appear to call in question the opinion of so
learned and diligent an inquirer, on a subject, which his philological and
geographical knowledge must enable him to examine with the greatest precision;
yet, from the search which I have had opportunity to make, it appears probable
to me that his first opinion was right, as far as it respects Frisland, and
perhaps Porland. My reasons are these:

1. Dr. Forster says that Frisland was "much larger than Iceland;" Page 181.
and Hakluyt, in his account of Zeno's voyage, speaks of it as "bigger than
Ireland." Vol. iii, p. 122.
Neither of these accounts can agree with the supposition of its being one of
the Orkneys; for Iceland is 346 miles long and 200 wide. Ireland is 310 in
length, and 184 in breadth; but Pomona, the mainland of the Orkneys, is but 22
miles long and 20 wide.

2. Frisland was seen by Martin Frobisher in each of his three voyages to and
from Greenland in the years 1576, 1577, and 1578. Hakluyt, vol. iii, p. 80, etc.
In his first voyage he took his departure from Foula, the westernmost of the
Shetland Islands, in lat. 60 30, and after sailing W. by N. fourteen days, he
made the land of Frisland, "bearing W. N. W. distant 16 leagues, in lat. 61."
In his second voyage he sailed from the Orkneys W. N. W. twenty six days,
before he came "within making of Frisland;" which he thus describes.

"July 4th. We made land perfect, and knew it to be Frisland. Found ourselves
in lat. 60 and were fallen in with the southernmost part of this land. It is
thought to be in bigness not inferior to England; and is called of some authors
West Frisland. I think it lies more west than any part of Europe. It extends
to the north very far, as seemed to us; and appears by a description set out
by two brethren Nicolo and Antonio Zeni; who being driven off from Ireland
about 200 years since, were shipwrecked there. They have in their sea charts
described every part, and, for so much of the land as we have sailed along,
comparing their charts with the coast, we find it very agreeable. All along
this coast the ice lies as a continual bulwark, and so defends the country,
that those who would land there incur great danger." Hakluyt, vol. iii. p. ^^
In his third voyage he found means to land on the island. The inhabitants fled
and hid themselves. Their tents were made of skins and their boats were like
those of Greenland. From these well authenticated accounts of Frisland, and its
situation so far westward of the Orkneys and Shetland, it seems impossible that
Dr. Forster's second opinion can be right.

3. One of the reasons which led the Doctor to give up his first opinion, that
these lands once existed, but had disappeared, was, that so great a revolution
must have left some vestige behind. If no person escaped to tell the news, what
better vestige can there be, than the existence of shoals or rocks, in the
places where these islands once were known to be? In a map prefixed to Crantz's
history of Greenland, there is marked a very extensive shoal between the
latitudes of 59 and 60, called "The sunken land of Buss." Its longitude is
between Iceland and Greenland, and the author speaks of it in these words,
"Some are of opinion that Frisland was sunk by an earthquake; and that it was
situate in those parts where the sunken land of Buss is marked in the maps;
which the seamen cautiously avoid, because of the shallow ground and turbulent
waves." Vol. i, p. 273.


Respecting Buss Island I have met with no other account than what is preserved
by Purchase Vol. iv, p. 815, 822.
in his abridgment of the journal of James Hall's voyages from Denmark to
Greenland. In his first voyage [A. D. 1605] he remarks thus, "Being in the
latitude of 59 we looked to have seen Busse Island; but I do verily suppose the
same to be placed in a wrong latitude in the marine charts." In his second
voyage [1606] he saw land which he "supposed to be Busse Island lying more to
the westward than it is placed in the marine charts," and the next day, viz.
July 2d. he writes, "we were in a great current setting S. S. W. which I
suppose to set between Busse Island and Frisland over toward America."

In a fourth voyage made in 1612 by the same James Hall, from England, for the
discovery of a N. W. passage, of which there is a journal written by John
Gatonbe and preserved in Churchill's Collections, Vol. vi, p. 260, 268.
they kept a good look out both in going and returning for the island of
Frisland but could not see it. In a map prefixed to this voyage, Frisland is
laid down between the latitude of 61 and 62; and Buss in the latitude of 57. In
Gatonbe's journal the distance between Shetland and Frisland is computed to be
260 leagues, the southernmost part of Frisland and the northernmost part of
Shetland are said to be in the same latitude. There is also a particular map of
Frisland preserved by Purchase Vol. iv, p. 625,
in which are delineated several towns and cities; the two islands of Ilofo and
Ledovo are laid down to the westward of it, and another called Stromio to the
eastward.

In a map of the North Seas prefixed to an anonymous account of Greenland, in
Churchill's Collection Vol. ii, p. 378.
we find Frisland laid down in the latitude 62, between Iceland and Greenland.

We have then no reason to doubt the existence of these islands as late as the
beginning of the last century; at what time they disappeared is uncertain, but
that their place has since been occupied by a shoal, we have also credible
testimony.

The appearance and disappearance of islands in the northern sea is no uncommon
thing. Besides former events of this kind there is one very recent. In the year
1783, by means of a volcanic eruption, two islands were produced in the sea
near the S. E. coast of Iceland. One was supposed to be so permanent, that the
King of Denmark sent and took formal possession of it as part of his dominions;
but the Ocean, paying no regard to the territorial claim of a mortal sovereign,
has since reabsorbed it in his watery bosom. See a new Geographical Grammar, by
Society in Edinburgh* published by Alexander Kincaid. Vol. 1, p. 123.


These reasons incline me to believe that Dr. Forster's first opinion was well
founded, as far as it respects Frisland.

He supposes Porland to be the cluster of islands called Faro Northern Voyages,
p. 207.
. But Porland is said to lie south ibid, p. 180.
of Frisland; whereas the Faro Islands lie northwest of Orkney, which he
supposes to be Frisland. The learned Doctor, who is in general very accurate,
was not aware of this inconsistency.

In the account which Hakluyt has given of Martin Frobisher's third voyage, we
find that one of his ships, the Buss of Bridgewater, in her return fell in with
land, 50 leagues S. E. of Frisland "which (it is said) was never found before"
the southernmost part of which lay in latitude 57. Along the coast of this
land, which they judged to extend 25 leagues, they sailed for three days.
Hakluyt, vol. iii. p. 77, 93.
The existence of this land, Dr. Forster seems to doubt; but yet allows that
"if it was then really discovered it must have sunk afterward into the sea, as
it has never been seen again; or else these navigators must have been mistaken
in their reckoning."

If such an island or cluster of islands did exist in the situation described
by Frobisher, it might be the Porland of Zeno; for the southernmost part of
Frisland lay in the latitude of 60; the southernmost part of this land in 57 in
a direction S. E. from it. It was probably called Buss, by the English, from
the name of Frobisher's vessel which discovered it.

The only proof which can now be produced of this fact must be the actual
existence of rocks and shoals in or near the same place. Of this, it is happily
in my power to produce the evidence of two experienced shipmasters, of
incontestible veracity, now living. The first is Isaac Smith of Malden, near
Boston, from whose log book I have made the following extract. "In a voyage
from Petersburg to Boston, in the ship Thomas and Sarah, belonging to Thomas
Russell, Esquire. of Boston, Merchant, Thursday, August 11, 1785, course W. N. W.
wind W. S. W. At 4 A. M. discovered a large rock a head, which for some time we
took to be a ship under close reefed topsail. At 7, being within two miles, saw
breakers under our lee, on which account wore ship. There are breakers in two
places bearing S. E; one a mile, the other two miles from the rock. It lies in
lat. 57 38; longitude West from London 13 36; and may be discovered five
leagues off. We sounded and had 56 fathom. The rock appears to be about 100
yards in circumference and 50 feet above water. It makes like a hay stack,
black below and white on the top." The other is Nathaniel Goodwin, of Boston,
who, in his homeward passage from Amsterdam, on the 15th of August 1793, saw
the same rock. According to his observation, (which however on that day was a
little dubious) it lies in lat. 57 48 and lon. 13 46. He passed within two
miles of it to the southward and saw breakers to the northward of it. Its
appearance he describes in the same manner with Smith.

From these authorities I am strongly inclined to believe that the shoal
denominated "the sunken land of Buss" is either a part of the ancient Frisland
or of some island in its neighborhood; and that the rock and ledges seen by
Smith and Goodwin, belonged to the cluster once called Porland. If these
conclusions be admitted, there can be no suspicion of fiction in the story of
Zeno, as far as it respects Prince Zichmni, and his expeditions. Shetland may
then well enough agree with Estland, which is described by Hakluyt as lying
"between Frisland and Norway." Vol. iii, p. 122.


The only place which in Zeno's relation is called by the same name, by which
it is now known, is Iceland; though there can be no doubt that Engroenland, or
Engroveland, is the same with Greenland; where, according to Crantz, there was
once a church dedicated to St. Thomas, and situate near a volcano and a hot
spring. Crantz's hist. of Greenland, vol. ii, p. 26^. Purchase, vol. iv, p. 651.


But the question is, where shall we find Estotiland? Dr. Forster is positive
that "it cannot be any other country, than Winland (discovered in 1001) where
the Normans made a settlement." The Latin books seen there by the fisherman, he
supposes to have been the library of Eric, Bishop of Greenland, who went
thither in the twelfth century to convert his countrymen. He is also of opinion
that this fisherman had the use of the magnetic needle which began to be known
in Europe about the year 1302, before the time of the Zenos. He also thinks
that the country called Drogio is the same with Florida.

In some of the old maps, particularly in Sanson's French Atlas, the name
Estotiland is marked on the country of Labrador; but the pompous description of
it by the fisherman, whether it be Labrador or Newfoundland, exceeds all the
bounds of credibility, and abuses even the license of a traveller. The utmost
extent of Zichmni's expedition, in consequence of the fisherman's report, could
not be any farther westward than Greenland, to which his description well
agrees. The original inhabitants were short of stature, half wild and lived in
caverns; and between the years 1380 and 1384 they had extirpated the Normans
and the monks of St. Thomas.

The discovery of Estotiland must therefore rest on the report of the
fisherman; but the description of it, of Drogio, and the Country S. W. of
Drogio must be ranked in the fabulous history of America; and would probably
have been long since forgotten, if Christopher Columbus had not made his grand
discovery; from the merit of which, his rivals and the enemies of the Spanish
nation have uniformly endeavored to detract.

IV. CHRISTOPHER COLUMBUS.
THE adventures which have been already spoken of were more the result of
accident than design; we are now entering on one, founded in science and
conducted by judgment; an adventure, which whether we regard its conception,
its execution, or its consequences, will always reflect the highest honor on
him, who projected it.

About the middle of the fifteenth century, when the Portuguese under the
conduct of Prince Henry, and afterward of King John II. were pushing their
discoveries along the western shore of Africa, to find a passage by the south
to India; a genius arose, whose memory has been preserved with veneration in
the pages of history, as the instrument of enlarging the region of science and
commerce, beyond any of his predecessors. CHRISTOPHER COLUMBUS, a native of the
Republic of Genoa, was born in the year 1447, and at the age of fourteen
entered on a seafaring life, as the proper sphere, in which his vigorous mind
was destined to perform exploits which should astonish mankind. Life of
Columbus by his son Ferdinand, Chap. 4. -- See vol. ii. of Churchill's
Collection of Voyages. Herrera's Hist. Amer. vol. i.
He was educated in the sciences of Geometry and Astronomy, which form the
basis of navigation; and he was well versed in Cosmography, History and
Philosophy. His active and enterprising genius, though it enabled him to
comprehend the old systems, yet would not suffer him to rest in their
decisions, however sanctified by time or by venerable names; but determined to
examine them by actual experiment, he first visited the seas within the polar
circle, and afterward those parts of Africa, which the Portuguese had
discovered, as far as the coast of Guinea; and by the time that he had attained
the age of thirty seven, he had from his own experience received the fullest
conviction, that the opinion of the ancients respecting the torrid and frigid
zones was void of any just foundation.

When an old system is found erroneous in one point, it is natural to suspect
it of farther imperfections; and when one difficulty is overcome, others appear
less formidable. Such was the case with Columbus; and his views were
accelerated by an incident, which threatened to put an end to his life. During
one of his voyages, the ship in which he sailed took fire, in an engagement
with a Venetian galley, and the crew were obliged to leap into the sea, to
avoid perishing in the flames. In this extremity, Columbus, by the help of a
floating oar, swam upwards of two leagues to the coast of Portugal near Lisbon,
and met with a welcome reception from many of his countrymen who were settled
there.

At Lisbon, he married the daughter of Perestrello, an old seaman, who had been
concerned in the discovery of Porto Santo and Madeira; from whose journals and
charts, he received the highest entertainment. Pursuing his inquiries in
Geography, and observing what slow progress the Portuguese made in their
attempts to find a way round Africa to India, "he began to reflect that as the
Portuguese traveled so far southward, it were no less proper to sail
westward," and that it was reasonable to expect to find the desired land in
that direction.

It must here be remembered, that India was in part known to the ancients, and
that its rich and useful productions had for many centuries been conveyed into
Europe, either by caravans through the deserts of Syria and Arabia; or by the
way of the Red Sea, through Egypt, into the Mediterranean. Robertson's India.
Bruce's Travels.
This lucrative commerce had been successively engrossed by the Phenicians, the
Hebrews, the Egyptians, the Assyrians, the Palmyrenes, the Arabians, the
Genoese and the Venetians. The Portuguese were then seeking it by attempting
the circumnavigation of Africa; and their expectation of finding it in that
direction was grounded on ancient historical traditions, that a voyage had been
formerly made by the orders of Necho King of Egypt, from the Red Sea, round the
southern part of Africa to the straits of Hercules; and that the same route had
been traversed by Hanno the Carthaginian, by Eudoxus the Egyptian, and others.
The Portuguese had consumed about half a century in making various attemps, and
had advanced no farther, on the western coast of Africa, than just to cross the
Equator, when Columbus conceived his great design of finding India in the west.

The causes which led him to entertain this idea are distinguished by his son,
the writer of his life, into these three; "natural reason, the authority of
writers, and the testimony of sailors."

By the help of "reason," he argued in this manner: That the earth and sea
composed one globe or sphere. This was known by observing the shadow of the
earth in lunar eclipses. Hence he concluded that it might be traveled over
from east to west, or from west to east. It had been explored to the east by
some European travelers as far as Cipango, or Japan; and as far westward as
the Azores or Western Islands. The remaining space, though now known to be more
than half, he supposed to be but one third part of the circumference of the
globe. If this space were an open sea, he imagined it might be easily sailed
over; and if there were any land extending eastwardly beyond the known limits
of Asia, he supposed that it must be nearer to Spain by the west, than by the
east. For, it was then a received opinion that the continent and islands of
India extended over one third part of the circumference of the globe; that
another third part was comprehended between India and the western shore of
Spain; therefore it was concluded, that the eastern part of India must be as
near to Spain as the western part. This opinion though now known to be
erroneous, yet being then admitted as true, made it appear to Columbus very
easy and practicable to discover India in the west. He hoped also that between
Spain and India, in that direction, there might be found some islands; by the
help of which, as resting places in his voyage, he might the better pursue his
main design. The probability of the existence of land in that Ocean, he argued,
partly from the opinion of philosophers, that there was more land than sea on
the surface of the globe; and partly from the necessity of a counterpoise in
the west, for the immense quantity of land which was known to be in the east.

Another source, from which he drew his conclusion, was, "the authority of
learned men," who had affirmed the possibility of sailing from the western
coast of Spain, to the eastern bounds of India. Some of the ancient Geographers
had admitted this for truth, and one of them Pliny.
had affirmed that forty days were sufficient to perform this navigation. These
authorities fell in with the theory which Columbus had formed; and having, as
early as 1474, communicated his ideas in writing, to Paul a learned physician
of Florence, he received from him letters of that date, confirming his opinion
and encouraging his design; accompanied with a chart, in which Paul had laid
down the city of Quisay (supposed to be the capital of China) but little more
than two thousand leagues westward from Lisbon, which in fact is but half the
distance. Thus, by arguing from true principles, and by indulging conjectures
partly well founded and partly erroneous, Columbus was led to the execution of
a plan, bold in its conception, and, to his view, easily practicable; for great
minds overlook intermediate obstacles, which men of smaller views magnify into
insuperable difficulties.

The third ground on which he formed his idea was "the testimony of mariners;"
a class of men who at that time, and in that imperfect state of science, were
too prone to mix fable with fact; and were often misled by appearances, which
they could not solve. In the sea, between Madcira and the Western Islands,
pieces of carved wood and large joints of cane had been discovered, which were
supposed to be brought by westerly winds. Branches of pine trees, a covered
canoe, and two human bodies of a complexion different from the Europeans and
Africans had been found on the shores of these islands. Some navigators had
affirmed, that they had seen islands not more than an hundred leagues westward
from the Azores. There was a tradition, that when Spain was conquered by the
Moors in the eighth century, seven Bishops, who were exiled from their country,
had built seven cities and churches, on an island called Antilla; which was
supposed to be not more than two hundred leagues west of the Canaries; and it
was said that a Portuguese ship had once discovered this island, but could
never find it again. These stories, partly true and partly fabulous, had their
effect on the mind of Columbus. He believed that islands were were to be found,
westward of the Azores and Canaries; though according to his theory, they were
at a greater distance than any of his contemporaries had imagined. His candor
led him to adopt an opinion from Pliny respecting floating islands, by the help
of which he accounted for the appearances related to him, by his marine
brethren. It is not improbable that the large islands of floating ice, driven
from the Polar Seas to the southward; or the Fog Banks, which form many
singular appearances resembling land and trees, might have been the true
foundation of this opinion and of these reports. The following account of a
curious deception, extracted from the Gentleman's Magazine, may elucidate the
above observations.

"March 4, 1748 -- 9, at two in the afternoon, made land which bore N. E. seven
leagues distance by estimation: at five tacked, being about three leagues from
said island, wind E. S. E. latitude by observation 49 40; longitude 24 30, from
the Lizard. This island stretches N. W. and S. E. about 5 leagues long, and 9
miles wide. On the south side fine valleys and a great number of birds.

March 5, said island bore N. three leagues, N. W. a reef of rocks three miles.
This day a ship's mast came along side. On the south point of said island is a
small marshy island."

"A copy of my journal on board the snow St. Paul, of London, bound from South
Carolina to London.

William Otton, Commander." P. S. Captain Otton thought he saw a tent on the
island, and would have gone ashore, but had unfortunately stove his boat some
time before.

"Commodore Rodney is commissioned to go in quest of an island, which,
according to the report of a master of a ship, and some others, on examination
before the Lords of the Admiralty, lies about 50 N. and about 300 leagues west
of England. Capt. Murdock Mackenzie, an excellent mathematician, and author of
the sea charts of the Orkney and Lewis islands, attends him in the Culloden
sloop, to bring back an account of what discoveries he may make. As this island
lies out of the track of the trade to America, it is supposed to have been
missed by navigators to our colonies, though marked in some Dutch maps. If the
Commodore discovers it, he is to take possession of it by the name of Rodney's
island."

"Friday, April 10, 1752, Commodore Rodney arrived at Woolwich; he had been
cruising ten days in quest of an island, and the men at the top-mast-head were
more than once deceived with what the sailors call fog-banks. About the 6th or
7th day the crew observed branches of trees with their leaves on, and slights
of gulls, and pieces of shipwreck, which are generally regarded as certain
signs of an adjacent shore, but could not discover any."

Gent. Mag. for 1751, p. 235. for 1752, p. 88, 189. N. B. The island marked in
the Dutch maps, could not have been mistaken for this imaginary island, being
but a single rock. It is the same that is described in the life of Zeno.

Page 82.


It is not pretended that Columbus was the only person of his age who had
acquired these ideas of the form, dimensions and balancing of the globe; but he
was one of the few who had begun to think for themselves, and he had a genius
of that kind, which makes use of speculation and reasoning only as excitements
to action. He was not a closet projector, but an enterprising adventurer; and
having established his theory on principles, he was determined to exert himself
to the utmost, to demonstrate its truth by experiment. But deeming the
enterprise too great to be undertaken by any but a sovereign state, he first
applied (as it is said) to the Republic of Genoa, by whom his project was
treated as visionary. This is said on the authority of Herrera the royal
Spanish historian; Ferdinando Columbus, in the life of his father, says nothing
of it; but represents his application to the King of Portugal as the first, and
gives this reason for it, "because he lived under him."
He then proposed his plan to John II. King of Portugal, who, though a Prince
of good understanding and of an enterprising disposition, yet was so deeply
engaged in prosecuting discoveries on the African coast, with a view to find a
way to India round that continent; and had been at so vast an expense without
any considerable success, that he had no inclination to accept the terms which
Columbus proposed. Influenced however by the advice of Calzadilla, a favorite
courtier, he privately gave orders to a ship, bound to the islands of Cape de
Verd, to attempt a discovery in the west; but through ignorance and want of
enterprise, the navigators, after wandering for some time in the ocean and
making no discovery, reached their destined port and turned the project of
Columbus into ridicule.

Disgusted with this base artifice, he quitted Portugal, and went to Ferdinand,
King of Spain, having previously sent his brother to England to solicit the
patronage of Henry VII. But being taken by pirates, and detained several years
in captivity, Bartholomew had it not in his power to reveal his project to
Henry, till Christopher Columbus had succeeded in Spain. Before this could be
accomplished, he had various obstacles to surmount; and it was not till after
seven years of painful solicitation that he obtained his request.

The objections made to the proposal of Columbus, by the most learned men in
Spain, to whom the consideration of it was referred, will give us some idea of
the state of geographical science at that time. One objection was, How should
he know more than all the wise men and skilful sailors who had existed since
the creation? Another was the authority of Seneca, who had doubted whether it
were possible to navigate the ocean at any great distance from the shore; but
admitting that it were navigable, they imagined, that three years would be
required to perform the voyage, which Columbus proposed. A third was, that if a
ship should sail westward on a round globe, she would necessarily go down, on
the opposite side, and then it would be impossible to return, because it would
be like climbing up a hill, which no ship could do with the strongest wind. A
fourth objection was grounded on a book of St. Augustine, in which he had
expressed his doubt of the existence of antipodes and the possibility of going
from one hemisphere to the other. As the writings of this Holy Father had
received the sanction of the Church, to contradict him was deemed heresy.

For such reasons, and by such reasoners, the proposal of Columbus was at first
rejected; but by the influence of John Perez, a Spanish Priest, and Lewis
Santangel, an officer of the King's household, Queen Isabella was persuaded to
listen to his solicitation, and after he had been twice repulsed, to recall him
to Court; when she offered to pawn her jewels to defray the expense of the
equipment, amounting to no more than 2500 crowns; which sum was advanced by
Santangel, and the Queen's jewels were saved. Thus, to the generous decision of
a female mind, we owe the discovery of America.

The conditions stipulated between Ferdinand and Isabella on the one part, and
Columbus on the other part, were these: "That he, his heirs and successors,
should hold the office of Admiral in all those Islands and Continents which he
should discover; that he should be Viceroy and Governor of the same* with power
of nominating three associates, of whom their majesty's should appoint one.
That he should have one tenth part of the neat proceeds of all the gold, and
silver, precious stones, spice and other merchandise which should be found;
that he, or a deputy of his own appointing, should decide all controversies
respecting the trade; that he should be at one eighth part of the expense of
equipping the first fleet, and should receive one eighth part of the profits."

The necessary preparations being made, and a year's provision laid in, on the
3d of August, 1492, Columbus sailed from Palos, a port of Spain, on the
Mediterranean, with three vessels, one of which was called a carrack, and the
other two, caravels; (...) vessel with a deck; a caravel had (...).
having on board, the whole, ninety men. Having passed through the straits of
Gibraltar, he arrived at the Canaries, on the 12th of the same month; where he
was detained in refitting one of the caravels, and taking in wood and water,
till the 6th of September, when he sailed westward on his voyage of discovery.

This voyage, which now is considered as an easy and pleasant run, between the
latitudes of 20 and 30 degrees, with a trade wind, was then the boldest attempt
which had ever been made, and filled the minds of the best seamen with
apprehension. They were going directly from home, and from all hope of relief,
if any accident should befall them. No friendly port nor human being was known
to be in that direction. Every bird which flew in the air, every fish which
appeared in the sea, and every weed which floated on its surface, was regarded
with the most minute attention, as if the fate of the voyage depended on it. A
phenomenon which had never before been observed struck them with terror. The
magnetic needle appeared to vary from the pole: They began to apprehend that
their compass would prove an unfaithful guide; and the trade wind, which wafted
them along with its friendly wings, they feared would obstruct their return.

To be twenty days at sea, without sight of land, was what the boldest mariner
had never before attempted. At the expiration of that time the impatient
sailors began to talk of throwing their commander into the ocean, and returning
home. Their murmurs reached his ears; but his active mind was never at a loss
for expedients, even in the greatest extremity. By soothing, flattery, and
artifice, by inventing reasons for every uncommon appearance, by promising
rewards to the obedient, and a gratuity to him who should first discover land,
in addition to what the King had ordered; and by deceiving them in the ship's
reckoning, he kept them on their course for sixteen days longer. In the night
of the 11th of October, he himself saw a light, which seemed to be on shore,
and in the morning of the 12th, they had the joyful sight of land, which proved
to be the island of Guanahana, one of the cluster called Bahamas, in the 25th
degree of north latitude.

Thus in the space of thirty six days, and in the 45th year of his age,
Columbus completed a voyage which he had spent twenty years in projecting and
executing; a voyage which opened to the Europeans a new world; which gave a new
turn to their thoughts, to their spirit of enterprise and of commerce; which
enlarged the empire of Spain, and stamped with immortality the name of Columbus.

After spending several months in sailing from one island to another in that
vast archipelago, which, from the mistakes of the age received the name of the
West Indies. Columbus returned to Spain with the two smaller vessels, (the
larger having been wrecked on the island of Hispaniola) leaving behind him a
colony of thirty nine men, furnished with a year's provision, and lodged in a
fort which had been built of the timber saved from the wreck. During his
passage he met with a violent tempest which threatened him with destruction. In
this extremity, he gave an admirable proof of his calmness and foresight. He
wrote on parchment an account of his discoveries, wrapped it in a piece of
oiled cloth, and enclosed it in a cake of wax, which he put into a tight cask
and threw into the sea. Another parchment, secured in the same manner, he
placed on the stern, that if the ship should sink, the cask might float, and
possibly one or the other might be driven on shore, or taken up at sea by some
future navigator. But this precaution proved fruitless. He arrived safe in
Spain, in March, 1493, and was received with the honors due to his merit.

The account which Columbus gave of his new discoveries, the specimens of gold
and other valuable productions, and the sight of the natives which he carried
from the West Indies to Spain, were so pleasing that the court determined on
another expedition. But first it was necessary to obtain the sanction of the
Pope, who readily granted it; and by an imaginary line, drawn from pole to
pole, at the distance of one hundred leagues westward of the Azores, he divided
between the crowns of Spain and Portugal, all the new countries already
discovered or to be discovered; giving the western part to the former, and the
eastern to the latter. No provision however was made, in case that they should
meet, and their claims should interfere on the opposite side of the globe. The
bull, containing this famous but imperfect line of demarkation, was signed by
Alexander VI. on the second day of May, 1493; and on the 28th of the same
month, the King and Queen of Spain, by a written instrument, explained and
confirmed the privileges and powers which they had before granted to Columbus,
making the office of Viceroy and Governor of the Indies hereditary in his
family. On the 25th of September following, he sailed from Cadiz, with a fleet
of seventeen ships, great and small, well furnished with all necessaries for
the voyage; and having on board 1500 people, with horses, cattle, and
implements to establish plantations.

On Sunday the third of November, he discovered an island, to which, in honor
of the day, he gave the name of Dominica. Afterward he discovered in succession
other islands, which he called Marigalante, Guadaloupe, Montserrat, Redonda,
Antigua, St. Martin's, St. Ursula, and St. John. On the 12th of November he
came to Navidad, on the North side of Hispaniola, where he had built his fort,
and left his colony; but he had the mortification to find, that the people were
all dead, and that the fort had been destroyed.

The account given by the natives, of the loss of the colony, was, that they
fell into discord among themselves, on the usual subjects of controversy, women
and gold; that having provoked a chief, whose name was Canaubo, he came against
them with a superior force, and destroyed them; that some of the natives, in
attempting to defend them, had been killed, and others were then ill of their
wounds; which, on inspection, appeared to have been made with Indian weapons.

Columbus prudently forbore to make any critical inquiry into the matter; but
hasted to establish another colony, in a more eligible situation, to the
eastward; which he called Isabella, after his royal patroness. He had many
difficulties to contend with, besides those which unavoidably attend
undertakings of such novelty and magnitude. Nature indeed was bountiful: the
soil and climate produced vegetation, with a rapidity to which the Spaniards
had not been accustomed. From wheat sown at the end of January, full ears were
gathered at the end of March. The stones of fruit, the slips of vines and the
joints of sugar cane sprouted in seven days, and many other seeds in half the
time. This was an encouraging prospect; but the slow operations of agriculture
did not meet the views of sanguine adventurers. The numerous followers of
Columbus, some of whom were of the best families in Spain, had conceived hopes
of suddenly enriching themselves, by the precious metals of those new regions;
and were not disposed, to listen to his recommendations of patience and
industry, in cultivating the earth. The natives were displeased with the
licentiousness of their new neighbors; who endeavored to keep them in awe by
a display of force. The explosion of fire arms, and the sight of men mounted on
horses, were at first, objects of terror; but use had rendered them less
formidable. Columbus, overburdened with care and fatigue, fell sick, and at his
recovery, found a mutiny among his men; which, by a due mixture of resolution
and lenity, he had the address to quell. He then endeavored to establish
discipline among his own people, and to employ the natives in cutting roads
through the woods. Whilst he was present, and able to attend to business,
things went on so prosperously, that he thought he might safely proceed on his
discoveries.

In his former voyage he had visited Cuba; but was uncertain whether it were an
island or a part of some continent. He therefore passed over to its eastern
extremity; and coasted its southern side, till he found himself entangled among
a vast number of small islands, which for their beauty and fertility he called
the Garden of the Queen; but the dangerous rocks and shoals, which surrounded
them, obliged him to stretch farther to the southward; by which means, he
discovered the island of Jamaica; where he found water and other refreshments
for his men, who were almost dead with famine. The hazard, fatigue and distress
of this voyage, threw him into a lethargic disorder, from which he had just
recovered, when he returned to his colony and found it all in confusion; from
the same causes which had proved destructive to the first.

In his absence, the licentiousness of the Spaniards had provoked several of
the chiefs; four of whom had united to destroy them, and had actually commenced
hostilities, in which twenty Spaniards were killed. Columbus collected his
people, put them into the best order, and by a judicious combination of force
and stratagem gained a decisive victory, to which the horses and dogs did not a
little contribute.

At his return to Hispaniola, he had the pleasure of meeting his brother
Bartholomew, whom he had not seen for several years, and whom he supposed to
have been dead. Bartholomew was a man of equal knowledge, experience, bravery
and prudence with himself. His patience had endured a severe trial in their
long separation. He had many obstacles to surmount, before he could get to
England and obtain access to the King. He was at Paris when he heard of the
success of his brother's first enterprise; who had gone on the second, before
Bartholomew could get to Spain. On his arrival there, and being introduced to
the court, he was appointed to the command of three ships, which were destined
to convey supplies to the colony; and he arrived whilst Christopher was absent
on his voyage to Cuba and Jamaica. Columbus appointed his brother to command at
Isabella, whilst he went into the interior part of the island, to perfect his
conquest, and reduce the natives to subjection and tribute.

The Indians were so unused to collect gold dust, in such quantities as their
conquerors demanded it, that they offered to plant the immense plains of
Hispaniola, and pay an equivalent in corn. Columbus was struck with the
magnanimity of the proposal; and in consequence, moderated the tribute. This
did not satisfy the avarice of his fellow adventurers, who found means to
complain of him to the King's ministers, for his negligence in acquiring the
only commodity, which they thought deserved the name of riches. The Indians
then desisted from planting their usual quantity of corn, and attempted to
subsist chiefly on animal food. This experiment proved injurious to themselves
as well as to their conquerors; and it was computed, that within four years,
from the first discovery of the island, one third part of its inhabitants
perished.

The complaints against Columbus so wrought on the jealous mind of King
Ferdinand, that John Aguado, who was sent, in 1495, with supplies to the
colony, had orders to act as a spy on his conduct. This man behaved with so
little discretion, as to seek matter of accusation, and give out threats
against the Admiral. At the same time, the ships which he commanded, being
destroyed by a hurricane, he had no means left to return; till Columbus,
knowing that he had enemies at home and nothing to support him but his own
merit, resolved to go to Spain, with two caravels; himself in one, and Aguado
in the other. Having appointed proper persons to command the several forts; his
brother Bartholomew to superintend the whole, and his brother James to be next
in authority; he set sail on the tenth of March 1496, and after a perilous and
tedious voyage, in the tropical latitudes, arrived at Cadiz on the eleventh of
June.

His presence at Court, with the gold and other valuable articles which he
carried home, removed, in some measure, the prejudices which had been excited
against him. But his enemies, though silent, were not idle; and in a court,
where phlegm and languor proved a clog to the spirit of enterprise, they found
it not difficult to obstruct his views; which, notwithstanding all
discouragements, were still pointed to the discovery of a way to India by the
west.

He now demanded eight ships, to carry supplies to his colony, and six to go on
discovery. These demands were complied with, and he began his third voyage on
the thirtieth of May 1498. He kept a course so far to the southward, that not
only his men, but his provisions and water suffered greatly from excessive
heat. The first land he made after leaving the Isles of Cape de Verd, was a
large island which he named Trinidad, from its appearance in the form of three
mountains. He then passed through a narrow strait and whirlpool into the gulf
of Paria; where, observing the tide to be rapid, and the water brackish, he
conjectured, that the land, on the western and southern sides of the gulf, was
part of a continent; and that the fresh water proceeded from some great rivers.

The people on the coast of Paria were whiter than those of the islands. They
had about their necks plates of gold and strings of pearl; which they readily
exchanged for pieces of tin and brass, and little bells; and when they were
questioned whence they obtained the gold and pearls, they pointed to the west.

The Admiral's provision not allowing him to stay long in this place; he passed
again, through that dangerous strait, to which he gave the name of the Dragon's
Mouth; and having satisfied himself, that the land on his left was a continent,
he steered to the N. W; discovering Margarita and several other islands in his
course; and on the thirtieth of August, arrived at the harbor of St. Domingo,
in Hispaniola; to which place his brother had removed the colony in his
absence, in consequence of a plan preconcerted between them.

Wearied with incessant care and watching, in this dangerous voyage, he hoped
now to enjoy repose; instead of which he found his colony much reduced by
deaths; many of the survivors sick, with a disease, the peculiar consequence of
their debauchery; and a large number of them in actual rebellion. They had
formed themselves into a body; they had gained over many of the Indians, under
pretense of protecting them; and they had retired to a distant part of the
island, which proved a resort for the seditious and discontented. Their
commander was Francis Roldan, who had been Chief Justice of the colony; and
their number was so considerable, that Columbus could not command a force
sufficient to subdue them. He therefore entered into a negotiation, by offering
a pardon to those who would submit, and liberty of returning to Spain to those
who desired it. These offers, however impolitic, proved successful. Roldan
himself accepted them, and persuaded others to do the same; then, being
restored to his office, he tried and condemned the refractory, some of whom
were put to death.

An account of this mutiny was sent home to Spain by Columbus and another by
Roldan. Each had their advocates at court, and the cause was heard by the King
and Queen. Roldan and his men were accused of adultery, perjury, robbery,
murder, and disturbing the peace of the whole island; whilst Columbus was
charged with cruelty to individuals, aiming at independence, and engrossing the
tribute. It was insinuated, that not being a native of Spain, he had no proper
respect for the noble families, who had become adventurers; and that the debts
due to them could not be recovered. It was suggested, that if some remedy were
not speedily applied, there was danger that he would revolt, and join with some
other Prince; and that to compass this design, he had concealed the real wealth
of the colony, and prevented the conversion of the Indians to the Catholic
faith.

These insinuations prevailed on the jealousy of Ferdinand, and even staggered
the constancy of Isabella. They resolved to appoint a judge, who should examine
facts on the spot; and if he should find the Admiral guilty, to supersede him.
For this purpose they sent Francis Bovadilla, a man of noble rank, but whose
poverty alone recommended him to the office. Furnished with these powers, he
arrived at St. Domingo, when Columbus was absent; took lodgings in his house;
invited accusers to appear against him; seized on his effects, and finally sent
him and both his brothers to Spain in three different ships, but all loaded
with irons.

The master of the ship in which the Admiral sailed had so much respect for
him, that, when he had got to sea, he offered to take off his fetters; but
Columbus nobly declared, that he would permit that honor to be done him, by
none but his sovereign. In this humiliating confinement, he was delivered to
Fonseca, Bishop of Badajos, who had been the chief instigator of all these
rigorous proceedings, and to whom had been committed the affairs of the Indies.

Not content with robbing Columbus of his liberty, this prejudiced ecclesiastic
would have deprived him of his well earned reputation of having first
discovered the new continent. With the accusations which Columbus had sent home
against Roldan, he had transmitted an account of the discovery of the coast of
Paria, which he justly supposed to be part of a continent. Ojeda, an active
officer, who had sailed with Columbus in his second voyage, was at court when
these dispatches arrived, and saw the draught of the discovery, with the
specimens of gold and pearls, which the Admiral had sent home. Being a
favorite of Fonseca, he easily obtained leave to pursue the discovery. Some
merchants of Seville were prevailed upon to equip four ships; with which, in
1499, Ojeda followed the track of Columbus, and made land on the coast of
Paria. Amerigo Vespucci, a Florentine merchant, well skilled in geography and
navigation, accompanied Ojeda in this voyage; and by publishing the first book
and chart, describing the new world, obtained the honor of having it called
AMERICA. This however did not happen till after the death of Columbus. Several
other adventurers followed the same track, and all supposed that the continent
which they had seen, was part of India.

As soon as it was known, that Columbus was arrived at Cadiz, (Nov. 5, 1500) in
the disgraceful situation abovementioned, the King and Queen, ashamed of the
orders which they had given, commanded him to be released, and invited him to
court, where they apologized for the misbehaviour of their new Governor, and
not only promised to recall him, but to restore to the Admiral all his effects.
Columbus could not forget the ignominy. He preserved the fetters, hung them up
in his apartment, and ordered them to be buried in his grave.

Instead of reinstating him in his government according to the original
contract, the King and Queen sent Ovando, to Hispaniola, to supersede
Bovadilla; and only indulged Columbus in pursuing his darling project, the
discovery of India by the west, which he still hoped to accomplish. He sailed
again from Cadiz, on the fourth of May, 1502; with four vessels, carrying one
hundred and forty men and boys; of which number were his brother Bartholomew
and his son Ferdinand, the writer of his life.

In his passage to the Caribbee islands, he found his largest vessel, of
seventy tons, unfit for the service; and therefore went to St. Domingo, in hope
of exchanging it for a better, and to seek shelter from a storm which he saw
approaching. To his infinite surprise and mortification, Ovando would not admit
him into the port. A fleet of thirty ships was then ready to sail for Spain, on
board of which Roldan and Bovadilla were prisoners. Columbus informed Ovando,
of the prognostics which he had observed, which Ovando disregarded, and the
fleet sailed. Columbus then laid three of his vessels, under the lee of the
shore; and, with great difficulty, rode out the tempest. His brother put to
sea; and by his great naval skill saved the ship in which he sailed. Of the
fleet bound to Spain, eighteen ships were lost, and in them perished Roldan and
Bovadilla.

The enemies of Columbus gave out that he had raised this storm by the art of
magic; and such was the ignorance of the age, that the story was believed: What
contributed the more to its credit, was, that one of the worst ships of the
fleet, on board of which were all the effects which had been saved from the
ruined fortune of Columbus, was the first which arrived in Spain. The amount of
these effects was "four thousand pesos of gold, each of the value of eight
shillings." The remark which Ferdinando Columbus makes on this event, so
destructive to the accusers of his father, is, "I am satisfied, it was the hand
of GOD, who was pleased to infatuate them; that they might not hearken to good
advice; for had they arrived in Spain, they had never been punished, as their
crimes deserved; but rather favored and preferred as being the Bishop's
friends." Chap. 88.


After this storm, and another which followed it, Columbus having collected his
little squadron, sailed on discovery toward the continent; and, steering to the
southwest, came to an island called Guanania, twelve leagues from the coast of
Honduras; where he met with a large covered canoe, having on board several
pieces of cotton cloth of diverse colors, which the people said they had
brought from the westward. The men were armed with swords of wood, in which
sharp flints were strongly fixed. Their provision was maize and roots, and they
used the berries of cocoa as money. When the Admiral inquired for gold, they
pointed to the west, and when he asked for a strait by which he might pass
through the land, they pointed to the east. From the specimens of colored
cloth, he imagined, that they had come from India; and he hoped to pass
thither, by the strait which they described. Pursuing his course to the east
and south, he was led to the gulf of Darien; and visited several harbors among
which was one which he called Porto Bello; but he found no passage extending
through the land. He then returned to the westward; and landed on the coast of
Veragua; where the beauty and fertility of the country invited him to begin a
plantation, which he called Belem; but the natives, a fierce and formidable
race, deprived him of the honor of first establishing a colony on the
continent, by killing some of his people and obliging him to retire with the
others.

At sea, he met with tempestuous weather of long continuance; in which his
ships were so shattered, that with the utmost difficulty he kept them above
water, till he ran them ashore on the island of Jamaica. By his extraordinary
address, he procured from the natives two of their largest canoes; in which two
of his most faithful friends, Mendez and Fiesco, accompanied by some of his
sailors and a few Indians, embarked for Hispaniola. After encountering the
greatest difficulties, in their passage, they carried tidings of his misfortune
to Ovando, and solicited his aid. The merciless wretch detained them eight
months, without an answer; during which time, Columbus suffered the severest
hardships, from the discontent of his company, and the want of provisions. By
the hospitality of the natives, he at first received such supplies, as they
were able to spare; but the long continuance of these guests had diminished
their store, and the insolence of the mutineers gave a check to their
friendship. In this extremity, the fertile invention of Columbus suggested an
expedient which proved successful. He knew that a total eclipse of the moon was
at hand, which would be visible in the evening. On the preceding day, he sent
for the principal Indians, to speak with them, on a matter of the utmost
importance. Being assembled, he directed his interpreter to tell them, that the
GOD of heaven, whom he worshipped, was angry with them, for witholding
provision from him, and would punish them with famine and pestilence; as a
token of which, the moon would, in the evening, appear of an angry and bloody
color. Some of them received his speech with terror, and others with
indifference; but when the moon rose, and the eclipse increased as she advanced
from the horizon, they came in crowds, loaded with provision, and begged the
Admiral to intercede with his GOD, for the removal of his anger. Columbus
retired to his cabin; and when the eclipse began to go off, he came out and
told them, that he had prayed to his GOD, and had received this answer; that if
they would be good for the future, and bring him provision as he should want,
GOD would forgive them; and as a token of it, the moon would put on her usual
brightness. They gave him thanks, and promised compliance; and whilst he
remained on the island there was no more want of provision.

At the end of eight months, Ovando sent a small vessel to Jamaica, with a cask
of wine, two flitches of bacon, and a letter of compliment and excuse, which
the officer delivered; and without waiting for an answer, weighed his anchor
the same evening and sailed back to Hispaniola. The men who adhered to Columbus
and were with him on board the wrecks, wondered at the sudden departure of the
vessel, by which they expected deliverance. Columbus, never at a loss for an
evasion, told them that the caravel was too small to take the whole company,
and he would not go without them. This fiction had the desired effect; those
who adhered to him resumed their patience; but the mutineers became so insolent
that it was necessary to subdue them by force. In the contest ten of them were
killed. Porras, their leader, was made prisoner and the others escaped.
Bartholomew Columbus and two others of the Admiral's party were wounded, of
whom one died.

The fugitives, having lost their leader, thought it best to submit; and on the
next day sent a petition to the Admiral, confessing their fault, and promising
fidelity. This promise they confirmed by an oath, of which the imprecation was
singular; "they renounced, in case of failure, any absolution from Priest,
Bishop, or Pope, at the time of their death; and all benefit from the
sacraments of the Church; consenting to be buried like heathens and infidels in
the open field." The Admiral received their submission, provided that Porras
should continue prisoner, and they would accept a commander of his appointment,
as long as they should remain on the island.

At length a vessel, which Mendez had been permitted to buy, with the Admiral's
money, at Hispaniola, came to Jamaica, and took them off. On their arrival at
St. Domingo (August 13, 1504) Ovando affected great joy, and treated the
Admiral with a show of respect; but he liberated Porras, and threatened with
punishment the faithful adherents of Columbus. As soon as the vessel was
refitted, the Admiral took leave of his treacherous host, and, with his
brother, son, and servants, embarked for Spain. After a long and distressing
voyage, in which the ship lost her masts, he arrived at St. Lucar, in May 1505.

His patroness Isabella had been dead about a year; and with her, had expired
all the favor which he ever enjoyed in the Court of Ferdinand. Worn out with
sickness and fatigue, disgusted with the insincerity of his Sovereign, and the
haughtiness of his courtiers, Columbus lingered out a year in fruitless
solicitation for his violated rights; till death relieved him from all his
vexations. He died at Valadolid, on the twentieth of May, 1506, in the 59th
year of his age; and was buried in the cathedral of Seville, with this
inscription on his Tomb.

A Castilla ya Leon,
Nuevo Mundo dio Colon.
Translated thus.

To Castile and Leon,
Columbus gave a new World.
In the life of this remarkable man there is no deficiency of any quality which
can constitute a truly great character. Some of these observations are taken
from Dr. Campbell's account of European settlements in America, Vol. I. Chap.
viii.
His genius was penetrating, and his judgment solid. He had acquired as much
knowledge of the sciences as could be obtained at that day; and he corrected
what he had learned, by his own observations. His constancy and patience were
equal to the most hazardous undertakings. His fortitude surmounted many
difficulties; and his invention extricated him out of many perplexities. His
prudence enabled him to conceal or subdue his own infirmities; whilst he took
advantage of the passions of others, adjusting his behavior to his
circumstances; temporizing, or acting with vigor, as the occasion required.

His fidelity to the ungrateful Prince, whom he served, and whose dominions he
enlarged, must render him forever conspicuous as an example of justice; and his
attachment to the Queen, by whose influence he was raised and supported, will
always be a monument of his gratitude.

To his other excellent qualities may be added his piety. He always
entertained, and on proper occasions expressed, a reverence for the Deity, and
a firm confidence in his care and protection. In his declining days, the
consolations of religion were his chief support; and his last words were, "Into
thy hands, O Lord, I commend my spirit."

The persecution and injustice which he suffered, may be traced up to the
contract, which he insisted on, before he engaged in the plan of discovery.
That a foreigner should attain so high a rank as to be Viceroy for life, and
that the honor of an Admiral should be hereditary in his family, to the
exclusion of all the nobles of Spain, was more than their pride and jealousy
could endure; and they constantly endeavored to depreciate his merit; the only
foundation on which his honors were erected.

There is a story recorded by Peter Martyr, a contemporary historian, which
exemplifies their malice, and his ingenuity in rising superior to it. After the
death of the Queen, the nobility affected to insinuate, that his discoveries
were more the result of accident and good fortune, than of any well concerted
measures. One day at a public dinner, Columbus having borne much insulting
raillery on that head, at length called for an egg, and asked whether any of
them could set it upright on its little end. They all confessed it to be
impossible. Columbus striking it gently, flatted the shell till it stood
upright on the table. The company, with a disdainful sneer, cried out, "Any
body might have done it." -- "Yes (said Columbus) but none of you thought of
it; so I discovered the Indies, and now every pilot can steer the same course.
Many things appear easy when once performed, though before, they were thought
impossible. Remember the scoffs that were thrown at me, before I put my design
in execution. Then it was a dream, a chimera, a delusion; now it is what any
body might have done as well as I." When this story was told to Ferdinand, he
could not but admire the grandeur of that spirit, which at the same time he was
endeavoring to depress.

Writers of different countries have treated the character of Columbus
according to their prejudices, either national or personal. It is surprising to
observe, how these prejudices have descended; and that even at the distance of
three centuries, there are some, who affect to deny him the virtues for which
he was conspicuous, and the merit of originating a discovery, which is an
honor to human reason. His humanity has been called in question, because he
carried dogs to the West Indies, and employed them in extirpating the natives.
The truth is, that in his second expedition he was accompanied by a number of
gentlemen of the best families in Spain; and many more would have gone if it
had been possible to accommodate them. These gentlemen carried with them
"horses, asses and other beasts, which were of great use in a new plantation."
The conflict which Columbus had with the natives was in consequence of the
disorderly conduct of these Spaniards; who, in his absence, had taken their
goods, abused their women and committed other outrages, which the Indians could
not endure, and therefore made war upon them. In this war he found his colony
engaged, when he returned from his voyage to Cuba; and there was no way to end
it, but by pursuing it with vigor. With two hundred Spaniards, of whom twenty
were mounted on "horses followed by as many dogs," he encountered a numerous
body of Indians, estimated at one hundred thousand, on a large plain. He
divided his men into two parties, and attacked them on two sides: the noise of
the fire arms, soon dispersed them, and the horses and dogs prevented them from
rallying; and thus a complete victory was obtained. In this instance alone,
were the dogs used against the natives. They naturally followed their masters
into the field, and the horses to which they were accustomed; but to suppose
that Columbus transported them to the West Indies, with a view to destroy the
Indians, appears altogether idle, when it is considered that the number is
reckoned only at twenty. Excepting in this instance, where he was driven by
necessity, there is no evidence, that he made war on the natives of the West
Indies; on the contrary, he endeavored as far as possible to treat them with
justice and gentleness. The same cannot be said of those who succeeded him.

Attempts have also been made to detract from his merit, as an original
discoverer of the New World. The most successful candidate, who has been set up
as a rival to him, is MARTIN BEHAIM of Nuremberg in Germany. His claim to a
prior discovery has been so well contested, and the vanity of it so fully
exposed by the late Dr. Robertson, that I should not have thought of adding any
thing to what he has written, had not a memoir appeared in the second volume of
the Transactions of the American Philosophical Society No. 35, p. 263
at Philadelphia, in which the pretensions of Behaim are revived by M. OTTO;
who has produced some authorities which he had obtained from Nuremberg, an
imperial city of Germany, and which appear to him, "to establish in the
clearest manner a discovery of America anterior to that of Columbus."

It is conceded that Behaim was a man of learning and enterprise; that he was
contemporary with Columbus, and was his friend; that he pursued the same
studies and drew the same conclusions; that he was employed by King John II. in
making discoveries; and, that he met with deserved honor for the important
services which he rendered to the crown of Portugal. But, there are such
difficulties attending the story of his discovering America, as appear to me
insuperable. These I shall state; together with some remarks on the authorities
produced by M. Otto.

The first of his authorities contains several assertions which are
contradicted by other histories; Memoirs of Philip de Comines. Mezeray's and
Heanult's history of France. Collier's Dictionary.
(1.) That Isabella, daughter of John, King of Portugal, reigned after the
death of Philip, Duke of Burgundy, surnamed the Good. (2.) That to this lady,
when regent of the Duchy of Burgundy and Flanders, Behaim paid a visit in
1459. And (3.) that having informed her of his designs, he procured a vessel in
which he made the discovery of the island of Fayal, in 1460.

It is true that Philip. Duke of Burgundy and Flanders, surnamed the Good,
married Isabella the daughter of John I. King of Portugal; but Philip did not
die till 1467, and was immediately succeeded by his son Charles, surnamed the
Bold, then thirty four years of age. There could therefore have been no
interregnum, nor female regent after the death of Philip; and if there had
been, the time of Behaim's visit will not correspond with it; that being placed
in 1459, eight years before the death of Philip. Such a mistake, in point of
fact, and of chronology, is sufficient to induce a suspicion that the "archives
of Nuremberg" are too deficient in accuracy to be depended on as authorities.

With respect to the discovery of Fayal, in 1460, M. Otto acknowledges that it
is "contrary to the received opinion;" and well he might; for the first of the
Azores, St. Maria, was discovered in 1431; the second, St. Michael, in 1444;
the third, Terceira, in 1445; and before 1449, the islands, St. George,
Graciosa, Fayal and Pico, were known to the Portuguese. Forster's history of
voyages and discoveries, p. 256, 257, Dublin edition.
However true it may be that Behaim settled in the island of Fayal, and lived
there twenty years; yet his claim to the discovery of it must have a better
foundation than the "archives of Nuremberg," before it can be admitted.

The genuine account of the settlement of Fayal, and the interest which Behaim
had in it, is thus related by Dr. Forster, a German author of much learning and
good credit.

"After the death of the infant Don Henry [which happened in 1463,] the island
of Fayal was made a present of by [his sister] Isabella, Duchess of Burgundy,
to Jobst von Hurter, a native of Nuremberg. Hurter went in 1466, with a colony
of more than 2000 Flemings of both sexes, to his property, the isle of Fayal.
The Duchess had provided the Flemish emigrants with all necessaries for two
years, and the colony soon increased. About the year 1486, Martin Behaim
married a daughter of the Chevalier Jobst von Hurter, and had a son by her
named Martin. -- Jobst von Hurter, and Martin Behaim, both natives of
Nuremberg, were Lords of Fayal and Pico." Forster's history of voyages and
discoveries, p. 257, 258, 259.


The date of the supposed discovery of America, by Behaim, is placed by M.
Otto, in 1484, eight years before the celebrated voyage of Columbus. In the
same year we are told Garcilasso de la Vega's Royal commentaries. Preface.
Purchase. vol. v, p. 1454.
that Alonzo Sanchez de Huelva was driven by a storm to the westward for twenty
nine days; and saw an island, of which at his return he gave information to
Columbus. From both these supposed discoveries this conclusion is drawn, "That
Columbus would never have thought of this expedition to America, had not Behaim
gone there before him." Whether it be supposed that Behaim and Sanchez sailed
in the same ship, or that they made a discovery of two different parts of
America, in the same year, it is not easy to understand from the authorities
produced; but what destroys the credibility of this plausible tale, is, that
Columbus had formed his theory, and projected his voyage, at least ten years
before; as appears by his correspondence with Paul, a learned physician of
Florence, which bears date in 1474. Life, chap. viii.
It is uncertain at what time Columbus first made his application to the King
of Portugal, to fit him out for a western voyage; but it is certain that after
a negotiation with him on the subject, and after he had found out the secret
and unsuccessful attempt, which had been made to anticipate a discovery; he
quitted that kingdom in disgust, and went into Spain, in the latter end of the
year 1484. The authority of these facts is unquestioned; and from them it fully
appears, that a prior discovery of America, by Behaim or Sanchez, made in 1484,
could not have been the foundation of the enterprise of Columbus.

M. Otto speaks of letters written by Behaim in 1486, in the German language,
and preserved in the "archives of Nuremberg" which support this claim to a
prior discovery. As these letters are not produced, no certain opinion can be
formed concerning them; but from the date of the letters, and from the voyages
which Behaim actually performed in the two preceding years, we may with great
probability suppose, that they related to the discovery of Congo, in Africa; to
which Behaim has an uncontroverted claim.

I will now state the facts relative to this event, partly from the authorities
cited by M. Otto; and partly from others.

Dr. Robertson places the discovery of Congo and Benin in 1483, and with him
Dr. Forster agrees. The authors of the modern universal history Vol. xvi. p.
133, 135.
speak of two voyages to that coast; the first in 1484, the second in 1485;
both of which were made by Diego Came, Diego is the Spanish name of James, in
Latin Jacobus, and in Portuguese, Jago. Came is in Latin, Camus or Ca^^s, and in
Spanish, Cano; these different names are found in different authors.
who is said to have been one of the most expert sailors and of an enterprising
genius. From the chronicle of Hartman Schedl, as quoted by M. Otto, we are
informed, that Behaim sailed with Came, in these voyages, which are described in
the following terms. "These two, by the bounty of heaven, coasting along the
southern ocean, and having crossed the equator, got into the other hemisphere;
where, facing to the eastward, their shadows projected toward the south, and
right hand." No words could be more completely descriptive of a voyage from
Portugal to Congo, as any person may be satisfied by inspecting a map of
Africa; but how could M. Otto imagine that the discovery of America was
accomplished in such a voyage as this? "Having finished this cruize (continues
Schedl) in the space of 26 months, they returned to Portugal, with the loss of
many of their seamen, by the violence of the climate." This latter circumstance
also agrees very well with the climate of the African coast; See Brooks
Gazetteer, Benin.
but Schedl says not a word of the discovery of America.

M. Otto goes on to tell us "that the most positive proof of the great services
rendered to the crown of Portugal by Behaim, is the recompense bestowed on him
by King John II; who, in the most solemn manner, knighted him, in the presence
of all his court." Then follows a particular detail of the ceremony of
installation, as performed on the 18th of February, 1485, and M. Otto fairly
owns that this was "a reward for the discovery of Congo." Now let us bring the
detached parts of the story together.

Behaim was knighted on the 18th of February, 1485, for the discovery of Congo,
in which he had been employed 26 months preceding; having within that time made
two voyages thither, in company with Diego Came. It will follow then that the
whole of the preceding years, 1484 and 1483, were taken up in these two
voyages. This agrees very well with the accounts of the discovery of Congo, in
Robertson and Forster, and does not disagree with the modern universal history,
as far as the year 1484 is concerned; which unfortunately is the year assigned
for Behaim's discovery of "that part of America called Brasil, and his sailing
even to the straits of Magellan."

The only thing in M. Otto's memoir which bears any resemblance to a solution
of this difficulty is this. "We may suppose that Behaim, engaged in an
expedition to Congo, was driven by the winds to Fernambouc, and from thence by
the currents toward the coast of Guiana." But suppositions without proof will
avail little; and suppositions against proof will avail nothing. The two
voyages to Congo are admitted. The course is described; and the time is
determined; and both these are directly opposed to the supposition of his being
driven by winds and currents to America. For if he had been driven out of his
course and had spent "several years in examining the American islands, and
discovering the strait which bears the name of Magellan;" and if one of those
years was the year 1484, then he could not have spent 26 months preceding
February, 1485, in the discovery of Congo; but of this we have full and
satisfactory evidence; the discovery of America therefore must be given up.

There is one thing further in this memoir which deserves a particular remark,
and that is the reason assigned by M. Otto, for which the King of Portugal
declined the proposal of Columbus to sail to India by the west. "The refusal of
John II. is a proof of the knowledge which that politic prince had already
procured, of the existence of a new continent, which offered him only barren
lands, inhabited by unconquerable savages." This knowledge is supposed to have
been derived from the discoveries made by Behaim. But, not to urge again the
chronological difficulty with which this conjecture is embarrassed, I will take
notice of two circumstances in the life of Columbus, which militate with this
idea. The first is, that when Columbus had proposed a western voyage to King
John, and he declined it, "The King, by the advice of one Doctor Calzadilla,
resolved to send a caravel privately, to attempt that which Columbus had
proposed to him; because in case those countries were so discovered, he thought
himself not obliged to bestow any great reward. Having speedily equipped a
caravel, which was to carry supplies to the islands of Cabo Verde, he sent it
that way which the Admiral proposed to go. But those whom he sent wanted the
knowledge, constancy and spirit of the Admiral. After wandering many days upon
the sea, they turned back to the islands of Cabo Verde, laughing at the
undertaking, and saying it was impossible there should he any land in those
seas." Life of Columbus, chap. xi.


Afterward, "the King being sensible how faulty they were whom he had sent with
the caravel, had a mind to restore the Admiral to his favor, and desired that
he should renew the discourse of his enterprise; but not being so diligent to
put this in execution, as the Admiral was in getting away, he lost that good
opportunity; the Admiral, about the end of the year 1484, stole away privately
out of Portugal for fear of being stopped by the King." This account does not
agree with the supposition of a prior discovery.

The other circumstance is an interview which Columbus had with the people of
Lisbon, and the King of Portugal, on his return from his first voyage. For it
so happened that Columbus on his return was by stress of weather obliged to
take shelter in the port of Lisbon; and as soon as it was known that he had
come from the Indies, "the people thronged to see the natives whom he had
brought and hear the news; so that the caravel would not contain them. Some of
them praising God for so great a happiness; others storming that they had lost
the discovery through their King's incredulity."

When the King sent for Columbus, "he was doubtful what to do; but to take off
all suspicion that he came from his conquests, he consented." At the interview,
"the King offered him all that he stood in need of for the service of their
Catholic Majesty's, though he thought, that forasmuch as he had been a Captain
in Portugal, that conquest belonged to him. To which the Admiral answered, that
he knew of no such agreement, and that he had strictly observed his orders,
which were not to go to the mines of Portugal, [the gold coast] nor to Guinea."
Life, chap. xli.
Had John II. heard of Behaim's voyage to a western continent, would he not
have claimed it by priority of discovery, rather than by the commission which
Columbus had formerly borne in his service? Had such a prior discovery been
made, could it have been concealed from the people of Lisbon? And would they
have been angry that their King had lost it by his incredulity? These
circumstances appear to me to carry sufficient evidence, that no discovery of
America prior to that of Columbus had come to the knowledge of the King of
Portugal.

In answer to the question "Why are we searching the archives of an imperial
city for the causes of an event, which took place in the western extremity of
Europe?" M. Otto gives us to understand, that "from the fourteenth to the
sixteenth centuries, the Germans were the best geographers, the best historians
and the most enlightened politicians." Not to detract from the merit of the
German literati of those ages, I think we may give equal credit to a learned
German author of the present age, Dr. John Reinhold Forster; who appears to
have a thorough understanding of the claims not only of his own countrymen, but
of others. In his indefatigable researches into the discoveries which have been
made by all nations, though he has given due credit to the adventures of Behaim
in Congo and Fayal, yet he has not said one word of his visiting America; which
he certainly would have done, if in his opinion there had been any foundation
for it.

LETTERS from PAUL, a Physician of Florence, to CHRISTOPHER COLUMBUS,
concerning the Discovery of the Indies.
LETTER I.
To CHRISTOPHER COLUMBUS, PAUL the Physician wishes health.
I PERCEIVE your noble and earnest desire to sail to those parts where the
spice is produced; and therefore in answer to a letter of yours, I send you
another letter, which some days since I wrote to a friend of mine, and servant
to the King of Portugal, before the wars of Castile, in answer to another he
wrote to me by his highness's order, upon this same account; and I send you
another sea chart like that I sent him, which will satisfy your demands. The
copy of the letter is this.

To FERDINAND MARTINEZ, canon of Lisbon, PAUL the Physician wishes health.
I AM very glad to hear of the familiarity you have with your most serene and
magnificent King; and though I have very often discoursed concerning the short
way there is from hence to the Indies, where the spice is produced, by sea,
which I look upon to be shorter than that you take by the coast of Guinea; yet
you now tell me that his highness would have me make out and demonstrate it, so
as it may be understood and put in practice. Therefore, though I could better
show it him with a globe in my hand, and make him sensible of the figure of the
world; yet I have resolved to render it more easy and intelligible, to show
this way upon a chart, such as are used in navigation; and therefore I send one
to his majesty, made and drawn with my own hand; wherein is set down the utmost
bounds of the west, from Ireland in the north, to the farthest part of Guinea,
with all the islands that lie in the way. Opposite to which western coast is
described the beginning of the Indies, with the islands and places whither you
may go, and how far you may bend from the north pole toward the equinoctial,
and for how long a time; that is, how many leagues you may sail, before you
come to those places most fruitful in all sorts of spice, jewels and precious
stones. Do not wonder if I term that country, where the spice grows, west, that
product being generally ascribed to the east; because those who shall sail
westward will always find those places in the west; and they that travel by
land eastward will ever find those places in the east. The strait lines that
lie lengthways in the chart, show the distance there is from west to east; the
others cross them, show the distance from north to south. I have also marked
down in the said chart, several places in India, where ships might put in upon
any storm, or contrary winds, or any other accident unforeseen.

Moreover to give you full information of all those places which you are very
desirous to know; you must understand, that none but traders live or reside in
all those islands, and that there is as great number of ships and seafaring
people with merchandise, as in any other part of the world; particularly in a
most noble port called Zacton, where there are every year a hundred large ships
of pepper, loaded and unloaded, besides many other ships that take in other
spice.

This country is mighty populous, and there are many provinces and kingdoms,
and innumerable cities under the dominion of a prince called the Kham, which
name signifies, King of Kings; who for the most part resides in the Province of
Cathay. His predecessors were very desirous to have commerce and be in amity
with Christians; and 200 years since, sent ambassadors to the Pope; desiring
him to send them many learned men and doctors to teach them our faith; but by
reason of some obstacles the ambassadors met with, they returned back, without
coming to Rome.

Besides, there came an ambassador to Pope Eugenius IV. who told him the great
friendship there was between those princes, their people, and the Christians. I
discoursed with him a long while upon the several matters of the grandeur of
their royal structures, and of the greatness, length and breadth of their
rivers. He told me many wonderful things of the multitude of towns and cities
founded along the banks of the rivers; and that there were 200 cities upon one
river only, with marble bridges over it, of a great length and breadth, and
adorned with abundance of pillars. This country deserves as well as any other
to be discovered; and there may not only be great profit made there, and many
things of value found, but also gold, silver, all sorts of precious stones, and
spices in abundance, which are not brought into our parts. And it is certain,
that many wise men, philosophers, astrologers, and other persons skilled in all
arts, and very ingenious, govern that mighty province, and command their armies.

From Lisbon directly westward, there are in the chart 26 spaces, each of which
contains 250 miles, to the most noble and vast city of Quisay, which is 100
miles in compass, that is 35 leagues; in it there are ten marble bridges. The
name signifies a heavenly city; of which, wonderful things are reported, as to
the ingenuity of the people, the buildings and the revenues. This space
abovementioned is almost the third part of the globe. This city is in the
province of Mango, bordering on that of Cathay, where the King for the most
part resides.

From the island Antilla, which you call the seven cities, and of which you
have some knowledge, to the most noble island of Cipango are ten spaces, which
make 2500 miles, or 225 leagues; which island abounds in gold, pearls and
precious stones; and you must understand, they cover their temples and palaces
with plates of pure gold. So that for want of knowing the way, all these things
are hidden and concealed, and yet may be gone to with safety.

Much more might be said, but having told you what is most material, and you
being wise and judicious, I am satisfied there is nothing of it, but what you
understand, and therefore I will not be more prolix. Thus much may serve to
satisfy your curiosity, it being as much as the shortness of time and my
business would permit me to say. So I remain most ready to satisfy and serve
his highness to the utmost in all the commands he shall lay upon me.

Florence, June 25, 1474.

LETTER II.
To CHRISTOPHER COLUMBUS, PAUL the Physician wishes health.
I RECEIVED your letters with the things you sent me, which I shall take as a
great favor, and commend your noble and ardent desire of sailing from east to
west, as it is marked out in the chart I sent you, which would demonstrate
itself better in the form of a globe.

I am glad it is well understood, and that the voyage laid down is not only
possible but true, certain, honorable, very advantageous and most glorious
among all Christians. You cannot be perfect in the knowledge of it, but by
experience and practice, as I have had in great measure, and by the solid and
true information of worthy and wise men, who have come from those parts to this
court of Rome; and from merchants who have traded long in those parts and are
persons of good reputation. So that when the said voyage is performed, it will
be to powerful kingdoms, and to the most noble cities and provinces; rich and
abounding in all things we stand in need of, particularly in all sorts of spice
in great quantities, and store of jewels.

This will moreover be grateful to those kings and princes, who are very
desirous to converse and trade with Christians of these our countries, whether
it be for some of them to become Christians, or else to have communication with
the wise and ingenious men of these parts, as well in point of religion, as in
all sciences, because of the extraordinary account they have of the kingdoms
and government of these parts. For which reasons, and many more that might be
alleged, I do not at all admire, that you who have a great heart, and all the
Portuguese nation, which has ever had notable men in all undertakings, be
eagerly bent upon performing this voyage.

V. JOHN CABOT AND SEBASTIAN CABOT.
THE economical disposition of Henry VII, King of England, induced him to
preserve tranquillity in his dominions, which greatly contributed to the
increase of commerce and manufactures; and to bring thither merchants from all
parts of Europe. The Lombards and the Venetians were remarkably numerous; the
former of whom had a street in London appropriated to them and called by their
name. Forster's northern Voyages, p. 2^6.


Among the Venetians resident there at that time was JOHN CABOT, a man
perfectly skilled in all the sciences requisite to form an accomplished
mariner. Campbell's Lives of Admirals, i.336.
He had three sons, Lewis, SEBASTIAN and Sanctius, Hakluyt. III.
all of whom he educated in the same manner. Lewis and Sanctius became eminent
men, and settled, the one at Genoa, the other at Venice. Of Sebastian a farther
account will be given.

The famous discovery made by Columbus caused great admiration and much
discourse, in the court of Henry, and among the merchants of England. To find a
way to India by the west, had long been a problem with men of science as well
as a desideratum in the mercantile interest. The way was then supposed to be
opened; and the specimens of gold, which Columbus had brought home, excited the
warmest desire of pursuing that discovery.

Cabot, by his knowledge of the globe, supposed that a shorter way might be
found from England to India, by the northwest. Having communicated his project
to the King, it was favorably received; and on the fifth of March 1496, a
commission was granted to "John Cabot, and his three sons, their heirs and
deputies, giving them liberty to sail to all parts of east, west, and north,
under the royal banners, and ensigns; to discover countries of the heathen,
unknown to christians; to set up the King's banners there; to occupy and
possess as his subjects, such places as they could subdue; giving them the rule
and jurisdiction of the same, to be holden on condition of paying to the King,
as often as they should arrive at Bristol, (at which place only they were
permitted to arrive) in wares and merchandise, one fifth part of all their
gains; with exemption from all customs and duties on such merchandise as should
be brought from their discoveri^^."

After the granting of this commission, the King gave orders for fitting out
two caravels for the purpose of the discovery. These were victualled at the
public expense; and freighted by the merchants of London and Bristol, with
coarse cloths and other articles of traffic. The whole company consisted of
three hundred men.

With this equipment, in the beginning of May 1497, There is no good account of
this voyage written by any contemporary author. It is therefore collected from
several who have set down facts without much order or precision. To reconcile
their contradictions, and deduce conclusions from what they have related,
requires much trouble; and leaves an uncertainty with respect to particular
circumstances; though the principal facts are well ascertained.
John Cabot and his son Sebastian sailed from Bristol toward the northwest,
till they reached the latitude of 58; where meeting with floating ice, and the
weather being severely cold, they altered their course to the southwest; not
expecting to find any land, till they should arrive at Cathay, the northern
part of China, from whence they intended to pass southward to India.

On the 24th of June, very early in the morning, they were surprised with the
sight of land; which, being the first that they had seen, they called Prima
Vista. The description of it is given in these words. "The island which lies
out before the land, he called St. John, because it was discovered on the day
of St. John, the Baptist. The inhabitants of this island wear beasts' skins. In
their wars, they use bows, arrows, pikes, darts, wooden clubs, and slings. The
soil is barren in some places and yields little fruit; but is full of white
bears and stags, far greater than ours. It yields plenty of fish, and those
very great, as seals and salmons. There are soles above a yard in length; but
especially there is great abundance of that kind of fish which the savages call
Bacalao. (Cod.) In the same island are hawks and eagles, as black as ravens;
also partridges. The inhabitants had great plenty of copper." Hakluyt iii, 6.
Purchase iv, 807.


This land is generally supposed to be some part of the island of Newfoundland;
and Dr. Forster thinks that the name, Prima Vista, was afterward changed to
Bona Vista, now the northern cape of Trinity bay, in Latitude 48 50. Peter
Martyr's account is, that Cabot called the land, Bacalaos; and there is a small
island off the south cape of Trinity bay, which bears that name. Mr. Prince, in
his chronology, (citing Galvanus for an authority) says, that the land
discovered by Cabot was in latitude 45. If this were true, the first discovery
was made on the peninsula of Nova Scotia; and as they coasted the land
northward, they must have gone into the gulf of St. Lawrence, in pursuit of
their northwest passage.

The best accounts of the voyage preserved by Hakluyt and Purchase, say nothing
of the latitude of Prima Vista; but speak of their sailing northward after they
had made the land, as far as 67. Stowe, in his chronicle, Reign of Hen. vii.
An. 14, p. 872.
says it was on the "north side of Terra de Labrador." This course must have
carried them far up the strait which separates Greenland from the continent of
America.

Finding the land still stretching to the northward, and the weather very cold
in the month of July; the men became uneasy, and the commanders found it
necessary to return to Bacalaos. Having here refreshed themselves, they coasted
the land southward, till they came into the same latitude with the straits of
Gibraltar 36, or according to some, no farther than 38, when their provisions
falling short, they returned to England; bringing three of the Savages as a
present to the King. "They were clothed with the skins of beasts, and lived on
raw flesh; but after two years, were seen in the King's court clothed like
Englishmen, and could not be discerned from Englishmen." Stowe Reign of Hen.
vii, page 875, Anno Regni 18.


Nothing more is said of John Cabot, the father; and some historians ascribe
the whole of this discovery to Sebastian only; but at the time of this voyage
he could not have been more than twenty years old; when, though he might
accompany his father, yet he was too young to undertake such an expedition
himself. The voyage having produced no specimens of gold; and the King being
engaged in a controversy with Scotland, no farther encouragement was given to
the spirit of discovery.

After the King's death, Sebastian Cabot was invited to Spain, and was received
in a respectful manner by King Ferdinand and Queen Isabella. In their service
he sailed on a voyage of discovery to the southern parts of the New Continent;
and having visited the coast of Brasil, entered a great river to which he gave
the name of Rio de la Plata. He sailed up this river one hundred and twenty
leagues; and found it divided into many branches; the shores of which were
inhabited by numerous people.

After this, he made other voyages, of which no particular memorials remain. He
was honored by Ferdinand, with a commission of Grand Pilot; and was one of the
council of the Indies. His residence was in the city of Seville. His character
was gentle, friendly and social. His employment was the drawing of charts; on
which he delineated all the new discoveries made by himself and others. Peter
Martyr speaks of him as his friend, with whom he loved familiarly to converse.
" Familiarem habeo domi CABOTUM ipsum, et interdum contubernalem." Decad. iii,
chap. vi.


In his advanced age, he returned to England, and resided at Bristol. By the
favor of the Duke of Somerset, he was introduced to King Edward VI, who took
great delight in his conversation, and settled on him a pension of L166. 13 s.
4 d. per annum for life. He was appointed governor of a company of merchants,
associated for the purpose of making discoveries of unknown countries. Hakluyt
I.268, III.10.
This is a proof of the great esteem, in which he was held as a man of
knowledge and experience in his profession. He had a strong persuasion that a
passage might be found to China, by the northeast, and warmly patronised the
attempt made by Sir Hugh Willoughby in 1553 to explore the northern seas, for
that purpose. There is still extant a complete set of instructions drawn and
subscribed by Cabot, for the direction of the voyage to Cathay, which affords
the clearest proof of his sagacity and penetration. Ibid I.226.
But though this, as well as all other attempts of the kind, proved ineffectual
to the principal end in view, yet it was the means of opening a trade with
Russia, which proved very beneficial to the company.

The last account which we have of Sebastian is, that in 1556, when the company
were sending out a vessel called the Search-thrift, under the command of
Stephen Borough, for discovery; the Governor made a visit on board; which is
thus related in the journal of the voyage as preserved by Hakluyt. Vol. i, p.
274.


"The 27th of April, being Monday, the Right Worshipful Sebastian Cabota came
aboard our pinnace, at Gravesend; accompanied with diverse gentlemen and
gentlewomen; who, after they had viewed our pinnace, and tasted of such cheer
as we could make them, went ashore, giving to our mariners right liberal
rewards. The good old gentleman Master Cabota gave to the poor most liberal
alms, wishing them to pray for the good fortune and prosperous success of the
Search-thrift, our pinnace. And then at the sign of St. Christopher, he and his
friends banqueted; and made me and them that were in the company great cheer;
and for very joy that he had to see the towardness of our intended discovery,
he entered into the dance himself, among the rest of the young and lusty
company; which being ended, he and his friends departed, most gently commending
us to the governance of Almighty GOD."

According to the calculation of his age by Dr. Campbell, he must at that time
have been about eighty years old.

He was one of the most extraordinary men of the age in which he lived. By his
ingenuity and industry, he enlarged the bounds of science and promoted the
interest of the English nation. Dr. Campbell supposes it was he who first took
notice of the variation of the magnetic needle. Lives of Admirals, i.419.
It had been observed in the first voyage of Columbus to the West Indies;
though probably Cabot might not have known it, till after he had made the same
discovery.

VI. JAMES CARTIER.
THOUGH the English did not prosecute the discovery made by the Cabots, nor
avail themselves of the only advantages which it could have afforded them; yet
their neighbors of Brittany, It is supposed that the island of Cape Breton
took its name from the Bretons, the fishermen of Brittany.
Normandy and Biscay wisely pursued the track of those adventurers and took
vast quantities of cod on the banks of Newfoundland.

In 1524, John Verazzani, a Florentine, in the service of France, ranged the
coast of the new continent from Florida to Newfoundland, and gave it the name
of New France. In a subsequent voyage he was cut to pieces and devoured by the
savages.

It is remarkable that the three great European kingdoms Spain, England and
France, made use of three Italians to conduct their discoveries: Columbus, a
Genoese; Cabot, a Venetian; and Verazzani, a Florentine. This is a proof that
among the Italians there were at that time persons superior in maritime
knowledge to the other nations of Europe; though the penurious spirit of those
republics, their mutual jealousy and petty wars, made them overlook the
benefits resulting from extensive enterprises, and leave the vast regions of
the new world to be occupied by others.

The voyages of Verazzani having produced no addition to the revenue of France;
all further attempts to perfect his discoveries were laid aside; but the
fishery being found conducive to the commercial interest, it was at length
conceived, that a plantation in the neighborhood of the banks might be
advantageous. This being represented to King Francis I, by Chabot the Admiral,
JAMES CARTIER His name is sometimes written Quartier.
of St. Malo, was commissioned to explore the country, with a view to find a
place for a colony. Forster's northern voyages, p. 435.


On the 20th of April 1534, he sailed from St. Malo with two ships of sixty
tons, and 122 men; and on the tenth of May came in sight of Bonavista, on the
island of Newfoundland. But the ice which lay along the shore obliged him to go
southward; and he entered a harbor to which he gave the name of St. Catharine;
Called in some maps Catalina.
where he waited for fair weather, and fitted his boats.

As soon as the season would permit he sailed northward, and examined several
harbors and islands, on the coast of Newfoundland; in one of which he found
such a quantity of birds, that in half an hour, two boats were loaded with
them; and after they had eaten as many as they could, five or six barrels full
were salted for each ship. This place was called Bird Island.

Having passed Cape de Great, the northern extremity of the land; he entered the
straits of Bellisle and visited several harbors on the opposite coast of
Labrador, one of which he called Cartier's Sound. The harbor is described as
one of the best in the world; but the land is stigmatized as the place to which
Cain was banished; no vegetation being produced among the rocks, but thorns and
moss. Yet, bad as it was, there were inhabitants in it, who lived by catching
seals, and seemed to be a wandering tribe. Hakluyt, vol. iii, p. 201 -- 211.


In circumnavigating the great island of Newfoundland, they found the weather
in general cold; but when they had crossed the gulf in a southwesterly
direction to the continent, they came into a deep bay, where the climate was so
warm, that they named it Baye de Chaleur, or the Bay of Heat. Here were several
kinds of wild berries, roses and meadows of grass. In the fresh waters they
caught salmon in great plenty.

Having searched in vain for a passage through the bay, they quitted it, and
sailed along the coast, eastward, till they came to the smaller bay of Gasp;
where they sought shelter from a tempest, and were detained twelve days in the
month of July. In this place Cartier performed the ceremony of taking
possession for the King of France. A cross of thirty feet high was erected on a
point of land. On this cross was suspended a shield, with the arms of France
and the words Vive le Roy de France. Before it, the people kneeled, uncovered;
with their hands extended, and their eyes lifted toward heaven. The natives,
who were present, beheld the ceremony at first with silent admiration; but
after a while, an old man, clad in a bear's skin, made signs to them that the
land was his, and that they should not have it, without his leave. They then
informed him by signs, that the cross was intended only as a mark of direction,
by which they might again find the port; and they promised to return the next
year, and to bring iron and other commodities.

They thought it proper however to conciliate the old man's good will, by
entertaining him on board the ship and making him several presents; by which
means, they so prevailed on him, that he permitted Cartier to carry two of his
sons, young men, to France, on the security of a promise that he would bring
them back, at his return the next spring.

From Gasp, he sailed so far into the Great River, afterward called St.
Lawrence, as to discover land on the opposite side; but the weather being
boisterous, and the current setting against him, he thought it best to return
to Newfoundland, and then to France; where he arrived safe in the harbor of
St. Malo on the fifth of September.

The discoveries made in this voyage excited farther curiosity; and the Vice
Admiral Melleraye represented Cartier's merits to the King, so favorably, as
to procure for him a more ample equipment. Three ships, one of 120, one of 60
and one of 40 tons, were destined to perform another voyage, in the ensuing
spring; and several young men of distinction entered as volunteers, to seek
adventures in the new world. When they were ready to sail, the whole company,
after the example of Columbus, went in procession to church, on Whitsunday,
where the Bishop of St. Malo pronounced his blessing on them. They sailed on
the 19th of May 1535. Meeting with tempestuous weather, the ships were
separated; and did not join again, till Cartier in the largest ship arrived at
Bird Island; where he again filled his boats with fowls, and on the 26th of
July was joined by the other vessels.

From Bird Island they pursued the same course as in the preceding summer; and
having come into the gulf on the western side of Newfoundland, gave it the name
of St. Lawrence. Here they saw abundance of whales. Passing between the island
of Assumption (since called Anticosti) and the northern shore, they sailed up
the great river, till they came to a branch on the northern side, which the
young natives who were on board called Saguenay; the main river they told him
would carry him to Hochelaga, the capital of the whole country.

After spending some time in exploring the northern coast, to find an opening
to the northward; in the beginning of September, he sailed up the river and
discovered several islands; one of which, from the multitude of filberts, he
called Coudres; and another, from the vast quantity of grapes, he named
Bacchus, (now Orleans.) This island was full of inhabitants who subsisted by
fishing.

When the ships had come to anchor between the N. W. side of the island and the
main, Cartier went on shore with his two young Savages. The people of the
country were at first afraid of them; but hearing the youths speak to them in
their own language, they became sociable, and brought eels and other fish, with
a quantity of Indian corn in ears, for the refreshment of their new guests; in
return for which, they were presented with such European baubles as were
pleasing to them.

The next day, Donacona, the prince of the place, came to visit them, attended
by twelve boats; but keeping ten of them at a distance, he approached with two
only, containing sixteen men. In the true spirit of hospitality, he made a
speech, accompanied with significant gestures, welcoming the French to his
country and offering his service to them. The young savages, Taignoagni and
Domagaia answered him, reporting all which they had seen in France, at which he
appeared to be pleased. Then approaching the Captain, who held out his hand, he
kissed it, and laid it round his own neck, in token of friendship. Cartier, on
his part, entertained Donacona with bread and wine, and they parted mutually
pleased.

The next day Cartier went up in his boat to find a harbor for his ships; the
season being so far advanced that it became necessary to secure them. At the
west end of the isle of Bacchus, he found "a goodly and pleasant sound, where
is a little river and haven; about three fathom deep at high water." To this he
gave the name of St. Croix, and determined there to lay up his ships.

Near this place was a village called Stadacona, of which Donacona was the
Lord. It was environed with forest trees, some of which bore fruit; and under
the trees, was a growth of wild hemp. As Cartier was returning to his ships, he
had another specimen of the hospitable manners of the natives. A company of
people, of both sexes, met him on the shore of the little river, singing and
dancing up to their knees in water. In return for their courtesy, he gave them
knives and beads; and they continued their music till he was beyond hearing it.

When Cartier had brought his ships to the harbor and secured them, he
intimated his intention to pass in his boats up the river to Hochelaga.
Donacona was loath to part with him; and invented several artifices to prevent
his going thither. Among others, he contrived to dress three of his men in
black and white skins, with horns on their heads and their faces besmeared with
coal, to make them resemble infernal spirits. They were put into a canoe and
passed by the ships; brandishing their horns and making an unintelligible
harrangue. Donacona, with his people, pursued and took them, on which they fell
down as if dead. They were carried ashore into the woods, and all the savages
followed them. A long discourse ensued, and the conclusion of the farce was,
that these demons had brought news from the God of Hochelaga, that his country
was so full of snow and ice, that whoever should adventure thither would perish
with the cold. The artifice afforded diversion to the French, but was too thin
to deceive them. Cartier determined to proceed; and on the 19th of September,
with his pinnace and two boats, began his voyage up the river to Hochelaga.

Among the woods on the margin of the river were many vines loaded with ripe
grapes, than which nothing could be a more welcome sight to Frenchmen, though
the fruit was not so delicious as they had been used to taste in their own
country. Along the banks were many huts of the natives; who made signs of joy
as they passed; presented them with fish; piloted them through narrow channels;
carried them ashore on their backs, and helped them to get off their boats when
aground. Some presented their children to them, and such as were of proper age
were accepted.

The water at that time of the year being low, their passage was rendered
difficult; but by the friendly assistance of the natives they surmounted the
obstructions. On the 28th of September they passed the rapids between the
islands in the upper part of the lake Angoleme, (now called St. Peter's) and on
the second of October they arrived at the island of Hochelaga; where they had
been expected, and preparations were made to give them a welcome reception.
About a thousand persons came to meet them, singing and dancing, the men on one
side, the women on the other, and the children in a distinct body. Presents of
fish and other victuals were brought, and in return were given knives, beads
and other trinkets. The Frenchmen lodged the first night in their boats, and
the natives watched on the shore, dancing round their fires during the whole
night.

The next morning Cartier, with twenty five of his company, went to visit the
town, and were met on the way by a person of distinction, who bad them welcome.
To him they gave two hatchets and two knives, and hung over his neck a cross
which they taught him to kiss. As they proceeded, they passed through groves of
oak, from which the acorns were fallen and lay thick on the ground. After this
they came to fields of ripe corn, some of which was gathered. In the midst of
these fields was situate the town of Hochelaga.

It was of a round form, encompassed with three lines of palisades, through
which was one entrance, well secured with stakes and bars. On the inside was a
rampart of timber, to which were ascents by ladders, and heaps of stones were
laid in proper places for defense. In the town were about fifty long huts built
with stakes and covered with bark. In the middle of each hut was a fire, round
which were lodging places, floored with bark and covered with skins. In the
upper part was a scaffold, on which they dried and preserved their corn. To
prepare it for eating, they pounded it in wooden mortars, and having mixed it
with water, baked it on hot stones. Besides corn they had beans, squashes and
pumpkins. They dried their fish and preserved them in troughs. These people
lived chiefly by tillage and fishing, and seldom went far from home. Those on
the lower parts of the river were more given to hunting, and considered the
Lord of Hochelaga as their sovereign, to whom they paid tribute.

When the new guests were conducted to an open square in the center of the
town; the females came to them, rubbing their hands and faces, weeping with joy
at their arrival, and bringing their children to be touched by the strangers.
They spread mats for them on the ground, whilst the men seated themselves in a
large circle on the outside. The King was then brought in a litter, on the
shoulders of ten men, and placed on a mat next to the French Captain. He was
about fifty years old, and had no mark of distinction but a coronet made of
porcupine's quills dyed red; which he took off and gave to the Captain,
requesting him to rub his arms and legs which were trembling with a palsy.
Several persons, blind, lame, and withered with age, were also brought to be
touched; as if they supposed that their new guests were messengers from heaven
invested with a power of healing diseases. Cartier gratified them as well as he
could, by laying his hands on them and repeating some devotional passages from
a service book, which he had in his pocket; accompanying his ejaculations with
significant gestures, and lifting up his eyes to heaven. The natives
attentively observed and imitated all his motions.

Having performed this ceremony, he desired the men, women and children to
arrange themselves in separate bodies. To the men he gave hatchets, to the
women beads, and to the children rings. He then ordered his drums and trumpets
to sound, which highly pleased the company and set them to dancing.

Being desirous of ascending the hill, under which the town was built, the
natives conducted them to the summit; where they were entertained with a most
extensive and beautiful prospect of mountains, woods, islands and waters. They
observed the course of the river above, and some falls of water in it; and the
natives informed them that they might sail on it for three months; that it ran
through two or three great lakes, beyond which was a sea of fresh water, to
which they knew of no bounds; and that on the other side of the mountains there
was another river which ran in a contrary direction to the southwest, through a
country full of delicious fruits and free from snow and ice; that there was
found such metal as the Captain's silver whistle and the haft of a dagger
belonging to one of the company which was gilt with gold. Being shown some
copper, they pointed to the northward, and said it came from Saguenay. To this
hill Cartier gave the name of Montreal, which it has ever since retained.

The visit being finished, the natives accompanied the French to their boats,
carrying such as were weary on their shoulders. They were loath to part with
their guests, and followed them along the shore of the river to a considerable
distance.

On the fourth of October, Cartier and his company departed from Hochelaga. In
passing down the river, they erected a cross on the point of an island, which,
with three others, lay in the mouth of a shallow river, on the north side,
called Fouetz. On the eleventh they arrived at the Port de St. Croix, and found
that their companions had enclosed the ships with a palisade and rampart, on
which they had mounted cannon.

The next day Donacona invited them to his residence, where they were
entertained with the usual festivity and made the customary presents. They
observed that these people used the leaves of an herb [tobacco] which they
preserved in pouches made of skins and smoked in stone pipes. It was very
offensive to the French; but the natives valued it as contributing much to the
preservation of their health. Their houses appeared to be well supplied with
provisions. Among other things which were new to the French, they observed the
scalps of five men, spread and dried like parchment. These were taken from
their enemies the Toudamani, who came from the south, and were continually at
war with them.

Being determined to spend the winter among these friendly people, they traded
with them for the provisions which they could spare, and the river supplied
them with fish till it was hard frozen.

In December the scurvy began to make its appearance among the natives, and
Cartier prohibited all intercourse with them; but it was not long before his
own men were taken with it. It raged with uncontroled violence for above two
months, and by the middle of February, out of one hundred and ten persons,
fifty were sick at once, and eight or ten had died.

In this extremity Cartier appointed a day of solemn humiliation and prayer. A
crucifix was placed on a tree, and as many as were able to walk went in
procession, through the ice and snow, singing the seven penitential psalms and
performing other devotional exercises. At the close of the solemnity Cartier
made a vow, that "if it would please God to permit him to return to France, he
would go in pilgrimage to our Lady of Roquemado." But it was necessary to watch
as well as pray. To prevent the natives from knowing their weak and defenseless
state, he obliged all who were able, to make as much noise as possible with
axes and hammers; and told the natives that his men were all busily employed,
and that he would not suffer any of them to go from the ships till their work
was done. The ships were fast frozen up from the middle of November to the
middle of March; the snow was four feet deep, and higher than the sides of the
ships above the ice. The severity of the winter exceeded all which they had
ever experienced; the scurvy still raged; twenty five men had fallen victims to
it, and the others were so weak and low in spirits, that they despaired of ever
seeing their native country.

In the depth of this distress and despondency, Cartier, who had escaped the
disease, in walking one day on the ice, met some of the natives, among whom was
Domagaia, one of the young men who had been with him to France and who then
resided with his countrymen at Stadacona. He had been sick with the scurvy, his
sinews had been shrunk and his knees swollen, his teeth loose, and his gums
rotten; but he was then recovered, and told Cartier of a certain tree, the
leaves and bark of which he had used as a remedy. Cartier expressed his wish to
see the tree; telling him that one of his people had been affected with the
same disorder. Two women were immediately dispatched, who brought ten or twelve
branches, and showed him how to prepare the decoction; which was thus, "to boil
the bark and the leaves; to drink of the liquor every other day; and to put the
dregs on the legs of the sick." This tree was called by the natives Ameda or
Haneda. Mr. Hakluyt supposes it to have been the Sassafras; but as the leaves
were used with the bark, in the winter, it must have been an evergreen. The
dregs of the bark were also applied to the sore legs of the patient. From these
circumstances I am inclined to think that it was the spruce pine (pinus
canadensis) which is used in the same manner by the Indians, and such as have
learned of them. Spruce beer is well known to be a powerful antiscorbutic: and
the bark of this and of the white pine serves as a cataplasm for wounds and
sores.


This remedy presently came into use, on board the ships; and its good effects
were so surprising, that within one week they were completely healed of the
scurvy; and some who had venereal complaints of long standing were also cured
by the same means.

The severity of winter having continued four months without intermission, at
the return of the sun, the season became milder, and in April the ice began to
break up. On the third of May, Cartier took possession of the country by
erecting a cross, thirty five feet high, on which was hung a shield, bearing
the arms of France, with this inscription: FRANCISCUS primus, Dei gratia,
FRANCORUM Rex, regnat.

The same day, being a day of festivity, the two young savages, Taignoagni and
Domagaia, with Donacona the chief of the place, came on board the ships; and
were partly prevailed on and partly constrained to accompany Cartier to France.
A handsome present was made to the Family of Donacona, but it was with great
reluctance that his friends parted with him; though Cartier promised to bring
him again at the end of twelve months. On the sixth of May they sailed from the
Port of St. Croix; and having touched at St. Peter's in Newfoundland, they
arrived at St. Malo in France the sixth of July 1536.

Whether Cartier performed his vow to God, the history does not tell us;
certain it is, however, that he did not perform his promise to his passengers.
The zeal for adventures of this kind began to abate. Neither gold nor silver
were carried home. The advantages of the fur trade were not fully understood;
and the prospect of benefit from cultivation in the short summer of that cold
climate, was greatly overbalanced, by the length and severity of a Canadian
winter. The natives had been so often told of the necessity of baptism in order
to salvation, that on their arrival in France, they were at their own request
baptized; but neither of them lived to see their native land again.

The report which Cartier brought home, of the fine country beyond the Lakes,
had however made such an impression on the minds of some, that, at the end of
four years, another expedition was projected. Francis de la Roche, Lord of
Roberval, was commissioned by the King as his Lieutenant Governor in Canada and
Hockelaga; and Cartier was appointed his pilot, with the command of five ships.
When they were ready to sail, Roberval had not finished his preparations, and
was therefore detained. The King's orders to Cartier being positive, he sailed
from St. Malo on the 23d of May 1540.

The winds were adverse and the voyage tedious. The ships were scattered, and
did not arrive at the place of their destination till the 23d of August; when
they came to the port of St. Croix in the river of Canada.

The first inquiry made by the natives was for their countrymen who had been
carried away. The answer was, that Donacona was dead, and that the others had
become great Lords, were married in France, and refused to return. Neither
sorrow nor resentment were shown on this occasion; but a secret jealousy, which
had long been working, received strength, from an answer so liable to suspicion.

The history of this voyage being imperfect, it is not possible to say, in what
particular manner this jealousy operated. Cartier made another excursion, up
the river; and pitched on a place about four leagues above St. Croix to lay up
three of his vessels for the winter. The other two he sent back to France, to
inform the King of what they had done; and that Roberval had not arrived.

At the new harbor, which he had chosen for his ships, was a small river,
running in a serpentine course to the south. On the eastern side of its
entrance was a high and steep cliff; on the top of which, they built a fort and
called it Charleburg. Below, the ships were drawn up and fortified, as they had
been in the former winter which he spent here. Not far from the fort were some
rocks containing chrystals; which they denominated diamonds; and on the shore
were picked up certain specks of a yellow substance, which their imaginations
refined into gold. Iron ore was found in abundance; and a kind of black slate,
with veins of an apparent metallic substance.

In what manner they passed the winter, the defective accounts which we have do
not inform us. In the spring of the following year, Cartier and his company
having heard nothing of Roberval; and concluding that they were abandoned by
their friends and exposed to perish in a climate the most severe, and among
people whose conduct toward them, was totally changed, determined to return to
France. Accordingly having set sail, at the breaking up of the ice, they
arrived in the harbor of St. John in Newfoundland, sometime in June; where
they met Roberval, who, with three ships and two hundred persons, male and
female, had sailed from Rochelle in April; and were on their way to establish a
colony in Canada. Cartier went on board Roberval's ship, and showed him the
diamonds and gold which he had found; but told him that the hostile disposition
of the natives had obliged him to quit the country; which however he
represented to him as capable of profitable cultivation. Roberval ordered him
to return to Canada; but Cartier privately sailed out of the harbor in the
night and pursued his voyage to France.

Mortified and disappointed, Roberval continued some time longer at St. John's
before he proceeded, and about the end of July arrived at the place which
Cartier had quitted. There he erected a fort on a commanding eminence, and
another at its foot; in which were deposited all the provision, ammunition,
artillery, implements of husbandry and other materials for the intended colony.

In September, two vessels were sent back to France, to carry specimens of
crystal, and fetch provisions for the next year; the stores which they had
brought being much reduced. By the help of the fish which they took in the
river, and the game which they procured from the savages; and by well
husbanding their provisions, they lingered out a tedious winter, having
suffered much from the scurvy, of which about fifty of them died. In addition
to this distress, Roberval exercised such severity in his government, that one
man was hanged, several were laid in irons, and some of both sexes underwent
the discipline of the whip.

In April the ice began to break up; and on the fifth of June he proceeded up
the river; leaving De Royeze, his Lieutenant, to command in his absence, with
orders to embark for France, if he should not return by the middle of July.

As the account of the expedition ends here, we can only remark that the colony
was broken up; and no farther attempt was made by the French to establish
themselves in Canada, till after the expiration of half a century. The last
account of Roberval is that, in 1549, he sailed with his brother on some voyage
of discovery, and never returned.

In this first visit, which the natives of Canada received from the Europeans,
we have a striking instance of their primitive manners. Suspecting no danger,
and influenced by no fear, they embraced the stranger with unaffected joy.
Their huts were open to receive him, their fires and furs to give warmth and
rest to his weary limbs; their food was shared with him or given in exchange
for his trifles; they were ready with their simple medicines to heal his
diseases and his wounds; they would wade through rivers and climb rocks and
mountains to guide him in his way, and they would remember and requite his
kindness more than it deserved.

Unhappily for them they set too high a value on their new guest. Imagining him
to be of a heavenly origin, they were extravagant and unguarded in their first
attachment, and from some specimens of his superiority, obvious to their
senses, they expected more than ought ever to be expected from beings of the
same species. But when the mistake was discovered, and the stranger whom they
had adored, proved to be no more than human, having the same inferior desires
and passions with themselves; especially when they found their confidence
misplaced and their generous friendship ill requited; then the rage of jealousy
extinguished the virtue of benevolence; and they struggled to rid themselves of
him, as an enemy, whom they had received into their bosom as a friend.

On the other hand, it was too common for the European adventurer, to regard
the man of nature as an inferior being; and whilst he availed himself of his
strength and experience, to abuse his confidence, and repay his kindness with
insult and injury; to stigmatize him as a heathen and a savage, and to bestow
on him the epithets of deceitful, treacherous, and cruel; though he himself had
first set the example of these detestable vices.

VII. FERDINANDO DE SOTO.
THE travels and transactions of this adventurer are of so little importance in
the history of America that I should not have thought them worthy of much
notice; had it not been, that some gentlemen of ingenuity and learning, have
had recourse to the expedition of this Spaniard as a means of solving the
question respecting the mounds and fortifications, of a regular construction,
which within a few years past have been discovered in the thickest shades of
the American forest. If the reader wishes to see a particular investigation of
this hypothesis, he may consult the American Magazine, printed at New York, for
December 1787, January and February 1788, and some subsequent numbers; compared
with the Columbian Magazine, printed at Philadelphia, for September and
November 1788.
Though the opinion seems to have been heartily given up by one of the writers
who attempted to defend it; yet, as what was published on the subject may have
impressed some persons with an idea that these works were of European fabric, I
shall briefly relate the history of Soto's march; and the difficulties which
attend the supposition that he was the builder of any of these fortifications.

After the conquest of Mexico and Peru, in the beginning of the sixteenth
century, the inextinguishable thirst for gold, which had seized the Spanish
adventurers, prompted them to search for that bewitching metal wherever there
could be any prospect of finding it. Three unsuccessful attempts had been made
in Florida, by Ponce, Gomez, and Narvaez; but because these adventurers did not
penetrate the interior parts of the continent; FERDINANDO DE SOTO, Governor of
Cuba, who had been a companion of the Pizarros in their Peruvian expedition,
and had there amassed much wealth, projected a march into Florida, of which
country he had the title of Adelantado, or President. He sailed from the Port
of Havannah May 18, 1539, with nine vessels, six hundred men, In Prince's
Chronology it is said that Soto had 900 men, but he quotes Purchase for his
authority, in whose book the number is " six hundred."
two hundred and thirteen horses, and a heard of swine, and arrived on the 30th
of the same month in the bay of Espiritu Santo, on the western coast of the
peninsula of Florida.

Being a soldier of fortune and determined on conquest, he immediately pitched
his camp and secured it. A foraging party met with a few Indians who resisted
them; two were killed, the others escaped, and reported to their countrymen
that the warriors of fire had invaded their territories; upon which the smaller
towns were deserted and the natives hid in the woods.

Having met with a Spaniard of the party of Narvaez, who had been wrecked on
the coast, and had been twelve years a captive with the Indians, Soto made use
of him as a messenger to them to inquire for gold and silver; and wherever he
could receive any information respecting these precious metals thither he
directed his march.

His manner of marching was this: The horsemen carried bags of corn and other
provisions; the footmen marched by the side of the horses, and the swine were
driven before them. When they first landed they had thirteen female swine,
which in two years increased to several hundreds; the warmth of the climate
being favorable to their propagation, and the forests yielding them a plenty
of food.

The first summer and winter were spent in the peninsula of Florida, not far
from the bay of Apalache; and in the beginning of the following spring, having
sent back his vessels to Cuba for supplies, and left a part of his men at the
port, where he expected the ships to return, he marched toward the north and
east, in search of a place called Yupaha, where he had been informed there was
gold.

In this march he crossed the river Altamaha and probably the Ogechee, and
came, as he was informed, within two days journey of the bay of St. Helena,
where the Spaniards had been several years before. In all this march he staid
not more than a week in any one place.

He then set his face northward, and having passed a hilly country, came to a
district called Chalaque, which is supposed to be the country now called
Cherokee, on the upper branches of the river Savannah. Thence he turned
westward, in search of a place called Chiaha, and in this route he crossed the
Allegany ridge, and came to Chiaha, where his horses and men, being excessively
fatigued, he rested thirty days. The horses fed in a meadow, and and the people
lay under the trees, the weather being very hot, and the natives in peace. This
was in the months of May and June. During their abode there they heard of a
country called Chisca, where was copper and another metal of the same color.
This country lay northward, and a party was sent with Indian guides to view it.
Their report was, that the mountains were impassable, and Soto did not attempt
to proceed any farther in that direction.

From a careful inspection of the maps in the American Atlas, I am inclined to
think that the place where Soto crossed the mountains was within the thirty
fifth degree of latitude. In Delisle's map, a village called Canasaga, is laid
down on the N. W. side of the Allegany (or as it is sometimes called) the
Apalachian ridge of mountains, in that latitude; and Chiaha is said in Soto's
journal to be five days westward from Canasagua.

To ascertain the situation of Chiaha we must observe that it is said to be
subject to the Lord of Cosa, which is situate on an eastern branch of the
Mobille; and Soto's sick men came down the river from Chiaha in boats. This
river could be none but a branch of the Mobille; and his course was then turned
toward the south. In this march he passed through Alibama, Talise, Tascalusa,
names which are still known and marked on the maps, till he came to the town of
Mavilla, which the French pronounced Mouville and Mabille. It was then a walled
town, but the walls were of wood. The inhabitants had conceived a disgust to
the Spaniards, which was augmented by an outrage committed on one of their
Chiefs, and finally broke out in a severe conflict, in which two thousand of
the innocent natives were slain, and many of the Spaniards killed and wounded,
and the town was burnt. This was in the latter end of October.

It is probable that Soto intended to pass the winter in the neighborhood of
that village, if he could have kept on friendly terms with the Indians; for
there he could have had a communication with Cuba. There he heard that the
vessels which he had sent to Cuba for supplies were arrived at Ochus
[Pensacola] where he had agreed to meet them; but he kept this information
secret, because he had not yet made any discoveries which his Spanish friends
would think worthy of regard. The country about him was populous and hostile,
and, being void of gold or silver, was not an object for him to possess at the
risque of losing his army, of which above an hundred had already perished. He
therefore, after staying twenty eight days for the recovery of his wounded,
determined on a retreat.

In this retreat it has been supposed that he penetrated northward, beyond the
Ohio. The truth is, that he began his march from Mavilla, a village near the
mouth of the Mobille, on the 18th of November, and on the 17th of December
arrived at Chicacca, an Indian village of twenty houses, where they remained
till the next April.

The distance, the time, the nature of the country, the course and manner of
the march, and the name of the village, all concur to determine this winter
station of Soto to be a village of the Chickesaw Indians, situate on the upper
part of the Yasou, a branch of the Mississippi, about eighty leagues
northwestward from Mobille, and not less than one hundred and forty leagues,
southwestward from the Muskingum, where the great fortifications, which gave
rise to this inquiry, are found. From Chicaca, in the spring, he went westward,
and crossed a river within the thirty fourth degree of latitude, which he
called Rio Grande, and which is now known to be the Mississippi.

On the western side of the Mississippi, after rambling all summer, he spent
the next winter, at a place called Autiamque, where he enclosed his camp with a
wall of timber, the work of three days only. Within this enclosure he lodged
safely during three months; and, in the succeeding spring, the extreme fatigue
and anxiety which he had suffered, threw him into a fever, of which he died,
May 21, 1542, at Guacoya. To prevent his death from being known to the Indians,
his body was sunk in the middle of a river.

His Lieutenant, Louis de Moscosco, continued to ramble on the western side of
the Mississippi, till the next summer; when worn with fatigue, disappointment,
and loss of men, he built seven boats, called brigantines, on the Mississippi,
in which, the shattered remnants, consisting of three hundrd and eleven,
returned to Cuba, in September 1543. Purchase, vol. v. p. 1532 to 1556.


The place where Soto died is said to have been on the bank of the Red river, a
western branch of the Mississippi, in lat. 31. The place where the remnant of
his army built their vessels and embarked for Cuba is called in the journal
Minoya. They were seventeen days in sailing down the river, and they computed
the distance to be two hundred and fifty leagues. Mr. Prince, in his
chronology, says 400, in figures; but Purchase, from whom he quotes, says "two
hundred and fifty."


From this account, faithfully abridged from Purchase and compared with the best
maps, I am fully persuaded that the whole country through which Soto traveled
on the eastern side of the Mississippi is comprehended within Florida, Georgia
and South Carolina; and that he never went farther northward than the 35th
degree of latitude, which is distant two degrees southward from any part of the
Ohio. The conclusion then is, that he could not have been the builder of those
fortifications, still remaining in that part of the continent, which lies N. W.
of the Ohio. Nor indeed can any works which he erected for the security of his
camp be subsisting at this time; for the best of them were made of wood, and
were intended to cover his men; and protect his horses and swine, only during
one winter.

The works which have so much excited curiosity and conjecture, are far more
numerous, extensive and durable. They are found in various and distant places,
in the interior part of the continent, on both sides of the Mississippi; on the
Ohio and its branches; on James and Potowmack rivers in Virginia; in the
country of the Six Nations, and on the shores of lake Erie; where they are
exceedingly numerous.

The most obvious mode of solving the question respecting them, is by inquiry
of the present natives. But the structures are too ancient for their tradition;
the oldest and wisest men know nothing of their original. The form and
materials of these works, indicate the existence of a race of men superior to
the present race, in improvement, in design, and in that patience which must
have accompanied the labor of erecting them.

Trees which have been found growing on them have been cut down, and, from
indubitable marks, are known to have been upwards of three hundred years old;
nor were these the first growth, upon them.

The mounds and ramparts are constructed of earth, and have acquired a firmness
and solidity, which render it probable that they are the work of some remote
age and some other people; who had different ideas of convenience and were
better acquainted with the arts of defense; and in fact, were much more
numerous than the ancestry of those natives, of whom we or our fathers have had
any knowledge.

It is to be hoped that the persons who now occupy and are cultivating the
lands where these singular buildings are found, will preserve, as far as they
are able, some, at least, of these monuments of unknown ages; that as they have
long resisted the ravages of time, and may possibly baffle the researches of
the present generation, they may subsist unimpaired as subjects of speculation
to our posterity.

VIII. HUMPHREY GILBERT.
AFTER the discovery of Newfoundland by the Cabots, the passion for adventure,
among the English, met with many severe checks. But whilst one adventurer after
another was returning home from an unsuccessful voyage, intended to penetrate
unknown seas to China; foreigners were reaping the benefit of their partial
discoveries.

Within the first forty years, we have no account of any attempt made by the
English to prosecute the discovery of the new continent, except, that in 1536,
two vessels containing one hundred and twenty persons, of whom thirty were
gentlemen of education and character, under the conduct of "Master Hoar of
London" made a voyage to Newfoundland; Hakluyt, vol. iii. p. 130.
but they were so ill provided, and knew so little of the nature of the
country, that they suffered the extremity of famine. For, notwithstanding the
immense quantities of fish and fowl to be found on those coasts; they were
reduced so low as to watch the nests of birds of prey and rob them of the fish
which they brought to feed their young. To collect this scanty supply, with a
mixture of roots and herbs, the men dispersed themselves in the woods, until
several of them were missing. It was at first thought that they were devoured
by wild beasts; but it was found that they met with a more tragical fate; the
stronger having killed the weaker and feasted on their flesh. In the midst of
this distress, a French ship arriving with a supply of provisions, they took
her by force, and returned to England; leaving to the Frenchmen their own
smaller vessels, and dividing the provision between them. Complaint of this act
of piracy was made to King HENRY VIII: who, knowing the miseries of the
unfortunate crew, instead of punishing them, paid the damage out of his own
coffers.

Within the succeeding forty years, the English had begun to make some
advantage by the fishery; and in 1578, the state of it is thus described.
Letter of Anthony Parkhurst to Richard Hakluyt, vol. iii, p. 132.
"There are about one hundred sail of Spaniards who come to take cod; who make
it all wet, and dry it when they come home; besides twenty or thirty more, who
come from Biscay to kill whales for train. These be better appointed for
shipping and furniture of munition than any other nation, save the English; who
commonly are Lords of the harbors. As touching their tonnage, I think it may
be near five or six thousand. Of Portugals, there are not above fifty sail,
whose tonnage may amount to three thousand, and they make all wet. Of the
French nation are about one hundred and fifty sail; the most of their shipping
is very small, not past forty tons; among which some are great and reasonably
well appointed; better than the Portugals, and not so well as the Spaniards;
the burden of them may be about seven thousand. The English vessels have
increased in four years from thirty to fifty sail. The trade which our nation
has to Iceland, makes, that the English are not there in such numbers as
other nations."

The next year [1579] Queen Elizabeth granted to Sir HUMPHREY GILBERT, a patent
for the discovering, occupying and peopling of "such remote, heathen and
barbarous countries as were not actually possessed by any Christian people."
Hakluyt iii.135. Forster, 292.
In consequence of this grant, many of his friends joined him, and preparations
were made for an expedition, which promised to be highly advantageous. But
before the fleet was ready, some declined and retracted their engagements.
Gilbert, with a few companions, sailed; but a violent storm, in which one of
the ships foundered, caused him to return. This misfortune involved him in
debt; and he had no way to satisfy the demands of his creditors, but by grants
of land in America. By such means, the country was not likely to be peopled,
nor the conditions of his patent fulfilled. He was obliged therefore to sell
his estate before he could make another attempt; and, after long solicitation,
being assisted by some friends, he set sail from Plymouth with five ships,
carrying two hundred and sixty men, on the eleventh of June 1583; and on the
eleventh of July arrived off the bay of St. John, on the eastern coast of
Newfoundland.

Thirty six fishing vessels were then in the harbor, who refused him
admittance. He prepared to enter by force of arms; but previously sent in his
boat with his commission from Queen Elizabeth; on sight of which they
submitted, and he sailed into the port. Stith's history of Virginia, page 6.


The intention of this voyage was to take formal possession of the island, and
of the fishery on its banks, for the crown of England. This was done in the
following manner: Hakluyt iii, 151, 165.


On Monday the fifth of August, Admiral Gilbert had his tent pitched on shore,
in sight of all the shipping; and being attended by his own people, summoned
the merchants and masters of vessels, both Englishmen and others, to be present
at the ceremony. When they were all assembled, his commission was read, and
interpreted to the foreigners. Then a turf and a twig were delivered to him,
which he received with a hazle wand. Immediately, proclamation was made, that
by virtue of his commission from the Queen, he took possession, for the crown
of England, of the harbor of St. John, and two hundred leagues every way round
it.

He then published three laws, for the government of the territory. By the
first, public worship was established according to the mode of the church of
England. By the second, the attempting of any thing prejudicial to her
Majesty's title was declared treason, according to the laws of England. By the
third, the uttering of words, to the dishonor of her Majesty, was to be
punished with the loss of ears and the confiscation of property.

The proclamation being finished, assent and obedience were signified by loud
acclamations. A pillar was erected, bearing a plate of lead, on which the
Queen's arms were engraven; and several of the merchants took grants of land,
in fee farm, on which they might cure their fish, as they had done before.

A tax of provision, by her Majesty's authority, was levied on all the ships.
This tax was readily paid; besides which, the Admiral received presents of
wine, fruit, and other refreshments, chiefly from the Portuguese.

This formal possession, taken by Sir Humphrey Gilbert, in consequence of the
discovery by the Cabots, is the foundation of the right and title of the crown
of England to the territory of Newfoundland and to the fishery on its banks.

As far as the time would permit, a survey was made of the country; one
principal object of which was the discovery of mines and minerals. The
mineralogist was a Saxon, who is characterized as "honest and religious." This
man brought to the Admiral first a specimen of iron, then a kind of ore, which,
on the peril of his life, he protested to be silver. The Admiral enjoined
secrecy, and sent it on board; intending to have it assayed, when they should
get to sea.

The company being dispersed abroad, some were taken sick and died; some hid
themselves in the woods, with an intention to go home, by the first
opportunity; and others cut one of the vessels out of the harbor and carried
her off.

On the twentieth of August, the Admiral, having collected as many of his men
as could be found, and ordered one of his vessels to stay and take off the
sick, set sail with three ships; the Delight, the Hind, and the Squirrel. He
coasted along the southern part of the island, with a view to make Cape Breton
and the Isle of Sable; on which last, he had heard that cattle and swine had
been landed by the Portuguese, thirty years before.

Being entangled among shoals and involved in fogs, the Delight struck on a
sand bank and was lost. Fourteen men only saved themselves in a boat; the loss
of the Saxon refiner was particularly noted, and nothing farther was heard of
the silver ore. This misfortune determined the Admiral to return to England,
without attempting to make any farther discoveries, or to take possession of
any other part of America. On his passage, he met with bad weather. The
Squirrel frigate, in which Sir Humphrey sailed, was overloaded on her deck; but
he persisted in taking his passage in her, notwithstanding the remonstrances of
his friends, in the Hind, who would have persuaded him to sail with them. From
the circumstance of his returning from his first voyage without accomplishing
its object, it had been reported that he was afraid of the sea; had he yielded
to the solicitation of his friends, the stigma might have been indelible.

When the wind abated, and the vessels were near enough, the Admiral was seen
constantly sitting in the stern with a book in his hand. On the ninth of
September, he was seen for the last time; and was heard by the people in the
Hind to say, "We are as near heaven by sea as by land." In the following night,
the lights of his ship suddenly disappeared. The people in the other vessel
kept a good look out for him, during the remainder of the voyage. On the twenty
second of September, they arrived, through much tempest and peril, at Falmouth.
But nothing more was seen or heard of the Admiral.

Whilst his zeal for the interest of the Crown, and the settlement of its
American dominions, has been largely commended; he has been blamed for his
temerity in lavishing his own and other men's fortunes in the prosecution of
his designs. This is not the only instance of a waste of property in
consequence of sanguine expectations; which, though ruinous to the first
adventurers, has produced solid advantages to their successors.

Dr. Forster has a remark on one of the incidents of this voyage which is
worthy of repetition and remembrance. "It is very clear (says he) in the
instance of the Portuguese having stocked the Isle of Sable with domestic
animals, that the discoverers of the new world were men of humanity; desirous
of providing for such unfortunate people as might happen to be cast away on
those coasts. The false policy of modern times is callous and tyrannical,
exporting dogs to devour them. Are these the happy consequences of the so much
boasted enlightened state of the present age, and refinement of manners
peculiar to our time? Father of mercies, when will philanthropy again take up
her abode in the breasts of men, of Christians and the rulers of this earth!"

IX. WALTER RALEIGH, AND RICHARD GRENVILLE.
THE distinguished figure, which the life of Sir Walter Raleigh makes in the
history of England, renders unnecessary any other account of him here, than
what respects his adventures in America; and particularly in Virginia; of which
colony he is acknowledged to have been the unfortunate founder.

He was half brother, by the mother's side, to Sir Humphry Gilbert, and was at
the expense of fitting out one of the ships of his squadron. Notwithstanding
the unhappy fate of his brother, he persisted in his design of making a
settlement in America. Being a favorite in the court of Queen Elizabeth, he
obtained a patent, bearing date the 25th of March 1584, for the discovering and
planting of any lands and countries which were not possessed by any christian
prince, or nation.

About the same time the Queen granted him another patent, to license the
vending of wine, throughout the kingdom; that by the profits thence arising he
might be able to bear the expense of his intended plan of colonization. Further
to strengthen his interest, he engaged the assistance of two wealthy kinsmen,
Sir Richard Grenville and William Sanderson. Stith's Histy. of Virginia, p. 7,
8.
They provided two barks, and having well furnished them with men and
provisions, put them under the command of Philip Amadas and Arthur Barlow, who
sailed from the west of England, April 27, 1584.

They took the usual route by the way of the Canaries and the West Indies; the
reason of which is thus expressed in the account of this voyage written by
Barlow Hakluyt, iii, 246.
, "because we doubted that the current of the bay of Mexico between the cape of
Florida and Havanna had been of greater force than we afterward found it to
be."

Taking advantage of the Gulf stream, they approached the coast of Florida; and
on the second of July came into shoal water; where the odoriferous smell of
flowers indicated the land to be near, though not within sight. On the fourth
they saw land; along which they sailed forty leagues before they found an
entrance. At the first opening, they cast anchor (July 13) and having devoutly
given thanks to GOD, for their safe arrival on the coast, they went ashore in
their boats, and took possession in the name of Queen Elizabeth.

The place where they landed was a sandy island, called Wococon, This island is
generally supposed to be one of those which lie at the mouth of Albermarle
sound, on the coast of North Carolina. Barlow, in his letter to Sir W. Raleigh,
preserved by Hakluyt, says, that he, with seven others, went in a boat " twenty
miles into the river Occam, and, the evening following, came to an island
called Roanoke, distant from the harbor by which we entered, seven leagues; at
the north end thereof was a village." Mr. Stith, who wrote the history of
Virginia, and who acknowledges that he had not seen this letter in English but
in a Latin translation, supposes, that the island Wococon must lie between cape
Hatteras and cape Fear, and that the distance might be 30 leagues. But it
appears from Barlow's letter that the boat went in one day and came in the
evening to the north end of Roanoke; the distance is twice mentioned, once in
miles and once in leagues. I see no reason therefore to admit Stith's
conjecture in opposition to Barlow. Stith however appears to have been a very
close and accurate inquirer, as far as his materials and opportunity permitted.
about sixteen miles in length and six in breadth, full of cedars, pines,
cypress, sassafras and other trees; among which were many vines loaded with
grapes. In the woods they found deer and hares; and in the waters and marshes,
various kinds of fowl; but no human creature was seen, till the third day; when
a canoe, with three men, came along by the shore. One of them landed; and,
without any fear or precaution, met the Europeans and addressed them in a
friendly manner, in his own language. They carried him on board one of their
vessels; gave him a shirt and some other trifles, and regaled him with meat and
wine. He then returned to his canoe; and with his companions went a fishing.
When the canoe was filled, they brought the fish on shore and divided them into
two heaps; making signs, that each of the vessels should take one.

The next day, several canoes came; in which were forty or fifty people, and
among them was Granganimeo, brother of Wingina King of the country; who was
confined at home by the wounds, which he had received in battle, with a
neighboring Prince. The manner of his approach was fearless and respectful. He
left his boats at a distance; and came along the shore, accompanied by all his
people, till he was abreast of the ships. Then advancing with four men only,
who spread a mat on the ground, he sat down on one end; and the four men on the
other. When the English went on shore, armed, he beckoned to them to come and
sit by him; which they did, and he made signs of joy and friendship, striking
with his hand on his head and breast, and then on theirs, to show that they
were all one. None of his people spoke a word; and when the English offered
them presents, he took them all into his own possession; making signs that they
were his servants, and that all which they had, belonged to him.

After this interview, the natives came in great numbers and brought skins,
coral, and materials for dies; but when Granganimeo was present, none were
permitted to trade, but himself and those who had a piece of copper on their
heads. Nothing pleased him so much as a tin plate, in which he made a hole and
hung it over his breast, as a piece of defensive armor. He supplied them every
day with venison, fish, and fruits, and invited them to visit him at his
village, on the north end of an island called Roanoke.

This village consisted of nine houses, built of cedar, and fortified with
sharp palisades. When the English arrived there in their boat, Granganimeo was
absent; but his wife entertained them with the kindest hospitality, washed
their feet and their clothes, ordered their boat to be drawn ashore and their
oars to be secured; and then feasted them with venison, fish, fruits, and
homony. Homony is made of Indian corn beaten in a mortar and separated from the
bran; then boiled either by itself or in the broth of meat.
Whilst they were at supper, some of her men came in from hunting, with their
bows and arrows in their hands; on which her guests began to mistrust danger;
but she ordered their bows to be taken from them, and their arrows to be
broken; and then turned them out at the gate. The English however thought it
most prudent to pass the night in their boat, which they launched and laid at
anchor. At this she was much grieved; but, finding all her solicitations
ineffectual, she ordered the victuals in the pots to be put on board, with mats
to cover the people from the rain; and appointed several persons of both sexes
to keep guard on the beach during the whole night. Could there be a more
engaging specimen of generous hospitality?

These people were characterized as "gentle, loving and faithful; void of guile
and treachery; living after the manner of the golden age; caring only to feed
themselves, with such food as the soil affords, and to defend themselves from
the cold, in their short winter."

No farther discovery was made of the country by these adventurers. From the
natives they obtained some uncertain account of its geography, and of a ship
which had been wrecked on the coast between twenty and thirty years before.
They carried away two of the natives, Wanchese and Manteo; and arrived in the
west of England about the middle of September.

The account of this discovery was so welcome to Queen Elizabeth, that she
named the country Virginia; either in memory of her own virginity, or because
it retained its virgin purity, and the people their primitive simplicity.

About this time Raleigh was elected knight of the shire, for his native county
of Devon; and in the Parliament which was held in the succeeding winter, he
caused a bill to be brought into the House of Commons to confirm his patent for
the discovery of foreign countries. After much debate, the bill was carried
through both houses, and received the royal assent. In addition to which, the
Queen conferred on him the order of Knighthood. Stith, p. 11.


A second expedition being resolved on, Sir Richard Grenville himself took the
command, and with seven vessels, large and small, sailed from Plymouth, on the
ninth of April, 1585. Hakluyt, iii.251.
They went in the usual course by the Canaries and the West Indies; where they
took two Spanish prizes; and, after narrowly escaping shipwreck on Cape Fear,
arrived at Wococon the 26th of June. Mr. Stith mistakes in saying May 26, and
Sir William Keith, who copies from him, adopts the same mistake.


The natives came, as before, to bid them welcome and to trade with them.
Manteo, whom they had brought back, proved a faithful guide, and piloted them
about from place to place. In an excursion of eight days with their boats, they
visited several Indian villages, on the islands and on the main, adjoining to
Albemarle Sound. At one place, called Aquascogok, an Indian stole from them a
silver cup. Inquiry being made, the offender was detected and promised to
restore it; but the promise being not speedily performed, a hasty and severe
revenge was taken, by the orders of Grenville; the town was burnt and the corn
destroyed in the fields, (July 16) whilst the affrighted people fled to the
woods for safety. From this ill judged act of violence, may be dated the
misfortunes and failure of this colony.

Leaving one hundred and eight persons to attempt a settlement, Grenville
proceeded with his fleet to the island of Hatteras; where he received a visit
from Granganimeo, and then sailed for England. On the 18th of September he
arrived at Plymouth; with a rich Spanish prize which he had taken on the
passage.

Of the colony left in Virginia, Ralph Lane was appointed Governor. He was a
military man, of considerable reputation in the sea-service. Philip Amadas, who
had commanded in the first voyage, was Admiral. They chose the island of
Roanoke in the mouth of Albemarle Sound, as the place of their residence; and
their chief employment was to explore and survey the country, and describe the
persons and manners of its inhabitants. For these purposes, Sir Walter Raleigh
had sent John With, an ingenious painter; and Thomas Heriot, a skilful
mathematician, and a man of curious observation: both of whom performed their
parts with fidelity and success. The drawings which Mr. With made were
engraven and printed at Frankfort (1590,) by Theodore De Bry. They represent
the persons and habits of the natives, their employments, diversions and
superstitions. From these, the prints in Beverley's history of Virginia are
copied.

Mr. Heriot wrote a topographical description of the country and its natural
history, which is preserved in Hakluyt's collection vol. iii, 226. It was
translated into Latin, and published by De Bry in his collection of voyages. It
has been supposed that Raleigh himself came to Virginia with this colony. This
is a mistake* grounded on a mistranslation of a passage in Heriot's narrative.
It is thus expressed in English "The actions of those who have been by Sir
Walter Raleigh therein employed." Which is thus rendered in the Latin
translation, "qui generosum D. Wal^^rum Ralegh, (...) comita^^ sunt."

Stith, p. ^2.


The farthest discovery which they made to the southward of Roanoke was
Secotan, an Indian town between the rivers of Pamptico and Neus, distant eighty
leagues. To the northward they went about forty leagues, to a nation called
Chesepeags, on a small river now called Elisabeth, which falls into Chesepeag
Bay, below Norfolk. To the westward they went up Albemarle Sound and Chowan
river, about forty leagues, to a nation called Chowanogs; whose King,
Menatonona, amused them with a story of a copper mine and a pearl fishery; in
search of which they spent much time and so exhausted their provisions, that
they were glad to eat their dogs before they returned to Roanoke.

During this excursion, their friend Granganimeo died; and his brother Wingina
discovered his hostile disposition toward the colony. The return of Mr. Lane
and his party, from their excursion, gave a check to his malice for a while;
but he secretly laid a plot for their destruction; which being betrayed to the
English, they seized all the boats on the island. This brought on a skirmish,
in which five or six Indians were killed, and the rest fled to the woods. After
much jealousy and dissimulation on both sides, Wingina was drawn into a snare;
and with eight of his men, fell a sacrifice to the resentment of the English.

In a few days after Wingina's death, Sir Francis Drake, who had been cruising
against the Spaniards in the West Indies, and had received orders from the
Queen to visit this colony, arrived with his fleet on the coast; and by the
unanimous desire of the people, took them all off and carried them to England,
where they arrived in July 1586.

Within a fortnight after the departure of this unfortunate colony, Sir Richard
Grenville arrived with three ships for their relief. Finding their habitation
abandoned, and being unable to gain any intelligence of them; he landed fifty
men, on the island of Roanoke, plentifully supplied with provisions for two
years, and then returned to England.

The next year (1587) three ships were sent, under the command of John White,
who was appointed Governor of the colony, with twelve Counselors. To them
Raleigh gave a charter of incorporation for the city of Raleigh, which he
ordered them to build on the river Chesepeag, the northern extent of the
discovery. After narrowly escaping shipwreck on Cape Fear, they arrived at
Hatteras, on the 22d of July, and sent a party to Roanoke to look for the
second colony of fifty men. They found no person living, and the bones of but
one dead. The huts were standing; but were overgrown with bushes and weeds. In
conversation with some of the natives, they were informed, that the colony had
been destroyed by Wingina's people, in revenge of his death.

Mr. White endeavored to renew a friendly intercourse with those natives; but
their jealousy rendered them implacable. He therefore went across the water to
the main with a party of twenty five men, and came suddenly on a company of
friendly Indians, who were seated round a fire, one of whom they killed before
they discovered the mistake.

Two remarkable events are mentioned as happening at this time; one was the
baptism of Manteo, the faithful Indian guide; the other was the birth of a
female child, daughter of Ananias Dare, one of the Council; which, being the
first child born in the colony, was named Virginia.

By this time (August 21) the ships had unloaded their stores and were
preparing to return to England. It was evident that a farther supply was
necessary, and that some person must go home to solicit it. A dispute arose in
the Council on this point, and after much altercation, it was determined, that
the Governor was the most proper person, to be sent on this errand. The whole
colony joined in requesting him to proceed, promising to take care of his
interest in his absence. With much reluctance he consented, on their
subscribing a testimonial of his unwillingness to quit the plantation. He
accordingly sailed on the 27th of August, and arrived in England the following
November. The nation was in a state of alarm and apprehension on account of the
war with Spain, and of the invincible armada, which had threatened it with an
invasion. Sir Walter Raleigh was one of the Queen's Council of war, as were
also Sir Richard Grenville and Mr. Lane. Their time was wholly taken up with
public consultations, and Governor White was obliged to wait, till the plan of
operations against the enemy could be adjusted and carried into execution.

The next spring, Raleigh and Grenville, who had the command of the militia in
Cornwall, and were training them for the defense of the kingdom; being strongly
solicited by White, provided two small barks, which sailed from Biddeford on
the 22d of April 1588. These vessels had commissions as ships of war, and being
more intent on gain to themselves, than relief to the colony, went in chase of
prizes, and were both driven back by ships of superior force, to the great
mortification of their patron, and the ruin of his colony.

These disappointments were a source of vexation to Raleigh. He had expended
forty thousand pounds, of his own and other men's money, in pursuit of his
favorite object; and his gains were yet to come. He therefore made an
assignment of his patent (March 7, 1589) to Thomas Smith, and other merchants
and adventurers, among whom was Governor White; with a donation of one hundred
pounds, for the propagation of the Christian religon in Virginia. Being thus
disengaged from the business of colonization; he had full scope for his martial
genius, in the war with Spain.

His assignees were not so zealous in the prosecution of their business. It was
not till the spring of 1590, that Governor White could return to his colony.
Then, with three ships, he sailed from Plymouth, and passing through the West
Indies, in quest of Spanish prizes, he arrived at Hatteras on the 15th of
August. From this place they observed a smoke arising on the island of Roanoke;
which gave them some hope that the colony was there subsisting; on their coming
to the place, they found old trees and grass burning, of but no human being. On
a post of one of the houses they saw the word Croatan, which gave them some
hope, that at the island of that name they should find their friends. They
sailed for that island; which lay southward of Hatteras; but a violent storm
arising, in which they lost their anchors, they were obliged to quit the
inhospitable coast and return home; nor was any thing afterward heard of the
unfortunate colony.

The next year (1591) Sir Richard Grenville was mortally wounded in an
engagement with a Spanish fleet; and died on board the Admiral's ship, where he
was prisoner.

Raleigh, though disengaged from the business of colonizing Virginia, sent five
times at his own expense to seek for and relieve his friends; but the persons
whom he employed, having more profitable business in the West Indies, either
went not to the place, or were forced from it by stress of weather; it being a
tempestuous region, and without any safe harbor. The last attempt which he
made, was in 1602; the year before his imprisonment; an event which gratified
the malice of his enemies, and prepared the way for his death; which was much
less ignominious to him than to his sovereign, King James I, the British
Solomon; successor to Elizabeth, the British Deborah. As a specimen of the
language of that time, let the reader take the following extract from Purchase.

"He [i. e. King James] is beyond comparison a mere transcendent, beyond all
his predecessors, princes of this realm; beyond the neigbouring princes of his
own time; beyond the conceit of subjects dazzled with so much brightness;
beyond our victorious Deborah, not in sex alone, but as peace is more excellent
than war, and Solomon than David; in this also that he (...) and (...) enjoy
his present sunshine."




This unfortunate attempt to settle a colony in Virginia, was productive of one
thing which will always render it memorable, the introduction of tobacco into
England. Cartier, in his visit to Canada, fifty years before, had observed that
the natives used this weed fumigation, but it was an object of disgust to
Frenchmen. Ralph Lane, at his return in 1586, brought it first into Europe; and
Raleigh, who was a man of gaiety and fashion, not only learned the use of it
himself, but introduced it into the polite circles; and even the Queen herself
gave encouragement to it. Some humourous stories respecting it are still
remembered. Raleigh laid a wager with the Queen, that he would determine
exactly, the weight of smoke which issued from his pipe. This he did by first
weighing the tobacco and then the ashes. When the Queen paid the wager, she
pleasantly observed, that many laborers had turned their gold into smoke; but
that he was the first who had converted smoke into gold.

It is also related that a servant of Sir Walter, bringing a tankard of ale
into his study as he was smoking his pipe, and reading, was so alarmed at the
appearance of smoke, issuing out of his mouth, that he threw the ale into his
face, and ran down to alarm the family, crying out that his master was on fire.

King James had so refined a taste, that he not only held this Indian weed in
great abhorrence himself, but endeavored, by proclamations and otherwise, to
prevent the use of it among his subjects. But all his zeal and authority could
not suppress it. Since his time it has become an important article of commerce,
by which individuals in Europe and America, as well as colonies and nations,
have risen to great opulence.

X. JOHN DE FUCA.
WHEN the existence of a western continent was known to the maritime nations of
Europe, one great object of their inquiry was, to find, through some openings
which appeared in it, a passage to India and China. For this purpose several
expensive and unsuccessful voyages were made; and every hint which could throw
any light on the subject was eagerly sought and attended to, by those who
considered its importance.

JOHN DE FUCA was a Greek, born in the island of Cephalonia in the Adriatic
gulf. He had been employed in the service of Spain, in the West Indies, as a
mariner and pilot, above forty years. Having lost his fortune, amounting (as he
said) to sixty thousand ducats, when the Acapulco ship was taken, by Captain
Cavendish an Englishman; and being disappointed of the recompense which he had
expected from the court of Spain; he returned in disgust, to his native
country, by the way of Italy; that he might spend the evening of his life, in
peace and poverty, among his friends.

At Florence he met with John Douglas, an Englishman, and went with him to
Venice. There, Douglas introduced him to Michael Lock, who had been Consul of
the Turkey company at Aleppo, and was then occasionally resident in Venice. (A.
D. 1596.)

In conversation with Mr. Lock, De Fuca gave him the following account of his
adventures.

"That he had been sent by the Viceroy of Mexico, as pilot of three small
vessels, to discover the straits of Anian, on the western coast of America;
through which, it was conjectured that a passage might be found, into some of
the deep bays on the eastern side of the continent. This voyage was frustrated,
by the misconduct of the commander, and the mutiny of the seamen.

"In 1592 the Viceroy sent him again, with the command of a caravel and a
pinnace, on the same enterprise. Between the latitudes of 47 and 48 N. he
discovered an inlet, into which he entered and sailed more than twenty days. At
the entrance was a great headland, with an exceeding high pinnacle or spired
rock, like a pillar. Within the strait, the land stretched N.W. and N.E. and
also E. and S.E. It was much wider within, than at the entrance, and contained
many islands. The inhabitants were clad in the skins of beasts. The land
appeared to be fertile like that of New Spain, and was rich in gold and silver.

"Supposing that he had accomplished the intention of the voyage and penetrated
into the North Sea; but not being strong enough, to resist the force of the
numerous savages, who appeared on the shores; he returned to Acapulco, before
the expiration of the year."

Such was the account given by De Fuca; and Mr. Lock was so impressed with the
sincerity of the relation and the advantages which his countrymen might derive
from a knowledge of this strait; that he earnestly urged him to enter into the
service of Queen Elizabeth, and perfect the discovery. He succeeded so far, as
to obtain a promise from the Greek, though sixty years old; that if the Queen
would furnish him with one ship, of forty tons, and a pinnace, he would
undertake the voyage. He was the more easily persuaded to this, by a hope that
the Queen would make him some recompense for the loss of his fortune by Capt.
Cavendish.

Mr. Lock wrote to the Lord Treasurer Cecil, Sir Walter Raleigh and Mr.
Hakluyt, requesting that they would forward the scheme, and that one hundred
pounds might be advanced to bring De Fuca to England. The scheme was approved;
but the money was not advanced. Lock was so much engaged in it, that he would
have sent him to England at his own expense; but he was then endeavoring to
recover at law, his demands from the Turkey company, and could not disburse the
money. The pilot therefore returned to Cephalonia; and Lock kept up a
correspondence with him, till 1602, when he heard of his death.

Though this account, preserved by Purchase, Lib. iv, chap. xx, p. 849.
bears sufficient marks of authenticity; yet it has been rejected as fabulous
for nearly two centuries; and is treated so even by the very candid Dr.
Forster. Northern voyages, p. 4^^.
Recent voyages however, have established the existence of the strait; and De
Fuca is no longer to be considered as an impostor; though the gold and silver
in his account were but conjectural.

The strait which now bears his name is formed by land, which is supposed to be
the continent of America on one side; and by a very extensive cluster of
islands on the other. Its southern entrance lies in lat. 48 20 N. long. 124 W.
from Greenwich, and is about seven leagues wide. On the larboard side, which is
composed of islands, the land is very mountainous; rising abruptly in high and
sharp peaks. On the starboard side, is a point of land terminating in a
remarkably tall rock, called the pillar. Within the entrance, the passage grows
wider, extending to the S. E. N. and N. W. and is full of islands. On the E.
and N. E. at a great distance are seen the tops of mountains; supposed to be on
the continent; but the ships trading for furs have not penetrated far to the
eastward; the sea otters being their principal object, and the land furs of
small consideration. For this reason, the eastern boundary of the inland sea is
not yet fully explored. The strait turns to the N. and N. W. encompassing a
large cluster of islands, among which is situate Nootka Sound, and comes into
the Pacific ocean again in lat. 51 15, long. 128 40. This extremity of the
strait is called its northern entrance, and is wider than the southern.

Another strait has been lately seen which is supposed to be that of De Font,
a Spanish Admiral, discovered in 1640; the existence of which has also been
treated as fabulous. The cluster of islands, called by the British seamen Queen
Charlotte's, and by the Americans, Washington's islands, are in the very spot
where De Font placed the Archipelago of St. Lazarus. See the Critical Review,
January, 1791.
The entrance only of this strait has been visited by the fur ships. It lies in
lat. 54 35 and long. 131 W. For this information I am indebted to Captain
ROBERT GRAY; who has the last summer, (1793) returned from a second
circumnavigation of the globe in the ship Columbia of Boston. He has sailed
quite through the strait of De Fuca; and seen the entrance of that of De Font.
The latitudes and longitudes of these places are taken from a very neat and
accurate map of the N. W. coast of America, drawn by Mr. HASWELL, first Mate of
the Columbia in her late voyage.


These recent and well established facts may induce us, to treat the relations
of former voyages with decent respect. The circumnavigation of Africa by the
ancient Phenicians, was for several ages deemed fabulous by the learned Greeks
and Romans. But its credibility was fully established by the Portuguese
discoveries in the fifteenth century. In like manner the discoveries of De Fuca
and De Font which have long been stigmatized by geographers as pretended, and
marked in their maps as imaginary, are now known to have been founded in truth,
though from the imperfection of instruments or the inaccuracy of historians,
the degrees and minutes of latitude and longitude were not precisely marked,
and though some circumstances in their accounts are but conjectural. Farther
discoveries may throw new light on the subject, and though perhaps a N. W.
passage, by sea, from the Atlantic into the Pacific may not exist; yet bays,
rivers and lakes are so frequent in those northern regions of our continent
that an inland navigation may be practicable.

It has been suggested that the company of English merchants who enjoy an
exclusive trade to Hudson's Bay have, from interested motives, concealed their
knowledge of its western extremities. Whether there be any just foundation for
this censure, I do not pretend to determine; but a survey is said to be now
making, from which, it is hoped, that this long contested question of a N. W.
passage will receive a full solution.

XI. BARTHOLOMEW GOSNOLD.
THE unfortunate issue of Raleigh's attempt to make a settlement in America,
together with the war with Spain, which continued for several years, gave a
check to the spirit of colonizing. In the beginning of the seventeenth century
it was revived by BARTHOLOMEW GOSNOLD, an intrepid mariner in the west of
England. At whose expense he undertook his voyage, to the northern part of
Virginia, does not appear; but, on the 26th of March 1602, he sailed from
Falmouth, in Cornwall, in a small bark, with thirty two men. Instead of going
by the way of the Canaries and the West Indies, he kept as far north as the
winds would permit, and was the first Englishman who came in a direct course to
this part of America.

On the 14th of May they made the land, and met with a shallop of European
fabric, in which were eight savages, one of whom was dressed in European
clothes; from which they concluded that some unfortunate fishermen of Biscay or
Brittany, had been wrecked on the coast.

The next day they had again sight of land, which appeared like an island, by
reason of a large sound which lay between it and the main. This sound they
called Shole Hope. Near this cape they took a great number of cod, from which
circumstance they named the land Cape Cod. It is described as a low sandy shore
in the latitude of 42. The Captain went on shore and found the sand very deep.
A young Indian, with plates of copper hanging to his ears, and a bow and arrows
in his hand, came to him, and in a friendly manner offered his service.

On the 16th, they coasted the land southerly, and at the end of twelve leagues
discovered a point, with breakers at a distance; and, in attempting to double
it, came suddenly into shoal water. To this point of land they gave the name of
Point Care; it is now called Sandy Point, and forms the southeastern extremity
of the county of Barnstable, in Massachusetts.

Finding themselves surrounded by shoals and breakers, they lay at anchor till
they had examined the coast and soundings in their boat; during which time some
of the natives made them a visit. One of them had a plate of copper over his
breast, a foot in length and half a foot in breadth; the others had pendants of
the same metal as their ears: they all had pipes and tobacco, of which they
were very fond.

In surveying the coast they discovered breakers lying off a point of land,
which they denominated Gilbert's Point; it is now called Point Gammon, and
forms the eastern side of the harbor of Hyennes.

On the 19th they passed the breach of Gilbert's Point, in four and five
fathoms of water, and anchored a league or more to the westward of it. Several
hummocks and hills appeared, which at first were taken to be islands; these
were the high lands of Barnstable and Yarmouth.

To the westward of Gilbert's Point, appeared an opening, which Gosnold
imagined to have a communication with the supposed sound which he had seen
westward of Cape Cod; he therefore gave it the same name Shole Hope; but
finding the water to be no more than three fathoms deep, at the distance of a
league, he did not attempt to enter it. From this opening, the land tended to
the southwest; and, in coasting it, they came to an island to which they gave
the name of Martha's Vineyard. This island is described as "distant eight
leagues from Shole Hope, five miles in circuit, and uninhabited; full of wood,
vines and berries: here they saw deer and took abundance of cod."

From their station off this island, where they rode in eight fathoms, they
sailed on the 24th; and doubled the cape of another island, next to it, which
they called Dover cliff: this course brought them into a sound, where they
anchored for the night, and the next morning sent their boat to examine another
cape, which lay between them and the main, from which projected a ledge of
rocks, a mile into the sea, but all above water, and not dangerous. Having
passed round them, they came to anchor again, in one of the finest sounds,
which they had ever seen; and to which they gave the name of Gosnold's Hope. On
the northern side of it was the main; and on the southern, parallel to it, at
the distance of four leagues, was a large island which they called Elizabeth,
in honor of their Queen. On this island they determined to take up their abode;
and pitched upon a small woody islet in the middle of a fresh pond, as a safe
place to build their fort. A little to the northward of this large island lay a
small one half a mile in compass, and full of cedars. This they called Hill's
Hap. On the opposite northern shore appeared another similar elevation to which
they gave the name of Hap's Hill.

By this description of the coast it is evident that the sound into which
Gosnold entered was Buzzard's Bay. The island which he called Martha's
Vineyard, was not that which now goes by that name, but a small island, the
easternmost of those which are known by the name of Elizabeth's islands. It is
called by the Indians Nenimissett; its present circumference is about four
miles, but it has doubtless been diminished since Gosnold's time, by the force
of the tides which set into and out of the bay with great rapidity. Its natural
productions and pleasant situation answer well to his description; and deer are
frequently seen and hunted upon it: but none were ever known to have been on
the great island, now called Martha's Vineyard; which is above twenty miles in
length and was always full of inhabitants. For what reason and at what time the
name was transferred from the one to the other, I have not yet learned.

The cliff named Dover is supposed to be the eastern head of a small island
which was called by the natives Onky Tonky, and is now corrupted into Uncle
Timmy. The rocky ledge is called Rattlesnake Neck. Hill's Hap consists now of
two very small islands called Wicpeckets. There is every appearance that these
were formerly united; and there are now a few cedars on them. Hap's Hill, on
the opposite part of the main, is a small elevated island, of an oval form,
near the mouth of a river which passes through the towns of Wareham and
Rochester. It is a conspicuous object to navigators.

The island on which Gosnold and his company took up their abode, is now called
by its Indian name Naushaun, and is the property of the Honorable JAMES
BOWDOIN, of Boston, to whom I am indebted for these remarks on Gosnold's
journal, which is extant at large in Purchas's collections. Vol. v, p. 1647.


Near the southwest end of Naushaun is a large fresh pond; such an one as
answers to Gosnold's description, excepting that there is no islet in the
middle of it. The shore is sandy; but what revolution may have taken place
within the space of almost two centuries past, we cannot say.

Whilst some of Gosnold's men labored in building a fort and store house on
the small island in the pond, and a flat boat to go to it; he crossed the bay
in his vessel and discovered the mouths of two rivers: one was that near which
lay Hap's Hill, and the other, that, on the shore of which the town of
New-Bedford is now built.

After five days absence, Gosnold returned to the island and was received by
his people with great ceremony; on account of an Indian chief and fifty of his
men who were there on a visit. To this chief they presented a straw hat and two
knives; the hat he little regarded; but the knives were highly valued. They
feasted these savages with fish and mustard, and diverted themselves with the
effect of the mustard on their noses. One of them stole a target, but it was
restored. They did not appear to be inhabitants, but occasional visitants at
the island, for the sake of gathering shellfish. Four of them remained, after
the others were gone, and helped the English to dig the roots of sassafras;
with which, as well as the furs which they bought of the Indians, the vessel
was loaded.

After spending three weeks in preparing a store house, when they came to
divide their provision, there was not enough to victual the ship, and to
subsist the planters till the ship's return. Some jealousy also arose about the
intentions of those who were going back; and after five days consultation they
determined to give up their design of planting, and return to England. On the
eighteenth of June they sailed out of the bay through the same passage by which
they had entered it; and on the twenty third of July they arrived at Exmouth,
in the west of England.

Gosnold's intention was to have remained with a part of his men, and to have
sent Gilbert, the second in command, to England, for farther supplies; but half
of so small a company would not have been a sufficient number to resist the
savages, had they been disposed to attack them.

After his return to England he was indefatigable in his endeavors to forward
the setsettling of a colony in America, and was one of those who embarked in
the next expedition for Virginia, where he had the rank of a Counselor, and
where he died in the year 1607.

XII. JOHN SMITH.
THOUGH the early part of the life of this extraordinary man was spent in
foreign travels and adventures which have no reference to America; yet the
incidents of that period so strongly mark his character, and give such a
tincture to his subsequent actions, and are withal so singular in themselves,
that no reader (it is presumed) will censure the introduction of them here as
impertinent.

He was born at Willoughby, in Lincolnshire, in the year 1579. This is
determined by an inscription annexed to his portrait on his map of New England
-- "Aetat 37. Anno 1616."

This portrait represents him clad in armor and under it are these verses:
"Such are the lines that show thy face; but those
That show thy grace and glory brighter be;
Thy fair discoveries and foul overthrowes
Of salvages much civilized by thee,
Best show thy spirit, and to it glory win,
So thou art brass without, but gold within."



From the first dawn of reason, he discovered a roving and romantic genius, and
delighted in extravagant and daring actions among his school fellows. When
about thirteen years of age, he sold his books and satchel, and his puerile
trinkets, to raise money, with a view to convey himself privately to sea; but
the death of his father put a stop for the present to this attempt, and threw
him into the hands of guardians, who endeavored to check the ardour of his
genius, by confining him to a compting house. Being put apprentice to a
merchant at Lynn, at the age of fifteen, he at first conceived hopes that his
master would send him to sea in his service, but this hope failing, he quitted
his master, and with only ten shillings in his pocket, entered into the train
of a young nobleman who was traveling to France. At Orleans he was discharged
from his attendance on lord Bertie, and had money given him to return to
England. With this money he visited Paris, and proceeded to the Low Countries,
where he enlisted as a soldier, and learned the rudiments of war, a science
peculiarly agreeable to his ardent and active genius. Meeting with a Scots
gentleman abroad, he was persuad-to pass into Scotland, with the promise of
being strongly recommended to King James; but being baffled in this
expectation, he returned to his native town, and finding no company there which
suited his taste, he built a booth in a wood, and betook himself to the study
of military history and tactics, diverting himself at intervals with his horse
and lance; in which exercise he at length found a companion, an Italian
gentleman, rider to the earl of Lincoln, who drew him from his sylvan
retirement to Tattersal.

Having recovered a part of the estate which his father had left him, he put
himself into a better condition than before, and set off again on his travels,
in the winter of the year 1596, being then only seventeen years of age. His
first stage was Flanders, where meeting with a Frenchman who pretended to be
heir to a noble family, he, with his three attendants, prevailed upon Smith to
go with them to France. In a dark night they arrived at St. Valery in Picardy,
and, by the connivance of the ship master, the Frenchmen were carried ashore
with the trunks of our young traveller, whilst he was left on board till the
return of the boat. In the mean time they had conveyed the baggage out of his
reach, and were not to be found. A sailor on board, who knew the villains,
generously undertook to conduct him to Mortaine where they lived, and supplied
his wants till their arrival at the place. Here he found their friends, from
whom he could gain no recompense; but the report of his sufferings induced
several persons of distinction to invite him to their houses.

Eager to pursue his travels, and not caring to receive favors which he was
unable to requite, he left his new friends and went from port to port in search
of a ship of war. In one of these rambles, near Dinan, it was his chance to
meet one of the villains who had robbed him. Without speaking a word, they both
drew; and Smith having wounded and disarmed his antagonist, obliged him to
confess his guilt before a number of persons who had assembled on the occasion.
Satisfied with his victory, he retired to the seat of an acquaintance, the earl
of Ployer, who had been brought up in England, and having received supplies
from him, he traveled along the French coast to Bayonne, and from thence
crossed over to Marseilles; visiting and observing every thing in his way which
had any reference to naval or military architecture.

At Marseilles he embarked for Italy, in company with a rabble of pilgrims. The
ship was forced by a tempest into the harbor of Toulon, and afterward was
obliged by a contrary wind to anchor under the little island of St. Mary, off
Nice, in Savoy. The bigotry of the pilgrims made them ascribe their ill fortune
to the presence of a heretic on board. They devoutly cursed Smith, and his
Queen Elizabeth, and in a fit of pious rage threw him into the sea. He swam to
the island, and the next day was taken on board a ship of St. Malo which had
also put in there for shelter. The master of the ship, who was well known to
his noble friend the earl of Ployer, entertained him kindly, and carried him to
Alexandria in Egypt; from thence he coasted the Levant; and on his return had
the high satisfaction of a naval engagement with a Venetian ship, which they
took and rifled of her rich cargo. Smith was set on shore at Antibes with a box
of a thousand chequins, (about 2000 dollars) by the help of which he made the
tour of Italy, crossed the Adriatic and traveled into Stiria, to the seat of
Ferdinand, Archduke of Austria. Here he met with an English and an Irish Jesuit
who introduced him to lord Eberspaught, baron Kizel and other officers of
distinction, and here he found full scope for his genius; for the emperor being
then at war with the Turks, he entered into his army as a volunteer.

He had communicated to Eberspaught a method of conversing at a distance by
signals made with torches, which being alternately shown and hidden a certain
number of times, designated every letter of the alphabet. He had soon after an
opportunity of making the experiment. Eberspaught being besieged by the Turks
in the strong town of Olimpach, was cut off from all intelligence and hope of
succor from his friends. Smith proposed his method of communication to baron
Kizel, who approved it, and allowed him to put it in practice. The method is
this. First, three torches are shown in a line equi-distant from each other,
which are answered by three others in the same manner. Then the message being
written as briefly as possible, and the alphabet divided into two parts, the
letters from A to L are signified by showing and hiding one light, as often as
there are letters from A to that letter, which you mean. The letters from M to
Z by two lights in the same manner. The end of a word is signified by showing
three lights. At every letter, the light stands till the other party may write
it down and answer by his signal, which is one light.
He was conveyed by a guard to a hill within view of the town, and sufficiently
remote from the Turkish camp. At the display of the signal, Eberspaught knew
and answered it, and Smith conveyed to him this intelligence, "Thursday night,
I will charge on the East; at the alarm sally thou." The answer was "I will."
Just before the attack, by Smith's advice, a great number of false fires were
made on another quarter, which divided the attention of the enemy and gave
advantage to the assailants; who, being assisted by a sally from the town,
killed many of the Turks, drove others into the river, and threw succors into
the place, which obliged the enemy the next day to raise the siege. This well
conducted exploit, produced to our young adventurer, the command of a company,
consisting of two hundred and fifty horsemen in the regiment of count Meldrick,
a nobleman of Transylvania.

The regiment in which he served being engaged in several hazardous
enterprises, Smith was foremost in all dangers and distinguished himself both
by his ingenuity and by his valor; and when Meldrick left the Imperial army,
and passed into the service of his native prince, Smith followed him.

At the siege of Regal, the Ottomans derided the slow approaches of the
Transylvanian army, and sent a challenge, purporting that the lord Turbisha, to
divert the ladies, would fight any single Captain of the Christian troops. The
honor of accepting this challenge, being determined by lot, fell on Captain
Smith; who, meeting his antagonist on horseback, within view of the ladies on
the battlements, at the sound of music began the encounter, and in a short time
killed him, and bore away his head in triumph to his general the lord Moyzes.

The death of the chief so irritated his friend Grualgo, that he sent a
particular challenge to the conqueror, who, meeting him with the same
ceremonies, after a smart combat, took off his head also. Smith then in his
turn sent a message into the town, informing the ladies, that if they wished
for more diversion, they should be welcome to his head, in case their third
Champion could take it. This challenge was accepted by Bonamolgro, who unhorsed
Smith and was near gaining the victory. But remounting in a critical moment, he
gave the Turk a stroke with his faulchion which brought him to the ground, and
his head was added to the number. For these singular exploits he was honored
with a military procession, consisting of six thousand men, three led horses,
and the Turks' heads on the points of three lances. With this ceremony Smith
was conducted to the pavilion of his general, who, after embracing him,
presented him with a horse richly furnished, a scymitar and belt worth three
hundred ducats, and a commission to be major in his regiment. The prince of
Transylvania, after the capture of the place, made him a present of his picture
set in gold, and a pension of three hundred ducats per annum, and moreover
granted him a coat of arms bearing three Turks' heads in a shield. The patent
was admitted and recorded in the college of Heralds in England, by Sir Henry
Segar, garter king at arms. Smith was always proud of this distinguishing
honor, and these arms are accordingly blazoned in the frontispiece to his
history, with this motto, "Vincere est vivere."

After this, the Transylvanian army was defeated by a body of Turks and Tartars
near Rotenton, and many brave men were slain, among whom were nine English and
Scots officers, who, after the fashion of that day, had entered into this
service, from a religious zeal to drive the Turks out of Christendom. Smith was
wounded in this battle and lay among the dead. His habit discovered him to the
victors as a person of consequence; they used him well till his wounds were
healed, and then sold him to the Basha Bogal, who sent him as a present to his
mistress Tragabigzanda at Constantinople, accompanied with a message, as full
of vanity as void of truth, that he had conquered in battle a Bohemian
nobleman, and presented him to her as a slave.

The present proved more acceptable to the lady than her lord intended. She
could speak Italian; and Smith, in that language, not only informed her of his
country and quality, but conversed with her in so pleasing a manner as to gain
her affections. The connection proved so tender, that to secure him for herself
and to prevent his being ill used or sold again, she sent him to her brother
the Basha of Nalbraitz, in the country of the Cambrian Tartars, on the borders
of the sea of Asoph. Her pretense was, that he should there learn the manners
and language as well as religion of the Tartars. By the terms in which she
wrote to her brother, he suspected her design, and resolved to disappoint her.
Within an hour after Smith's arrival he was stripped; his head and beard were
shaven, an iron collar was put about his neck; he was clothed with a coat of
hair-cloth, and driven to labor among other Christian slaves. He had now no
hope of redemption, but from the love of his mistress, who was at a great
distance, and not likely to be informed of his misfortune; the hopeless
condition of his fellow slaves could not alleviate his despondency.

In the depth of his distress, an opportunity presented for an escape, which to
a person of a less courageous and adventrous spirit would have proved an
aggravation of misery. He was employed in threshing, at a grange, in a large
field about a league from the house of his tyrant, who in his daily visits
treated him with abusive language, accompanied with blows and kicks. This was
more than Smith could bear, wherefore watching an opportunity when no other
person was present, he levelled a stroke at him with his threshing instrument,
which dispatched him. Then hiding his body in the straw and shutting the doors,
he filled a bag with grain, mounted the Basha's horse, and betaking himself to
the desert, wandered for two or three days, ignorant of the way, and so
fortunate as not to meet with a single person who might give information of his
flight. At length he came to a post erected in a cross road, by the marks on
which he found the way to Moscovy, and in sixteen days arrived at Exapolis on
the river Don; where was a Russian garrison, the commander of which
understanding that he was a Christian, received him courteously; took off his
iron collar, and gave him letters to the other governors in that region. Thus
he traveled through part of Russia and Poland, till he got back to his friends
in Transylvania; receiving presents in his way from many persons of
distinction, among whom he particularly mentions a charitable lady, Callamata,
being always proud of his connection with that sex, and fond of acknowledging
their favors. At Leipsic he met with his colonel, count Meldrick, and
Sigismund, prince of Transylvania, who gave him 1500 ducats to repair his
losses. With this money he was enabled to travel through Germany, France, and
Spain, and having visited the kingdom of Morocco, he returned by sea to
England; having in his passage enjoyed the pleasure of another naval
engagement. At his arrival in his native country he had a thousand ducats in
his purse, which, with the interest he had remaining in England, he devoted to
seek adventures and make discoveries in NORTH AMERICA.

Bartholomew Gosnold having conceived a favorable idea of America, had made it
his business, on his return to England, to solicit assistance in prosecuting
discoveries. Meeting with Captain Smith, he readily entered into his views, the
employment being exactly suited to his enterprizing genius. Having engaged
Edward Maria Wingfield, a merchant, Robert Hunt, a clergyman, and several
others, they prevailed upon a number of noblemen, gentlemen, and merchants, to
solicit a patent from the crown, by which the adventurers to Virginia became
subject to legal direction, and had the support and encouragement of a wealthy
and respectable corporation; which was usually styled the South Virginia
company, or the London company, in distinction from the Plymouth company, who
superintended the affairs of North Virginia. The date of their patent was April
10, 1606, and on the 19th of the following December, three ships, one of one
hundred tons, another of forty, and one of twenty, fell down the river Thames
for Virginia. The commander was Christopher Newport, an experienced mariner.
They had on board the necessary persons and provisions for a colony; and their
orders for government were sealed in a box, which was not to be opened till
they should arrive in Virginia.

The ships were kept in the Downs by bad weather six weeks, and afterward had a
tempestuous voyage. They took the old route by the Canary and Caribbee islands,
and did not make the entrance of Chesapeak Bay till the 26th of April 1607.
From the beginning of their embarkation, there was a jealousy and dissension
among the company. Smith and Hunt were friends, and both were envied and
suspected by the others. Hunt was judicious and patient, his office secured him
from insult. Smith was ardent and industrious, courteous in his deportment, but
liberal in his language. On some suggestions that he intended to usurp the
government, and that his confederates were dispersed among the companies of
each ship, he was made a prisoner from the time of their leaving the Canaries,
and was under confinement when they arrived in the Chesapeak. When the box was
opened it was found that Bartholomew Gosnold, John Smith, Edward M. Wingfield,
Christopher Newport, John Ratcliff, John Martin, and George Kendal were named
to be of the council; who were to choose a president from among themselves for
one year, and the government was vested in them. Matters of moment were to be
"examined by a jury, but determined by the major part of the council, in which
the president had two voices." When the council was sworn, Wingfield was chosen
president, and a declaration was made of the reasons for which Smith was not
admitted and sworn among the others.

Seventeen days from their arrival were spent in seeking a proper place for
their first plantation. The southern point of the bay was named Cape Henry, and
the northern Cape Charles, in honor of the two sons of King James. To the
first great river which they discovered they gave the name of their sovereign;
and the northern point of its entrance was called Point Comfort, on account of
the good channel and anchorage which they found there. On the flats they took
plenty of oysters, in some of which were pearls; and on the plain they found
large and ripe strawberries, which afforded them a delicious repast.

Having met with five of the natives, they invited them to their town,
Kecoughtan, where Hampton is now built. Here they were feasted with cakes made
of Indian corn, and regaled with tobacco and a dance. In return they presented
the natives beads and other trinkets. Proceeding up the river, another company
of Indians appeared in arms. Their chief, Apamatica, holding in one hand his
bow and arrow, and in the other a pipe of tobacco, demanded the cause of their
coming; they made signs of peace, and were hospitably received. On the 13th of
May, they pitched upon a peninsula where the ships could lie in six fathom
water, moored to the trees, as the place of their intended settlement. Here
they were visited by Paspiha, another Indian chief, who being made acquainted
with their design, offered them as much land as they wanted, and afterward sent
them a deer for their entertainment. On this spot they piched their tents, and
gave it the name of James-town.

Every man was now employed either in digging and planting gardens, or making
nets, or in cutting and riving timber to relade the ships. The president at
first would admit of no martial exercise, nor allow any fortifications to be
made excepting the boughs of trees thrown together in the form of a half moon.
Captain Newport took Smith and twenty more with him to discover the head of
James-river. In six days they arrived at the falls, and erecting a cross, as
they had at Cape Henry, took possession of the country in the name of King
James. In this route they visited POWHATAN, the principal Indian chief, or
emperor. His town consisted of twelve houses pleasantly situate on a hill;
before which were three islands, a little below the spot where Richmond is now
built. Captain Newport presented a hatchet to this prince, which he gratefully
received, and when some of his Indians murmured at the coming of the English
among them, he silenced them by saying "why should we be offended? they hurt us
not, nor take any thing by force; they want only a little ground which we can
easily spare." This appearance of friendship was not much relied on, when at
their return to James-town, they found that the company had been surprised at
their work by a party of Indians, who had killed one and wounded seventeen
others. A double headed shot from one of the ships had cut off a bough of a
tree, which falling among the Indians, terrified and dispersed them. This
incident obliged the President to alter the plan of the fort, which was now a
triangular palisade with a lunette at each angle; and five pieces of artillery
were mounted on the works, which were completed by the 15th of June. It was
also found necessary to exercise the men at arms, to mount guard and be
vigilant, for the Indians would surprise and molest stragglers, whilst by their
superior agility they would escape unhurt.

The ships being almost ready to return, it was thought proper that some
decision should be had respecting the allegations against Smith. His accusers
affected commiseration, and pretended to refer him to the censure of the
company in England, rather than to expose him, to a legal prosecution which
might injure his reputation or touch his life. Smith, who knew both their
malice and their impotence, openly scorned their pretended pity and defied
their resentment. He had conducted himself so unexceptionably in every
employment which had been allotted to him, that he had rendered himself very
popular; and his accusers had by a different conduct lost the affections and
confidence of the people. Those who had been suborned to accuse him
acknowledged their fault, and discovered the secret arts which had been
practiced against him. He demanded a trial, and the issue was, that the
President was adjudged to pay him two hundred pounds; but when his property was
seized in part of this satisfaction, Smith generously turned it into the common
store, for the benefit of the colony. Such an action could not but increase his
popularity. Many other difficulties had arisen among them, which, by the
influence of Smith, and the exhortations of Hunt, their chaplain, were brought
to a seemingly amicable conclusion. Smith was admitted to his seat in the
council, and on the next Sunday they celebrated the communion. At the same time
the Indians came in, and voluntarily desired peace. With the good report of
these transactions Newport sailed for England on the 22d of June, promising to
return in twenty weeks with fresh supplies.

The colony thus left in Virginia consisted of one hundred and four persons, in
very miserable circumstances, especially on account of provisions, to which
calamity their long voyage did not a little contribute, both as it consumed
their stock, and deprived them of the opportunity of sowing seasonably in the
spring. Whilst the ships remained, they could barter with the sailors for
bread; but after their departure, each man's allowance was half a pint of
damaged wheat, and as much barley, per day: the river, which at the flood was
salt, and at the ebb was muddy, afforded them their only drink; it also
supplied them with sturgeon and shellfish. This kind of food, with their
continual labor in the heat of summer, and their frequent watchings by night
in all weathers, having only the bare ground to lie on with but a slight
covering, produced diseases among them; which by the month of September carried
off fifty persons, among whom was Captain Gosnold. Those who remained were
divided into three watches, of whom not more than five in each were capable of
duty at once. All this time the President, Wingfield, who had the key of the
stores, monopolized the few refreshments which remained, and was meditating to
desert the plantation privately in the pinnace, and remove to the West Indies.
These things rendered him so hateful to the rest, that they deposed him and
elected Ratcliffe in his room; they also removed Kendal from his place in the
council, so that by the middle of September, three members only were left.

Ratcliffe, being a man of no resolution nor activity, committed the management
of affairs abroad to Smith, in whom his confidence was not misplaced. At the
same time the Indians in their neighborhood brought in a plentiful supply of
such provisions as they had, which revived their drooping spirits; and Smith
seeing the necessity of exertion to secure themselves, and provide for the
approaching winter, partly by his animating speeches, but more by his example,
set them to work in mowing and binding thatch, and in building and covering
houses. In these exercises he bore a large share, and in a short time got a
sufficiency of houses to make comfortable lodgings for all the people excepting
himself. This being done, and the provisions which the natives had brought in
being expended, he picked a number of the best hands and embarked in a shallop
which they had brought from England, to search the country for another supply.

The party which accompanied Smith in this excursion, consisted of six men,
well armed, but ill provided with clothing and other necessaries. What was
wanting in equipment was to be supplied by resolution and address; and Smith's
genius was equal to the attempt. They proceeded down the river to Kecoughtan
[Hampton] where the natives, knowing the needy state of the colony, treated
them with contempt, offering an ear of corn in exchange for a musket, or a
sword, and in like proportion for their scant and tattered garments. Finding
that courtesy and gentle treatment would not prevail, and that nothing was to
be expected in the way of barter, and moreover provoked by their contempt,
Smith ordered his boat to be drawn on shore and his men to fire at them. The
affrighted natives fled to the woods, whilst the party searched their houses in
which they found plenty of corn; but Smith did not permit his men to touch it;
expecting that the Indians would return and attack them. They soon appeared to
the number of sixty or seventy, formed into a square carrying their idol OKEE,
composed of skins, stuffed with moss and adorned with chains of copper. They
were armed with clubs and targets, bows and arrows, and advanced, singing, to
the charge. The party received them with a volley of shot, which brought
several of them to the ground and their idol among them; the rest fled again to
the woods, from whence they sent a deputation to offer peace and redeem their
god. Smith, having in his hands so valuable a pledge, was able to bring them to
his own terms; he stipulated that six of them should come unarmed, and load his
boat with corn, and on this condition he would be their friend and give them
hatchets, beads and copper. These stipulations were faithfully performed on
both sides; and the Indians in addition presented them with venison, turkies,
and other birds; and continued singing and dancing till their departure.

The success of this attempt encouraged him to repeat his excursions by land
and water; in the course of which he discovered several branches of
James-River, and particularly the Chickahamony, from whose fertile banks he
hoped to supply the colony with provision. But industry abroad will not make a
flourishing plantation without economy at home. What he had taken pains and
risqued his life to provide, was carelessly and wantonly expended; the traffic
with the natives being under no regulation, each person made his own bargain,
and by out bidding each other they taught the Indians to set a higher value on
their commodities, and to think themselves cheated when they did not all get
the same prices. This bred a jealousy and sowed the seeds of a quarrel with
them, which the colony were in a poor condition to maintain, being at variance
among themselves.

The shallop being again fitted for a trading voyage, whilst Smith was abroad
on one of his usual rambles, and the people being discontented with the
indolence of Ratcliffe, their president, and the long sickness of Martin;
Wingfield and Kendal, who had been displaced, took advantage of Smith's
absence, and conspired with some malcontents to run away with the vessel and go
to England. Smith returned unexpectedly, and the plot was discovered. To
prevent its execution, recourse was had to arms, and Kendal was killed. Another
attempt of the same kind was made by Ratcliffe himself, assisted by Archer; but
Smith found means to defeat this also. He determined to keep possession of the
country, the value of which was daily rising in his estimation; not only as a
source of wealth to individuals, but as a grand national object; and he knew
that great undertakings could not be accomplished without labor and
perseverance.

As the autumn advanced, the waters were covered with innumerable wild fowl;
which with the addition of corn, beans, and pumpkins, procured from the
Indians, changed hunger into luxury, and abated the rage for abandoning the
country. Smith had been once up the river Chickahamony, but because he had not
penetrated to its source, exceptions were taken to his conduct as too dilatory.
This imputation he determined to remove. In his next voyage, he went so high
that he was obliged to cut the trees, which had fallen into the river, to make
his way through as far as his boat could swim. He then left her in a safe
place, ordering his men not to quit her until his return; then taking two of
them, and two Indians for guides, he proceeded in one of their canoes to the
meadows at the river's head; and leaving his two men with the canoe, he went
with his Indian guides across the meadows. A party of 300 Indians below, had
watched the motions of the boat. They first surprised the straggling crew, and
made one of them prisoner, from whom they learned that Smith was above. They
next found the two men, whom he had left with the canoe, asleep by a fire, and
killed them; then having discovered Smith, they wounded him in the thigh with
an arrow. Finding himself thus assaulted, and wounded, he bound one of his
Indian guides with his garters to his left arm, and made use of him as a
shield, whilst he dispatched three of his enemies and wounded some others. He
was retreating to his canoe, when regarding his enemies, more than his
footsteps, he suddenly plunged with his guide into an oozy creek, and stuck
fast in the mud. The Indians astonished at his bravery did not approach him,
till almost dead with cold, he threw away his arms, and begged them to draw him
out, which they did and led him to the fire, where his slain companions were
lying. This sight admonished him what he was to expect. Being revived by their
chafing his benumbed limbs, he called for their chief, Opechankanow, King of
Pamaunkee, to whom he presented his ivory compass and dial. The vibrations of
the needle, and the fly under the glass, which they could see but not touch,
afforded them much amusement; and Smith, having learned something of their
language, partly by means of that, and partly by signs, entertained them with a
description of the nature and uses of the instrument; and gave them such a
lecture on the motions of the heavens and earth, as amazed them, and suspended
for a time, the execution of their purpose. At length, curiosity being
satiated, they fastened him to a tree, and prepared to dispatch him with their
arrows. At this instant, the chief holding up the compass, which he esteemed as
a divinity, they laid aside their arms, and forming a military procession, led
him in triumph to their village Orapaxe. The order of their march was thus:
they ranged themselves in a single file, the King in the midst, before him were
borne the arms taken from Smith and his companions; next after the King, came
the prisoner, held by three stout savages; and on each side a file of six. When
they arrived at the village, the old men, women, and children, came out to
receive them; after some maneuvers, which had the appearance of regularity,
they formed themselves round the King and his prisoner, into a circle, dancing
and singing, adorned with paint, furs, and feathers, brandishing their rattles,
which were made of the tails of rattlesnakes. After three dances, they
dispersed, and Smith was conducted to a long hut, guarded by forty men. There
he was so plentifully feasted with bread and venison, that he suspected their
intention was to fatten and eat him. One of the Indians, to whom Smith had
formerly given beads, brought him a garment of furs, to defend him from the
cold. Another, whose son was then sick and dying, attempted to kill him, but
was prevented by the guard. Smith being conducted to the dying youth, told them
that he had a medicine at James-town, which would cure him, if they would let
him fetch it; but they had another design, which was to surprise the place, and
make use of him as a guide. To induce him to perform this service, they
promised him his liberty, with as much land, and as many women, as would
content him. Smith magnified the difficulty and danger of their attempt, from
the ordnance, mines and other defenses of the place, which exceedingly
terrified them, and to convince them of the truth of what he told them, he
wrote on a leaf of his pocket book, an inventory of what he wanted, with some
directions to the people at the fort, how to affright the messengers who went
to deliver the letter. They returned in three days, reporting the terror, into
which they had been thrown, and when they produced the things for which he had
written, the whole company were astonished at the power of his divination by
the speaking leaf.

After this they carried him through several nations, inhabiting the banks of
the Potowmack and Rapahanock, and at length brought him to Pamaunkee; where
they performed a strange ceremony, by which they intended to divine, whether
his intentions toward them, were friendly or hostile. The manner of it was
this: early in the morning a great fire was made in a long house, and a mat
spread on each side, on one of which he was placed, and the guard retired.
Presently, an Indian priest, hideously painted, and dressed in furs and snake
skins, came skipping in, and after a variety of uncouth noises and gestures,
drew a circle with meal round the fire. Then came in three more in the same
frightful dress, and after they had performed their dance, three others. They
all sat opposite to him in a line, the chief priest in the midst. After singing
a song, accompanied with the music of their rattles, the chief priest laid down
five grains of corn, and after a short speech three more; this was repeated
till the fire was encircled. Then continuing the incantation, he laid sticks
between the divisions of the corn. The whole day was spent in these ceremonies,
with fasting; and at night a feast was prepared of the beast meats which they
had. The same tricks were repeated the two following days. They told him that
the circle of meal represented their country, the circle of corn the sea shore,
and the sticks his country; they did not acquaint him, or he has not acquainted
us with the result of the operation; but he observed that the gunpowder, which
they had taken from him, was laid up among their corn, to be planted the next
spring.

After these ceremonies, they brought him to the emperor POWHATAN, who received
him in royal state, clothed in a robe of racoon skins, seated on a kind of
throne, elevated above the floor of a large hut, in the midst of which was a
fire; at each hand of the prince, sat two beautiful girls, his daughters, and
along each side of the house, a row of his counselors, painted and adorned
with feathers and shells. At Smith's entrance a great shout was made. The Queen
of Apamatox, brought him water to wash his hands, and another served him with a
bunch of feathers, instead of a towel. Having feasted him after their manner, a
long consultation was held, which being ended, two large stones were brought
in, on one of which his head was laid, and clubs were lifted up to beat out his
brains. At this critical moment, POCAHONTAS, the King's favorite daughter,
flew to him, took his head in her arms, and laid her own upon it. Her tender
entreaties prevailed. The king consented that Smith should live, to make
hatchets for him, and ornaments for her.

Two days after, Powhatan caused him to be brought to a distant house; where,
after another threatening, he confirmed his promise, and told him he should
return to the fort, and send him two pieces of cannon, and a grindstone; for
which he would give him the country of Capahousick, and forever esteem him as
his son. Twelve guides accompanied him, and he arrived at James-town, the next
day. According to the stipulation, two guns and a large grindstone were offered
them. but having in vain tried to lift them, they were content to let them
remain in their place. Smith, however, had the guns loaded, and discharged a
volley of stones, at a tree covered with icicles. The report and effect
confounded them; but being pacified with a few toys, they returned, carrying
presents to Powhatan and his daughter, of such things as gave them entire
satisfaction. After this adventure, the young princess, Pocahontas, frequently
visited the plantation, with her attendants, and the refreshments which she
brought from time to time proved the means of saving many lives, which
otherwise would have been lost.

Smith's return happened at another critical juncture. The colony was divided
into parties, and the malcontents, were again preparing to quit the country.
His presence a third time, defeated the project; in revenge for which they
meditated to put him to death, under pretense that he had been the means of
murdering the two men who went with him in the canoe; but by a proper
application of valor and strength, he put his accusers under confinement, till
an opportunity presented for sending them as prisoners to England.

The misfortunes and mismanagements of this Virginian colony, during the period
here related, seem to have originated partly in the tempers and qualifications
of the men who were appointed to command, and partly in the nature and
circumstances of the adventure. There could be no choice of men for the
service, but among those who offered themselves; and these were previously
strangers to each other, as well as different in their education, qualities and
habits. Some of them had been used to the command of ships, and partook of the
roughness of the element on which they were bred. It is perhaps, no great
compliment to Smith, to say that he was the best qualified of them, for
command; since the event proved that none of them, who survived the first
sickness, had the confidence of the people in any degree. It is certain that
his resolution prevented the abandonment of the place the first year; his
enterprizing spirit led to an exploration of the country, and acquainted them
with its many advantages; his captivity produced an intercourse with the
savages; and the supplies gained from them, chiefly by means of his address,
kept the people alive till the second arrival of the ships from England. The
Virginians, therefore, justly regard him, if not as the father, yet as the
savior of that infant plantation.

In the winter of 1607, Capt. Newport arrived from England in Virginia. The
other ship, commanded by Capt. Nelson, which sailed at the same time, was
dismasted on the American coast, and blown off to the West Indies. The supplies
sent by the company were received in Virginia with the most cordial avidity;
but the general license given to the sailors, to trade with the savages, proved
detrimental to the planters, as it raised the prices of their commodities so
high, that a pound of copper would not purchase, what before could be bought
for an ounce. Newport himself was not free from this spirit of profusion, so
common to seafaring men, which he manifested by sending presents of various
kinds to Powhatan, intending thereby to give him an idea of the grandeur of the
English nation. In a visit which he made to this prince, under the conduct of
Smith, he was received and entertained with an equal show of magnificence; but
in trading with the savage chief, he found himself outwitted. Powhatan, in a
lofty strain, spoke to him thus: "It is not agreeable to the greatness of such
men as we are, to trade like common people for trifles; lay down therefore at
once, all your goods, and I will give you the full value for them." Smith
perceived the snare, and warned Newport of it; but he, thinking to out brave
the savage prince, displayed the whole of his store. Powhatan then set such a
price on his corn, that not more than four bushels could be procured; and the
necessary supplies could not have been had, if Smith's genius, ever ready at
invention, had not hit on an artifice which proved successful. He had secreted
some trifles, and among them a parcel of blue beads, which, seemingly in a
careless way, he glanced in the eyes of Powhatan. The bait caught him; and he
earnestly desired to purchase them. Smith, in his turn, raised the value of
them, extolling them as the most precious jewels, resembling the color of the
sky, and proper only for the noblest sovereigns in the universe. Powhatan's
imagination was all on fire; he made large offers. Smith insisted on more, and
at length suffered himself to be persuaded to take between two and three
hundred bushels of corn for about two pounds of blue beads, and they parted in
very good humor, each one being very much pleased with his bargain. In a
subsequent visit to Opecankanough, King of Pamaunkee, the company were
entertained with the same kind of splendour and a similar bargain closed the
festivity; by which means, the blue beads grew into such estimation, that none
but the princes and their families were able to wear them.

Loaded with this acquisition, they returned to James-town; where an unhappy
fire had consumed several of their houses, with much of their provisions and
furniture. Mr. Hunt, the chaplain, lost his apparel and library in this
conflagration, and escaped from it with only the clothes on his back. This
misfortune was severely felt; the ship staying in port fourteen weeks, and
reserving enough for the voyage home, so contracted their stock of provisions,
that before the winter was gone, they were reduced to great extremity, and many
of them died. The cause of the ship's detention for so long a time was this: In
searching for fresh water in the neighborhood of James-town, they had
discovered in a rivulet, some particles of a yellowish ising-glass, which their
sanguine imaginations had refined into gold dust. The zeal for this precious
matter was so strong, that in digging, washing and packing it to complete the
lading of the ship, all other cares were absorbed. This was a tedious interval
to Capt. Smith; his judgment condemned their folly, his patience was exhausted,
and his passion irritated, and the only recompense which he had for this long
vexation was, the pleasure of sending home Wingfield and Archer, when the ship
departed.

The other ship arrived in the spring, and notwithstanding a long and
unavoidable detention in the West Indies, brought them a comfortable supply of
provisions. They took advantage of the opening season, to rebuild their houses
and chapel, repair the palisades, and plant corn for the ensuing summer, in all
which works the example and authority of Smith, were of eminent service. Every
man of activity was fond of him, and those of a contrary disposition were
afraid of him. It was proposed that he should go into the country of the
Monacans, beyond the falls of James-river, that they might have some news of
the interior parts to send home to the company; but a fray with the Indians
detained him at James-town, till the ship sailed for England, laden chiefly
with cedar, but not without another specimen of the yellow dust, of which
Martin was so fond, that he took charge of the packages himself and returned to
England. An accession of above one hundred men, among whom were several
goldsmiths and refiners, had been made to the colony, by the two last ships,
and a new member, Matthew Scrivener, was added to the council.

Having finished the necessary business of the season, and dispatched the ship,
another voyage of discovery was undertaken by Capt. Smith and fourteen others.
They went down the river (June 10, 1608) in an open barge, in company with the
ship, and having parted with her at Cape Henry, they crossed the mouth of the
bay, and fell in with a cluster of islands without Cape Charles, to which they
gave the name of Smith's Isles, which they still bear. Then re-entering the bay
they landed on the eastern neck, and were kindly received by Acomack, the
prince of that peninsula, a part of which still bears his name. From thence
they coasted the eastern shore of the bay, and landed sometimes on the main,
and at other times on the low islands, of which they found many, but none fit
for habitation. They proceeded up the bay to the northward and crossed over to
the western shore, down which they coasted to the southward, and in this route
discovered the mouths of the great rivers, which fall into the bay on that
side. One in particular, attracted much of their attention, because of a
reddish earth which they found there, and from its resemblance to
bole-ammoniac, they gave it the name of Bolus-river, and it is so named in all
the early maps of the country; but in the later, it bears the Indian name
Patapsco; on the north side of which is now the flourishing town of Baltimore.
They sailed thirty miles up the Potowmack, without seeing any inhabitants; but
on entering a creek found themselves surrounded by Indians who threatened them.
Smith prepared for an encounter; but on firing a few guns, the Indians,
terrified at the noise, made signs of peace, and exchanged hostages. One of the
company was by this means carried to the habitation of their prince, and the
whole were kindly used. They learned that it was by direction of Powhatan that
the Indians were in arms, and had attempted to surprise them; from this
circumstance they were led to suspect that Powhatan, had been informed of this
expedition, by the discontented part of the colony whom Smith had obliged to
stay in the country when they would have deserted it.

It was Smith's invariable custom, when he met with the Indians, to put on a
bold face, and if they appeared desirous of peace to demand their arms, and
some of their children as pledges of their sincerity; if they complied, he
considered them as friends; if not, as enemies. In the course of this voyage,
he collected some furs, and discovered some colored earths, which the savages
used as paints, but found nothing of the mineral kind. At the mouth of the
Rappahanock, the boat grounded, and whilst they were waiting for the tide, they
employed themselves in sticking with their swords the fishes which were left on
the flats. Smith having stuck his sword into a stingray, the fish raised its
tail, and with its sharp indented thorn, wounded him in the arm. The wound was
extremely painful, and he presently swelled to that degree, that they expected
him to die, and he himself gave them orders to bury him on a neighboring
island. But the surgeon, Dr. Russel, having probed the wound; by the help of a
certain oil, so allayed the anguish and swelling, that Smith was able to eat
part of the fish for his supper. From this occurrence, the place was
distinguished by the name of Stingray-Point, which it still bears.

On the 21st of July, they returned to James-town. Having, with the colored
earths which they had found, disguised their boat and streamers, their old
companions were alarmed at their approach, with the apprehension of an attack
from the Spaniards; this was a trick of Smith's to frighten the old President,
who had rioted on the public stores, and was building a house in the woods,
that he might seclude himself from the sickly, discontented, quarrelsome
company. On Smith's arrival, they signified their desire of investing him with
the government. Ratcliffe being deposed, it fell to him of course; and having
recommended Scrivener to preside in his absence, he entered on another voyage
of discovery, being determined to spare no pains for a full exploration of the
country.

From the 24th of July, to the 7th of September, with twelve men in an open
barge, he ranged the bay of Chesapeak, as far northward as the falls of
Susquehannah, entering all the rivers that flow into the bay, and examining
their shores. In some places, the natives were friendly, and in others jealous.
Their idea of the strange visitors, was, that they had come "from under the
world to take their world from them." Smith's constant endeavor, was to
preserve peace with them; but when he could not obtain corn in the way of
traffic, he never scrupled to use threats, and in some cases, violence, and by
one or the other method he prevailed so as to bring home a load of provisions
for his discontented companions, who without his efforts would not have been
able to live. Sickness and death were very frequent, and the latest comers,
were most affected by the disorders of the climate.

Smith was now established in the presidency, by the election of the council
and the request of the company; but the commission gave to a majority of the
council the whole power. Newport, at his third arrival, brought over two new
members, and Ratcliffe having still a seat, though deposed from the presidency,
Smith was obliged in some cases to comply with their opinions, contrary to his
own judgment, an instance of which will now be exhibited.

The Virginia company in London, deceived by false reports, and misled by their
own sanguine imaginations, had conceived an expectation not only of finding
precious metals in the country, but of discovering the South Sea, from the
mountains at the head of James-river; and it was thought, that the journey
thither, might be performed in eight or ten days. For the purpose of making
this capital discovery, they put on board Newport's ship, a barge capable of
being taken to pieces, and put together again at pleasure. This barge was to
make a voyage to the head of the river, then to be carried in pieces across the
mountains, and to descend the rivers which were supposed to run westward to the
South Sea. To facilitate this plan, it was necessary to gain the favor of
Powhatan, through whose country the passage must be made; and as means of
winning him, a royal present was brought over, consisting of a basin and ewer,
a bed and furniture, a chair of state, a suit of scarlet clothes, with a cloak
and a crown, all which were to be presented to him in due form; and the crown
placed on his head, with as much solemnity as possible. To a person who knew
the country and its inhabitants so well as Smith, this project appeared
chimerical, and the means whereby it was to be carried on, dangerous. With a
small quantity of copper and a few beads, he could have kept Powhatan in good
humor, and made an advantage of it for the colony, whereas a profusion of
presents he knew would but increase his pride and insolence. The project of
traveling over unknown mountains with men already weakened by sickness, and
worn out with fatigue, in a hot climate, and in the midst of enemies, who might
easily cut off their retreat, was too romantic even for his sanguine and
adventrous spirit. His opinion upon the matter cannot be expressed in more
pointed language, than he used in a letter to the company. "If the quartered
boat was burned to ashes, one might carry her in a bag, but as she is, five
hundred cannot, to a navigable place above the falls." His dissent however was
ineffectual, and when he found that the voice of the council was for executing
it, he lent his assistance to effect as much of it as was practicable.

Previously to their setting out, he undertook, with four men only, to carry
notice to Powhatan of the intended present, and invite him to come to
James-town, that he might receive it there. Having traveled by land twelve
miles to Werocomoco, on Pamunky (York) river, where he expected to meet
Powhatan, and not finding him there, whilst a messenger was dispatched thirty
miles for him; his daughter Pocahontas, entertained Smith and his company with
a dance, which for its singularity, merits a particular description.

In an open plain, a fire being made, the gentlemen were seated by it. Suddenly
a noise was heard in the adjacent wood, which made them fly to their arms, and
seize on two or three old men, as hostages for their own security, imagining
that they were betrayed. Upon this the young princess came running to Smith,
and passionately embracing him, offered herself to be killed, if any harm
should happen to him or his company. Her assurances, seconded by all the
Indians present, removed their fears. The noise which had alarmed them, was
made by thirty girls, who were preparing for the intended ceremony. Immediately
they made their appearance, with no other covering than a girdle of green
leaves and their skins painted, each one of a different color. Their leader
had a pair of buck's horns on her head, an otter's skin as her girdle, and
another on one arm; a bow and arrow in the other hand, and a quiver at her
back. The rest of them had horns on their heads, and a wooden sword or staff in
their hands. With shouting and singing, they formed a ring round the fire, and
performed a circular dance for about an hour, after which they retired in the
same order as they had advanced. The dance was followed by a feast, at which
the savage nymphs were as eager with their caresses as with their attendance;
and this being ended, they conducted the gentlemen to their lodging by the
light of fire brands.

The next day Powhatan arrived, and Smith delivered the message from his
father, Newport (as he always called him) to this effect. "That he had brought
him from the King of England, a royal present, and wished to see him at
James-town, that he might deliver it to him; promising to assist him in
prosecuting his revenge against the Monacans, whose country they would
penetrate even to the sea beyond the mountains." To which the savage prince
with equal subtilty and haughtiness, answered, "If your King has sent me a
present, I also am a King, and am on my own land. I will stay here eight days.
Your father must come to me, I will not go to him, nor to your fort. As for the
Monacans, I am able to revenge myself. If you have heard of salt water beyond
the mountains, from any of my people, they have deceived you." Then with a
stick he drew a plan of that region on the ground; and after many compliments
the conference ended.

The present being put on board the boats, was carried down James-river and up
the Pamunkee, whilst Newport, with fifty men, went across by land and met the
boats, in which he passed the river, and held the proposed interview. All
things being prepared for the ceremony of coronation, the present was brought
from the boats; the basin and ewer were deposited, the bed and chair were set
up, the scarlet suit and cloak were put on, though not till Namontac (an Indian
youth whom Newport had carried to England and brought back again) had assured
him that these habiliments would do him no harm; but they had great difficulty
in persuading him to receive the crown, nor would he bend his knee, or incline
his head in the least degree. After many attempts, and with actual pressing on
his shoulders, they at last made him stoop a little and put it on. Instantly, a
signal being given, the men in the boats fired a volley, at which the monarch
started with horror, imagining that a design was forming to destroy him in the
summit of his glory; but being assured that it was meant as a compliment, his
fear subsided, and in return for the baubles of royalty received from King
James, he desired Newport to present him his old fur mantle and deer skin
shoes, which in his estimation were doubtless a full equivalent; since all this
finery could not prevail on the wary chief to allow them guides for the
discovery of the inland country, or to approve their design of visiting it.
Thus disappointed they returned to James-town, determined to proceed without
his assistance.

Smith, who had no mind to go on such a fruitless errand, tarried at the fort
with eighty invalids to relade the ship, whilst Newport with all the council,
and one hundred and twenty of the healthiest men, began their transmontane tour
of discovery. They proceeded in their boats to the falls at the head of the
river; from thence they traveled up the country two days and a half, and
discovered two towns of the Monacans, the inhabitants of which seemed very
indifferent toward them, and used them neither well nor ill. They took one of
their petty princes and led him bound to guide them. Having performed this
march, they grew weary and returned, taking with them in their way back certain
portions of earth, in which their refiner pretended that he had seen signs of
silver. This was all the success of their expedition; for the Savages had
concealed their corn, and they could neither persuade them to sell it, nor find
it to take it by force. Thus they returned to James-town, tired, disappointed,
hungry and sick, and had the additional mortification of being laughed at by
Smith for their vain attempt.

The Virginia company had not only a view to the discovery of the South Sea,
but also to establish manufactures in their colony; and for this purpose had
sent over a number of workmen from Poland and Germany, who were skilled in the
making pot ashes and glass, as well as pitch and tar. Had the country been full
of people, well cultivated and provided with all necessaries for carrying on
these works, there might have been some prospect of advantage; but, in a new
region, the principal objects are subsistence and defense; these will
necessarily occupy the first adventurers to the exclusion of all others.
However, Smith was of so generous a disposition, and so indefatigable in doing
what he apprehended to be his duty, and in gratifying his employers, that as
soon as Newport returned from his fruitless attempt to find the South Sea, he
set all, who were able, to work, that he might, if possible, answer the
expectation of the company. Those who were skilled in the manufactures, he left
under the care of the council, to carry on their works; whilst he took thirty
of the most active with him, about five miles down the river, to cut timber,
and make clapboards; this being, as he well knew, an employment the most
certain of success. Among these were several young gentlemen, whose hands not
having been used to labor, were blistered by the axes, and this occasioned
frequent expressions of impatience and profaneness. To punish them, Smith
caused the number of every man's oaths to be taken down daily, and at night as
many canns of water to be poured inside his sleeve. This discipline was no less
singular than effectual; it so lessened the number of oaths, that scarcely one
was heard in a week, and withal it made them perfectly good humoured, and
reconciled them to their labor. At his return to the fort, he found, not only
that business had been neglected, but much provision consumed, and that it was
necessary for him to undertake another expedition for corn. He, therefore, went
up the Chickahamony with two boats and eighteen men, and finding the Indians
not in a humor for trading, but rather scornful and insolent, he told them
that he had come not so much for corn, as to revenge his imprisonment, and the
murder of his two men, some time before. Putting his crew in a posture of
attack, the Indians fled, and presently sent messengers to treat of peace; for
the obtaining which, he made them give him an hundred bushels of corn, with a
quantity of fish and fowls; and with this supply he kept the colony from
starving, and preserved the ship's provisions for her voyage to England. At her
departure, she carried such specimens as could be had of tar, pitch,
turpentine, soap ashes, clapboards, and wainscot; and at Point Comfort, met
with Scrivener, who had been up the Pamaunkee for corn, and had got a quantity
of pocones, a red root, used in dying; these being taken on board, Capt.
Newport returned to England the third time, leaving about two hundred persons
in Virginia.

The harvest of 1608, had fallen short both among the new planters and the
natives; and the colony was indebted to the inventive genius and indefatigable
perseverance of Smith, for their subsistence during the succeeding winter. As
long as the rivers were open, he kept the boats continually going among the
natives, for such supplies as could be obtained; and he never would return
empty, if any thing were to be had by any means in his power. Whilst abroad on
these excursions, he and his men were obliged frequently to lodge in the woods,
when the ground was hard frozen and covered with snow; and their mode of
accomodating themselves was, first to dig away the snow and make a fire; when
the ground was dried and warmed, they removed the fire to one side, and spread
their mats over the warm spot for their bed, using another mat as a screen from
the wind; when the ground cooled, they shifted the fire again; by thus
continually changing their position they kept themselves tolerably warm through
many cold nights; and it was observed, that those who went on this service and
submitted to these hardships, were robust and healthy, whilst those who stayed
at home were always weak and sickly.

The supplies procured by trading being insufficient, and hunger very pressing,
Smith ventured on the dangerous project of surprising Powhatan, and carrying
off his whole stock of provisions. This Indian prince, had formed a similar
design respecting Smith; and for the purpose of betraying him, had invited him
to his seat, promising that if he would send men to build him a house, after
the English mode, and give him some guns and swords, copper and beads, he would
load his boat with corn. Smith sent him three Dutch carpenters, who
treacherously revealed to him the design which Smith had formed. On his arrival
with forty six men, he found the prince, so much on his guard, that it was
impossible to execute his design. Having spent the day in conversation (in the
course of which Powhatan had in vain endeavored to persuade Smith to lay aside
his arms, as being there in perfect security) he retired in the evening and
formed a design to surprise Smith, and his people at their supper; and had it
not been for the affectionate friendship of Pocahontas, it would probably have
been effected. This amiable girl, at the risque of her life, stole from the
side of her father, and passing in the dark through the woods, told Smith with
tears in her eyes of the plot, and then as privately returned. When the Indians
brought in the supper, Smith obliged them to taste of every dish; his arms were
in readiness, and his men vigilant; and though there came diverse sets of
messengers one after another, during the night, under pretense of friendly
inquiries, they found them so well prepared, that nothing was attempted, and
the party returned in safety.

In a subsequent visit to Opecancanough, by whom he formerly was taken
prisoner, this prince put on the semblance of friendship, whilst his men lay in
ambush with their bows and arrows. The trick being discovered by one of Smith's
party and communicated to him, he resolutely seized the King by his hair, and
holding a pistol to his breast, led him trembling to the ambush, and there with
a torrent of reproachful and menacing words, obliged him to order those very
people not only to lay down their arms, but to load him with provisions. After
this, they made an attempt to murder him in his sleep, and to poison him, but
both failed of success. The chief of Paspiha meeting him alone in the woods,
armed only with a sword, attempted to shoot him, but he closed with the savage,
and in the struggle both fell into the river; where, after having narrowly
escaped drowning, Smith at last prevailed to gripe him by the throat, and would
have cut off his head, but the entreaties of the poor victim prevailing on his
humanity, he led him prisoner to James-town.

This intrepid behavior struck a dread into the savages, and they began to
believe what he had often told them, that, "his God would protect him against
all their power, whilst he kept his promise; which was to preserve peace with
them as long as they should refrain from hostilities, and continue to supply
him with corn." An incident which occurred about the same time, confirmed their
veneration for him. An Indian having stolen a pistol from James-town, two
brothers who were known to be his companions were seized, and one was held as
hostage for the other, who was to return in twelve hours with the pistol, or
the prisoner was to be hanged. The weather being cold, a charcoal fire was
kindled in the dungeon which was very close, and the vapor had so suffocated
the prisoner, that on the return of his brother at the appointed time, with the
pistol, he was taken out as dead. The faithful savage lamented his fate in the
most distressing agony. Smith, to console him, promised, if they would steal no
more, that he should be recovered. On the application of spirits and vinegar,
he showed signs of life, but appeared delirious; this grieved the brother as
much as his death. Smith undertook to cure him of this also, on the repetition
of the promise to steal no more. The delirium being only the effect of the
spirits which he had swallowed, was remedied by a few hours sleep; and being
dismissed, with a present of copper, they went away, believing and reporting
that Smith was able to bring the dead to life. The effect was, that not only
many stolen things were recovered, and the thieves punished, but that peace and
friendly intercourse were preserved, and corn brought in as long as they had
any, whilst Smith remained in Virginia.

He was equally severe and resolute with his own men, and finding many of them
inclining to be idle, and this idleness in a great measure the cause of their
frequent sicknesses and deaths, he made an order, "that he who would not work
should not eat, unless he were disabled, by sickness; and that every one who
did not gather as much food in a day as he did himself, should be banished." A
recent attempt having been made, to run away with the boats, he ordered that
the next person who should repeat this offense should be hanged. By firmness in
the execution of these laws, and by the concurrent force of his own example in
laboring continually, and distributing his whole share of European provisions
and refreshments to the sick, he kept the colony in such order, that, though
many of them murmured at his severity, they all became very industrious; and
withal so healthy, that, of two hundred persons, there died that winter and the
next spring no more than seven. In the space of three months they had made a
quantity of tar, pitch, and pot ashes; had produced a sample of glass; dug a
well in the fort; built twenty new houses; provided nets and wiers for fishing;
erected a block house on the isthmus of James-town; another on Hog Island; and
had begun a fortress on a commanding eminence. As the spring came on, they paid
such attention to husbandry, as to have thirty or forty acres cleared and fit
for planting; and a detachment had been sent to the southward, to look for the
long lost colony of Sir Walter Raleigh, but without success.

Such was the state of the Virginia colony, when Captain Samuel Argal arrived
on a trading voyage, and brought letters from the company in England,
complaining of their disappointment, and blaming Smith as the cause of it. They
had conceived an ill opinion of him, from the persons whom he had sent home,
who represented him as arbitrary and violent toward the colonists, cruel to the
savages, and disposed to traverse the views of the adventurers, who expected to
grow rich very suddenly.

There was this disadvantage attending the business of colonization in North
America, at that day, that the only precedents which could be had were those of
the Spaniards, who had treated the natives with extreme cruelty, and amassed
vast sums of gold and silver. Whilst the English adventurers detested the means
by which the Spaniards had acquired their riches, they still expected that the
same kind of riches might be acquired by other means; it was therefore thought
politic, to be gentle in demeanor and lavish of presents toward the natives, as
an inducement to them to discover the riches of their country. On these
principles the orders of the Virginia company to their servants were framed.
But experience had taught Smith, the most discerning and faithful of all whom
they had employed, that the country of Virginia would not enrich the
adventurers in the time and manner which they expected; yet he was far from
abandoning it as worthless: his aim, was thoroughly to explore it; and by
exploring, he had discovered what advantages might be derived from it; to
produce which, time, patience, expense and labor, were absolutely necessary.
He had fairly represented these ideas to his employers, he had spent three
years in their service, and from his own observations had drawn and sent them a
map of the country; and he had conducted their affairs, as well as the nature
of circumstances would permit. He had had a disorderly, factious, discontented,
disappointed set of men, to control, by the help of a few adherents; in the
face of the native lords of the soil, formidable in their numbers and knowledge
of the country, versed in stratagem, tenacious of resentment, and jealous of
strangers. To court them by presents was to acknowledge their superiority, and
inflate their pride and insolence. Though savages, they were men and not
children. Though destitute of science, they were possessed of reason, and a
sufficient degree of art. To know how to manage them, it was necessary to be
personally acquainted with them; and it must be obvious, that a person who had
resided several years among them, and had been a prisoner with them, was a much
better judge of the proper methods of treating them, than a company of
gentlemen at several thousand miles distance, and who could know them only by
report. Smith had, certainly, the interest of the plantation at heart, and by
toilsome experience, had just learned how to conduct it; when he found himself
so obnoxious to his employers, that a plan was concerted to supersede him, and
reinstate, with a share of authority, those whom he had dismissed from the
service.

The Virginia Company had applied to the King to recall their patent and grant
another; in virtue of which they appointed Thomas Lord de la War, general;
Sir Thomas Gates, lieutenant general; Sir George Summers, admiral; Sir Thomas
Dale, marshal; Sir Ferdinando Wainman, general of horse; and Captain Newport,
(the only one of them who had seen the country) vice admiral. The adventurers
having, by the alteration of their patent, acquired a reinforcement both of
dignity and property, equipped nine ships; in which were embarked five hundred
persons, men, women and children. Gates, Summers, and Newport, had each a
commission, investing either of them who might first arrive, with power to call
in the old and set up the new commission. The fleet sailed from England in May
1609, and by some strange policy the three commanders were embarked in one
ship. This ship being separated from the others in a storm, was wrecked on the
island of Bermuda; another foundered at sea; and when the remaining seven
arrived in Virginia, two of which were commanded by Ratcliffe and Archer, they
found themselves destitute of authority; though some of them were full enough
of prejudice against Smith who was then in command. The ships had been greatly
shattered in their passage, much of their provision was spoiled, many of their
people were sick; and the season in which they arrived was not the most
favorable to their recovery. A mutinous spirit soon broke out, and a scene of
confusion ensued; the new comers would not obey Smith, because they supposed
his commission to be superseded; the new commission was not arrived, and it was
uncertain whether the ship which carried it would ever be seen or heard of.
Smith would gladly have withdrawn and gone back to England, but his honor was
concerned in maintaining his authority till he should be regularly superseded;
and his spirit would not suffer him to be trampled on by those whom he
despised. Upon due consideration, he determined to maintain his authority as
far as he was able; waiting some proper opportunity to retire. Some of the most
insolent of the new comers, "he laid by the heels." With the more moderate he
consulted what was best to be done; and, as a separation seemed to be the best
remedy, and it had been in contemplation to extend the settlements, some were
induced to go up to the Falls, others to Nansemond, and others to Point
Comfort. Smith's year being almost expired, he offered to resign to Martin, who
had been one of the old council, but Martin would not accept the command; he,
therefore, kept up the form; and, as much as he could, of the power of
government; till an accident which had nearly proved fatal to his life, obliged
him to return to England.

On his return from the new plantation at the Falls; sleeping by night in his
boat; a bag of gun powder took fire, and burnt him in a most terrible manner.
Awaking in surprise, and finding himself wrapped in flames, he leaped into the
water, and was almost drowned, before his companions could recover him. At his
return to James-town, in this distressed condition, Ratcliffe and Archer
conspired to murder him in his bed; but the assassin, whom they employed, had
not courage to fire a pistol. Smith's old soldiers would have taken off their
heads; but he thought it prudent to pass by the offense, and take this
opportunity, as there was no surgeon in the country, of returning to England.
As soon as his intention was known, the council appointed Mr. Percie to preside
in his room; and detained the ship three weeks, till they could write letters,
and frame complaints against him. He at length sailed for England, about the
latter end of September 1609; much regreted by his few friends, one of whom has
left this character of him. "In all his proceedings he made justice his first
guide, and experience his second; hating baseness, sloth, pride, and indignity,
more than any dangers. He never would allow more for himself than for his
soldiers; and upon no danger would send them where he would not lead them
himself. He would never see us want what he had, or could by any means get for
us. He would rather want than borrow; or starve, than not pay. He loved action
more than words; and hated covetousness and falsehood worse than death. His
adventures were our lives; and his loss our deaths."

There needs no better testimony to the truth of this character, than what is
related of the miserable colony after he had quitted it. Without government,
without prudence, careless, indolent, and factious, they became a prey to the
insolence of the natives, to the diseases of the climate and to famine. Within
six months, their number was reduced from five hundred to sixty; and when the
three commanders, who had been wrecked on Bermuda, arrived (1610) with one
hundred and fifty men in two small vessels, which they had built out of the
ruins of their ship, and the cedars which grew on the island; they found the
remnant of the colony in such a forlorn condition; that without hesitation,
they determined to abandon the country, and were sailing down the river; when
they met a boat from the Lord De la War, who had come with a fleet to their
relief. By his persuasion they resumed the plantation, and to this fortunate
incident, may be ascribed the full establishment of the colony of Virginia.

Such a genius as Smith's could not remain idle. He was well known in England,
and the report of his valor, and his spirit of adventure, pointed him out to a
number of merchants, who were engaged in the American fishery, as a proper
person to make discoveries on the coast of North Virginia. In April 1614, he
sailed from London with two ships, and arrived at the island of Monahigon in
latitude 43, as it was then computed, where he built seven boats. The design of
the voyage was to take whales, to examine a mine of gold, and another of
copper, which were said to be there; and if either, or both of these should
fail, to make up the cargo with fish and furs. The mines proved a fiction, and
by long chasing the whales to no purpose, they lost the best season for
fishing; but whilst the seamen were engaged in these services; Smith, in one of
his boats, with eight men, ranged the coast, east and west, from Penobscot to
Cape Cod; bartering with the natives for beaver and other furs, and making
observations on the shores, islands, harbors, and head lands, which, at his
return to England, he wrought into a map, and presenting it to prince Charles,
(afterward the royal martyr) with a request that he would give the country a
name, it was for the first time called New England. The prince also made
several alterations in the names which Smith had given to particular places.
For instance, he had called the name of that promontory, which forms the
eastern entrance of Massachusetts bay, Tragabigzanda; after the name of the
Turkish lady to whom he had been formerly a slave at Constantinople; and the
three islands which lie off the Cape, the Turks Head, in memory of his victory
over the three Turkish champions, in his Transylvanian adventures. The former,
Charles, in filial respect to his mother, called Cape Anne, which name it has
ever since retained; the name of the islands has long since been lost; and
another cluster to which he gave his own name, Smith's Isles, and which name
the prince did not alter, are now, and have for more than a century been called
the Isles of Shoals; so that the most pointed marks of his discoveries on the
coast of New England, have, either by his own complaisance to the son of his
sovereign, or by force of time and accidents become obsolete. When he sailed
for England in one of the ships, he left the other behind, to complete her
lading, with orders to sell the fish in Spain. The master, Thomas Hunt, decoyed
twenty four of the natives on board, and sold them in Spain for slaves. The
memory of this base transaction was long preserved among the Americans, and
succeeding adventurers suffered on account of it.

At Smith's return to England he put in at Plymouth; where relating his
adventures, and communicating his sentiments to Sir Ferdinando Gorges, he was
introduced to the Plymouth Company of adventurers to North Virginia, and
engaged in their service. At London he was invited by the South Virginia
company to return to their service; but made use of his engagement with the
Plymouth adventurers as an excuse for declining their invitation. From this
circumstance it seems, that they had been convinced of his former fidelity,
notwithstanding the letters and reports which they had formerly received to his
disadvantage.

During his stay in London, he had the very singular pleasure of seeing his
friend Pocahontas, the daughter of Powhatan. Having been made a prisoner in
Virginia, she was there married to Mr. John Rolfe, and by him was brought to
England. She was then about twenty two years of age; her person was graceful,
and her deportment gentle and pleasing. She had been taught the English
language and the Christian religion, and baptized by the name of Rebecca. She
had heard that Smith was dead, and knew nothing to the contrary, till she
arrived in England.

The fame of an Indian princess excited great curiosity in London; and Smith
had the address to write a handsome letter to the Queen, setting forth the
merits of his friend, and the eminent services she had done to him and the
colony of Virginia. She was introduced by the lady De la War; the Queen and
royal family received her with much complacency, and she proved herself worthy
of their notice and respect. At her first interview with Smith she called him
father; and because he did not immediately return the salutation and call her
child, she was so overcome with grief, that she hid her face and would not
speak for sometime. She was ignorant of the ridiculous affectation which
reigned in the court of James; which forbad Smith assuming the title of father,
to the daughter of a King; and when informed of it she despised it;
passionately declaring, that she loved him as a father, and had treated him as
such in her own country, and would be his child wherever she went. The same
pedantic affectation caused her husband to be looked upon as an offender, for
having, though a subject, invaded the mysterious rights of royalty in marrying
above his rank. This marriage, however, proved beneficial to the colony, as her
father had thereby become a friend to them, and when she came to England, he
sent with her Uttamaccomac, one of his trusty counselors; whom he enjoined to
inquire for Smith, and tell him whether he was alive. Another order which he
gave him was, to bring him the number of people in England; accordingly, on his
landing at Plymouth, the obedient savage began his account by cutting a notch
on a long stick for every person whom he saw; but soon grew tired of his
employment, and at his return told Powhatan that they exceeded the number of
leaves on the trees. A third command from his prince was, to see the God of
England, and the King, Queen, and Princes, of whom Smith had told him so much;
and when he met with Smith, he desired to be introduced to those personages. He
had before this seen the King, but would not believe it; because the person
whom they pointed out to him had not given him any thing. "You gave Powhatan
(said he to Smith) a white dog, but your King has given me nothing." Mr. Rolfe
was preparing to return with his wife to Virginia, when she was taken ill and
died at Gravesend; leaving an infant son, Thomas Rolfe, from whom are descended
several families of note in Virginia, who hold their lands by inheritance from
her.

Smith had conceived such an idea of the value and importance of the American
continent, that he was fully bent on the business of plantation, rather than
fishing and trading for furs. In this he agreed with his friend Sir Ferdinando
Gorges, and the few other active members of the council of Plymouth, but it had
become an unpopular theme. One colony had been driven home from Sagadahock by
the severity of the season and the deaths of their leaders. Men who were fit
for the business were not easily to be obtained, those who had formerly been
engaged were discouraged, and it required great strength of mind as well as
liberality of purse, to set on foot another experiment. After much trouble in
endeavoring to unite persons of opposite interests, and stimulate those who
had sustained former losses, to new attempts, he obtained one ship of two
hundred tons, and another of fifty, with which he sailed in 1615. Having
proceeded about one hundred and twenty leagues, they were separated in a storm;
the smaller one commanded by Capt. Thomas Dermer pursued her voyage; but Smith
having lost his masts was obliged to put back under a jury mast to Plymouth.
There he put his stores on board a small bark of sixty tons, and thirty men, of
whom sixteen were to assist him in beginning a new colony.

Meeting with an English pirate, his men would have had him surrender; but
though he had only four guns, and the pirate thirty six, he disdained to yield.
On speaking with her, he found the commander and some of the crew to be his old
shipmates, who had run away with the ship from Tunis, and were in distress for
provisions; they offered to put themselves under his command, but he rejected
the proposal and went on his voyage. Near the Western Islands he fell in with
two French pirates; his men were again thrown into a panic, and would have
struck, but he threatened to blow up the ship, if they would not fight; and by
firing a few running shot, he escaped them also. After this he was met by four
French men of war, who had orders from their sovereign to seize pirates. He
showed them his commission under the great seal; but they prefidiously detained
him whilst they suffered his ship to escape in the night, and return to
Plymouth. They knew his enterprising spirit, and were afraid of his making a
settlement in New England, so near to their colony of Acadia; and they
suspected, or at least pretended to suspect, that he was the person who hod
broken up their fishery at Port Royal (which was really done by Captain Argal)
the year before.

When their cruise was finished, they carried him to Rochelle; and
notwithstanding their promises to allow him a share of the prizes which they
had taken whilst he was with them, they kept him as a prisoner on board a ship
at anchor. But a storm arising, which drove all the people below, he took the
boat, with an half pike for an oar, thinking to make his escape in the night.
The current was so strong that he drifted to sea, and was near perishing. By
the turn of the tide he got ashore, on a marshy island, where some fowlers
found him in the morning almost dead with cold and hunger. He gave them his
boat to carry him to Rochelle, where he learned that the ship which had taken
him, with one of her prizes, which was very rich, had been driven on shore in
that storm, and lost, with her Captain and one half of the men.

Here he made his complaint to the judge of the Admiralty, and produced such
evidence in support of his allegations, that he was treated with fair words;
but it does not appear that he got any recompense. He met here and at Bourdeaux
with many friends, both French and English, and at his return to England,
published in a small quarto, an account of his two last voyages, with the
depositions of the men who were in the ship when he was taken by the French. To
this book he prefixed his map of New England; and in it gave a description of
the country, with its many advantages, and the proper methods of rendering it a
valuable acquisition to the English dominions. When it was printed, he went all
over the west of England, giving copies of it to all persons of note; and
endeavoring to excite the nobility, gentry, and merchants, to engage with
earnestness in the business of colonizing America. He obtained from many of
them fair promises, and was complimented by the Plymouth company with the title
of Admiral of New England. But the former ill success of some too sanguine
adventurers, had made a deep impression, and a variety of cross incidents,
baffled all his attempts.

However, his experience and advice were of eminent service to others. The open
frankness and generosity of his mind led him to give all the encouragement
which he could to the business of fishing and planting in New England; for
which purpose, in 1622, he published a book, entitled, "New-England's Trials"
some extracts from which are preserved by Purchase. Vol. v, p. 1837.
No man rejoiced more than himself in the establishment of the colonies of
Plymouth and Massachusetts.

When the news of the massacre of the Virginian planters by the Indians, 1622,
arrived in England, Smith was all on fire to go over to revenge the insult. He
made an offer to the company that if they would allow him one hundred soldiers
and thirty sailors, with the necessary provisions and equipments, he would
range the country, keep the natives in awe, protect the planters, and make
discoveries, of the hitherto unknown parts of America; and for his own risque
and pains would desire nothing but what he would "produce from the proper
labor of the savages." On this proposal the company was divided, but the
pusillanimous and avaricious party prevailed; and gave him this answer, "that
the charges would be be too great; that their stock was reduced; that the
planters ought to defend themselves; but, that if he would go at his own
expense, they would give him leave, provided he would give them one half of the
pillage." Such an answer could be received only with contempt.

When the King in 1624, instituted a commission for the reformation of
Virginia, Smith, by desire of the commissioners, gave in a relation of his
former proceedings in the colony, and his opinion and advice respecting the
proper methods of remedying the defects in government, and carrying on the
plantation with a prospect of success. Agreeably to Smith's advice to these
commissioners, King Charles I. at his accession dissolved the company, in 1626,
and reduced the colony under the immediate direction of the crown, appointing
the governor and council, and ordering all patents and processes to issue in
his own name.
These with many other papers he collected and published, in 1627, in a thin
folio, under the title of, "The General History of Virginia, New England, and
the Somer Isles." The narrative part is made up of journals and letters of
those who were concerned with him in the plantation, intermixed with his own
observations. His intimate friend, Mr. Purchase, had published most of them two
years before in his "Pilgrims."

In 1629, at the request of Sir Robert Cotton, he published a history of the
early part of his life, entitled, "The true Travels, Adventures and
Observations of Capt. John Smith." This work is preserved entire, in the second
volume of Churchill's collections, and from it, the former part of this account
is compiled. In the conclusion he made some addition to the history of
Virginia, Bermuda, New England and the West Indies, respecting things which had
come to his knowledge, after the publication of his general history. He stated
the inhabitants of Virginia in 1628 at five thousand, and their cattle about
the same number. Their produce was chiefly tobacco; but those few who attended
to their gardens had all sorts of fruit and vegetables in great abundance and
perfection. From New England, they received salted fish; but of fresh fish
their own rivers produced enough, beside an infinite quantity of fowl; as their
woods did of deer and other game. They had two brew houses; but they cultivated
the Indian corn, in preference to the European grain. Their plantations were
scattered; some of their houses were palisaded; but they had no fortifications
nor ordnance mounted.

His account of New England is, that the country had been represented by
adventurers from the west of England, as rocky, barren and desolate; but that,
since his account of it had been published, the credit of it was so raised,
that forty or fifty sail went thither annually on fishing and trading voyages.
That nothing had been done to any purpose in establishing a plantation, till
"about an hundred Brownists went to New-Plymouth; whose humorous ignorance
caused them to endure a wonderful deal of misery, with infinite patience."

He then recapitulates the history of his American adventures in the following
terms. "Now to conclude the travels and adventures of Captain Smith: How first
he planted Virginia, and was set ashore with a hundred men in the wild woods;
how he was taken prisoner by the savages, and by the King of Pamaunky tied to a
tree to be shot to death; led up and down their country, to be shown for a
wonder; fatted as he thought for a sacrifice to their idol, before whom they
conjured three days, with strange dances and invocations; then brought before
their Emperor Powhatan, who commanded him to be slain; how his daughter
Pocahontas saved his life, returned him to James-town, relieved him and his
famished company, which was but eight and thirty, to possess those large
dominions; how he discovered all the several nations on the rivers falling into
the bay of Chesapeak; how he was stung almost to death by the poisonous tail of
a fish called a stingray; how he was blown up with gunpowder and returned to
England to be cured.

"Also how he brought New England to the subjection of the kingdom of Great
Britain; his fights with the pirates, left alone among French men of war, and
his ship ran from him; his sea fights for the French against the Spaniards;
their bad usage of him; how in France, in a little boat, he escaped them; was
adrift all such a stormy night at sea by himself, when thirteen French ships
were split or driven on shore by the isle of Rhee, the General and most of his
men drowned; when GOD, to whom be all honor and praise, brought him safe on
shore to the admiration of all who escaped; you may read at large in his
general history of Virginia, the Somer islands and New England."

This was probably his last publication, for he lived but two years after. By a
note in Josselyn's voyage, it appears that he died in 1631, at London, in the
fifty second year of his age.

It would give singular pleasure to the compiler of these memoirs, if he could
learn from any credible testimony, that Smith ever received any recompense for
his numerous services and sufferings. The sense which he had of this matter, in
1627, shall be given in his own words. "I have spent five years, and more than
five hundred pounds, in the service of Virginia and New England, and in neither
of them have I one foot of land, nor the very house I built, nor the ground I
dug with my own hands; but I see those countries shared before me by those
who know them only by my descriptions."

XIII. DE MONTS, POUTRIN COURT AND CHAMPLAIN.
AFTER the discovery of Canada, by Cartier, the French continued trading to
that country for furs, and fishing on the banks of Newfoundland, Cape Breton
and Acadia; where they found many excellent and convenient harbors, among
which Canseau was early distinguished as a place extremely suitable for the
fishery. One Savalet, an old mariner, who frequented that port, had before 1609
made no less than forty two voyages to those parts. Purchase v. 1640.


Henry IV, King of France, perceived the advantages which might arise to his
kingdom from a farther exploration of the northern parts of America; and
therefore gave encouragement to those who were desirous of making adventures.
In 1598, the Marquis DE LA ROCHE obtained a commission of Lord Lieutenant, and
undertook a voyage with a view to establish a colony; consisting of convicts
taken out of the prisons. Happening in the course of his voyage to fall in with
the isle of Sable, a low, sandy island, lying about twenty five leagues
southward of Canseau, he there landed forty of his miserable crew, to subsist
on the cattle and swine, with which the place had been stocked by the
Portuguese, for the relief of shipwrecked seamen. The reason given for choosing
this forlorn place, for the disembarkation of his colony, was, that they would
be out of all danger from the savages, till he should find a better situation
for them on the continent, when he promised to return and take them off.
Whether he ever reached the continent is uncertain, Forster says, that "he made
in different parts of it, such researches as he thought necessary, and then
returned to France." p. 443. Purchase says that "it was his fortune, by reason
of contrary wind, not to find the main land, but was blown back to France."
Vol. v, p. 1807.
but he never again saw the isle of Sable. Returning to France, he engaged in
the wars, was made a prisoner by the Duke of Merceur, and soon after died. The
wretched exiles subsisted on such things as the place afforded, and clothed
themselves with the skins of seals. At the end of seven years, Purchase says
twelve; this will bring it to the last year of Henry's life, 1610.
King Henry, in compassion, sent a fisherman to bring them home. Twelve only
were then alive. The fisherman, concealing from them the generous intention of
their sovereign, took all the skins which they had collected as a recompense
for his services, some of which being black foxes were of great value. The King
had them brought before him in their seal skin habits and long beards. He
pardoned their former crimes, and made each of them a present of fifty crowns.
When they discovered the fraud of the fisherman, they instituted a process
against him at law, and recovered large damages; by means of which they
acquired so much property as to enter into the same kind of traffic.

The King also granted to PONTGRAVE DE CHAUVIN, an exclusive privilege of
trading at Tadousac, the mouth of the river Saguenay; to which place he made
two voyages, and was preparing for a third when he was prevented by death.

The next voyager of any note was SAMUEL CHAMPLAIN, of Brouage; a man of a
noble family; who, in 1603, sailed up the river of Canada, as far as Cartier
had gone in 1535. He made many inquiries of the natives concerning their
country, its rivers, falls, lakes, mountains and mines. The result of his
inquiry was, that a communication was formed, by means of two lakes, with the
country of the Iroquois toward the south; that toward the west there were more
and greater lakes of fresh water, to one of which they knew no limits; and that
to the northward there was an inland sea of salt water. In the course of this
voyage, Champlain anchored at a place called Quebeck, which in the language of
the country signified a strait; and this was thought to be a proper situation
for a fort and settlement. He heard of no mines but one of copper, far to the
northward. With this information he returned to France, in the month of
September.

On the eighth of November in the same year King Henry granted to the Sieur DE
MONTS, a gentleman of his bed chamber, a patent constituting him Lieutenant
General of all the territory of L'Acadia, from the fortieth to the forty sixth
degree of north latitude, with power to subdue the inhabitants and convert them
to the Christian faith. See the patent, in French, in Hazard's Collection, vol.
i.45, and translated into English, in Churchill's Collections, vol. viii, p.
796.
This patent was published in all the maritime towns of France; and De Monts
having equipped two vessels sailed for his new government on the seventh of
March, 1604; taking with him the aforesaid Samuel Champlain for a pilot, and
Monsieur DE POUTRINCOURT who had been for a long time desirous to visit America.

On the 6th of May, they arrived at a harbor on the S. E. side of the
peninsula of Acadia where they found one of their countrymen, Rossignol,
trading with the Indians without license. They seized his ship and cargo;
leaving him only the poor consolation, of giving his name to the harbor where
he was taken; the provisions found in his ship were a seasonable supply, and
without them the enterprise must have been abandoned. This place is now called
Liverpool.

From Port Rossignol they coasted the peninsula to the S. W. and having doubled
Cape Sable came to anchor in the bay of St. Mary, where Aubry, a priest, going
ashore, was lost in the woods, and a protestant was charged with having
murdered him, because they had sometimes had warm disputation on religious
subjects. They waited for him several days, firing guns and sounding trumpets,
but in vain; the noise of the sea was so great that no other sound could be
heard. Concluding that he was dead, they quitted the place after sixteen days;
intending to examine that extensive bay on the west of the peninsula to which
they gave the name of La Baye Francoise; but which is now called the Bay of
Funda. The priest was afterward found alive, but almost starved to death.

On the eastern side of this bay they discovered a narrow strait, into which
they entered, and soon found themselves in a spacious basin, environed with
hills, from which descended streams of fresh water; and between the hills ran a
fine navigable river, which they called L'Equille. It was bordered with fertile
meadows, and full of delicate fish. Poutrincourt, charmed with the beauty of
the place, determined here to take his residence, and having received a grant
of it from De Monts, gave it the name of Port Royal. [Annapolis.]

From Port Royal, De Monts sailed farther into the great bay, to visit a copper
mine. It was a high rock, on a promontory, between two bays. [Menis.] The
copper, though mixed with stone, was very pure; resembling that called Rozette
copper. Among these stones they found chrystals and a certain shining stone of
a blue color. Specimens of these stones were sent to the King.

In farther examining the bay they came to a great river which they called St.
John's; full of islands and swarming with fish. Up this river they sailed fifty
leagues, and were extremely delighted with the vast quantity of grapes which
grew on its banks. By this river they imagined that a shorter communication
might be had with the Baye de Chaleur and the port of Tadousac, than by the sea.

From the river St. John they coasted the bay, southwesterly, till they came to
an island in the middle of a river which Champlain had previously explored.
Finding its situation safe and convenient, De Monts resolved there to build a
fort and pass the winter. To this island he gave the name of St. Croix; This is
a station of much importance. It has given rise to a controversy, between the
United States and the British government, which is not yet terminated. I shall
therefore give a description of this island and its surrounding waters, from a
translation of Mark Lescarbot's history of the voyages of De Monts, in which he
himself was engaged, and therefore had seen the place which he describes. This
translation is to be found at large in Churchill's Collections, vol. viii, 796,
and an abridgement of it in Purchas's Pilgrims, vol. v, 1619.

"Leaving St. John's river, they came, following the coast twenty leagues from
that place, to a great river, which is properly sea, [i. e. salt water] where
they fortified themselves in a little island seated in the midst of this river,
which the said Champlain had been to discover and view. And, seeing it strong
by nature, and of easy defense and keeping; besides that the season began to
slide away, and therefore it was behoveful to provide of lodging, without
running any farther, they resolved to make their abode there.

"Before we speak of the ship's return to France, it is meet to tell you, how
hard the isle of St. Croix is to be found out, to them that were never there.
For there are so many isles and great bays to go by [from St. John's] before
one be at it, that I wonder how one might ever pierce so far as to find it.
There are three or four mountains, imminent above the others, on the sides; but
on the north side from whence the river runs down, there is but a sharp
pointed one, above two leagues distant. The woods of the main land are fair and
admirable high, and well grown, as in like manner is the grass. There is right
over against the island fresh water brooks, very pleasant and agreeable; where
diverse of Mons. De Monts men did their business, and builded there, certain
cabbins. As for the nature of the ground it is most excellent, and most
abundantly fruitful. For the said Mons. De Monts having caused there some piece
of ground to be tilled, and the same sowed with rye; he was not able to tarry
for the maturity thereof to reap it; and notwithstanding, the grain fallen has
grown and increased so wonderfully, that two years after, we reaped and did
gather of it as fair, big and weighty as in France, which the soil has brought
forth without any tillage; and yet at this present [1609] it does continue
still to multiply every year.

"The said island contains some half a league in circuit, and at the end of
it, on the sea side, there is a mount, or small hill, which is, as it were, a
little isle, severed from the other, where Mons. De Monts his cannon were
placed. There is also a little chapel, built after the savage fashion. At the
foot of which chapel there is such store of muscles as is wonderful, which may
be gathered at low water, but they are small.

"Now let us prepare and hoist up sails. Mons. de Poutrincourt made the voyage
into these parts, with some men of good sort, not to winter there; but as it
were to seek out his seat, and find out a land that might like him. Which he
having done, had no need to sojourne there any longer. So then, the ships being
ready for the return, he shipped himself, and those of his company in one of
them.

"During the foresaid navigation, Mons. De Monts his people, did work about the
fort; which he seated at the end of the island, opposite to the place where he
had lodged his cannon. Which was wisely considered, to the end to command the
river up and down. But there was an inconvenience; the said fort did lie toward
the north, and without any shelter, but of the trees that were on the isle
shore, which all about he commanded to be kept and not cut down.

"The most urgent things being done, and hoary snowy father being come, that is
to say winter, then they were forced to keep within doors, and to live every
one at his own home. During which time, our men had three special
discommodities, in this island, want of wood, (for that which was in the said
isle was spent in buildings) lack of fresh water, and the continual watch made
by night, fearing some surprise from the savages, that had lodged themselves,
at the foot of the said island, or some other enemy. For the malediction and
rage of many christians is such, that one must take heed of them much more than
of infidels. When they had need of water or wood, they were constrained to
cross over the river, which is thrice as broad of every side as the river of
Seine."

By a gentleman who resided several years in those parts, I have been informed,
that an island which answers to this description, lies in the eastern part of
the bay of Passamaquoddy; and there the river St. Croix was supposed to be, by
the commissioners who negociated the peace in 1783, who had Mitchel's map
before them; but, in a map of the coast of New England and Nova Scotia,
published in London, 1787, by Robert Sayer, and said to be drawn by Capt.
Holland, the river St. Croix is laid down at the western part of the bay; the
breadth of which is about six or seven leagues.


because that two leagues higher there were brooks which "came cross-wise to
fall within this large branch of the sea."

The winter proved severe, and the people suffered so much by the scurvy, that
thirty six of them died; the remaining forty, who were all sick, lingered till
the spring (1605) when they recovered by means of the fresh vegetation. The
remedy which Cartier had found in Canada was here unknown.

As soon as his men were recovered, De Monts resolved to seek a comfortable
station in a warmer climate. Having victualled and armed his pinnace he sailed
along the coast to Norombega, a name which had been given by some European
adventurers to the bay of Penobscot; from thence he sailed to Kennebec, Casco,
Saco, and finally came to Malebarre, as Cape Cod was then called by the French.
In some of the places which he had passed, the land was inviting; and
particular notice was taken of the grapes; but the savages appeared numerous,
unfriendly and thievish: De Monts' company being small, he preferred safety to
pleasure, and returned first to St. Croix, and then to Port Royal; where he
found Dupont, in a ship from France, with fresh supplies and a reinforcement of
forty men. The stores which had been deposited at St. Croix were removed across
the bay, but the buildings were left standing. New houses were erected at the
mouth of the river, which runs into the basin of Port Royal; there the stores
and people were lodged; and De Monts having put his affairs in as good order as
possible, in the month of September embarked for France; leaving Dupont as his
lieutenant, with Champlain, and Champdore to perfect the settlement, and
explore the country.

During the next winter they were plentifully supplied by the savages with
venison, and a great trade was carried on for furs. Nothing is said of the
scurvy; but they had short allowance of bread; not by reason of any scarcity of
corn but because they had no other mill to grind it than the hand mill, which
required hard and continual labor. The savages were so averse to this
exercise, that they preferred hunger to the task of grinding corn, though they
were offered half of it in payment. Six men only died in the course of this
winter.

In the spring of 1606, Dupont attempted to find what De Monts had missed, in
the preceding year, a more southerly settlement. His bark was twice forced back
with adverse winds; and the third time was driven on rocks and bilged at the
mouth of the port. The men and stores were saved; but the vessel was lost.
These fruitless attempts proved very discouraging; but Dupont employed his
people, in building a bark and shallop; that they might employ themselves in
visiting the ports, whither their countrymen resort to dry their fish, till new
supplies should arrive.

De Monts and Poutrincourt were at that time in France, preparing, amidst every
discouragement, for another voyage. On the thirteenth of May, they sailed from
Rochelle, in a ship of one hundred and fifty tons; and on the 27th of July
arrived at Port Royal, in the absence of Dupont, who had left two men only to
guard the fort. In a few days he arrived, having met with one of their boats
which they had left at Canseau, and great was the joy on both sides at their
meeting.

Poutrincourt now began his plantation; and having cleared a spot of ground,
within fifteen days he sowed European corn and several sorts of garden
vegetables. But notwithstanding all the beauty and fertility of Port Royal, De
Monts had still a desire to find a better place at the southward. He therefore
prevailed on Poutrincourt to make another voyage to Cape Malebarre; and so
earnest was he to have this matter accomplished, that he would not wait till
the next spring, but prepared a bark to go to the the southward as soon as the
ship was ready to sail.

On the 28th of August, the ship and the bark both sailed from Port Royal. In
the ship De Monts and Dupont returned to France; whilst Poutrincourt,
Champlain, Champdore and others crossed the bay to St. Croix, and thence sailed
along the coast; touching at many harbors in their way till they arrived in
sight of the Cape, the object of their voyage. Being entangled among the
shoals, their rudder was broken and they were obliged to come to anchor, at the
distance of three leagues from the land. The boat was then sent ashore to find
a harbor of fresh water; which by the information of one of the natives was
accomplished. Fifteen days were spent in this place; during which time, a cross
was erected, and possession taken, for the King of France; as De Monts had done
two years before at Kenebeck. When the bark was repaired and ready to sail,
Poutrincourt took a walk into the country, whilst his people were baking bread.
In his absence some of the natives visited his people and stole a hatchet. Two
guns were fired at them, and they fled. In his return he saw several parties of
the savages, male and female, carrying away their children and their corn; and
hiding themselves, as he and his company passed. He was alarmed at this strange
appearance; but much more so, when early the next morning a shower of arrows
came flying among his people, two of whom were killed and several others
wounded. The savages having taken their revenge, fled; and it was in vain to
pursue them. The dead were buried at the foot of the cross; and whilst the
funeral service was performing, the savages were dancing and yelling in mock
concert, at a convenient distance, but within hearing. When the French retired
on board their bark, the savages took down the cross, dug up the bodies and
stripped them of their grave clothes, which they carried off in triumph.

This unhappy quarrel gave Poutrincourt a bad idea of the natives. He attempted
to pass farther round the cape; but was prevented by contrary winds; and forced
back to the same harbor, where the savages offering to trade, six or seven of
them were seized and put to death.

The next day another attempt was made to sail farther; but the wind came
against them. At the distance of six or seven leagues they discovered an
island; but the wind would not permit them to approach it; they therefore gave
it the name of Douteuse, or Doubtful. This was probably either Nantucket or
Capawock, now called Martha's Vineyard; and if so, the contest with the Indians
was on the south shore of Cape Cod; where are several harbors and streams of
fresh water. To the harbor where he lay, he gave the name of Port Fortune.

It was now late in the season and no prospect appeared of obtaining any better
place for a settlement; besides, he had two wounded men whose lives were in
danger. He therefore determined to return, which he did by the shortest and
most direct course; and after a perilous voyage, in which the rudder was again
broken, and the bark narrowly escaped shipwreck, he arrived at Port Royal on
the 14th of November.

The manner in which they spent the third winter was social and festive. At the
principal table, to which fifteen persons belonged, an order was established,
by the name of L'ordre de bon temps. Every one took his turn to be caterer and
steward, for one day, during which he wore the collar of the order and a
napkin, and carried a staff. After supper he resigned his accoutrements, with
the ceremony of drinking a cup of wine, to the next in succession. The
advantage of this institution was, that each one was emulous to be prepared for
his day; by previously hunting or fishing, or purchasing fish and game of the
natives, who constantly resided among them, and were extremely pleased with
their manners.

Four only died in this winter; and it is remarked that these were "sluggish
and fretful." The winter was mild and fair. On a Sunday in the middle of
January, after divine service, they "sported and had music on the river;" and
in the same month they went two leagues, to see their corn field, and dined
cheerfully in the sunshine.

At the first opening of the spring (1607) they began to prepare gardens; the
produce of which was extremely grateful; as were also the numberless fish which
came into the river. They also erected a water mill, which not only saved them
much hard labor, at the hand mill; but gave them more time for fishing. The
fish which they took were called herrings and pilchards; of which they pickled
several hogsheads to be sent home to France.

In April they began to build two barks, in which they might visit the ports,
frequented by the fishermen, and learn some news from their mother country, as
well as get supplies for their subsistence. Having no pitch to pay the seams,
they were obliged to cut pine trees and burn them in kilns, by which means they
obtained a sufficiency.

On Ascension day, a vessel arrived from France, destined to bring supplies; a
large share of which, the crew had ungenerously consumed in their voyage. The
letters brought by this vessel informed them that the company of Merchants,
associated with De Monts, was dicouraged; and that their ship was to be
employed in the fishery at Canseau. The reason of this proceeding was, that
contrary to the King's edict, the Hollanders had intruded themselves into the
fur trade, in the river of Canada; having been conducted by a treacherous
Frenchman; in consequence of which, the King had revoked the exclusive
privilege which he had given to De Monts for ten years. The avarice of these
Hollanders was so great, that they had opened the graves of the dead, and taken
the beaverskins in which the corpses had been buried. This outrage was so
highly resented by the savages at Canseau, that they killed the person, who had
shown the places where the dead were laid. This news was extremely unwelcome,
as it portended the destruction of the colony.

Poutrincourt however was so well pleased with his situation, that he
determined to return to it, though none but his own family should accompany
him. He was very desirous to see the issue of his attempt at agriculture, and
therefore detained the vessel, as long as he could; and employed his bark in
small voyages, about the bay, to trade for furs, and gather specimens of iron
and copper to be transported to France. When they were all ready to sail, he
tarried eleven days longer than the others, that he might carry home the first
fruits of his harvest. Leaving the buildings, and part of the provision with
the standing corn, as a present to the friendly natives, he finally sailed from
Port Royal, on the 11th of August, and joined the other vessels at Canseau;
from which place, they proceeded to France, where they arrived in the latter
end of September.

Specimens of the wheat, rye, barley, and oats were shown to the King; which,
with other productions of the country, animal and mineral, were so highly
acceptable, that he renewed and confirmed to De Monts the privilege of trading
for beavers; that he might have it in his power to establish a colony. In
consequence of which, the next spring several families were sent to renew the
plantation, who found that the savages had gathered seven barrels of the corn
which had been left standing; and had reserved one for their friends whom they
expected to return.

The revocation of the exclusive patent given to De Monts, was founded on
complaints, made by the masters of fishing vessels, that the branch of commerce
in which they were engaged would be ruined. When this patent was restored, it
was limited to one year; and on this condition, that he should make an
establishment in the river St. Lawrence. De Monts therefore quitted his
connection with Acadia, and the company of Merchants, with whom he had been
connected, fitted out two ships for the port of Tadousac, in 1608. The fur
trade was of very considerable value, and the company made great profits; but
De Monts finding their interests hurt by his connection with them, withdrew from
the association.

Poutrincourt resolving to prosecute his plantation at Port Royal, the grant of
which had been confirmed, to him by the King, sent Biencourt, his son, to
France, (1608) for a supply of men and provisions. One condition of the grant
was, that attempts should be made convert the natives to the Catholic faith, it
was therefore necessary to engage the assistance of some ecclesiastics. The
first who embraced the proposal were the Jesuits, by whose zealous exertions a
contribution was soon made for the purpose; and two of their order, Biard and
Mass, embarked for the new plantation. It was not long before a controversy
arose between them and the proprietor, who said "it was his part to rule them
them on earth, and theirs only to guide him to heaven." Purchase v. 1808.
After his departure for France, his son Biencourt, disdaining to be controled
by those whom he had invited to reside with him, threatened them with corporal
punishment, in return for their spiritual anathemas. It became necessary then
that they should separate. The Jesuits removed to mount Desert, where they
planted gardens and entered on the business of their mission, which they
continued till 1613 or 1614; when Sir Samuel Argal from Virginia broke up the
French settlements in Acadia. In the encounter one of these Jesuits was killed
and the other was made prisoner. Of the other Frenchmen, some dispersed
themselves in the woods and mixed with the savages; some went to the river St.
Lawrence and strengthened the settlement which Champlain had made there; and
others returned to France.

Two advantages were expected to result from establishing a colony in the river
St. Lawrence: One was, an extension of the fur trade, and another was the hope
of penetrating westward, though the lakes, to the Pacific Ocean, and finding a
nearer communication with China. One of the vessels sent by the company of
merchants, in 1608, to that river, was commanded by Champlain. In his former
voyage he had marked the strait above the Isle of Orleans, as a proper
situation for a fort; because the river was there contracted in its breadth,
and the northern shore was high and commanding. He arrived there in the
beginning of July, and immediately began to clear the woods, to build houses,
and prepare fields and gardens. Here he spent the winter, and his company
suffered much by the scurvy. The remedy which Cartier had used, was not to be
found, or the savages knew nothing of it. It is supposed that the former
inhabitants had been extirpated, and a new people held possession. Purchase v,
1642.


In the spring of 1609, Champlain, with two other Frenchmen and a party of the
natives, went up the river now called Sorel and entered the lakes, which lie
toward the south, and communicate with the country of the Iroquois. To the
largest of these lakes Champlain gave his own name, which it has ever since
retained. On the shore of another, which he called Lake Sacrament, now Lake
George, they were discovered by a company of the Iroquois, with whom they had a
skirmish. Champlain killed two of them with his musket. The scalps of fifty
were taken and brought to Quebeck in triumph.

In the autumn, Champlain went to France, leaving Capt Pierre to command; and
in 1610 he returned to Quebeck, to perfect the colony, of which he may
considered as the founder.

After the death of Henry IV, he obtained of the Queen Regent, a commission as
Lieutenant of New-France, with very extensive powers. This commission was
confirmed by Lewis XIII; and Champlain was continued in the Government of
Canada.

The religious controversies, which prevailed in France, augmented the number
of colonists. A settlement was made at Trois Rivieres, and a brisk trade was
carried on at Tadousac. In 1626, Quebeck began to assume the face of a city,
and the fortress was rebuilt with stone; but the people were divided in their
religious principles and the Hugonot party prevailed.

In this divided state, (1629) the colony was attacked by an armament from
England under the conduct of Sir David Kirk. He sailed up the river St.
Lawrence and appeared before Quebeck, which was then so miserably supplied,
that they had but seven ounces of bread to a man for a day. A squadron from
France, with provision for their relief, entered the river; but, after some
resistance, were taken by the English. This disappointment increased the
distress of the colony and obliged Champlain to capitulate. He was carried to
France in an English ship; and there found the minds of the people divided,
with regard to Canada; some thinking it not worth regaining, as it had cost the
government vast sums, without bringing any return; others deeming the fishery
and fur trade to be great national objects, especially as they proved to be a
nursery for seamen. These sentiments, supported by the solicitation of
Champlain, prevailed; and by the treaty of St. Germain's, in 1632, Canada,
Acadia and Cape Breton were restored to France.

The next year Champlain resumed his government, and the company of New France
were restored to their former rights and privileges. A large recruit of
inhabitants, with a competent supply of Jesuits, arrived from France; and with
some difficulty a mission was established among the Hurons; and a seminary of
the order was begun at Quebeck. In the midst of this prosperity Champlain died,
in the month of December, 1635; and was succeeded the next year by De Montmagny.

Champlain is characterized as a man of good sense, strong penetration and
upright views; volatile, active, enterprizing, firm and valiant. He aided the
Hurons in their wars with the Iroquois, and personally engaged in their
battles; in one of which he was wounded. His zeal for the propagation of the
Catholic religion was so great that it was a common saying with him, that "the
salvation of one soul was of more value than the conquest of an empire."
Charlevoix Hist. Nouvelle, France, Tom. i, p. 197, 410.


XIV. FERDINANDO GORGES. AND JOHN MASON.
WE know nothing concerning Gorges in the early part of his life. In Josselyn's
voyage he is called "Sir F. G. of Ashton Phillips, in Somerset." p. 197.
The first account we have of him, is the discovery which he made of a plot
which the earl of Essex had laid to overthrow the government of Queen
Elizabeth, the tragical issue of which is too well known to be here repeated.
Gorges, who had been privy to the conspiracy at first, communicated his
knowledge of it to Sir Walter Raleigh, his intimate friend, but the enemy and
rival of Essex. Hume.


There was not only an intimacy between Raleigh and Gorges, but a similarity in
their genius and employment; both were formed for intrigue and adventure; both
were indefatigable in the prosecution of their sanguine projects; and both were
naval commanders.

During the war with Spain, which occupied the last years of Queen Elizabeth,
Gorges, with other adventurous spirits, found full employment in the navy of
their mistress. When the peace, which her successor, James I, made in 1604, put
an end to their hopes of honor and fortune by military enterprises, Sir
Ferdinando was appointed Governor of Plymouth, in Devonshire. This
circumstance, by which the spirit of adventure might seem to have been
repressed, proved the occasion of its breaking out with fresh ardour, though in
a pacific and mercantile form, connected with the rage for foreign discoveries,
which after some interruption, had again seized the English nation.

Lord Arundel, of Wardour, had employed a Captain Weymouth in search of a
northwest passage to India. This navigator having mistaken his course, fell in
with a river on the coast of America, which, by his description, must have been
either Kenebeck, or Penobscot. From thence he brought to England, five of the
natives, and arrived in the month of July, 1605, in the harbor of Plymouth,
where Gorges commanded, who immediately took three of them into his family.
Their names were Manida, Sketwarroes and Tasquantum; they were all of one
language, though not of the same tribe. This accident proved the occasion,
under God's providence, of preparing the way for a more perfect discovery than
had yet been made of this part of North America.

Having gained the affections of these savages by kind treatment, he found them
very docile and intelligent; and from them he learned by inquiry, many
particulars concerning their country, its rivers, harbors, islands, fish and
other animals; the numbers, disposition, manners and customs of the natives;
their government, alliances, enemies, force and methods of war. The result of
these inquiries served to feed a sanguine hope of indulging his genius and
advancing his fortune by a more thorough discovery of the country.

His chief associate in this plan of discovery, was Sir John Popham, Lord Chief
Justice of the King's Bench, who, by his acquaintance with diverse noblemen, and
by their interest at court, obtained from King James a patent for making
settlements in America, which was now divided into two districts, and called
North and South Virginia. The latter of these districts was put under the care
of certain noblemen, knights, and gentlemen, who were styled the London
Company; the former under the direction of others in Bristol, Exeter and
Plymouth, who were called the Plymouth Company, because their meetings were
usually held there.

By the joint efforts of this company, of which Popham and Gorges were two of
the most enterprising members; a ship, commanded by Henry Chalong, was fitted
out, and sailed in August, 1606, for the discovery of the country, from which
the savages had been brought, and two of them were put on board. The orders
given to the master, were to keep in as high a latitude as Cape Breton, till he
should discover the main land, and then to range the coast southward, till he
should find the place from which the natives had been taken. Instead of
observing these orders, the Captain falling sick on the passage, made a
southern course, and first arrived at the island of Porto Rico, where he
tarried some time for the recovery of his health; from thence coming
northwardly, he fell in with a Spanish fleet from the Havannah, by whom the
ship was seized and carried to Spain.

Captain Prynne, (...) another ship, which sailed from Bristol, with orders to
find Chalong, and join with him in a survey of the coast, had better success;
for though he failed of meeting his consort, yet he carried home a particular
account of the coasts, rivers, and harbors, with other information relative to
the country, which made so deep an impression on the minds of the company, as
to strengthen their resolution of prosecuting their enterprise.

It was determined to send over a large number of people sufficient to begin a
colony. For this purpose George Popham was appointed president; Raleigh
Gilbert, admiral; Edward Harlon, master of ordnance; Robert Davis, sergeant
major; Elis Best, marshal; Mr. Seaman, secretary; James Davis, commander of the
fort; Gome Carew, searcher. All these were to be of the council; and besides
these, the colony consisted of 100 men, who were styled planters. They sailed
from Plymouth in two ships (May 31, 1607) and having fallen in with the island
of Monahigon (August 11,) landed at the mouth of Sagadahock, or Kenebeck river,
on a peninsula, where they erected a store house, and having fortified it as
well as their circumstances would admit, gave it the name of Fort St. George.

By means of two natives, whom they brought with them from England, viz.
Sketwarroes, sent by Gorges, and Dehamida, by Popham, they found a cordial
welcome among the Indians, their sachems offering to conduct and introduce them
to the Bashaba or great chief, whose residence was at Penobscot, and to whom,
it was expected, that all strangers should make their address. The Bashaba of
Penobscot, was a prince, superior in rank to the sachems of the several Tribes.
All the sachems, westward, as far as Naumkeeg [Salem] acknowledged subjection
to him. He is frequently mentioned in the accounts of the first voyages to
New England; but was killed by the Tarrateens in 1615, before any effectual
settlement was made in the country. We have no account of any other Indian
chief in these northern parts of America, whose authority was so extensive.


The President having received several invitations, was preparing to comply
with their request, and had advanced some leagues on his way, but contrary
winds, and bad weather, obliged him to return, to the great grief of the
sachems, who were to have attended him. The Bashaba hearing of the
disappointment, sent his son to visit the President, and settle a trade for
furs.

The ships departed for England, in December, leaving behind them only 45
persons of the new colony. The season was too far advanced before their arrival
to begin planting for that year, if there had been ground prepared for tillage.
They had to subsist on the provisions which they had brought from England, and
the fish and game which the country afforded. The severity of an American
winter was new to them; and though it was observed, that the same winter was
uncommonly severe in England, yet that circumstance being unknown, could not
alleviate their distress. By some accident, their store house took fire, and
was consumed, with the greater part of their provisions, in the middle of the
winter; and in the spring (1608) they had the additional misfortune to lose
their President, Captain Popham, by death. The ship, which their friends in
England had by their united exertions sent over with supplies, arrived a few
days after, with the melancholy news of the death of Sir John Popham, which
happened while she lay waiting for a wind at Plymouth. The command of the
colony now devolved on Gilbert, but the next ship brought an account of the
death of his brother Sir John Gilbert, which obliged him to return to England,
to take care of the estate to which he succeeded. These repeated misfortunes
and disappointments, operating with the disgust which the new colonists had
taken to the climate and soil, determined them to quit the place. Accordingly,
having embarked with their President, they returned to England, carrying with
them, as the fruit of their labor, a small vessel, which they had built during
their residence here, and thus the first colony, which was attempted in New
England, began and ended in one year.

The country was now branded as intolerably cold, and the body of the
adventurers relinquished the design. Sir Francis Popham, indeed, employed a
ship for some succeeding years in the fishing and fur trade; but he, at length,
became content with his losses, and none of this company but Sir Ferdinando
Gorges, had the resolution to surmount all discouragements. Though he sincerely
lamented the loss of his worthy friend, the Chief Justice, who had zealously
joined with him, in these hitherto fruitless, but expensive labors, yet, "as
to the coldness of the clime (he says) he had too much experience in the world,
to be frighted with such a blast, as knowing many great kingdoms and large
territories more northerly seated, and by many degrees colder, were plentifully
inhabited, and diverse of them stored with no better commodities than these
parts afford, if like industry, art and labor, be used."

Such persevering ardor in the face of so many discouragements, must be allowed
to discover a mind formed for enterprise, and fully persuaded of the
practicability of the undertaking.

When he found that he could not be seconded in his attempts for a thorough
discovery of the country, by others, he determined to carry it on by himself;
and for this purpose he purchased a ship, and engaged with a master and crew to
go to the coast of New England for the purpose of fishing and traffic, the only
inducement which seafaring people could have to undertake such a voyage. On
board this ship he put RICHARD VINES, and several others of his own servants in
whom he placed the fullest confidence and whom he hired at a great expense to
stay in the country, over the winter, and pursue the discovery of it. These
persons having left the ship's company to follow their usual occupation on the
coast, traveled into the land, and meeting with the savages, who had before
returned to America, by their assistance became acquainted with such
particulars as Gorges wished to know.

Mr. Vines and his companions were received by the Indians with great
hospitality, though their residence among them was rendered hazardous; both by
a war which raged among them, and by a pestilence which accompanied or
succeeded it.

This war and pestilence are frequently spoken of by the historians of New
England, as remarkable events, in the course of Providence, which prepared the
way for the establishment of an European colony. Concerning the war, we know
nothing more than this; that it was begun by the Tarratenes, a nation who
resided eastward of Penobscot. These formidable people surprised the Bashaba,
or chief sachem, at his head quarters, and destroyed him with all his family;
upon which all the other sachems who were subordinate to him, quarrelled among
themselves for the sovereignty: and in these dissensions many of them as well
as of their unhappy people perished. Of what particular kind the pestilence
was, we have no certain Mr. Gookin says, that he "had discoursed with some old
Indians who were then youths, who told him, that the bodies of the sick were
all over exceeding yellow, (which they described by pointing to a yellow
garment) both before they died and afterward." See Collections of Historical
Society for 1792. p. 148.
information; but it seems to have been a disorder peculiar to the Indians, for
Mr. Vines, and his companions, who were intimately conversant with them, and
frequently lodged in their wigwams, were not in the least degree affected by
it, though it swept off the Indians at such a prodigious rate, that the living
were not able to bury the dead, and their bones were found several years after,
lying about the villages where they had resided. The extent of this pestilence
was between Penobscot in the east, and Narraganset in the west. These two
tribes escaped, whilst the intermediate people were wasted and destroyed.

The information which Vines obtained for Sir Ferdinando, though satisfactory,
in one view, produced no real advantage proportionate to the expense. Whilst he
was deliberating by what means he should farther prosecute his plan of
colonization, Capt. Henry Harley, who had been one of the unfortunate
adventurers to Sagadahock, came to him, bringing a native of the Island
Capawock, now called Martha's Vineyard, who had been treacherously taken from
his own country by one of the fishing ships and shown in London as a sight.
Gorges received this savage, whose name was Epenow, with great pleasure: and
about the same time recovered Assacumet, one of those who had been sent in the
unfortunate voyage of Captain Chalong. These two Indians at first, scarcely
understood each other; but, when they had grown better acquainted, Assacumet
informed his old master of what he had learned from Epenow concerning his
country. This artful fellow had invented a story of a mine of gold in his
native island which he supposed would induce some adventurer to employ him as a
pilot, by which means he hoped to get home, and he was not disappointed in his
expectation.

Gorges had engaged the Earl of Southampton, then commander of the Isle of
Wight, to advance one hundred pounds, and Capt. Hobson another hundred, and
also to go on the discovery. With this assistance, Harley sailed in June 1614,
carrying with him several land soldiers and the two before mentioned Indians,
with a third named Wanape, who had been sent to Gorges from the Isle of Wight.
On the arrival of the ship, she was soon piloted to the island of Capawock, and
to the harbor where Epenow was to perform his promise. The principal
inhabitants of the place, with some of his own kinsmen, came on board, with
whom he held a conference and contrived his escape. They departed, promising to
return the next day with furs for traffic. Epenow had pretended that if it
were known, that he had discovered the secrets of his country, his life would
be in danger, but the company were careful to watch him; and to prevent his
escape, had dressed him in long clothes, which could easily be laid hold of, if
there should be occasion. His friends appeared the next morning in twenty
canoes, and lying at a distance, the Captain called to them to come on board,
which they declining, Epenow was ordered to renew the invitation. He, mounting
the forecastle, hailed them as he was directed, and at the same instant, though
one held him by the coat, yet being strong and heavy, he jumped into the water.
His countrymen then advanced to receive him, and sent a shower of arrows into
the ship, which so disconcerted the crew, that the prisoner completely effected
his escape. Thus the golden dream vanished, and the ship returned without
having performed any services adequate to the expense of her equipment.

The Plymouth company were much discouraged by the ill success of this
adventure; but the spirit of emulation between them and the London company
proved very serviceable to the cause in which they were jointly engaged. For
these having sent our four ships under the command of Michael Cooper, to South
Virginia, [January, 1615] and Captain John Smith, who had been employed by that
company, having returned to England, and engaged with the company at Plymouth,
their hopes revived. Sir Ferdinando Gorges, in concert with Dr. Sutliffe, Dean
of Exeter, and several others, equipped two vessels, one of two hundred, the
other of 50 tons, on board of which (besides the compliment of seamen) were
sixteen men who were destined to begin a colony in New England. [March, 1615]
When they had sailed one hundred and twenty leagues, the large ship lost her
masts, and sprung a leak; which obliged them to put back under jury masts to
Plymouth. From thence Smith sailed again [June 24] in a bark of sixty tons,
carrying the same sixteen men; but on this second voyage, was taken by four
French men of war, and carried to France. The vessel of fifty tons, which had
been separated from him, pursued her voyage, and returned in safety; but the
main design of the voyage, which was to effect a settlement, was frustrated.

The same year (October) Sir Richard Hawkins, by authority of the Plymouth
company, of which he was President for that year, visited the coast of New
England, to try what services he could do them in searching the country, and
its commodities; but on his arrival, finding the natives engaged in war, he
passed along the coast to Virginia, and from thence returned to England, by the
way of Spain, where he disposed of the fish, which he had taken in the voyage.

After this, ships were sent every season by the London and Plymouth Companies
on voyages of profit; their fish and furs came to a good market in Europe, but
all the attempts which were made to colonize North Virginia, by some unforeseen
accidents failed of success. Gorges, however, had his mind still invariably
bent on his original plan, and every incident which seemed to favor his views,
was eagerly improved for that purpose. Being possessed of the journals and
letters of the several voyagers, and of all the information which could be had,
and being always at hand, to attend the meetings of the Company, he contrived
to keep alive their hopes, and was the prime mover in all their transactions.

About this time Captain Thomas Dermer, who had been employed in the American
fishery, and had entered fully into the same views; offered his service to
assist in prosecuting the discovery of the country. He was at Newfoundland, and
Gorges prevailed on the company, to send Captain Edward Rocraft, in a ship, to
New England, with orders to wait there till he should be joined by Dermer.
Rocraft, on his arrival, met with a French interloper, which he seized, and
then sailed with his prize to South Virginia. In the mean time Dermer went to
England, and having conferred with Gorges and the company, on the intended
discovery, went out in a ship, which Gorges himself owned; hoping to meet with
Rocraft, but was much perplexed at not finding him.

Having ranged and examined every part of the coast, and made many useful
observations, which he transmitted to Gorges, he shaped his course for
Virginia, It is said that he was the first who passed the whole extent of Long
Island Sound, and discovered that it was not connected with the continent. This
was in 1619.
where Rocraft had been killed in a quarrel, and his bark sunk. Dermer being
thus disappointed of his consort, and of his expected supplies, returned to the
northward. At the island of Capawock, he met with Epenow, who knowing him to be
employed by Gorges, and suspecting that his errand was to bring him back to
England, conspired with his countrymen, to seize him and his companions,
several of whom were killed in the fray: Dermer defended himself with his
sword, and escaped, though not without fourteen wounds, which obliged him to go
again to Virginia, where he died. The loss of this worthy man, was the most
discouraging circumstance which Gorges had met with, and as he himself
expresses it, "made him almost resolve never to intermeddle again in any of
these courses." But he had in fact so deeply engaged in them, and had so many
persons engaged with him, that he could not retreat with honor, whilst any
hope of success remained. Soon after this, a prospect began to open from a
quarter, where it was least expected.

The patent of 1606, which divided Virginia into two colonies, expressly
provided that neither company should begin any plantation within one hundred
miles of the other. By this interdiction the middle region of North America was
neglected, and a bait was laid to attract the attention of foreigners.

The adventurers to South Virginia had prohibited all who were not free of
their company from planting or trading within their limits; the northern
company had made no such regulation; by this means it happened that the South
Virginia ships could fish on the northern coast, whilst the other company were
excluded from all privileges in the southern parts. The South Virginians had
also made other regulations in the management of their business, which the
northern company were desirous to intimate. They thought the most effectual way
to do this, was to procure an exclusive patent. With this view, Gorges, ever
active to promote the interest which he had espoused, solicited of the crown a
new charter, which, by the interest of his friends in court, was after some
delay obtained. By this instrument forty noblemen, knights and gentlemen, were
incorporated by the style of "the council established at Plymouth, in the
county of Devon, for the planting, ruling and governing of New England in
America." The date of the charter was November 3, 1620. The territory subject
to their jurisdiction was from the 40th to the 48th degree of north latitude,
and from sea to sea. This charter is the foundation of all the grants which
were made of the country of New England.

Before this division was made, a number of families, who were styled Puritans,
on account of their seeking a farther reformation of the Church of England,
which they could not obtain, and who had retired into Holland to avoid the
severity of the penal laws against dissenters, meditated a removal to America.
The Dutch were fond of retaining them as their subjects, and made them large
offers, if they would settle in some of their transmarine territories; but they
chose rather to reside in the dominions of their native prince, if they could
have liberty of conscience. They had, by their agents, negociated with the
South Virginia company, and obtained a permission to transport themselves to
America within their limits; but as to the liberty of conscience, though they
could obtain no indulgence from the crown under hand and seal, yet it was
declared, that "the King would connive at them, provided they behaved
peaceably." As this was all the favor which the spirit of the times would
allow, they determined to cast themselves on the care of Divine Providence and
venture to America. After several disasters, they arrived at Cape Cod in the
42d degree of north latitude, a place remote from the object of their
intention, which was Hudson's river. The Dutch had their eye on that place and
bribed their pilot not to carry them thither. It was late in the season when
they arrived; their permission from the Virginia company was of no use here;
and having neither authority nor form of government, they were obliged for the
sake of order, before they disembarked, to form themselves into a body politic,
by a written instrument. This was the beginning of the colony of New-Plymouth;
and this event happened (Nov. 11, 1620) a few days after King James had signed
the patent for incorporating the council, These circumstances served the
interest of both, though then wholly unknown to each other. The council, being
informed of the establishment of a colony within their limits, were fond of
taking them into their protection, and the colony were equally desirous of
receiving that protection as far as to obtain a grant of territory. An agent
being dispatched by the colony to England, Sir F. Gorges interested himself in
the affair, and a grant was accordingly made (1623) to John Pierce, in trust
for the colony. This was their first patent; they afterward (1629) had another
made to William Bradford and his associates.

One end which the council had in view, was, to prevent the access of
unauthorized adventurers to the coast of New England. The crews of their ships,
in their intercourse with the natives, being far from any established
government, were guilty of great licentiousness. Besides drunkenness, and
debauchery, some flagrant enormities had been committed, which not only injured
the reputation of Europeans, but encouraged the natives to acts of hostility.
To remedy these evils, the council thought proper to appoint an officer to
exercise government on the coast. The first person who was sent in this
character, was Capt. Francis West; who finding the fishermen too licentious and
robust to be controled by him, soon gave up this ineffectual command. They next
appointed Capt. Robert Gorges, a son of Sir Ferdinando. He was like his father,
of an active and enterprizing genius, and had newly returned from the Venetian
war. He obtained of the council a patent for a tract of land on the
northeastern side of Massachusetts Bay, containing thirty miles in length and
ten in breadth, and by the influence of his father, and of his kinsman Lord
Edward Gorges, he was dispatched with a commission to be " Lieutenant General
and Governor of New England." They appointed for his council the aforesaid
West, with Christopher Levet, and the Governor of New Plymouth for the time
being. Gorges came to Plymouth in 1623, published his commission, and made some
efforts to execute it. He brought over with him as a Chaplain, William Morrell,
an Episcopal clergyman. This was the first essay for the establishment of a
General Government in New England, and Morrel was to have a superintendence in
ecclesiastical, as Gorges had in civil affairs; but he made no use of his
commission at Plymouth; and only mentioned it in his conversation about the
time of his departure. This Morrell appears to have been a diligent inquirer
into the state and circumstances of the country, its natural productions and
advantages, the manners, customs, and government of the natives; the result of
his observations he wrought into a poem which he printed both in Latin and
English. The Latin is by no means destitute of classical merit, of which the
following lines may serve as an evidence.

"Est locus occiduo procul hinc spatiosus in orb
Plurima regna tenens, populisque incognitus ipsis:
Felix frugi^eris sulcis, simul aequore felix,
Praedis perdives variis, and flumine dives,
Axe satis calidus, rigidoque a frigore tutus."
The description itself is just and animated, and the English translation
(considering the date of it) is very tolerable. It is printed in the
collections of the Historical Society, for 1792, page 125.


This general government was a darling object with the council of Plymouth, but
was much dreaded by the planters of New England; however, all the attempts
which were made to carry it into execution failed of success. Gorges, after
about a year's residence in the country, and holding one court at Plymouth,
upon a Mr. Weston, who had begun a plantation at Wessagusset, [Weymouth] where
Gorges himself intended a settlement, was recalled to England, the supplies
which he expected to have received having failed. This failure was owing to one
of those cross accidents which continually befell the Council of Plymouth.
Though the erection of this board was really beneficial to the nation, and gave
a proper direction to the spirit of colonizing, yet they had to struggle with
the opposing interests of various sorts of persons.

The company of South Virginia, and indeed the mercantile interest in general,
finding themselves excluded from the privilege of fishing and traffic,
complained of this institution as a monopoly. The commons of England were
growing jealous of the royal prerogative; and wishing to restrain it; the
granting charters of incorporation with exclusive advantages of commerce was
deemed a usurpation on the rights of the people. Complaints were first made to
the King in council; but no disposition appeared there to countenance them. It
happened however, that a parliament was called for some other purposes
(February 1624) in which Sir Edward Cook was chosen speaker of the commons. He
was well known as an advocate for the liberties of the people, and an enemy to
projectors. The King was at first in a good humor with his parliament and
advantage was taken of a demand for subsidies to bring in a bill against
monopolies.

The house being resolved into a committee, Sir Ferdinando Gorges was called to
the bar, where the speaker informed him, that the patent granted to the council
of Plymouth was complained of as a grievance; that under color of planting a
colony, they were pursuing private gains: that though they respected him as a
person of worth and honor, yet the public interest was to be regarded before
all personal considerations; and therefore they required that the patent be
delivered to the house. Gorges answered, that he was but one of the company,
inferior in rank and abilities, to many others; that he had no power to deliver
it, without their consent, neither in fact, was it in his custody. Being asked
where it was, he said, it was for aught he knew, still remaining in the
crown-office, where it had been left for the amendment of some errors. As to
the general charge he answered; that he knew not how it could be a public
grievance; since it had been undertaken for the advancement of religion, the
enlargement of the bounds of the nation, the increase of trade, and the
employment of many thousands of people; that it could not be a monopoly; for
though a few only were interested in the business, it was because many could
not be induced to adventure where their losses at first were sure, and their
gains uncertain; and, indeed, so much loss had been sustained that most of the
adventurers themselves were weary; that as to the profit arising from the
fishery it was never intended to be converted to private use, as might appear
by the offers which they had made to all the maritime cities in the West of
England; that the grant of exclusive privileges made by the crown, was intended
to regulate and settle plantations, by the profits arising from the trade, and
was in effect no more than many gentlemen and lords of manors in England
enjoyed without offense. He added, that he was glad of an opportunity for such
a parliamentary inquiry, and if they would take upon themselves the business of
colonization, he and his associates would be their humble servants as far as
lay in their power, without any retrospect to the vast expense which they had
already incurred in discovering and taking possession of the country, and
bringing matters to their then present situation. He also desired, that if any
thing further was to be inquired into, it might be given him in detail; with
liberty of answering by his council.

A committee was appointed to examine the patent and make objections; which
were delivered to Gorges; accompanied with a declaration from the speaker that
he ought to look upon this as a favor. Gorges having acknowledged the favor,
employed council to draw up answers to the objections. His council were Mr.
(afterward Lord) Finch, and Mr. Caltrup, afterward attorney general to the
court of wards. Though in causes where the crown and parliament are concerned
as parties, council are often afraid of wading deeper than they can safely
return; yet Gorges was satisfied with the conduct of his council, who fully
answered the objections, both in point of Law and Justice; these answers being
read, the house asked what further he had to say, upon which he added some
observations in point of Policy, to the following effect:

That the adventurers had been at great cost and pains to enlarge the King's
dominions; to employ many seamen, handicraftsmen, and laborers; to settle a
flourishing plantation, and advance religion in those savage countries; matters
of the highest consequence to the nation, and far exceeding all the advantage
which could be expected from a simple course of fishing, which must soon have
been given over; for that so valuable a country, could not long remain
unpossessed either by the French, Spaniards, or Dutch; so that if the
plantations were to be given up, the fishery must inevitably be lost, and the
honor, as well as interest of the nation, greatly suffer; that the mischief
already done by the persons who were foremost in their complaints was
intolerable; for, in their disorderly intercourse with the savages, they had
been guilty of the greatest excesses of debauchery and knavery, and in addition
to all these immoralities, they had furnished them with arms and ammunition; by
which they were enabled to destroy the peaceable fishermen, and had become
formidable enemies to the planters.

He further added, that he had, in zeal for the interest of his country, deeply
engaged his own estate, and sent one of his sons to the American coast, besides
encouraging many of his friends to go thither; this he hoped would be an
apology for his earnestness in this plea, as if he had shown less warmth it
might have been construed into negligence and ingratitude.

These pleas however earnest and rational, were to no purpose. The parliament
presented to the King the grievances of the (...) the patent for New England
was the first on the list. Gorges, however, had taken care that the King should
be previously acquainted with the objections and answers; and James was so
jealous of his prerogative, that though he gave his assent to a declaratory act
against monopolies in general, yet he would not recall the patent. However, in
deference to the voice of the nation, the council thought fit to suspend their
operations. This proved for a while, discouraging to the spirit of adventure
and occasioned the recalling Robert Gorges from his government.

But the parliament having proceeded with more freedom and boldness in their
complaints, than suited the feelings of James, he dissolved them in haste,
before they could proceed to measures for remedying the disorders in church and
state, which had been the subject of complaint; and some of the more liberal
speakers were committed to prison. This served to damp the spirit of
reformation, and prepared the way for another colony of emigrants to
New England.

About the same time, the French ambassador put in a claim in behalf of his
court to these territories, to which Gorges was summoned to answer before the
King and council, which he did in so ample and convincing a manner, that the
claim was for that time silenced. Gorges then, in the name of the Council of
Plymouth, complained of the Dutch, as intruders on the English possessions in
America, by making a settlement on Hudson's river. To this, the States made
answer, that if any such things had been done, it was without their order, as
they had only erected a company for the West Indies. This answer, made the
council resolve to prosecute their business and remove these intruders.

Hitherto Gorges appears in the light of a zealous, indefatigable and
unsuccessful adventurer; but neither his labors, expense, nor ill success were
yet come to a conclusion.

To entertain a just view of Sir Ferdinando Gorges, we must consider him both
as a member of the Council of Plymouth, pursuing the general interest of
American plantations; and at the same time as an adventurer, undertaking a
settlement of his own, in a particular part of the territory which was subject
to the jurisdiction of the council. Having formed an intimacy with Capt. John
Mason, Governor of Portsmouth, in the county of Hants, who was also a member
of the council; and having (1622) jointly with him procured from the council, a
grant of a large extent of country, which they called Laconia, extending from
the river Merrimack to Sagadahock, and from the ocean to the lakes and river of
Canada, they indulged sanguine expectation of success. From the accounts given
of the country by some romantic travelers, they had conceived an idea of it as
a kind of terrestrial paradise, not merely capable of producing all the
necessaries and conveniences of life but as already richly furnished by the
bountiful hand of nature. The air was said to be pure and salubrious; the
country pleasant and delightful, full of goodly forests, fair valleys, and
fertile plains; abounding in vines, chestnuts, walnuts, and many other sorts of
fruit; the rivers stored with fish and environed with goodly meadows full of
timber trees. In the great lake, Lake Champlain.
it was said, were four islands, full of pleasant woods and meadows, having
great store of stags, fallow deer, elks, roebucks, beavers and other game; and
these islands were supposed to be commodiously situate for habitation and
traffic, in the midst of a fine lake, abounding with the most delicate fish.
This lake was thought to be less than 100 miles distant from the sea coast; and
there was some secret expectation that mines and precious stones, would be the
reward of their patient and diligent attention to the business of discovery.
Such were the charms of Laconia!

It has been before observed that Gorges had sent over Richard Vines, with some
others, on a discovery, to prepare the way for a colony. The place which Vines
pitched upon, was at the mouth of the river Saco. Some years after, another
settlement was made on the river of Agamenticus, by Francis Norton, whom Gorges
sent over with a number of other people, having procured for them a patent of
12,000 acres on the east side of the river, and 12,000 more on the west side;
his son Ferdinando Gorges being named as one of the grantees; this was the
beginning of the town of York. Norton was a Lieutenant Colonel, and had raised
himself to that rank from a common soldier, by his own merit. In this company
were several artificers, who were employed in building saw mills, and they were
supplied with cattle and other necessaries for the business of getting lumber.

About the same time (viz. 1623) a settlement was begun at the river
Piscataqua, by Captain Mason, and several other merchants, among whom Gorges
had a share. The principal design of these settlements was, to establish a
permanent fishery, to make salt, to trade with the natives, and to prepare
lumber for exportation. Agriculture was but a secondary object, though in
itself the true source of all opulence and all subsistence.

These attempts proved very expensive and yielded no adequate returns. The
associates were discouraged, and dropped off one after another, till none but
Gorges and Mason remained. Much patience was necessary, but in this case it
could be grounded only on enthusiasm. It was not possible in the nature of
things that their interest should be advanced by the manner in which they
conducted their business. Their colonists came over either as tenants or as
hired servants. The produce of the plantation could not pay their wages, and
they soon became their own masters. The charge of making a settlement in such a
wilderness was more than the value of the lands when the improvements were
made: overseers were appointed, but they could not hold the tenants under
command; nor prevent their changing places on every discontent: The proprietors
themselves never came in person to superintend their interests, and no regular
government was established to punish offenders or preserve order. For these
reasons though Gorges and Mason expended from first to last more than twenty
thousand pounds each, yet they only opened the way for others to follow, and
the money was lost to them and their posterity. See History of New Hampshire,
vol. i. Chap. i.ii.


Whilst their private interest was thus sinking in America, the reputation of
the council of which were members lay under such disadvantage in England as
tended to endanger their political existence. As they had been incorporated for
the purpose, not merely of granting lands, but of making actual plantations in
America, they were fond of encouraging all attempts, from whatever quarter,
which might realize their views and expectations.

The ecclesiastical government at this time allowed no liberty to scrupulous
consciences; for which reason many who had hitherto been peaceable members of
the national church, and wished to continue such, finding that no indulgence
could be granted, turned their thoughts toward America where some of their
brethren had already made a settlement. They first purchased of the council of
Plymouth a large territory, and afterward obtained of the crown a charter, by
which they were constituted a body politic within the realm. In June 1630 they
brought their charter to America, and began the colony of Massachusetts. This
proved an effectual settlement, and the reasons which rendered it so were the
the zeal and ardour which animated their exertions; the wealth which they
possessed, and which they converted into materials for a new plantation; but
principally the presence of the adventurers themselves, on the spot, where
their fortunes were to be expended and their zeal exerted. The difference
between a man's doing business by himself, and by his substitutes, was never
more fairly exemplified than in the conduct of the Massachusetts planters,
compared with that of Sir Ferdinando Gorges: what the one had been laboring
for, above twenty years without any success, was realized by the others in two
or three years; in five, they were so far advanced as to be able to send out a
colony from themselves to begin another at Connecticut; and in less than ten,
they founded an University which has ever since produced an uninterrupted
succession of serviceable men in church and state.

The great number of people who flocked to this new plantation, raised an alarm
in England. As they had manifested their discontent with the ecclesiastical
government, it it was suspected that they aimed at independence, and would
throw off their allegiance to the crown. This jealousy was so strong, that a
royal order was made to restrain any from coming hither who should not first
take the oaths of allegiance and supremacy, and obtain a license for their
removal.

To refute this jealous cavil against the planters of New England, we need only
to observe, that at the time when they began their settlement, and for many
years after, the lands which they occupied were objects of envy both to the
Dutch and French. The Dutch claimed from Hudson, as far as Connecticut river,
where they had erected a trading house. The French claimed all the lands of New
England; and the Governor of Port Royal, when he wrote to Governor Winthrop,
directed his letters to him as Governor of the English at Boston in Acadia.
Had the New England planters thrown off their subjection to the crown of
England they must have become a prey to one or the other of these rival powers.
Of this they were well aware, and if they had entertained any idea of
independency, which they certainly did not (nor did their successors till
driven to it by Britain herself) it would have been the most impolitic thing in
the world to have avowed it, in the presence of neighbors with whom they did
not wish to be connected.

This jealousy, however groundless, had an influence on the public councils of
the nation, as well as on the sentiments of individuals, and contributed to
increase the prejudice which had been formed against all who were concerned in
the colonization of New England. The merchants still considered the Council of
Plymouth, as monopolizing a lucrative branch of trade. The South Virginia
company, disrelished their exclusive charter, and spared no pains to get it
revoked. The popular party in the commons regarded them as supporters of the
prerogative, and under the royal influence. This manifestly appears from the
grant which they were obliged to make to Sir William Alexander, of the country
of Nova Scotia, by virtue of a message from the King, which they considered as
a command. This grant was confirmed to him by the King, and he sold it to the
French.
The high church party were incensed against them as enemies of prelacy,
because they had favored the settlement of the Puritans within their
territory: and the King himself suspected that the colonies in New England had
too much liberty to consist with his notions of government. Gorges was looked
upon as the author of all the mischief; and being publicly called upon,
declared, "that though he had earnestly sought the interest of the plantations,
yet he could not answer for the evils which had happened by them." It was
extremely mortifying to him to find that after all his exertions and expenses
in the service of the nation, he had become a very unpopular character, and had
enemies on all sides.

To remedy these difficulties, he projected the resignation of the charter to
the crown; and the division of the territory into twelve lordships, to be
united under one General Governor. As the charter of Massachusetts stood in
the way of this project, he, in conjunction with Mason, petitioned the crown
for a revocation of it. This brought on him the ill will of those colonists
also, who from that time regarded him and Mason as their enemies. Before the
council surrendered their charter, they made grants to some of their own
members, of twelve districts, from Maryland to St. Croix, among which the
district from Piscataqua to Sagadahock, extending one hundred and twenty miles
northward into the country, was assigned to Gorges. In June 1635, the council
resigned their charter, and petitioned the King and the lords of the privy
council for a confirmation of the several proprietary grants, and the
establishment of a general government. Sir Ferdinando Gorges, then three score
years of age, was the person nominated to be the General Governor. About this
time, Mason, one of the principal actors in this affair, was removed by death:
and a ship, which was intended for the service of the new government, fell and
broke in launching. A quo warranto was issued against the Massachusetts
charter, but the proceedings upon it were delayed, and never completed. An
order of the King in council, was also issued in 1637, for the establishment of
the general government, and Gorges was therein appointed Governor; but the
troubles in Scotland and England, at this time grew very serious and put a
check to the business. Soon after, Archbishop Laud and some other lords of
council, who were zealous in the affair, lost their authority, and the whole
project came to nothing.

Gorges however, obtained of the crown in 1639, a confirmation of his own
grant, which was styled the Province of Maine, and of which he was made Lord
Palatine with the same powers and privileges as the bishop of Durham in the
County Palatine of Durham. In virtue of these powers, he constituted a
government within his said province, and incorporated the plantation at
Agamenticus into a city, by the name of Gorgeana, of which his cousin, Thomas
Gorges, was Mayor, who resided there about two years, and then returned to
England. The council for the administration of government were Sir Thomas
Josselyn, Knight, Richard Vines, (Steward) Francis Champernoon (a nephew to
Gorges,) Henry Josselyn, Richard Boniton, William Hook, and Edward Godfrey.

The plan which he formed for the government of his province was this: It was
to be divided into eight counties, and these into sixteen hundreds, the
hundreds were to be subdivided into parishes and tythings, as the people should
increase. In the absence of the proprietor a lieutenant was to preside. A
chancellor was constituted for the decision of civil causes; a treasurer to
receive the revenue, a marshal for managing the militia, and a marshal's court,
for criminal matters; an admiral, and admiral's court, for maritime causes; a
master of ordnance and a secretary. These officers were to be a standing
council. Eight deputies were to be elected, one from each county, by the
inhabitants, to sit in the same council; and all matters of moment were to be
determined by the lieutenant with advice of the majority. This council were to
appoint justices, to give licenses for the sale of lands subject to a rent of
four pence or six pence per acre. When any law was to be enacted or repealed,
or public money to be raised, they were to call on the counties to elect each
two deputies, "to join with the council in the performance of the service;" but
nothing is said of their voting as a separate house. One lieutenant and eight
justices were allowed to each county; two head constables to every hundred; one
constable and four tythingmen to every parish; and in conformity to the
institutions of King Alfred, each tythingman was to give an account of the
demeanor of the families within his tything, to the constable of the parish,
who was to render the same to the head constables of the hundred, and they to
the lieutenant and justices of the county; who were to take cognizance of all
misdemeanors; and from them an appeal might be made to the proprietor's
lieutenant and council.

Forms of government, and plans of settlement, are much more easily drawn on
paper, than carried into execution. Few people could be induced to become
tenants in the neighborhood of such a colony as Massachusetts, where all were
freeholders. No provision was made for public institutions; schools were
unknown, and they had no ministers, till in pity to their deplorable state, two
went thither from Boston on a voluntary mission, and were well received by
them. The city of Gorgeana, though a lofty name, was in fact but an
inconsiderable village; and there were only a few houses in some of the best
places for navigation. The people were without order and morals, and it was
said of some of them, that "they had as many shares in a woman, as they had in
a fishing boat." Hutchinson's Collection of Papers, p. 424.
Gorges himself complained of the prodigality of his servants, and had very
little confidence in his own sons, for whose aggrandizement he had been
laboring to establish a foundation. He had indeed erected saw mills and corn
mills, and had received some acknowledgment in the way of rents, but lamented,
that he had not reaped the "happy success of those who are their own stewards,
and the disposers of their own affairs."

How long Gorges continued in his office as Governor of Plymouth, does not
appear from any materials within my reach. In 1625, he commanded a ship of war
in a squadron under the Duke of Buckingham, which was sent to the assistance of
France, under pretense of being employed against the Genoese. But a suspicion
having arisen that they were destined to assist Louis against his protestant
subjects at Rochelle, as soon as they were arrived at Dieppe, and found that
they had been deceived, Gorges was the first to break his orders and return
with his ship to England. The others followed his example, and their zeal for
the Protestant religion was much applauded. Hume.


When the civil dissensions in England broke out into a war, Gorges took the
royal side; and, though then far advanced in years, engaged personally in the
service of the crown. He was in Prince Rupert's army at the siege of Bristol in
1643; and when that city was retaken in 1645 by the parliament's forces, he was
plundered and imprisoned. Josselyn says that he was several times plundered and
imprisoned. p. 197.
His political principles rendered him obnoxious to the ruling powers, and when
it was necessary for him to appear before the commissioners for foreign
plantations, he was severely frowned upon, and consequently discouraged.

The time of his death is uncertain; he is spoken of in the records of the
Province of Maine as dead in June 1647. Upon his decease, his estate fell to
his eldest son, John Gorges, who, whether discouraged by his father's ill
success, or incapacitated by the severity of the times, took no care of the
province, nor do we find any thing memorable concerning him. Most of the
commissioners who had been appointed to govern the province deserted it; and
the remaining inhabitants in 1649, were obliged to combine for their own
security. In 1651, they petitioned the Council of State that they might be
considered as part of the commonwealth of England. The next year, upon the
request of a great part of the inhabitants, the colony of Massachusetts took
them under their protection, being supposed to be within the limits of their
charter; some opposition was made to this step; but the majority submitted or
acquiesced; and considering the difficulties of the times, and the unsettled
state of affairs in England, this was the best expedient for their security.

On the death of John Gorges, the propriety descended to his son Ferdinando
Gorges, of Westminster, who seems to have been a man of information and
activity. He printed a description of New England in 1658, to which he annexed
a narrative written by his grandfather; from which this account is chiefly
compiled; but another piece which in some editions is tacked to these, entitled
"Wonder working Providence," was unfairly ascribed to Sir Ferdinando Gorges,
though written by a Mr. Johnson of Woburn in New England.

On the restoration of King Charles II. Gorges petitioned the crown,
complaining of the Massachusetts colony for usurping the government of Maine,
and extending their boundary lines. In 1664, commissioners were sent to
America, who finding the people in the Province of Maine divided in their
opinions with respect to matters of government, appointed justices in the
King's name to govern them; and about the same time the proprietor nominated
thirteen commissioners and prepared a set of instructions which were entered on
the records of the province. But upon the departure of the royal commissioners
the colony resumed its jurisdiction over them. These two sources of government
kept alive two parties, each of whom were always ready to complain of the other
and justify themselves.

An inquiry into the conduct of Massachusetts had been instituted in England,
and the colony was ordered to send over agents to answer the complaints of
Gorges, and Mason, the proprietor of New Hampshire, who had jointly proposed to
sell their property to the crown to make a government for the Duke of Monmouth.
This proposal not being accepted, the colony themselves took the hint, and
thought the most effectual way of silencing the complaint would be, to make a
purchase. The circumstances of the Province of Maine were such as to favor
their views. The Indians had invaded it, most of the settlements were destroyed
or deserted, and the whole country was in trouble; the colony had afforded them
all the assistance which was in their power, and they had no help from any
other quarter. In the height of this calamity John Usher, Esquire. was employed to
negociate with Mr. Gorges for the purchase of the whole territory, which was
effected in the year 1677. The sum of twelve hundred and fifty pounds sterling
was paid for it, and it has ever since been a part of Massachusetts. It is now
formed into two counties, York and Cumberland; but the District of Maine, as
established by the laws of the United States, comprehends also the counties of
Lincoln, Washington, and Hancock; extending from Piscataqua to St. Croix; a
territory large enough, when fully peopled, to be formed into a distinct state.

XV. HENRY HUDSON
NOTWITHSTANDING the fruitless attempts, which had been made, to find a passage
to India, by the north, the idea was not given up; but it was supposed, that
under the direction of some prudent, resolute and experienced commander, the
object might yet be attained. A society of wealthy and sanguine adventurers, in
England, believed the practicability of the passage; and with a resolution and
liberality almost unexampled, raised the money to carry on this expensive
undertaking. They gave the command of the expedition, to HENRY HUDSON, a seaman
of enlarged views and long experience; in whose knowledge and intrepidity they
could safely confide; and whose enterprizing spirit was exceeded by none, and
equalled by few of his contemporaries. Forster's northern voyages p. 32^.


When the ship, which they had destined for the voyage, was ready, Hudson with
his crew, according to the custom of seamen in that day, went to church on
April 19, 1607, and there partook of the Lord's Supper. Purchase iv.567.
On the first of May, he sailed from Gravesend; and on the 21st of June,
discovered land, in lat. 73, on the eastern coast of Greenland, which he called
Hold with Hope.

His design was, to explore the whole coast of Greenland, which he supposed to
be an island; and, if possible, to pass round it, to the northwest; or else
directly under the pole. But having sailed as far as the latitude of 82, he
found the sea obstructed by impenetrable ice; and was obliged to return to
England; where he arrived on the 15th of September.

By this voyage, more of the eastern coast of Greenland was explored, than had
ever before been known; and the island, afterward called Spitzbergen, was first
discovered. It also opened the way to the English, and after them to the Dutch,
to prosecute the whale fishery in those northern seas.

The next year, Purchase iv, p. 574.
the same company of adventurers resolved to make another attempt, and sent
Hudson again, to find a passage by the northeast. He sailed on the 22d of April
1608. The highest latitude, to which he advanced in this voyage, was 75 30.
After having made several attempts, to pass between Spitzbergen and Nova
Zembla, which he found impracticable; the season was so far spent, and the
winds so contrary, that he had not time to try the strait of Waygats, nor
Lumley's Inlet; and therefore thought it his "duty, to save victual, wages and
tackle, by a speedy return." He arrived at Gravesend on the 20th of August. In
the journal of this voyage, written by Hudson himself, is the following remark.
"June 15, lat. 75 7, this morning one of our company looking overboard saw a
mermaid, and calling up some of the company to see her, one more came up, and
by that time, she was come close to the ship's side, looking earnestly on the
men. A little after, a sea came and overturned her. From the navel upward, her
back and breasts were like a woman; (as they say that saw her) her body as big
as one of us; her skin very white; and long hair hanging down behind, of color
black. In her going down, they saw her tail, which was like the tail of a
porpoise, and speckled like a mackarel. Their names that saw her were Thomas
Hills and Robert Rayner." Purchase iv.575.


After his return from his second voyage, he went over to Holland and entered
into the service of the Dutch. Their East India company fitted out a ship for
discovery, and put him into the command. This is said on the authority of Dr.
Forster. The journal says nothing of it. It was written by Robert Juet, his
mate. ibid. 581.
He sailed from Amsterdam on the 25th of March 1609. Smith, in his history of
New York, following Oldmixon and other second hand authorities, places this
voyage in 1608. But as the journals of Hudson's four voyages are extant in
Purchase, I take all dates from him.


The highest latitude which he made in this voyage was 71 46; where he found
the sea in the neighborhood of Nova Zembla so filled with ice, and covered
with fogs, that it was impossible to pass the strait of Waygats to the
eastward. He therefore tacked and steered westerly, toward Greenland; intending
to fall in with Buss Island, which had been seen by one of Frobisher's ships in
1578; but when he came into the latitude where it was laid down, he could not
find it.

He then steered southwesterly; passed the banks of Newfoundland among the
French ships which were fishing, without speaking with any of them; and sailed
along the coast of America. In this route he discovered Cape Cod and landed
there; then pursued his course to the south and west; making remarks on the
soundings and currents, till he came to the entrance of Chesapeak bay. Here he
plied off and on for several days, and then turned again to the northward.

In his return along the coast, on the 28th of August he discovered the great
bay, now called Delaware, in the latitude of 39 5. In this bay he examined the
soundings and currents, and the appearance of the land; but did not go on shore.

From this bay, passing along a low marshy coast skirted with broken islands,
on the 2d of September he saw high hills to the northward; which I suppose were
the Neversinks in New Jersey.

On the 4th of September, he came to anchor in "a very good harbor" in the
latitude 40 30, which is the bay within Sandy Hook. On the 6th, the boat was
sent to survey what appeared to be the mouth of a river, distant four leagues.
This was the street called the Narrows, between Long Island and Staten Island;
here was a good depth of water; and within was a large opening, and a narrow
river, to the west; the channel between Bergen Neck and Staten Island. As the
boat was returning, it was attacked by some of the natives, in two canoes. One
man, John Colman, was killed; he was buried on a point of land, which, from
that circumstance, was called Colman's point. It is probably Sandy Hook, within
which the ship lay.

On the 11th, they sailed through the Narrows, and found a "good harbor secure
from all winds." The next day, they turned against a N. W. wind, into the mouth
of the river, which bears Hudson's name; and came to anchor two leagues within
it. On these two days, they were visited by the natives, who brought corn,
beans, oysters and tobacco. They had pipes of copper, in which they smoked; and
earthen pots, in which they dressed their meat. Hudson would not suffer them to
stay on board by night.

From the 12th to the 19th of September, he sailed up the river; which he found
about a mile wide and of a good depth, abounding with fish, among which were
"great store of salmons." As he advanced, the land on both sides was high, till
it became very mountainous. This "high land had many points, the channel was
narrow, and there were many eddy winds."

From a careful enumeration of the computed distances, in each day's run, as
set down in the journal, it appears that Hudson sailed fifty three leagues. To
this distance, the river was navigable, for the ship; the boat went up eight or
ten leagues farther; but found the bottom irregular, and the depth not more
than seven feet. It is evident therefore that he penetrated this river, as far
as where the city of Albany now stands.

The farther he went up the river, the more friendly and hospitable the natives
appeared. They gave him skins in exchange for knives and other trifles. But as
he came down, below the mountains, the savages were thievish and troublesome,
which occasioned frequent quarrels, in which eight or nine of them were killed.
The land on the eastern side of the river near its mouth, was called Manahata.

On the 4th of October he came out of the river; and without anchoring in the
bay, stood out to sea; and steering directly for Europe, on the 7th of November
arrived "in the range of Dartmouth in Devonshire." Here the journal ends.

The discoveries made by Hudson, in this remarkable voyage, were of great
mercantile consequence to his employers. It has been said, that he "sold the
country, or rather his right to it, to the Dutch." Smith's history of New York,
p. 14. Carey's edition.
This however is questionable. The sovereigns of England and France laid equal
claim to the country, and it is a matter which requires some discussion,
whether the Hollanders were, at that time, so far admitted into the community
of nations, as to derive rights which would be acknowledged by the other
European powers. Chalmers' Annals. 568
However, whilst they were struggling for existence among the nations, they
were growing rich by their mercantile adventures; and this capital discovery,
made at their expense, was a source of no small advantage to them. They had,
for some time before, cast an eye on the fur trade; and had even bribed some
Frenchmen, to admit them into the traffic at Acadia and St. Lawrence. The
discovery of Hudson's river, gave them at once, an entrance of above fifty
leagues into the heart of the American continent; in a situation, where the
best furs could be procured without any interruption from either the French or
the English. The place indeed lay within the claim of both these nations:
Acadia extended from the latitude of 40 to 48; and Virginia from 34 to 45; but
the French had made several fruitless attempts to pass southward of Cape Cod;
and had but just begun their plantations at Acadia and St. Lawrence. The
English had made some efforts to establish colonies in Virginia, one of which
was struggling for existence, and others had failed, both in the southern and
northern division. Besides, King James, by a stroke of policy peculiar to
himself, in dividing Virginia, between the North and South Companies, had
interlocked each patent with the other; and at the same time interdicted the
patentees from planting within one hundred miles of each other. See page 41,
42. See also Ha^a^d's Collection, vol. 1, page 50.
This uncertainty, concurring with other causes, kept the adventurers at such a
distance, that the intermediate country, by far the most valuable, lay exposed
to the intrusions of foreigners; none of whom knew better than the Dutch, how
to avail themselves of the ignorance or inattention of their neighbors, in the
pursuit of gain.

But whether it can, at this time, be determined or not, by what means the
Hollanders acquired a title to the country; certain it is, that they understood
and pursued the advantage which this discovery opened to them. Within four
years, a fort and trading house were erected on the spot where Albany is now
built; and another fort on the S. W. point of the island, where the city of
New York now stands; by a company of Merchants, who had procured from the
States General a patent for an exclusive trade to Hudson's river.

The transactions between Hudson and his Dutch employers are not stated in the
accounts of his voyages. Dr. Forster says that he offered to undertake another
voyage in their service, but that they declined it, upon which he returned to
England; and again entered into the service of the Company, who had before
employed him.

The former attempts for a northern passage having been made in very high
latitudes, it was now determined, to seek for one, by passing to the westward
of Greenland, and examining the inlets of the American continent. For this
purpose a ship was fitted out, and the command was given to Hudson; but,
unhappily, the Company insisted that he should take with him as an assistant,
one Colburne, a very very able and experienced seaman. Their great confidence
in Colburne's skill excited Hudson's envy; and after the ship had fallen down
the river, he put him on board a pink, bound up to London, with a letter to the
owners, containing the reasons of his conduct; and then proceeded on his
voyage. [April 22, 1610.] This rash step gave the crew an example of
disobedience, which was so severely retaliated on himself, as to prove the
cause of his ruin.

He went round the north of Scotland, through the Orkney and Faro islands, and
on the 11th of May made the eastern part of Iceland. Sailing along its southern
shore, in sight of the volcanic mountain Hecla, he put into a harbor in the
western part of the island; where he met with a friendly reception from the
inhabitants; but found great dissensions among his crew, which he could not
appease without much difficulty.

Having doubled the southern promontory of Greenland, he steered N. W. for the
American continent. In this passage he was so entangled with floating ice, that
he almost despaired of getting clear. But at length, with much labor and
peril, he forced his way through the strait and into the bay which bear his
name. The farther he advanced, the greater were the murmurings among his men.
He removed his mate and boatswain and put others into their places. This
discipline not only rendered him more unpopular; but inflamed the displaced
officers with bitter resentment against him.

The whole summer having been spent, in examining the eastern and southern
extremities of the deep and extensive bay, which he had discovered; in October
it was too late to return; the discovery was yet incomplete, and he was loath to
leave it. He had taken but half a year's provision from England. It was
therefore necessary to husband what was left, and procure more by hunting;
which was done in great plenty, by reason of the numerous flights of fowl,
which succeeded each other through the winter.

In November the ship was frozen up. Soon after the gunner died, and a
controversy took place about dividing his clothes. Hudson was partial to Henry
Green, a young man of a debauched character, whom he had taken on board; and
whose name was not on the ship's books. This young man ungenerously took part
with the discontented, and lost Hudson's favor.

They had to struggle with a severe winter, and bad accommodations, which
produced scorbutic and rheumatic complaints. These were relieved by a decoction
of the buds of a tree filled with a balsamic juice; the liquor was drank, and
the buds applied to the swelled joints. This is supposed to have been the
Populus balsamifera.

When the spring came on, the birds disappeared, and their provisions fell
short. To still the clamor among the discontented, Hudson injudiciously
divided the remaining stores, into equal shares, and gave each man his portion;
which some devoured at once and others preserved.

The ship being afloat, he began to sail toward the N. W. to pursue the object
of his voyage; when, (June 21, 1611) a conspiracy which had been sometime in
fermentation, broke out into open mutiny. The displaced mate and boatswain,
accompanied by the infamous Green and others, rose and took command of the
ship. They put Hudson, his son, the carpenter, the mathematician, and five
others, most of whom were sick and lame, into the shallop; with a small
quantity of meal, one gun and ammunition, two or three spears and an iron pot;
and then with the most savage inhumanity turned them adrift. This is the last
account of Hudson. Whether he, with his unhappy companions, perished by the
sea, by famine, or by the savages, is unknown.

The conspirators put the ship about to the eastward and hasted to get out of
the bay. Near Cape Digges, they met with seven canoes of the savages, by whom
they were attacked. The perfidious Green was killed, and three others wounded,
of whom two died in a few days. The miserable remnant, pursued their course
homeward, and suffered much by famine; but at length arrived in Ireland, and
from thence got to England.

This account of the unfortunate end of Hudson and the return of the ship, is
taken from a narrative written by Abacuc Pricket, Purchase, iv, 597.
whom the mutineers preserved, in hope that by his connection with Sir Dudley
Digges, one of the owners, they should obtain their pardon.

The most astonishing circumstance in this horrid act of cruelty, is the oath,
by which the conspirators bound themselves to execute their plot; the form of
it is preserved by Pricket, and is in these words.

"You shall swear truth, to GOD, your Prince and Country; you shall do nothing
but to the Glory of GOD, and the good of the action in hand, and harm to no
man." It is to be hoped, that the absurdity, hypocrisy, and blasphemy of this
transaction will ever be unparalleled in the history of human depravity!

POSTSCRIPT
THE author is so much indebted to HAKLUYT and PURCHASE, that he thinks it but
just to give some account of them and their writings.

RICHARD HAKLUYT, Prebendary of Westminster, was born in Herefordshire, 1553.
He early turned his attention to geography, and read lectures in that science
at Oxford, where he was educated, and where he introduced maps and globes, into
the public schools. In 1582 he published a small collection of voyages and
discoveries; and going two years after as chaplain to Sir Edward Stafford
ambassador to France, he there met with and published a M. S. entitled, The
Notable History of Florida, by Laudonnierre and other Adventurers. He returned
to England in 1588, when he applied himself to collect, translate and digest
all the voyages, journals and letters that he could procure, which he published
first in one volume, 1589, to which he afterward added two others, and
reprinted the first in 1599, and 1600. He was a man of indefatigable diligence
and great integrity; much in favor with Queen Elizabeth's ministry, and
largely conversant with seamen. He died in 1616, and his manuscripts fell into
the hands of Mr. Purchase.

[Wood and Northouck.]

A complete set of Hakluyt's Voyages is in the library of the Massachusetts
Historical Society.

SAMUEL PURCHASE was born at Thackstead in Essex, 1577, and educated at
Cambridge. He was first vicar of Eastwood in Essex, then rector of St. Martin's
London. He published a folio volume entitled, Purchase his Pilgrimage, or
Relations of the World and the Religions observed, in all Ages and Places, etc.
The third edition of it, is dated 1617. When Mr. Hakluyt's papers fell into his
hands he compiled four other volumes, which were printed 1625; they are
entitled, Purchase his Pilgrims. Part i, ii, iii, iv. The whole makes a set of
five volumes. They consist of journals, letters, narratives, translations and
abridgements, comprehending all the travels and discoveries made in all parts
of the world, and are, with Hakluyt's work, the largest and most authentic
collection of the kind, extant for that time. By the publishing of this
voluminous work, Purchase brought himself into debt; and it has been said that
he died in prison; but Northouck says he died in his own house in London, 1628.

A complete set of Purchas's Pilgrims is in the library of Harvard College.

ERRATA.
Page 7. note read -- sailing westward saw the meridian sun on the right hand.
-- 38, dele the marginal note. -- 186, line 4, from bottom, for heard read
herd. -- 190, line 6, for Mabille read Mobille -- 208, note, line 4, for about,
read a boat. -- 220, line 4, from bottom, dele the first of. -- 222, line 6,
after weed insert in. -- 363, line 6, from bottom, read imitate.

The SUCCESSION of SOVEREIGNS of the EUROPEAN NATIONS who have had POSSESSIONS
or CONNEXIONS in AMERICA.
ENGLAND.
A.D. 1485 Henry VII. A.D. 15^^ Henry VIII. A.D. 1547 Edward VI. A.D. 1553
Mary. A.D. 1558 Elizabeth. A.D. 1603 James I. A.D. 1625 Charles I. A.D. 1648
Commonwealth A.D. 1653 O. Cromwell. A.D. 1658 R. Cromwell. A.D. 1660 Charles
II. A.D. 1685 James II. A.D. 1688 William and Mary A.D. 1694 William III. A.D.
1701 Anne. A.D. 1714 George I. A.D. 1727 George II. A.D. 1760 George III.
FRANCE.
A.D. 1483 Charles VIII. A.D. 1498 Lewis XII. A.D. 1515 Francis I. A.D. 1547
Henry II. A.D. 1559 Francis II. A.D. 1560 Charles IX. A.D. 1574 Henry II. A.D.
1589 Henry IV. A.D. 1610 Lewis XIII. A.D. 1643 Lewis XIV. A.D. 1773 Lewis XVI.
A.D. 1792 Republic.
SPAIN.
A.D. 1474 Ferdinand V. and Isabella A.D. 15^4 Phillip I. A.D. 1516 Charles I
King V. Emp.
A.D. 1556 Philip II. A.D. 1598 Philip ^^^ A.D. 1621 Philip IV. A.D. 1665
Charles II. A.D. 1700 Philip V. A.D. 1746 Ferdinand VI. A.D. 1759 Charles III.
A.D. 1789 Charles IV.
PORTUGAL.
A.D. 1481 John II. A.D. 1495 Imanuel. A.D. 1521 John III. A.D. 1557 Sebastian.
A.D. 1578 Henry. A.D. 1580 Philip II. of Spain and Portugal. A.D. 1598 Philip
III. of Spain and Portugal. A.D. 1621 Philip IV. of Spain and Portugal. A.D.
1640 John IV. A.D. 1656 Alphonso VI. A.D. 1667 Peter. A.D. 1704 John V. A.D.
1750 Joseph. A.D. 1777 Maria Frances Isabella.
INDEX.
A
ACADIA, its Limits, 323 Africa, Circumnavigated, 7 Aguado, sent to Hispaniola,
109 America, Peopled in Part from the East, 25 --, Named from Amerigo, 115
Argal Samuel, his Voyages, 297, 312 Azores, Discovered, 131
B.
Behaim Martin, 129 --, Discovers Congo and Benin, 134 Biron, 47 Bligh
Lieutenant, his Hazardous Voyage, 14 Botello, his Daring Voyage from India to
Lisbon, 15 Bovadilla, Supersedes Columbus, 113 Brazil, Discovered, 28 Breton
Cape, Named, 159 Buss Island, 77 Buzzard's Bay Discovered, 235
C.
Cabot John and Sebastian, 149 Cabral, Discovers Brazil, 28 Canary Islands
Discovered, 23 --, Volcanos in, 24 Cape Cod Discovered by Gosnold, 232 --,
Visited by the French from Acadia, 328, 332 --, --, by Hudson, 397 Cartier
James, 159 Chaleur Bay, Discovered, 162 Champlain Samuel, 320 --, Sails up the
St. Lawrence, 323 --, Builds a Fort at Quebeck, 341 --, Discovers the Lakes,
342 --, Surrenders Quebeck to the English, 343 --, his Death and Character, 344
Charaibes, Emigrants from the East, 29 Columbus Christopher, 86 --, his Reasons
for Seeking India in the West, 90 --, his First Voyage, 99 --, his Second
Voyage, 104 --, his Third Voyage, 110 --, his Fourth Voyage, 116 --, Wrecked on
Jamaica, 119 --, his Death and Character, 123.124 Columbus Bartholomew, 96, 107
Congo, Discovered, 134 Croix St. Port of, 166 --, Island of, 326 Cuba,
discovered, 106
D.
Delaware Bay, discovered, 397 Dermer Thomas, 361 Drogio, 70 Dutch, intrude
into the Fur Trade, 337 --, complained of as Intruders, 375 --, possess
Hudson's River, 401
E.
Eclipse Lunar, fortunate to Columbus, 120 Egg, set on its smallest End, 125
Elizabeth Island, 234 Estotiland, 69, 83 Eudoxus, his Voyage, 21
F.
Fog Banks, 94 Fortifications, antique, 194 Frisland, 67, 75 Font de, Strait
of, 229 Fuca John de, 224 --, Strait of, described, 225, 228
G.
Gasp, Bay of, discovered, 162 Gilbert Humphrey, 196 --, takes possession of
Newfoundland, 200 --, is lost at Sea, 203 Gorges Ferdinando. 346 --, his
Perseverance, 353 --, his Defense before the Commons, 370 --, his Complaint
against the Dutch, 375 --, his Expense and Loss, 379 --, his Misfortunes and
Death, 389 Gorges Thomas, 385 Gorges Robert, 368, 374 Gorges John, 390 Gorges
Ferdinando, 2d. 390 Gosnold Bartholomew, his Voyage, 231 --, his Death, 259
Grenville Richard, 206 --, his Voyage to Virginia, 213 --, his Death, 221
Greenland, discovered, 48 Guanahana, discovered, 101 Guadaloupe, discovered,
26, 104
H.
Hanno, his Voyage, 19 Hispaniola* discovered, 104 Homony, described, 211
Hudson Henry, 394 -- 's River, discovered, 399 -- 's Bay, discovered, 404 --
his Misfortunes and Death, 406
I. J.
Jamaica, discovered, 106 --, Columbus Wrecked on, 119 James-town, 255 Jesuits
Introduced to Port Royal, 340 Independence of the Colonies Suspected, 381
K.
Kirk David, takes Quebeck, 343
L.
Laconia, described, 376 Lane Ralph, Governor of Virginia, 214 Lawrence St.
Bay and River discovered, 163 Line of Demarkation, 103 Lisbon, Columbus puts in
at, 139
M.
Madoc, Prince of Wales, 58 Maine, Province of, 385 --, its Plan of Government,
386 --, protected by Massachusetts, 390 --, purchased by Massachusetts, 392
Mason John, connected with Gorges, 376 --, his Plantation at Piscataqua, 378
--, his great Expense and Loss, 379 Massachusetts Colony Established, 380
Mermaid seen, 396 Monsoons, known to the Phenicians, 11 Montreal, discovered
and named, 172 Monts de, 320 --, his Patent for Acadia, 323 --, his Fort at St.
Croix, 326 --, quits Acadia, 339 Morell William, first Episcopal Clergyman in
New England, 368
N.
Necho, his Voyage round Africa, 7 Newfoundland, discovered, 153 --, its
Productions, 54 --, State of its Fishery, 197 --, Possessed by the English, 200
Newport Christopher, his Voyages, 273, 288 Norombega, 328 Normans, their
Navigation, 47
O.
Opecankanow, King of Pamaunky, 265 Ovando, Governor of Hispaniola, 116 --,
his Cruelty to Columbus, 119, 121
P.
Paria, Gulf of, discovered, 110 Paul the Physician, his Letters to Columbus,
141, 147 Pestilence among the Indians, 356 Phenicians, the First Navigators, 5
--, construction of their Ships, 13 --, their Mercantile Jealousy, 16 Plymouth,
Council of, Established, 364 --, embarrassed 383 --, dissolved, 384 --, Colony
Established, 365 Pocahontas, saves Captain Smith, 270 --, entertains him with a
Dance, 284 --, reveals her father's Treachery, 293 --, her Voyage to England,
307 --, her Death, 310 Porland, 81 Port Royal, Plantation at, 325 Poutrincourt,
320 Powhatan, 256 --, his Coronation, 287
Q.
Quebeck, named, 323 --, Fort built, 341 --, taken by the English, 343 --,
restored to the French, 344
R.
Raleigh Walter, 206 --, his Death, 221 Roanoke, discovered, 208 Roldan, his
Mutiny, 112
S.
Sable, Island, stocked with Cattle, 202, 204 --, convicts landed at, 321
Sagadahock, Colony at, 350 Scurvy, Remedy for, 176 Skraelings, 51 Smith John,
240 --, his Encounter with the Turks, 247 --, sold as a Slave, 249 --, his
Escape, 250 Smith John, his Voyage to South Virginia, 253 --, taken by the
Indians, 265 --, saved by Pocahontas, 270 --, released, 271 --, his
Discoveries, 277, 290 --, made President of Virginia, 281 --, his Fame among
the Indians, 294 --, his Singular Discipline, 290, 296 --, his Return to
England, 303 --, his Voyage to North Virginia, 305 --, his Writings, 316 --,
his Death, 319 Soto Ferdinando de, his Adventures in Florida, 185 --, his
Death, 192
T.
Tobacco first known, 173 --, carried to England, 222 Trinidad, Island
discovered, 110
V.
Vineyard Martha's, discovered, 234 Virginia named, 212 --, its Topography by
Heriot, 215 --, first Child born in, 218 --, Company, their Mistakes, 282, 289
--, second Patent, 300 --, divided into North and South, 348
W.
White John, Governor of Virginia, 217 Winland, discovered, 50
X.
Xerxes, his orders to sail round Africa, 8, 19
Z.
Zeno, 67 Zones, Doctrine of, 17
END OF VOL. I.

