A NARRATIVE OF THE EXTRAORDINARY SUFFERINGS OF Mr. ROBERT FORBES, his Wife,
and Five Children; DURING An unfortunate Journey through the Wilderness, from
Canada to Kennebeck River, IN THE YEAR 1784: In which THREE of their Children
were starved to Death.

[Taken partly from their own mouths, and partly from an imperfect journal; and
published at their request.]

BY ARTHUR BRADMAN.

PHILADELPHIA -- PRINTED FOR M. CAREY. -- 1794. (Price, Six Pence.)

A NARRATIVE, etc.
MR. ROBERT FORBES, not being a native of Canada, but having resided there
several years, was desirous of being where he might have a more frequent
opportunity of associating with his own countrymen.

He and his wife had premeditated a removal to the United States of America,
when falling in company with three men, by the names of Midstaff, Pancake, and
Christian, they were induced, by their insinuations, to undertake the journey
by land: the said Midstaff engaging, for a certain sum, that with the
assistance of the other two, he would conduct them, in twelve days time, to the
settlement on Kennebeck River.

Mr. Forbes' neighbors endeavored to dissuade him from the attempt, not only
on account of the length and difficulty of the way, but because there was a
possibility of his being deserted by his guides in the midst of the wilderness.

Nevertheless, being determined on a removal, and having paid to Midstaff a
large stipulated sum for that purpose, on the seventeenth day of March, A. D.
one thousand seven hundred and eighty-four, they entered upon this unfortunate
journey.

From Nouvelle Bois, on the river Chadore, they took their departure. The men
and Mrs. Forbes, (who was then pregnant), and Mr. Forbes' son John, a lad about
thirteen years old, on snow shoes.

Their provisions and other effects, together with four children, viz. Mary,
about seven years; Peggy, about five; Catharine, about three; Robert, about
fifteen months old, they undertook to haul on Indian sleighs, or hand sleds.

In this manner, but with great difficulty, they pursued their way eight days;
and on the ninth, being obliged to leave the river which they had followed
hitherto, and whereon they had traveled some part of the time, they found the
country so broken with large and deep gullies, and so rough and mountainous,
that they concluded it next to impossible to proceed any further with the
sleighs.

Here they were obliged to make a halt; and after a short consultation, having
first erected a small camp, to leave the woman and children in, they took the
chief part of their provisions, and as much of the rest of their baggage as
they were able to carry on their backs; and leaving the woman and children,
about ten o'clock in the morning, set out in quest of Meconick Pond, otherwise
called Lake Chadore, expecting to return the next day. But meeting much
difficulty, they did not reach the pond until the next day about three o'clock
in the afternoon.

Here being much fatigued, they left their baggage; and Midstaff having had
some previous notice that there was an Indian residing not far from thence,
went in quest of him to the other side of the pond, where they found an old
camp, without inhabitants; and there they encamped that night.

The next morning, being Sunday, the twenty-seventh day of March, they crossed
the pond back to where they had left their baggage. When, to the great
astonishment of Mr. Forbes, his pilot and the other two, taking to themselves
the provisions, and his other effects of any considerable consequence, frankly
told him, that they were determined not to return with him to his family; and
that they must now leave him, and make the best of their way through to
Kennebeck.

This may well be supposed to be shocking indeed to one who was already
discouraged and disheartened. "This," said he, struck me to the heart, and
filled my eyes with tears; it confirmed what my neighbors had repeatedly
mentioned amongst their fears of what might happen to myself and family.

Notwithstanding his importunities, his most earnest entreaties and
solicitations, they would not be prevailed upon to continue any longer with
him; but, leaving him only one axe, a small firelock, and two loaves of bread,
they departed.

With a heavy heart did this unfortunate man then make the best of his way back
to his family; where he arrived that evening, with the sorrowful tidings.

Here were they left in the wide wilderness, strangers to the country,
destitute of provisions, and without a compass; eight days journey from the
inhabitants in Canada, and how far from any other settlement they knew not;
probably not less than one hundred and fifty miles.

The wife and son had labored under the most terrible apprehensions during Mr.
Forbes's absence, especially seeing he did not return at the time appointed.
Their fears had almost driven them to despair; and the poor lad, a little
before his father's return, had fatigued himself almost to death, having
followed their tracks for several miles; and had just got back when his father
arrived.

The next morning they were in the most doubtful perplexity whether to go
backward or forward. Should they undertake to return to Canada, it might take
them more than double the length of time in which they had got thus far, the
river being then about breaking up; and in that case they must inevitably
starve.

When the husband and wife were in this pitiable situation, gazing at each
other, and tears gushing from their eyes, their children were hanging around
them, and crying bitterly, for a morsel of bread.

Upon the whole, as the beforementioned two loaves of bread, were in the way
toward Kennebeck, and as they might, peradventure, find the Indian at Meconick
pond, they concluded, by the help of God, to proceed on their journey.

Accordingly they left the most cumbersome, though necessary articles, which
they had now remaining, and the eldest daughter undertook to travel on foot
with her mother, while Mr. Forbes took two of the children, and John one, upon
sleds; and thus they proceeded with as much dispatch as possible.

The way, however, was rough; and they traveled but a short distance during
that day. At night, they encamped, and the next morning there came on a violent
storm of rain, hail, and snow, which continued until Wednesday evening. In the
mean while, the children were pinched with hunger and with the cold; and their
cries were so bitterly distressing, that, leaving the mother and children in
camp, the father and son pushed forward with all speed to the pond; but it was
still stormy, and the traveling so difficult, that they did not get back with
the two loaves until Wednesday evening.

Upon their return, they had not a dry thing about them, nor any dry clothes to
put on. And to add to their misfortune, the fire was extinguished, and they
were unable to rekindle it for the whole night.

The next morning, the storm being considerably abated, they proceeded on their
journey; but the trees and bushes being wet, they had an uncomfortable time,
and did not reach the pond until Friday morning about ten o'clock.

Soon after this, to their great consolation, they met with the beforementioned
Indian, who proved to be one John Baptist, and with whom they had had some
previous acquaintance in Canada. -- He very hospitably invited them to his
camp, which was at a considerable distance from the pond; and there he kindly
treated them with the best of what his house afforded.

This was a camp where his wife resided, while he followed hunting. Here they
tarried until the next Monday. And the Indian having, just before their
meeting, killed a moose, at a few miles distance, Mr. Forbes and his son went
with their sleds, and assisted him in bringing it home.

The Indian gave them as much moose meat as they would undertake to carry; and
agreed to pilot them to Kennebeck river. -- This agreement he punctually
fulfilled; and would have proceeded with them to the settlements, but his wife
was so sick that he did not dare to be any longer absent from her. He therefore
marked the way on a piece of bark, representing the bends, windings, falls, and
carrying places along the river. -- He then wished them well, and left them.

On taking leave of the Indian, they could not express their gratitude. His
kindness was beyond their expectation. -- Before his departure, however, they
gave him what things they had left behind, together with some other things of
considerable value. And they had reason afterward to wish that they had
presented him with more; for their loads proved so much too heavy for them,
that they were obliged to leave by the way a large bag full of valuable
articles.

They now met with almost insurmountable difficulties; for in pursuing the
river, their progress was obstructed by craggy windfalls, rocky ledges, lofty
mountains, and hideous precipices.

On the twelfth day of April, their provisions were exhausted; and Mrs. Forbes
thought it most advisable to have a camp erected, and for herself and the
children to remain there, while her husband and oldest son should go forward to
see whether they could find the inhabitants -- apprehending that they were much
nearer than they afterward proved to be.

A camp was therefore erected, and leaving Mrs. Forbes with her four young
children, Mr. Forbes and his son went forward with as much speed as possible.
The first and second days, finding the ice would bear them, they traveled on
the river; and would have made considerable progress, but unfortunately they
mistook their way at a very material carrying place, where, instead of leaving
the river, and crossing by land to the next bend, which was only twelve miles,
they followed the river sixty miles around.

A little before night, the second day, they came to falls, and could go no
further on the ice. They went on shore, and soon after came to a precipice
where they were obliged to descend twenty feet almost perpendicularly, and at
the risque of being dashed upon the rocks. -- Night coming on, they encamped;
and the next day, finding a shoal rocky place in the river, they crossed over
to the other side, in hopes of finding better traveling, and a more convenient
place to encamp. Here they were obliged by reason of stormy weather, to encamp
for the remainder of the day.

The next day they traveled on; and perceiving the river to be almost clear of
ice, they concluded to build a kind of raft -- a thing with which they were
altogether unacquainted, and by means of which they had both like to have lost
their lives.

A few days after they got on the raft, and under way about ten o'clock in the
morning. The current, however, ran so swift, that they soon found there was no
possibility of turning it to the shore. As they passed down the river, they
struck against a tree, which they were obliged to cut away, in order to clear
the raft. When they descended over ripples, the water never failed of dashing
over them, so that they were wet continually.

About the middle of the day, the raft moving with great rapidity, struck a
large rock, parted one of its corners, and spread into a single string of logs.
At this time they lost their axe, and it became extremely difficult to keep
upon their broken machine.

They were, from this time, driven with amazing rapidity, expecting every
moment would be their last, until about four o'clock in the afternoon; when,
falling into an eddy, they were brought up by a point of land, and both got
safe on shore.

They now traveled on by land until their strength was almost exhausted. About
the twentieth of April, they heard the report of a gun, which seemed to give
them new life. They fired several times, but were not answered. Then,
concluding that it might be nothing more than the falling of a tree, their
spirits again sunk within them, and they moved on with heavy hearts.

But on the evening of the twenty-second, having kindled a small fire upon an
eminence, they were discovered, and kindly relieved by two hunters -- Jonathan
Crosby and Luke Sawyer.

It was now the tenth day since they left Mrs. Forbes and the children. And
during this time they had eaten up all the moose meat which they had taken with
them (it being only two or three ounces) and their moggasons -- having had
nothing else to subsist upon.

The hunters supplied them with such articles of nourishment as they had with
them; and then conducted them to the settlements at Seven Mile Brook, a little
above Norridgewalk, where they arrived in a few hours; but so reduced, that
they were scarcely able to stand alone.

Upon their arrival, Mr. Forbes procured major Hale, William Huston, and
Ebenezer Hilton, three of the most suitable men that could be found, to go with
all speed to the relief of his wife and children. They set out immediately, and
after having been gone thirteen days, returned without having been able to find
them.

It was now twenty-four days from the time Mr. Forbes left them, with only one
pound and an half of moose meat, and a pound and a half of tallow, for their
subsistence: It was the general opinion, therefore, that they must have been
dead.

Nevertheless, Mr. Forbes' anxiety would not permit him to rest satisfied until
he had procured two other persons, Messrs. James M'Donald and Jonathan Ames, to
go with him, and see whether they might not be still alive. But by this time,
all the low lands adjacent to the river were overflowed, which rendered the
passing extremely difficult. For this reason, and because they had no
expectation of finding them alive, they could not be prevailed upon to set off
until the waters were abated.

On the twenty-eighth day of May, they set out. Having traveled one day, Mr.
Forbes found himself unable to keep up with them; and upon their telling him he
could be of no service, and that he might depend upon their fidelity, he
consented to return.

They proceeded on their way, and, on the second day of June, arrived at the
place where Mrs. Forbes and her children were left. And here, to their great
astonishment, they found the mother and one of her children alive. It was now
fifty days since they were left with nothing besides the before mentioned moose
meat and tallow. Nor had they any thing else during that whole time, excepting
cold water, and the inside bark of the fir tree. And in addition to this, they
had been forty-eight days without fire.

To paint in proper colors this scene of distress, is altogether beyond my
powers of description. It must be left to the imagination of the reader.

On the thirty-eighth day after the departure of Mr. Forbes, the little boy
expired. Catharine died the next day; and Mary lived but four days longer. This
last child had often told her mother, they should all certainly starve to
death; and earnestly begged, in case her mother should outlive her, that she
might be put where the wild beasts could not devour her.

The poor woman was herself but just alive, and expected every hour to close
the eyes of Peggy, her only remaining child and companion. The bodies of the
deceased children were laid out, and kept by her side: For she was unable to
bury them -- having been so weak, for the last fifteen days, that she had been
obliged to crawl upon her hands and knees to the spring for water.

The breath of life, however, was still remaining in them. And the two men who
came to their relief, afforded them such assistance, and administered to them
such nourishment as their situation and circumstances required.

On the third day of June they set out for home; and carried Mrs. Forbes and
the child on a bier by land, and in a canoe by water, till they all safely
arrived at Norridgewalk: where, to the surprise of the inhabitants, and the
utter astonishment of Mr. Forbes, he was once more presented with a living
wife, and one living child.

On this occasion, well might he adopt the language of holy DAVID -- in whose
words we shall now close the narrative: MY soul with grateful thoughts of love
Entirely is possessed,
Because the Lord was pleased to hear
The voice of my request.
Since he has now his ear inclined,
I never will despair.
But still, in all the straits of life,
To him address my prayer.
With deadly sorrows compassed round,
With painful fears oppressed;
When troubles seized my aching heart
And anguish racked my breast:
On God's almighty name I called,
And thus to him I prayed,
"Lord, I beseech thee save my soul,
With sorrows quite dismayed."
How just and merciful is God;
How gracious is the Lord!
Who saves the feeble, and to me
Does timely help afford.
Then, free from doubtful cares, my soul
Resume thy wonted rest;
For God has wond'rously to thee
His bounteous love expressed.
When death alarmed me, he removed
My dangers and my fears:
My feet from failing he secured,
And dried my eyes from tears.
Therefore my life's remainimg years,
Which God to me shall lend,
Will I in praises to his name,
And in his service spend.


POSTSCRIPT.
AFTER the arrival of Mr. and Mrs. Forbes, at Norridgewalk, a number of
gentlemen gave them a writing from under their hands; in which the relation of
their unparalleled suffering was confirmed, and by which they were warmly
recommended to the notice and charitable assistance of all Christian people.
This recommendation was signed by some of the first characters in the county of
Lincoln.

Mr. Forbes and his wife, with their two surviving children are now living in
the town of New-Gloucester, about twenty-five miles from Portland; where, by
their industry and economy, they have since been enabled to procure a very
comfortable subsistence.

Mrs. Forbes, from the emaciated state in which we have before described her,
has now become a large and corpulent woman. And the child, of which she was
delivered soon after their arrival at Norridgewalk, is a healthy and very
promising boy.

A NARRATIVE OF THE CAPTIVITY and ESCAPE of Mrs. Frances Scott, An inhabitant
of Washington county, Virginia.
ON Wednesday, the 29th of June, 1785, late in the evening, a large company of
armed men passed the house, on their way to Kentucky: Some of whom encamped
within two miles. Mr. Scott living on a frontier part, generally made the
family watchful; but on this calamitous day, after so large a body of men had
passed, shortly after night he lay down in his bed, and imprudently left one of
the doors of his house open -- the children were all in bed, and asleep. Mrs.
Scott was nearly undressed, when, to her unutterable astonishment and horror,
she saw rushing in through the door that was left open, painted savages, with
presented arms, raising a hideous shriek -- Mr. Scott being awake, instantly
jumped out of bed, but was immediately fired at: he forced his way through the
middle of the enemy, and got out of the door, but fell a few paces from thence.
An Indian seized Mrs. Scott, and ordered her to a particular spot, and not to
move: others stabbed and cut the throats of the three youngest children in
their bed. And afterward lifted them up and dashed them down to the floor,
near the mother; the eldest, a beautiful girl of eight years old, awoke, and
escaped out of the bed, and ran to her parent, and with a most plaintive
accent, cried, "O mamma! mamma! save me," -- the mother, in the deepest anguish
of spirit, and with a flood of tears, entreated the savages to spare her child,
but with a brutal fierceness, they tomahawked and stabbed her in the mother's
arms. Adjacent to Mr. Scott's dwelling house another family lived, of the name
of Ball. The Indians also attacked them at the same instant they did Mr. Scott;
but the door being shut, the enemy fired into the house through an opening
between two logs, and killed a young lad, and then essayed to force the door
open, but a surviving brother fired through the door, and the enemy desisted,
and went off; the remaining part of the family ran out of the house and
escaped. In Mr. Scott's house were four good rifles well loaded, belonging to
people that had left it on their way to Kentucky. The Indians loaded themselves
with the plunder, being 13 in number, and then speedily made off, and continued
traveling all night; next morning their chief allotted to each man his share,
and detached nine of a party to steal horses, from the inhabitants in Clinch.
The eleventh day after Mrs. Scott's captivity, the four Indians after having
her in charge, stopped at a place fixed on for a rendezvous, and to hunt, being
now in great want of provisions. Three went out, and the chief, being an old
man, was left to take care of the prisoner, who, by this time, expressed a
willingness to proceed to the Indian towns, which seemed to have the desired
effect of lessening the keeper's vigilance. In the day time, as the old man was
graining a deer skin, the captive pondering on her situation, and anxiously
looking for an opportunity to make her escape, took the resolution, and went to
the Indian carelessly, asked liberty to go a small distance to a stream of
water, to wash the blood off her apron, that had remained besmeared since the
fatal night of the murder of her little daughter. He told her in the English
tongue, "Go along;" she then passed by him, his face being in a contrary
direction from that she was going, and he very busy. She after getting to the
water, proceeded on without delay, made to a high barren mountain, and
traveled till late in the evening, when she came down into the valley, in
search of the track she had been taken along; hoping thereby to find the way
back, without the risk of being lost, and perishing with hunger in uninhabited
parts. On coming across the valley, on the river side, supposed to be the
easterly branch of the Kentucky river, she observed in the sand, tracks of two
men, that had gone up the river, and had just returned. She concluded these to
have been her pursuers, which excited emotions of gratitude and thankfulness to
divine providence for so timely a deliverance. Being without any provisions,
having no kind of weapon or tool to assist her in getting any, and being almost
destitute of clothing; also knowing, that a vast track of rugged high mountains
intervened between where she was and the inhabitants eastwardly, and she almost
as ignorant as a child of the method of steering through the woods, excited
painful sensations. But certainly death, either by hunger or wild beasts,
seemed to her better than to be in the power of beings, who had excited in her
mind such horror. She addressed Heaven for protection, and taking courage,
proceeded onward.

After traveling three days, she nearly met with the Indians, as she supposed,
that had been sent to Clinch to steal horses, but providentially hearing their
approach, concealed herself among the cane, until the enemy had passed. This
giving a fresh alarm, and her mind being filled with consternation, she got
lost, proceeding backwards and forwards for several days; at length she came to
a river, that seemed to come from the east; concluding it was Sandy river, she
accordingly resolved to trace it to its source, which is adjacent to Clinch
settlement. After proceeding up the same several days, she came where the river
runs through a great laurel mountain, where is a prodigious water fall, and
numerous high craggy cliffs along the water edge; that way seemed impassable,
the mountain steep and difficult: However, our mournful traveller concluded
that the latter way was the best. She therefore ascended for some time, but
coming to a range of inaccessible rocks, she turned her course toward the foot
of the mountain and the river side; after getting into a deep gulley, and
passing over several high steep rocks, she reached the river side, where, to
her inexpressible affliction, she found that a perpendicular rock, or rather
one that hung over, of 15 or 20 feet high, formed the bank. Here a solemn pause
took place, she essayed a return; but the height of the steps and rocks she had
descended over, prevented her. She then returned to the edge of the precipice,
and viewed the bottom of it, as the certain spot to end all her troubles, or
remain on the top to pine away in hunger, or be devoured by wild beasts. After
serious meditation and devout exercises, she determined on leaping from the
height, and accordingly jumped off. Although the place she had to alight was
covered with uneven rocks, not a bone was broken; but being exceedingly stunned
with the fall, she remained unable to proceed for some time. The dry season
caused the river to be shallow -- she traveled in it, and where she could, by
its edge, until she got through the mountain, which she concluded was several
miles. After this, as she was traveling along the bank of the river, a
venomous snake bit her on the ancle: she had strength to kill it; and knowing
its kind, concluded that death must soon overtake her. By this time Mrs. Scott
was reduced to a mere skeleton, with fatigue, hunger, and grief; probably this
state of her body was the means of preserving her from the effects of the
poison; be that as it may, so it was, that very little pain succeeded the bite,
and what little swelling there was, it fell into her feet. Our wanderer now
left the river, and after proceeding a good distance, she came to where the
valley parted into two, each leading a different course. -- Here a painful
suspense again took place; a forlorn creature, almost exhausted, and certain if
she was far led out of the way, that she would never see a human creature.
During this doubt, a beautiful bird passed close by her, fluttering along the
ground, and went out of sight up one of the valleys. This drew her attention,
and, whilst considering what it might mean, another bird of the same
appearance, in like manner fluttered past her, and took the same valley the
former had done. This determined her choice of her way; and in two days, which
was on the 11th day of August, she reached the settlement at Clinch, called
New-Garden; whereas (she is since informed by woodmen) had she taken the other
valley, it would have led back toward the Ohio. Mrs. Scott related that the
Indians told her, that the party was composed of four different nations, two of
whom she thinks they named Delawares and Mingoes.

She further relates, that, during her wandering from the 10th of July to the
11th of August, she had no other subsistence but chewing and swallowing the
juice of young cane stalks, sassafras leaves, and some other plants she did not
know the name of; that, on her journey, she saw buffaloes, elks, deer, and
frequently bears and wolves; not one of which, although some of them passed
very near her, offered her any harm. One day a bear came near her, with a young
fawn in his mouth, and on discovering her, he dropped his prey and ran off.
Hunger prompted her to go and take the flesh, and eat it; but on reflection,
she desisted, thinking that the bear might return and devour her; besides, she
had an aversion to taste raw flesh. -- Mrs. Scott continues in a low state of
health, and remains inconsolable for the loss of her family, particularly
bewailing the cruel death of her little daughter.

FINIS.

