THE COLUMBIAN MUSE.

A SELECTION OF AMERICAN POETRY, FROM VARIOUS AUTHORS OF ESTABLISHED REPUTATION.

NEW YORK: PRINTED BY J. CAREY, NO. 91, BROAD-STREET.

1794.

CONTENTS.
The Conspiracy of Kings, Barlow Page 1 The Prospect of Peace, ibid 10
Philosophic Solitude, Livingstone 16 Single Life and Matrimony contrasted,
Anon. 33 An Oration, Hopkinson 34 The Federal Convention, Anon. 42 Address to
the Continental Convention, Dwight 43 Columbia, Ibid 48 The Seasons Moralized,
ibid 50 Elegy on the Times, Trumbull, 51 Elegy on the Death of Mr. B. St. John,
ibid 61 Ambition, an Elegy, ibid, 65 A Song, Dwight 68 The Critics, a Fable.
ibid 69 Epistle to Colonel Humphreys, ibid 73 Sketches of American History,
Freneau 80 Description of the first American Congress, Barlow 89 American
Revolution, ibid 91 American Sages, ibid 105 American Painters, ibid 107
American Poets, ibid 108 Eulogium on Rum, Smith 109 Elegy on the burning of
Fairfield, Humphreys 112 Elegy on Lieutenant De Heart, ibid 114 Mount Vernon,
ibid 116 Ode to Laura, ibid 119 The Genius of America, ibid 120 The Country
Meeting, James 121 Lines written at sea in a heavy Gale, Freneau 125 The
American Warrior, Anon. 126 The Doctrine of Consequences, ibid 128 Song. ibid
132 Stanzas on the President's Birth Day, ibid 133 The Fire Fly, ibid 134 The
Thunder Storm, Anon. 135 An Epistle to Dr. Dwight, Humphreys, 136 A song. From
the French, ibid 140 Epitaph, Hopkins, 142 The Hypocrite's Hope, ibid 144 An
intended Inscription, Allen 146 Depredations of the Algerines, etc. Humphreys
147 A Winter Piece, Lathrop 157 An Indian Eclogue, Smith 160 Future State of
the Western Territory, Humphreys 162 American Winter ibid 165 On Love and the
American Fair, ibid 167 Benevolence, Dawes 169 The Old Soldier, Featham 171 The
War Horse, Ladd 172 On the migration to America, etc. Freneau 173 A Pastoral
Song, Bradford 175 Address to the Robin Red Breast, Bayard 177 Progress of
Science, Evans 181 Description of Jehovah, Ladd 183 Nature and Art, Smyth 183
Cololoo. An Indian Tale, Dunlap 187 An Elegy, Alsop, 190 The Deity and his
Dispensations, Dwight 194 Creation, ibid 196 New England Described, ibid 199
Picture of a New England Village, ibid 204 The House of Sloth, ibid 205 A
Female Worthy, ibid 207 The miseries of War, ibid 209 Ella. -- A Norwegian
Tale, Dunlap 215 The Country School, Anon. 219 Invocation to Hope, ibid 221
Prayer to Patience, ibid 222 Character of St. Tamany, Prichard 223
THE COLUMBIAN MUSE.
THE CONSPIRACY OF KINGS.
BY JOEL BARLOW, ESQUIRE.
SUPPOSED TO HAVE BEEN WRITTEN IN THE YEAR 1792.
ETERNAL Truth, thy trump undaunted lend,
People and priests and courts and kings, attend;
While, borne on western gales (from that far shore
Where justice reigns, and tyrants tread no more)
The unwon^ed voice, that no dissuasion awes,
That fears no frown, and seeks no blind applause,
Shall tell the bliss that Freedom sheds abroad,
The rights of nature and the gift of God.
Think not, ye knaves, whom meanness styles the Great,
Drones of the Church, and harpies of the State, --
Ye, whose cursed sires, for blood and plunder famed,
Sultans or kings or czars or emp'rots named,
Taught the deluded world their claims to own,
And raise the crested reptiles to a throne, --
Ye who pretend to your dark best was given
The lamp of life, the mystic keys of heaven:
Whose impious arts, with magic spells, began
When shades of ignorance veiled the race of man;
Who change, from age to age, the fly deceit,
As Science beams, and Virtue learns the cheat;
Tyrants of double powers, the soul that blind,
To rob, to scourge, and brutalize mankind, --
Think not I come to croak, with omen'd yell,
The dire damnations of your future hell;
To bend a bigot or reform a knave,
By opening all the scenes beyond the grave.
I know your crested souls: while one defies,
In skeptic scorn, the vengeance of the skies,
The other boasts, -- "I ken thee, Power divine,
"But fear thee not; the avenging bolt is mine."
No! it is the present world that prompts the song;
The world we see; the world that feels the wrong,
The world of men, whose arguments ye know,
Of men, long curbed to servitude and woe;
Men, roused from sloth, by indignation slung,
Their strong hands loosed, and found their fearless tongue;
Whose voice of fire, whose deep-descending steel,
Shall speak to souls, and teach dull nerves ^o feel.
Think not -- (al^no! the weak delusion shun;
Burke leads you wrong, the world is not his own)
Indulge not once the thought, the vapory dream,
The fool's repast, the madman's threadbare theme,
That nations, rising in the light of truth,
Strong with new life and pure regen'rate youth,
Will shrink from tolls so splendidly begun,
Their bliss abandon and their glory shun;
Betray the trust by Heaven's own hand consigned,
The great concentred stake, the interest of mankind.
Ye speak of kings combined, some league that draws
Europe's whole force, to save your sinking cause;
Of fancied hosts by myriads that advance,
To crush the untried power of new-^orn France.
Misguided men! these idle tales despise;
Let one bright ray of reason strike your eyes;
Show me your kings, the sceptred horde parade, --
See their pomp vanish! see your visions fade!
Indignant man resumes the shaft he gave,
Disarms the tyrant, and unbinds the slave,
Displays the unclad skeletons of kings, Ossa vides regum vacuis exhausta
medullis.

J^v. Sat. 8.



Specter of power, and serpents without stings.
And shall mankind, shall France, whose (...) might
Rent the dark veil, and dragged them forth to light,
Heed now their threats in dying anguish tossed?
And She who felled the monster, fear the ghost?
Bid young Alcides, in his grasp who takes,
And gripes with naked hand the twisting snakes,
Their force exhausted, bid him prostrate fall,
And dread their shadows trembling on the wall.
But grant to kings and courts their ancient play,
Recall their splendor and revive their sway;
Can all your cant and all your cries persuade
One power to join you, in your wild crusade?
In vain ye search to earth's remotest end;
No court can aid you, and no king defend.
Not the mad knave that S -- scepter stole,
Nor she, whose thunder shakes the northern pole;
For Frederick's widowed sword, that scorns to tell
On whose weak brow his crown reluctant fell:
Not the tri-sceptred Prince, of Austrian mould,
The ape of wisdom and the slave of gold,
Theresa's son, who, with a feeble grace,
Just mimics all the vices of his race;
For him no charm can foreign strife afford,
Too mean to spend his wealth, too wise to trust his sword.
Peep over the Pyrenees, -- but you will disdain
To break the dream that sooths the monk of Spain.
He counts his beads, and spends his holy zeal
To raise once more the inquisitorial wheel,
Prepares the faggot and the flame renews,
To roast the French, as once the Moors and Jews,
While able hands the busy task divide,
His Queen to dandle, and his State to guide.
Ye ask g^^^t Pit to join your desperate work, --
See how his annual aid confounds the Turk!
Like a war-elephant his bulk he shows,
And treads down friends, when frightened by his foes.
Where then, forsaken villains, will ye turn?
Of France the outcast and of earth the scorn;
What new-made charm can dissipate your scars?
Can Burke's mad foam, or Calonne's house of Peers? M. de Calonne, at an
immense labor, and by the aid of his friends in England, has framed a
constitution for France, after the English model; the chief ornament of which
is that"CORINTHIAN CAPITAL OF POLISHED SOCIETY,"a House of Peers. It is said
that, after debates and altercations which lasted fix mouths, he has persuaded
the emigrant princes to agree to it. It only remains now for him and them to
try on this new livery upon the French nation.

Can Artois' sword, that e^st near Calpe's wall,
Where Crillion fought and Elliot was to fall,
Burned with the fire of fame, but harmless burned,
For sheathed the sword remained, and in its sheath returned? Among the
disadvantages attending the lives of Princes, must be reckoned the singular
difficulties with which they have to struggle in acquiring a military
reputation. A Duke of Cumberland, in order to become an Alexander, had to ^ide
all the way to Culloden, and back again to London, Louis the fourteenth was
obliged to submit to the fatigue of being carried on board of a splendid barge,
and rowed across the Rhine, about the same time that the French army crossed
it; and all this for the simple privilege of being placed above the Macedonian
in the temple of Fame; and of causing this achievement to be celebrated, as
more glorious than the passing of the Grani^us: as may be seen on that modest
monument in the PLACE VENDOME in Paris.

The Court d'Artois has purchased, at a still dearer rate, the same of being
styled" le I^gne rejeton da grand Henri,"and of being destined to command all
the armies of Europe in reestablishing the Monarchy of France. This champion of
Christendom set out, at the age of twenty-five, and traveled by land with a
princely equipage, from Paris to Gibraltar; where he arrived just in time to
see, at a convenient distance, Elliot's famous bonfire of the floating
batteries. He then returned, covered with glory, by the way of Madrid; and
arrived at Versailles, amidst the caresses of the court and the applauses of
all Europe. The accomplishment of this arduous enterprise has deservedly placed
him, in point of military same, at the head of all the present branches of the
illustrious house of Bourbon.



Oh Burke, degenerate slave! with grief and shame,
The muse indignant must repeat thy name.
Strange man, declare, -- since, at creation's birth,
From crumbling chaos sprang this heaven and earth,
Since wrecks and outcast relics still remain,
Whirled ceaseless round confusion's dreary reign,
Declare, from all these fragments, whence you stole
That genius wild, that monstrous mass of soul;
Where spreads the widest waste of all extremes,
Fell darkness frowns, and heaven's own splendor beams;
Truth, Error, Falsehood, Rhetoric's raging tide,
And Pomp and Meanness, Prejudice and Pride,
Strain to an endless clang thy voice of fire,
Thy thoughts bewilder and thy audience tire.
Like Phoebus' son, we see thee wing thy way,
Snatch the loose reins and mount the ear of day;
To earth now plunging plough thy wasting course,
The great sublime of weakness and of force.
But while the world's keen eye, with generous glance,
Thy faults could pardon and thy worth enhance,
When foes were hushed, when justice dared commend,
And even fond Freedom claimed thee as a friend,
Why in a gulf of baseness sink forlorn,
And change pure praise for infamy and scorn?
And did thou hope, by thy infuriate quill,
To rouse mankind the blood of realms to spill?
Then to restore, on death -- devoted plains,
Their scourge to tyrants, and to man his chains?
To swell their souls with thy own bigot rage,
And blot the glories of so bright an age?
First stretch thy arm, and, with less impious might,
^ipe out the stars, and quench the solar light:
" For heaven and earth,"the voice of God ordains,
" Shall pass and perish, but my word remains."
The eternal Word, which gave, in spite of thee,
Reason to man, that bids the man be free.
Thou could not hope: 'twas Heaven's returning grace,
In kind compassion to our injured race,
Which stripped that soul, ere it should flee from hence,
Of the last garb of decency or sense,
Left thee its own foul horrors to display,
In all the blackness of its native day,
To sink at last, from earth's glad surface hurled,
The sordid sovereign of the lettered world.
In some sad hour, ere death's dim terrors spread,
Ere seas of dark oblivion whelm thy head,
Reflect, lost man -- If those, thy kindred knaves,
Over the broad Rhine, whose flag rebellious waves,
Once draw the sword; its burning point shall bring
To thy quick nerves a never-ending sting:
The blood they shed thy weight of woe shall swell,
And their grim ghosts for ever with thee dwell.
Learn hence, ye tyrants, ere ye learn too late,
Of all your craft the inevitable fate.
The hour is co^^e, the world's unclosing eyes
Disc^rn with rapture where its wisdom lies;
From western heavens the inverted Orient springs,
The morn of man, the dreadful night of kings.
Dim, like the day struck owl, ye grope in light,
No arm for combat, no resource in flight;
If on your guards your lingering hopes repose,
Your guards are men, and men you have made your foes;
If to your rocky ramparts ye repair,
De Launay's De Launay was the last governor of the Bastile. His well-known
exit, serving as a warning to others, saved the lives of many commanders of
fortresses in different parts of France during the revolution. It may probably
have the same salutary effect in other countries.
fate can tell your fortune there.
No turn, no shift, no courtly arts avail,
Each mask is broken, all illusions fail;
Driven to your last retreat of shame and fear,
One counsel waits you, one relief is near:
By worth internal, rise to self -- wronght fame,
Your equal rank, your human kindred claim;
It Is Reason's choice, it is Wisdom's final plan,
To drop the monarch and assume the man.
Hail man, exalted title! first and best,
On God's own image by his hand impressed;
To which at last the reasoning race is driven
And seeks anew what first it gained from Heaven.
O Man, my brother, how the cordial flame
Of all endearments kindles at the name!
In every clime, thy visage greets my eyes,
In every tongue, thy kindred accents rise;
The thought expanding swells my heart with glee,
It finds a friend, and loves itself in thee.
Say then, fraternal family divine,
Whom mutual wants and mutual aids combine,
Say from what source the dire delusion rose,
That souls like ours were ever made for foes;
Why earth's maternal bosom, where we tread,
To rear our mansions and receive our bread,
Should blush so often for the race she bore,
So long be-drench'd with floods of filial gore;
Why to small realms for ever rest confined
Our great affections, meant for all mankind?
Though climes divide us, shall the stream or sea
That forms a barrier 'twixt my friend and me,
Inspire the wish his peaceful state to mar,
And meet his falc^ion in the ranks of war?
Not seas, nor climes, nor wild ambition's fire,
In nations minds, could ever the wish inspire;
Where equal rights each sober voice should guide,
No Blood would stain them, and no war divide.
It Is dark deception, it is the glare of state,
Man sunk in titles, lost in Small and Great;
It Is Rank, Distinction, all the hell that springs,
From those prolific monsters, Courts and Kings.
These are the vampires n^^s'd on nature's spoils;
For these with pangs the starving peasant toils;
For these the earth's broad surface teems with grain;
Theirs the dread labors of the devious main:
And when the wasted world but dares refuse
The gifts oppressive and extorted dues,
They bid wild slaughter spread the gory plains,
The life blood gushing from a thousand veins;
Erect their thrones amid the sanguine flood,
And dip their purple in the nation's blood.
The gazing crowd, of glittering State afraid,
Adore the power their coward meanness made;
In war's short intervals, while regal shows
Still blind their reason and insult their woes,
What strange events for proud processions call!
See kingdoms crowding to a birth -- night hall!
See the long pomp in gorgeous glare displayed,
The tinsel'd guards, the squadron'd horse parade;
See heralds gay, with emblems on their vest;
In tissu'd robes, tall, beauteous pages dressed;
Amid superior ranks of splendid slaves,
Lords, Dukes and Princes, titulary knaves;
Confusedly shine their crosses, gems and stars,
Sceptres and globes and crowns and spoils of wars.
On gilded orbs see thundering chariots rolled,
Steeds, snorting fire, and champing bits of gold,
Prance to the trumpet's voice, while each assumes
A loftier gait, and lifts his neck of plumes.
High on a moving throne, and near the van,
The tyrant rides, the chosen scourge of man;
Cl^^ions and flutes and drums his way prepare,
And shouting millions rend the troubled air:
Millions, whose ceaseless toils the pomp sustain,
Whose hour of stupid joy repays an age of pain.
Of these no more. From orders, slaves and kings,
To thee, O Man! my heart rebounding springs:
Behold the ascending bliss that waits your call,
Heaven's own bequest, the heritage of all:
Awake to wisdom, seize the proffered prize;
From shade to light, from grief to glory rise.
Freedom at last, with Reason in her train,
Extends over earth her everlasting reign;
See Gallia's sons, so late the tyrant's sport,
Machines in war and sycophants at court,
Start into men, expand their well-taught mind,
Lords of themselves and leaders of mankind:
On equal rights their base of empire lies,
On wall's of wisdom see the structure rise;
Wide over the gazing world it towers sublime,
A mo^ell'd form for each surrounding clime.
To useful toils they bend their noblest aim,
Make patriot views and moral views the same;
Renounce the wish of war, bid conquest cease,
Invite all men to happiness and peace;
To faith and justice rear the youthful race,
With strength exalt them and with science grace;
Till truth's blessed banners, over the regions hurled,
Shake tyrants from their thrones, and cheer the waking world.
In northern climes, where feudal shades of late
Chilled every heart and palsied every State,
Behold, illumined by the instructive age,
That great phenomenon, a sceptred sage:
There Stanislaus unfolds his prudent plan,
Tears the strong bandage from the eyes of man,
Points the progressive march, and shapes the way
That leads a realm from darkness into day.
And deign, for once, to turn a transient eye
To that wide world that skirts the western sky;
Hail the mild morning, where the dawn began,
The full fruition of the hopes of man;
Where sage experience seals the sacred cause,
And that rare union, Liberty and Laws,
Speaks to the reasoning race,"To freedom rise,
Like them be equal, and like them be wise."
THE PROSPECT OF PEACE.
BY THE SAME.
WRITTEN IN THE YEAR 1778.
THE closing scenes of Tyrants' fruitless rage,
The opening prospects of a golden age,
The dread events that crown the important year,
Wake the glad song, and claim the attentive ear.
Long has Columbia rung with dire alarms,
While Freedom called her injured sons to arms;
While various fortune fired the embattled field,
Conquest delayed, and victory stood concealed;
While closing legions marked their dreadful way,
And millions trembled for the dubious day.
In this grand conflict heaven's Eternal Sire,
At whose dread frown the sons of guilt expire,
Bade vengeance rise, with sacred fury driven,
On these who war with Innocence and Heaven.
Behold, where late the trembling squadrons fled,
Hosts bowed in chains, and hapless numbers bled,
In different fields our numerous heroes rouse,
To crop the wreath from Britain's impious brows.
Age following age shall these events relate,
Till Time's old empire yield to destined Fate;
Historic truth our guardian chiefs proclaim,
Their worth, their actions, and their deathless fame;
Admiring crowds their life-touch'd forms behold,
In breathing canvass, or in sculptured gold;
And hail the Leader of the favorite throng,
The rapturous theme of some heroic song.
And soon, emerging from the orient skies,
The blissful morn in glorious pomp shall rise,
Wasting fair Peace from Europe's fared coast;
Where wandering long, in mazy factions lost,
From realm to realm, by rage and discord driven,
She seemed resolved to re-ascend her heaven.
This LEWIS viewed, and reached a friendly hand,
Pointing her slight to this far distant land;
Bade her extend her empire over the West.
And Europe's balance tremble on her crest!
Now, see the Goddess mounting on the day,
To these fair climes direct her circling way,
Willing to seek, once more, an earthly throne,
To cheer the globe, and emulate the sun,
With placid look she eyes the blissful shore,
Bids the loud-thund'ring cannon cease to roar;
Bids british navies from these ports be tossed,
And hostile keels no more insult the coast;
Bids private feuds her sacred vengeance feel,
And bow submissive to the public weal;
Bids long, calm years adorn the happy clime,
And roll down blessings to remotest time.
Hail! heaven-born Peace, fair Nurse of Virtue, hail!
Here fix thy scepter and exalt thy scale;
Hence, through the earth extend thy late domain,
Till Heaven's own splendor shall absorb thy reign!
What scene's arise! what glories we behold!
See a broad realm its various charms unfold;
See crowds of patriots bless the happy land,
A godlike senate and a warlike band;
One friendly Genius fires the numerous whole,
From glowing Georgia to the frozen pole.
Along these shores, amid these flowery vales,
The woodland shout the joyous ear assails;
Industrious crowds in different labors toil,
Those ply the arts, and these improve the soil:
Here the fond merchant counts his rising gain,
There strides the rustic over the surrow'd plain;
Here walks the statesman, pensive and serene,
And there the school boy gambols round the green.
See ripening harvests gild the smiling plains,
Kind Nature's bounty and the pride of swains;
Luxuriant vines their curling tendrils shoot,
And bow their heads to drop the clust'ring fruit;
In the gay fields, with rich profusion strow'd,
The orchard bends beneath its yellow load;
The lofty boughs their annual burden pour,
And juicy harvests swell the autumnal store.
These are the blessings of impartial heaven,
To each fond heart in just proportion given
No grasping lord shall grind the neighboring poor,
Starve numerous vassals to increase his store;
No cringiug slave shall at his presence bend,
Shrink at his frown, and at his nod attend;
Afric's unhappy children, now, no more
Shall feel the cruel chains they felt before;
But every State in this just mean agree,
To bless mankind, and set the oppressed free.
Then, rapt in transport, each exulting slave
Shall taste that Boon which God and nature gave;
And, fired with virtue, join the common cause,
Protect our freedom and enjoy our laws.
At this calm period, see, in pleasing view,
Art vi^^ with Art, and nature smiles anew:
On the long winding strand, that meets the tide,
Unnumber'd cities lift their spiry pride;
Gay, flowery walks salute the enrap^ur'd eyes;
Tall, beauteous domes in dazzling prospect rise;
There thronging navies stretch their wanton sails,
Tempt the broad main and catch the driving gales;
There commerce swells from each remotest shore,
And wafts in plenty to the smiling store.
To these thronged seats, the country wide resorts,
And rolls her treasures to the opening ports;
While, far remote, gay health and pleasure flow,
And calm retirement cheers the laboring brow.
No din of arms the peaceful patriot hears,
No parting sigh the tender matron fears,
No field of fame invites the youth to rove,
Nor virgins know a harsher found than love.
Fair Science then her laureled beauty rears,
And soars with Genius to the radiant stars:
Her glimmering dawn from Gothic darkness rose,
And nations saw her shadowy veil disclose;
She cheered fair Europe with her rising smiles,
Beamed a bright morning over the British isles,
Now soaring reaches her meridian height,
And blessed Columbia hails the dazzling light!
Here, rapt in thought, the philosophic soul
Shall look through Nature's parts and grasp the whole:
See Genius kindling at a FRANKLIN'S fame,
See unborn sages catch the electric flame;
Bid hovering clouds the threatening blast expire,
Curb the fierce stream and hold the imprisoned fire;
See the pleased youth, with anxious study, rove,
In orbs eccentric through the realms above,
No more perplexed, while RITTENHOUSE appears
To grace the museum with the rolling spheres.
See that young Genius, that inventive soul,
Whose laws the jarring elements control:
Who guides the vengeance of mechanic power,
To blast the watery world and guard the peaceful shore.
And where is the rising Sage, the unknown name,
That new advent'rer in the lists of fame,
To find the cause, in secret nature bound,
The unknown cause, and various charms of sound?
What subtle medium leads the devious way;
Why different tensions different sounds convey;
Why harsh, rough tones, in grating discord roll,
Or mingling concert charms the enraptured soul.
And tell the cause why sluggish vapors rise,
And wave, exalted, through the genial skies;
What strange contrivance nature forms to ^ear
The ponderous burden through the lighter air.
These last Displays the curious mind engage,
And fire the genius of the rising age;
While moral thoughts the pleased attention claim,
Swell the warm soul, and wake the virtuous flame;
While Metaphysics soar a boundless height,
And launch with EDWARDS to the realms of light.
See the blessed Muses hail their roseate bowers,
Their mansions blooming with poetic flowers;
See listening Seraphs join the epic throng,
And unborn JOSHUAS rise in future song.
Satire attends at Virtue's wakening call,
And Pride and Coquetry and Dullness fall.
Unnumber'd bards shall string the heavenly lyre,
To those blessed strains which heavenly themes inspire;
Sing the rich Grace on mortal Man bestowed,
The Virgin's Offspring and the filial God;
What love descends from heaven when JESUS dies:
What shouts attend him rising through the skies!
See Science now, in lovelier charms appear,
Graced with new garlands from the blooming Fair.
See laureled nymphs in polished pages shine,
And Sapphic sweetness glow in every line.
No more the rougher Muse shall dare disgrace
The radiant charms that deck the blushing face;
But rising Beauties scorn the tinsel show,
The powdered coxcomb and the flaunting beau;
While humble Merit, void of flattering wiles,
Claims the soft glance, and wakes the enlivening smiles.
The opening luster of an angel-mind,
Beauty's bright charms, with sense superior joined,
Bid Virtue shine, bid Truth and Goodness rise,
Melt from the voice, and sparkle from the eyes;
While the pleased Muse the gentle bosom warms,
The first in genius, as the first in charms.
Thus age and youth a smiling aspect wear,
Awed into virtue by the leading Fair;
While the bright offspring, rising to the stage,
Conveys the blessings to the future age.
THESE are the views that Freedom's cause attend;
THESE shall endure 'till Time and Nature end.
With Science crowned, shall Peace and Virtue shine,
And blessed Religion beam a light divine.
Here the pure Church, descending from her God,
Shall fix on earth her long and last abode;
Zion arise, in radiant splendours dressed,
By Saints admired, by Infidels confessed;
Her opening courts, in dazzling glory, blaze,
Her walls salvation, and her portals praise.
From each far corner of the extended earth,
Her gathering sons shall claim their promised birth:
Through the drear wastes, beneath the setting day,
Where prowling natives haunt the woods for prey,
The swarthy Millions lift their wondering eyes,
And smile to see the Gospel morning rise:
Those who, through time, in savage darkness lay,
Wake to new light and hail the glorious day!
In those dark regions, those uncultur'd wilds,
Fresh blooms the rose, the peaceful lily smiles;
On the tail cliffs unnumber'd Carmels rise,
And in each vale some beauteous Sharon lies.
From this fair Mount the excinded stone shall roll,
Reach the far East, and spread from pole to pole;
From one small Stock shall countless nations rise,
The world replenish and adorn the skies:
Earth's blood stained empires, with their Guide, the Sun,
From orient climes their gradual progress run;
And circling far, reach every western shore,
'Till earth-born empires rise and fall no more.
But see the imperial GUIDE from heaven descend,
Whose beams are Peace, whose kingdom knows no
From calm Vesperia, through the etherial way, end;
Back sweep the shades before the effulgent day;
Through the broad East, the bright'ning splendor driven,
Reverses Nature and illumines heaven;
Astonished regions bless the gladd'ning sight,
And Suns and Systems own superior light.
As when the asterial blaze over Bethl'em stood,
Which marked the birthplace of the incarnate God;
When eastern priests the heavenly splendor viewed,
And numerous crowds the wondrous sign pursued;
So eastern kings shall view the unclouded day
Rise in the West and streak its golden way:
That signal spoke a Savior's humble birth;
This speaks his long and glorious reign on earth!
THEN Love shall rule, and Innocence adore,
Discord shall cease, and Tyrants be no more:
Till yon bright orb, and those celestial spheres,
In radiant circles, mark a thousand years;
'Till the grand fiat burst the ethe^ial frames,
Worlds crush on worlds, and Nature sink inflames!
The Church elect, from smould'ring ruins, rise,
And sail triumphant through the yielding skies,
Hailed by the Bridegroom! to the Father given,
The Joy of Angels, and the Queen of Heaven!
PHILOSOPHIC SOLITUDE.
BY WILLIAM LIVINGSTON, ESQUIRE. Late Governor of the State of New Jersey, etc. etc.
LET ardent heroes seek renown in arms,
Pant after fame and rush to war's alarms;
To shining palaces let fools resort,
And dunces cringe, to be esteemed at court:
Mine be the pleasures of a rural life,
From noise remote, and ignorant of strife;
Far from the painted belle, and white-glov'd beau,
The lawless masquerade, and midnight show:
From ladies, lap-dogs, courtiers, garters, stars,
Fops, fiddlers, tyrants, emperors, and czars.
Full in the center of some shady grove,
By nature formed for solitude and love:
On banks arrayed with ever-blooming flowers,
Near beauteous landscapes or by roseate bowers,
My neat, but simple mansion I would raise,
Unlike the sumptuous domes of modern days;
Devoid of pomp, with rural plainness formed,
With savage game, and glossy shells adorned.
No costly furniture should grace my hall;
But curling vines ascend against the wall,
Whose pliant branches should luxuriant twine,
While purple clusters swelled with future wine;
To slake my thirst a liquid lapse distill
From craggy rocks, and spread a limpid rill.
Along my mansion, spiry firs should grow,
And gloomy yews extend the shady row:
The cedars flourish, and the poplars rise,
Sublimely tall, and shoot into the skies:
Among the leaves, refreshing zephyrs play,
And cro^ding trees exclude the noontide ray;
Whereon the birds their downy nests should form,
Securely sheltered from the battering storm;
And to melodious notes their choir apply,
Soon as Aurora blushed along the sky:
While all around the enchanting music rings,
And every vocal grove responsive sings.
Me to sequestered scenes, ye muses, guide,
Where nature wantons in her virgin pride;
To mossy banks, edged round with opening flowers,
Elysian fields and amaranthine bowers,
To ambrosial founts, and sleep -- inspiring rills,
To herbag'd vales, gay lawns, and sunny hills.
Welcome, ye shades! all hail, ye vernal blooms!
Ye bow'ry thickets, and prophetic glooms!
Ye forests, hail! ye solitary woods!
Love-whispering groves, and silver-streaming floods!
Ye meads, that aromatic sweets exhale!
Ye birds, and all ye sylvan beauties, hail!
Oh how I long with you to spend my days,
Invoke the muse, and try the rural lays!
No trumpets there with martial clangour sound,
No prostrate heroes strew the crimson ground;
No groves of lances glitter in the air,
Nor thundering drums provoke the sanguine war:
But white-rob'd Peace, and universal Love,
Smile in the field, and brighten every grove:
There all the beauties of the circling year,
In native ornamental pride appear;
Gay, rosy-bosom'd Spring, and April showers:
Wake, from the womb of earth, the rising flowers:
In deeper verdure, Summer clothes the plain,
And Autumn bends beneath the golden grain;
The trees weep amber; and the whispering gales
Breeze over the lawn, or murmur through the vales:
The flowery tribes in gay confusion bloom,
Profuse with sweets, and fragrant with perfume;
On blossoms blossoms, fruits on fruits arise,
And varied prospects glad the wandering eyes.
In these fair seats, I Would pass the joyous day,
Where meadows flourish, and where fields look gay,
From bliss to bliss with endless pleasure rove,
Seek crystal streams, or haunt the vernal grove,
Woods, fountains, lakes, the fertile fields, or shades,
Aerial mountains, or subjacent glades.
There from the polished fetters of the great,
Triumphal piles, and gilded rooms of state --
Prime ministers, and sycophantic knaves,
Illustrious villains, and illustrious slaves,
From all the vain formality of fools,
And odious task of arbitrary rules;
The ruffling cares, which the vexed soul annoy,
The wealth the rich possess, but not enjoy,
The visionary bliss the world can lend,
The insidious foe, and false, designing friend,
The sevenfold fury of Zantippe's soul,
And S -- 's rage, that burns without control;
I Would live retired, contented, and serene,
Forgot, unknown, unenvied, and unseen.
Yet not a real hermitage I Would choose,
Nor wish to live from all the world recluse;
But with a friend sometimes unbend the soul,
In social converse, over the sprightly bowl.
With cheerful W --, serene and wisely gay,
I Would often pass the dancing hours away:
He, skilled alike to profit and to please,
Politely talks with unaffected ease;
Sage in debate, and faithful to his trust,
Mature in science, and severely just;
Of soul diffusive, vast and unconfined,
Breathing benevolence to all mankind;
Cautious to censure, ready to commend,
A firm, unshaken, uncorrupted friend;
In early youth, fair Wisdom's paths he trod,
In early youth, a minister of God,
Each pupil loved him, when at Yale he shone,
And every bleeding bosom weeps him gone.
Dear A --, too, should grace my rural seat,
Forever welcome to the green retreat:
Heaven for the cause of righteousness designed
His florid genius, and capacious mind:
Often have I heard, amidst the adoring throng,
Celestial truths devolving from his tongue:
High over the listening audience seen him stand,
Divinely speak, and graceful stretch his hand;
With such becoming grace and pompous sound,
With long-rob'd senators encircled round,
Before the Roman bar, while Rome was free,
Nor bowed to Caesar's throne the servile knee,
Immortal Tully plead the patriot cause,
While every tongue resounded his applause.
Next round my board should candid S -- appear,
Of manners gentle, and a friend sincere,
Averse to discord, party-rage and strife,
He sails serenely down the stream of life.
With these three friends, beneath a spreading shade,
Where silver fountains murmur through the glade;
Or in cool grots, perfumed with native flowers,
In harmless mirth, I Would spend the circling hours;
Or gravely talk, or innocently sing,
Or, in harmonious concert, strike the trembling string.
Amid sequestered bowers, near gliding streams,
Druids and bards enjoyed serenest dreams.
Such was the seat where courtly Horace sung,
And his bold harp immortal Maro strung:
Where tuneful Orpheus' unresisted lay
Made rapid tigers bear their rage away:
While groves, attentive to the extatic sound,
Burst from their roots, and, raptured, danced around,
Such feats the venerable seers of old
(When blissful years in golden circles rolled)
Chose and admired: even goddesses and gods
(As poets feign) were fond of such abodes:
The imperial consort of fictitious Jove
For fount-full Ida forsook the realms above.
Often to Idalia, on a golden cloud,
Veiled in a mist of fragrance, Venus rode:
There numerous altars to the queen were reared,
And lovesick youths their amorous vow^ preferred,
While fair hair'd damsels (a lascivious train)
With wanton rites adored her gentle reign.
The silver-shafted huntress of the woods,
Sought pendant shades, and bathed in cooling floods.
In palmy Delos, by Scamander's side,
Or where Cajister rolled his silver tide,
Melodious Phoebus sang; the muses round
Alternate warbling to the heavenly sound.
Even the feigned monarch of heaven's bright abode,
High throned in gold, of gods the sovereign god,
Often time preferred the shade of Ida's grove
To all the ambrosial feasts, and nectar'd caps above.
Behold, the rosy fingered morning dawn,
In saffron robbed, and blushing over the lawn!
Reflected from the clouds, a radiant stream
Tips with etherial dew the mountain's brim.
The unfolding roses, and the opening flowers,
Imbibe the dew, and strew the varied bowers,
Diffuse nectareous sweets around, and glow
With all the colors of the show'ry bow.
The industrious bees their balmy toil renew,
Buzz over the field, and sip the rosy dew.
But yonder comes the illustrious god of day,
Invests the east, and gilds the etherial way;
The groves rejoice, the feathered nations sing,
Echo the mountains, and the valleys ring.
Hail, orb! arrayed with majesty and fire,
That bids each sable shade of night retire!
Fountain of light! with burning glory crowned,
Da^ting a deluge of effulgence round!
Waked by thy genial and prolific ray,
Nature resumes her verdure, and looks gay:
Fresh blooms the rose, the drooping plants revive,
The groves reflourish, and the forests live.
Deep in the teeming earth, the ripening ore
Confesses thy consolidating power;
Hence Labor draws her tools, and artists mould
The fusile silver and the ductile gold;
Hence war is furnished; and the regal shield,
Like lightning, flashes over the illumined field.
If thou so fair, with delegated light,
That all heaven's splendours vanish at thy sight,
With what effulgence must the ocean glow,
From which thy borrowed beams incessant flow!
The exhaustless source whose single smile supplies
The unnumber'd orbs that gild the spangled skies!
Often would I view, in admiration lost,
Heaven's sumptuous canopy, and starry host;
With levelled tube, and astronomic eye,
Pursue the planets whirling through the sky:
Immeasurable vault! where thunders roll,
And forky lightnings flash from pole to pole.
Say, railing infidel! can thou survey
Yon globe of fire, that gives the golden day,
The harmonious structure of this vast machine,
And not confess its architect divine?
Then go, vain wretch! though deathless be thy soul,
Go, swell the riot, and exhaust the bowl;
Plunge into vice -- humanity resign --
Go fill the stie -- and bristle into swine!
None but a power omnipotent and wise
Could frame this earth, or spread the boundless skies:
He made the whole; at his omnific call,
From formless chaos rose this spacious ball,
And one Almighty God is seen in all.
By him our cup is crowned, our (...) spread,
With luscious wine, and life-sustaining bread.
What countless wonders does the earth contain!
What countless wonders the unfathomed main^
Bedropp'd with gold, there scaly nations shine,
Haunt coral groves, or lash the foaming brine.
Jehovah's glories blaze all nature round,
In heaven, on earth, and in the deeps profound;
Ambitious of his name, the warblers sing,
And praise their Maker, while they hail the spring;
The zephyrs breathe it; and the thunders roar,
While surge to surge, and shore resounds to shore.
But man, endu'd with an immortal mind,
His Maker's image, and for heaven designed,
To loftier notes his raptured voice should raise,
And chaunt sublimer hymns to his Creator's praise.
When rising Phoebus ushers in the morn,
And golden beams the impurpled skies adorn:
Waked by the gentle murmur of the floods,
Or the soft music of the waving woods;
Rising from sleep with the melodious quire,
To solemn sounds I Would tune the hallowed lyre.
Thy name, O God! should tremble on my tongue,
Till every grove proved vocal to my song:
(Delightful task! with dawning light to sing
Triumphant hymns to heaven's eternal king.)
Some courteous angel should my breast inspire,
Attune my lips, and guide the warbled wire,
While sportive echoes catch the sacred sound;
Swell every note, and bear the music round;
While mazy streams, meand'ring to the main,
Hang in suspense to hear the heavenly strain,
And, hushed to silence, all the feathered throng
Attentive listen to the tuneful song.
Father of light! exhaustless source of good!
Supreme, eternal, self-existent God!
Before the beamy sun dispensed a ray,
Flamed in the azure vault, and gave the day;
Before the glimmering moon, with borrowed light,
Shone queen amid the silver host of night;
High in the heavens, thou reign'dst superior Lord,
By suppliant angels worshipped and adored.
With the celestial choir then let me join,
In cheerful praises to the power divine:
To sing thy praise, do thou, O God! inspire
A mortal breast with more than mortal fire:
In dreadful majesty thou (...) enthroned,
With light encircled, and with glory crowned;
Through all infinitude extends thy reign,
For thee, nor heaven, nor heaven of heavens contain;
But though thy throne is fixed above the sky,
Thy omnipresence sills immensity.
Saints, robbed in white, to thee their anthems bring,
And radiant martyrs hallelujahs sing:
Heaven's universal host their voices raise
In one eternal chorus, to thy praise;
And, round thy awful throne, with one accord,
Sing, holy, holy, holy is the Lord.
At thy creative voice, from ancient night,
Sprang smiling beauty, and you worlds of light:
Thou spak'st -- the planetary chorus rolled,
And all the expanse was starr'd with beamy gold;
Let there be light, said God -- light instant shone,
And from the orient, burst the golden sun;
Heaven's gazing hierarchs, with glad surprise,
Saw the first morn invest the recent skies,
And strait the exulting troops thy throne surround
With thousand thousand harps of heavenly sound:
Thrones, powers dominions (ever shining trains!),
Shouted thy praises in triumphant strains:
Great are thy works, they ^^ng; and, all around,
Great are thy works, the echoing heavens resound.
The effulgent sun, insufferably bright,
Is but a beam of thy overflowing light;
The tempest is thy breath; the thunder hurled,
Tremendous roars thy vengeance over the world;
Thou ^ow'st the heavens, the smoking mountains nod,
Bocks fall to dust, and nature owns her God;
Pale tyrants shrink, the atheist stands aghast.
And impious kings in horror breathe their last.
To this great God alternately I Would pay
The evening anthem, and the morning lay.
For sovereign gold I never would repine,
Nor wish the glittering dust of monarchs mine.
What though high columns, heave into the skies.
Gay cielings shine, and vaulted arches rise!
Though fretted gold the sculptured roof adorn,
The rubies redden, and the jaspers burn!
O what, alas! avails the gay attire
To wretched man, who breathes but to expire?
Often on the vilest, riches are bestowed,
To show their meanness in the sight of God.
High from a dunghill, see a Dives rise,
And, Titan like, insult the avenging skies:
The crowd, in adulation, calls him Lord,
By thousands courted, flattered and adored:
In ^iot plunged, and drunk with earthly joys,
No higher thought his groveling soul employs;
The poor he scourges with an iron rod,
And from his bosom banishes his God.
But often in height of wealth and beauty's bloom,
Deluded man is fated to the tomb!
For, lo! he sickens; swift his color flies,
And rising mists obscure his swimming eyes;
Around his bed his weeping friends bemoan,
Extort the unwilling tear, and wish him gone;
His sorrowing heir augments the tender shower,
Deplores his death -- yet hails the dying hour.
Ah bitter comfort! Sad relief! to die,
Though sunk in down, beneath the canopy!
His eyes no more shall see the cheerful light,
Weighed down by death in everlasting night,
And now the great, the rich, the proud, the gay,
Lie breathless, cold -- unanimated clay!
He, that just now was flattered by the crowd,
With high applause, and acclamations loud --
That steeled his bosom to the orphan's cries,
And drew down torrents from the widow's eyes --
Whom, like a God, the rabble did adore --
Regard him now -- and, lo! he is no more.
My eyes no dazzling vestments should behold,
With gems instarr'd, and stiff with woven gold;
But the tall ram his downy fleece afford,
To clothe, in modest garb, his frugal lord.
Thus the great Father of mankind was dressed,
When shaggy hides composed his flowing vest;
Doomed to the cumb'rous load, for his offense,
When clothes supplied the want of innocence:
But now his sons (forgetful whence they came)
Glitter in gems, and glory in their shame.
Often would I wander through the dewy field,
Where clust'ring roses balmy fragrance yield:
Or in lone grots, for contemplation made,
Converse with angels and the mighty dead;
For all around unnumber'd spirits fly,
Wast on the breeze, or walk the liquid sky,
Inspire the poet with repeated dreams,
Who gives his hallowed muse to sacred themes;
Pro^ect the just, serene their gloomy hours,
Becalm their slumbers, and refresh their powers.
Methinks I see the immortal beings fly,
And swiftly shoot athwart the streaming sky:
Hark! a melodious voice I seem to hear,
And heavenly sounds invade my listening ear!
Be not afraid of us, innoxious band,
Thy cell surrounding by divine command;
Ere while, like thee, we led our lives below,
(Sad lives of pain, of misery, and woe!)
Long by affliction's boisterous tempests tossed,
We reached at length the ever bli^^ful coast:
Now in the embow'ring groves, and lawns above,
We taste the raptures of immortal love,
Attune the golden harp in roseate bowers,
Or bind our temples with unfading flowers.
Often on kind errands bent, we cut the air,
To guard the righteous, heaven's peculiar care'
Avert impending harms, their minds compose,
Inspire gay dreams, and prompt their soft repose.
When from thy tongue divine hosannas roll,
And sacred raptures swell thy rising soul,
To heaven we bear thy prayers, like rich perfumes;
Where, by the throne, the golden censer sumes;
And when with age thy head is silvered over,
And, cold in death, thy bosom beats no more,
Thy soul, exulting, shall desert its clay,
And mount, triumphant, to eternal day,
But to improve the intellectual mind,
Reading should be to contemplation joined.
First I Would collect from the Parnassion spring,
What muses dictate, and what poets sing. --
Virgil, as prince, should wear the laureled crown,
And other bards pay homage to his throne;
The blood of heroes now effus'd so long,
Will run for ever purple through his song:
See! how he mounts toward the blessed abodes,
On planets rides, and talks with demigods!
How do our ravished spirits melt away,
When in his song Sicilian Shepherds play!
But what a splendor strikes the dazzled eye,
When Dido shines in awful majesty!
Embroidered purple clad the Tyrian queen,
Her motion graceful, and august her mein;
A golden zone her royal limbs embraced,
A golden quiver ^^^tled by her waist,
See her proud steed majestically prance,
Contemn the trumpet, and deride the lance!
In crimson trappings, glorious to behold,
Confusedly gay with interwoven gold!
He champs the bit, and throws the foam around,
In patient paws, and tears the solid ground,
How stern AEners thunders through the field!
With towering helmet, and refulgent shield!
Coursers o'erturn'd, and mighty warriors slain,
Deformed with go^e, lie welt^ring on the plain,
Struck through with wounds, ill-fated chieftains lie,
Frown even in death, and threaten as they die,
Through the thick squadrons see the hero bound!
(His helmet slashes, and his arms resound!)
All grim with rage, he frowns over Turnus' head,
(Re kindled ire! for blooming, Pallas dead)
Then in his bosom plunged the shining blade --
The soul indignant sought the Stygian shade!
The far-fam'd bards that graced Britannia's isle,
Should next compose the venerable pile.
Great Milton first, for towering thought renowned,
Parent of song, and famed the world around!
His glowing breast divine Urania fired,
Or God himself the immortal bard inspired:
Borne on triumphant wings, he takes his flight,
Explores all heaven, and treads the realms of light:
In martial pomp he clothes the angelic train,
While warring myriads shake the etherial plain,
First Michael stalks, high towering over the rest,
With heavenly plumage nodding on his crest:
Impenetrable arms his limbs infold,
Eternal adamant, and burning gold!
Sparkling in fiery mail, with dire delight,
Rebellions Satan animates the sight:
Armipotent they sink in rolling smoke,
All heaven resounding, to its center shook.
To crush his foes, and quell the di^e alarms,
Messiah sparkled in refulgent arms:
In radiant panoply divinely bright,
His limbs incas'd, he flashed devouring light:
On burning wheels, over heaven's crystalline road,
Thundered the chariot of the filial God;
The burning wheels on golden axles turned,
With flaming gems the golden axles burned.
Lo^ the apostate host, with terror struck,
Roll back by millions! The empyrean shook!
Sceptres, and orbed shields, and crowns of gold,
Cherubs and seraphs in confusion rolled;
Till from his hand the triple thunder hurled,
Compelled them, headlong, to the internal world.
Then tuneful Pope, whom all the nine inspire,
With Sapphic sweetness, and Pindaric fire,
Father of (...) melodious and divine^
Next peerless Milton should distinguished shine.
Smooth flow his numbers, when he paints the grove,
The enraptured virgins listening into love:
But when the night, and hoarse-resounding storm
Rush on the deep and Neptune's face deform,
Rough runs the verse, the son'rous numbers roar,
Like the hoarse surge that thunders on the shore.
But when he sings, the exhilirated swains,
The embow'ring groves, and Windsor's blissful plains.
Our eyes are ravished with the sylvan scene,
Embroidered fields, and groves in living green;
His lays the verdure of the meads prolong,
And withered forests blossom in his song.
Thames' silver streams his flowing verse admire,
And cease to murmur while he tunes his lyre.
Next should appear great Dryden's lofty muse,
For who would Dryden's polished verse refuse?
His lips were moistened in Parnassus' spring,
And Phoebus taught his laureat son to sing.
How long did Virgil untranslated moan,
His beauties fading, and his flights unknown;
Till Dryden rose, and, in exalted strain,
Re-sang the fortune of the god-like man!
Again the Trojan prince, with dire delight,
Dreadful in arms, demands the lingering sight:
Again Camilla glows with martial fire,
Drives armies back, and makes all Troy retire.
With more than native luster, Virgil shines,
And gains sublimer heights in Dryden's lines.
The gentle Watts, who strings his silver lyre
To sacred odes, and heaven's all ruling Sire;
Who scorns the applause of the licentious stage,
And mounts you sparkling worlds with hallowed rage,
Compels my thoughts to wing the heavenly road,
And waf^s my soul, exulting, to my God:
No fabled nine, harmonious bard! inspire
Thy raptured breast with such seraphic sire;
But prompting angels warm thy boundless rage,
Direct thy thoughts, and animate thy page.
Blessed man! for spotless sanctity revered,
Loved by the good, and by the guilty feared;
Blessed man! from gay, delusive scenes removed,
Thy Maker loving, by thy Maker loved,
To God thou tun'st thy consecrated lays,
Nor meanly blush to sing Jehovah's praise.
Oh! did, like thee, each laureled bard delight
To paint Religion in her native light,
Not then with plays the laboring press would groan,
Nor Vice defy the pulpit and the throne;
No impious rhyme^s charm a vicious age,
Nor prostrate Virtue groan beneath their rage:
But themes divine in lofty numbers rise,
Fill the wide earth, and echo through the skies.
These for delight. For profit I would read
The labored volumes of the learned dead.
Sagacious Lock, by Providence designed,
To exalt, instruct, and rectify the mind,
The unconquerable sage Cato.
whom virtue fi^'d,
And from the tyrant's lawless rage retired,
When victor Caesar freed unhappy Rome
From Pompey's chains, to substitute his own.
Longinus, Livy, famed Thucydides,
Quintilian, Plato, and Demosthenes,
Persuasive Tully, and Corduba's sage, Sen^ca.

Who fell by Nero's unrelenting rage;
Him Socrates.
whom ungrateful Athens doomed to bleed,
Despised when living, and deplored when dead,
Raleigh I Would read with ever fresh delight,
While ages past rise present to my sight:
Ah man unblest! he foreign realms explo^'d,
Then fell a victim to his country's sword!
Nor should great Derham pass neglected by,
Observant sage! to whose deep piercing eye,
Nature's stupendous works expanded lie.
Nor he, Britannia, thy unmatched renown!
(Adjudg'd to wear the philosophic crown)
Who on the solar orb uplifted rode,
And scanned the unfathomable works of God^
Who bound the silver planets to their spheres,
And traced the elliptic curve of blazing stars!
Immortal Newton; whose illustrious name
Will shine on records of eternal fame.
By love directed, I would choose a wife,
To improve my bliss, and ease the load of life.
Hail, wedlock! hail, inviolable rye!
Perpetual fountain of domestic joy!
Love, friendship, honor, truth, and pure delight
Harmonius mingle in the nuptial rite.
In Eden, first, the holy state began,
When perfect innocence distinguished man;
The human pair, the Almighty pontiff led,
Gay as the morning, to the bridal bed;
A dread solemnity the espousals graced,
Angels the witnesses, and God the priest!
All earth exulted on the nuptial hour,
And voluntary roses decked the bower;
The joyous birds on every blossomed spray,
Sang hymeneans to the important day,
While Philomela swelled the spousal song,
And Paradise with gratulations rung.
Relate, inspiring muse! where shall I find
A blooming virgin with an angel mind?
Unblemished as the white-rob'd virgin quire
That fed, O Rome! thy consecrated fire?
By reason awed, ambitious to be good,
Averse to vice, and zealous for her God?
Relate, in what blessed region can I find
Such bright perfections in a female mind?
What phoenix-woman breathes the vital air
So greatly good, and so divinely fair?
Sure not the gay and fashionable train,
(...) proud, immoral, and (...);
Who (...) their golden hours in antic dress,
(...) us whispers, and inglorious ease.
Lo! round the boa^d a shining train appears
In rosy beauty, and in prime of years!
This hates a flounce, and this a flounce approves,
This shows the trophies of her former loves;
Polly avers, that Sylvia dressed in green,
When last at church the gaudy nymph was seen;
Chloe condemns her optics; and will lay
'Twas azure satin, interstreak'd with gray;
Lucy, invested with judicial power,
Awards 'twas neither, -- and the strife is over.
Then parrots, lap dogs, monkeys, squirrels, beaux,
Fans, ribands, tuckers, patches, furbeloes,
In quick succession, through their fancies run,
And dance incessant, on the flippant tongue.
And when, fatigued with every other sport,
The belles prepare to grace the sacred court,
They marshal all their forces in array,
To kill with glances, and destroy in play.
Two skilful maids with reverential fear,
In wanton wreaths collect their silken hair;
Two paint their cheeks, and round their temples pour
The fragrant unguent, and the ambrosial shower;
One pulls the shape -- creating stays; and one
Encircles round her waist the golden zone;
Not with more toil to improve immortal charms,
Strove Juno, Venus, and the queen of arms,
When Priam's son adjudg'd the golden prize,
To the resistless beauty of the skies.
At length, equipped in Love's enticing arms,
With all that glitters, and with all that charms,
The ideal goddesses to church repair,
Peep through the fan, and mutter over a prayer,
Or listen to the organ's pompous sound,
Or eye the gilded images around;
Or, deeply studied in coquettish rules,
Aim wily glances at unthinking fools;
Or show the lily hand with graceful air,
Or wound the fopling with a lock of hair:
And when the hated discipline is over,
And misses tortured with repent, no more,
They mount the pictured coach; and, to the play,
The celebrated idols hie away.
Not so the lass that should my joys improve,
With solid friendship, and connubial love:
A native bloom, with intermingled white,
Should set her features in a pleasing light;
Like Helen flushing with unrivaled charms,
When raptured Paris darted in her arms.
But what, alas! avails a ruby cheek,
A downy bosom, or a snowy neck!
Charms ill supply the want of innocence,
Nor beauty forms intrinsic excellence:
But in her breast let moral beauties shine,
Supernal grace and purity divine:
Sublime her reason, and her native wit
Unstrain'd with pedantry, and low conceit;
Her fancy lively, and her judgment free
From female prejudice and bigotry:
Averse to idol pomp, and outward show,
The flattering coxcomb, and fantastic beau.
The fop's impertinence she should despise,
Though sorely wounded by her radiant eyes;
But pay due reverence to the exalted mind,
By learning polished, and by wit refined,
Who all her virtues, without guile, commends,
And all her faults as freely reprehends,
Soft Hymen's rites her passion should approve,
And in her bosom glow the flames of love:
To me her soul, by sacred friendship, turn,
And I, for her, with equal friendship burn:
In every stage of life afford relief,
Partake my joys, and sympathize my grief;
Unshaken, walk in Virtue's peaceful road,
Nor bribe her reason to pursue the mode;
Mild as the saint whose errors are forgiven,
Calm as a vestal, and composed as heaven.
This be the partner, this the lovely wife,
That should embellish and prolong my life,
A nymph! who might a second fall inspire,
And fill a glowing cherub with desire!
With her I Would spend the pleasurable day,
While fleeting minutes gayly danced away:
With her I Would walk, delighted, over the green,
Through every blooming mead, and rural scene;
Or sit in open fields damask'd with flowers,
Or where cool shades imbrown the noontide bowers,
Imparadis'd within my eager arms,
I Would reign the happy monarch of her charms;
Often on her panting bosom would I lay,
And, in dissolving raptures melt away;
Then lulled, by nightingales, to balmy rest,
My blooming fair should slumber at my breast.
And when decrepid age (frail mortals' doom)
Should bend my withered body to the tomb,
No warbling sirens should retard my flight
To heavenly mansions of unclouded light.
Though Death, with his imperial horrors crowned,
Terrific grinn'd, and formidably frowned,
Offenses pardoned, and remitted sin,
Should form a calm serenity within:
Blessing my natal and my mortal hour
(My soul committed to the eternal power)
Inexorable Death should smile, for I,
Who knew to live, would never fear to die.
SINGLE LIFE AND MATRIMONY CONTRASTED.
BY A STUDENT OF YALE COLLEGE.
THE matrimonial state -- All prudent men approve;
The wise sincerely hate -- A course of changing love;
True happiness we find -- In Hymen's silken chain,
With those who are unjoin'd -- There Is naught but fear and pain.
I Will therefore wisely dare -- To have a constant wife,
To change from fair to fair -- Is but a wretched life.
AN ORATION, Which might been delivered to the Students in Anatomy, on the late
Rupture between the two Schools in Philadelphia. A Dispute arose between the
Medical Students who had attached themselves to two Anatomical Professors, in
the city of Philadelphia. This Dispute was carried on for a considerable time,
and with great violence. Resolutions of Committees, -- Journals of Meetings, --
etc, etc were printed; and the town was threatened with a deluge of
uninteresting publications. In this situation of affairs, Dr. Hopkinson took up
the pen; and by the well-tim'd raillery of the (...) wing Poem, (...) the
contending parties; restored peace to the (...), and agreeably entertained the
Lovers of Poetry and Humor.

BY THE HON. FRANCIS HOPKINSON, ESQUIRE. ^. ^. D. Late Federal Judge for the
District of Pennsylvania, etc. etc.
THE ARGUMENT.
ADDRESS -- the folly and danger of dissension -- the Orator enumerates the
enemies of the fraternity -- reminds them of a late unseasonable interruption
-- a night scene in the Potter's Field -- he laments the want of true zeal in
the brotherhood -- and boasts of his own -- the force of a ruling passion --
the earth considered as a great animal -- the passion of love not the same in a
true son of Esoulapius as in other m^n -- his own amor -- a picture of his
mistress in high taste -- shows his learning in the description of her mouth,
arm and hand -- his mistress dies -- his grief -- and extraordinary consolation
-- his (...) fidelity -- he apologizes for giving this history of his (...) --
the great difficulties (...) have to encounter in the present times, arising
from false delicacy. prejudice and ignorance -- a strong instance in proof that
it was not so formerly -- curious argument to prove the inconsistency of the
present opinions respecting the practice -- he mentions many obstacles in the
road to science -- and reproaches them for their intestine broils, at a time
when not only popular clamor is loud, but even the powers of government are
exerted against them -- he then encourages his brethren with hopes of better
times, founded on the establishment of the College of Physicians -- is inspired
with the idea of the future glory of that institution -- and prophesies great
things.

FRIENDS and associates! lend a patient ear,
Suspend intestine broils and reason hear.
Ye followers of F -- your wrath forbear --
Ye sons of S -- your invectives spare;
The fierce dissension your high minds pursue
Is sport for others -- ruinous to you.
Surely some fatal influenza reigns.
Some epidemic rabies turns your brains --
Is this a time for brethren to engage
In public contest and in party rage?
Fell discord triumphs in your doubtful strife
And, smiling, whets her anatomic knife;
Prepared to cut our precious limbs away
And leave the bleeding body to decay --
Seek ye for foes! -- alas, my friends, look round,
In every street, see numerous foes abound!
Methinks I hear them cry, in varied tones,
"Gives us our father's, -- brother's, -- sister's bones."
Methinks I see a mob of sailor's rise --
Revenge! -- Revenge! they cry -- and dawn their eyes --
Revenge for comrade Jack, whose flesh, they say,
Y^^ mine'd to morsels and then threw away.
Methinks I see a black internal train --
The genuine offspring of accursed Cain --
Fiercely on you their angry looks are bent,
They grin and gibber dangerous discontent,
And seem to say, -- "Is there net meat enough
"Ah! massa cannibal, why eat poor CUFF?"
Even hostile watchmen stand in strong array,
And over our heads their threatening staves display,
Howl hideous discord through the noon of night,
And shake their dreadful lanthorns in our sight.
Say, are not these sufficient to engage
Your high wrought souls eternal war to wage?
Combine your strength these monsters to subdue
No friends of science and sworn foes to you;
On these, -- on these your wordy vengeance pour,
And strive our fading glory to restore.
Ah! think how, late, our mutilated rites
And midnight orgies, were by sudden frights
And loud alarms profaned -- the sacrifice,
Stretched on a board before our eager eyes,
All naked lay -- even when our chieftain stood
Like a high priest, prepared for shedding blood;
Prepared, with wondrous skill, to cut or slash
The gentle sliver or the deep drawn gash;
Prepared to plunge even elbow deep in gore
Nature and nature's secrets to explore --
Then a tumultuous cry -- a sudden fear --
Proclaimed the foe -- the enraged foe is near --
In some dark hole the hard got corse was laid,
And we, in wild confusion, fled dismayed.
Think how, like brethren, we have shared the toil,
When in the Potter's Field The Negro burial ground.
we sought for spoil:
Did midnight ghosts, and death, and horror, brave,
To delve for science in the dreary grave.
Shall I remind you of that awful night
When our compacted band maintained the fight
Against an armed host? -- fierce was the fray,
And yet we bore our sheeted prize away,
Firm on a horse's back the corse was laid,
High blowing winds the winding sheet displayed;
Swift flew the steed -- but still his burden bore --
Fear made him fleet, who never was fleet before;
Over tombs and sunken graves he cours'd around,
Nor ought respected consecrated ground.
Mean time the battle raged -- so loud the strife,
The dead were almost frightened into life;
Though not victorious, yet we scorned to yield,
Retook our prize, and left the doubtful field.
In this degenerate age, alas! how few
The paths of science with true zeal pursue?
Some trifling contest, some delusive joy,
Too often the unsteady minds of youth employ.
For me -- whom ESCULAPIUS has inspired --
I boast a soul with love of science flr'd;
By one great object is my heart possessed;
One ruling passion quite absorbs the rest;
In this bright point my hopes and fears unite,
And one pursuit alone can give delight.
To me things are not as to vulgar eyes,
I would all nature's works anatomize:
This world a living monster seems to me,
Rolling and sporting in the aerial sea;
The soil encompasses her rocks and stones,
As flesh in animals encircles bones.
I see vast ocean, like a heart in play,
Pant systole and diastole every day,
And by unnumber'd venus streams supplied
Up her broad rivers force the arterial tide.
The world's great lungs, monsoons and trade winds show
From east to west, from west to east they blow
Alternate respiration --
The hills are pimples which earth's face defile,
And burning AEtna, an eruptive boil:
On her high mountains hairy forests grow,
And downy grass o'erspreads the vales below;
From her vast body perspirations rise,
Condense in clouds and float beneath the skies.
Thus fancy, faithful servant of the heart,
Tranforms all nature by her magic art.
Even mighty LOVE, whose power all power controuls,
Is not, in me, like love in other souls;
Yet I have loved -- and CUPID'S subtle dart
Has through my pericardium pierced my heart.
Brown CADAVERA did my soul ensnare,
Was all my thought by night and daily care;
I longed to clasp, in her transcendant charms,
A living skeleton within my arms.
Long, lank and lean, my CADAVERA stood,
Like the tall pine, the glory of the wood;
Ofttimes I gazed, with learned skill to trace
The sharp edged beauties of her bony face:
There rose Os frontis prominent and bold,
In deep sunk orbits two large eye balls rolled,
Beneath those eye balls, two arched bones were seen
Whereon two flabby cheeks hung loose and lean;
Between those cheeks, protuberant arose,
In form triangular, her lovely nose:
Like EGYPT'S pyramids, it seemed to rise,
Scorn earth, and bid defiance to the skies;
Thin were her lips, and of a fallow hue,
Her open mouth exposed her teeth to view;
Projecting strong, protuberant and wide
Stood incis^res -- and on either side
The canine ranged, with many a beauteous flaw,
And last the grinders, to fill up the jaw;
All in their alveoli fixed secure,
Articulated by gomphosis sure.
Around her mouth perpetual smiles had made
Wrinkles wherein the loves and graces played;
There, stretched and rigid by continual strain,
Appeared the zygomatic muscles plain,
And broad montanus over her peeked chin
Extended to support the heavenly grin.
In amorous dalliance often I stroak'd her arm.
Each rising muscle was a rising charm.
Over the flex^res my fond fingers played,
I found instruction with delight conveyed;
There carpus, orbitus, and radius too,
Were plainly felt and manifest to view.
No muscles on her lovely hand were seen,
But only bones envelop'd by a skin.
Long were her fingers and her knuckles bare,
Much like the claw -- foot of a walnut chair.
So plain was complex matacarpus shown,
It might be fairly counted bone by bone.
Her slender phalanxes were well defined,
And each with each by ginglymus combined.
Such were the charms that did my fancy fire,
And love -- chaste scientific love inspire.
At length my CADAVERA fell beneath
The fatal stroke of all subduing death:
Three days in grief -- three nights in tears I spent,
And sighs incessant gave my sorrows vent.
Few are the examples of a love so true --
Even from her death I consolation drew,
And in a secret hour approached her grave,
Resolved her precious corse from worms to save:
With active haste removed the incumbent clay,
Seized the rich prize and bore my love away.
Her naked charms now lay before my sight,
I gazed with rapture and supreme delight,
Nor could fobrear, in ecstasy, to cry --
Beneath that shrivelled skin what treasures lie!
Then feasted to the full my amorous soul,
And skinn'd, and cut, and slashed without control.
'Twas then I saw, what long I Would wished to see,
That heart which panted often for love and me --
In detail viewed the form I once adored,
And nature's hidden mysteries explored.
Alas! too truly did the wise man say
That flesh is grass, and subject to decay:
Not so the bones; of substance firm and hard,
Long they remain the Anatomist's reward.
Wise nature in her providential care,
Did, kindly, bones from vile corruption spare,
That sons their fathers' skeletons might have,
And heaven born science triumph over the grave.
My true love's bones I boiled -- from fat and lean
These hands industrious scraped them fair and clean,
And every bone did to its place restore,
As Nature's hand had placed them long before;
These fingers twisted every pliant wire
With patient skill, urged on by strong desire.
Now what remains of CADAVERA'S mine,
Securely hanging in a case of pine.
Ofttimes I sit and contemplate her charms,
Her nodding skull and her long dangling arms,
Till quite inflamed with passion for the dead,
I take her beauteous skeleton to bed;
There stretched, at length, close to my faithful side
She lies all night, -- a lovely, grinning bride. --
Excuse, my friends, this detail of my love,
You must the intent, if not the tale, approve:
By facts exemplary I meant to show
To what extent a genuine zeal will go.
A mind, so fixed, will not be drawn aside
By vain dissentions or a partial pride;
But every hostile sentiment subdue,
And keep the ruling passion still in view.
False-delicacy -- prejudices strong,
Which no distinctions know' twixt right and wrong,
Against our noble science spend their rage,
And mark the ig'norance of this vulgar age.
Time was, when living men their flesh would spare,
And to the knife their quivering nates bare,
That skilful surgeons TALIACOTIUS.
noses might obtain
For noses lost -- and cut and come again; --
But now the living churlishly refuse
To give their dead relations to our use;
Talk of decorum -- and a thousand whims --
Whenever we hack their wives' or daughter's limbs:
And yet their tables daily they supply
With the rich fruits of sad mortality;
Will pick, and gut, and cook a chicken's corse,
Dissect and eat it up without remorse;
Devouring fish, flesh, fowl, whatever comes,
Nor fear the ghosts of murdered hecatombs.
Now where is the difference? -- to the impartial eye
A leg of mutton and a human high
Are just the same: for surely all must own
Flesh is but flesh, and bone is only bone;
And though indeed, some flesh and bone may grow
To make a monkey -- some to make a beau,
Still the materials are the same, we know.
Nor can our anatomic knowledge trace
Internal marks distinctive of our race. --
Whence, then, these loud complaints -- these hosts of foes
Combined, our useful labors to oppose?
How long shall foolish prejudices reign?
And when shall reason her just empire gain?
Ah! full of danger is the up hill road,
That leads the youth to learning's high abode:
His way thick mists of vulgar errors blind,
And sneering satire follows close behind;
Sour envy strews the rugged path with thorns,
And lazy ignorance his labor scorns.
Is this a time, ye brethren of the knife,
For civil contest and internal strife?
When loud against us general clamours cry,
And persecution lifts her lash on high?
When government -- that many headed beast --
Against our practice rears her horrid crest,
And, our noctural access to oppose,
Around the dead a penal barrier A Law past in New York, making it penal to
steal bodies from the burial ground.
throws?
To crush our schools her awful power applies,
And even forbids the gibbet's just supplies. The wheel-barrow law of
Pennsylvania.

Yet in this night of darkness storms and fears,
Behold one bright benignant star The Medical College.
appears --
Long may it shine, and, ere it is course is run,
Increase, in size and splendor, to a sun! --
Methinks I see this fun of fa^ure days,
Spread far abroad his diplomatic rays --
See life and health submit to his control,
And like a planet, death around him roll.
Methinks I see a stately fabric rise,
Reared on the skulls of these our enemies;
I see the bones of our invet'rate foes
Hang round it is walls in scientific rows.
There solemn sit the learned of the day
Dispensing death with uncontrolled sway,
And by prescription regulate with ease
The sudden crisis or the slow disease.
Then shall physicians their millennium find,
And reign the real sov'reigns of mankind:
Then shall the face of this vile world be changed,
And nature's healthful laws all new arrang'd --
In min'ral powders all her dust shall rise,
And all her insects shall be Spanish flies:
In medicated potions streams shall flow,
Pills fall in hail -- storms, and sharp salts in snow;
In every quagmire bolusses be found,
And slimy cataplasms spread the ground --
Nature herself assume the chymist's part,
And furnish poisons unsublim'd by art.
Then to our schools shall wealth in currents flow,
Our theaters no want of subjects know;
Nor laws nor mobs the Anatomist shall dread,
For graves shall freely render up their dead.
THE FEDERAL CONVENTION.
CONCENTRED here the united wisdom shines,
Of learned judges, and of found divines:
Patriots, whose virtues searching time has tried,
Heroes, who sought, where brother heroes died;
Lawyers, who speak, as Tully spoke before,
Sages, deep read in philosophic lore;
Merchants whose plans are to no realms confined,
Formers -- the noblest title amongst mankind:
Yeomen and tradesmen, pillars of the state;
On whose decision hangs Columbia's fate.
September, 1787.
ADDRESS OF THE GENIUS OF COLUMBIA, TO THE MEMBERS OF THE CONTINENTAL
CONVENTION.
BY TIMOTHY DWIGHT, D. D.
FROM western skies, a cloud of glory came,
A small, dim spot, a torch of lambent flame;
Ascending, widening, slow the skirts unroll'd,
Rainbow'd with fire, and warmed with glowing gold.
There, borne by summoned winds, in pomp sublime,
His look far-piercing down the vast of time,
Where the long, narrowing vale deserts the eye,
Unbosom'd dimly on the eternal sky,
The Genius fate. He saw, when faction spent,
No more with war his darling kingdom rent;
The stream of kindred blood forbore to flow,
And morn faint trembled over the night of woe;
Called from each sister realm, the wise and great,
In Penn's fair walls, an awful council sat;
Poised in their hands, Columbia's mighty sway,
And tottering laws, and rights, and freedom lay.
He saw, when fairer than the glow of even,
And bright as visions of disclosing heaven,
Full in his face a sacred splendor shone,
And the west kindled with another sun.
"All hail, my sons,"he cried,"my voice attend,
Your country's genius, guardian, guide, and friend:
The counsels mark, that faithful friend supplies,
Attend, and learn the dictates of the skies.
Before you, lo! what scenes of glory spread,
The fairest, brightest, noblest, heaven has made:
Their home, where freedom, science, virtue, find,
The last recesses of oppressed mankind.
The immense of empire here, amazed, descry,
Where realms are lost, and hidden oceans lie;
Where Persia's vast would sink in shades concealed,
And Rome's proud world diminish to a field.
See, from the pole, where frozen fountains rise,
And pour their waters under torrid skies,
Where Rhines and Danubes, rills and streamlets play,
To swell the pomp of Missisippi's sea;
Where a zone's breadth majestic woods extend,
And other Andes over the storms ascend;
Where meadows bound the morn and evening rays;
Where plains are kingdoms, and where lakes are seas.
See through all climes the unmeasured empire run,
And drink each influence from the lingering sun;
Pure skies unbosom'd, days serenest roll,
And gales of health, from Darien fan the pole.
In each blessed clime, to crown industrious toil;
See every product spring from every soil:
Here the fur whitens in the frozen shade;
Here flocks unnumber'd crowd the pastur'd glade;
Here threatening famine double harvests scorn --
Europe's rich grains, and India's useful corn --
Virginia's fragrant pride, huge fleets convey,
And fields of rice float cumbrous over the sea:
While all its wealth, the world of waters yields,
And treasures fill the subterranean fields.
These goods to waft wherever expands the wind,
To bless and to sustain the human kind,
See, stretched immense from Cancer to the pole,
On either side contending oceans toll;
Over this, all Europe wings her haughty sails;
Over that, all India wafts on spicy gales;
While bays, and streams, and lakes, her realms explore,
And land each product at each happy door.
To fill these realms, a generous race behold,
Of happiest genius, and of firmest mould;
In thoughts, in arts, in life, in language joined,
One says, one worship, one politic mind;
Patient, serene, in toils and dangers dire,
Their nerves of iron, and their souls of fire:
Called from all realms, these chosen sons have joined
Expansive manners, and a genial mind,
The liberal sentiment, the adventurous thought,
With greatness teeming, and with goodness fraught;
Chained to no party; by no system bound;
Confining merit to no speck of ground;
Nor Britons, Frenchmen, Germans, Swiss, or Huns,
Of earth the natives, and of heaven the sons;
Regarding, loving, all the great and good,
Of every rank, clime, party, sect, and blood.
The swain, with bliss to Europe's climes unknown.
His wife, his house, his lands, his flock, his own,
Treads, independent, on the subject soil,
Prepared for every danger, every toil;
Prepared to see antarctic oceans roll,
To circle earth, and search the lonely pole;
Or through the immense of science wind his way,
Or lift poetic wings beyond the day;
The ridgy front of death for freedom dare,
Or, round all regions, hush the voice of war.
Heaven from all climes this happy realm concealed,
While wolves and Indians roam'd the bloody field,
Till human rule a softening aspect wore,
Till war's black chariot ceased to roll in gore,
Till bigot zeal resigned his scarlet sway,
And his dread thunders puffed in smoke away.
Thus oh how blessed the era of her fate,
How bright the morning, and how long the date
For now each fair improvement of the mind,
Each nobler effort lifts the human kind;
Vast means of bliss mechanic arts combine;
All liberal arts the rugged soul refine;
Freedom, and right, and law, their reign assume,
Stern power resist, and cheer the world's sad doom;
On nature's ocean, science lifts her sails,
Finds other stars, and catches nobler gales;
While dawning virtue beams from yonder sky,
And brighter suns arise on human joy.
Such scenes of bliss, ye sages, bless your eyes:
For men, for realms like these, your plans devise.
Be then your counsels, as your subject, great,
A world their sphere, and time's long reign their date.
Each party-view, each private good, disclaim,
Each petty maxim, each colonial aim;
Let all Columbia's weal your views expand,
A mighty system rule a mighty land;
Yourselves her genuine sons let Europe own,
Not the small agents of a paltry town.
Learn, cautious, what to alter, where to mend;
See to what close projected measures tend.
From pressing wants the mind averting still,
Thinks good remotest from the present ill:
From feuds anarchial to oppression's throne,
Misguided nations hence for safety run;
And through the miseries of a thousand years,
Their fatal folly mourn in bloody tears.
Ten thousand follies through Columbia spread;
Ten thousand wars her darling realms invade.
The private interest of each jealous state;
Of rule the impatience, and of law the hate.
But ah! from narrow springs these evils flow,
A few base wretches mingle general woe;
Still the same mind her manly race pervades;
Still the same virtues haunt the hallowed shades.
But when the peals of war her center shook,
All private aims the anxious mind forsook.
In danger's iron-bond her race was one,
Each separate good, each little view unknown.
Now rule, unsystem'd, drives the mind astray;
Now private interest points the downward way
Hence civil discord pours her muddy stream,
And fools and villains float upon the brim;
Over all, the sad spectator casts his eye,
And wonders where the gems and minerals lie.
But never of freedom, glory, bliss, despond:
Uplift your eyes those little clouds beyond;
See there returning suns, with gladdening ray,
Roll on fair spring to chase this wint'ry day.
It Is yours to bid those days of Eden shine:
First, then, and last, the federal bands entwine:
To this your every aim and effort bend:
Let all your efforts here commence and end.
Over state concerns, let every state preside;
Its private tax control; its justice guide;
Religion aid; the morals to secure;
And bid each private right through time endure.
Columbia's interests public sway demand,
Her commerce, impost, unlocated land;
Her war, her peace, her military power;
Treaties to seal with every distant shore;
To bid contending states their discord cease;
To send through all the calumet of peace;
Science to wing through every noble flight;
And lift desponding genius into light.
Through every state to spread each public law,
Interest must animate, and force must awe.
Persuasive dictates realms will never obey;
Sway, uncoer^^ve, is the shade of sway.
Be then your task to alter, aid, amend;
The weak to strengthen, and the rigid bend;
The prurient lop; what is wanted to supply;
And graft new scions from each friendly sky.
Slow, by degrees, politic systems rise;
Age still refines them, and experience tries.
This, this alone consolidates, improves;
Their sinews strengthens, their defects removes;
Gives that consistence time alone can give;
Habituates men by law and right to live;
To gray-hair'd rules increasing reverence draws;
And wins the slave to love even tyrant laws.
But should Columbia, with distracted eyes,
See over her ruins one proud monarch rise:
Should vain partitions her fair realms divide,
And rival empires float on faction's tide;
Lo fixed opinions against the fabric rage!
What wars, fierce passions with fierce passions wage!
From Cancer's glowing wilds, to Brunswick's shore,
Hark, how the alarms of civil discord roar!
"To arms,"the trump of kindled warfare cries,
And kindred blood smokes upward to the skies.
As Persia, Greece, so Europe bids her flame,
And smiles, with eye malignant, over her shame.
Seize then, oh! seize Columbia's golden hour;
Perfect her federal system, public power;
For this stupendous realm, this chosen race,
With all the improvements of all lands its base,
The glorious structure build; its breadth extend;
Its columns lift, its mighty arches bend!
Or freedom, science, arts, its stories shine,
Unshaken pillars of a frame divine;
For over the Atlantic wild its beams aspire,
The world approves it, and the heavens admire;
Over clouds, and suns, and stars, its splendours rise,
Till the bright top-stone vanish in the skies."
COLUMBIA.
BY THE SAME.
COLUMBIA, Columbia, to glory rise,
The queen of the world, and child of the skies!
Thy genius commands thee; with rapture behold,
While ages on ages thy splendours unfold.
Thy reign is the last, and the noblest of time,
Most fruitful thy soil, most inviting thy clime;
Let the crimes of the east never encrimson thy name,
Be freedom, and science, and virtue, thy same
To conquest, and slaughter, let Europe aspire;
Whelm nations in blood, and wrap cities in fire:
Thy heroes the rights of mankind shall defend,
And triumph pursue them, and glory attend.
A world is thy realm: for a world be thy laws,
Enlarged as thine empire, and just as thy cause;
On Freedom's broad basis, that empire shall rise,
Extend with the main, and dissolve with the skies.
Fair Science her gates to thy sons shall unbar,
And the east see thy morn hide the beams of her star.
New bards, and new sages, unrivaled shall soar
To fame, unextinguish'd, when time is no more;
To thee, the last refuge of virtue designed,
Shall fly from all nations the best of mankind;
Here, grateful to heaven, with transport shall bring
Their incense, more fragrant than odours of spring.
Nor less shall thy fair ones to glory ascend,
And Genius and Beauty in harmony blend;
The graces of form shall awake pure desire,
And the charms of the soul ever cherish the fire;
Their sweetness unmingled, their manners refined,
And Virtue's bright image, instamp'd on the mind,
With peace, and soft rapture, shall teach life to glow,
And light up a smile in the aspect of woe.
Thy sleets to all regions thy power shall display,
The nations admire, and the ocean obey;
Each shore to thy glory its tribute unsold,
And the east and the south yield their spices and gold.
As the dayspring unbounded, thy splendor shall flow,
And earth's little kingdoms before thee shall bow;
While the ensigns of union, in triumph unfurled,
Hush the tumult of war, and give peace to the world.
Thus, as down a lone valley, with cedars o'er^ spread,
From war's dread confusion I pensively strayed --
The gloom from the face of fair heaven retired;
The winds ceased to murmur; the thunder expired;
Perfumes, as of Eden, flowed sweetly along,
And a voice, as of angels, enchantingly sung:
"Columbia, Columbia, to glory arise,
The queen of the world, and the child of the skies."
THE SEASONS MORALIZED.
BY THE SAME.
BEHOLD the changes of the skies,
And see the circling seasons rise;
Hence, let the moral truth refined,
Improve the beauty of the mind.
Winter, late with dreary reign,
Ruled the wide, unjoyous plain;
Gloomy storms with solemn roar
Shook the hoarse, resounding shore.
Sorrow cast her sadness round,
Life and joy forsook the ground,
Death, with wild imperious sway,
Bade the expiring world decay.
Now cast around thy raptured eyes,
And see the beauteous spring arise;
See, flowers invest the hills again,
And streams re-murmur over the plains.
Hark, hark, the joy inspiring grove
Echoes to the voice of love;
Balmy gales the sound prolong,
Wasting round the woodland song.
Such the scenes our life displays,
Swiftly fleet our rapid days;
The hour that rolls forever on,
Tells us our years must soon be gone.
Sullen Death, with mournful gloom
Sweeps us downwards to the tomb;
Life, and health, and joy decay,
Nature sinks and dies away.
But the soul in gayest bloom,
Disdains the bondage of the tomb;
Ascends above the clouds of even,
And, raptured, hails her native heaven.
Youth, and peace, and beauty there
Forever dance around the year;
An endless joy invests the pole,
And streams of ceaseless pleasure roll.
Light, and joy, and grace divine
With bright and lasting glory shine:
Jehovah's smiles, with heavenly ray,
Diffuse a clear, unbounded day.
ELEGY ON THE TIMES.
FIRST PRINTED AT BOSTON, SEPT. 20TH. 1774.
BY JOHN TRUMBULL, ESQUIRE.
OH BOSTON! late with every pleasure crowned,
Where Commerce triumphed on the ^avouring gales,
And each pleased eye, that roved in prospect round,
Hailed thy bright spires and blessed thy opening fails!
Thy plenteous marts with rich profusion smiled;
The gay throng crowded in thy spacious streets;
From either IND thy cheerful stores were filled;
Thy ports were gladden'd with unnumber'd sleets.
For there more fair than in their native vales,
Tall groves of masts arose in beauteous pride;
The waves were whitened by the swelling sails,
And plenty wasted on the neighboring ^ide.
Alas, how changed! the swelling fails no more
Catch the fair winds and wanton in the sky;
But hostile beaks affright the guarded shore,
And pointed thunders all access deny.
Where the bold Cape its warning forehead rears,
Where tyrant Vengeance waved her magic wand,
Far from the sight each friendly vessels veers,
Calls the kind gales and sties the fatal strand.
The ruined merchant turn his mournful eyes
From the drear shore and desolated way;
Thy silent marts unusual glooms surprise,
And through thy streets the sons of rapine stray.
Such the dread stillness of the desert night,
When brooding horror settles on the groves;
While powers of darkness claim their hateful right,
And fierce for prey the savage tiger roves.
Along thy fields, which late in beauty shone
With lowing herd and grassy vesture fair,
The insulting tents of barbarous troops are strown,
And bloody standards stain the peaceful air.
Are these thy deeds, oh Britain? this the praise,
That points the growing luster of thy name?
These glorious works that in thy latter days,
Gild the bright period of thine early fame?
Shall thy strong fleets, with awful sails unfurled,
On Freedom's shrines the unhallowed vengeance bend?
And leave forlorn the desolated world,
Crushed -- every foe, and ruined -- every friend:
And damped, alas! thy soul-inspiring ray,
Where Virtue prompted and where Genius soared,
Or quenched in darkness and the gloomy sway
Of Senates venal and the liveried Lord!
There shame sits blazoned on the unmeaning brow,
And over the scene thy factious Nobles wait,
Prompt the mixed tumult of the noisy show,
Guide the blind vote and rule the mock debate.
To these how vain, in weary woes forlorn,
With fearful hands the fond complaint to raise,
Lift fruitful offering to the ear of Scorn --
Of servile vows and well-dissembled praise!
Will the grim savage of the nightly fold
Learn from their cries the blameless flock to spare?
Will the deaf gods, that frown in molten gold,
Bless the dup'd hand, that spreads the prostrate prayer?
With what pleased hope before the face of Pride,
We reared our suppliant eyes with filial awe;
While loud Disdain with ruffian voice replied,
And Injury triumphed in the garb of Law!
While Peers enraptured hail the unmanly wrong,
See Ribaldry, vile prostitute of shame,
Stretch the bribed hand and prompt the venal tongue,
To blast the laurels of a FRANKLIN'S fame!
But will the Sage, whose philosophic soul,
Controlled the lightning in its fierce career,
Heard unappal'd the aerial thunders roll,
And taught the bolts of vengeance where to steer; --
Will he, while echoing to his just renown
The voice of kingdoms swells the loud applause;
Heed the weak malice of a Courtier's frown,
Or dread the coward insolence of laws?
See envying Britain rends the sacred bays;
Illuded Justice pens the mock decree;
While infamy her darling scroll displays,
And points, well pleased, oh, WEEDERBURNE, to thee!
For naught avails the virtues of the heart,
The vengeful bolt no Muse's laurels ward;
From Britain's rage, and death's relentless dart,
No worth can save us, and no same can guard.
Over hallowed bounds see dire Oppression roll;
Fair Freedom buried in the whelming flood;
Nor charter'd rights the tyrant course control,
Though sealed by Kings and witnessed in our blood.
No more shall Justice, with unbiased hand,
From lawless Rapine snatch her trembling prey,
While in her balance by supreme command
Hang the dead weights of ministerial sway.
(For taught by pain, our injured bosoms feel
The potent claims whence all our woes began,
And own supreme the power, that could repeal,
Those laws of heaven, that guard the rights of man.)
In vain we hope from Britain's haughty pride
An hand to save us, or an heart to bless;
It Is strength, our own, must stem the rushing tide,
And our own virtue yield the wished success.
But, oh, my friends, the arm of blood This is not meant as a caution against
defending our rights with (...) if we should be driven to that (...) but only
against the (...) zeal of those, who seem (...) to (...) of popular resentment,
and bring matters (...) to a crisis in this Province.
restrain!
(No rage intemperate aids the public weal)
No (...) (too daring, but in vain)
The assassin's madness with the patriot's zeal.
Shall the fields blush, with vital crimson stained,
When blind resentment marks the victim'd breast?
Will reeking life, by vengeful hands profaned,
Our wrongs relieve, or charm our woes to rest?
Ours be the manly firmness of the sage,
From shameless foes the ungrateful wounds to bear;
Alike removed from baseness and from rage,
The flames of faction, and the chills of fear.
Check the vast torrent of commercial gain,
That buys our ruin at a price so rare;
And while we scorn Britannia's servile chain,
Disdain the livery of her marts to wear.
For shall the lust of fashions and of show,
The cursed idolatry of silks and lace,
Bid our proud robes insult our Country's woe,
And welcome Slavery in the glare of dress?
Will the blind dupe, in liveried tinsel gay,
Boast the shamed trappings, that adorn the slave?
Will the fond mourner change his sad array,
To attend in gorgeous pomp a parent's grave?
No! the rich produce of our fertile soil,
Shall cloth the neatness of our cheerful train,
While heaven-born virtues bless the pious toil,
And gild the humble vestures of the plain.
No foreign labor in the Asian field
Shall weave her silks to deck the wanton age,
But, as in Rome, the surrow'd vale shall yield
The unvanquish'd Chieftain and paternal Sage.
And ye, whose heaven in ermin'd pomp to shine,
To run with joy the vain, luxurious round,
Bless the full banquet with the charms of wine,
And roll the thundering chariot over the ground*
For this, while guis'd in sycophantic smile,
With hearts all mindless of your country's pain,
Your flattering falsehoods feed the ears of Guile,
And barter freedom for the dreams of gain!
Are these the joys, on vassal'd climes that wait --
In downs of ease luxuriant to repose,
Quaff streams nectareous in the domes of state,
And blaze in splendor of imperial shows?
No -- the hard hand, the tortured brow of care.
The thatch-roof'd hamlet and defenseless shed,
The tattered garb, that meets the inclement air,
The famished table, and the matted bed. --
These are their fate -- In vain the arm of toil
With gifts autumnal crowns the bearded plain;
In vain glad Summer prompts the genial soil,
And Spring dissolves in softening showers vain;
There savage Power extends his dismal shade,
And chill Oppression, with her frosts severe.
Sheds her dire blastings over the springing blade,
And robs the expecting labors of the year.
So must we sink? -- and at the stern command
That bears the terrors of a tyrant's word,
Bend the crouch'd knee and raise the suppliant hand,
The scorned, dependant, vassals of a Lord?
The winery ravage of the storm to meet,
Brave the scorched vapors of the autumnal air,
Then pour the hard-earned harvest at his feet,
And beg some pittance from our pains to share?
But not for this, by heaven and virtue led,
From the mad rule of hierarchal pride,
From slavish chains our injured fathers fled,
And followed freedom on the adventurous tide;
Dared the wild horrors of these climes unknown,
The insidious savage, and the crimsoned plain,
To us bequeathed the prize, their woes had won,
Nor deemed they suffered, or they bled in vain.
And think thou, NORTH, the sons of such a race,
Where beams of glory blessed their purpled morn,
Will shrink unnerv'd before a tyrant's face,
Nor meet thy louring insolence with scorn?
Look through the circuit of the extended shore,
That checks the surges of the Atlantic deep!
What weak eye trembles at the frown; of power?
What leaden soul invites the bands of sleep?
How Goodness warms each heaven-illumin'd heart!
What generous gifts the woes of want assuage,
And sympathetic tears of pity start,
To aid the destined victims of thy rage!
No clamourous faction, with unhallowed zeal,
To wayward madness wakes the impassioned throng;
No thoughtless furies sheath their breasts with steel,
Or call the sword to avenge the oppressive wrong.
Fraternal bands with vows accordant join;
One Guardian Genius, one enrapturing Soul
Nerves the bold arm, inflames the just design,
Combines, inspires, and illumes, the whole.
Now meet the Fathers of this western clime;
Nor names more noble graced the rolls of same,
When Spartan firmness braved the wrecks of time,
Or Rome's bold virtues fanned the heroic flame'
Not deeper thought the immortal Sage inspired,
On Solon's lips when Grecian senates hung;
Nor manlier eloquence the bosom fired,
When genius thundered from the Athenian tongue.
And hopes thy pride to match the patriot strain,
By the bribed slave in pension'd lists enrolled;
Or awe their councils by the voice profane,
That wakes to utterance at the calls of gold?
Can frowns of terror da^nt the warrior's deeds,
Where guilt is stranger to the ingenious heart?
Or Craft illude, where godlike Science sheds
The beams of knowledge and the gifts of art?
Go, raise thy hand, and with its magic power
Pencil with night the sun's ascending ray,
Bid the broad veil eclipse the noontide hour,
And damps of Stygian darkness shroud the day. --
(Such night as lours over Britain's fated land,
Where rayless shades the darkened throne surround;
Nor deeper glooms at Moses' waving wand,
Poured their thick horrors over the Memphian ground.)
Bid heaven's dread thunders at thy voice expire,
Or chain the angry vengeance of the waves;
Then hope thy breath can chill the eternal fire,
And free souls pinion with the bonds of slaves.
Thou can not hope -- Attend the flight of days,
View the bold deeds, that wait the dawning age,
Where Time's strong arm, that rules the mighty maze,
Shifts the proud actors on this earthly stage!
Then tell us, NORTH, -- for thou art sure to know;
For have not kings and fortune made thee great?
Or lurks not genius in the ennobled brow,
And dwells not wisdom in the robes of state?
Tell how the powers of luxury and pride
Taint thy pure zephyrs with their poisoned breath;
How dark Corruption spreads the envenomed tide,
And Britain trembles on the verge of death.
And tell how, rapt by Freedom's deathless flame,
And fost'ring influence of the favoring skies,
This Western World, the last recess of same,
Sees in her wilds a newborn empire rise:
A newborn Empire, whose ascendant hour
Defies the foes, that would its life destroy,
And like Alcides, with its infant power
Shall crush those serpents, who its rest annoy.
Then look through time, and with extended eye,
Pierce the deep veil of fate's obscure domain!
The morning dawns, the effulgent star is nigh,
And crimsoned glories deck her rising reign!
Behold afar, beneath the cloud of days,
Where rest the wonders of ascending fame;
What heroes rise, immortal heirs of praise!
What fields of death with conquering standards flame!
See her thronged cities warlike gates unfold!
What towering armies stretch their banners wide,
Where cold Ontario's icy waves are rolled,
Or far Altama's silver waters glide!
Lo from the groves, the aspiring cliffs that shade,
Ascending pines the surging ocean brave,
Rise in tall masts, the floating canvas spread,
And rule the dread dominions of the wave!
Where her clear rivers pour the mazy tide,
The laughing lawns in full luxuriance bloom,
The golden harvest spreads her wanton pride,
The flowery garden breathes a glad perfume.
Her potent voice shall hush the storms of fate,
Where the meads blossom or the billows roar;
And cities, gay with sumptuous domes of state,
Stretch their bright turrets on the sounding shore.
There mark that Coast, which seats of wealth surround,
That haven, rich with many a flowing sail,
Where mighty ships, from earth's remotest bound,
Float on the chearly pinions of the gale.
There BOSTON smiles, no more the sport of scorn,
And meanly imprisoned by thy fleets no more;
And far as ocean's billowy tides are borne,
Lifts her seared ensigns of imperial power.
So smile the shores, where lordly Hudson strays,
(Whose floods fair YORK and proud ALBANIA lave)
Or PHILADELPHIA'S happier clime surveys
Her glist'ring spires in Schuylkyll's lucid wave.
Or southward far extend thy wondering eyes,
Where fertile streams the garden'd vales divide;
And mid the peopled fields distinguished rise
Virginian towers, and Charleston's spiry pride.
Genius of arts, of manners and of arms,
See decked with glory and the blooms of grace,
This Virgin clime unfolds her brighter charms,
And gives her beauties to thy fond embrace
Hark, from the glades, and every listening spray,
What heaven-born Muses wake the enraptured song!
The vocal shades attune the enchanting lay,
And echoing vales harmonious strains prolong.
Through the vast series of descending years,
That lose their currents in the eternal wave,
Till heaven's last trump shall rend the affrighted spheres,
And open each empire's everlasting grave;
Propitious skies the joyous field shall crown,
And robe her valleys in perpetual prime,
And ages blessed of undisturbed renown,
Beam their mild radiance over the imperial clime.
And where is BRITAIN? -- In the skirt of day,
Where stormy Neptune rolls his utmost tide,
Where suns oblique diffuse a feeble ray,
And lonely waves the sated coasts divide;
See thou yon Isle, whose desert landscape yields
The mournful traces of the same she bore;
Where matted thorns oppress the cultured fields,
And piles of ruin choke the dreary shore? --
From those loved seats, the Virtues sad withdrew,
From fell Corruption's bold and venal hand;
Reluctant Freedom waved her last adieu,
And Devastation swept the vassal'd land.
On her white cliffs, the pillars once of same,
Her melancholy Genius sits to wail;
Drops the fond tear, and over her latest shame,
Bids dark Oblivion draw her sable veil.
AN ELEGY, On the death of Mr. BUCKINGHAM Sr. JOHN; who was drowned in his
passage from New Haven to Norwalk, May 5th, 1771.
BY THE SAME.
THE world now yields to night's returning sway;
The deeper glooms lead on the solemn hour,
And call my steps, beneath the moon's pale ray,
To roam in SADNESS on the sea-beat shore.
Now glide the inconstant shadows over the plain,
The broad moon swimming through the broken clouds,
The gleam of waters brightens on the main,
And anchored navies lift their wavering shrouds.
Deep silence reigns; save on the moory ground,
The long reed rustling to the passing gales,
The noise of dashing waves, and hollow sound
Of rushing winds, that murmur through the sails.
Far hence, ye pleasures of a mind at ease,
The sprightly joys, that rural scenes can yield,
When spring, led jocund by the softening breeze,
Wakes the glad morn, and robes the dewy field
Far be the giddy raptures of the gay,
The midnight joys licentious youth can share,
When ruin, smiling over her destined prey,
In sweet allurements hides the deadly snare.
Mine be the music of the rolling wave,
The moonlight shadows and surrounding gloom;
Mine the dread haunts of contemplation grave,
That lift the soul to scenes beyond the tomb.
Here while deep midnight holds her silent reign,
And fancy bears the ravished thought along,
Dark melancholy spreads her airy train,
And friendship calls, and grief inspires the song.
As through these mournful glooms I stretched my sight,
'Mid sounds of death, that bid the soul attend,
'Mid empty forms, and fleeting shapes of night,
Slowly I view a white-rob'd shade ascend,
That says -- "I once was St. John! from the bounds
Of unknown realms beneath the dreary wave,
Where ever-restless floods, in nightly rounds,
Roll their dark surges over my watery grave;
From seats, which never to mortal sight displayed,
The gates of dread eternity surround,
In night concealed, and death's impervious shade,
My voice ascends: attend the warning sound!
Oh thou, attend! who flushed with early bloom,
In life's new spring, and vernal sweetness gay,
Heedless of fate, that must thy branch entomb,
Spread'st thy green blossoms to the morning ray.
With thee how late, how like, alas! to thee;
To mortal joys, by opening youth beguiled,
I stretched my airy wish, and followed free,
Where pleasure triumphed, and where fancy smiled.
Then, while fond hope her glittering pinions spread,
Pointing to climes beyond the distant wave, Mr. St. John was meditating a
voyage to Europe.

Even then, unnotic'd, over my destined head,
Hung death's dire form, and sealed me for the grave.
How vain the thought for many a joyous morn,
To taste of raptures unallay'd by woe!
At once from life and every other pleasure torn,
From all I wished, and all I loved below.
The faithless morning, on our opening sails,
Smiled out serene, and smoothed our gliding way,
While the gay vessel, fanned by breathing gales,
Played on the placid bosom of the sea.
When lo, descending on the darkening wind
Burst the dire storm, -- and feeble to sustain
The rushing blasts, in warring fury joined,
The frail skiff sinks beneath the surging main.
And see, afar the oarless boat conveys
The trembling sailors to the distant shore;
Alone, of aid bereft, with one last gaze,
I sunk in deeps: and sunk to rise no more.
In that sad hour, what fearful scenes arise,
What pangs distress, what unknown fears dismay!
When future worlds disclosing on our eyes,
The trembling soul forsakes the kindred day:
Before the awful bar, the Almighty throne,
In dread I Have stood the Eternal Judge to see,
And fixed in bliss, or doomed to endless moan,
Have heard the long, the unrevers'd decree:
Nor earth must know the rest." -- Where art thou now,
In youthful joys my partner and my friend;
Of those blessed hours thy fortune gave below,
Of all our hopes is this the fatal end?
Ah what availed that energy of mind,
The heights of science, and of arts to explore,
That early led where genius unconfined,
Spreads her glad feast, and opes her classic store!
Ah what availed, in earthly bliss so frail,
The fame gay dawning on thy rising years!
Ah what availed, -- for what could then avail? --
Thy friend's deep sorrows, or thy country's tears!
In pleasure's paths, by vivid fancy led,
'Mid every hope that blooming worth could raise,
The wings of death with fatal horror spread,
Blank'd the bright promise of thy future days.
So, from the louring west, the darkened clouds
Rush on the sun and dim his orient ray,
And hateful night in glooms untimely shrouds
The ascending glories of the vernal day.
Adieu, my friend, so dear in vain, adieu,
Till some short days their fleeting courses roll;
Soon shall our steps thine earlier fate pursue,
Moved in the race, and crowding to the goal.
The approaching hour shall see the sun no more,
Wheel his long course, or spread his golden ray,
Soon the vain dream of mortal life be over,
The brightness dawning of celestial day.
Then joined in bliss, as once in friendship joined,
May pitying Heaven our purer spirits raise,
Each crime atoned, each virtue well refined,
To pass a blessed eternity of praise! --
AMBITION.
AN ELEGY.
BY THE SAME.
HENCE, gaudy Flattery, with thy siren song,
Thy fading laurels, and thy trump of praise,
Thy magic glass that cheats the wondering throng,
And bids vain men, grow vainer, while they gaze.
For what the gain, though nature have supplied
A tender soul, to feel the sting of pain?
That same how poor, that lifts our baseless pride,
And shows the heights our steps must never attain!
How vain those thoughts that through creation rove,
Returning fraught with images of woe!
Those gifts how vain that please not those we love!
With grief oppressed, how small the gain to know!
And oh, that (...) in life's sequestered shade,
Had fixed the limits of my silent way,
Far from the scenes in noisy pomp arrayed,
Where hope and fame but flatter to betray.
The lark had called me at the birth of dawn,
My cheerful toils and rural sports to share;
Nor when mild evening glimmer'd on the lawn,
Had sleep been frighted at the voice of care.
So the soft flocks in harmless pleasure stray,
Or sport in rapture on the flowery mead,
Enjoy the beauties of the vernal day,
And no sad prescience tells them they must bleed
Then wild ambition never had swelled my heart,
Nor had my stepped pursued the road to fame;
Thou never had slander raised the envenomed dart,
Nor hung in vengeance over my hated name.
Nor views of bliss that never must be mine,
Urged the fond tear or swelled the bursting sigh;
Nor tenderest pangs had bid my soul repine,
Nor torture warned me that my hopes must die.
F^^ewel, ye glittering phantoms of the mind,
The golden vision, or ambitious dream,
The fickle forms by fairy fancy joined,
The pride of laurels and the muse's theme.
Vain hope, adieu^ thou dear deluding cheat,
Whose magic charm can (...) the bonds of pain;
(...) decoyed, we clasp the gay deceit,
And plan the scenes of future joys in vain.
(...) Sadness! come mild sister of Despair,
(...) helpless (...) l^st support and friend,
(...) scenes (...) sooth the wretch's care,
Where life's false joys, and life itself, must end!
Well pleased, I wander over the solemn ground,
Where Death in horror holds his (...) domain,
While (...) sits gloomy in the (...) round,
And swimming vapors cloud the dreary plain.
Ye ghosts, the tenants of the evening skies,
That sweep in sadness over the dust, vale,
Enrob'd in mists, I see your forms arise;
I hear your voices sounding in the gale!
Of life ye speak, and life's fantastic toys,
How vain the wish, that grasps at (...) below!
How disappointment lours on all our (...)
And hope bequeaths the legacy of woe!
Ye too, perhaps, while youth supplied its beam,
On fancy's pinions soaring to the sky,
Fed your deluded thoughts with many a dream,
Of love and ^ame, and future scenes of joy.
Like yours how soon our empty years shall fade,
Past, like the vapors that in clouds (...)
Past, like the forms that slit along the (...)
Ourselves as worthless, and as vain as they!
Here the kind haven greets our weary sail,
When the rude voyage of troubled life is over,
Safe from the stormy blast, the faithless gale,
The gulphs that threaten, and the waves that roar.
The heart no more the pains of love shall share,
Nor torturing grief the wayward (...) enslave,
Through toil -- worn years fatigued with restless care,
Peace, sought in vain, awaits us in the grave.
Nor peace, alone! death breaks the sullen gloom,
That (...) the portals of e^^^nal day.
(...) the freed soul her nobler powers (...)
And wing from woes her heaven directed way.
Fly hence ye shades! ye brighter scenes arise!
Ye joys celestial, opening on my view!
Vanish, ye griefs, that dwell beneath the skies,
Ye streaming tears, ye fond complaints, adieu!
A SONG.
BY TIMOTHY DWIGHT, D. D.
LOOK, lovely maid, on yonder flower,
And see that busy fly,
Made for the enjoyment of an hour,
And only born to die.
See, round the rose he lighty moves,
And wantons in the sun,
His little life in joy improves,
And lives, before it is gone.
From this instinctive wisdom, learn,
The present hour to prize;
Nor leave to-day's supreme concern,
'Till morrow's morn arise.
Say, lov'liest fair, can thou divine
That morrow's hidden doom?
Know thou, if cloudless skies will shine,
Or heaven be wrapped in gloom?
Fond man, the trifle of a day,
Enjoys the morning light,
Nor knows, his momentary play
Must end, before it is night.
The present joys are all we claim;
The past are in the tomb;
And, like the poet's dream of fame,
The future never come.
No longer then, fair maid, delay
The promised scenes of bliss;
Nor idly give another day,
The joys assigned to this.
If then my breast can soothe thy care,
Twill now that care allay:
If joy this hand can yield, my fair,
'Twill yield that joy today.
Quit then, oh quit! thou lovely maid,
Thy bashful, virgin pride;
Today the happy plot be laid,
The bands, tomorrow, tied!
The purest joys shall be our own,
That ever to man were given;
And those bright scenes, on earth begun,
Shall brighter shine in heaven.
THE CRITICS.
A FABLE.
Written September 1785.
'To every general rule there are exceptions.'
COMMON SENSE.
BY THE SAME.
IT IS said of every dog that is found,
Of mongrel, spaniel, cur, and hound;
That each sustains a doggish mind,
And hates the new, sublime, refined.
It Is hence the wretches bay the moon,
In beauty throned at highest noon;
Hence every nobler brute they bite,
And hunt the stranger-dog with spite;
And hence, the nose's dictates parrying,
They fly from meat to feed on carrion.
It Is also said, the currish soul
The critic race possesses whole;
As near they come, in thoughts and natures,
As two legged can, to four legged creatures;
Alike the things they love and blame,
Their voice, and language, much the same.
The Muse this subject made her theme,
And told me in a morning dream.
Such dreams you sages may decry;
But Muses know they never lie.
Then hear, from me, in grave narration,
Of these strange facts, the strange occasion.
In Greece Cynethe's village lay,
Well known to all, who went that way,
For dogs of every kindred famed,
And from true doggish manners named.
One morn, a greyhound passed the street;
At once the soul-mouth'd conclave met,
Huddling around the stranger ran,
And thus their smart review began.
"What tramper"with a grinning sneer,
Barked out the clumsy cur,"is here?
No native of the town, I see;
Some foreign whelp of base degree.
I Would show, but that the record's torn,
We true Welsh curs are better born.
His coat is smooth; but longer hair
Would more become a dog by far.
His slender ear, how strait and sloping!
While ours is much improved by cropping."
"Right,"cried the blood-hound,"that strait ear
Seems made for nothing, but to hear;
It Is long agreed, through all the town,
That handsome ears, like mine, hang down;
And though his body's gaunt, and round,
It Is no true rawboned gaunt of hound.
How high his nose the creature carries!
As if on bags, and flies, his fare is;
I Will teach this strutting stupid log,
To smell's the business of a dog."
"Baugh-waugh!"the shaggy spaniel cried,
"What wretched covering on his hide!
I wonder where he lives in winter;
His strait, sleek legs too, out of joint are:
I hope the vagrant will not dare
His fledging with my fleece compare.
He never plunged in pond or river,
To search for wounded duck and diver;
By kicks would soon be set a skipping,
Nor take, one half so well, a whipping."
"Rat me,"the lap dog yelp'd,"through nature,
Was ever seen so coarse a creature?
I hope no lady's sad mishap
Ever led the booby to her lap;
He Would fright PRIMRILLA into fits,
And rob FOOLERIA of her wits;
A mere barbarian, Indian whelp!
How clownish, countryish, sounds his yelp!
He never tasted bread and butter,
Nor played the petty squirm and flutter;
Nor ever, like me, has learned to satin,
On kisses sweet, and softest patting."
"Some parson's dog, I vow,"whined puppy;
"His rusty coat how sunburned! stop ye!"
The beagle called him to the wood.
The bull-dog bellowed,"Zounds! and blood!"
The wolf-dog and the mastiff were,
The Muse says, an exception here;
Superior both to such foul play,
They wished the stranger well away.
From spleen the strictures rose to sury,
"Villain,"growl'd one,"I cannot endure you."
"Let Us seize the truant,"snarl'd another,
Encored by every soul-mouth'd brother.
"'It Is done,"barked all,"we'll mob the creature,
And sacrifice him to ill nature."
The greyhound, who despised their breath,
Still thought it best to shun their teeth.
Easy he winged his rapid flight,
And left the scoundrels not of sight.
Good JUNO, by the ancients holden,
The genuine notre-dame of scolding,
Sat pleased, because there'd such a fuss been,
And in the hound's place wished her husband;
For here, even pleasure bade her own,
Her ladyship was once outdone.
"Hail dogs,"she cried,"of every kind!
Retain ye still this snarling mind,
Hate all that is good, and fair, and new,
And I Will a goddess be to you.
Nor this the only good you prove;
Learn what the fruits of JUNO'S love.
Your souls, from forms, that creep all four on,
I Will raise, by system Pythagorean,
To animate the human frame,
And gain my favorite tribe a name.
Be ye henceforth (so I ordain)
Critics, the genuine curs of men.
To snarl be still your highest bliss,
And all your criticism like this.
Whatever is great, or just, in nature,
Of graceful form, or lovely feature;
Whate'r adorns the ennobled mind,
Sublime, inventive, and refined;
With spleen, and spite, forever blame,
And load with every dirty name.
All things of noblest kind and use.
To your own standard vile reduce,
And all in wild confusion blend,
Nor heed the subject, scope, or end.
But chief, when modest young beginners,
Against critic laws, by nature sinners,
Peep out in verse, and dare to run,
Through towns and villages your own,
Hunt them, as when you stranger dog
Set all your growling crew agog;
Till stunned, and scared, they hide from view,
And leave the country clear for you."
This said, the goddess kind caressing,
Gave every cur a double blessing.
Each doggish mind, though grown no bigger,
Henceforth assumed the human figure,
The body walked on two; the mind
To four, still chose to be confined;
Still creeps on earth, still scents out foes,
Is still led onward by the nose;
Hates all the good, it used to hate,
The lofty, beauteous, new, and great;
The stranger hunts with spite quintessent,
And snarls, from that day to the present.
EPISTLE TO COLONEL HUMPHREYS.
BY THE SAME.
FROM realms, where nature sports in youthful prime,
Where Hesper lingers over his darling clime,
Where sunny genius lights his sacred flame,
Where rising science casts her morning beam,
Where empire's final throne in pomp ascends,
Where pilgrim Freedom finds her vanished friends,
The world renews, and man from eastern fires,
Phoenix divine, again to Heaven aspires,
Health to my friend this happy verse conveys,
His fond attendant over the Atlantic seas.
Health to my friend let every wish prolong;
Be this the burden of each artless song;
This in the prayer of every morn arise;
Thou angel guardian, waft it to the skies!
His devious course let fostering Heaven survey;
Nor (...) beside, nor foes arrest his way.
Nor health alone -- may bliss thy path attend;
May truth direct thee, and may peace befriend;
From virtue's fount thy taintless actions flow;
The shield of conscience blunt the dart of woe;
To rising bliss refined above alloy,
Where budding wishes blossom into joy,
Where glory dwells, where saints and seraphs sing,
Let Heaven, in prospect, tempt thy lifted wing.
Me the same views, the same soft tide of cares,
Bear gently onward down the stream of years,
Still the same duties call my course along;
Still grows, at times, the pain-deluding song;
Still scenes domestic earthly joys refine,
Where blessed Maria mingles cares with mine;
The same fond circle still my life endears,
Where Fairfield's elms, or Stamford's groupe appears;
Or where, in rural guise, around me smile
Mansions of peace, and Greenfield's beauteous hill;
Still to my cot the friend delighted hies,
And one loved parent waits beneath the skies.
To thee, far summoned from each native scene,
With half the breadth of this wide world between,
How blessed the news my happy verse conveys,
Of friends, divided by interfluent seas?
Health, peace, and competence, their walks surround,
On the bright margin of yon beauteous Sound;
Where Hartford sees the first of waters glide,
Or where thy Avon winds his silver tide.
Yet thou must mourn a friend, Major Elijah Humphreys, brother to Colonel
Humphreys, who died in the West Indies, in 1785.
a brother dear,
And over departed merit drop a tear.
Him sense illum'd, the hero's warmth inspired,
Grace taught to please, and patriot virtue fired;
Alike in peace, in war, at home, abroad,
Worth gained him honor, where his footsteps trod;
Yet all in vain: his laureled garlands bloom;
But waste their beauty on the untimely tomb.
Meantime, invited over the Atlantic tide,
Where arts refined allure thy feet aside,
May thou, unmoved by splendour's painted charms,
And steeled, when pleasure smiling spreads her arms,
The great simplicity of soul retain,
The humble fear of Heaven, and love of man.
When round thy course temptations sweetly throng,
When warbling sirens chant the luscious song,
When wealth's fair bubble beams its hues a far,
When grandeur calls thee to her golden car,
When pleasure opes the bosom bright of joy,
And the died serpent gazes to destroy;
Oh! may the heavenly Guide thy passions warm,
Up virtue's hills thy feet resistless charm,
Show thee what crowns reward the glorious strife,
And quicken fainting duty into life.
Often has thine eyes, with glance indignant seen
Columbia's youths, unfolding into men,
Their minds to improve, their manners to adorn,
To Europe's climes by fond indulgence borne;
Often have thou seen those youths, at custom's shrine,
Victims to pride, to folly, and to sin,
Of worth bereft, of real sense forlorn,
Their land forget, their friends, their freedom spurn;
Each noble cause, each solid good desert,
For splendor happiness, and truth for art;
The plain, frank manners of their race despise,
Fair without fraud, and great without disguise;
Where, through the life the heart uncovered ran,
And spoke the native dignity of man.
For these, the gain let Virtue blush to hear,
And each sad parent drop the plaintive tear!
Trained in soul stews, impoison'd by the stage,
Hoyl'd into gaming, key (...) into age,
To smooth hypocrisy by Stanhope led,
To truth ^n alien, and to virtue dead,
Swollen with an English butcher's four disdain,
Or to a fribble dwindled from a man,
Homeward again behold the jackdaw run,
And yield his fire the ruins of a son!
What though his mind no thought has ever perplexed,
Converse illum'd, or observations vexed;
Yet here, in each debate, a judge he shines,
Of all, that man enlarges, or refines;
Religion, science, politics, and song;
A prodigy his parts; an oracle his tongue.
Open wide your mouths; your knees in homage bend;
Hist! hist! ye mere Americans attend;
While Curl discloses to the raptured view
What Peter, Paul, and Moses, never knew;
The light of newborn wisdom sheds abroad,
And adds a An awkward addition to a dwelling house, very common in New England.
leanto ^o the word of God.
What Creole wretch shall dare, with home-made foils,
Attack opinions, brought three thousand miles;
Sense, in no common way to mortals given,
But on Atlantic travelers breathed by Heaven;
A head, en queue, by Monsieur Frizzle dressed;
Manners, a Paris tailor's arts invest;
Pure criticism, formed from acted plays;
And graces, that would even a Stanhope grace?
Commercial wisdom, merchants here inhale
From him, whose eye has seen the unfinished bale;
Whose fee, have passed the shop, where pins were sold,
The wire was silvered, and the heads were rolled!
Convened, ye lawyers, make your humblest leg!
Here stands the man has seen Lord Mansfield's wig!
Physicians hushed, hear Galen's lips distill,
From Buchan's contents, all the Art to heal!
Divines, with reverence cease your scripture whims,
And learn this male Minerva's moral schemes;
Schemes theologic found in D^ury-lane,
That prove the bible false, and virtue vain!
Heavens! shall a child in learning, and in wit,
Over Europe's climes, a bird of passage ^lit;
There, as at home, his stripling self unknown,
By novel wonders stupefied to stone,
Shut from the wise, and by no converse taught,
No well-read day, nor hour of serious thought,
His head by pleasure, vice, and hurry, turned,
All prudence trampled, all improvements spurned;
Shall he, with less of Europe in his cap,
Than satche^l'd schoolboy guesses from the map,
On every subject struttingly decree,
Ken the far shore, and search the unfathomed sea,
Where learning has her lamp for ages oil'd,
Where Newton ponders, and where Berkeley toiled?
Of all the plagues, that rise in human shape,
Good Heaven, preserve us from the traveled Ape!
"Peace to all such:" (...)
but were there one, whose mind
Bold genius winged, and converse pure, refined,
By nature prompted science' realms to roam,
And both her Indies bring with rapture home;
Who men, and manners, searched with eagle eye,
Exact to weigh, and curious to descry:
Himself who burnished with the hand of care,
Till kings might boast so bright a gem to wear;
Should he, deep plunged in Circe's sensual bowl,
Imbrue his native manliness of soul,
With eye estranged, from fair Columbia turn,
Her youth, her innocence, and beauty scorn;
To that foul harlot, Europe, yield his mind,
Witch'd by her smiles, and to her snares resigned;
To nature's bloom prefer the rouge of art,
A tinsell'd outside to a golden heart,
Show, to the bliss by simple freedom given,
To virtue, Stanhope, and Voltaire to Heaven;
Who but must wish, the apostate youth to see?
Who but must agonize, were Humphreys he?
But all thy soul shall 'scape, the escape to aid,
Fair to thy view be every motive spread.
Of each gay cause the dire effects survey,
And bring the painted tomb disclosed to day.
Though there proud pomp uprears his throne on high;
Though there the golden palace lights the sky;
Though wealth unfolds her gay, Edenian fears,
Her walk of grandeur, and her wild of sweets;
The stage, the park, the ring, the dance, the feast,
Charm the palled eye, and lure the loathing cast;
Yet there fierce war unceasing sounds alarms;
Pride blows the trump, and millions rush to arms;
See steel and ^^^e extinguish human good;
See realms manured with corses, and with blood!
At slaughter's shrine expires the new born joy,
And all Jehovah's bounty fiends destroy.
See the huge jail in gloomy grandeur rise,
Lower over mankind, and mock the tempted skies!
Hear the chain clank! the bursting groan attend!
And mark the neighboring gibbe^'s pride ascend.
See earth's fair face insatiate luxury spoils!
For one poor tyrant, lo, a province toils!
To brothels, half the female world is driven,
Lost to themselves, and reprobates of heaven.
There too refinement glances over the mind;
And naught but vice, and outside, is refined;
To vice auspicious, brilliant manners blend,
The waxen saint, and sinner, foe, and friend,
Melt from the soul each virtue, as they shine,
And warm the impoison'd blossom into sin.
In fair Columbia's realms, how changed the plan;
Where all things bloom, but, first of all things, man!
Lord of himself, the independent swain,
Sees no superior stalk the happy plain:
His house, his herd, his harvest all his own,
His farm a kingdom, and his chair a throne.
Unblench'd by foul hypocrisy, the soul
Speaks in her face, and bids his acc^nts roll;
(Her wings unclipp'd) with fire instinctive warms,
Strong pulses (...), and bold conceptions forms:
At noblest objects aims her slight supreme,
The purpose vast, and enterprise extreme.
Hence round the pole her sons exalt the sail,
Search southern seas, and rouse the Falkland whale;
Or on bold pinions hail the Asian skies,
And bid new stars in spicy oceans rise.
Hence in bright arms her chiefs superior flame,
Even now triumphant on the steep of fame,
Where Vernon's Hero mounts the throne sublime,
And sees no rival grace the reign of time.
Hence countless honors rising Medicine claims;
Hence Law presents her constellated names;
The Sacred Science sees her concave bright
Instarr'd, and beauteous, with the sons of light:
Hence Edwards cheered the world with moral day,
And Franklin walked, unhurt, the realms where lightnings play.
Mechanic genius hence exalts his eye,
All powers to measure, and all scenes descry,
Bids Rittenhouse the heavenly system feign,
And Bushnell search the chambers of the main.
Hence too, where Trumbull leads the ardent throng,
Ascending bards begin the immortal song:
Let glowing friendship wake the cheerful lyre,
Blessed to commend, and pleased to catch the fire.
Be theirs the same, to bards how rarely given!
To fill with worth the part assigned by Heaven:
Distinguished actors on life's busy stage,
Loved by mankind, and useful to the age;
While science round them twines her vernal bays,
And sense directs, and genius fires their lays.
While this fair land commands thy feet to roam,
And, all Columbian, still thou plann'st for home,
From those bright sages, with whose mission joined,
Thou seek'st to build the interests of mankind,
Experience, wisdom, honor, may thou gain,
The zeal for country, and the love of man.
There through the civil science may thou run;
There learn how empires are preserved, or won;
How arts politic wide dominions sway;
How well-train'd navies bid the world obey;
How war's imperial car commands the plain,
Or rolls majestic over the subject main;
Through earth, how commerce spreads a softer sway,
And Gallia's sons negociate realms away.
Then, crowned with every gift, and grace, return,
To add new glories to the western morn;
With sages, heroes, bards, her charms display,
Her arts, arms, virtues, and her happy sway;
Bid over the world her constellation rise,
The brightest splendor in the unmeasured skies;
Her genial influence through all nations roll,
And hush the sound of war from pole to pole.
And oh, may he, who stilled the stormy main,
And lightly winged thee over the glassy plain,
Through life's rough-billow'd sea, with kinder gales,
With skies serener, and with happier sails,
Each shoal escaped, afar each tempest driven,
And naught but raptures round the enchanted Heaven,
To bliss, fair shore, thy prosperous course convey,
And join my peaceful bark, companion of thy way.
GREENFIELD, 1785.
SKETCHES OF AMERICAN HISTORY.
BY CAPTAIN PHILIP FRENEAU.
THE American world, as our histories say,
Secluded from Europe long centuries lay,
But peopled by beings whom white men detest,
The sons of the Tartars that came from the west.
These Indians, it is certain, were here long before ye all,
And dwelt in their wigwams from time immemorial;
In a mere state of nature, untutored, untaught,
They did as they pleased and they spoke as they thought:
No priests they had then for the cure of their souls,
No lawyers, recorders, nor keepers of rolls;
No learned physicians vile nostrums concealed --
Their druggist was nature -- her shop was the field.
In the midst of their forests how happy and blessed,
In the skin of a bear or a buffaloe dressed!
No care to perplex, and no luxury seen
But the feast, and the song, and the dance on the green,
Some bowed to the moon, and some worshipped the sun,
And the king and the captain were centered in one;
In a cabin, they met, on their councils of state,
Where age and experience alone might debate:
With quibbles they never essayed to beguile,
And nature had taught them the orator's style;
No pomp they affected, nor quaintly refined
The nervous idea that glanced on the mind.
When hunting or battle invited to arms,
The women they left to take care of their farms --
The toils of the summer did winter repay,
While snug in their cabins they snor'd it away.
If Death came among them, his dues to demand,
They still had some prospect of comfort at hand --
The dead man they sent to the regions of bliss,
With his bottle and dog and his fair maids to kiss.
Thus happy they dwelt in a rural domain.
Uninstructed in commerce, unpractic'd in gain,
Till, taught by the loadstone to traverse the seas,
Columbus came over, that bold Genoese.
From records authentic, the date we can show,
One thousand four hundred ninety and two
Years, borne by the seasons, had vanished away,
Since the babe in the manger at Bethlehem lay.
What an era was this, above all that had passed,
To yield such a treasure, discovered at last --
A new world, in value exceeding the old,
Such mountains of silver, such torrents of gold!
Yet the schemes of Columbus, however well planned,
Were scarely sufficient to find the main land;
On the islands alone with the natives he spoke,
Except when he entered the great Oronoque:
In this he resembled old Moses, the Jew,
Who, roving about with his wrong-headed crew,
When at length the reward was no longer denied,
From the top of mount Pisgah he saw it, and died.
These islands and worlds in the watery expanse,
Like most mighty things, were the offspring of chance,
Since, steering for Asia, Columbus, they say,
Was astonished to find such a world in his way:
No wonder, indeed, he was smit with surprise --
This empire of nature was new to their eyes --
Cut short in their course by so splendid a scene,
Such a region of wonders intruding between!
Yet great as he was, and deserving, no doubt,
We have only to thank him for finding the route;
These climes to the northward, more stormy and cold,
Were reserved for the efforts of Cabot the bold.
Where the sun in December appears to decline,
Far off to the southward, and south of the line,
A merchant of Florence, Americus Vespucius.
more fortunate still,
Explored a new track, and discovered Brazil:
Good fortune, Vespucius, pronounced thee her own,
Or else to mankind thou had scarcely been known --
By giving thy name, thou art ever renowned --
Thy name to a world that another had found!
Columbia the name was, that merit decreed,
But Fortune and Merit have never agreed --
Yet the poets, alone, with commendable care,
Are vainly attempting the wrong to repair.
The bounds I prescribe to my verse are too narrow,
To tell of the conquests of Francis Pizarro;
And Cortez it is needless to bring into view,
One Mexico conquered, the other Peru.
Montezuma with credit in verse might be read,
But Dryden has told you the monarch Indian Emperor, a tragedy.
is dead!
And the woes of his subjects -- what torments they bore
Las Casas, good bishop, has mentioned before;
Let others be fond of their stanzas of grief --
I hate to descant on the fall of the leaf --
Two scenes are so gloomy, I view them with pain,
The annals of Death, and the triumphs of Spain.
Poor Ata-bualpa I cannot forget --
He gave them his utmost, yet died in their debt,
His wealth was a crime, that they could not forgive,
And when they possessed it -- forbade him to live.
Foredoom'd to misfortunes (that came not alone)
He was the twelfth Inca that sat on the throne,
Who fleecing his brother Huascar, who was legal heir to the throne.
of half his domains,
At the palace of Cusco confined him in chains.
But what am I talking -- or where do I roam?
It Is time that our story was brought nearer home --
From Florida's cape did Cabot explore
To the fast frozen regions of cold Labradore.
In the year fourteen hundred and ninety and eight
He came, as the annals of England relate:
But finding no gold in the lengthy domain,
And coasting the country, he left it again.
Next Davis -- then Hudson adventured, they say,
One found out a straight, and the other a bay,
Whose desolate region, or turbulent wave
One present bestowed him -- and that was a grave.
In the reign of a virgin (whom some called a w --)
Drake, Hawkins, and Raleigh in squadrons came over --
While Barlow and Grenville succeeded to these,
Who all brought their colonies over the seas.
These, left in a wilderness teeming with woes,
The natives, suspicious, concluded them foes,
And murdered them all without notice or warning,
Ralph Lane with his vagabonds, scarcely returning.
In the reign of king James (and the first of the name)
George Summers with Hacluit to Chesapeake came,
Where far in the forests, not doomed to renown,
On the river Powhatan James river, Virginia.
they built the first town. James Town.

Twelve years after this some scores of dissenters
To the northernmost district, came seeking adventures;
Outdone by the bishops, those great faggot fighters,
They left them to hell with their cassocks and mitres.
Thus banished forever, and leaving the sod,
The first land they saw was the pitch of Cape Cod,
Where, famished with hunger, and quaking with cold,
They planned their new Plymouth -- so called from the old.
They were, without doubt, a delightful collection;
-- Some came to be rid of a Stuart's direction;
Some sailed with a view to dominion and riches,
Some to pray without book, and a few to hang witches;
Some came, on the Indians to shed a new light,
Convinced, long before, that their own must be right,
And that all, who had died in the centuries past,
On the devil's lee shore were eternally cast.
These exiles were cast in a whimsical mould,
And were awed by their priests, like the Hebrews of old;
Disclaimed all pretenses to jesting and laughter,
And sighed their lives through to be happy hereafter.
On a crown immaterial their hearts were intent,
They looked toward Zion, wherever they went,
Did all things in hope of a future reward,
And worried mankind -- for the sake of the Lord.
With rigor excessive they strengthened their reign,
Their laws were conceived in the ill-natured strain;
With mystical meanings the saint was perplexed,
And the flesh and the devil were slain by a text,
The body was scourged, for the good of the soul,
All folly discouraged by peevish control,
A knot on the head was the sign of no grace,
And the pope and his comrade were pictured in lace.
A stove in their churches, or pews lined with green,
Were horrid to think of, much more to be seen.
Their bodies were warmed with the linings of love,
And the fire was sufficient that flashed from above.
'Twas a crime to assert, that the moon was opaque;
To say the earth moved, was to merit the stake;
And he, that could tell an eclipse was to be,
In the college of satan had taken his degree.
On Sundays their faces were dark as a cloud --
The road to the meeting was only allowed;
And those they caught rambling, on business or pleasure,
Were sent to the stocks, to repent at their leisure.
This day was the mournfullest day in the week:
Except on religion, none ventured to speak:
This day was the day to examine their lives,
To clear off old scores, and to preach to their wives.
In the school of oppression though woefully taught.
'Twas only to be the oppressors they sought;
All, all but themselves, were be-devil'd and blind,
And their narrow-soul'd creed was to serve all mankind.
This beautiful system of nature below
They neither considered, nor wanted to know,
And called it a dog-house wherein they were pent,
Unworthy themselves, and their mighty descent.
They never perceived, that in nature's wide plan,
There must be that whimsical creature, called man,
Far short of the rank he affects to attain,
Yet a link in its place, in creation's vast chain.
Whatever is foreign to us and our kind,
Can never be lasting, though seemingly joined --
The hive swarmed at length, and a tribe that was teased,
Set out for Rhode Island, to think as they pleased.
Some hundreds to Britain ran murmuring home --
While others went off in the forests to roam,
When they found they had mist what they looked for at first,
The down^al of sin, and the reign of the just.
Hence, dry controversial reflections were thrown.
And the old dons were vexed in the way they had shown;
So those, that are held in the workhouse all night,
Throw dirt the next day at the doors, out of spite.
Ah, pity the wretches that lived in those days,
(Ye modern admirers of novels and plays)
When nothing was suffered but musty, dull rules,
And nonsense from Mather, and stuff from the schools.
No story, could tempt them, like Rachel's, to sigh,
(...) and Judith employed the bright eye --
No fine-spun adventures tormented the breast,
Like our modern Clarissa, Tom Jones, and the rest,
Those tyrants had chosen the books for your shelves,
(And, trust me, no other than suited themselves,
For always by this may a bigot be known,
He speaks well of nothing but what is his own.)
From indwelling evil these souls to release,
The quakers arrived, with their kingdom of peace --
But some were transported, and some (...) the lash,
And four they hanged fairly for preaching up thrash.
The lands of New England (of which we now treat)
Were famous, ere that, for producing of (...);
But the soil (or tradition says strangely amiss) (...)
Has been pestered with pumpkins from that day to this,
Thus, feuds and vexations distracted their reign,
(And perhaps a few vestiges still may remain.)
But time has presented an offspring as bold,
(...) free to believe, and more wise than the old.
Their phantoms, their wizzards, their witches are fled --
Matthew Paris's story with horror is read --
His daughters, and all the enchantments they bore --
And the demon that pinched them, are heard of no more.
Their taste for the fine arts is strangely increased,
And Latin's no longer a mark of the beast;
Mathematics, at present, a farmer may know,
Without being hanged for connexions below.
Proud, rough, independent, undaunted and free,
And patient of hardships, their task is the sea;
Their country too barren their wish to attain,
They make up the loss by exploring the main.
Wherever bright Phoebus awakens the gales,
I see the bold Yankees expanding their sails,
Throughout the wide ocean pursuing their schemes,
And chasing the whales on its uttermost streams.
No climate, for them, is too cold or too warm,
They reef the broad canvass, and fight with the storm;
In war with the foremost their standards display,
Or glut the loud cannon with death, for the fray.
No valor, in fable, their valor exceeds,
Their spirits are fitted for desperate deeds;
No rivals have they in our annals of same,
Or if they are rivall'd, it is York has the claim.
Inspired at the sound, while the name she repeats,
Bold Fancy conveys me to Hudson's retreats --
Ah, sweet recollection of juvenile dreams
In the groves, and the forests that skirted his streams!
How often, with rapture, those streams were surveyed,
When, sick of the city, I flew to the shade --
How often the bard, and the peasant shall mourn
Ere those groves shall revive, and those shades shall return!
Not a hill, but some fortress disfigures it round!
And ramparts are raised where the cottage was found!
The plains and the valleys with ruin are spread,
With graves in abundance, and bones of the dead.
The first that attempted to enter this straight,
(In anno one thousand six hundred and eight),
Was Hudson (the same that we mentioned before,)
Who was lost in the gulf that he went to explore.
For a sum that they paid him (we know not how much)
This captain transferred all his right to the Dutch;
For the time has been here, to the world be it known,
When all a man sailed by, or saw, was his own.
The Dutch on their purchase sat quietly down,
And fixed on an island to lay out a town;
They modeled their streets from the horns of a ram,
And the name that bost pleased them was New Amsterdam,
They purchased large tracts from the Indians for beads,
And sadly tormented some runaway Swedes,
Who, none knows for what, from their country had slown
To live here in peace undisturbed and alone.
New Belgin, the Dutch called their province, be sure,
But names never yet made possession secure;
For Charly (the second that honored the name)
Sent over a squadron, asserting his claim.
(Had his sword and title been equally slender,
In vain had they summoned Mynheer to surrender)
The soil they demanded or threatened their worst,
Insisting that Cabot had looked at it first.
The want of a squadron to fall on their rear,
Made the argument perfectly plain to Mynheer --
Force ended the contest -- the right was a sham,
And the Dutch were sent packing to hot Surinam.
'Twas hard to be thus of their labors deprived,
But the age of republics had not yet arrived --
Fate saw -- though no wizzard could tell them as much,
-- That the crown, in due time, was to fare like the Dutch.
DESCRIPTION OF THE FIRST AMERICAN CONGRESS.
BY JOEL BARLOW, ESQUIRE.
COLUMBUS looked; and still around them spread,
From south to north, the immeasurable shade;
At last, the central shadows burst away,
And rising regions opened on the day.
He saw, once more, bright Del'ware's silver stream,
And Penn's thronged city cast a cheerful gleam;
The dome of state, that met his eager eye,
Now heaved its arches in a loftier sky.
The bursting gates unfold: and lo, within,
A solemn train, in conscious glory, shine.
The well-known forms his eye had traced before,
In different realms along the extended shore;
Here, graced with nobler fame, and robbed in slate,
They looked and moved magnificently great.
High on the foremost seat, in living light,
Majestic Randolph caught the hero's sight:
Fair on his head, the civic crown was placed,
And the first dignity his scepter graced.
He opes the cause, and points in prospect far,
Through all the toils that wait the impending war --
But, hapless sage, thy reign must soon be over,
To lend thy luster, and to shine no more.
So the bright morning star, from shades of even,
Leads up the dawn, and lights the front of heaven,
Points to the waking world the sun's broad way,
Then veils his own, and shines above the day.
And see great Washington behind thee rise,
Thy following sun, to gild our morning skies;
Over shadowy climes to pour the enlivening flame,
The charms of freedom and the fire of fame.
The ascending chief adorned his splendid seat,
Like Randolph, ensign'd with a crown of state;
Where the green patriot bay beheld, with pride,
The hero's laurel springing by its side;
His sword, hung useless, on his graceful thigh,
On Britain still he cast a filial eye;
But sovereign fortitude his visage bore,
To meet their legions on the invaded shore.
Sage Franklin next arose, in awful mien,
And smiled, unruffled, over the approaching scene;
High, on his locks of age, a wreath was braced,
Palm of all arts, that ever a mortal graced;
Beneath him lies the scepter kings have borne,
And crowns and laurels from their temples torn.
Nash, Rutledge, Jefferson, in council great,
And Jay and Laurens opened the rolls of fate.
The Livingstons, fair Freedom's generous hand,
The Lees, the Houstons, fathers of the land,
Over climes and kingdoms turned their ardent eyes,
Bade all the oppressed to speedy vengeance rise;
All powers of state, in their extended plan,
Rise from consent to shield the rights of man.
Bold Wolcott urged the all-important cause;
With steady hand the solemn scene he draws;
Undaunted firmness with his wisdom joined,
Nor kings nor worlds could warp his steadfast mind.
Now, graceful rising from his purple throne,
In radiant robes, immortal Hosmer shone;
Myrtles and bays his learned temples bound,
The statesman's wreath, the poet's garland crowned:
Morals and laws expand his liberal soul,
Beam from his eyes, and in his accents roll.
But lo! an unseen hand the curtain drew,
And snatched the patriot from the hero's view;
Wrapped in the shroud of death, he sees descend
The guide of nations and the muse,' friend.
Columbus dropped a tear. The angel's eye
Traced the freed spirit mounting through the sky.
Adams, enraged, a broken charter bore,
And lawless acts of ministerial power;
Some injured right in each loose leaf appears
A king in terrors and a land in tears;
From all the guileful plots the veil he drew,
With eye retortive looked creation through;
Opened the wide range of nature's boundless plan,
Traced all the steps of liberty and man;
Crowds rose to vengeance while his accents rung,
And Independence thundered from his tongue.
AMERICAN REVOLUTION.
BY THE SAME.
NOW, where the sheeted flames through Charleston roar,
And lashing waves hiss round the burning shore,
Through the deep folding fires, a neighboring height
Thunders over all, and seems a field of fight.
Like shadowy phantoms in an evening grove,
To the dark strife the closing squadrons move;
They join, they break, they thicken through the air,
And blazing batteries burst along the war;
Now, wrapped in redd'ning smoke, now dim in sight
They sweep the hill, or wing the downward flight.
Here, wheeled and wedged, whole ranks together turn,
And the long lightnings from their pieces burn:
There, scattering flashes light the scanty train,
And broken squadrons tread the moving plain.
Britons in fresh battalions rise the height,
And, with increasing vollies, give the fight.
Till, smeared with clouds of dust and bathed in gore,
As growing foes their raised artillery pour,
Columbia's hosts move over the fields afar,
And save, by slow retreat, the sad remains of war.
There strides bold Putnam, and from all the plains,
Calls the tired host, the tardy rear sustains.
And, mid the whizzing deaths that fill the air,
Waves back his sword, and dares the following war.
Through falling fires, Columbus sees remain
Half of each host in heaps promiscuous slain;
While dying crowds the lingering lifeblood ^our,
And slippery steeds are trod with prints of gore,
There, hapless Warren, thy cold earth was seen,
There spring thy laurels in immortal green;
Dearest of chiefs, that ever pressed the plain,
In Freedom's cause, with early honors slain;
Still dear in death, as when in fight you moved,
By hosts applauded and by heaven approved,
The faithful muse shall tell the world thy fame,
And unborn realms resound the immortal name.
Now, from all plains, as smoky wreaths decay,
Unnumber'd shapes start forward to the affray;
Tall, through the lessening shadows, half concealed,
They glide and gather in a central field;
There, stretched immense, like lengthening groves they stand,
Eye the dark foe, and eager strife demand.
High in the frowning front exalted shone
A hero, pointing towered the half-seen sun:
As, through the mist the bursting splendours glow,
And light the passage to the distant foe;
His waving steel returns the living day,
Clears the broad plains and marks the warrior's way;
The long, deep squadrons range in order bright,
And move impatient for the promised fight.
When great Columbus saw the chief arise,
And his bold blade cast lightning on the skies,
He traced the form that met his view before,
On drear Ohio's desolated shore.
Matur'd with years, with nobler glory warm,
Fate in his eye, and vengeance on his arm,
The great observer here with joy beheld
The hero moving in a broader field.
Unnumber'd chiefs around their leader stand,
Fired by his voice, and guided by his hand,
Now on his steps their raptured eye balls glow,
And now roll dreadful on the approaching foe.
There rose brave Green, in all the strength of arms,
Unmoved and bright'ning as the danger warms;
In counsel great, in every science skilled,
Pride of the camp and terror of the field.
With eager look, conspicuous over the crowd,
The daring port of great Montgomery strode;
Barred the bright blade, with Honor's call elate,
Claimed the first field, and hastened to his fate.
Calm Lincoln next, with unaffected mien,
In dangers daring, active and serene,
Careless of pomp, with steady greatness shone,
Sparing of others' blood and liberal of his own,
Heath, for the impending strife, his falchion draws;
And fearless Wooster aids the sacred cause.
There stood stern Putnam, s^^m'd with many a scar,
The vet'ran honors of an earlier war;
Undaunted Stirling, dreadful to his foes,
And Gates and Sullivan to vengeance rose;
While brave M'Dougall, steady and sedate,
Stretched the nerv'd arm to open the scene of fate,
How moved with rapture to the toils of fame,
And Schuyler still adorned an honored name;
Parsons and Swallwood lead their daring bands,
And bold St. Clair in front of thousands stands.
There gallant Knox his moving engines brings,
Mounted and engraved, the last resort of kings; Ultima ratio regum; a device of
Louis XIV. engraved on his ordinance.

The long, black rows in dreadful order wait,
Their grim jaws gaping soon to utter fate;
When, at his word, the red-wing'd clouds shall (...),
And the deep thunders rock the shores and skies.
Beneath a waving sword, in blooming prime,
(...) moves graceful, ardent, and sublime;
In foreign guise, in Freedom's noble cause,
His untried blade the youthful hero draws:
(...) the great chief his eyes in transport roll,
And Fame and Washington inspire his soul.
Steuben advanced, in vet'ran armor dressed,
The noble ensign beaming on his breast;
From rank to rank, in eager haste, he flew,
And marshalled hosts in dread arrangement drew,
Morris, in aid, with open coffers stood,
And Wadsworth, patron of the brave and good.
While other chiefs and heirs of deathless fame
Rise into sight, and equal honors claim;
But who can tell the dew-drops of the morn?
Or count the rays that in the diamond burn?
With his dread host, Montgomery issues forth,
And lights his passage through the dusky north;
Over streams and lakes his conquering banners play,
Navies and forts surrend'ring, mark his way;
Through desert wilds, over rocks and sens, they go,
And hills before them, lose their crags in snow.
Unbounded toils they brave; when rise in sight
Quebec's dread walls, and Wofe's still dreary height.
They climb the steep; he eyes the turrets round,
With piked hosts and dark artillery crowned,
The daring onset points: and, high in air,
Over rocky ramparts leads the dreadful war.
As wreaths of morning mist ascend on high
Up the tall mountain's side and reach the sky,
So rose the rapid host; the walls are red
With flashing flames; down roll the heaps of dead;
Now back recoil the ranks, over squadrons slain,
And leave their leader, with a scanty train,
Closed in the circling terrors of the wall,
Where (...) his a^m the hostile legions fall.
Through the wide streets, collecting from afar,
The foes in shouting squadrons urged the war;
The smoke convolv'd, the thunders rocked around,
And the brave hero pressed the gorey ground.
Another Wol^e, Columbus here beheld,
In youthful charms, a soul undaunted yield;
But lost, o'erpower'd, his hardy host remains,
Stretched by his side, or led in captive chains.
Now the bright angel turned the hero's eye,
To other realms, where other standards fly;
Where the great leader, mid surrounding foes,
Still greater rises, as the danger grows;
And wearied ranks, over welt'ring warriors slain,
Attend his course through many a crimsoned plain.
From Hudson's banks, along the dreary strand,
He guards, in firm retreat, his feeble hand;
While countless foes, with British How advance,
Bend over his rear, and point the lifted lance;
Over Del'ware's frozen wave, with scanty force,
He lifts the sword, and points the backward course,
Wings the dive vengeance on the shouting train,
And leads whole squadrons in the captive chain;
Where vaunting foes to half their numbers yield,
Tread back the flight, or press the fatal field.
While, mid the furious strife, brave Mercer strode,
And sealed the victory with his streaming blood.
Now, where dread Laurence mingles with the main,
Rose, on the widening wave, a hostile train:
From shore to shore, along the unfolding skies,
Beneath full sails, the approaching squadrons rise;
High waving on the right, red banners dance,
And British legions over the decks advance;
While at their side, an azure flag, displayed,
Leads a long (...), in German robes arrayed.
Tall on the boldest b^^k, superior shone
A warrior, ensign'd with a various crown:
Myrtles and laurels equal honor joined,
Which arms had purchased, and the (...) twined:
His sword waved forward; and his ardent eye
Seemed sharing empires in the southern sky.
Beside him rose a herald, to proclaim
His various honors, titles, feats, and fame;
Who raised an opening scroll, where proudly shone
Pardon to realms and nations yet unknown.
Champlain receives the congregated host;
And his dark waves, beneath the sails, are lost;
St. Clair beholds; and, with his scanty train,
In firm retreat, over many a fatal plain,
Lures their wild march. -- Wide moves their furious force,
And flaming hamlets mark their wasting course;
Through pathless realms their spreading ranks are wheeled,
Over Mohawk's western wave and Bennington's dread field.
Till, where deep Hudson's winding waters stray,
A yeoman host opposed their rapid way;
There on a towery height brave Gates arose,
Waved the blue steel, and dared the headlong foes;
Undaunted Lincoln, moving at his side,
Urged the dread strife, and spread the squadrons wide;
Now roll, like winged storms, the lengthening lines,
The clarion thunders, and the battle joins;
Thick flames, in vollied flashes, fill the air,
And echoing mountains give the noise of war;
The clouds rise, reddening, round the dreadful height,
And veil the skies, and wrap the sounding fight.
Now, in the skirt of night, where thousands toil,
Ranks roll away and into light recoil.
The rout increases. All the British train
Tread back their steps, and scatter over the plain;
To the glad holds precipitate retire,
And wide behind them streams the flashing fire.
Scarce moved the smoke above the gor^y height,
And opened the slaughter to the hero's sight;
Back to their fate, when baffled squadrons flew,
Resumed their rage, and poured the strife anew,
Again the batt'ries roar, the lightnings play
Again they fall, again they roll away.
And now Columbia, circling round the field.
Points her full force; the trembling thousands yield;
When bold Burgoyne, in one (...) day,
Sees future crowns and former wreaths decay;
While two illustrious armies shade the plain,
The mighty victors and the captive train.
Still to fresh toils, over all the western shore,
Britannia's fleets her new battalions pour;
The realms unconquered still their terrors wield,
And stain with mingled gore the embattled field.
Over Schuylkill's wave, to various fight they move,
And adverse nations equal slaughter prove;
Till, where dread Monmouth lifts a blooming height,
Britannia's thousands met the observer's sight.
There strode imperious Clinton over the field,
And marshalled hosts for ready combat held.
As the dim sun, beneath the skirts of even,
Crimsons the clouds, that sail the western heaven;
So, in red wavy rows, where spread the train
Of men and standards, shone the unmeasured plain.
But now the chief of heroes moved in sight,
And the long ranks roll forward to the sight;
He points the charge: the mounted thunders roar,
And plough the plain, and rock the distant shore.
Above the folds of smoke, that veiled the war,
His guiding sword illum'd the fields of air;
The vollied flames, that burst along the plain,
Break the deep clouds, and show the piles of slain;
Till flight begins; the smoke is rolled away,
And the red standards open into day.
Britons and Germans hurry from the field,
Now wrapped in dust, and now to sight revealed;
Behind, great Washington his falchion drives,
Thins the pale ranks, and copious vengeance gives.
Hosts captive bow, and move behind his arm,
And hosts before him wing the driven storm;
When the glad shore salutes their fainting sight,
And thundering navies screen their rapid flight.
Through plains of death, that gleam with hostile fires,
Brave Lincoln now to southern climes retires;
Where over her streams beleaguered Charleston rose,
The hero moves, to meet the assembled foes.
Shading the invaded isle, on either flood,
Red standards waved, and winged batt'ries rode;
While, braving death his scanty host remains,
And the dread strife with various fate sustains.
High from the sable decks, the bursting fires
Sweep the full streets, and cleave the glittering spires.
Vaulted with flying flames, the burning air
Reddens with shells, and pours the etherial war;
The tented plain, where dauntless heroes tread,
Is torn with broken crags, and strow'd with dead.
Long crowds of suppliants, round the gallant chief,
Raise their wild cries, and pour their frantic grief;
Each shower of flames renews their startled woe,
They wail the strife, they dread the infuriate foe.
The afflicted fair, while tears bedew their charms,
Babes at their side and infants in their arms,
With piercing shrieks his guardian hand implore,
To save them, trembling, from the victors' power,
He shares their anguish with a moist'ning eye,
And bids the balls rain thicker through the sky;
When a lost hero, in a neighboring post,
Gives a lone fortress to the approaching host;
Now gathering thousands crowd around the isle,
Threat wider vengeance, and increase the toil;
On tempered terms, great Lincoln yields the prize,
And plucks the standard from the saddening skies.
The conquering legions now the champaign tread,
And towered the north their sire and slaughter spread;
Through towns and realms, where arming peasants fly,
The bold Cornwallis bears his standard high;
Over many a field displays his dreadful force,
And thousands fall, and thousands aid his course;
While through the conquered lands, from every plain,
The fresh battalions join his splendid train.
So mountain streams, over climes of melting snow,
Spread with increasing waves, and whelm the world below,
The great Columbus, with an anxious sigh,
Saw British ensigns reaching round the sky,
Saw desolation whelm his favorite coast,
His children scattered and their vigor lost;
De Kalb in furious combat press the plain,
Morgan and Smallwood various shocks sustain;
When Green, in lonely greatness, rose to view,
A few firm patriots to his standard drew;
And, moving stately to a rising ground,
Bade the loud trump to speedy vengeance sound;
Fired by the voice, new squadrons, from afar,
Crowd to the hero and demand the war.
Round all the shores and plains he turned his eye;
Saw forts arise and conquering banners fly:
The sadd'ning scene suspends his rising soul,
And fates of empires in his bosom (...).
With scanty force where should he lift the steel,
While boasting foes immeasurably wheel?
Or how behold the boundless slaughter spread?
Himself stand idle, and his country bleed?
A silent moment, thus the hero stood,
And held his warriors from the field of blood;
Then points the British legions where to roll,
Marks out their progress, and designs the whole.
He lures their chief, over yielding realms to roam,
To build his greatness, and to find his doom?
With gain and grandeur feeds his fateless flame,
And leaves the victory to a nobler name;
Give (...) great Washington, to meet his way,
Nor claims the glories of so bright a day.
Now to the conquered south with gathering force,
Over sanguine plains he shapes his rapid course,
Forts ^all around him; hosts before him fly;
And captive bands his growing train supply.
At length, far spreading through a fatal field,
Collecting chiefs their circling armies wheeled;
Near Eutaw's fount, where, long renowned for blood,
Pillars of ancient fame in triumph stood,
Britannia's squadrons, ranged in order bright,
Stand, like a fiery wall, and wait the shock of fight.
When over the distant hill brave Green arose,
Eyed the far plain, and viewed the glittering foes;
Disposed his squadrons, formed each folded train,
To lead the charge, or the wide wings sustain,
Roused all their rage, superior force to prove,
Waved the bright blade, and bade the onset move.
As hovering clouds, when morning beams arise,
Hang their red curtains round the eastern skies,
Unfold a space to hail the promised sun,
And catch their splendours from his rising throne;
Thus glowed the approaching fronts, whose steely glare
Glanced over the hideous interval of war.
Now roll with kindling haste the rapid lines,
From wing to wing the sounding battle joins;
Batteries, and fosses wide, and ranks of fire,
In mingled shocks, their thundering blasts expire:
Beneath the smoke, when firm advancing bands,
With piked arms bent forward in their hands,
In dreadful silence tread. As, wrapped from sight,
The nightly ambush moves to secret fight;
So rush the raging files, and sightless close,
In plunging strife, with fierce conflicting foes;
They reach, they strike, they struggle over the slain,
Deal heavier blows, and strew with death the plain;
^^^ks crush on ranks, with equal slaughter gored,
While dripping streams, from every lifted sword,
(...) the thin carnag'd hosts; who still maintain,
With mutual shocks, the vengeance of the plain.
Till, where brave Williams strove, and Campbell sell,
Unwonted strokes the British force repel:
The rout begins: the shattered wings, afar,
Roll back in haste, and scatter from the war;
They drop their arms; they scour the marshy field;
Whole squadrons fall, and faint battalions yield.
Over all the great observer fixed his eye,
Marked the whole strife; beheld them fall and fly;
He saw where Green through all the combat drove,
And Death and Victory with his presence move;
Beneath his arm, saw Marion pour the strife,
Pickens and Sumner, prodigal of life;
He saw young Washington, the child of fame,
Preserve in fight the honors of his name;
Brave Lee, in pride of youth, and vet'ran might,
Swept the dread field, and put whole troops to flight;
While numerous chiefs, that equal trophies raise,
Wrought, not unseen, the deeds of deathless praise.
Columbus now his gallant sons beheld
In triumph move through many a banner'd field;
When over the main, from Gallia's crowded shore,
To the glad strife a host of heroes pour.
On the tall, shaded decks the leaders stand,
View lessening waves, and hail the approaching strand.
Brave Rochambeau, in gleamy steel arrayed,
The ascending scenes with eager joy surveyed;
Saw Washington, amid his thousands stride,
And longed to toil and conquer by his side.
Great Chastelleux, with philosophic view,
Marked the glad prize that rising realms pursue;
Intent in thought, his glowing bosom warms,
To grace the walks of science and of arms.
Two brother chiefs, in rival luster rose,
Reared the long lance, and claimed the field of foes,
The bold Viomin^s, of equal fame,
And eager both to exalt the noble name.
Lauzon, beneath his ^ail, in armor bright,
Frowned over the wave, impatient for the sight;
A fiery steed beside the hero stood,
And his broad blade waved forward over the crowd.
And now, with eager haste, they tread the coast;
Through grateful regions lead the vet'ran host;
Hail the great chief; beneath his banners join;
Demand the foe; and bid the strife begin.
Again Columbus cast his anxious eye,
Where the red standard waved along the sky;
And, graced with spoils of many a field of blood,
The bold Cornwallis on a bulwark stood.
Over conquered provinces and towns in flame,
He marked his recent monument of ^ame,
High raised in air, his hands securely hold,
With conscious pride a sheet of cypher'd gold;
There, in delusive haste, his skill had engraved
A clime subdued, a flag in triumph waved:
A middle realm, by fairer figures known,
Adorned with fruits, lay bounded for his own;
Deep through the center, spreads a beauteous bay,
Full sails ascend, and golden rivers stray;
Bright palaces arise, relieved in gold,
And gates and streets the crossing lines unfold
Over all the mimic scene, his fingers trace
His future seat and glory of his race.
While thus the raptured chief his conquests viewed,
And gazing thousands round the rampart stood,
Whom future ease and golden dreams employ,
The songs of triumph and the feast of joy;
Sudden, great Washington arose in view,
And union'd flags his stat^^y steps pursue;
Blessed Gallia's bands and young Columbia's pride,
Bend the long march, and glitter at his side.
Now on the wave the warring fleets advance,
And different ensigns over their pinions dance;
From northern shores, great Albion's flag unfurled,
Waved proud defiance to the watery world;
While, from the southern isles, a daring train,
With Gallic banners, shades the billowy main.
Here brave de Grass, in awful splendor, rode.
And there stern Graves a rival splendor showed.
The approaching ^ails, as far as eye can sweep,
Look through the skies, and shade the shudd'ring deep.
As, when the winds of heaven, from each far pole,
Their adverse storms across the concave roll,
The fleecy vapors through the expansion run,
Veil the blue vault, and tremble over the sun:
Till the dark folding wings together drive,
And, ridg'd with fires, and rocked with thunders, strive;
So, bearing through the void, at first appear
White clouds of canvass, floating on the air;
Then frown the approachine fronts; the sails are laid,
And the black decks extend a dreadful shade;
While rolling flames and tides of smoke arise,
And thundering cannons rock the seas and skies.
Where the long bursting fires the cloud disclose,
Hosts heave in sight, and blood the decks overflows;
There, from the strife, tossed navies rise to view,
Drive back to vengeance and the toil renew;
Here, shattered barks in squadrons move afar,
Led through the smoke, and struggling from the war;
While hulls half-seen, beneath a gaping wave,
And plunging heroes sill the watery grave.
Now the dark, smoky volumes rolled away,
And a long line ascended into day;
The pinions swelled, Britannia's flag arose,
And slew the vengeance of triumphing foes.
When up the bay, Virginian lands that laves,
Great Gallia's line its conquering standard waves:
Where still dread Washington illumes the way,
And fleets and moving realms his voice obey;
While the brave Briton mid the gathering host,
Perceives his glories and his empire lost.
The heav'n-taught sage in this broad scene beheld
His favorite sons the fates of nations wield;
There joyous Lincoln shone in arms again,
Nelson and Knox moved ardent over the plain,
Unconquered Scammel, mid the closing strife,
In sight of victory, poured his gallant life;
While Gallic thousands eager toils sustain,
And death and danger brighten every train.
Where Tarleton strides, with hopes of flight elate,
Brave Lauzon moves, and drives him back to fare.
In one dread view, two chosen bands advance,
Colambia's veterans and the pride of France;
These bold Viominil exalts to fame,
And those Fayette's conducting guidance claim.
They lift the sword, with rival glory warm,
Over piked ramparts pour the flaming storm;
The mounted thunders brave, and lead the foe,
In captive squadrons, to the plain below.
Over all great Washington his arm extends,
Points every movement, every toil defends,
Bids closer strife and bloodier strokes proceed,
New batteries blaze, and heavier squadrons bleed;
Round the grim foe approaching ba^ners rise,
And shells like meteors vault the flaming skies.
With dire dismay the British chief beheld
The foe advance, his vet'rans quit the field;
Despair and slaughter when he turns his eye,
No hope in combat and no power to fly;
There dread de Grass o'ershades the loaded tide,
Here conquering thousands all the champaign hide;
Fosses and batteries, growing on the fight,
Still pour new thunders and increase the fight;
Shells rain before him, rock the shores around,
And crags and balls o'erturn the tented ground;
From post to post, the driven ranks retire,
The earth in crimson and the skies on fire.
Now grateful truce suspends the burning war,
And groans and shouts, promiscuous, load the air;
When the pen^ squadrons, where the smokes decay,
Drop all their arms, and move in open day.
Columbus saw the immeasurable train,
Thousands on thousands, redden all the plain;
Beheld the glorious leader stand sedate,
Hosts in his chain, and banners at his feet;
Nor smile over all, nor chide the fallen chief,
But share, with pitying eye, his manly grief.
Thus through the extremes of life, in every state,
Shines the clear soul, beyond all fortune great;
While smaller minds, the dupes of fickle chance,
Slight woes overwhelm, and sudden joys entrance.
So the full sun through all the changing sky,
Nor blasts, nor overpow'rs the naked eye;
Though transient splendours, borrowed from his light,
Glance on the mirror, and destroy the sight.
He points brave Lincoln, as they move along,
To claim the triumph of the trembling throng;
Who sees, once more, two armies shade the plain,
The mighty victors and the captive train.
AMERICAN SAGES.
BY THE SAME.
SEE on yon dark'ning height bold Franklin tread,
Heaven's awful thunders rolling over his head;
Convolving clouds the billowy skies deform,
And forky flames emblaze the black'ning storm.
See the descending streams around him burn,
Glance on his rod, and with his guidance turn;
He bids conflicting heavens their blasts expire,
Curbs the fierce blaze, and holds the imprisoned fire.
No more, when folding storms the vault overspread,
The livid glare shall strike thy race with dread;
Nor towers nor temples, shuddering with the sound,
Sink in the flames, and spread destruction round.
His daring toils, the threatening blast that wait,
Shall teach mankind to ward the bolts of fate;
The pointed steel o'er-top the ascending spire,
And lead over trembling walls the harmless fire;
In his glad fame while distant worlds rejoice,
Far as the lightnings shine, or thunders raise their voice.
See the sage Rittenhouse, with ardent eye,
Lift the long tube, and pierce the starry sky:
Clear in his view the circling systems roll,
And broader splendours gild the central pole.
He marks what laws the eccentric wanderers bind,
Copies creation in his forming mind,
And bids, beneath his hand, in semblance rise,
With mimic orbs, the labors of the skies.
There wondering crowds with raptured eye behold
The spangled heavens their mystic maze unfold;
While each glad sage his splendid hall shall grace,
With all the spheres that cleave the etherial space.
To guide the sailor in his wandering way,
See Godfrey's toils reverse the beams of day.
His lifted quadrant to the eye displays
From adverse skies the counteracting rays;
And marks, as devious sails bewildered roll,
Each nice gradation from the steadfast pole.
AMERICAN PAINTERS.
BY THE SAME.
SEE, West with glowing life the canvass warms;
His sovereign hand creates impassioned forms,
Spurns the cold critic rules, to seize the heart,
And boldly bursts the former bounds of art.
No more her powers to ancient scenes confined,
He opes her liberal aid to all mankind;
She calls to life each patriot chief or sage,
Garb'd in the dress and drap'ry of his age,
Again bold Regulus to death returns;
Again her falling Wolf Britannia mourns;
Warriors in arms to frowning combat move.
And youths and virgins melt the soul to love;
Grief, rage, and fear beneath his pencil start,
Roll the wild eye, and pour the flowing heart;
While slumbering heroes wait his wakening call,
And distant ages fill the storied wall.
With rival force, see Copley's pencil trace
The air of action and the charms of face;
Fair in his tints unfold the scenes of state,
The senate listens and the peers debate;
Pale consternation every heart appalls,
In act to speak, while death-struck Chatham falls.
His strong, deep shades a bold expression give,
Raised into light the starting figures live:
With polished pride the finished features boast
The master's art in nature's softness lost.
Fi^'d with the martial toils, that bathed in gore
His brave companions on his native shore,
Trumbull with daring hand the scene recals,
He (...) with night Quebec's beleagur'd walls,
Mid flashing flames, that round the turrets rise,
Blind carnage raves, and great Montgomery dies.
On Charlestown's height, through floods of rolling fire,
Brave Warren falls, and sullen hosts retire;
While other plains of death, that gloom the skies,
And chiefs immortal over his canvass rise.
See rural seats of innocence and ease,
High tufted towers, and walks of waving trees,
The white waves dashing on the craggy shores,
Meand'ring streams, and meads of spangled flowers,
Where nature's sons their wild excursions lead,
In just design, from Taylor's pencil spread.
Steward and Brown the moving portrait raise,
Each rival stroke the force of life conveys;
See circling beauties round their tablets stand,
And rise, immortal, from their plastic hand;
Each breathing form preserves its wonted grace,
And all the soul stands speaking in the face.
Two kindred arts the swelling statue heave,
Wake the dead wax, and teach the stone to live.
While the bold chissel claims the rugged strife,
To rouse the sceptred marble into life;
While Latian shrines their figured patriots boast,
And gods and heroes crowd each orient coast;
See Wright's fair hands the livelier fire control,
In waxen forms she breathes the impassioned soul;
The pencil'd tint over molded substance glows,
And different powers the unrivaled art compose.
AMERICAN POETS.
BY THE SAME.
TO equal fame ascends the tuneful throng,
The boast of genius, and the pride of song;
Warmed with the scenes that grace their various clime,
Their lays shall triumph over the lapse of time.
With keen-ey'd glance through nature's walks to pierce,
With all the powers and every charm of verse,
Each science opening in his ample mind,
His fancy glowing, and his taste refined,
See Trumbull lead the train. His skilful hand
Hurls the keen darts of Satire through the land;
Pride, Knavery, Dullness, feel his mortal stings,
And listening Virtue triumphs while he sings;
Proud Albion's sons, victorious now no more,
In guilt retiring from the wasted shore,
Strive their cursed cruelties to hide in vain --
The world shall learn them from his deathless strain.
On glory's wing to raise the ravished soul,
Beyond the bounds of earth's benighted pole,
For daring Dwight, the epic muse sublime*
Hails her new empire on the western clime.
Fired with the themes by seers seraphic sung,
Heaven in his eye, and rapture on his tongue,
His voice divine revives the promised land,
The heaven-taught leader and the chosen band.
In Hanniel's fate, proud faction finds her doom,
Ai's midnight flames light nations to their tomb.
In visions bright supernal joys are given,
And all the dread futurities of heaven.
While Freedom's cause his patriot bosom warms,
In lore of nations skilled and brave in arms,
See Humphreys, glorious, from the field retire,
Sheath the glad sword, and string the sounding lyre;
That lyre which, erst, in hours of dark despair,
Roused the sad realms, to urge the unfinished war.
Over fallen friends, with all the strength of woe,
His heartfelt sighs in moving numbers flow;
His country's wrongs, her duties, dangers, praise,
Fire his full soul, and animate his lays;
Immortal Washington with joy shall own
So fond a favorite and so great a son.
EULOGIUM ON RUM.
BY JOSEPH SMITH.
ARISE! ye pimpled, tippling race, arise!
From every town and village tavern, come!
Show your red noses, and overflowing eyes,
And help your poet chant the praise of Rum.
The cordial drop, the morning dram, I sing,
The midday toddy, and the evening sling.
Hail, mighty Rum! and by this general name
I call each species -- whisky, gin, or brandy:
(The kinds are various -- but the effect's the same;
And so I choose a name that is short and handy:
For reader, know, it takes a deal of time,
To make a crocked word lie smooth in thyme.)
Hail, mighty Rum! thy song inspiring merit
Is known to many a bard in these our days:
Apollo's drink, they find, is void of spirit --
Mere chicken-broth -- insipid as their lays:
And, pleased, they would give a riv'let -- aye a sea
Of tuneful water, for one quart of thee!
Hail, mighty Rum! how wondrous is thy power!
Unwarm'd by thee, how would our spirits fail,
When dark December comes, with aspect sour,
And, sharp as razor, blows the northern gale!
And yet you are grateful in that sultry day,
When raging Sirius darts his fervid ray.
Hail, mighty Rum! to thee the wretched fly:
And find a sweet oblivion of their woes;
Locked in thy arms, as in the grave, they lie --
Forget their kindred -- and forgive their foes.
And Lethe's stream, (so much extolled by some,
In ancient times) I shrewdly guess, was Rum.
Hail, mighty Rum! what can thy power withstand!
Even lordly Reason flies thy dreadful face:
And Health, and Joy, and all the lovely band
Of social virtues, shun thy dwelling place:
(For in whatever breast it rears its throne,
Like Turkish monarchs, Rum must rule alone.)
When our bold fathers crossed the Atlantic wave,
And here arrived -- a weak defenseless band --
Pray, what became of all the tribes so brave --
The savage owners of this happy land?
Were they sent headlong to the realms below,
"By doom of battle?"friend, This alludes only to Jersey, Pennsylvania, (...)
I answer no.
Our fathers were too wise to think of war;
They knew the woodlands were no^ quickly past,
They might have met with many an (...) --
Lost many a foretop -- and been.
But Rum, assisted by his son, Disease,
Performed the business with surprising ease.
And would our western brethren be less proud, or,
In other words, throw by their gun and drum --
For ducks and squirrels, save their lead and powder,
And send the tawny rogues some pipes of rum --
I dare predict, they all would gladly suck it;
And every mother's son soon kick the bucket.
But lo! the ingratitude of Adam's race!
Though all these clever things to Rum we owe --
Gallons of ink are squirted in his face;
And his bruised back is banged with many a blow;
Some hounds of note have rung his funeral knell,
And every puppy joins the general yell.
So have I seen (the simile is fine --
And wonderfully pat -- though rather old)
When rising Phoebus shot his rays benign,
A flock of sheep come skipping from the fold;
Some restless sheep cries baa: and all the throng,
Ewes, rams, lambs, wethers, bellowing pour along.
But fear not, Rum, though fiercely they assail,
And none but I, the bard, thy cause defend,
Think not thy foes -- though numerous -- shall prevail,
Thy power diminish, or thy being end:
Though spurned from table, and the public eye,
In the snug closet safely shall thou lie.
And often, when Sol's proud chariot quits the sky,
And humbler Cynthia mounts her one-horse chair,
To that snug closet shall thy vot'ry fly;
And, wrapped in darkness, keep his orgies there;
Lift the full bottle, joyous, to his head,
Then, great as Caesar, reel sublime to bed.
Burlington Dec. 7 th, 1789.
AN ELEGY On the burning of FAIRFIFLD, in CONNECTICUT.
Written on the spot, -- anno 1779.
BY COLONEL DAVID HUMPHREYS.
YE smoking ruins, marks of hostile ire,
Ye ashes warm, which drink the tears that slew,
Ye desolated plains my voice inspire,
And give soft music to the song of woe!
How pleasant, Fairfield, on the enraptured sight,
Rose thy tall spires, and opened thy social halls!
How often my bosom beat with pure delight,
At yonder spot, where stand the darkened walls!
But there the voice of mirth resounds no more,
A silent sadness through the streets prevails,
The distant main alone is heard to roar,
And hollow chimnies hum with sullen gales;
Save where scorched elms the untimely foliage shed,
Which rustling hovers round the faded green;
Save where at twilight mourners frequent tread,
'Mid recent graves over desolation's scene.
How changed the blissful prospect, when compared
These glooms funereal with thy former bloom:
Thy hospitable rights when Tryon shared,
Long ere he sealed thy melancholy doom.
That impious wretch, with coward voice decreed
Defenseless domes and hallowed fa^es to dust,
Beheld with sneering smile the wounded bleed,
And spurred his bands to rapine, blood and lust.
Vain was the widow's, vain the orphan's cry,
To touch his feelings or to sooth his rage;
Vain the fair drop that rolled from beauty's eye,
Vain the dumb grief of supplicating age.
Could Tryon hope to quench the patriot flame,
Or make his deeds survive in glory's page?
Could Britons seek of savages the same,
Or deem it conquest thus the war to wage?
Yes, Britons scorn the councils of the skies,
Extend wide havoc, spurn the insulted foes!
The insulted foes to tenfold vengeance rise,
Resistance growing as the danger grows.
Red in their wounds and pointing to the plain,
The visionary shapes before me stand;
The thunder bursts, the battle burns again,
And kindling fires encrimson all the strand. --
Long dusky wreaths of smoke, reluctant driven,
In blackening volumes over the landscape bend;
Here the broad splendor blazes high to heaven,
There umber'd streams in purple pomp ascend.
In fiery eddies round the tottering walls,
Emitting sparks, the lighter fragments fly;
With frightful crash the burning mansion falls,
The works of years in glowing embers lie.
Tryon! behold thy sanguine flames aspire,
Clouds tinged with does intolerably bright!
Behold, well pleased, the village wrapped in fire;
Let one wide ruin glut thy ravished sight!
Ere fades the grateful scene, indulge thine eye,
See age and sickness tremulously slow,
Creep from the flames -- see babes in torture die --
And mothers swoon in agonies of woe.
Go, gaze, enraptured with the mother's tear,
The infant's terror, and the captive's pain,
Where no bold bands can check thy cursed career,
Mix fire with blood on each unguarded plain.
These be thy triumphs! this thy boasted same!
Daughters of memory, raise thy deathless songs
Repeat through endless years his hated name,
Embalm his crimes and teach the world our wrongs!
AN ELEGY ON LIEUTENANT DE HEART, This young warrior was killed in the attack on
the blockhouse, near (...)
VOLUNTEER AID TO GENESIS WAYNE.
BY THE SAME.
WHEN autumn, all humid and drear,
With darkness and storms in his train,
Announcing the death of the year,
Despoiled of its verdure the plain:
When horror congenial prevailed,
Where graves are with fearfulness trod,
De Heart by his sister was wail'd,
His sister thus sighed over his sod:
Near Hudson, a fort, on these banks,
Its flag of defiance unfurled:
He led to the storm the first ranks;
On them, iron tempests were hurled,
Transpierc'd was his breast with a ball --
His breast a red fountain supplied,
Which, gushing in waves still and small,
Distained his white bosom and side.
His visage was ghastly in death,
His hair, that so lavishly curled,
I saw, as he lay on the heath,
In blood, and with dew-drops impearl'd.
How dumb is the tongue, that could speak
Whatever could engage and delight!
How faded the rose on his cheek!
Those eyes, how envelop'd in night!
Those eyes, that illumined each soul,
All darkened to us are now grown:
In far other orbits they roll,
Like stars to new systems when gone.
My brother, the pride of the plain,
In vain did the graces adorn;
His blossom unfolded in vain,
To die like the blossom of morn.
Oh war, thou have wasted our clime,
And tortured my bosom with sighs;
My brother, who fell ere his prime,
Forever is torn from my eyes.
To me, how distracting the storm,
That blasted the youth in his bloom:
Alas, was so finished a form
Designed for so early a tomb?
How bright were the prospects that shone!
Their ruin it is mine to deplore --
Health, beauty, and youth were his own.
Health, beauty, and youth are no more.
No blessings of nature and art,
Nor music that charmed in the song,
Nor virtues that glowed in the heart,
Dear youth, could thy moments prolong
Thrice six times the spring had renewed
Its youth and its charms for the boy;
With rapture all nature he viewed,
For nature he knew to enjoy.
But chiefly his country could charm:
He felt -- 'twas a generous heat --
With drums and the trumpet's alarm,
His pulses in consonance beat.
Ye heroes, to whom he was dear,
Come weep over this sorrowful urn,
Come ease the full heart with a tear --
My hero will never return:
He died in the dawn of applause,
His country demanded his breath;
Go, heroes, defend the same cause,
Avenge, with your country, his death.
So sung on the top of the rocks,
The virgin in sorrow more fair;
In tears her blue eyes; and her locks
Of auburn flew loose on the air.
I heard, as I passed down the stream;
The guards of the foe were in view: --
To enterprise fired by the theme,
I bade the sweet mourner adieu.
MOUNT VERNON: AN ODE.
BY THE SAME.
BY broad Potowmack's azure tide,
Where Vernon's mount, in sylvan pride,
Displays its beauties far,
Great Washington, to peaceful shades,
Where no unhallowed wish invades,
Retired from fields of war.
Angels might see, with joy, the sage,
Who taught the battle where to rage,
Or quenched it is spreading flame,
On works of peace employ that hand,
Which waved the blade of high command,
And hewed the path to fame.
Let others sing his deeds in arms,
A nation saved, and conquest's charms:
Posterity shall hear,
'Twas mine, returned from Europe's courts,
To share his thoughts, partake his sports,
And sooth his partial ear.
To thee, my friend, these lays belong:
Thy happy seat inspires my song;
With gay, perennial blooms,
With fruitage fair, and cool retreats,
Whose bow'ry wilderness of sweets
The ambient air perfumes.
Here spring its earliest buds displays,
Here latest on the leafless sprays,
The plumy people sing:
The vernal shower, the ripening year,
The autumnal store, the winter drear,
For thee new pleasures bring.
Here lapp'd in philosophic ease,
Within thy walks, beneath thy trees,
Amidst thine ample farms,
No vulgar converse heroes hold,
But past or future scenes unfold,
Or dwell on nature's charms.
What wondrous era have we seen,
Placed on this (...) half between
A rude and polished state!
We saw the war tempestuous rise,
In arms a world, in blood the skies,
In doubt an empire's fate.
The storm is calmed, seren'd the heaven,
And mildly over the climes of even,
Expands the imperial day:
O God, the source of light supreme,
Shed on our dusky morn a gleam,
To guide our doubtful way!
Restrain, dread power, our land from crimes!
What seeks, though blessed beyond all times,
So querulous an age?
What means to freedom such disgust,
Of change, of anarchy the lust,
The fickleness and rage?
So spoke his country's friend, with sighs,
To find that country still despise
The legacy he gave --
And half he feared his toils were vain,
And much that man would court a chain,
And live, through vice, a slave.
A transient gloom overcast his mind:
Yet, still on Providence reclined,
The patriot fond believed,
That power benign too much had done,
To leave an empire's task begun,
Imperfectly achiev'd.
Thus buoyed with hope, with virtue blessed,
Of every human bliss possessed,
He meets the happier hours;
His skies assume a lovelier blue,
His prospects brighter rise to view,
And fairer bloom his flowers.
AN ODE. ADDRESSED TO LAURA.
BY THE SAME.
OH, lovely Laura, may a youth,
Inspired by beauty, urged by truth,
Disclose the heart's alarms,
The fire in raptured breasts that glows,
The impassioned pang on love that grows,
And dare to sing thy charms!
Enough with war my lay has rung;
A softer theme awakes my tongue;
It Is beauty's force divine:
Can I resist that air, that grace,
Thy harmony of form and face?
For every charm is thine.
Of health, of youth the expanding flush,
Of virgin fear the flying blush,
With crimson stain thy cheek:
The be such nectar never sips,
As yield the rose-buds of thy lips,
When sweetly thou do speak.
It Is thine the heaviest heart to cheer,
Those accents, drank with eager ear,
So musically roll:
Where swells the breast, the snow-white skin
Scarce hides the secret thoughts within,
Nor needs disguise that soul.
With thee, of cloudless days I dream;
Thy eyes, in morning splendours, beam
So exquisitely fair --
What taste! as over thy back and breast,
In light-brown ringlets neatly dressed,
Devolves a length of hair.
Unblam'd, oh, let me gaze and gaze,
While lovesick fancy fondly strays,
And feasts on many a kiss; --
For us let tides of rapture roll,
And may we mingle soul with soul,
In extacies of bliss!
THE GENIUS OF AMERICA. A SONG.
TUNE, -- The watery God, etc.
BY THE SAME.
WHERE spirits dwell and shad'wy forms,
On Andes' cliffs mid black'ning storms,
With livid lightnings curled:
The awful genius of our clime,
In thunder raised his voice sublime,
And hushed the listening world.
In lonely waves and wastes of earth,
A mighty empire claims its birth,
And heaven asserts the claim;
The sails that hang in yon dim sky,
Proclaim the promised era nigh,
Which wakes a world to same.
Hail, ye first bounding barks that roam,
Blue tumbling billows topp'd with foam,
Which keel never plough'd before!
Here suns perform their useless round,
Here rove the naked tribes embrown'd,
Who feed on living gore.
To midnight orgies, offering dire,
The human sacrifice on fire,
A heavenly light succeeds --
But, lo' what horrors intervene,
The toils severe, the carnag'd scene,
And more than mortal deeds!
Ye FATHERS, spread your same afar,
It Is yours to still the sounds of war,
And bid the slaughter cease;
The peopling hamlets wide extend,
The harvests spring, the spires ascend,
Mid grateful songs of peace.
Shall steed to steed, and man to man,
With discord thundering in the van,
Again destroy the bliss?
Enough my mystic words reveal,
The rest the shades of night conceal,
In fate's profound abyss.
THE COUNTRY MEETING: OR FRIENDS' PLACE OF WORSHIP.
BY T. C. JAMES.
OF wars tremendous deeds, the din of arms,
And acts by Fame renowned, fain would I sing,
But that ambition never my bosom warms,
Nor would Calliope her succor bring
To hard that soars with too adventurous wing,
O Shenstone! sweetest child of fancy fair,
Dart one fond ray and guide the weakest quill,
That ever rashly claimed thy guardian care,
To point the high path up the slippery hill,
Where thou thy lyre do touch with (...) skill.
Themes that have never been polished into rhyme,
Would a faint pencil in this verse pourtray,
If in the fond attempt to gain on time,
No taunting critic meet me on my way,
And with these accents rude my heart dismay:
Vain youth, forbear, by desperate folly moved,
Of poetasters the mean herd to swell;
But mark his strain whom laurell'd Phoebus loved,
What Horace, tuneful bard, has sung so well,
How Daedalus's son, bold artist, headlong fell.
View yonder ancient dome with trees beset,
From which no lofty spire does proudly rise,
Nor hence each week, when congregation's met,
Are studied hymns ever winged unto the skies,
Nor does amen from parish clerk arise.
Even music's lulling charms beseems wrong
To those who did this modest temple rear;
For all, who to those lonely confines throng,
Worship in guise of solemn silent prayer;
Nor can they think that words their sinful deeds repair.
No pulpit here does grace the naked wall,
Nor does the sculptor his gay art express:
For thus they teach: Religion does not call
For the vain ornaments of splendid dress,
Nor will meek heaven superfluous grandeur bless.
And wrong they hold it, that the flock should pay
For truths which ought to flow without control,
Free as the silver dew, or light of day,
To beam mild virtue on the expanding soul,
And spread celestial sparks, free gift, from pole to pole.
But see, over yonder field, the elder train
Of village dames their little infants bring,
Who else might loiter on the grassy plain,
And wet their new clothes in yon bubbling spring,
Which would their parents' minds with sorrow sting.
The sportive urchins often will skip away,
To chase the partridge from the neighboring bush;
And often, with balls of well-attemper'd clay,
Will from its covert fright the trembling thrush,
Nor mind the matron's careful voice, which would them hush.
Down the slop'd hill the gayer tribe descend,
On neighing steeds, that champ the steeled bit,
Strait to the fane their pompous way they tend;
There 'midst their peers in goodly order ^it,
Young swains for strength renowned, and maids for wit;
Such strength as at the mill-door often is seen,
When Colin lifts the sack of mighty weight;
Such wit as sports in gambols over the green,
And would the ear of nicer townsman grate:
He Would call it shocking stuff, and rude, unseemly prate.
Yet Humor her abode will deign to fix
Amidst the lively rustics of the place,
And with the village hinds will often mix,
Giving to every feat a festive grace,
And spreading cheerfulness over every face.
Let the polite, the polished, blame their joys,
Whom Nature, unconstrained, can never charm:
This is the life which (...) never cloys,
Nor ever can fell Ambition work it harm,
Blowing with hideous blast its poisonous alarm.
See yonder youth on prancing bay steed ride,
While satisfaction on his broad front beams;
And view his gentle charmer by his side,
For whom he wishes, and of whom he dreams;
Of heavenly form and mind to him she seems.
For her each evening, anxiously he calls,
Of wild flowers fair, a nosegay scented sweet:
For her the chestnut drops its prickly hulls,
And the wood pigeon yields its sav'ry meat,
(...) thousand tempting gifts which verse cannot repeat.
And now through folding doors, full wide displayed,
The assembly's grave and pious numbers throng,
While well each noisy buzzing murmur's stayed,
With the loose prattling of each infant tongue;
For often confusion has from childhood sprung.
See the wise elder's venerable grace,
Mark with what slow paced dignity he moves:
See every little eye hangs on his face,
And over all his features fondly roves,
For he the junior train affectionately loves.
The village teacher sits with looks profound,
And marks the entering throng, with eye askance;
If, as he careful views the dome around,
He should on careless pupil's visage chance,
He sends him straight a play forbidding glance.
Of looks like these he has a plenteous store,
To fright his students from each frolic mood:
And well they watch to see his aspect lour,
Trying each art to avert the baleful wood,
By sitting wondrous still, and seeming even us good.
Silence with Sleep his empire now divides,
While some on this, and some on that side nod;
The ploughman still his steers and ploughshare guides,
And breaks, in pleasing dreams, the fancied sod;
While the school-mistress wields the birchen rod.
Others, more wakeful, plan their future deeds,
While on increase of wealth their wishes stray:
The farmer thus in rapture counts his steeds,
And deals to each his part of winter's hay,
Till spring renews the grass, and gives returning May.
Where will not thirst of treacherous gold approach,
Since here, even here, it holds its wide domain!
From the warm cit who rolls in gilded coach,
To the dull carter, whistling over the plain,
Does Plutus, god of shining lucre, reign.
Happy, thrice happy are the instructed few,
On whom fell Want never lays her harpy claws,
But, far retired from 'midst the toiling crew,
Live in observance of wise Nature's lays,
And learn from her to trace the great Eternal Cause.
WRITTEN AT SEA, IN A HEAVY GALE.
BY CAPTAIN PHILIP FRENEAU.
HAPPY the man who, safe on shore,
Now trims, at home, his evening fire;
Unmoved he hears the tempest roar,
That on the tufted groves expire;
Alas! on us they doubly fall,
Our feeble bark must bear them all.
Now to their haunts the birds retreat,
The squirrel seeks his hollow tree,
Wolves in their shaded caverns meet,
All, all are blessed but wretched we --
For, doomed a stranger to repose,
No rest the unsettled ocean knows.
Whilst over the dark abyss we roam,
Perhaps, whatever the pilots say,
We saw the sun's descending gloom,
No more to see the rising ray;
But buried low, by far too deep,
On coral beds unpitied sleep!
But what a strange uncoasted strand
Is that where death permits no day,
No charts we have to mark that land,
No compass to direct the way!
What pilot shall explore that realm,
What new Columbus take the helm!
While death and darkness both surround,
And tempests rage with lawless power,
Of friendship's voice I hear no sound,
No comfort in this dreadful hour --
What friendship can in tempests be,
What comforts on this angry sea!
The barque accustomed to obey,
No more the trembling pilots guide,
Alone she gropes her trackless way.
While mountains burst on every side.
Thus skill and science both must fall,
And ruin is the lot of all.
THE AMERICAN WARRIOR.
BY A SOUTH CAROLINIAN, AGED 17.
FROM THE (CHARLESTON) STAR.
Virtus, recludens immoritis m^ri
Coelum, n^gata tentat iter via:
Coetusque vu^gares, et udam
Spernit humum fugiente penn^^.

AT that still hour when midnight shades the sky,
And twinkling planets roll their orbs on high,
The ^ad CARANDOC left his native home
A while through drear Columbia's wilds to roam.
Pensive he moved, by bitterest griefs oppressed,
And thus poured forth the sorrows of his breast:
Curse on the insidiously deceitful foes!
In vain would force their treachery oppose!
Envelop'd by the solemn shades of night,
Our town was hushed! extinguished every light!
No hollow murmurs breathed along the vale,
No echoes whispered to the gentle gale:
At length a sudden yell is heard around,
And all ALTAMA shudder'd at the found.
Confused amazed, each warrior left his bed,
And rushed upon the snare the traitors spread;
Part seize their arms, and fierce to combat fly;
And part, reclined in sleep, ignobly die:
All wild at random deal the deadly blow,
The javelin that prepares, and this the bow:
But most, alas! with groans yield up their breath,
And leave the bonds of sleep, for those of death.
Loud, conquering shouts, and horrid groans arise,
From all around; the clangour mounts the skies!
Soon as these dreadful shouts assault my ear,
I wield the ax, and brandish high my spear:
To join the war my gallant men I call,
And bid them conquer, or as bravely fall.
Full many a warrior fell beneath my hand,
Clasped the cold earth, and bit thensanguin'd sand,
Whilst horror, hand in hand with wild affright.
Stalked through the ranks, or hovered over the sight.
Now clouds of arrows whizz'd along the air,
Whilst all the cots involved in flames appear:
On every side shrill female shrieks resound,
And slaughtered heroes strewn the mournful ground.
My dear companions all at length were slain;
When, impotent the battle to sustain,
While yet the grass was tipped with midnight dew,
Through hostile ranks, through slaughtering foes I flew.
Till, quite overcome. I rested in this gloom;
Where soon I trust to end my hapless doom!
Can this lone forest peace of mind bestow?
Or ease a wretch whose life's surcharged with woe?
Can I my nation, and my griefs survive?
No, honor, glory bid me cease to live!
Thick clouds of smoke ascend the lurid skies!
Lo! even now the glaring flames arise!
And, hark! the conqueror's shouts assail my ear,
While groans of heroes urge the briny tear!
Farewell, ye dreary wilds! for now I go
To visit peaceful realms unknown to woe:
Whose vales are blooming with perennial flowers,
And meadows watered by refreshing showers,
There shall I see my loved Lamuna's shade,
Stray over the fields, and haunt the blossomed glade:
Clasp to my breast the idol of my heart,
And (oh! the pleasing thought) no more to part:
But, while she wanders (...) valleys over,
I Will hunt the stag or rouse the mountain boar.
-- She glides before me on the gentle wind! --
And bids me cease to tarry long behind! --
I come, -- I come, -- Lamuna dear -- I come!
And joyful seek thembraces of the tomb!
Carandoc plunged a weapon in his breast,
Closed his dim eyes, and sunk to endless rest.
THE DOCTRINE OF CONSEQUENCES.
A TALE.
FROM THE SAME.
THE greatest plagues on earth ('it is plain),
Are restless phantoms of the brain,
The frantic hobby of the hour,
Subjects us to his wayward power:
So (...) charm the view,
And we their devious paths pursue.
O be it then our earliest care,
TO arrest wild fancy's m^d career:
Unless we check the growing evil,
With common sense 't will play the devil.
Bernard, the hero of our tale.
Was, like our common nature, frail;
Judicious often -- but sit and start
Would whisper folly to his heart.
Of every whimsey when possessed,
He hailed his lot, and called it blessed.
Long had his philosophic eye,
Been moving round the world, to espy
A single rule by which to square,
To measure, ascertain, compare,
And fix futurity's events,
Beyond the range of common sense.
Pond'ring through all the moods and tenses,
Last hit"the rule of consequences."
Proud of his vast, profound employ,
He owned the miracle with joy.
To give it vent, and teach mankind
This grand arcanum of the mind,
First called his lad, began a lecture,
Announc'd the infallible director.
Haranguing with all due confusion,
His logic spun to this conclusion --
"Then learn -- the slightest hint -- a word --
Should full intelligence afford.
Nor keep events in dubitation,
To ask a year of explication.
Now, James, remark -- tomorrow morn,
I wish to ride before the dawn,
This doctrine teaches you (of course),
To straight prepare my faithful horse;
To clean my stirrups, spurs, and boots,
And fix all else the occasion suits,
Complete and ready at the door,
And wake me (for I rise) at four.
So says the rule -- anticipate --
Nor tedious explanations wait."
The pupil promised to obey,
And have all done before break of day.
He swore allegiance to the maxim,
Defied any with neglect to tax him.
Before the sun had reached the skies,
Brisk Jemmy to our hero flies;
With thundering knocks the chamber rung;
"Arise. sir, it is four, you will ride"he sung.
"I Am sick -- I Have had a restless night;
Disordered, fev'rish, sluggish quite.
Go, James, unsaddle then the horse" --
He did -- and hurried for a nurse;
Next to a druggist and physician,
He told old Bernard's sad condition;
That he was sick -- he wanted breath --
Alas! and at the hour of death.
"O hasten with a tenfold pace,
I fear it is a desperate case!"
But ere they reached the good man's bed,
Our wag proclaimed the patient dead.
Next to the sexton forth he hurried,
Announc'd his master to be buried!
Now the old man, (good luck it seems),
Was rapt in sleep and gentle dreams.
A coffin came -- was placed beside him --
Some waggish maids fell to and tied him.
The shutter's closed, the lamps were lighted,
The chamber hung in gloom, benighted.
The funeral bell began to toll,
The house resounded"Ah, poor soul!"
Old Bernard woke -- alas! the dread,
That struck his heart -- he raised his head --
Big drops of sweat rolled down his cheek --
He looked -- he hemmed -- and tried to speak.
The lamps -- the knell -- the coffin -- gloom --
With all the horrors of a tomb,
Roused every hair -- his eye balls rolled --
He gnash'd his teeth -- his blood ran cold --
With fright, amaze, and anguish spent,
He almost breathed a meek consent.
When James, to save the patient's reason,
Come in just at the lucky season.
"Heaven spare me! gentle spirit, tell,
What region's this -- am I in hell?
O whither, whither, pr'ythee say,
Is fled the cheering light of day?"
Quick to the corpse, with hasty strides,
Whilst loudest laughter shook his sides,
James ran, and grasped his master's feet,
Unwrapp'd the well-bound winding sheet.
Withdrew the horrid apparatus
Out put the lamps, and opened the shutters.
Our sage, once more to reason brought,
With rage impelled, James' throat fast caught --
"Infernal! tell me, what is your meaning?"
Scratching his head (the wag) and grinning,
"Why, master Bernard, what is the flurry?
We only came your corpse to bury.
So says the rule -- anticipate --
Nor tedious explanations wait.
I heard you groan, complain, and sigh,
Could any doubt exist, you would die?
If wrong -- you will father such offenses,
Your doctrine this -- of consequences."
The joke went round -- the unhappy sage
Was laughed at to a good old age.
Boys hooted -- negroes ran to view him,
A standing jest to all who knew him.
SONG.
FROM THE SAME.
YE constant to truth and to love!
Forgive me this wandering of mind --
Ah! do not forgive, but approve,
And repentance I Will throw to the wind.
In absence from Delia I Have wept;
I Have pined at the loss of my fair;
Had the vows pledged so sacred been kept,
My breast had never swelled with despair!
But no more I repine -- for a maid,
The sweetest, the lov'liest ever seen,
Has healed my heart's wounds as they bled.
And bade me no more to complain.
Who the charms of Eliza can paint?
Her mind so adorned, so improved,
Her heart to the virtues so bent,
Her manners so soft, so beloved?
What enchantment, what magic her eyes!
It Is rapture to see her but move:
When she smiles, -- nor is great the surprise, --
Even envy is ravished to love.
O, hasten ye sweet future hours!
To bind the attachment still more --
Hear destiny, kindest of powers!
It Is friendship and love that implore!
Henceforth when keen sorrows aggrieve
The heart of her bard -- he will confess,
None so keen but the nymph can relieve,
And pleasure create from distress.
STANZAS, ON THE PRESIDENT'S BIRTH DAY.
NO peerage we covet, no sceptres desire,
Nor gew gaws that garnish a throne;
Yet liberty loves on her own native lyre
To celebrate sons of her own.
And always with rapture his virtue she sings,
And exults on the morn of his birth,
Who shakes every throne of despotical kings,
And gives a new lesson to earth.
O, widely diffuse it, ye winds as ye blow!
O waft it ye waves that they fan!
For the choicest of gifts that the gods can bestow,
Is the ^lessing of freedom to man.
O Washington, hail! whom the breath of pure same
With praises more sweet shall perfume,
Than ever embalmed or exalted a name
In Macedon, Athens, or Rome.
For freedom say what did that foe of the Greek,
Alexander, that hero admired?
Let the foes, or the friend whom he massacred speak;
Or beautiful city he fired!
Ye unfettered freemen examine each deed
That made him renowned and adored;
Then mention what race by his valor was freed,
Or blessed by his scepter or sword!
Did conquering Caesar Rome's senate obey?
Did the legions disperse at a word?
Did he halt or retire from a summit of sway
That saving his country conferred?
Then, Washington, hail^ whom the breath of pure same
With praises more sweet shall perfume,
Than ever embalmed or exalted a name,
In Macedon, Athens, or Rome.
Did Athens, did Sparta one hero produce
TO extinguish their sends by his mind,
Or prove to the free the pre-eminent cause
Of union to them and mankind?
Ah, no! if wise Greece but one patriot adept,
One leader like ours, had enjoyed,
No lover of freedom or science had wept,
For science and freedom destroyed.
Then, Washington, hail! whom the breath of pure same
With praises more sweet shall perfume
Than ever embalmed or exalted a name
In Macedon, Athens, or Rome.
THE FIRE FLY.
LITTLE rambler of the night,
Where and whence thy glowing light
Is it formed of evening dew?
Where and whence thy brilliant hue?
Hark! methinks, a voice replies,
He that formed the azure ^^ies,
Great in least, and good to all,
Lord of man, and insect small,
He it was, that made this vest,
Search, adore, nor know the rest.
Little rambler of the night,
Blessed be this voice of thine!
He that clothed thy form in light,
Is the God of me and mine!
Go enjoy in verdant fields,
What his royal bounty yields;
Nip the leaf or taste the flower;
S^p in nature's roseate bower;
Falling full the span that is given,
With the boons of gracious heaven.
THE THUNDER STORM.
MANTLING in the azure sky,
Watery clouds resolve on high,
(...) lightenings stream around;
Rolling thunder rocks the ground;
Now, the rain impetuous sweeps,
Fast adown the etherial steeps;
Rapid pours the torrent on:
Thirsty mount, and parched lawn,
Lofty hill, and lowly vale,
Smiling bid the tempest hail;
We were thirsty, we were dry;
Open, open wide the sky,
Let the flood descend on all,
This is nature's fervent call,
See, again it clears away,
Brighter shines the fare of day;
Purer breathes the ambient air,
All creation doubly fair,
Rises on the raptured view,
In a livery more than new.
AN EPISTLE TO DR. DWIGHT. For Dr. Dwight's letter to Colonel Humphreys, see
page (...).

BY COLONEL HUMPEREYS.
On board the Courier de ^'Europe, July 20, 1784.
FROM the wide watery waste, where naught but skies
And mingling waves salute the aching eyes
Where the same moving circle bounds the view,
And paints with ^ap'ry tints the billows blue;
To thee, my early friend! to thee, dear Dwight!
Fond recollection turns, while thus I write;
While I reflect, no change of time or place,
The impressions of our friendship can efface;
Nor peace, nor war, though changed for us the scene,
Though mountains rise, or oceans roll between;
Too deep that sacred passion was impressed
On my young heart, too deep it marked your breast;
Your breast which asks the feelings of your friend,
What chance betides him, or what toils attend?
Then hear the muse, in sea-born numbers tell
In mind how cheerful, and in health how well;
And even that muse will deign to let you know,
What things concur to make and keep him to.
We go, protected by supernal care,
With cloudless skies, and suns serenely fair;
While over the unruffled main the gentle gale
Consenting breathes, and sills each swelling ^ail;
Conscious of safety in the self same hand,
Which guides us on the ocean or the land.
Of thee, fair (...)! the (...) prophetic sings,
Europes swift Messenger! expand thy wings,
(...) thy tall m^sts, extend thine ample arms,
Catch the light breeze, nor dread impending harms.
Full of shall thou, if aught the muse avails,
Wing the broad deep with such delighted gales;
Full often to either world announce glad news,
Of allied realms promote the friendly views;
So shall each distant age assert thy claim,
And Europe's messenger be known to same!
What though this plain so uniform and vast,
Illimitably spreads its dreary waste;
What though no isles, nor vales, nor hills, nor groves,
Meet the tired eye that round the horizon roves;
Yet, still collected in a narrow bound,
Ten thousand little pleasures may be found.
Here we enjoy accommodations good,
With pleasant liquors, and well-flavour'd food,
Me^^s nicely fatten'd in Columbian fields,
And luscious wines, that Gallia's vintage yields,
On which you bards ('it was so in former days)
Might feast your wit, and I wish all your praise.
Within our ship, well-furnish'd, roomy, clean,
Come see the uses of each different scene.
Far in the prow, for culinary use,
Fires, not poetic, much good cheer produce;
The ovens there our daily bread afford,
And thence the viands load our plenteous board.
See various landscapes shade our dining hall,
Where m^^nic nature wantons round the wall,
There no vain pomp appears, there all is neat,
And there cool zephyrs fanning, as we eat,
Avert the fervours of the toon-tide ray,
And give the mildness of the vernal day.
See the great cabin nigh, its doors unfold,
Show fleeting forms from mirrors fixed in gold!
Over painted ceilings brighter prospects rise,
And rural scenes again delight our eyes;
There (...) from converse or from social sports,
We drink delight less dashed than that of courts.
But when more sober cares the hour requires,
Faith to his cell of solitude retires;
His bed, his books, his paper, pen and ink,
Present the choice, to rest, to read, or think.
Yet what would all avail to prompt the smile,
Cheer the sad breast, or the dull hour beguile;
If well-bred passengers, discreet and free,
Were not at hand to mix in social glee?
Such my companions -- such the muse shall tell,
Him first, whom once you knew in war so well,
Our Polish friend, General ^^^^eiuszko.
whose name still sounds so hard,
To make it rhyme would puzzle any bard;
That youth, whom bays and laurels early crowned,
For virtue, science, arts, and arms, renowned,
Next him, behold, to grace our watery scene,
An honest German lifts his generous mein;
Him Carolina sends to Europe's shore,
Canals and inland waters to explore;
From thence returned, she hope's to see her tide,
In commerce rich, through ampler channels glide.
Next comes the bleak Quebec's well natured son;
And last, our naval chief, the friend of (...);
Whose plain, frank manners, formed on sickle seas,
Are cheerful still, and always aim to please:
Nor less the other chiefs their zeal display,
To make us happy as themselves are gay.
Severed from all society but this,
Half way from either world we plough the abyss:
Save the small sea bird and the fish that flies,
On you blue waves no object meets my eyes.
No^ has the insidious book, with lutes, beguiled
Of peopled ocean scarce a single child.
Yet luckless Dolphin, (...) to Arion Ille se let, citharamque tenet pretiumque
vehendi Cantat, et (...) carmine (...) aqu^s.

Ovid. Fast. 2.


true,
Naught could avail thy beauteous transient hue;
As over the deck, in dying pang you rolled,
Wrapped in gay rain-bows and pellucid gold.
Now see that wanderer bird, fatigued with flight
Over many a watery league, is forced to light
High on the mast, -- the bird our seamen take,
Though scared, too tired its refuge to forsake:
Fear not sweet bird, nor judge our motives ill,
No barbarous man, now means thy blood to spill,
Or hold thee cag'd; soon as we reach the shore,
Free shall thou fly, and gaily sing and soar!
Another grateful sight now cheers the eye,
At first a snow-white spot in yon clear sky;
Then through the optic tube a ship appears,
And now distinct athwart the billows veers;
Daughter of ocean, made to bless mankind!
Go, range wide waters on the wings of wind;
With friendly intercourse far climes explore,
Their produce barter and increase their store;
Never saw my eye so fair a pageant swim,
As thou appear'st, in all thy gallant trim!
Amused with trivial things, reclined at ease,
While the swift bark divides the summer seas;
Your bard (for past neglect to make amends)
Now writes to you, anon to other friends.
Anon the scene, in Europe's polished climes,
Will give new themes for philosophic rhymes,
Open broader fields for reason to explore,
Improvements vast of scientific lore!
Through nations blessed with peace, but strong in arms,
Refined in arts, and apt for social charms,
Your friend will stray, and strive, with studious care,
To mark whatever is useful, great, or rare;
Search the small shades of manners in their lives,
What policy prevails, how commerce thrives;
How morals form of happiness the base,
How others differ from Columbia's race;
And, gleaning knowledge from the realms he roved,
Bring home a patriot heart, enlarged, improved.
A SONG.
TRANSLATED FROM THE FRENCH.
BY THE SAME.
IT rains, it rains, my fair,
Come drive your white sheep fast:
To shelter quick repair,
Haste, shepherdess, make haste.
I hear -- the water pours,
With patt'ring on the vines:
See here! see here! it lours --
See there the lightning shines.
The thunder do thou hear?
Loud roars the rushing storm:
Take (while we run, my dear)
Protection from my arm.
I see our cot, ah hold!
Mama and sister Nance,
To open our sheepfold,
Most cheerily advance.
God bless my mother dear,
My sister Nancy too!
I bring my sweet heart here,
To sleep to night with you.
Go, dry yourself, my friend,
And make yourself at home --
Sister, on her attend:
Come in, sweet lambkins, come.
Mama, let us take good care
Of all her pretty sheep;
Her little lamb we'll spare
More straw whereon to sleep.
It Is done -- now let us haste
To her; -- you here, my fair!
Undressed, oh what a waist!
My mother, look you there.
Let Us sup; come take this place,
You shall be next to me,
This pine-knot's cheerful blaze
Shall shine direct on thee.
Come taste this cream so sweet,
This syllabub so warm;
Alas! you do not cat:
You feel even yet the storm.
'Twas wrong -- I pressed too much
Your steps, when on the way:
But here, see here your couch --
There sleep till dawn of day.
With gold the mountain tips: --
Good night, good night, my dove:
Now let me on your lips,
Imprint one kiss of love.
Mama and I will come,
When morn begins to shine,
To see my sweetheart home,
And ask her hand for mine.
EPITAPH On a Patient killed by a Cancer Quack.
BY DR. LEMUEL HOPKINS.
HERE lies a fool fiat on his back,
The victim of a Cancer Quack;
Who lost his money and his life,
By plaster, caustic, and by knife.
The case was this -- a pimple rose,
South-east a little of his nose;
Which daily redden'd and grew bigger,
As too much drinking gave it vigor:
A score of gossips soon ensure
Full three score different modes of cure:
But yet the full-fed pimple still
Defied all petticoated skill:
When fortune led him to peruse
A hand-bill in the weekly news;
Signed by six fools of different sorts,
All cured of cancers made of warts;
Who recommend, with due submission,
This cancer-monger as magician;
Fear winged his flight to find the quack,
And prove his cancer-curing knack:
But on his way he found another, --
A second advertising brother:
But as much like him as an owl
Is unlike every handsome fowl;
Whose fame had raised as broad a fog,
And of the two the greater hog:
Who used a still more magic plaster,
That sweat forsooth, and cured the faster.
This doctor viewed, with moony eyes
And scowl'd up face, the pimple's size;
Then christened it in solemn answer,
And cried,"This pimple's name is CANCER."
But courage, friend, I see you're pale,
My sweating plasters never fail;
I Have (...) hundreds out with ^ase,
With roots as long as maple trees,
And never (...) in all my trial --
Behold these samples here in (...)
Preserved to show my wondrous (...),
Just as my liver (...) -- in spirits.
For twenty (...) the cure is done --
The bargain struck, the plaster on,
Which gnawed the cancer at its leisure,
And pained his face above all measure.
But still the pimple spread the faster,
And swelled, like toad that meets disaster.
Thus foiled, the doctor gravely swore,
It was a right rose cancer sore;
Then stack his probe beneath the beard,
And showed them where the leaves appeared;
And raised the patient's drooping spirits,
By praising up the plaster's merits --
Quoth he,The roots now scarcely stick --
I Will fetch her out like crab or tick;
And make it rendezvous, next trial,
With six more plagues, in my old vial.
Then purged him pale with jalap drastic,
And next applies the infernal caustic.
But yet, this semblance bright of hell
Served but to make the patient yell;
And, gnawing on with fiery pace,
Devoured one broadside of his face --
' Courage, it is done,' the doctor cried,
And quick the incision knife applied:
That with three cuts made such a hole,
Out flew the patient's tortured ^oul!
Go, readers, gentle, eke and simple,
If you have wart, ^^corn, or pimple;
To quack infallible apply;
Here Is room enough for you to lie.
His skill triumph but still prevails,
For DEATH's a cure that never fails.
THE HYPOCRITE'S HOPE.
BY THE SAME.
BLESSED is the man, who from the womb,
To faintship him betakes,
And when too soon his child shall come,
A long confession makes.
When next in Broad Church-alley, he
Shall take his former place,
Relates his past iniquity,
And consequential grace.
Declares how long by Satan vexed,
From truth he did depart,
And tells the time, and tells the text,
That smote his flinty heart.
He stands in halfway covenant sure;
Full five long years or more,
One foot in church's pale secure,
The other out of door.
Then riper grown in gifts and grace,
With every rite complies,
And deeper lengthens down his face,
And higher rolls his eyes.
He tones like Pharisee sublime,
Two lengthy prayers a day;
The same that he from early prime,
Had heard his father say.
Each Sunday perched on bench of pew,
To passing priest he bows,
Then loudly 'mid the quav'ring crew,
Attunes his vocal nose.
With awful look then rises ^low,
And pray'rful visage sour,
More fit to fight the apostate foe,
Than seek a pard'ning power.
Then nodding hears the sermon next,
From priest haranguing loud;
And doubles down each quoted text,
From Genesis to Jude.
And when the priest holds forth address,
To old ones born anew,
With holy pride and wrinkled face,
He rises in his pew.
Good works he cares naught about,
But faith alone will seek,
While Sunday's pieties blot out
The knaveries of the week.
He makes the poor his daily prayer,
Yet drives them from his board:
And though to his own good he swear,
Through habit breaks his word.
This man advancing fresh and fair,
Shall all his race complete;
And wave at last his hoary hair,
Arrived in Deacon's seat.
There shall he all church honors have,
By joyous brethren given --
Till priest in funeral sermon grave.
Shall send him straight to heaven.
AN INTENDED INSCRIPTION,
Written f^^ the Monument on Beacon-Hill, in Boston, and addressed to the
Passenger.
BY JAMES ALLEN, OF BOSTON.
WHERE stretched your sail, beneath what foreign sky
Did lov'lier landscapes ever charm your eye?
Could fancy's fairy pencil, Stranger! say,
Even dipped in dreams, a nobler scene pourtray?
Behold yon vales, whose skirts elude your view,
And mountains fading to aerial blue!
Along their bow'ry shades how healthy toil
Alternate sports, or tends the mellow soil.
See (...) towns mid groves and gardens rise,
And eastward, -- where the stretching ocean lies,
^o! our fair capital sublimes the scene,
New (...) pride, and ocean's future queen;
How over the tradeful port august she smiles,
^^er sea like haven boasts an hundred isles,
Whence hardy commerce swells the lofty sails
Over arctic seas, and mocks the polar gales,
Thence tides of wealth the wafting breezes bring,
And hence even culture feels its vital spring.
These scenes our Sires from rugged nature wrought,
Since -- what dire wars their patriotic race have fought!
Witness yon tracts, where first the Briton bled,
Driven by our youth redoubted PI^RCY fled:
There BREED ascends, and BUNKER'S bleeding steeps,
Still over whose brow abortive Victory weeps;
What Trophies since! the gaze of after times,
Reared Freedom's empire over our happy climes!
But hence, fond Stranger, take a nobler view,
See yon shorn elm, The stamp of Liberty-tree.
whence all these glories grew.
Here, where the armed foe presumptuous trod.
Trampled our shrines, and even mouthed our GOD,
His vengeful hand, deep as the parent-root,
Lopt each grown branch, and every suckling shoot;
Because beneath her consecrated shade
Our earliest vows to LIBERTY were paid.
High from ^er Altar blew the heaven-caught fire,
While all our wealth o'erhung the kindling pyre.
How at the deed the Nations stood aghast,
As on the pile our plighted lives we cast!
O! if an alien from our fair domains,
The blood of Britain, hapless, taint your veins,
Pace over that hallowed ground with awful tread,
And tears, atoning, over you^ ^^^ick shed;
But if, American! your lineage springs,
From Sires, who scorn the pedigree of kings,
A Georgian born you breathe the tepid air,
Or on the breezy banks of Delaware,
Or hardy Hampshire claim your haughty birth,
Revere yon root, and kiss its nurt'ring earth:
O be its fibers fed by flowing springs,
Whence rose our empires over the thrones of kings;
Even now descend, adore the dear remain,
Where first reared Liberty's illumined fane,
There all her race, while time's revolve shall come,
As pilgrims flock to MECCA'S idol'd tomb.
DEPREDATIONS AND DESTRUCTION OF THE ALGERINES.
BY COLONEL DAVID HUMPHREYS.
BUT what dark prospect interrupts our joy?
What arm, presumptuous, da^es our trade annoy?
Great God! the rovers, who insult thy waves,
Have seized our ships, and made our freemen slaves;
And hark! the cries of that disastrous ^and
Float over the main, and reach Columbia's strand --
The wild alarm from ocean spreads around,
And circling echoes propagate the sound,
From smooth Saluda, fed with silver rills,
Up the Blue-ridge, over Alleganean hills,
To where Niagara tremendous roars,
As over white-sheeted rocks his torrent pours,
(The dreadful cataract whole regions shakes
Of boundless woods and congregated lakes!)
Through farthest Kennebeck, adown whose tide,
The future ships, unfashion'd, monstrous glide,
On whose rough banks, where stood the savage den,
The axe is heard and busy hum of men --
But hark! their labors and their accents cease,
A warning voice has interdicted peace,
Has spread through cities, gained remotest farms,
And fired the indignant states with new alarms:
The sickly flame in every bosom burns,
Like gloomy torches in sepulchral urns.
Why sleep'st thou, Barlow, child of genius? why
See thou, blessed Dwight, our land in sadness lie?
And where is Trumbull, earliest boast of fame?
It Is yours, ye bards, to wake the smothered flame
-- To you, my dearest friends! the task belongs,
To rouse your country with heroic songs;
For me, though glowing with conceptions warm,
I find no equal words to give them form:
Pent in my breast, the mad'ning tempest raves,
Like imprisoned fires in Etna's burning caves:
For me why will no thundering numbers roll?
Why, niggard language! do thou balk my soul?
Come thou sweet Feeling of another's woe,
That make the heart to melt, the eye to flow!
Come thou, keen Feeling, liveliest sense of wrong
Aid Indignation, and inspire my song!
Teach me the woes of slavery to paint,
Beneath whose weight our captur'd freemen saint!
Teach me in Shades of Stygian night to trace,
In characters of hell the pirate race!
Teach me prophetic, to disclose their doom,
A new born nation trampling on their tomb!
What mortal terrors all my senses seize,
Possess my heart and life's warm current freeze?
Why grow my eyes with thick suff^s;ions dim?
What visionary forms before me swim?
Where am I? Heavens! what mean these dol'rous cries!
And what these horrid scenes that round me rise?
Heard ye the groans, those messengers of pain?
Heard ye the clanking of the captive's chain?
Heard ye your free born sons their fate deplore,
Pale in their chains, and laboring at the oar?
Saw ye the dungeon, in whose blackest cell,
That house of woe, your friends, your children dwell?
Or saw ye those, who dread the torturing hour,
Crushed by the rigours of a tyrant's power?
Saw ye the shrinking slave, the uplifted lash,
The frowning butcher, and the red'ning gash?
Saw ye the naked limbs, writhed to and fro,
In wild conto^sions of convulsing woe?
Felt ye the blood, with pangs alternate rolled,
Thrill through your veins, and freeze with death-like cold,
Or sire, as down the tear of pity stole,
Your manly breasts, and harrow up the soul?
Some guardian power in mercy intervene,
Hide from my dizzy eyes the cruel scene!
Oh stop the shrieks that tear my tortured ear!
Ye visions, vanish! dungeons, disappear!
Ye fetters, burst! ye monsters fierce, avaunt!
Infernal furies on those monsters haunt!
Pursue the footsteps of that miscreant crew,
Pursue in flames, with hell-born ^age pursue!
Shed such dire curses as all utterance mock,
Whose plagues astonish, and whose horrors shock!
Great maledictions of eternal wrath,
Which like heaven's vial'd vengeance, singe and scathe!
Transfix with scorpion stings the callous heart!
Make blood-shot eye balls from their sockets start!
For balm, pour brimstone in their wounded soul;
Then open, perdition, and ingulf them whole!
How long will heaven restrain its bursting ire,
Nor rain blue tempests of devouring fire?
How long shall widows weep their sons in vain,
The prop of years in slav'ry's iron chain!
How long the love sick maid, unheeded, rove
The sounding shore, and call her absent love;
With wasting tears and sighs his lot bewail,
And seem to see him in each coming sail?
How long the merchant turn his failing eyes,
In desperation on the seas and skies,
And ask his captur'd ships, his ravished good,
With frantic ravings, of the heavens and floods?
How long, Columbians dear! will ye complain
Of these cursed insults on the open main?
In timid sloth shall injured brav'ry sleep?
Awake! awake! avengers of the deep!
Revenge! revenge! the voice of nature cries:
Awake to glory, and to vengeance rise!
To arms! to arms! ye bold indignant bands!
It Is heaven inspires; it is God himself commands.
Save human nature from such deadly harms,
By force of reason, or by force of arms.
O ye great powers, who passports basely crave,
From Afric's lords, to sail the midland wave --
Great fallen powers, whose gems and golden bribes
Buy paltry passports from these savage tribes --
Ye whose fine purples, silks, and stuffs of gold,
(An annual tribute) their dark limbs infold --
Ye whose mean policy for them equips,
To plague mankind, the predatory ships --
Why will ye buy your infamy so dear?
Is it self-interest or a dastard fear?
Is it because ye meanly think to gain
A richer commerce on the infested main?
Is it because ye meanly wish to see
Your rivals chained, yourselves ignobly free?
Who gave commission to these monsters fierce,
To hold in chains the humbled universe?
Would God, would nature, would their conquering swords,
Without your meanness, make them ocean's lords?
What! do ye fear? nor dare their power provoke?
Would not that bubble burst beneath your stroke?
And shall the weak remains of barbarous rage,
Insulting, triumph over the enlightened age?
Do ye not feel confusion, horror, shame,
To bear a hateful, tributary name?
Will ye not aid to wipe the foul disgrace,
And break the fetters from the human race?
Then, though unaided by these mighty powers,
Ours be the toil; the danger, glory ours:
Then, O my friends, by heaven ordained to free,
From tyrant rage, the long-infested sea --
Then let us firm, though solitary, stand,
The sword, and olive branch in either hand:
An equal peace propose with reason's voice,
Or rush to arms, if arms should be their choice.
Stung by their crimes, can aught your vengeance stay?
Can terror daunt you? or can death dismay?
The soul enraged, can threats, can tortures tame,
Or the dank dungeon quench the etherial flame?
Have ye not once to heaven's dread throne appealed,
And has not heaven your independence sealed?
What was the power ye dared that time engage,
And brave the terrors of its hostile rage?
Was it not Britain, great in warlike toils?
The first of nations, as the queen of isles --
Britain, whose fleets, that ruled the briny surge,
Made navies tremble to its utmost verge,
Whose single arm held half the world at odds,
Great nurse of sages, bards, and demigods!
But what are these, whose threat'nings round you burst?
Of men the dregs, the feeblest, vilest, worst;
These are the pirates from the ^arb'ry strands,
Audacious miscreants, fierce, yet feeble band!
Who, impious, dare (no provocation given)
Insult the rights of man -- the laws of heaven!
Will thou not rise, O God, to plead our cause,
Assert thine honor, and defend thy laws!
Will thou not bend thine awful throne to hear
The pris'ner's cry, and stop the falling tear!
Will thou not strike the guilty race with dread,
On impious realms thy tenfold fury shed!
Oh thou Most High, be Innocence thy care,
Oh make thy red right arm of vengeance bare,
Resume in wrath the thunders thou have hurled,
To blight the tenants of the nether world!
Thou God of hosts, our steadfast councils guide,
Lead forth our arms, and crush the sons of pride!
But hark! the trumps, as if by whirlwinds blown,
Sound from cold Lawrence to the burning zone;
Thy cause, Humanity, that swells their breath,
Wakes in each bosom cool contempt of death.
By rumbling drums, from distant regions called,
Men, scorning pirate rage, start unappall'd:
With eye balls flaming, cheeks of crimson flesh,
From rice green fields, and fur-clad mountains, rush
High-mettled youth -- unused to sights of stain,
Of hostile navies, or the stormy main --
Enraged, they leave unfinished furrows far,
To dare the deep, and toil in fields of war:
From dreams of peace, stern visag'd vet'rans wake,
Their rattling arms, with grasp indignant, shake;
Those arms their pride, their country's gift, what day
To independence they had opened the way;
Frowning wide ruin, terrible they rise,
Like battling thunders bursting from the skies.
From Erie's inland vales, unnam'd in song,
In native fierceness pour the hunter throng;
Beneath their rapid march realms roll behind;
Their uncomb'd locks loose floating on the wind;
Coarse their worn garbs -- they place their only pride
In the dread rifle, often in battle tried;
With aim unbalk'd, whose leaden vengeance sings,
Sure as the dart the king of terrors flings;
So erst, brave Morgan, thy bold hunters sped --
Such light-armed youths the gallant Fayette led,
Ere Steuben brought the Prussian lore from far,
Or Knox created all the stores of war.
Through tented fields impatient ardour spreads --
Roused by the trump, the coursers rear their heads,
Snuff in the tainted gale the sulfurous grain,
Responsive neigh, and prance the wide champaign.
Now preparation forms the gleaming blade;
In moulds capacious, ponderous deaths are made:
In crowded docks, the incessant labor glows:
The tool resounds -- the wondrous structure grows
-- Propp'd on the stocks, stupendous navies stand,
Raise their huge bulks, and darken all the strand;
Till towering fleets, from different harbors joined,
Float on the pinions of the favoring wind:
Tall groves of masts, like mountain forests rise;
Waved high in air, the crimson streamer flies:
To prosperous gales the canvas wide unfurled,
Bears the roused vengeance round the watery world:
See! ocean whitens with innum'rous sails;
Be still, ye storms! breathe soft, ye friendly gales!
See! where Columbia's mighty squadron runs
To climes illum^d by other stars and suns;
Gains the deep straight; ascends the midland wave,
Of ancient fleets the unfathomable grave!
When Freedom's ardent chiefs, with eager eye,
Dim through the mist the corsair force descry;
Their cloudlike sails hang in the distant heaven,
Like shad'wy vapors of ascending even --
Here over the topmast, flames the imperial star,
There the red crescent leads the coming war.
The obstructions cleared -- obliquely on the gales --
With open ports -- half-furl'd the flapping sails --
Near and more near, athwart the bill'wy tide,
In terrors armed, the floating bulwarks glide;
Tier pil'd over tier, the sleeping thunder lies,
Anon to rend the shudd'ring main and skies.
Ere yet they shut the narrow space between,
Begins the prelude of a bloodier scene --
With sudden touch, deep-throated engines roar,
Pierce heaven's blue vault, and dash the waves to shore;
Then mad'ning billows mock the fearful sound,
While over their surface globes of iron bound;
Unknown concussions rolling over their heads,
Far fly the monsters round their coral beds.
The battle closes -- fiercer fights begin --
And hollow hulls reverberate the din:
The green waves blacken, as the tempest lours,
Chain bolts and langrage rain in dreadful showers;
Ship locked to ship, hangs over the foaming flood,
The black sides wrapped in flames, the decks in blood:
From both the lines, now smoke, now flames aspire,
Now clouds they roll, now gleam a ridge of fire:
On hostile prows, Columbia's heroes stand,
Conquering 'mid death, or dying sword in hand:
Promiscuous cries, with shouts confusedly drowned,
In the wild uproar, swell the dol'rous found:
And naught distinct is heard, and naught is seen,
Where wreaths of vapor hovering intervene,
Save when black grains expand imprisoned air,
The thunders wake, and shoot a livid glare:
Then ghastly forms are seen by transient gleams,
The dead and wounded drenched in purple streams.
Now helmless ships in devious routes are driven,
The cordage torn, the masts to atoms riv'n;
Now here they glow, with curling waves of sire;
In one explosion total crews expire.
Here barks relinquished, burnt to ocean's brink,
Half veiled in crimson clouds begin to sink.
With men submerg'd, there frailer fragments float,
Here yawning gul^s absorb the o'erloaded boat:
There red-hot balls, that g^^ze the waters, hiss,
And plunge the galleys down the dread abyss.
^ere shattered limbs -- there garments dipped in blood,
With mingling crimson stain the soughten flood,
While Afric's pirates, shrinking from the day,
By terror urged, drag wounded hulks away.
As when two adverse storms, impetuous driven,
From east and west, sail up the azure heaven,
In flaming fields of day together run,
Explode their fires, and blot with night the sun --
The eastern cloud, its flames expired at last,
Flies from the lightning of the western blast:
So fled the corsair line the blighting stroke
Of Freedom's thunder -- so their battle broke --
As if by heaven's own arm subdued at length,
Their courage perished, withered all their strength.
Oh then let victory stimulate the chase,
To free from shameful chains the human race,
To drive these pirates from the insulted waves,
To open their dungeons to despairing slaves,
To snatch from impious hands, and break the rod,
Which erst defaced the likeness of a God:
Then seize the occasion, call the furious gales,
Crack bending oars, stretch wide inflated sails;
On rapid wings of wind the tempest bear,
Make Death's deep tube with horrid lightnings glare:
Like evanescent mists dispel their hosts,
And with Destruction's bosom sweep their coasts.
Woe to proud Algiers; to your princes woe!
Your pride is falling with your youths laid low --
Woe to your people, woe distress, and fears!
Your hour is come, to drink the cup of tears:
A ghastly paleness gathers on your cheeks,
While Memory haunts your ears with captive shrieks;
Then stifled Conscience, wak'ning, dares to cry,
"Think on your crimson crimes, despair, and die."
Then ruin comes, with fire, and sword, and blood,
And men shall ask, where once your cities stood?
It Is done! Behold the uncheery prospects rise;
Unwonted glooms the silent coasts surprise:
The heavens with sable clouds are overcast,
And death-like sounds ride on the hollow blast --
The rank grass rustling to the passing gale:
Even now of men the cheerful voices fail --
No busy marts appear, no crowded ports,
No rural dances, and no splendid courts;
In halls, so late with feasts, with music crowned,
No revels sport, nor mirthful cymbals sound.
Fastidious pomp! how are thy pageants fled!
How sleep the fallen in their lowly bed!
Their cultured fields to desolation turned,
The buildings levelled, and the enclosures burned.
Where the fair garden bloomed, the thorn succeeds,
'Mid noxious brambles and envenomed weeds.
Over fallow plains, no vagrant flocks are seen,
To print with tracks, or crop, the dewy green:
The Plague, where thousands felt his mortal stings,
In vacant air his shafts promiscuous flings;
Here walks in darkness, thirsting still for gore,
And raves, unsated, round the desert shore.
The sandy waste, the immeasurable heath,
Alone are prowl'd by animals of death.
Here tawney lions guard their goary den;
There birds of prey usurp the haunts of men:
Through dreary wilds, a mournful echo calls,
From mouldering towers and desolated walls.
Where the wan light through broken windows gleams,
The fox looks ou^, the boding raven screams;
While trembling travelers in wild amaze,
On wrecks of state, and piles of ruin gaze.
The direful signs, which mark the day of doom,
Shall scarcely scatter such portentous gloom --
When, rocked the ground, convulsed each roaring flood,
The stars shall fall, the sun be turned to blood,
The globe itself dissolve in fluid fire,
Time be no more, and man's whole race expire.
Thus has thy hand, great God! through every age,
When ripe for ruin, poured on man thy rage:
So did thou erst on Babylon let fall
The plagues thy hand inscribed upon the wall:
So did thou give Sidonia's sons for food,
To cow'ring eagles, drunk with human blood;
Seal in thy wrath imperial Salem's doom,
And sweep her millions to a common tomb.
But let us turn from objects that disgust,
The ghosts of empires and of men accursed:
Turn we from sights that pain the feeling breast,
To where new nations populate the west:
For there, anon, shall new auroras rise,
And, streaming, brighten up the Atlantic skies,
Back on the solar path, with living ray,
Heaven's own pure splendours pour a tide of day.
And lo! successful from heroic toils,
With glory covered, and enriched with spoils,
With garlands waving over these spoils of war,
The pomp preceded by the imperial star,
' Mid shouts of joy, from liberated slaves,
In triumph ride the avengers of the wa^es.
And see, they gain Columbia's happy strand,
Where anxious crowds in expectation stand.
See raptured nations hail the kindred race,
And court the heroes to their fond embrace:
In fond embraces strained, the captive clings,
And feels and looks unutterable things.
See there, the widow finds her darling son,
See, in each others' arms the lovers run,
With joy tumultuous their swollen bosoms glow,
And one short moment pays for years of woe!
When grateful sports and festal songs proclaim
Their joys domestic, and their distant fame.
Then glorious days, by hallowed bards foretold,
Shall far surpass the fabled age of gold;
The human mind its noblest powers display,
And knowledge, rising to meridian day,
Shine like the liberal sun; the illumined youth
By fair discussion find immortal truth.
Why turns the horizon red? the dawn is near:
Infants of light, ye harbingers, appear!
With tenfold brightness gild the happier age,
And light the actors over a broader stage!
This drama closing -- ere the approaching end,
See heaven's perennial year to earth descend.
Then wake, Columbians! favorites of the skies,
Awake to glory and to rapture rise!
Behold the dawn of your ascending same,
Illume the nations with a purer flame;
Progressive splendours spread over every clime,
Then rapt in visions of unfolding time,
Pierce midnight clouds, that hide the dark abyss,
And see, in embryo, scenes of future bliss!
See days, and months, and years there roll in night,
While age, succeeding age, ascends to light,
Till your blessed offspring countless as the stars,
In open ocean quench the torch of wars;
With god-like aim, in one firm union bind,
The common good and interest of mankind;
Unbar the gates of commerce for their race,
And build the general peace on freedom's broadest base.
A WINTER PIECE.
BY -- LATHROP.
SURLY Winter now returns;
Nature droops her head, and mourns:
Sol's oblique, descending ray,
Lends a faint and transient day;
Night the realms of day invades,
And her dark dominion spreads.
Brooks no more meandering run;
Streams are hardened into stone;
Where the boatman often has plied,
Ponderous sleds securely glide.
Naked and deformed are seen
Meadows lately dressed in green.
Groves and fields are disarray'd;
Leaves are withered, dried the blade.
Songsters of the wood are flown,
All their cheerful music gone;
Not a swallow strains his throat,
The lark forgets his sprightly note;
Zephyrs, with their gentle breeze,
Sport no more along the trees:
Winds in angry murmurs howl,
Skies with gathering tempests scowl;
Proudest forests humbly bend;
Thick the woolly flakes descend,
See, how fast the valley fills!
How the driving snow-bank swells!
Batt'ring hailstones urge the hind,
Refuge in her shed to find;
Trembling stand the hardy steer,
Lowing for the master's care.
Farmers now their stables tend,
And from storms the herds defend;
Load with new -- thresh'd grain the floor;
Prudent deal the winter's store;
Shivering from the cold retire;
Heap fresh fuel on the fire;
From the evening borrow day,
Drive the piercing frosts away;
Sit secure within the doors,
And defy the storm that roars;
With a book, or chat, deceive
The slow hours of winter's eve;
Teach the listening youths the lore,
Which their grandsires taught before;
And their admiration raise
With good things of ancient days:
Or the works of distant climes,
Or the news of modern times.
Thus dull winter rolls away:
Thus we pass the irksome day.
Ah! a deadlier winter speeds --
Winter which no spring succeeds.
When our blooming youth is gone,
And our frosty age comes on,
Then no more will spring return --
Age is hopeless -- age forlorn --
Hopeless? -- no -- the silvered head
Shows, the storms of life are fled:
So the sunshine tips the hills,
As it louring clouds dispels.
Happy Christian, who has trod
All the length of virtue's road,
From the goal his eye can cast
Back on storms and dangers past,
And with hope anticipate
Pleasures of the heavenly state!
When is closed this varied scene,
Calmer seasons then begin.
AN INDIAN ECLOGUE.
SCENE, THE BANKS OF THE OHIO.
BY JOSEPH SMITH.
SCARCE had the morn her orient course begun,
Or early breezes fanned the rising sun,
When Mingo on Ohio's margin stood,
And told his sorrows to the gliding stood; --
With love of glory would the chiefs inflame
My breast; and lead me to the field of same;
In vain with glee, they show their scalps and sears,
The glorious trophies of their former wars,
On me their praises and reproofs are lost,
No flame but love, but scorching love I boast.
The nimble Lawrah does my breast inspire,
Wakes every sense, and sets me all on fire;
Enraptured while I view her yellow neck,
As soft as bear-grease, and as beaver sleek.
From her gray eyes the living lightnings rush.
Like the fresh dew-drops glittering through a bush.
But vain my songs re-echo through the shade,
Nor vows, nor tears, can move the haughty maid.
Even late I met her fainting in the track,
Her child and blanket dangling at her back:
Scarce moved her feet beneath the heavy load,
And drops of sweat bedewed the groaning road.
Yet other nymphs with fruitless ardour burn,
And feel a passion I can never return.
In vain with gifts of fish Agolla strove
To shake my constancy and win my love.
Her rough advances like a skunk I shun,
And from her face with eager footsteps run;
But vain my songs re-echo through the grove,
Nor vows, nor tears, the haughty maid can move:
Then cease these fruitless plaints, I Will take my spear,
And through the forest chase the shaggy bear;
The bounding buck shall own my oft-try'd art,
And feel this arrow rankling in his heart.
FUTURE STATE OF THE WESTERN TERRITORY.
BY COLONEL HUMPHREYS.
THEN oh, my friends! the task of glory done,
The immortal prize by your bold efforts won --
Your country's saviors, by her voice confessed,
While unborn ages rise and call you blessed --
Then let us go where happier climes invite,
To midland seas and regions of delight;
With all that is ours, together let us rise,
Seek brighter plains, and more indulgent skies;
Where fair Ohio rolls his amber tide,
And nature blossoms in her virgin pride;
Where all that Beauty's hand can form to please,
Shall crown the toils of war, with rural case.
The shady coverts and the sunny hills,
The gentle lapse of ever-murm'ring ^ills,
The loft repose amid the noontide bowers,
The evening walk along the blushing flowers,
The fragrant groves that yield a sweet perfume,
And vernal glories in perpetual bloom,
Await you there: and heaven shall bless the toll --
Your own the produce -- as your own the soil.
No tyrant lord shall grasp a thousand farms,
Curse the mild clime, and spoil its fairest charms:
No blast severe your ripening fields deform,
No vollied hailstones, and no driving storm:
No raging murrain on your cattle seize,
And nature sicken with the dire disease.
But golden years, anew, begin their reigns,
And cloudless sunshine gild salubrious plains.
Herbs, fruits, and flowers shall clothe the uncultur'd field;
Nectareous juice, the vine and orchard yield;
Rich, dulcet creams, the copious goblets fill;
Delicious honey from the trees distill;
The gardens smile, spontaneous harvests spring,
The woodlands warble, and the valleys sing.
Along the meads, or near the shady groves;
There sport the flocks, there feed the fatt'ning droves;
There strays the steed, through bloomy vales afar,
Who erst moved lofty in the ranks of war.
There, free from envy, cank'ring care and strife,
Flow the calm pleasures of domestic life:
There mutual friendship soothes each placid breast,
Blessed in themselves, and in each other blessed.
From house to house the social glee extends,
For friends in war, in peace are doubly friends:
Their children, taught to emulate their fires,
Catch the warm glow, and feel the kindred fires,
Till by degrees the mingling joys improve,
Grow with their years, and ripen into love:
Nor long the blushing pair in secret sigh,
And drink sweet poison from the love sick eye;
Blessed be their lot! when in his eager arms
The enamored youth folds the fair virgin's charms,
On her ripe lip imprints the burning kiss,
And seals, with hallowed rites, the nuptial bliss.
Then festal sports the evening hours prolong --
The mazy dance, and the sweet warbling song:
Then each endearment wakes the ravished sense
To pure delights, and raptures most intense;
And the pleased parent tells his listening son,
What wondrous deeds by him, in youth were done.
No sights of woe, no torturing fears annoy
The sweet sensations of the heartfelt joy:
Nor shall the savages, of murderous soul,
In painted bands dark to the combat roll,
With midnight orgies, by the gloomy shade,
On the pale victim point the reeking blade;
Or cause the hamlet, lulled in deep repose,
No more to wake, or wake to ceaseless woes:
For your strong arm the guarded band secures,
And freedom, glory, happiness are yours.
So shall you flourish in unfading prime,
Each age refining through the reign of time;
A nobler offspring crown the fond embrace,
A band of heroes and a patriot race:
Not by soft luxury's too dainty food,
Their minds contaminated with their blood,
But like the heirs our great forefathers bred,
By Freedom nurtured, and by Temperance fed;
Healthful and strong, they turned the virgin soil,
The untamed forest how'd beneath their toil:
At early dawn, they sought the mountain chase,
Or roused the Indian from his lurking place;
Curbed the mad fury of those barbarous men,
Or dragged the wild beast struggling from his den:
To all the vigor of that pristine race,
New charms are added and superior grace.
Then cities rise, and spiry towns increase,
With gilded domes, and every art of peace.
Then Cultivation shall extend his power,
Rear the green blade, and nurse the tender flower;
Make the fair villa, in full splendours smile,
And robe with verdure all the genial soil.
Then shall rich Commerce court the favoring gales,
And wondering wilds admire the passing sails,
Where the bold ships the stormy Huron brave,
Where wild Ontario rolls the whit'ning wave,
Where fair Ohio his pure current pours,
And Missisippi laves the extended shores.
Then oh, blessed land' with genius unconfined,
With polished manners, and the illumined mind.
Thy future race on d^^ing wing shall soar,
Each science trace, and all the arts explore;
Till bright Religion, beck'ning to the skies,
Shall bid thy sons to endless glories rise.
As round thy clime celestial joy extends,
Thy beauties ripen, and thy pomp ascends;
Farther and farther still, thy blessings roll,
To southern oceans and the northern pole;
Where now the thorn, or tangled thicket grows,
The wilderness shall blossom as the rose,
Unbounded deserts unknown charms assume,
Like Salem flourish, and like Eden bloom.
And oh, may heaven, when all our tolls are past,
Crown with such happiness our days at last:
So rise our sons, like our great sires of old,
In Freedom's cause unconquerably bold,
With spotless faith, and morals pure, their name
Spread through the world and gain immortal fame.
And thou Supreme! whose hand sustains this ball,
Before whose nod, the nations rise and fall,
Propitious smile, and shed diviner charms,
On this blessed land, the queen of arts and arms:
Make the great empire rise on wisdom's plan,
The seat of bliss, and last retreat of man.
AMERICAN WINTER.
By THE SAME.
THEN doubling clouds the wintry skies deform:
And, wrapped in vapor, comes the roaring storm,
With snows surcharged, from tops of mountains sails,
Loads leafless trees, and fills the whitened vales.
Then Desolation strips the faded plains:
Then tyrant Death over vege^ation reigns:
The birds of heaven to other climes repair,
And deep'ning glooms invade the turbid air.
Nor then, unjoyous, winter's rigours come,
But find them happy and content with home;
Their gran'ries filled -- the task of culture past --
Warm at their fire, they hear the howling blast,
With patt'ring rain and snow, or driving sleet,
Rave idly loud, and at their window beat:
Safe from its rage regardless of its roar,
In vain the tempest rattles at the door --
The same brutes sheltered and the feathered brood
From them, more provident, demand their food.
It Is then the time from hoarding cribs to feed
The ox laborious, and the noble steed:
It Is then the time, to tend the bleating fold,
To strew with litter, and to fence from cold.
The cattle fed -- the fuel pil'd within --
At setting day, the blissful hours begin:
It Is then, sole owner of his little cot,
The farmer feels his independent lot;
Hears with the crackling blaze, that lights the wall,
The voice of gladness and of nature call,
Beholds his children play, their mother smile,
And tastes with them the fruit of summer's toil.
From stormy heavens, the mantling clouds unroll'd,
The sky is bright, the air serenely cold.
The keen north-west, that heaps the drifted snows,
For months entire over frozen regions blows:
Man braves his blast; his gelid breath inhales;
And feels more vigorous as the frost prevails.
The obstructed path beneath the frequent tread,
Yields a smooth crystal to the flying steed.
It Is then full often, in arts of love untried
The amorous stripling courts his future bride;
And often, beneath the broad moon's paler day,
The village pairs ascend the rapid sleigh;
With jocund sounds impel the enlivened steed --
Say ye, who know their joys, the lulling speed,
At every bridge the tributary kiss,
Can courtly balls exceed their rustic bliss?
ON LOVE AND THE AMERICAN FAIR.
BY THE SAME.
O THOU sweet passion, whose blessed charm connects
In heaven's own ties, the strong and feebler sex!
Shed thy soft empire over the willing mind,
Exalt, adorn, and purify mankind!
All nature feels thy power. The vocal grove
With air borne melody awakes to love;
To love the boldest tenants of the sky,
To love the little birds, extatic, fly;
To love submit the monsters of the main,
And every beast that haunts the desert plain:
But man, alone, the brightest flame inspires,
A spark enkindled from celestial fires.
Hail, hallowed wedlock! purest, happiest state,
Thy untried raptures let my song relate:
Give me, ere long, thy mysteries to prove,
And taste, as well as sing, the sweets of love!
Ye blooming daughters of the western world,
Whose graceful locks by artless hands are curled,
Whose limbs of symmetry, and snowy breast,
Allure to love, in simple neatness dressed;
Beneath the veil of modesty, who hide
The boast of nature and of virgin pride --
(For beauty needs no meretricious art
To find a passage to the opening heart)
Oh make your charms even in my song admired,
My song immortal by your charms inspired.
Though lavish nature sheds each various grace,
That forms the figure or that decks the ^ace --
Though Health, with Innocence, and Glee, the while,
Dance in their eye, and wanton in their smile --
Though mid the lily's white, unfolds the rose,
As on their cheek the bud of Beauty blows,
Spontaneous blossom of the transient flush,
Which blows and reddens to a scarlet blush,
What time the maid, unread in flames and darts,
First feels of love the palpitating starts,
Feels from the heart, life's quickened currents glide,
Her bosom heaving with the bounding tide --
Though sweet their lips, their features more than fair --
Though curls luxuriant of untortur'd hair
Grow long, and add unutterable charms,
While every look enraptures and alarms;
Yet something still beyond the exterior form,
With goodness fraught, with animation warm,
Inspires their actions: dignifies their mien;
Gilds every hour; and beautifies each scene.
It Is those perfections of superior ^ind,
The moral beauties which adorn the mind;
It Is those enchanting sounds mellifluous hung,
In words of truth and kindness on their tongue --
It Is delicacy gives their charms new worth,
And calls the loveliness of beauty forth;
It Is the mild influence beaming from their eyes,
Like vernal sunbeams, round coerulian skies;
Bright emanations of the spotless soul,
Which warm, and cheer, and vivify the whole!
Here the fair sex an equal honor claims,
Wakes chaste desire, nor burns with lawless flames;
No eastern manners, here, consign the charms
Of beauteous slaves to some loathed master's arms:
No lovely maid in wedlock ever was fold
By parents base, for mercenary gold;
Nor forced the hard alternative to try,
To live dishonored, or with hunger d^e,
Here, uncontrol'd, and foll'wing nature's voice,
The happy lovers make the unchanging choice,
While mutual passions in their bosoms glow,
While fof^ confessions in their kisses flow,
While their free hands in plighted faith are given,
Their vows, accordant, reach approving heaven
Nor here the wedded fair in splendor vie,
To shine the idols of the public eye;
Nor place their happiness, like Europe's dames,
In balls and masquerades, in plays and games;
Each home-felt bliss exchanged for foreign sports,
A round of pleasures, or the intrigues of courts;
Nor seek of government to guide the plan,
And wrest his bold prerogatives from man.
What though not formed in Affectation's school,
Nor taught the wanton eye to roll by rule,
Nor how to prompt the glance, the frown, the smile,
Or practice all the little arts of guile --
What though not taught the use of female arms,
Nor clothed in panoply of conquering charms,
Like some fine garnished heads -- the exterior fair,
In paints, cosmetics, powder, borrowed hair:
Yet theirs are pleasures of a different kind,
Delights at home, more useful, more refined:
Theirs are the attentions, theirs the smiles that please,
With hospitable cares and modest ease:
Their youthful taste, improved by finer arts,
Their minds embellished, and refined their hearts --
It Is theirs to act, in still, sequestered life,
The glorious parts of parent, friend, and wife:
What nameless grace, what unknown charm is theirs,
To soothe their partners, and divide their cares,
Calm raging pain, delay the parting breath,
And light a smile on the wan cheek of death!
BENEVOLENCE.
BY -- DAWES.
WIDE as the sun his bright dominion spreads,
Heaven-born Benevolence her bounty sheds.
She, meek eyed goddess, quits the angelic sphere,
To banish grief, and dry the human tear.
Plenty's rich urn her willing arms sustain,
Life, Hope, and Joy, exulting in her train.
Her ear is open to the orphan's cry,
Her soul expanding, as the poor pass by.
From her blessed tongue, the words of manna flow,
And carry courage to desponding Woe.
Objects of aid she seeks, through all the land,
Diffusing bounty with a Savior's hand.
Through prison-bars she darts a pitying eye,
Her heart, responsive, echoes sigh for sigh:
Nor scorns she even the malefactor's chain:
She mourns his guilt -- but mitigates his pain.
The wretch she asks not, in what climate bred,
To what profession or religion wed;
That Is not the subject of her mission there --
To succor all who want, is all her care.
With Love's apology and Candour's veil,
The multitude of errors to conceal --
The long-elapsed inj'ry to forget,
And, as the debtor weeps, forgive the debt --
Full tides of renovating hopes to roll
Through the dry channels of the feverish soul --
These are, O bright Benevolence, thy ways,
And these the solid basis of thy praise!
When Caesar's fame, and Mal^^o's deeds are past,
The effects of thy philanthropy shall last.
In nature's wreck, the juster fates shall see
Distinguished worth; and fix their eyes on thee;
A preference far thy honest heart shall find,
Before the proud destroyers of mankind.
Their lapsing honors shall forbear to save:
But thy blessed name shall triumph over the grave.
THE OLD SOLDIER.
BY -- FENTHAM.
"Pity the sorrows of a poor old man."
CLEAR was the blue expanse -- the day serene --
All nature wore an universal green:
Smooth passed fair Schuylkill's wave, delightful flood!
As, musing, on its verdant banks I stood,
There wrapped in praise, O bounteous God! to thee,
Who blessed this happy land with liberty:
And thou General Washington.
, the instrument in Virtue's cause,
Who bravely freed us from oppressive laws!
An aged soldier in a voice of grief,
Showed his gray locks, and thus implored relief:
Oh youth, who, yet a stranger to distress,
Feel not (like me) the extremes of wretchedness!
If, in thy country's cause, thy bosom glows,
That country, late overspread by barbarous foes --
In whose defense, life's richest blood was drained
From these poor limbs, while yet a drop remained.
Now, worn with toil, and impotent with age,
Soon shall I leave this joyless, mortal stage.
Yet if Humanity, with genial hear,
Expands thy soul to actions good and great,
Some trifling help, (which may you never need!)
Oh give, and heaven reward the pious deed.
Once, gay in life, and free from anxious care,
I through the furrows drove the shining share --
I saw my waving fields with plenty crowned,
And yellow Ceres, joyous, smile around;
'Till roused by freedom at my country's call,
I left my peaceful home, and gave up all,
Now forced, alas! to beg my hard earned bread,
This crazy body longs to join the dead:
Ungrateful country! when the danger's over,
Your bravest sons cold charity implore.
Children of wealth, in downy pleasure bred,
Pampered in ease, by favoring fortune fed;
Who view with thoughtless eye the humble poor,
That glean their scanty meals from door to door;
Ah! heave for me a sympathetic sigh,
And wipe the falling tear from Sorrow's eye.
THE WAR-HORSE.
BY DOCTOR LADD.
PARAPHRASED FROM JOB. "And have thou given the horse strength? have thou
clothed his neck with thunder?"
AGAIN the Almighty from the whirlwind broke,
And thus to Job in stern continuance spoke,
Did thou the horse with strength unequalled mould,
Whose lofty neck the writhen thunders fold?
And can thou make the intrepid courser fly,
When steely dangers glitter in his eye?
"See! all around him spreads the flamy cloud,
Spurned from his nostrils, while he snorts aloud;
Trembling with vigor, how he paws the ground,
And hurls the thunder of his strength around!
Behold! he pants for war, and, scorning flight,
Collects his strength; and rushes to the fight.
"When clouds of darts a fable horror spread,
And the full quiver rattles over his head --
To him no dread the sound of battle bears,
The clash of armor and the strife of spears;
But over his neck his waving mane reclined,
Spreads to the gale, and wantons in the wind:
He spurns the field, fierce, terrible, and strong,
And rolls the earth back as he shoots along.
"Lo! where their strife the distant warriors wage,
The neighing courser snuff^ the sanguine rage:
While roaring trumpets, and the dire affray,
Provoke his laughter on that dreadful day --
More loud he snorts, more terrible he foams,
When nearer still the storm of battle comes;
And mingling roars are dreadful on the heath,
In shouts of victory, and in groans of death.
ON THE MIGRATION TO AMERICA, AND PEOPLING THE WESTERN COUNTRY.
BY CAPTAIN PHILIP PRENEAU.
To western woods and lonely plains,
Palemon from the crowd departs,
Where Nature's wildest genius reigns,
To tame the soil, and plant the arts --
What wonders there shall Freedom show!
What mighty states successive grow!
From Europe's proud, despotic shores,
Hither the stranger takes his way,
And, in our newfound world, explores
A happier soil -- a milder sway --
Where no proud despot holds him down,
No slaves insult him with a crown.
What charming scenes attract the eye
On wild Ohio's savage stream!
Here Nature reigns, whose works outvie
The boldest pattern Art can frame --
Here ages past have rolled away,
And forests bloomed but to decay.
From these fair plains, these rural seats,
(So long concealed, so lately known)
The unsocial Indian far retreats,
To make some other clime his own --
Where other streams, less pleasing, flow,
And darker forests round him grow.
Great ^ire of floods Missisippi.
! whose rapid wave
Through various countries takes its way,
To which creating Nature gave
Unnumber'd streams to swell thy sway:
No longer shall they useless prove,
Nor idly through the forest rove.
No longer shall thy princely flood
From distant lakes be swelled in vain:
Nor longer, through a darksome wood,
Advance, unnotic'd, to the main;
Far other ends the fates decree,
And Commerce plans new freights for thee.
While Virtue warms the generous breast,
Here heaven-born Freedom shall reside;
Nor shall the voice of War molest,
Nor Europe's all-aspiring pride:
Here Reason shall new laws devise,
And order from confusion rise.
Forsaking kings and regal state,
With all the^^ pomp and fancied bliss,
The trav'ller owns -- convinced -- though late,
No realm so free, so blessed as this;
The east is half to slaves consigned,
And half to slavery more refined.
O come the time, and haste the day,
When man shall man no longer crush!
When Reason shall enforce her sway,
No^ those fair regions raise our blush,
Where still the African complains,
And mourns his, yet unbroken, chains.
Far brighter scenes, a future age,
The muse predicts, these states shall hail,
Whose genius shall the world engage,
Whose deeds shall over Death prevail!
And happier systems bring to view,
Than ever eastern sages knew.
A PASTORAL SONG.
BY -- BRADFORD.
THE shepherd, of fortune possessed,
May scorn, if he please, my poor cot,
May think in his wealth to be blessed,
But I never will envy his lot:
The pleasures, which riches impart,
Are fleeting, and feeble, when known;
They never give peace to the heart,
It scorns to be happy alone.
That shepherd true happiness knows,
Whose bosom by beauty is moved,
Who tastes the pure pleasure that flows,
From loving and being beloved.
It Is a joy of angelical birth,
And when to poor mortals it is given,
It chears their abode upon earth,
And sweetens their journey to heaven,
Now briskly my spirits would move!
What peace in this bosom would reign!
Were I blessed with the nymph that I love,
Sweet Emma, the pride of the plain!
Ye shepherds, she is fair as the light!
The critic no blemish can find;
And all the soft virtues unite,
And glow in her innocent mind,
Her accents are fitted to please,
Her manners engagingly free;
Her temper is ever at ease,
And calm as an angel's can be.
Her presence all sorrow removes,
She enraptures the wit and the clown:
Her heart is as mild as the dove's,
Her hand is as soft as its down.
Yon lily, which graces the field,
And throws its perfume to the gale,
In fairness and fragrance must yield
To Emma, the pride of the vale.
She Is pleasant as yonder cool rill
To trav'llers who faint on the way;
She Is sweet, as the rose on the hill,
When it opens its bosom to day.
I ask not for wealth or for power;
Kind heaven! I these can resign;
But hasten, O hasten the hour,
When Emma shall deign to be mine.
O teach her to pity the pain
Of a heart, that, if slighted, must break;
O teach her to love the fond swain,
Who would lay down his life for her sake.
Though poor, I will never repine,
Content that my Emma is true;
I Will press her dear bosom to mine,
And think myself rich as Peru.
With her I will stray through the grove,
And fondly I Will pour out my soul,
Indulge my effusions of love,
And find myself blessed to the full.
And often in the cool of the day,
We'll ramble to hear the sweet song,
That vibrates so soft from each spray,
Where Codorus rolls gently along.
With flowers I Will crown her dear hair.
Then gaze on her beauties; and cry,
What nymph can with Emma compare,
What shepherd so happy as I!
Thus cheerful the moments shall roll,
Of all my fond wishes possessed;
And peace shall descend on my soul,
And make it her favorite rest:
Contentment my life shall prolong,
All trouble and sorrow forgot;
And Time, as he hurries along,
Shall smile upon Corydon's cot.
ADDRESS TO THE ROBIN RED-BREAST.
BY -- BAYARD.
SEE, perched on yonder lofty spray,
The red-breast sits, so blithe and gay;
Far from danger, void of fear,
Warbling to the listening ear,
Notes of pleasure, airy, wild,
Softly plaintive -- sweetly mild;
Whispering to the shady grove
Tender strains of artless love.
Of real or of fancied ills,
That human life incessant seels,
Our visionary hopes or fears,
It nothing knows, and nothing cares.
Often when the streaks of morn,
First the groves and hills adorn.
When, bursting on the verdant mead,
They bid the shades of night recede;
Or on the lawn clear splendours break,
And all the feathered choir awake;
Then little red-breast takes her seat,
Near my lone -- my cool retreat.
There, in nature's melting lays,
She tunes her great Creator's praise.
Her music there so sweetly trills,
That rapture all my bosom fills.
Sweet bird! whose softly-soothing strain,
Lulls the smart of fancied pain;
Whose tender accents, mild and clear,
Seize the heart, and charm the ear.
And when, remote from Reason's coast,
On mental Mis'ry's waves we are tossed,
Or Fancy, overcast by glooms,
In darkness and in error reams --
Thy voice an still the boisterous sea:
Thy voice can bid the darkness flee.
Sweet bird! who, with the dawning day,
Do to thy Maker homage pay --
And when the shades of eye appear,
Off'rest up thy humble prayer,
Bidding zephyr, as he floats,
Bear to heaven thy grateful notes.
Oh! would man (who lives like thee,
On mercy, infinite, as free)
Like thee, in nature's language raise
His morning and his evening praise;
Render to the "Source of bliss,"
That tribute, which by right is his;
His soul would then such feelings know,
As but from heavenly fountains flow.
And by thy fair example taught,
Could I often clothe the grateful thought,
In tenderly expressive lays,
And thus exalt my Maker's praise.
Pure affections, soft and kind,
Would spring to gild and bless my mind,
Songster of the lonely vale!
Often, when thy plaintive tale,
Trilling from some thicket near,
Vibrates on my raptured ear,
Thy strains, so sweet, yet sadly flow --
That all my heart's dissolved in woe.
Often I conceive, in this retreat,
Thou ^itt'st to mourn thine absent mate;
Or near yo^ gently murmuring flood,
Deplor'st thy lost -- thy hapless brood.
Perhaps, while here thou sweetly sung,
Some serpent stole thy new-fledg'd young;
Or boys, perhaps, in cruel play,
Have borne thy tender care away.
If such has been thy case, sweet bird,
For this if flowed the strains I heard,
Though great the cause, and just the woe,
Sure I can sympathize with you.
I had a friend -- nay still he is.
Whose pleasure is my highest bliss --
Whose heart is kind, whose soul sincere,
Whose welfare, as my life, is dear --
Whose breast has felt the shafts of pain,
Struck deep into the tenderest vein --
Whose soul has known sharp pangs of grief,
Beyond expression and relief.
Like thee, sweet warbler! he would a mate,
Kind in her heart; in temper, sweet;
In manners, mild; appearance, fair;
Her bosom, gentle; judgment, clear;
Devote to friends; to strangers, kind;
Benign her looks, and meek her mind.
Her heart she would not think her own;
Her best affections all had flown;
They rested on her little brood:
I was her son -- and oh, I loved.
For numerous years quite uncontrolled
Joy's crystal current smoothly rolled;
No strife nor care our lives annoyed;
No broils, domestic peace destroyed.
The purest bliss each hour beguiled,
Heaven, nature, and the world, all smiled.
But, ah! how dark a change was near!
No more did pleasing scenes appear;
Clouds of distress, collecting fast,
Joy's whole horizon soon overcast.
We feared -- we hoped -- but all in vain;
Over hopes were dashed: -- bliss turned to pain.
Two brothers first, of tender years,
Whose brows were yet unmarked with cares --
Whose souls were generous, as their birth --
Whose virtues were just opening forth,
At once were summoned -- Friendship sighed,
Affection wept -- but oh! -- they died.
Though hard this stroke -- though great our woe,
We felt too soon a heavier blow.
That tender parent -- loving wife,
The glory of domestic life --
The boast of friends -- her husband's pride,
The poor man's trust, her children's guide --
Whose smiles could sinking hope enliv'n,
Who showed and led the way to heaven,
Pom'd pious precepts on our ear,
And with her precepts, joined her prayer --
That best of mothers -- best of wives,
Oh! can I say -- no more survives --
Burst, Sorrow! burst, and soothe the smart,
That tortures and consumes my heart.
Shall every softer charm we praise,
Each christian and domestic grace,
Forsake us, never to return,
And shall not filial fondness mourn?
Though more than twice two years have flown,
Since to the vale of death she is gone,
Yet often, by love and duty taught,
On her^ fix the tender thought;
For her escapes the sigh sincere;
For her I drop the pious tear.
Dear angel (for in heaven you dwell,
And taste delight, no tongue can tell,)
Shall not thy secret influence still
Sway my heart, and rule my will?
Arrest me, if inclined to stray;
And keep my feet in Virtue's way?
Sweet parent! yes' my willing feet
Shall tread the path, which thou have set.
Thy precept and example, joined,
Shall be the pole star of my mind,
Till this fond heart shall cease to beat,
Till tho^ and I in heaven shall meet.
PROGRESS OF SCIENCE.
BY -- EVANS.
AS from the east, yon orb first dar^s (...) sway;
Over heavens blue vault, and westward (...)
So Science in the orient climes began,
And, like bright Sol, a western circuit ran:
From Egypt's schools to Greece was learning brought,
What Cadmus old, or Palamedes taught;
Her form illustrious Athens did illume,
And raised the genius of imperial Rome.
From Latium's plains she fought Britannia's shore,
And bid her barbarous sons be rude no more.
Fierce nations roam'd around the rugged isle,
Till Science on its fields began to smile.
Fair Came and Isis heard no Muse's strains,
Their shades were trod by wolves and fiercer Danes;
'Till, with the Arts, Augusta's grandeur rose,
And her loud thunder shook the deep's repose:
And such in time (if right the Muse descries)
Shall this wide realm with tow'ry cities rise.
The spacious Delaware through future song,
Shall roll in deathless majesty along;
Each grove and mountain shall be sacred made,
As now is Cooper's Hill and Windsor's shade.
Flushed with the thought, I Am borne to ages hence,
The Muse-wrought vision rushes on my sense,
Methinks Messiah's ensign I behold
In the deep gloom of yonder shades enrolled,
And hear the gospel's silver clarion sound,
Rousing with heavenly strains the heathen round:
Methinks I hear the nations shout aloud,
And to the glory-beaming standard crowd;
New inspiration shake each trembling frame,
The Paracelete pour forth the lambent flame,
In unremitting streams on every soul,
While through their breasts celestial transports roll.
Stupendous change! methinks the effects appear.
In the dark region sacred temples rear
Their lofty heads. Fair cities strike my sight;
And heav'n-taught Science spreads a dazzling light,
Over the rough scene where Error's court was found,
And red-ey'd Slaughter crimsoned all the ground.
ON A LADY'S BIRTH DAY.
BY W. M. SMITH, ESQUIRE.
SHEPHERDS, shepherds, hither come!
What, though lost the vernal bloom,
What, though Winter rules the year,
Yet the joys of Spring are here:
Here we taste the sweets of May,
On Eliza's natal day.
Do we want the blushing rose?
In Eliza's cheek it grows:
See the cherry's tempting red
Over her dewy lips is spread;
And the lily's every grace
Is exceeded in her face,
Where Is the fragrance of the vale?
Where the music of the dale?
Balmy is her breath as spring,
Or the odor zephyrs bring:
Soft as is a seraph's song,
Is the music of her tongue.
Shepherds, then, the chorus join:
Haste the festive wreath to twine:
Come, with bosoms all sincere,
Come with breasts devoid of care;
Bring the pipe, and merry lay,
It Is Eliza's natal day.
DESCRIPTION OF JEHOVAH, FROM THE XVIIITH PSALM.
BY DOCTOR LADD.
HE spoke: and lo! the heavens were bowed;
High on ^^erubic wings he rode, Majestic to behold.
Profoundest night, the dark abyss,
And the thick gloom of all the skies,
Beneath his feet were rolled.
Tempestuous winds about him past,
Sublime upon each winged blast,
The great Jehovah came,
He flew abroad, all clothed in fire,
But bade thick clouds of smoke aspire,
To wrap the awful flame.
Enfolding skies his brightness veiled:
And, in the depth of night, concealed,
His dread pavilion stood,
The blackened clouds around him sweep,
And the dark waters of the deep
Enthrone their sovereign God.
'Midst pealing thunders, fire, and smoke,
Jehovah awful silence broke,
And shook the powers beneath:
The rapid lightnings of the sky,
In awful dread of the MOST HIGH,
Were scattered by his breath.
NATURE AND ART.
BY W. M. SMITH, ESQUIRE.
IT IS said that once upon a time,
(So tales begin, and so my rhyme)
Nature held high dispute with Art,
Which had most power upon the heart.
They each agreed, to end debate,
A lovely maiden to create,
Endowed with their respective charms,
To fill the soul with love's alarms.
Obedient to each high command,
Two female forms before them stand.
Art flew for lightning to the skies,
And plac^d it in her daughter's eyes:
But Nature, tender and sincere,
Taught here is to shed soft Pity's tear.
While Art, from her abundant store,
Her fav'rite's cheeks vermillion'd over --
Another method Nature chose,
In here is she placed the blushing rose.
Art wandered through Arabia's plain,
Each richest, costliest gum to gain.
She rifled every region over,
And left Ambara's valley poor:
Then with her gathered sweets she h^e^,
To grace the object of her pride.
Such gales as kiss the daisied meads,
When Spring the jocund Hours leads,
When every object, grown more gay,
Joins to had returning May,
Through even rows of pearly teeth,
Nature caught her child to breathe.
A neck, that caught the gazer's sight,
As alabaster, cold and white,
Where symmetry's extremest point
Was tortured into every joint --
Rising from a snowy breast,
The Sculptor's curious art confessed --
Such Art bestowed upon her child,
Wa^^e indignant Nature smiled.
A spotless skin of fairest hue,
With vei^s of sky, eye -- tinctured blue --
A bosom which concealed a heart
That bo^e in every pang a part,
And th^obb'd responsive to each groan,
Soft Nature bade her child to own.
Next Art to Persia's regions slew,
From thence the richest silks she drew.
Transparent emeralds she sought,
The Ceylon-ruby, too, she brought;
Golconda's richest mine explored,
To add the diamond to her hoard;
And on her idol she bestowed
The curions, costly, cumbrous load;
While Youth, Simplicity, and Ease,
Gave Nature's daughter power to please.
Thus decked, each mother gave her charge,
Before she set her child at large.
Now go, -- said Art -- and let your eyes
Fill each beholder with surprise:
Go -- be but seen -- without control,
You Will lord it over the human soul;
Before your feet you will daily see
Unnumber'd captives bend the knee:
But let them drag a hopeless chain,
And sigh, and swear, and rave in vain.
In humbler accents, NATURE said:
Be not of yonder form afraid:
Perhaps she will wound the fopling's heart,
Be yours, my dear, a nobler part:
The trifling conquests of her eyes,
Are such as all your sex despise.
But if some tender youth you find,
In whom good sense to virtue's joined,
Within whose open generous breast,
Dissimulation cannot rest,
Of him a worthy conquest make,
He Will love my child for Nature's sake.
In him no short-lived flame you will fear;
Where virtue dwells, the soul's sincere;
Go then, my life, my joy, my pride,
Go -- be the counterpart of F -- d.
COLOLOO. -- AN INDIAN TALE.
THROWN INTO ENGLISH VERSE.
BY WILLIAM DUNLAP.
COLWALL! the women cry;
Colwall! the dales resound,
Colwall, the hills reply,
And hollow caves rebound.
Wild shrieks through thickets ring,
Fast flies the dark brown night:
"Come, ye warriors bring
The captive taken in sight;
Draw tight the cutting bands!
Bring matches blazing blue!
Now! now! the victim stands
To mighty Colwall due."
With scorn the captive smiled,
With scorn he eyed the throng,
Then thus his pain beguiled,
With high exulting song.
SONG.
And are these all the means ye know
I'o give a warrior pain?
Oh give your sires a fiercer glow;
Remember Colwall slain.
My father gloried in his son.
My warriors came from fight,
None staid behind; the scalps we won
Declared our matchless might.
Who has not heard Cololoo's fame?
My nation well ye know, --
And dreadful is the Tiger's name,
And feared by every foe.
Pain does not lie so near the skin,
More burning pine knots bring!
Cololoo's all at peace within --
And Logan's fame he will sing.
RECITAL.
Then whilst from every limb the red streams gush,
And round him glows the fire;
Whilst thorns and nails transfix the quivering flesh,
The death song rises higher. --
SONG.
Aged Logan led the fight,
Logan's fame is ever new, --
Logan seized a treacherous White,
His murdered children rush to view:
"Curses blast thee! pale-faced Savage,
Ruin seize thy ruthless kind,
Trained to rapine, skilled to ravage,
Gain, the God that grasps thy mind.
Now ye red men take your fill,
Give the scalping knife its due,
The red right arm is bare to kill, --
This my children, this to you."
Reeking from the white man's brain,
Lo! he lifts the scalp on high;
"Logan does not wish thee pain,
Fly to death's dark caverns, fly!
See they come! they come to meet us!
Raise the yell that makes them quake,
Say, -- shall puny white men beat us?
Men that every blast can shake?
Men that fear the rushing rain,
Men that fear the clouded sky,
Men that shrink and howl at pain,
Nor know to triumph when they die.
Now ye Tiger tribe be brave,
Think that Logan sees the fight;
Scalps on scalps adorn my cave,
Glad'ning to my children's sight.
Sulfurous smokes obscure the view,
War! the hills and dales reply.
Now ye red men, now be true!
Ye know to fight! ye dare to die!"
Hand to hand the warriors rush,
Shouts and yells in echoes die;
Tom'hawks cleave, and bay'nets push, --
They fly! they fly! the white men fly!
One brave band alone remains,
One alone of all that band,
Every shot and blow sustains,
Red like ours his heavy hand.
See they sink -- he is left alone, --
Still our warriors stain the fields;
See! he falls, but fighting on
Sits, and still his sword he wields.
Logan seized the brave man's arm,
Longing, looked upon his face;
Logan will not do thee harm,
Though thou art of faithless race;
Logan's sons had been like thee, --
White men shot them from the bush;
The brave shall not be harmed by me, --
He Is dead, -- he is flown, -- and all is hush. --
None thy beauteous corse shall wound;
None thy hairy scalp shall tear;
Thou shall sleep with warriors round,
Thou the dead-men's feast shall share.
Seize the scalps, and count the slain;
White-men, weep your brothers' woes!
Ease our dying chiefs from pain: --
White men learn to fear your foes!
So, Logan triumphed over the foe;
Logan's fame was fairly won:
So, Logan laid the white-men low, --
-- But set is Logan's sun, --
Why bring ye not the heated stone,
To sear and seam my manly breast?
Why sure the torture is not done!
Such pain Cololoo bears in jest.
RECITAL.
Round his head Idiego hurled
His hatchet keen and good;
Whizzing, fierce the weapon whirled,
And quiver'd in the wood.
Reldor then with sullen stride,
His knife was in his hand,
Advanced, and thus aloud he cried, --
And cut the twisted band.
Reldor takes thee for his son,
Colwall in battle stain:
In many a fight his fame he won,
Nor shrunk from death or pain. --
Silent now the warrior train
Bear the blood-stained chief, --
No more they weep for Colwall slain, --
No more is known of grief. --
AN ELEGY, WRITTEN IN FEBRUARY 1791.
BY MR. RICHARD ALSOP.
DARK is the hour and lone, over icy plains,
The wandering meteors gleam a deadly light:
Wild howls the blast amid descending rams,
And forms funereal (...) along the night.
Retired from scenes where Pleasure's airy wand
Gilds the light moments with delusive joy,
Where Mirth exulting leads her festive band,
Far other scenes my pensive soul employ.
The clouds of death that gloom the baleful year,
The days of joy, alas, so lately fled!
While Friendship bids its sympathetic tear
Stream in remembrance of the much-loved dead.
My friend, but now, of every bliss possessed
That love connubial can on man bestow,
When (...) wishes warm the mutual (...)
Behold the prey of life (...) woe.
Of late, how fair the beauteous prospect show (...),
How lovely glittering in the morning's eye;
But long ere noon, like April's painted cloud,
Or hues that tinge the summer's evening sky.
The fairy hopes that raptured Fancy drew,
The dream of future bliss that shone so bright,
On Fate's swift pinions vanished from the view,
And sunk in shadows of eternal night. --
What notes of woe, in mournful cadence swell
Along the western breeze from climes afar,
Mixed with the dying groan, the savage yell,
And all the horrid dissonance of war!
And lo! 'mid gliding specter dimly seen,
Pale as the mists that Autumn's car surround,
A form superior lifts his pensive mien,
While on his bosom glares the shadowy wound.
Behold,he cries,the band who lately bled,
'M^d western wilds in glorious conflict slain;
While recreant troops in pale confusion fled,
Ignobly left unburied on the plain. --
Far opes the view, sublime in savage pride
A wild unbounded frowns on Fancy's eye;
Tall rise the trees and over savannahs wide
The rank grass trembles to the breeze on high.
With torrent sweep, amid a night of woods,
Where scarce the sun a livid glimmering lends,
A blood-stained river rolls his foaming floods,
And over the plains in wild meanders bends.
Lo! this the scene where War, with bloody hand,
Waved his red standard over the carnag'd ground;
Where wild-eyed Horror led the tawny band,
And fell the brave with dear-bought laurels crowned.
Here, grim with gore, beneath the inclement sky,
(...) by the parching ray and driving (...),
The mangled forms of breathless warriors lie,
(...) pale extended on the lonely plain.
In slaughtered heaps, around promiscuous cast,
' Mid savage chiefs Columbia's sons are spread,
While, breathed from polar snows, the northern blast.
Shakes its cold pinions over the unburied dead.
For them no more shall morning gild the sky,
No more shall May unveil her radiant charms,
No more shall Joy illume the sparkling eye,
Or Glory's voice excite the soul to arms.
Near yon gray rock by withering leaves concealed,
Amyntor lies, benevolent and brave;
Whose duteous hand a father's age upheld,
And smoothed his dreary passage to the grave.
Not far, a corse distinguished over the rest,
Of noble stature and heroic mien;
Deep opes the wound that gored his manly breast,
And his pale features wear a smile serene.
Too well, alas! that much-loved form I know,
Those features pale with gory dust over spread,
Over whom has Friendship mourned in bitterest woe,
For whom Affection's tenderest tears are shed.
Still, still in Fancy's view recurs the day,
When war's black demons poured their hideous yell,
Then left exposed to savage ^age a prey,
Thy gallant hand beside their leader sell.
Oppressed with toil, while countless foes surround,
Thy arm, thy voice, the fainting troop inspired;
And even when sinking with the deadly wound,
Thy latest breath their martial ardour fired.
Lamented Hero, far from weeping friends!
No funeral honors to thy corse were paid,
And no memorial, over thy grave extends,
To mark the lonely spot where low you are laid.
Yet what avails to please the senseless clay,
"The trophied tomb,"the monumental bust,
Or recks the spirit mid the realms of day,
The empty rites attendant on its dust.
A fairer wreath shall friendship's hand bestow,
A fairer tribute shall thy shade receive,
Than all the idle pageantry of woe,
Than all its pompous monuments can give.
Long, long shall Memory's ardent eye recall
Thy worth, thy milder virtues to her view;
Thy Country long lament her hero's fall,
And over thee Fame her brightest laurels strew.
Over the lone spot where rests thy mouldering form,
Shall opening spring her mildest breezes wave;
And Flora's hand with every fragrant charm,
Deck the soft turf that forms thy verdant grave.
There the Wild-Rose in earliest pride shall bloom,
There the Magnolia's gorgeous flowers unfold,
The purple Violet shed its sweet perfume,
And beauteous Meadia wave her plumes of gold.
Rest much-loved Chief, with thy Jer -- (...) blessed,
Amid yon realms of light, yon seats of joy,
Where hushed is sorrow in perpetual rest,
And pleasure smiles unconscious of alloy.
From that calm shore with pitying eye survey
The varying schemes of man, the busy strife,
The vain pursuits that fill his"little day,"
And toss with ceaseless storms the sea of life.
While seraphs, bending from their thrones of gold,
With songs of triumph hymn thy soul to peace;
And to thy raptured eye, with smiles, unfold
The happy mansions of eternal bliss.
THE DEITY, AND HIS DISPENSATIONS.
BY TIMOTHY DWIGHT, D. D.
FAR, very far beyond this lower sky,
Beyond the sun, beyond the flames on high,
Dwells in pure light, in heaven's serene abode,
The Source of life, the Spring of endless good;
All scenes, all heights above, sublimely reigns
All worlds created, and all worlds sustains.
Yon orb, whose brightness wakes thy raptured praise,
Is but a beam of his unbounded blaze;
His breath illum'd, his hand exalted high,
And rolled him flaming through the expanded sky.
His bounteous influence, through all nature driven,
Warms the wide earth, and cheers the wider heaven.
All scenes, all beings his pure sight surveys,
Where morn begins, and where pale eve decays;
Where hell's dark shores the glooms of night display:
Or heaven's broad palace glows in lasting day:
Through worlds of endless youth, where angels shine,
And unknown nations rove in light divine:
He moves, informs, directs, and rules the whole:
Their cause, their end, their guardian, and their soul.
He wakes the beauties of the vernal morn;
He bids the flames of sultry summer burn:
He showers the autumnal wealth; and his dread power
Sounds in the wintry storm, and bids the wild waves roar.
In these vast regions countless beings move,
Live in his smiles, and wanton in his love:
In all, his power, and boundless wisdom shine,
The works, the glories of a hand divine.
Throned in high heaven, in starry mansions reign,
Of purest intellect, the angelic train;
All sense, all soul, all love, eternal power
Their thoughts contemplate, and their songs adore.
Through earth's wide realms unnumber'd tribes we find,
Of different ranks, for different ends designed.
On every leaf the insect millions swarm,
Hum round the flower, or in the sun -- beam warm;
The birds, on painted pinions, gaily fly
Through the wide regions of the sapphire sky;
Beasts climb the cliff, or walk the savage wood;
And fishes sport around the foamy flood.
These, with the reptile ^ace, to time a prey,
Of dust were fashioned, and to dust decay.
To man, of nobler rank, two parts were given,
This formed of earth, and that inspired by heaven.
Such as the texture, such the allowed doom;
His body moulders in the narrow tomb:
But the winged soul, when earth in dust is hurled,
Shall spring, immortal, from the ^inking world;
Or dain'd, if crimes its earthly course distain,
To bathe in fire, and waste with endless pain;
If cleans'd from guilt, with active joy to rise
To the pure transports of angelic skies.
But man, unmindful of his nobler birth,
In vain seeks pleasure from surrounding earth.
Far different, far, the scenes by heaven designed
To fill the wishes of the active mind.
This bounded point is but our being's morn;
To endless life (...)' ethe^^al soul was born,
Upward with nimble (...) her thoughts should soar,
And, winged by virtue, brighter worlds explore;
Earth's grovelling joys disdain with conscious pride,
Like angels fashioned, and to heaven allied.
For this fair train our nature to prepare,
And the pure fragrance of immortal air,
To raise the downward heart from earthly toys,
And mould our wishes to sublimer joys,
Through earth's wide realms, afflictions first began,
The noblest blessings heaven bestows on man,
Toil, disappointment, hunger, thirst, and pain,
A long, long, dismal, melancholy train,
Cleanse the dim eye, dissolve the powerful lust,
And loose the chains, that bind our hearts to dust.
From sorrow's fire, like silver well refined,
Freed from vile earth, shall rise the und^ossy mind,
Each hour with beams of clearer beauty shine,
And ceaseless claim an image more divine.
At length when sickness brings the expected doom,
Its powers shall rise triumphant over the tomb,
Forward to nobler scenes with rapture spring,
And hail the message of the undreaded king;
While life's long stream its farthest shore shall lave,
And seek the bosom of the eternal wave.
Then shall we see diviner winds arise,
The main grow calm, and smiles invest the skies:
Then shall our happy bands exalt the sail,
Launch on the deep, and call the etherial gale;
With joy, our spirits leave the fading shore,
And hear the lessening storms at distance roar.
In wrapped in beams of uncreated light,
All heaven, disclosed, shall burst upon the sight:
Streams of immortal bliss in vision ^oll,
And hosts of angels hail the kindred soul.
CREATION.
BY THE SAME.
FROM realms divine, high-rais'd beyond all height,
The Almighty Parent cast his piercing sight;
With boundless view, he saw the etherial vast
A clouded gloom, an undelightsome waste:
Around the extended wild, no sun's broad ray
Marked the clear splendor of immortal day;
No varying moon, ordained at eve to rise,
Led the full pomp of constellated skies;
No day in circling beauty learned to roll;
No fair spring smiled, nor frost congealed the pole;
Substantial darkness space unmeasured filled,
And nature's realms lay desolate and wild.
He spoke: at once, over earth's far distant bounds
The heavens wide-arching stretched their sapphire rounds.
With hoary cliffs the far-seen hills ascend;
Down sink the vales, and wide the plains extend;
Headlong from steep to steep the billows roar,
Fill the broad main, and toss against the shore.
He spoke; and beauty through all nature flowed;
With springing verdure earth's wide regions glowed.
Forth rush the flowery tribes; and trees on high
Shroud their ^all summits in the ambient sky.
He spoke; the heavens with sudden glory shone;
In godlike pomp (...) forth the golden sun;
Far through immensity his kindling my
Shot life and joy, and poured the newborn day;
With milder luster rose the charms of even,
The moon's broad beam, and all the pride of heaven.
He spoke; and fishes filled the watery rounds,
Swarm'^ in the streams and swam the Ocean's bounds;
The green sea sparkled with unnumber'd dies,
And varying beauty waved upon the skies;
Whales through the foaming billows proudly rode,
And unknown monsters gambol'd over the flood.
From the deep wave, adorned with nobler grace,
In countless millions sprang the feathered race.
Through the far clouds, the eagle cleft his way,
And soared, and wantoned in the flames of day:
Full on the morn the peacock opened his beams;
And swans majestic rowed the expanded streams.
He spoke; and, wondering, from disparted plains,
In throngs unnumber'd, rose the bestial trains:
Their snowy robes the harmless flocks revealed:
Gay steeds, exulting, pranc'd the vernal field.
The lion glar'd; and, mid the gazing throng,
Shook his rough main, and grimly stalked along.
The wide earth finished, from his western throne,
In splendid beauty looked the gladsome sun;
Calm were the skies; the fields with luster crowned,
And nature's incense filled the etherial round.
Enshrined in sacred light, the Maker stood,
Complacent smiled, and owned the work was good,
Then from his hand, in silent glory, came
A nobler form, and man his destined name;
Erect, and tall, in solemn pomp he stood,
And living virtue in his visage glowed,
Then, too, a fairer being showed her charms;
Young Beauty wantoned in her snowy arms;
The heavens around her bade their graces fly,
And Love sat blooming in her gentle eye,
O pair divine! superior to your kind;
To virtue fashioned, and for bliss designed!
He, born to rule, with calm, uplifted brow,
Looked down majestic on the world below;
To heaven, his mansion, turned his thoughts sublime,
Or roved far onward through the scenes of time;
Over nature's kingdom cast a searching eye,
And dared to trace the secrets of the sky;
On fancy's pinions scanned the white abode,
And claimed his friend, an angel, or a God.
Her he indu'd with nature more refined,
A lovelier image, and a softer mind.
To her he gave to kindle sweet desire,
To rouse great thoughts and fan the heroic fire;
At Pity's gentle call to bend his ear;
To prompt for woe the unaffected tear:
In scenes refined his softening soul improve,
And tune his wishes with the hand of love.
To her he gave with sweetness to obey,
Inspire the friend, and charm the lord away;
Each bleeding grief with balmy ^and to heal,
And teach his rending sinews not to feel;
Each joy to improve, the pious wish to raise,
And add new raptures to his languid praise.
To this loved pair a blessed retreat was given,
A seat for angels, and an humbler heaven;
Fair Eden named: in swift succession, there
Glad scenes of rapture led the vernal year;
Round the green garden, living Beauty played;
In gay profusion Earth her treasures spread:
The air breathed fragrance: streams harmonious rung,
And love, and transport, tuned the aerial song.
With tranquil beams the seventh bright morn appeared,
And thus, from fiery clouds, a voice was heard:
This day, O man, to sacred transports rise,
And pass the hours in converse with the skies:
To prayer, to praise, be all thy wishes given;
Soar from the world, and here begin thy heaven!
So shall thy sons pursue the virtuous road,
And, each returning sabbath, wake to God.
The sovereign voice the reverend pair obeyed;
A solemn beauty earth and heaven arrayed;
With joy the pinioned tribes, in every grove,
Hymn'd the blessed influence of immortal love.
Man joined the concert: and his raptured lays
Charmed the gay fields, when angels ceased to praise.
NEW ENGLAND DESCRIBED.
BY THE SAME.
HAIL, O hail,
My much loved native land! New Albion hail!
The happiest realm, that, round his circling course,
The all-searching sun beholds. What though the breath
Of Zembla's winter shuts thy lucid streams,
And hardens into brass thy generous soil;
Though, with one white, and cheerless, robe, thy hills,
Invested, rise a long and joyous waste;
Leafless the grove, and dumb the lonely spray,
And every pasture mute: What though with clear
And fervid blaze, thy summer rolls his car,
And drives the languid herd, and fainting flock,
To seek the shrouding umbrage of the dale;
While man, relaxed and feeble, anxious waits
The dewy eve, to slake his thirsty frame:
What though thy surface, rocky, rough, and rude,
Scoop'd into vales, or heaved in lofty hills,
Or cloud embosom'd mountains, dares the plough,
And threatens toil intense to every swain:
What though foul Calumny, with voice malign,
Thy generous sons, with every virtue graced,
Accused of every crime, and still rolls down
The kennell'd stream of impudent abuse:
Yet to high HEAVEN my ardent praises rise,
That in thy lightsome vales he gave me birth,
All-gracious, and allows me still to live.
Cold is thy clime, but every western blast
Brings health, and life, and vigor on its wings;
Innerves the steely frame, and firms the soul
With strength and hardihood; wakes each bold
And manly purpose; bears above the ills,
That stretch, upon the rack, the languid heart
Of summer's maiden sons, in pleasure's lap,
Dandled to dull repose. Exertion strong
Marks their whole life. Mountains before them sink
To mole-hills; oceans bar their course in vain.
Through the keen wintry wind they breast their way,
Or summer's fiercest flame. Dread dangers rouse
Their hearts to pleasing conflict; toils and woes,
Quicken their ardour: while, in milder climes,
Their peers effeminate they see, with scorn
On lazy plains, dissolved in putrid sloth,
And struggling hard for being. Thy rough soil
Tempts hardy labor, with his sturdy team,
To turn, with sinewy hand, the stony glebe,
And call forth every comfort from the mould,
Unpromising, but kind. Thy houses, barns,
Thy granaries, and thy cellers, hence are stored
With all the sweets of life: while, through thy realm,
A native beggar rarely pains the sight.
Thy summer glows with heat; but choicest fruits
Hence purple in the sun; hence sparkling flowers
Gem the rich landscape; double harvests hence
Load the full fields: pale Famine scowls aloof,
And Plenty wantons round thy varied year.
Rough is thy surface; but each landscape bright,
With all of beauty, all of grandeur dressed,
Of mountains, hills, and sweetly winding vales,
Of forests groves, and lawns, and meadows green,
And waters, varied by the plastic hand,
Through all their fairy splendor, ceaseless charms,
Poetic eyes. Spring bubbling round the year,
Gay-wand'ring brooks, wells at the surface full,
Yield life, and health, and joy, to every house,
And every vivid field. Rivers, with foamy course,
Pour over the ragged cliff, the white cascade,
And roll unnumber'd mills, or, like the Nile,
Fatten the beauteous interval; or bear
The sails of commerce through the laughing groves.
With wisdom, virtue, and the generous love
Of learning, fraught, and freedom's living flame,
Electric, unextinguishable, fired,
Our Sires established, in thy cheerful bounds,
The noblest institutions, man has seen,
Since time his reign began. In little farms
They measured all thy realms, to every child
In equal shares descending; no entail
The firstborn listing into bloated pomp,
Tainting with lust, and sloth, and pride, and rage,
The world around him: all the race beside.
Like brood of ostrich, left for chance to rear,
And every foot to trample. Reason's sway
Elective, founded on the rock of truth,
Wisdom their guide, and equal good their end,
They built with strength, that mocks the battering storm,
And spurns the mining flood; and every right
Dispensed alike to all. Beneath their eye,
And forming hand, in every hamlet, rose
The nurturing school, in every village, smiled
The heaven inviting church, and every town
A world within itself, with order, peace,
And harmony, adjusted all its weal.
Hence every swain, free, happy, his own lord,
With useful knowledge fraught, of business, laws,
Morals, religion, life, unawed by man,
And doing all, but ill, his heart can wish,
Looks round, and finds strange happiness his own:
And sees that happiness on laws depend.
On this heaven laid foundation rests thy sway;
On knowledge to discern, and sense to feel,
That freeborn rule is life's perennial spring
Of real good. On this alone it rests.
For, could thy sons a full conviction feel,
That government was noxious, without arms,
Without intrigues, without a civil broil,
As torrents sweep the sand-built structure down,
A vote would wipe it is very trace away.
Hence too each breast is steeled for bold defense;
For each has much to lose. Chosen by all,
The messenger of peace, by all beloved,
Spreads, hence, the truth and virtue, he commands.
Hence manners mild, and sweet, their peaceful sway
Widely extend. Refinement of the heart
Illames the general mass. Even those rude hills,
Those deep embow'ring woods, in other lands
Prowl'd round by savages, the same soft scenes,
Mild manners, order, virtue, peace, disclose;
The howling forest polished as the plain.
From earliest years, the same enlightened soul
Founded bright schools of science. Here the mind
Learned to expand it is wing, and stretch it is flight
Through truth's broad fields. Divines, and lawyers, hence,
Physicians, statesmen, all with wisdom fraught,
And learning, lusted to the use of life,
And minds, by business, sharpened into sense,
Sagacious of the duty, and the weal,
Of man, spring numberless; and knowledge hence
Pours it is salubrious streams, through all the spheres
Of human life. Its bounds, and generous scope,
Hence Education opens, spreading far,
Through the bold yeomanry, that (...) thy climes,
Views more expanded, generous, just, refined,
Than other nations know. In other lands,
The mass of man, scarce raised above the brutes,
Drags dull the horsemill round of sluggish life:
Naught known, beyond their daily toil; all else
By ignorance' dark curtain hid from sight.
Here, glorious contrast! every mind, inspired
With active inquisition, restless wings
Its flight to every flower, and, settling, drinks
Largely the sweets of knowledge.
Is this a state of life, thy honest tongue Candor, say,
Could blacken? These a race of men, thy page
Could hand to infamy? The shameful task
Thy foes at first began, and still thy foes,
Laborious, weave the web of lies. It Is hence,
The generous traveller round him looks, amazed,
And wonders at our unexpected bliss.
PICTURE OF A NEW ENGLAND VILLAGE.
BY THE SAME.
FAIR Verna! loveliest village of the west;
Of every joy, and every charm, possessed;
How pleased amid thy varied walks I rove,
Sweet, cheerful walks of innocence, and love,
And over thy smiling prospects cast my eyes,
And see the seats of peace, and pleasure, rise,
And hear the voice of Industry resound,
And mark the smile of Competence, around*
Hail, happy village! Over thy cheerful lawns,
With earliest beauty, spring delighted dawns;
The northward sun begins his vernal smile;
The spring birds carols over the cressy rill:
The shower, that patters in the ruffled stream,
The ploughboy's voice, that chides the lingering team,
The be, industrious, with his busy song,
The woodman's axe, the distant groves among,
The wagon, rattling down the rugged sleep,
The light wind, lulling every care to sleep,
All these, with mingled music, from below,
Deceive intruding sorrow, as I go.
Sweet-smiling village! loveliest of the hills!
How green thy groves! How pure thy glassy rills!
With what new joy, I walk thy verdant streets!
How often pause, to breathe thy gale of sweets;
To mark thy well built walls! thy budding fields!
And every charm, that rural nature yields;
And every joy, to Competence allied,
And every good, that Virtue gains from Pride!
No griping landlord here alarms the door,
To halve, for rent, the poor man's little store.
To haughty owner drives the humble swain
To some far refuge from his dread domain;
Nor wastes, upon his robe of useless pride,
The wealth, which shivering thousands wants beside;
Nor in one palace sinks a hundred cots;
Nor in one manor drowns a thousand lots;
Nor, on one table, spread for death and pain*
Devours what would a village well sustain.
THE HOUSE OF SLOTH.
BY THE SAME.
BESIDE yon lonely tree, whose branches bare
Rise white, and murmur to the passing air,
There, where the twining briars the yard enclose,
The house of Sloth stands hushed in long repose.
In a late round of solitary care,
My feet instinct to rove, they knew not where,
I thither come. With yellow blossoms gay,
The tall rank weed begirt the tangled way:
Curious to view, I forced a path between,
And climbed the broken stale, and gazed the scene.
Over an old well, the curb half fallen spread,
Whose boards, end-loose, a mournful creaking made;
Poised on a leaning post, and ill-sustain'd,
In ruin (...), a mouldering swepe remained;
Useless, the crooked pole still dangling hung,
And, tied with thrumbs, a broken bucket swung.
A half-made wall around the garden lay,
Mended, in gaps, with brushwood in decay.
No culture through the woven briars was seen,
Save a few sickly plants of faded green:
The starved potatoe hung it is blasted seeds,
And fennel struggled to o'ertop the weeds.
There gazed a ragged sheep, with wild surprise,
And two lean geese upturn'd their slanting eyes.
The cottage gaped, with many a dismal yawn,
Where, rent to burn, the covering boards were gone;
Or, by one nail, where others endwise hung,
The sky looked through, and winds portentous rung.
In waves, the yielding roof appeared to run,
And half the chimney-top was fallen down.
The ancient cellar door, of structure rude,
With tattered garments calk'd, half open stood.
There, as I peeped, I saw the ruined bin;
The sills were broke; the wall had crumbled in;
A few, long emptied casks lay mouldering round,
And wasted ashes sprinkled over the ground;
While, a sad sharer in the household ill,
A half-starv'd rat crawled out, and bade farewell.
One window dim, a loop-hole to the sight,
Shed round the room a pale, penurious light;
Here rags gay-colour'd eked the broken glass;
There panes of wood supplied the vacant space.
As, pondering deep, I gazed, with gritty roar,
The hinges creak'd, and open stood the door.
Two little boys, half-naked from the waist,
With staring wonder, eyed me, as I passed.
The smile of Pity blended with her tear --
Ah me! how rarely Comfort visits here!
On a lean hammoc, once with feathers filled,
His limbs by dirty tatters ill concealed,
Though now the sun had rounded half the day,
Stretched at full length, the lounger snorting lay:
While his sad wife, beside her dresser stood,
And washed her hungry houshold's meagre food,
His aged sire, whose beard, and flowing hair,
Waved silvery, over his antiquated chair,
Rose from his seat; and, as he watched my eye,
Deep from his bosom heaved a mournful sigh --
Stranger, he cried, once better days I knew;
And, trembling, shed the venerable dew.
I wished a kind reply; but wished in vain;
No words came timely to relieve my pain:
To the poor parent, and her infants dear,
Two mites I gave, besprinkled with a tear;
And, fixed again to see the wretched shed,
Withdrew in silence, closed the door, and fled.
Yet this so lazy man I Have often seen
Hurrying, and bustling, round the busy green;
The loudest prater, in a blacksmith's shop;
The wisest statesman, over a drunken cup;
(His sharp-bon'd horse, the street that nightly fed,
Tied, many an hour, in yonder, tavern-shed)
In every gambling, racing match, abroad:
But a rare hearer, in the house of God.
A FEMALE WORTHY.
BY THE SAME.
BEYOND that hillock, topp'd with scattered trees,
That meet, with freshest green, the hastening breeze,
There, where the glassy brook reflects the day,
Nor weeds, nor sedges, choke its crystal way,
Where budding willows feel the earliest spring,
And wonted red breasts safely nest, and sing,
A female Worthy lives; and all the poor
Can point the way to her sequestered door.
She, unseduc'd by dress and idle show,
The forms, and rules, of fashion never knew;
Nor glittering in the ball, her form displayed;
Nor yet can tell a diamond, from a spade.
Far other objects claimed her steady care;
The morning chapter, and the nightly prayer;
The frequent visit to the poor man's shed;
The wakeful nursing, at the sick man's bed;
Each day, to rise, before the early sun;
Each day, to see her daily duty done;
To cheer the partner of her household cares,
And mould her children, from their earliest years.
Small is her house; but filled with stores of good;
Good, earned with toil, and with delight bestowed.
In the clean cellar, ranged in order neat,
Gay -- smiling Plenty boasts her casks of meat,
Points, to small eyes, the bins where apples glow,
And marks her cider-butts, in stately row.
Her granary, filled with harvest's various pride,
Still sees the poor man's bushel laid aside;
Here swells the flaxen, there the fleecy store,
And the long wood pile mocks the winter's power:
White are the swine; the poultry plump and large;
For every creature thrives, beneath her charge.
Plenteous, and plain, the furniture is seen;
All formed for use, and all as silver clean.
On the clear dresser, pewter s^incs arow;
The clean scower'd bowls are trimly set below;
While the washed coverlet, and linen white,
Assure the traveller a refreshing night.
Often have I seen, and often still hope to see,
This friend, this parent to the poor and me,
Though bent with years, and toil, and care, and woe,
Age lightly silvered on her furrowed brow,
Her f^ame still useful, and her mind still young,
Her judgment vigorous, and her memory strong,
Serene her spirits, and her temper sweet,
And pleased the youthful circle still to meet,
Cheerful, the long-accustom'd task pursue,
Prevent the rust of age, and life renew;
To church, still pleased, and able still, to come,
And shame the lounging youth, who sleep at home.
Such as her toils, has been the bright reward;
For Heaven will always toils like these regard.
Safe, on her love, her truth and wisdom tried,
Her husband's heart, through lengthened life, relied;
From little, daily saw his wealth increase,
His neighbors love him, and his household bless;
In peace and plenty lived, and died resigned,
And, dying, left six thousand pounds behind.
Her children, trained to usefulness alone,
Still love the hand, which led them kindly on,
With pious duty, own her wise behest,
And, every day, rise up, and call her blessed.
More would ye know, of each poor hind enquire,
Who sees no sun go down upon his hire;
A cheerful witness, did each neighbor come;
Ask each sad wanderer, where he finds a home;
His tribute even the vilest wretch will give,
And praise the useful life, he will not live.
THE MISERIES OF WAR.
BY THE SAME.
THROUGH earth's immeasurable bounds,
Through time's interminable rounds,
Each day has heard the clarion roar*
Each land been bathed in human gore.
The Egyptian ru^e, the Assyrian throne,
Was reared of spoils, and realms undo^e.
Greece redden'd earth around with blood,
And poured of* woe an ocean flood;
Then pointed at herself the dart,
And brothers pierced a brother's heart.
The Persian ruined half mankind:
The Macedonian wept to find,
While brooding over the wrecks of joy,
No new would left him, to destroy.
The structure mark of Rome's dread power!
Its marble bones! its cement gore;
Her sway the waste of human joy;
The arts to plunder, and destroy:
A curse to earth's extended climes:
A web of madness, woes, and crimes!
Her towers were built by galled hands;
In blood her proud Pantheon stands;
Her triumphs showed the tyger's prey;
And corpses paved her Appian way.
In each tall temple's dread abode,
Pale specter hovered round the god,
(The injured ghosts of countless lands,
Cut off from life by Roman hands)
Hung round, and claimed the spoils their own,
Shrieked over their native realms undone,
Hauntell each shrine, with livid state,
And mingled groans with every prayer.
Nor le^^, in modern days, when art
Has led so nobler scenes the heart,
When science beams with vernal rays,
And lights to b^^ss ten thousand ways,
The Gospel, found in every tongue,
Has peace and sweet salvation sung,
The tiger charmed to quit his prey,
And taught the wolf with lambs to play --
Still roars the trump's funereal sound;
"To arms,"the startled hills rebound;
War's iron car in thunder rolls,
From medial climes, to distant poles.
Amazed, see Europe, first of all,
Proud Empress of this suffering b^ll,
The sun of power, and arts refined,
The boast, and beauty, of mankind,
The work of death, and plunder, spread,
And riot on the untimely dead!
When, borne by winds of softest wing,
Returns the life renewing spring,
The tempest ^^ies to earth's far ends,
And HEAVEN in peace and love descends,
Shines in the sun's serener ray,
Breaches in the bul^ry breath of May,
Du^^^s in earth dissolving showers,
And glows in rainbow-painted flowers,
While wisdom works, while goodness warms,
In sky-born tints, and angel forms,
The new, the sweet, creation springs,
And beauty blooms, and rapture sings:
Fait swell the teeming seeds of food;
The world is heaped with boundless good;
In every scene, the GODHERD smiles,
And man of rage, and lust, beguiles.
Then beats the drum its fierce alarm;
Then millions, fired to madness, arm,
Fight, plunder desolate, devour,
And drench the wasted world in gore.
Whose name rolls down, from age to age?
Whose splendours light the Historic page?
Who wakes the inrapt Maeonian song?
Who prompts the universal tongue?
The world's great guardian, genius, god?
The Man of spoil, the Man of blood.
C^^sar, the butcher of mankind,
Loads with his praise each passing wind;
The general thief, adulterer, brute;
His boast to murder, waste, pollute;
Dread rival of Apollyon's fame;
His labors, arts, and praise, the same.
What most the heart with vice defiles;
Of worth disrobes; of heaven beguiles?
What bids in storms the passions roll;
Consigns to appetite the soul;
Bids Pride ascend the ETERNAL'S throne,
And claim the universe, her own;
Ambition's vulture-wing expands,
Borne, hungry, keen, over suffering lands;
The wide world talon'd to his sway,
A field of death, and food, and prey!
What lights, for fell Revenge, the pyre;
Of Malice heats the quenchless fire;
And lifts Assassination's knife
Against a friend's, or parent's, life?
What stretches Avarice' gulphy maw,
And opens wide her shark-tooth'd jaw,
Both India's bowels to devour,
To drink the sea, and gorge the shore;
Calls forth, in viper paths, Disguise,
And points her thousand tongues with lies;
Bold, bronzy Fraud invests in mail,
And clips his weights, and lops his scale:
For Honor's house digs Forgery's mine,
And gilds his green, impoisoning coin;
Breaks tiger Rapine's iron cage,
And sends him loose, to roam, and rage:
Extortion rouses, from his lair,
The cote to o'erleap, the flock to tear,
To make the fenceless poor his food,
And eat their flesh and drink their blood?
What fires, to phrenzy, Lewdness' veins;
Throws on Adultery's neck the reins;
Gives high-fed Rape at large to fly,
And makes the world a general stye:
Peoples a^ calm with sots, and swine,
And bids men live, to drink, and dine;
Tempts burrow'd Atheism abroad,
To infuriate man, to hiss at GOD,
To burst each moral bond divine,
And nature's magic ^inks disjoin,
The sense of common good erase,
The etherial stamp of HEAVEN deface,
Dog gentle peace, bait generous worth,
Haunt justice, truth, and law, from earth,
And bid in hell's subjected fire,
Religion's sky built fane expire?
What licks the final dregs of joy,
And leaves the inverted vessel dry;
Makes earth, of virtue besom'd clean,
The cage of every beast obscene;
A ruined dome, whose walls around
The hollow moan of death resound;
An Afric sand; a Greenland shore;
Where life and comfort spring no more;
An image dark and drear of hell;
Where fiends, invoked familiar dwell;
Where lost immortals Angels weep;
Where curses wake, and blessings sleep;
And GOD, the rebels forced to abhor,
Repents his marred creation? War.
Say, Child of Nature! does thy tear
Start, as thy pained eye wanders here?
Thy cheek with manly blushes burn?
Thy wonted praise to curses turn?
Thy bosom waste with cankering woe?
And thy heart heave the indignant throe?
Go then, ah go! whatever thy lot;
Be thine the palace, or the cot,
To wield the rod, the yoke to bear,
A million, or a crown, to share,
The senate's guided hand to sway,
Or bid the little flock obey,
Go, ere thy heart be changed to stone,
Or ear find music in a groan,
Or gold the gates of pity bar,
Hate, cursed, oppose, Tartarean war.
Disdain, despise, with horror name,
And give to never-dying shame,
The King, that throned for human good,
Consigns his realm to waste, and blood;
Senates, that, formed for general weal,
Sanction the dread decree to kill;
Statesmen, to tigers changed by power,
That smile, and feast on human gore,
And chiefs, that havoc love to spread,
And pluck their wreaths from fields of dead.
But round thee gentle peace diffuse,
Her morning smiles, and evening dews;
Thy sons with love of peace inform;
Their hearts with sweet affections warm;
Bid them pernicious strife abhor,
And lisp the infant curse on war.
Far round thee light the genial fire;
Thy neighbors, and thy friends, inspire:
United, lift the ardent prayer,
That GOD thy ruined race may spare,
Wake in their hearts affections mild,
Sweet semblance of the meekly child,
MESSIAH'S peaceful sway extend,
Bid kings, and chiefs, to virtue bend,
Protract of life the little span,
And change the reasoning wolf to man.
ELLA. -- A NORWEGIAN TALE.
BY WILLIAM DUNLAP.
History (...) that Sivard, King of Sweden, entered Norway with a numerous
army, and committed the greatest enormities, but was at last overthrown, his
Army routed, and himself slain by one of those women whom he had brutally
abused.
BETWEEN Norwegian hills, wide spreads a plain,
By Nature formed for sport;
The vet'ran warrior here, and hardy swain,
To annual games resort.
High over their heads was hung the hoary brow,
Which cast an ample shade;
From thence these words majestic seemed to flow --
"Fierce foes your sports invade!"
They upward gaze -- a warrior struck their sight;
He bore aloft his lance,
All sheathed in arms, insufferably bright,
Where beamy splendours dance.
The western sun beam round his helmet flies,
He more than man appears;
And more than mortal seemed to sound the voice
That rang upon their ears.
Ye sons of Norway! hearken to my tale,
Your rural games, oh cease;
Sivard is marching through Dulvellon's vale,
Break off the sports of peace!
The bloody Sivard leads his conquering Swedes,
He riots in our shame;
The man, the matron, and the infant bleeds --
Norway is but a name!
The husband sees -- curse on the tyrant's lust --
He sees his beauteous bride --
Her virtue, worth and honor in the dust --
On where is Norway's pride!
(...) rouse Norwegians! seize your arms (...),
Let (...) over shade the brow;
Let Us meet these Swedish demons on the plain,
And lay their triumphs low.
Oh had you seen what these poor eyes have seen!
'Twas Sivard did the deed --
Our hoary monarch, and our helpless queen,
I -- yes, I saw them bleed.
Their daughter Ella -- no, I will not tell!
Norwegians never enquire --
Never hear it -- what the royal maid befell;
I see your souls on sire.
Oh seize your swords, your spears, your helms, and shields!
Oh vindicate your fame!
Sivard and Sweden glare on Norway's fields;
Remember Norway's name.
He said, tears flow apace -- fierce glow the swains,
Rage sills each honest breast;
In Swedish blood, to wipe away their stains
Was every thought addressed.
Then red hair'd Rollo, fierce advancing, cried,
Whoever thou art, come down!
We live on hills, to every toil we are tried,
And war is all our own.
Let Sivard come, we'll meet the tyrant here.
But Stranger come thou down.
He came; old Athold gazed with look severe; --
He gazed -- but ceased to frown.
Or Athold has forgot his monarch's face,
Or sure thou art his son!
Eric, of mighty Norway's royal race! --
Full quick the tidings run.
With shouts they press to see the beauteous chief;
The aged kiss his hand!
On either side fast rolled the marks of grief,
Then Athold spoke the band --
Ye sons of Norway, to your homes repair,
There seize the sword and shield,
And ere the morning's purple streaks the air,
Meet Eric in the field.
Oh Prince! do you with aged Athold go,
And take refreshing sleep;
Athold will sing, and sooth the rising woe,
Or, -- break his harp and weep. --
'Twas night -- in Athold's hall each took his place;
Of other times he sung;
Fast streamed the tears adown the hero's face,
And groans responsive rung.
Bright came the morn! and bright in battered arms
The rustic vet'rans came;
And many a youth, untried in rough alarms,
Now hoped a patriot's name.
They heard from far the hum of Sivard's host;
Young Eric struck his shield;
Then high in air his heavy spear he tossed,
And blazed along the field.
Next aged Athold followed; Rollo strong;
Black Calmar lifts his mace;
Culullin, Marco, Streno, rush along,
And all the rugged race.
Fierce came the Swede, in strength of numbers proud,
She scorned her feeble foe;
But soon the voice of battle roared aloud,
And many a Swede lay low.
Strong Rollo struck the towering Ol^us dead,
Fall fifteen bl^d beside.
Old Athold cleft the brave Adolphu's head,
In all his youthful pride.
But Eric' Eric! tang'd the field around,
On Sivard still he cried:
The gasping Swedes lay heaped upon the ground --
Sivard! the hills replied.
In fury Sivard seized his shining shield,
His mail, his helm and spear;
He mounts his car, he thunders over the field;
And Norway knows to fear.
Great Rollo falls beneath his dreadful arm,
His steeds are stained with blood;
Young Eric smiled to hear the loud alarm,
And flew to stop the flood.
He raged, he foamed, -- fierce flew the thirsty spear,
Down fell the foremost steed:
Astonished Sivard felt unusual sear --
"Tyrant, you are doomed to bleed."
Up sprung the youth -- deep griding fell the sword
Sunk in the Tyrant's brow;
Fast fly the Swedes, and leave their hated lord,
His towering pride laid low.
Now Norway's sons their great deliverer hail,
But lot he bleeds! he falls!
Old Athold strips the helm and beamy mail,
And on his Gods he calls.
He lifts the helm, and down the snowy neck
Fast falls the silky hair --
"And could those limbs, the conquering Sivard check,
Oh power of great despair! -- "
Life ebbs apace -- she lifts her languid head,
She strives her hand to wave,
Confessed to all, the beauteous Ella said --
"Thanks, thanks companions brave."
Freedom rewards you -- naught can Ella give:
Low, low, poor Ella lies;
Sivard is dead! and Ella would not live.
She bleeds, she faints, she dies.
THE COUNTRY SCHOOL.
FROM THE NEW HAMPSHIRE SPY.
PUT to the door -- the school's begun --
Stand in your places every one, --
Attend, --
Read in the bible, -- tell the place --
" Job twentieth and the seventeenth varse --
Caleb, begin. And -- he -- shall -- suck --
Sir, -- Moses got a pin and stuck --
Silence, -- stop Caleb -- Moses! here!
What Is this complaint? I didn't, Sir, --
Hold up your hand, -- What is it a pin?
O dear, I will not do so agin.
Read on. The increase of his h -- h -- horse --
Hold: H, O, U, S, E, spells house.
Sir, what is this word? for I cannot tell it.
Cannot you indeed! Why spell it. Spell it.
Begin yourself, I say. Who, I?
Yes, try. Sure you can spell it. Try.
Go, take your seats and primers, go,
You sha'n't abuse the bible so.
Will pray Sir Master mend my pen?
Say, Master, that is enough. -- Here Ben,
Is this your copy? Cannot you tell?
Set all your letters parallel.
I Have done my sum -- it is just a groat --
Let Us see it. -- Master, m' I g' out?
Yes, -- bring some wood in -- What Is that noise?
It is (...) I, Sir, it is them boys. --
Come Billy, read -- What Is that? That Is A --
Sir, Jim has snatched my rule away --
Return it, James. -- Here, rule with this --
Billy, read on, -- That Is crooked S.
Read in the spelling-book -- Begin --
The boys are out -- Then call them in --
My nose bleeds, may not I get some ice,
And h^ld it in my breeches? -- Yes.
John, keep your seat. My sam is more --
Then do it again -- Divide by four,
By twelve, and twenty -- Mind the rule.
Now speak, Manassah, and spell tool.
I cannot; -- Well try -- T, W, L.
Not washed your hands yet, booby, ha?
You had your orders yesterday.
Give me the ferrule, hold your hand.
Oh! Oh! There, -- mind my next command.
The grammar read. Tell where the place is.
C sounds like K in cat and cases.
(...) b^ck is torn. The next. -- Here not --
(...) final makes it long -- say note.
What are the stops and marks, Susannah?
Small points, Sir. -- And how many Hannah?
Four, Sir. How many, George? You look:
Here Is more than fifty in my book.
How Is this? Just come, Sam? Why I Have been --
Who knocks? I don't know, Sir. Come in.
"Your most obedient, Sir?"And yours.
Sit down, Sir, Sam, put to the doors.
What do you bring to tell that is new!
Nothing, that is either strange or true.
What a prodigious school! I Am sure
You Have got a hundred here, or more.
A word, Sir, if you please.I will --
You girls, till I come in be still.
Come, we can dance to night -- so you
Dismiss your brain distracting crew,
And come -- For all the girls are there.
We'll have a fiddle and a player.
Well, mind and have the sleigh -- bells sent,
I Will soon dismiss my regiment.
Silence! The second class must read.
As quick as possible -- proceed.
Not found your book yet? Stand -- be fixed --
The next read, stop -- the next -- the next.
You need not read again, it is well.
Come Tom and Dick, choose sides to spell.
Will this word do? Yes, Tom spell dunce.
Sit still there all you little ones.
I Have got a word, Well, name it. Gizzard.
You spell it Sampson. -- G, I, Z.
Spell conscience, Jack. K, O, N,
S, H, U, N, T, S. -- Well done!
Put out the next -- mine is folks.
Tim, spell it -- P, H, O, U, X.
O shocking! Have you all tried? No.
Say Master, but no matter, go --
Lay by your books -- and you, Josiah,
Help Jed to make the morning fire.
INVOCATION TO HOPE.
FROM THE MASSACHUSETTS MAGAZINE.
SOOTHER of Life! by whose delusive charm
This feeling heart resists the pointed woe,
Whose magic power, with fancied joys can warm,
And wipe the tear which Anguish taught to flow;
If, through the varied griefs my Youth has known,
No charm but these could raise my votive eye;
O leave me not, now every blessing's flown,
Whilst my sad bosom heaves the lengthened sigh.
The grated prison, and the love-form'd bower,
The wretch, whom Disappointment wastes away,
The frugal hut, the gilded dome of power,
Joy in thy smiles and court thy equal sway.
By thee, the friendless sufferer learns to bear;
By thee, the patient heart forgets its woe;
Thou make Misfortune's iron aspect fair,
And even the frozen cheek of Misery glow.
Leave me no more, as on that sated morn
When my rash soul the impious deed designed,
And when, unconscious of thy blessed return,
The for Despair usurped my tortured mind.
But yet, bright Goddess! with deceptive smile,
Come, and a host of Fictions in thy train,
With dreams of peace my wearied heart beguile.
And sink in fancied bliss the real pain.
CONSTANTIA.

PRAYER TO PATIENCE.
FROM THE SAME.
GODDESS of the steady eye!
All thy Apathy impart,
From a world of woe I fly,
Take, oh take me to thy heart!
Lend me all thy healing power,
Teach me to suppress the groan,
Let me while afflictions lour,
Turn like NIOBE to stone.
Let me to the sneer of scorn,
Still return the placid smile,
Calm, -- when angry passions frown,
Silent, -- when the rude revile.
Check the tyrant of the mind,
Source of sorrow, Foe to thee;
Who can peace, or solace find,
Racked by Sensibility!
Snatch me from her wasting sway,
Shield me with thy firmer aid,
Let me still thy voice obey,
Gentle, peace preserving maid!
If greater pangs this bosom rend,
Than ever bosom felt before;
Further may thy sway extend,
Greater, deeper be thy power.
Be every wrong disarmed by thee,
Rob stern Oppression of his pride,
Bid Malice at thy presence flee,
Turn Euoy's venomed dart aside.
Let hard Reproach soft kindness feel,
To cold Disdain be pity lent,
From Anger wrest his lifted steel,
From black Revenge his discontent.
Goddess of the tearless eye!
Yet give me thy pacific charms;
To thy calm bosom let me fly,
And find a refuge in thy arms!
CONSTANTIA

CHARACTER OF ST. TAMANY.
BY WILLIAM PRICHARD.
IMMORTAL Tamany, of Indian race,
Great in the field, and foremost in the chase!
No puny saint was he, with fasting pale,
He climbed the mountain, and he swept the vale,
Rushed through the torrent with unequalled might;
Your ancient saints would tremble at the sight;
Caught the swift boar, and swifter deer, with case,
And worked a thousand miracles like these.
To public views he added private ends,
And loved his country most, and next his friends;
With courage long he strove to ward the blow,
(Courage we all respect even in a foe,)
And when each effort he in vain had tried,
Kindled the flame in which he bravely died!
Let the full horn to Tamany go round,
His same let every honest tongue resound!
With him let every generous patriot vie,
To live in freedom, or with honor die.
FINIS.

