THE EXAMINERS EXAMINED; BEING A DEFENSE OF THE AGE OF REASON.

LE TEMS PRESENT EST GROS DE L'AVENIR.

Leibnitz. NEW YORK: PRINTED FOR THE AUTHOR; AND SOLD BY L. WAYLAND AND J.
FELLOWS. 1794.

(Copy-right secured.)

CONTENTS.
THOUGHTS on the Christian Religion, PAGE 5 Remarks on the Pamphlet, entitled,
the Folly of Reason, PAGE 22 -- Mr. Wakefield's Examination, PAGE 25 -- The Age
of Infidelity, PAGE 51 -- The Guide to Reason, PAGE 69 -- The New York
Reviewer, PAGE 71 -- An Anonymous Publication, PAGE 79 -- Reverend Usal Ogden's
Address, PAGE 81
THOUGHTS ON THE CHRISTIAN RELIGION.
RELIGION, in some form or other, seems to have been observed by mankind, in
all ages and all parts of the world; and considered as the most noble
employment, of the most divine nature, and producing the most benesicial
effects to society, of all the objects that ever engaged their attention:
although from casual circumstances, and interested motives of individuals,
there are as many modes and varieties of worship, as languages or nations on
the face of the earth.

Europeans have in general embraced christianity, as contained in the bible,
which they call the Word of God, as the only true and infallible system on
earth, and which only can lead us to eternal happiness. This bible, we have
been taught to believe, is holy, just, perfect, and superior to the human
understanding; so sacred, that to doubt or disbelieve it, would entail on us
inevitable never-ending misery. This doctrine, being instilled into children by
their nurses; and enforced by terror at a riper age, has long been assented to
by the generality of people, who seldom think or inquire for themselves, but
are always more or less the dupes of designing men.

But the times are now changing; the privilege of reasoning and believing for
ourselves, begins to be exercised -- freedom of enquiry abounds; and the
natural inherent right of speaking and acting according to the dictates of our
own conscience (without injuring society) is happily enjoyed. Consequently,
impositions of every kind, superstitious prejudices, and the long worshipped
sabrics of civil and religious tyranny, are daily growing into contempt, and in
all probability will soon be corn from their foundations, and consigned to that
infamous oblivion which they so highly merit.

To come more immediately to the point -- the christian religion, as generally
practiced, presents itself as one of those monuments of ignorance and
credulity, which the wisdom of the present generation is probably destined to
overthrow, and to substitute a system more simple, more pure, and more
agreeable to the dictates of reason. The bible, upon examination, we shall find
deficient in many of the virtues that have been ascribed to it. As a human
composition, its merits have been greatly over-rated: it is exceeded in
sentiment, invention, style, and every other literary qualification. The
obscurity, incredibility and obscenity, so conspicuous in many parts of it,
would justly condemn the works of a modern writer. It contains a mixture of
inconsistency and contradiction; to call which the word of God, is the highest
pitch of extravagance: it is to attribute to the Deity that which any person of
common sense would blush to confess himself the author of.

How are the rights and dignity of human nature ^^ sulted, degraded, and
trampled upon! how are mankind blinded, deceived, and led away by this system!
how is the honor and character of the Almighty affronted by the absurd and
impious doctrines it contains! how is the sacred name of God abused and
prostituted to the vilest and most execrable purposes, by his pretended
worshippers! and all for one simple, evident end, to gratify the pride and
avarice of unprincipled, designing men!

But something more than declamation is necessary to support these assertions.
I shall therefore give the reasons why I disbelieve the christian system, and
all the arguments advanced in its favor.

As to the existing proofs of the divine authority of the bible, whether
internal or external, whether the evidence we feel in our own minds on examming
it, or the miracles which are said to have attended its propagation, they are
of no avail in convincing us of its divine origin: And I do not think, that
independent of the prejudices of education, and the power of eloquence, there
ever was a reasonable thinking man, who felt a sufficient internal evidence to
convince him of the reality of the whole of its doctrines.

With respect to the public proofs exhibited by its founders, we find them no
stronger than those in favor of Mahometanism, or perhaps any other system.
Mahomet is said to have wrought as many miracles, preached as good doctrine,
converted ten times as many followers, and was far more successful in all his
enterprises, however bold or difficult, than Jesus Christ. The christians say,
the Mohammedan miracles were nothing but impostures; and the Mahometans say,
with as much authority, that the christian miracles were the time.

If the gospel system was so clear, so reasonable, and so powerful, as its
advocates assert, what necessity could there have been for miracles to support
it? If it had any foundation in reason and nature, there would have been no
occasion for mystery, miracle or revelation, to confirm it. A doctrine that is
reasonable and true, will appear so to every unprejudiced mind, without the aid
of any thing supernatural. Consequently, that system which requires miraculous
assistance to establish it, and cannot be proved by human means, is neither
reasonable nor true.

Supposing the bible to have been written by divine inspiration, at the times,
and by the persons mentioned in it, still it is next to impossible, that it
could have been transmitted down to the present time pure and uncontaminated,
even if there had been but one nation and one language upon earth. The variety
of translations and editions it has passed through in the course of near
eighteen hundred years, if it has existed so long, (which I am inclined to
disbelieve of many parts) and the continual improvements and alterations in
human language, during that period, amount to a presumptive proof that the
sense has been unavoidably mistaken, or wilfully perverted. A confirmation of
this remark is open to all: Let any one take the trouble of comparing different
cop^es of the bible, printed in the last and present centuries, or even in the
same year, and he will often find a striking disagreement.

Admitting that the bible contains the only doctrine by which we can obtain
salvation and everlasting life, which of the numberless professions that have
sprung out of it are we to embrace? One sect tells us that there is no
salvation out of the pale of their church. Another tells us, that unless we
believe and practice their doctrines, we shall surely be damned. Let us believe
therefore, in whatever particular profession we may, we shall be damned
according to the principles of the others.

How gracious and beneficent is the christian system! so perfect and pure that
it creates so many different, distinct, and opposite denominations of
believers; all of them right, infallibly right, in their own opinions, and
proving their doctrine by the clear, incontestible authority of divine
revelation!

Many, as an excuse for countenancing a doctrine which they confess may not be
true, say, that if the christian religion be false, it is still very hurtful to
attempt to overturn it; as we have no better guide, and no other method to
restrain the passions and regulate the conduct of mankind; as it is the most
perfect and beneficial system that could be devised. To determine this, we must
look at its effects.

That doctrine which has the greatest tendency to secure our present and future
happiness, is the best; it proves itself to be so. That the christian system
does not tend to make us happier, may easily be shown, by tracing its natural
operations on the human mind. By it we are led to believe, that we are all
miserable and ruined wretches; corrupt and exceedingly wicked from our very
birth; naturally sinful, and opposed to the will of God in all our actions,
words and thoughts; and so far from deserving the common blessings of life,
that if justice had been done us, we should long since have been cast into
endless punishment. Tribulation, disitess and sore trials, are the common lot
of mankind, especially the good. "Whom the Lord loves be chadeneth." This
world, it tells us, is a wretched, tiresome and accursed place; a mere sink of
guilt and misery; and all its enjoyments vanity and vexation of spirit. Though
by the bye, those who are called sincere and pious christians seem to be as
desirous of continu(...) in it, and tasting the good things it affords, as the
(...) and worldly-minded sinner. It likewise (...) its followers such a servile
fear, and dread of (...) w^^th of heaven, that they can neither lie down as
night, nor rise in the morning, without first attempting, by entreaty, flattery
and fair promises, to appease the Divine anger, and persuade the Almighty to
permit them to exist in peace. Every accident is a judgment, and a prelude to
further punishment. Every misfortune that happens to their neighbors is a
warning to them; and they are liable every moment to be cut off by an avenging
God, and sent to Hell.

While on the one hand, they represent the Deity as then servant, to assist
them on every occasion, averting every ill they bring upon themselves, and
extricating them from every difficulty and distress they plunge themselves
into. On the other, he is supposed to be a fierce, revengeful tyrant,
delighting in cruelty, punishing his creatures for the very sins which he
causes them to commit; and creating numberless millions of immortal souls, that
could never have offended him, for the express purpose of tormenting them to
all eternity. Thus they are generally miserable through life, in meditating on
death and its supposed consequences.

The authority of the bible appears still more doubtful from the absurdities
and contradictions it contains; contradictions which all the sophistical
ingenuity of reverend divines, with their literal meaning of this text, and
spiritual interpretation of that, can never explain or reconcile.

In the very first chapter of the whole volume, containing an account of the
creation, we find an inexplicable difficulty. In Genesis i. 27, 28. we are
told, that "God created man, male and semale, blessed them, and said unto
them," etc. But in ii. 20. we find that "there was not an help meet for Adam:"
therefore, ver. 18. "God said, it is not good that man should be alone." And,
ver. 22. "he made a woman, and brought her unto the man."

The Almighty, according to many parts of the bible, is a perfect, unchangeable
being. In Isaiah, he is said to declare, that he is "not as a man, that he
should repent." But in other places we read of his repenting very frequently.
He repented that he had made man. Having determined to destroy the Israelites,
and having slain seventy thousand of them, he "repented of the evil," and
spared the rest. He told Hezekiah that "he should surely die, and not live;"
but immediately repented, and gave him fifteen years longer. Jonah prophesied,
in his name, that in forty days Nineveh should be overthrown; but the people
believing him (though he did not perform his promise) and forsaking their sins,
he "repented of the evil that he said he would do unto them, and did it not."

In one place it says, "Our God is a consuming fire;" and in another, "God is
love." He is said to be jealous, revengeful and angry with the wicked every
day; and pleased again as often at they repent: possessing all the good and
evil qualities of man, that unstable, wicked, miserable, and insignificant
worm. Notwithstanding all this, he is perfectly just, wise, immutable, and can
never repent.

The christian system, I venture to affirm, has been the cause of more evil in
the world, man any other that ever appeared in it. By inculcating a belief that
the Deity was a terrible God, an inexer^able judge, taking vengeance on all his
enemies; its professors, wishing to conform as much as possible to the
character and disposition of their God, have in all ages acted with the same
spirit, and upon the same principles: "O (...) strong, unerring hand,
T^ny bolts forever throw;
And deal da^^ation round the land,
On each I judge thy foe."


Inspired with the most vindictive hatred to all who do not subscribe to the
principles they profess (who are, according to their faith, enemies; for they
say, there is no medium or neutrality, "all who are not for us are against
us:") they have never fai^ed, in any country, and at all times, when they had
the power, to exercise the most cruel and detestable spirit that ever disgraced
human nature. Not contented with insulting, oppressing, enslaving and
butchering the poor heretics here, but most humanely and charitably condemning
them to everlasting torments hereafter.

During the first 320 years of its existence, christianity occasioned the
destruction of many millions of mankind. In the first part of this period, the
christians were the greatest sufferers; but in the year 312 Maxentius and his
army of 200,000, were most of them drowned in the Tiber, or slain by
Constautine, the christian emperor; who, in three great battles, in one of
which 100,000 were killed, reduced and put to death Licinus, the deputy emperor
of the East; persecuted the Heathens and destroyed their idols, the symbols of
their divinities.

In the twelfth and subsequent centuries, millions of Walden^^^ (...)
protestants were murdered in the south of France. How many millions lost their
lives in the mad crusades for the recovery of the Holy Land! In Germany and
Flanders, in England, Scotland and Ireland, in South America -- But I stop, or
"I could a tale unfold, whose lightest word would harrow up the soul," chill
the blood with horror, and draw forth curses from the grave against the very
name of a religion which has been made the pretext for such cruelties.

Indeed, it is impossible to calculate the mischief that has attended the
christian system since its commencement. But, say its advocates, all this was
done by antichrist, or the false church. Which then is the true church? Not
that which persecutes. And what church is that? The church of Rome? No: For
that, after long struggles, no sooner became established in power, than it
persecuted its dissenting sons with all the zeal and barbarity that it had
experienced from its enemies. The church of England? No: For although that
separated from the church of Rome, and rejected many of the errors and
corruptions which had crept into it; yet no sooner was it fully established in
Great Britain, than it very carefully trod over the steps of the mother church,
persecuted Roman catholics, and all dissenters. The puritans who fled to this
country for the sake of freedom of conscience and religious liberty, were no
sooner settled than they discovered the same illiberal persecuting spirit,
which drove them hither, and persecuted the Quakers in their turn; becoming as
corrupt as any of the former churches. Each of them, while they were weak and
defenseless, suffered by the murderous hand of its oppressors; and, when become
strong and powerful, persecuted and martyred its feebler enemies. And I believe
there is not a church in Christendom but would, if it could not convert, most
gladly destroy all its opposers; had it that one essential and only necessary
quality, power. For they affirm, that the world, with all its blessings, are
nothing but temptations to draw them away from their true interest; and that
unbelievers of every kind are their natural implacable enemies.

The ^arnal mind, say they, is enmity to God and his people (themselves) and is
in continual opposition to every thing good and heavenly; they must then of
necessity wage an eternal war against all who do not acknowledg^ their system,
as the only sure guide to heaven.

The powerful blow which has been aimed at this system of faith by P^ine's Age
of Reason, has created a general and well-founded alarm. That work, to every
bigoted o^ interested follower of christianity, appears in a dreadful light
indeed; as it is a direct attack upon their favorite, their dearly beloved
system of gospel faith, which exalts them, in their own opinions, so much above
the rest of mankind.

The christian theology (...) so favorable to the pride and vanity of man, that
the slightest attempt to overturn it, occasions an universal panic in its
supporters, who immediately display all the ensigns of their cause, the
pompous, high-sounding anathemas of scripture, to frighten the bold invader of
their aerial territories. -- So far they act consistently; for where they have
no weapons or defense from nature and reason, fe^r and hope, though unfounded
and delusive, are the only expedients left. By representing the terrors of
their law in the most horrid colors, the wretched victim of their designs
cries out in the depth of despair, " Lord, what shall I do to be saved?" The
work is then in a certain way of success; the convert gives himself up to the
direction of the church in all things, and is ever after the passive tool of
its power. These converts are seldom or never made by pure reason and sound
argument; for these would never answer the purpose: but the passions, which may
be driven by every gale that blows, the fickle and inconstant passions, are so
influenced by the power of false eloquence in violent declamations and vehement
harrangues, that the calm, even voice of reason is not heard, or is
disregarded, amidst the bustle of jarring emotions; and the poor frightened
wretch catches hold of the first object that is held out to save him from his
fancied perishing and undone condition. Without ever once considering whether
the profession they embrace is founded in nature and reason, they confide
wholly in the p^^ty of their spiritual teacher, leave their faith and hope
altogether in his hands, and trust entirely upon his promises and power. Their
belief he can alter or abolish at pleasure; for what he preaches they must
ad^er^ to: what he allows they must profess; what he appro^es must be true.

In fact, the christian system has never yet been weighed in the imparti^^
(...) of reason, or received a candid trial in the (...) world. Force, fraud,
and other unfair means have always been necessarily employed for its
establishment. Had it been founded on truth, or consistent with common sense,
its advocates would never have refused to submit it to reason, and the cool,
dispassionate judgment of mankind. But they well knew that it could neverstand
the test, and this would be the certain means of its destruction. They
therefore boldly and presumptuously tell the world, that it is beyond the reach
of human reason, which is not competent to judge rightly of it. They confess
that we cannot comprehend a great part of it; but at the same time command us
to believe it, though we cannot understand it.

It has been the peculiarly honorable lot of Thomas Pain, the firm advocate of
truth, the undaunted champion of reason, and the resolute and unconquerable
enemy of tyranny, bigotry and prejudice, to open the door to free and impartial
enquiry. He has boldly entered the field himself, and taught the world, that no
true system of principles, however sacred they may be held in the public
opinion, and however strongly protected and enforced by the terrors of man's
vengeance here, and eternal punishment hereafter, is too awful to be canvassed
by reason, or too sublime to be comprehended by common sense.

The christian system, as it is not consistent with reason, is declared to be
above it; and should be received even if it does not appear clear and
intelligible to our human capacities.

This by prohibiting enquiry, effectually prevents detection of falsehood and
confirmation of truth. The doctrine is received upon trust, upon the credit of
our forefathers; because they taught, or rather said so, we must implicitly
believe so, all the remonstrances of reason and experience to the contrary
notwithstanding.

This is certainly a very great absurdity. For there once was a beginning to
every system or theory in being; and at that beginning it was necessary to
exercise reason as the unerring guide to direct in the choice or rejection
thereof. If mankind were not only allowed, but necessitated to weigh every
doctrine in (...) ^^fallible balance of reason, at any time, why are we ^ot
entitled to the same privilege at present? Is our reason degenerated? Are our
faculties impaired? Or rather are we not far more wise and enlightened than
mankind were centuries ago, and much more competent to understand and judge of
things than they were? By the practice before mentioned, by that tyranny over
the minds of men, which has ever been exercised in despotic states, the
grossest falsehoods have been forced upon the world for realities, and the most
detestable impositions established and maintained in all the strength and
vigor of immutable truth.

But these arts, how long soever they may prosper, and by whatever authority
they may be supported; though they may call to their aid all the powers of
superstition and prejudices of education, and be assisted by the pride and
deceit of hypocritical bygots and mercenary tyrants; still must they finally
fall, and sink into contemptuous oblivion. The present state of society seems
peculiarly adapted to the advancement of truth, and destruction of error. The
sun of reason has begun to appear, dispelling the thick and almost impenetrable
mists of ignorance and superstition, illuminating the most secret recesses of
the mind, and will continue to increase in splendour, till it shine forth in one
clear, unclouded and eternal day.

The writing; of modern philosophers have served greatly to illuminate the
minds of the present generation. I will here quote Pope's beautiful description
of that sublime and heavenly religion, which mankind in a state of nature
professed, contrasted with that distorted, gloomy religion which has been
imposed on mankind by power and fraud.

"Man, like his maker, saw that all was right,
To virtue, in the paths of pleasure, trod,
And owned a father when he owned a God.
LOVE all the faith, and all the allegiance then;
For Nature knew no right divine in men,
No ill could fear in God; and understood
A sovereign being but a sovereign good."
" Superstition taught the tyrant awe,
Then shared the tyranny, then lent it aid,
And Gods of conq'rors, slaves of subjects made:
She, 'midst the lightning's blaze and thunder's sound,
When rocked the mountains, and when groaned the ground,
She taught the weak to bend, the proud to pray,
To power unseen, and mightier far than they:
She, from the rending earth and bursting skies,
Saw Gods deseend, and fiends infernal rise:
Here fixed the dreadful, there the blessed abodes;
Fear made her devils, and weak hope her gods;
Gods partial, changeful, passienate, unjust,
Whose attributes were rage, revenge, or lust;
Such as the souls of cowards might conceive,
And, formed like tyrants, tyrants would believe.
Zeal, then, not charity, became the guide,
And hell was built on spite, and heaven on pride.
Then sacred seemed the etherial vault no more;
Altars grew marble then, and reek'd with gore:
Then first the Flamen tasted living food;
Next his grim idol smeer'd with human blood;
With heaven's own thunders shook the world below,
And played the god an engine on his foe."
From an attentive perusal of such liberal, enlightened writers as Pope, Lock,
Hume, etc. who were not interested in forcing any unnatural systems upon
mankind, whose only aim was the happiness of the human race, and from my own
reflections, I have adopted the following creed, which I here submit to the
impartial consideration of my fellow-citizens of all denominations.

1. I believe in one God, or first cause, wise, powerful and good; and too far
above the influence of human actions to be affected by any thing that can be
done on earth.

2. I believe in the equality of men by nature (though so different by
accident) the universal power of conscience, and the unerring authority of
natural reason.

3. I believe the whole duty of man is comprised in this one great republican
principle -- do just as you would be done unto. -- My reasons for believing
thus are, in the first place, that this first cause is wise and powerful beyond
our conception, is clearly evinced in the wonderful formation and disposition
of nature, exhibited in every thing that we have any perception of. That he is
good, the whole creation proves; for we find nothing made but what is useful,
beneficial, and conducive to the happiness of the whole. And that he is too far
above the reach of human actions to be affected by any thing that can be done
on earth, is inferred from nature, reason and experience: for the only idea
that we can form of the Deity is, that he is a perfect, unchangeable being; and
if we suppose that he so particularly notices the conduct of mankind as to be
differently affected by their different actions, we must allow that he is an
imperfect, changeable being, liable to be pleased or vexed at the mere will and
pleasure of his creatures, and dependent upon the whim and caprice of man.

In the second place, it appears from the experience of mankind in all ages,
that Nature, in the creation of man, acts impartially and equally; but leaves
his talents, disposition, etc. to be regulated by mere accidental
circumstances. That conscience has an universal power, is evident from the
dislike and abhorrence, with which all mankind look upon actions that tend to
the injury of society. And not to believe in the unerring authority of natural
reason, would be to accuse the Deity of injustice for not creating us capable
of distinguishing good from evil, and then punishing us for the evil we commit.

In the third place, that the whole duty of man is comprised in this one great
republican principle, "Do as you would be done unto," has appeared so notorious
to the world in all ages, that it has been universally agreed upon, as the
unerring rule of action, and the basis of happiness: by the observing of which
there can be neither oppression, deceit, or injustice of any kind. The duty of
man is his interest; his interest is to make himself happy; and the surest and
best way of doing this is to promote the prosperity of the whole.

Finally, that system of religion which contradicts itself, cannot be wholly
true. -- That which is not consistent with reason, or agreeable to the order of
nature, must be false, as different from the will of the Deity, displayed in
all his works: -- And, that which tends to promote discord, pride and deceit,
is prejudicial to society, and ought to be discountenanced and opposed by every
good man.

REMARKS ON THE PUBLICATIONS WHICH HAVE APPEARED IN OPPOSITION TO THE AGE OF
REASON.
THE first attack, the author very wisely entitled "The Folly of Reason,"
which, as the title indicates, is a mere catch-penny performance, and was
probably written from no other than mercenary views: argument and reason are
rejected, and declamation and bare assertion substituted in their place.

With respect to the real merit of the piece, it would be an insult on common
sense to suppose it worthy a serious consideration. But as the advocates of the
doctrine it attempts to support are in such need of assistance, that they
eagerly catch at every appearance of reason or argument in their favor, and
deceive themselves with the idea of importance in that which really possesses
none; some remarks, to remove the feeble impressions made by this pamphlet, and
show the absurdity of the principles it is intended to establish, may therefore
not be unnecessary.

The ludicrous absurdity of the title, is so evident to every reader of common
sense, that I shall not insult his understanding by commenting upon it. It is,
however, very curious, that the author should attempt, by the power of his
share of reason, to prove the folly and insufficiency of all reason. If reason,
as he asserts, is weak and deceitful, it is what I never suspected before;
though I must confess, he goes as far to prove it, not by argument, but
example, as any writer I ever met with.

The "bigotry of a deist," which he mentions in his first sentence, is an
entire new expression; and as it is an inconsistent one, it cannot apply to Mr.
Pain or any one else. Bigotry signifies ^anaticism, blind zeal or
superstition; of which neither Mr. Pain, nor any other deist can be accused.

In the next sentence he observes, "To, doubt the truth of the scriptures at
this day is truly alarming." I cannot see why it should be alarming at this or
any other day, or that it is alarming or dangerous at all: for we know that
there is now, and always have been, men of the greatest eminence, who have both
doubted and denied the truth of them, and that without any evil consequences
following. The author proceeds, "A jargon of logic^ pla^^ing upon the passions,
not the reason of men, ^^^onfess is calculated more to draw them from the
practice of every moral duty, than to instilinto their minds either morality or
brotherly love." A gar^^n of l^gic, playing upon the passions, not the reason
of men, never did o^ could exi^t, but in his imagination -- another newly
coined expression.

As for the succeeding paragraphs, to page 11, they either mean nothing, or
their meaning is unknown to any but the writer: we will therefore pass on to
take notice of what he intends as arguments to prove the truth of the bible,
from page 11 to 20. His first observation is, that "The marks and tokens
whereby to judge at all times of the truth of a revelation, is the credibility
of the person who brings it." On the contrary, the only marks to judge of the
truth of a story are, the credibility and reasonableness of the matter, and the
evidences brought to prove it.

He says, "That God would suffer a book that pretends to such marks of truth
and authority, to make its way so long, etc. is not only highly impropable, but
in the nature of the thing, plainly impossible." But I say it is both probable
and possible. For has not the Turkish Alcoran, which the christians affirm to
be false and wicked, existed for a time nearly as long as our bible;
notwithstanding all the opposition it met with, and in spite of all the power
and policy of christendom; so that it is now as fully believed and more
uniformly adheared to than the christian faith?

He asserts, that "the bible contains nothing poor, mean, or superfluous." If,
as he attempts to prove, reason is incompetent to determine the matter, he has
no right to make the assertion. At any rate, he has no more authority for
saying this, than I have for saying the contrary. And had the author been
endowed with a common share of understanding, he would have been convinced that
it contain^ much poorness, meanness, and superfluity: that there are many parts
of it highly indecent, perfectly obscene, and by their obscurity and
unintelligibility truly superfluous. Many chapters in the bible, by being read
in churches, have raised the blush of modesty on the cheek of innocence; shamed
the virtuous matron, and disgusted every man of sense and decency. I could
point out many passages which no reasonable parent would suffer his children to
read, and which if contained in any other book, would banish it from polished
society.

Page 20. "Now it is just the same in the choice of religion, as in the choice
of a condition of life." In one sense, this is perfectly true: for of the great
variety of conditions in human life, it is sometimes very difficult to
determine which would be the best for an individual to adopt. And in religion,
there being an almost innumerable number of different sects, each one declaring
itself to be superior to all the rest; it is not easy to discover which we
ought to embrace as the most excellent. -- That we must be solely directed by
reason in the choice of a condition in life, I believe no person will pretend
to deny. If, then, as our author asserts, the cases are exactly similar, we
must also be guided by reason in the choice of a religion.

WE now come to the " Examination of the Age of Reason, by Gilbert Wakefield,
late Fellow of Jesus College; which, we are led to suppose, must be a powerful
and unanswerable refutation of Mr. Paine's work, since the author received his
education at Cambridge University, and in Jesus College; and if we may credit
what he intimates in the motto, one who has "drank deep of the Pierian spring;"
while Mr. Pain has only taken "shallow draughts."

He begins his "Examination" with an encomium on Mr. Pain and his writings,
and, after allowing the Age of Reason that merit which he or any other
newfangled reformer cannot deprive it of, informs us what were his motives for
combating so great a writer.

In pages 6 and 7, he observes, "the time is come when all our opinions must be
tried at the touchstone of severe enquiry; and, if the Jewish and Christian
revelations cannot support themselves against the batteries of their
assailants, in the estimation of capable and disinterested judges, the
out-posts must be abandoned, and a retreat secured to the fortresses of Deism,
already occupied by the patriarchs of old, and the illustrious philosophres of
later times." I confess it is a proof of his candor when he calls the Jewish
and Christian revelations only out-posts, while he acknowledges Deism as the
fortress, occupied by the patriarchs of old, and the illustrious philosophers
of later times; though it is not much in favor of the cause he is engaged in,
but rather a good argument against it.

By the patriarchs of old, I understand the ancient fathers, or heads of
families, tribes and nations, wise and experienced men, honorable and upright
judges of the land. If Deism was the fortress which they occupied, as the most
reasonable and just foundation on which to place their confidence, in
opposition to the Jewish and Christian revelations, which were believed
principally by the mean and ignorant -- it is certainly a very strong reason
why we should withhold our belief from it, at least until we are convinced of
its truth by our own reason; and if the illustrious philosophers of later
times, who must be allowed to be the most learned, and unprejudiced of mankind;
and who, it is presumed, would not adopt any system of such magnitude without
the most mature deliberation and perfect satisfaction thereon; if these men
preferred the principles of Deism to the doctrines or revealed religion, it is
a consideration which ought to sink deep in every thinking mind, particularly
when we reflect that these philosophers, free from the influence of vulgar
prejudices and popular opinions, had the advantage of all the writings which
preceded them, on which to found their opinion.

Mr. Wakefield seems to be confident that the Jewish and Christian revelations
are pefectly consistent with each other, and that no person can acknowledge the
authority of the one without believing in the other. -- But if he will take the
trouble of reading David Levy's answer to Dr. Priestly's letters to the Jews,
he will find that they do not quite agree with each other; which would most
certainly be the case, if they were both the words of an unchangeable God. In
fact, Mr. Levy makes it appear evident, that the two testaments or covenants,
are not only inconsistent with each other, but are so notoriously
contradictory, that they cannot both be true. Our author himself has not by far
so firm a belief in the old testament as in the new; indeed, some of the
miraculous stories in it he discredits entirely; but according to Levy, he
ought to believe every part of the old, and consider the new only as an
appendix or confirmation of it.

He shortly after observes, "The creed of christian churches, which
acknowledges Jesus Christ also to be God, and the Holy Ghost to be God, is a
fundamental violation of all theology; a doctrine alike unknown to the Heathens
and Jews, and contemplated with abhorrence by the followers of Moses from its
first propagation to this very day: a doctrine, inconsistent with the plainest
declarations of Christ himself and his apostles; a doctrine, which no human
testimony whatever could render credible; a doctrine, which will happily prove
a millstone to all political establishments of christianity." All this may be
allowed to be true, excepting that it is a doctrine, inconsistent with the
plainest declarations of the apostles; for we find the Godhead of Jesus Christ
strictly agreeable to scripture, according to the writings of the apostles.
Which belief is adopted as the foundation of almost every church in
Christendom. He must then admit that article as consistent with scripture, or
reject those passages which contain it: and if he rejects one part which he
does not believe, why may not all the world likewise refuse their assent to
those parts which they cannot comprehend or believe? Or has he the sole
privilege of adopting and rejecting whatever portion of the bible he may think
proper? The doctrine of the Trinity is certainly found in the christian
revelation; and as it is a fundamental article of their faith, if false, it
must overturn the whole system.

The next article of Mr. Paine's creed, our author proceeds, in pages 8 and 9,
to corroborate and confirm, by some judicious and just remarks on civil
privileges and titular distinctions; in which he contradicts the doctrine of
that infinite inequality among mankind, predestined from eternity, so often
repeated in scripture, saps the foundation of the christian religion, and
strengthens our disbelief of it.

The succeeding article of Mr. Paine's belief, or rather disbelief, he likewise
confirms, and calls the Athamasian and Nicene creeds, a "monstrous farrago of
ab^urdities and contradictions;" declaring that "some articles of the Apostles'
creed, which may be found in the liturgies of established churches, are
certainly not written in the book of life." In this we agree with him; although
we do not suppose that he possesses that perfect and true knowledge of the
doctrines contained in the scriptures, which can render him capable of removing
all the doubts, reconciling all the contradictions, and explaining all the
difficulties we find in it.

The professors of christianity, generally hold, that if we reject one part of
the bible, we must the whole; for it is all of equal authority and importance:
And if our author refuses his consent to the doctrines of the Trinity,
predestination, etc. which it certainly contains, he must consequently doubt of
the whole; or believe only such parts as his interest or opinion may incline
him. To this privilege he is no more entitled than any other man. And if every
one has a right, as he undoubtedly has, of not believing any part which appears
doubtful to him, the whole bible, at least the doctrinal part of it, may appear
false or dubious to different persons, and its credit be thereby entirely
destroyed; leaving it a matter of indifference to every one to believe or
disbelieve as he may think most to his advantage.

The remainder of this and the following page, contains farthen quotations from
Mr. Pain, illustrated and enforced with much more good sense and liberality
than is to be found in the remainder of the work; giving him credit for
justness of remark, conciseness and pregnancy of expression, manly sense,
dignified morality, and simple, but energetic language. Indeed, so far it seems
to have been intended as the elougium of an enraptured friend, rather than the
efforts of a violent and conceited adversary.

But he can confine himself to propriety and candor no longer; and we
accordingly find him, in page 13, breaking out into the most pointed and
ill-founded opposition. He asserts, that "the system of Jesus Christ, proceeds
upon the supposition, that the way of God is open to every man alike; as might
be proved by many passages of the christian scriptures." That this can be
proved by them, in a certain degree, may be true; as they can be brought to
prove, if their authority is good, almost any notion that ever entered the
imagination of man. But we find them declaring, "that there is no other name
under heaven, by which a man can be saved, but by Jesus Christ." How this
leaves the way of God open to every man alike, I cannot conceive; for it
expressly lays this down as the only way, and prohibits our ever enjoying
spiritual, or even temporal happiness in any other.

In the next sentence, he adds, "What the Jews and Christians maintain in
behalf of their religious systems is that their founders delivered to mankind
rational sentiments of the divine nature, of his existence, and his
providential government of the world." This statement, to use his own language,
is frivolous and erroneous in the extreme: for their sentiments of the
existence of the divine nature, and his government of the world, are not only
very absurd and incons^^tent with reason, but a great part of them couched in
mysterious and unintelligible terms, and incomprehensible, on their own
principles, by any who are not immediately inspired from Heaven. Indeed, they
declare them to be beyond the reach of human reason; the wisdom of the world,
say they, is foolishness to the doctrine of Christ, and the prophets.

With respect to his long string of indubitable positions, as he calls them,
concerning the antiquity and excellence of the writings of the Jews, little
need be said. For we cannot be convinced that they were written at the times
and by the persons which they are said to be. The book of Job, for instance,
one of the best in the old testament, is attributed by divines to various
authors; some suppose Moses wrote it, while he tended his father-in-law's sheep
in the land of Midian; others imagine it to be the work of Job himself; and
others think it was witten by Elihu the Buzite; while no person can be certain
that it was the production of either. And how can he inform us, that the Jewish
writers did not profit by the works of the Greek and Roman moralists, instead
of the contrary? or in short, whether the christian faith was not, according to
Mr. Pain (which in all probability is the case) built with the same materials,
and founded upon the ruins of the ancient system of heathen mythology?

Mr. Paine's observations on the word revelation, our critic says, in page 16,
are inacurate, sallacious and inconclusive; and proceeds to prove his assersion
by what he calls "a rational and unexceptionable representation of the point in
question."

Were the Jews at that time, or is he at present, fully acquainted with all the
laws and operations of nature? Is he possessed of that infinite wisdom which
comprehends every property, power and quality of the whole creation? Can his
purblind eye, at one view, discern all the improvements and discoveries that
may hereafter be made in every art and science? If so, then is he capable of
determining what are supernatural proofs of a revelation. But, says he,
"Whether such a display were in reality made in the case before us, is not now
the question." Why is it not? If a display of supernatural agency was necessary
to prove the authority of the Jewish revelation, why is it not likewise to the
christian? For if there was an absolute necessity for this display to support
the doctrine of Moses; then without that agency it was not entitled to belief.
Consequently, if the christian faith was not attended by something
supernatural, mankind could not be expected to believe it. And if there was
once a necessity for miracles to confirm the doctrine of the gospel, I can see
no reason why there is not at the present time. We find, in the scriptures,
that when Jesus sent out his disciples to preach the gospel to the world, he
gave them power to raise the dead, heal the sick, cast out devils, and cure the
blind, deaf and dumb, to convince mankind of the truth of their doctrines. But
we see nothing of the kind in the ministers of the gospel (at this day) to
prove their divine mission: though in the bible the doctrine with its proofs
are related as inseparably connected together. And if they preach it without
exhibiting its proofs, how can we believe them? We must conclude that the
preacher and his doctrine are both without authority; as hearsay is all the
evidence we have of their authenticity. Indeed, as in the early ages of
christianity, we hear of frequent instances of miracles being performed by low,
illiterate persons, by which they have obtained the honorable appellation of
saints, so among the most ignorant and superstitious nations of the present
sent age, the reli^s of some of these deified saints are said to perform
wonderful cures, and other supernatural feats. Whether the miracles wrought by
the former, are entitled to a greater degree of credit than those performed by
the latter, every one can judge for himself. It is worthy of note, however,
that these miraculous performances, whenever exhibited in support of any other
cause, are called by christians, artificial deceptions or diabolical cheats.

In answer to Mr. Paine's observation, that "visiting the sins of the fathers
upon the children is contrary to every principle of moral justice," Mr.
Wakefield bluntly asserts, "Nothing in reality can be more feeble and
inefficient than this objection."

That for the sins of fathers their children, whether innocent or guilty,
should suffer punishment, is a principle contrary to reason, justice, and the
laws of every well governed nation. It is a maxim of moral polity, that it is
better that an hundred guilty should escape, than one innocent should suffer:
but according to the foregoing doctrine, an indiscriminate punishment falls
alike upon the innocent and the guilty.

The difficulties concerning the immaculate conception of Jesus, our author
"concedes to the Deist, for his own part, in all their force, as pertinent in
themselves, and of serious significancy to those whom they may ^^ncern. This,
says he, constitutes no essential article of my creed, ^^d certainly rests on
much weaker evidence than any other important fact of all the gospels." The
evidence of the divine authority of the scriptures, I always thought was the
same for one part as for any other: at any rate, I cannot see that it is weaker
in this instance than any where else; and should suppose, if there was any
difference, it should be in favor of this particular circumstance; as the
prophets, who, it is said, so often foretold his coming, mentioned as one of
the most important proofs of his authority, that "a virgin should conceive and
bear a son."

But I certainly agree with our author in believing the story not sufficiently
authenticated to be entitled to a place in my creed. At the same time, as we
have the same evidence for this that we have for every other part of the bible,
viz. hearsay; it is full as worthy of belief as any other miraculous story
related in it.

Of Mr. Paine's remarks on the character of Jesus Christ, and the morality
which he preached, he says, (page 20) "The former part is excellent; the latter
was never surpassed in ignorance and absurdity." He did not consider his
examination in the light that many do, or he would not have made this last
assertion.

"To say, moreover, of the Christian system merely, that it has not been
exceeded by any system ancient or modern, is such a misconception as candor
will choose to impute, not to malignant disparagement, but to an ignorance
rather of the philosophical systems of antiquity, and the comparative merits of
evangelical morality."

Our author wishes to make it appear, that to say merely that it has not been
exceeded by any, he considers as a malignant disparagement of a system, which
in his own opinion is a jumble of truth, falsehood, purity and absurdity: for in
the very preceding page he will not admit one of its fundamental doctrines into
his creed. Or he means that it is an ignoront disparagement of the
philosophical systems of antiquity, to suppose the christian system equal to
them; the ambiguous manner in which he expresses himself rendering it uncertain
what his real meaning is.

Our author's next sentence, page 21, contains a caution, to avoid that very
line of conduct which he has himself so fully practiced. "I wish those heavenly
maxims of Solon and the son of Sirach, know thyself, and understand first, and
then rebuke; were more deeply impressed on the hearts and memories of us all."

"Jesus Christ wrote no account of himself," says Mr. Pain; to which our
author replies, "to this argument against the resurrection of Jesus, various
^nswers might be instituted: but I shall confine myself to one only, which
appears to my mind incapable of confutation upon any principle of philosophy or
experience: and will indeed admit of no dispute, but upon positions subversive
of all historical testimony whatsoever, and introductory of universal
skepticism."

"The numerous circumstances interspersed through the gospel narratives and in
the acts of the apostles, appertaining to the geography of countries, the
positions of rivers, towns and cities, etc. etc. with a vast multiplicity of
detached occurrences and facts, not necessary to be specified at large,
challenge (to speak with moderation) as large a portion of credibility to th^se
books, considered in the light of historical testimonies, as can be claimed for
any writings whatever, received as genuine, and equally ancient and
multi^a^ion. Now no mean presumption arises in favor of the most extraordinary
transactions also, blended in the same texture of narrative by history of so
credible a character with respect to the rest of their relations: but, when
these extraordinary facts are found to have so intimate an incorporation with
the common and unsuspicious occurrences of these histories so as to admit of no
detachment, but to stand or fall with the main body of these compositions; I
cannot see how any historical probability of the authenticity of these
extraordinary events can rise higher than in such an instance."

This is one of the most absurd and ridiculous arguments that could possibly
enter the imagination of man. Because the framers of a story, to give it the
appearance of probability, have artfully interspersed through the whole some
historical and geographical facts, which cannot be controverted; our author
pretends that every part is equally entitled to our fullest belief. Suppose
that Mr. Pain had asserted, that he was in Luxembourg, Paris, on the 27th of
January, 1794, as he certainly was; mentioning several important circumstances
that occured there at that time; and conclude with declaring that an angel
appeared to him, took the pen from his hand, and wrote every word of the Age of
Reason. This story then, according to Mr. Wakefield's reasoning, would be
undoubtedly true: the miraculous part of it would admit of no detachment, but
must stand or fall with the main body of the relation; and as the historical
and geographical facts could not be denied, the whole must be established as
divine and infallible truth. If this be just reasoning, it is what was never
known before; and our author may congratulate himself on the honor of a
discovery of the highest consequence to the literary and thinking world: for at
this rate, the Arabian Night's entertainment, Robinson Crusoe, and every tale
or novel in being, would be confirmed as indubitable realities.

But he proceeds to "unfold the purport of this reasoning," by informing us, at
great length, that many disciples suffered martyrdom in desence of what they
declared they had seen and heard. And what does it all amount to? Have not
multitudes of Jews, Mahometans, and every other national sect on earth,
suffered martyrdom with as much zeal and constancy as ever the apostles or any
other christians did? That they were incapable of being deceived respecting the
angels, miracles, or wonders which they might suppose they saw and heard, no
person will contend. Animal magnetism, pretended ghosts and witches, not to
mention whole nations being deceived by false Christ's, prophetic gypsies, and
wonder-working conjurers, are sufficient to show the extent to which the human
mind may be imposed upon.

To Mr. Paine's observations on the demonstration of the resurrection, our
author makes this remark; "Not a thousandth part of the people in Great Britain
saw Lunardi go up from the Art^lery Ground in a balloon; but the superior
impulse to any possible action of my mind, who saw him, in consequence of that
event, does not exceed the impulse to a similar action on the mind of another
who did not see him, by an evancscent infinitesimal of efficacy." The meaning
of which I suppose to be, that as the people of Great Britain believed in the
assension of Lunardi, though they did not see him go up; so all mankind should
believe in the resurrection and ascension of Jesus Christ, though they were not
eyewitnesses of the fact. But the cases are not at all s^^ilar: the one is a
thing possible and veprobable; but the other is impossible. The generality of
people in Great Britain and every other country, have seen globes of cloth,
paper, or something else of the nature of a balloon, ascend; which would
convince them that the thing was possible, and therefore entitled to some
degree of credibility. Even the most ignorant cook, that sees a potlid raised
by the steam of boiling water, must be convinced of the probability of the
fact. Whereas no man living ever faw a person rise from perfect death, fly in
the air, or any thing of the kind ever performed; and therefore cannot believe
the story without ocular conviction of its truth. He next takes much pains to
convince us, that the Jews were at that time a vicious and corrupt people; and
not at all likely to believe in the authority and doctrines of Jesus; even so
depraved that it would have been next to a miracle if they had accepted his
mission. He labors hard to establish this proposition, by compairing Mr. Pain
and his rights of man to Jesus and his preaching; both suffering, one in
effigy, the other in reality, by the very people for whose happiness they were
laboring. Observing, "upon the whole, we find no difficulty in declaring, that
what has astonished Mr. Pain so long, should astonish him no longer; as no
species of reasoning is more common and more legitimate, than that which proves
the truth of a circumstance from the evidence of corrupt and interested
witnesses, who assert it is false." If Mr. Wakefield can clearly prove to us,
that the Jews were at that time so corrupt and interested that few, very few,
and those mean and ignorant, were prevailed upon to believe a doctrine, which,
though opposed and persecuted by the nation in general, was still undoubtedly
true, and confirmed by many real miracles; if he can convince us of this, he
may then hold the rejection of the gospel by the Jews as no good argument
against its reality. But how is he to do this? We have only his hardy assersion
for it; and it ^ould be the height of absurdity to let that outweigh or destroy
the credibility of a whole nation.

Mr. Pain next appears to our author, in page 32, in his observations on the
story of the devil and his angels, as a tumid and hypertragical declaimer;
although he cannot avoid agreeing with him on the subject, which he likewise
illustrates by several learned and (in his opinion) conclusive remarks. But it
seems, before he had finished his paragraph, that he perceived he was
confirming instead of confuting his antagonist. He therefore, recollecting
which side of the question he had engaged to support, exclaims, "Alas! our
deist fancied himself in stout combat with genuine christianity, whilst he was
buffeting a mere phantum of ignorance and superstition! So easy is declamation
against folly!"

"These books, beginning with Genesis, and ending with Revelations (which, by
the bye, is a book of riddles, that requires a revelation to explain it) are,
we are told, the word of God," says Mr. Pain; to which our author replies,

"The vindicator, who occupies himself in the confutation of such unsupported
and dogmatical assertions, is not much more excusable than the ignoramus, who
has the audacity to produce them." Here, because he has no other subterfuge at
hand, he instantly converts the "sagacious, plain, sensible Thomas Pain" into
an audacious ignoramus, and impudently endeavors to expose the absurdity of his
calling the Apocrypha the word of God, when it is evident that he intended no
such thing; for he says expressly, that they were voted to be doubtful. What a
miserable situation must our redoubtable champion be in, when he is under the
wretched necessity of attacking theideal specter of his ownimagination,
instead of the real and substantial arguments of his opponent. We find also,
that he passes over the most important and influential parts of Mr. Paine's
reasoning, and dwells upon those only which he fondly imagines he can oppose or
ridicule, with at least some appearance of confidence and success.

Mr. Pain says, "When the church mythologists established their system, they
collected all the writings they could find, and managed them as they pleased."

This, Mr. Wakefield boldly asserts, page 36, "is an undigested and inaccurate
statement of the case;" and after giving us several more of his assertions and
opinions, comes off exultingly with, "What need of circumstantial detail in
repelling the objections of men, who really knew just nothing of the subject,
and satisfy their reason and philosophy by peremptory asseveration only,
unilluminated by one single ray of information on the topic in dispute?" By
such pitiful evasions, such unsounded insinuations, and such impertinent
questions, is our profound author to "vindicate his says in christianity upon
principles truly rational and unambiguously explicit, or relinquish it
altogether." He continues, "It were most easy to enlarge on this subject; but
more has been said already, than such desultory and unsubstantiated allegations
have any reason to expect:" Yes, truly; and more than any thing else could have
reason toexpect, from any but the most conceited pedant; and more than can
possibly reflect the least degree of credit on either his cause, his heart, or
his head. "And I shall only add, from a multitude of cogent instances, with
reference to one branch of evidence of the first moment, that a comparison of
the 28th chapter of Deutoronomy caly, with the subsequent and present state of
the Israelitish nation, must flash conviction, I should think, upon any mind,
not totally prejudiced and perverted, in favor of the prophetical pretensions
of the scriptures: for that the book of Dueteronomy was composed posterior to
those events, what effrontery even of unlearned deism, if it hazard the
assertion, will undertake to prove?" It may perhaps be as hard to prove that it
was written posterior to those events, as the contrary. But the more time that
elapses since the writing of it, renders the probability of its not coming to
us unchanged and mistranslated, the greater. And at any rate, it cannot be held
up as an argument in favor of the divine authority of the new testament: for by
the appearance of Christ on earth, we are told, the law, by which these curses
were entailed on the Jews, was abolished. Indeed it reduces that nation to a
most unhappy dilemma: for if they do not continue to perform the injunctions of
this law, all the curses of Pardora's box are heaped on their devoted heads;
and if they do not embrace the doctrines of the gospel, that repeals this law,
they are to be damned to all eternity. These sufferings too, when sustained by
the Jews for an adhereance to their says, were the just judgments of God, for
disobedience as prophesied in the scriptures; but when born by the christians,
were cruel and unjust persecutions, instigated by the devil, in opposition to
the divine will.

Our author next attacks Mr. Paine's definition of the word revelation, with as
much courage and fierceness as though he would annihilate the whole system of
deism with one stroke. He calls it "not only the essence, but the quintessence,
of all weakness and absurdity:" at the same time tacitly acknowledging it to be
just, and answering all the purpose for which it was intended; by the following
confession, "The greater part of the bible-history contains simply a narrative
of the political occurrences, the Jews; and the transactions recorded are,
therefore, to be considered in the same light with those of all other
histories; namely, as aggravated and disguised in a thousand instances by
passing through the mediam of national partiality."

"Aggravated and disguised in a thousand instances!" A very candid and
important confession, Mr. Wakefield; and if you can only point out to us which
these thousand instances are, we will perhaps allow the remainder a little more
credit than we can the whole, before we are satisfied in that particular.

His next acknowledgment is, "I agree with Thomas Pain, that the account of
the creation, with which the book of Cenesis opens, has all the appearance of
being a tradition, which the Israelites had among them before they came into
Egypt; and after their departure from that country, they put it at the head of
their history, without telling, as it is most probable that they did not know,
how they came by it." Another very important concession. And if the scripture
account of the creation, is nothing more than a tradition (and all nations have
their disserent traditions) what becomes comes of the credibility of the story
of original sin, Adam's damning all mankind by eating an apple, etc? It must
certainly fall to the ground, together with the necessity of a mediator to
repair the loss, and every other doctrine founded on this tradition.

"But, says he, what majesty of sentiment, what a dignified simplicity of
expression, characterizes the Mosaic account of the creation of the world!" In
the name of common sense, what has majesty of sentiment, or dignified
simplicity of expression to do with the truth or falsehood of a story? Truth is
truth, without the assistance of artificial support: and all the majestic
sentiments, and dignified expressions that were ever invented, cannot make a
false story true.

"To all that occurs comprehending any objections to the Jewish institution, a
very satisfactory answer has, if I mistake not, been already given." Yes,
truly: if no other answer can be found, what has been already given, is
sufficient to satisfy us of the propriety of the objections.

Mr. Pain says, "why it has been called the Mosaic acconnt of the creation, I
am at a loss to conceive. -- Moses, I believe, was too good a judge of such
subjects to put his name to that account. He had been educated among the
Egyptians, who were a people as well skilled in science, and particularly in
astronomy, as any people of their day." To which Mr. W. answers: "All this may
be literally true: but a palpable ^^truth is implied in it; that the Egyptians
were really a learned and scientific people: whereas their (...) stronomy was
just nothing at all. If not, produce me your youchers to this fact, from
existing monuments or ancient testimony." To what purpose is it whether the
Egyptians were really at that time a learned people or not? How can the
discussion of this subject affect the point in question? and yet our author
takes up near two pages in endeavoring to prove this uninteresting and
impertinent assertion; or rather to display his extraordinary knowledge of
ancient history.

Mr. Pain observes, "If we permit ourselves to conceive right ideas of things,
we must necessarily affix the idea, not only of unchangeableness, but of the
utter impossibility of any change taking place, by any means or accident
whatever, in that which we would honor with the name of the word of God; and
therefore the word of God cannot exist in any written or human language."

To which our author replies, first, by asking "What can be more frivolous, or
unworthy of a man of sense?" then giving us his ideas of a revelation, and
finally by endeavoring to prove that we believe the Jewish and christian
revelations as fully as we do that Michael Angelo, planned the fabric of St.
Peter's at Rome, and Sir Christopher Wren, that of St. Paul's in London.

Well may we ask, "What can be more frivolous, and unworthy a man of sense?"
The comparison here introduced, is as fallacious and improper as can possibly
be conceived. For whoever sees the fabries of St. Peter's and St. Paul's, must
be convinced, that they were planned by Michael Angelo, Christopher Wren, or
some other persons; as there is no other way by which they possibly could have
been in existence; and we likewise see, that fabries are planned every day. But
if Mr. Wakefield can convince us, that there was no other way than a revelation
from heaven by which the Jewish and Christian systems of religion could have
been in existence; and that such revelations are common, and occur every day;
then will we allow the comparison to be just, and the inferences he draws from
it reasonable. As this is impossible, we must conclude, that the cases are
entirely dissimilar, the similitude false, and the whole argument absurd and
inconclusive.

On Mr. Paine's observing, "The event that served more than any other to break
the first link in this long chain of despotic ignorance, is that known by the
name of the reformation of Luther." Mr. Wakefield advances as an argument,
"Surely it forms no mean presumption in favor of the reasonableness of
revelation, that the restoration of science and the rectification of religion,
should be congenial and contemporary; that the beams of knowledge should dispel
the damps and darkness of ignorant superstition, but contribute illumination
and vigor to the sincere gospel of Jesus Christ."

Whether the reformation of science did really contribute illumination and
vigor to the gospel of Jesus Christ, is a point not clearly established; and
whether, if a complete and unlimited restoration of science had taken place,
the christian system would not have been wholly rejected, might be insisted on,
with much more reason than many of his assertions. But one plain, undeniable
position, of the same nature with our author's, will sufficiently overbalance
the weight of his argument: as we may assert, with equal confidence, that it is
no mean presumption in favor of the reasonableness of deism, and the
unreasonableness of divine revelation, that the restoration of civil and
religious liberty, and the rejection of all revealed religion, in France,
should be congenial and contemporary; that the beams of knowledge should dispel
the damps and darkness of ignorant superstition and hereditary despotism, but
add illumination, vigor and confirmation, to the sincere and unerring religion
of nature, and revive the Age of Reason and deism.

The most distinguislied mathematicians (mathematics, according to the latter
part of this same paragraph, has no connection with religion: what does it
signify, then, that distinguished mathematicians believe the christian
revelation?) and philosophers of our own country, Baron, Boil, Newton, Lock,
Barrow and Hartley, have been the firmest believers of the christian
revelation." To which may be opposed as many distinguished names on the other
side of the question: The greatest philosophers, and most virtuous of their
country, Voltaire, Rousseau, Pope, Bolinbroke, Hume, Franklin and Pain, have
been the firmest disbelievers of the christian revelation.

We will here further illustrate the absurdity of Mr. W's reasoning, in his
strictures upon Mr. P's remanksupon revelation. Mr. P. endeavors to prove that
"the historical and annectdotal part of the bible, which is almost the whole of
it, is not within the meaning and compass of the word revelation, and therefore
is not the word of God." He observes, "Revelation is a communication of
something, which the person, to whom that thing is revealed, did not know
before. For if I have done a thing, or seen it done, it needs no revelation to
tell me I have done it, or seen it, nor to enable me to tell it, or to write
it." To which Mr. W. replies, "so then, not only the professors of philosophy
at the highest places of education, but every dame, that teaches the born-book
in a country village, communicates, it seems, a revelation!" This remark is
certainly beneath the sense of Mr. Wakefield, if I relate what I have done, or
seen done, it is no revelation, it requires no immediate inspiration from
heaven to enable me to tell it.

Mr. Paine's dissmission is clear and pertinent; and to predend that it
necessarily follows from his position that every thing told to a person, which
he did not know before, is a revelation, is the height of sophistry. Nothing
but a puerile habit of syllogistic disputation (which Mr. Wakefield probably
acquired at Jesus' College) could have betrayed him into so weak an argument.
It is not unlike the fyllogism of the mouse and cheese, noticed by Senea. "Two
legged animals eat cheese, a mouse is not a two legged animal, therefore a
mouse does not eat cheese." "Away with these childish follies!"

Mr. Pain makes some very just remarks upon the impropriety of obliging boys,
at this day, to waste their genius and time in delving over the dear languages;
observing that the reason which once operated in favor of these studies now
cease to exist, since all the ancient authors of note are translated into
modern languages; which have received every improvement necessary to embellish
them. To which Mr. W. makes the following clownish reply, "all have not that
sensibility of perception, and that elegance of taste, which is necessary to a
relish of the inimitable beauties of ancient composition. I may be, for
example, a delicate bird, delighted in strawberries and the choicest fruits --
Thomas Pain, a crow; who prefers a feast on carrion and putressence." For
shame, Mr. Wakefield, did you learn to make such comparisons at Jesus' College!
Mr. Pain then because he prefers reading modern authors, and the translation
of the ancients, in modern languages, is a crow, and likes to feast on matter
which that bird is peculiarly fond of. While yourself who are delighted with
treasuring up Greek and Hebrew, in order to astonish your parishioners with
your vast learning, and to convince them of your divine mission, are to be sure
a very delicate bird indeed. You pay a very great compliment to the ancients at
the expense of the moderns; and, perhaps, when some part of your composition in
this reply are taken into consideration with a considerable degree of propriety.

With respect to the beauties of composition, it is the height of absurdity to
suppose that a person, not thoroughly versed in ancient languages (which is
rarely the case) can discover so many beauties in the original, as would be
communicated to him in a good translation. Besides is it prudent to be so
prodigal of time, since human life is reduced to so short a period, as to spend
seven or eight years in searching for beauties in dead languages? The idea is
opposed to the reason of the present age.

His last observation on his opponent is, "Mr. Pain descants with a tolerable
share of merriment, in the conclusion of his pamphlet, respecting Jonah and the
Whale, which my stomach also feels an equal indisposition to ingurgitate." O
what blasphemy! to disbelieve a plan, unequivocal, and uncontradicted scripture
account, wrote by the prophet himself, who centainly must have been the best
competent judge of the affair! To doubt the word of an inspired prophet! Why,
Mr. Wakefield, you may as well suspect the truth of every part of the bible,
which you find not confirmed by the testimony of ancient profane history and
your own weak fallible reason.

"It is not unlike a tale that I lately heard, which many will think not
inferior to that before us in symptoms of credibility. A negro boy falls
overboard, and is swallowed by a shark; which though is immediately taken, and
carefully opened, by the sailorse. But how great was their admiration and
delight to discover little Caesar, perched on a tubercle of the purtenance,
dispatching his bread and cheese in perfect composure and safety." Blasphemy,
horrid blasphemy again! Not content with flatly denying the authority of the
most holy scriptures, he here even ridicules them, and tells us an evident
barefaced fiction, intimating that it is full as worthy of credit as the story
of Jonah and the Whale!!

This last expression, perched on a tubercle of the purtenance, with his
"evanscent infinitesimal of efficacy," and several others, independent of the
general complexion of the work, and his latin notes, so industriously
interspersed through it; must certainly convince us, that he is, without
sufficient sense to conceal, or judgment to disguise it, a vain, conceited,
boasting pedant; not attending so much to argument as to pomposity, truth as to
affected sublimity, or reason as to sophistry and declamation.

"I have now, says he, finished my remarks on this pamphlet of Thomas Pain;
which has been extended thus far, more in deference to the deserved celebrity
of the name, than the powers of the disputant; nor am I conscious to myself of
eluding any difficulty, or shrinking from the terrors of a single argument, in
the course of this examination. To the best of my ability, a con^ise answer to
every objection (excepting some that we perfectly agreed in, he should have
said) not completely puerile, has been specifically given, or is virtually
included in the course of these observations."

This opinion, with which he seems to be so highly pleased, as it is probable
that few will coincide with him in, we leave to his quiet and happy enjoyment.
And, after wishing him better motives, and a better cause for the display of
his zeal; commending him for his generous and godlike sentiment of "love, peace
and liberty, without distinction, to the whole human race;" and returning him
thanks for the assistance he has rendered the cause of reason and justice; we
bid Mr. Wakefield, the enthusiastic disciple of (...)

THE AGE OF INFIDELITY, BY A LAYMAN, IS THE NEXT IN THE ORDER OF ATTACK AGAINST
THE FATAL BLOW TO FANATICISM AND PRIESTCRAFT, THE AGE OF REASON.
FROM the polemic abilities of this writer, and his thorough knowledge of all
the arguments for and against the tenets he professes, we are inclined to
believe that he here appears under false colors, being really a gentleman of
the cloth: perhaps some may think a pious fraud in this case justifiable; we
only suggest it to put the reader on his guard against the artful reasoning of
a person who may think himself interested in supporting the present impositions.

As many of the errors in this paraphlet have been animadverted upon in our
reply to Mr. Wakefield, and as a minute examination of it would far exceed our
intended limits, we shall only notice the most prominent absurdities that
appear on a cursary review of the work.

The author commences thus, "In an age like this, it is no wonder that
infidelity has its champions. The genuine gospel of Christ is a system too pure
and divine to meet the cordial approbation of men of vicious hearts and corrupt
principles; and such have hitherto composed the majority of mankind."

With respect to the morality which Christ preached, infidels, or the
disbelievers in revelation, acknowledge its purity, and observe it often more
scrupulously, than those who make so great pretentions to piety. But they
contend that it required no divine nature to teach such doctrine, as many, whom
christians call heathens, have taught and practiced the same.

And they conceive that there can be neither virtue nor vice, in believing or
disbelieving any particular speculative opinion. Virtue and vice consist in
actions, and not in creeds.

The latter part of the passage cited above, contains a severe censure upon the
majority of mankind, which they by no means merit. Every one who is the least
conversant in society, and will credit his own experience, instead of the
gloomy lessons of his nurse; and those who are interested to deceive him, will
attest to the fallacy and illiberality of this aspersion. From constantly
viewing human nature upon the dark side, from hearing it continually fulminated
from the pulpit, that man is prone to evil, as the sparks sly upward, has
arisen this illfounded opinion.

We have been taught to believe that mankind were by nature depraved, at enmity
with God and one another, and if it were in their power would hurl the
omnipotent from his throne.

How ungenerous, how wicked the deception! meet your fellow creature in any
part of the globe, and (religious and political prejudices apart) he greets you
as his brother, takes part in your sufferings, and sooths your afflictions.

To false systems of education, and not to evil dispositions in human nature,
are owing the calamities of mankind. The doctrine of total depravity has
perhaps a greater tendency to viciate the morals of mankind than any sentiment
that has ever been propagated. Tell a man that you know him to be a rogue, and
you inspire him with a propensity to cheat you.

"To compare," says the Layman, "the propagation of Mahomet's system with that
of Judaism or christianity, is weak and unjust in the extreme. Mahomet wrought
no miracles, delivered no predictions: but, on the contrary, founded his
dominion on the sword. There is therefore no comparison."

This is the assertion of a bigoted christian; let us hear what the votaries of
Mahomet have to say on the other side of the question. "They affirm that he fed
the hungry, cured the sick, and raised the dead, and that both animate and
inanimate nature were equally subject to the apostle of God. A mysterious
animal, the Borak, conveyed him from the temple of Mecca to that of Jerusalem:
with his companion Gabriel, he successively ascended the seven heavens and
received and repaid the salutations of the patriarchs, the prophets, and the
angels, in their respective mansions. Beyond the seventh heavens, Mahomet alone
was permitted to proceed; he passed the veil of unity, approached within two
bow-shots of the throne, and felt a cold that pierced him to the heart, when
his shoulder was touched by the hand of God. After this familiar though
important conversation, he again descended to Jerusalom, remounted the Borak,
and returned to Mecca." This n^cturnal journey is circumstantially related by
Abulseda; and by Ganier who declares, from the zealous Aljunnabi, that to deny
this journey, is to disbelieve the Koran.


These miracles a musulman believes with as much assurance, as a Jew, or
christian, the extraordinary exploits related in the old and new testament. And
why not with the same color of reason? "In all religions the life of the
founder supplies the silence of his written revelation: the sayings of Mahomet
were so many lessons of truth; his actions so many examples of virtue.

"The inspiration of the Hebrew prophets, of the apostles and evangelists of
Christ, might not be incompatible with the exercise of their reason and memory;
and the diversity of their genius is strongly marked in the style and
composition of the books of the old and new testament. But Mahomet was content
with a character, more humble, yet more sublime, of a simple editor: the
substance of the Koran, according to himself or his disciples, is uncreated and
eternal; subsis^ing in the essence of the deity, inscribed with a pen of light
on the table of his everlasting decrees. A paper copy in a volume of silk and
gems, was brought down to the lowest heaven by the Angel Gabriel, who, under
the Jewish economy, had indeed been dispatched on the most important errands;
and this trusty messenger successively revealed the chapters and verses to the
Arabian prophet."

Since Mr. Layman has introduced Mahomet, we will make a brief statement of the
causes which led to his establishment; and take notice of some of the most
important creeds and precepts enjoined in the Koran; by which we shall be
enabled to judge whether that religion and it; founder have merited all the
abuse which has been so liberally bestowed upon them by christian writers. This
we shall do by citing several detached passages from an author of undoubted
respectability.

"It is the boast of the Jewish apologists, that while the learned nations of
antiquity were deluded by the fables of polytheism, their simple ancestors of
Palestine preserved the knowledge and worship of the true God. The moral
attributes of Jehovah may not easily be reconciled with the standard of human
virtue: his metaphysical qualities are darkly expressed; but each page of the
Pentateuch and the Prophets is an evidence of his power: the unity of his name
is inscribed on the first table of the law; and his sanctuary was never defiled
by any visible image of the invisible essence. After the ruin of the temple,
the faith of the Hebrew exiles was purified, fixed, and enlightened, by the
spiritual devotion of the synagogue. But the children of Israel had ceased to
be a people; and the religions of the world were guilty, at least in the eyes
of the prophet, of giving sons, or daughters, or companions, to the supreme
God. In the rude idolatry of the Arabs, the crime is manifest and audacious:
the Sabians are poorly excused by the pre-eminence of the first p^^net, or
intelligence in their celestial hierarchy; and in the Magian system the
conflict of the two principles betrays the imperfection of the conqueror. The
christians of the seventh century had insensibly relapsed into a semblance of
paganism; their public and private vows were addressed to the relics and images
that disgraced the temples of the East: the throne of the Almighty was darkened
by a cloud of martyrs, and saints, and angels, the objects of popular
veneration; and the Collyridian heretics, who flourished in the fruitful soil
of Arabia, invested the Virgin Mary with the name and honors of a goddess. The
mysteries of the Trinity and Incarnation appear to contradict the principle of
the divine unity. In their obvious fense, they introduce three equal Deities,
and transform the man Jesus into the substance of the son of God: an orthodox
commentary will satisfy only a believing mind; intemperate curiosity and zeal
had torn the veil of the sanctuary; and each of the Oriental sects was eager to
confess that all except themselves, deserved the reproach of idolatry and
polytheism. The creed of Mahomet is free from suspicion or ambiguity; and the
Koran is a glorious testimony to the unity of God. The prophet of Mecca
rejected the worship of idols and men, of stars and planets, on the rational
principle that whatever rises must set, that whatever is born must die, that
whatever is corruptible must decay and perish. In the author of the universe,
his rational enthusiasm confessed and adored an infinite and eternal being,
without form or place, without issue or similitude, present to our most secret
thoughts, existing by the necessity of his own nature, and deriving from
himself all moral and intellectual perfection. These sublime truths, thus
anounced in the language of the prophet, are firmly held by his disciples, and
defined with metaphysical precision by the interpreters of the Koran. A
philosophic theist might subscribe the popular creed of the Mahometans: a creed
too sublime perhaps for our present faculties.

"The first principle of reason and revelation was confirmed by the voice of
Mahomet: his proselytes, from India to Morocco, are distinguished by the name
of Unitarians; and the danger of idolatry has been prevented by the
interdiction of images.

"The God of nature has written his existence on all his works, and his law in
the heart of man. To restore the knowledge of the one and the practice of the
other, has been the real or pretended aim of the prophets of every age: the
liberality of Mahometallowed to his predecessors the same credit which he
claimed for himself; and the chain of inspiration was pro^onged from the fall
of Adam to the promulgation of the Koran. During that period, some rays of
prophetic light had been imparted to one hundred and twenty-four thousand of
the elect, discriminated by their respective measure of virtue and grace; three
hundred and thirteen apostles were sent with a special commission to recall
their country from idolatry and vice; one hundred and four volumes have been
dictated by the holy spirit; and six legislators of transcendent brightness
have announced to mankind the six successive revelations of various rites, but
of one immutable religion.

"During six hundred years the gospel was the way of truth and salvation; but
the christians insensibly forgot both the laws and the example of their
founder; and Mahomet was instructed by the Gnostics to accuse the church, as
well as the synagogue, of corrupting the integrity of the sacred text. The
piety of Moses and of Christ rejoiced in the assurance of a future prophet,
more illustrious than themselves: the evangelic promise of the Paraclete or.
Holy Ghost, was prefigured in the name, and accomplished in the person of
Mahomet, the greatest and the last of the apostles of God.

"The polytheist is oppressed and distracted by the variety of superstition: a
thousand rights of Egyptian origin were interwoven with the essence of the
Mosaic law: and the spirit of the gospel had evaporated in the pageantry of the
church. The prophet of Mecca was tempted by prejudice, or policy, or
patriotism, to sanctify the rites of the Arabians, and the custom of visiting
the holy stone of the Caaba. But the precepts of Mahomet himself inculcate a
more simple and rational piety: prayer, fasting, and alms, are the religious
duties of a musulman; and he is encouraged to hope, that prayer will carry him
half way to God, fasting will bring him to the door of his palace, and alms
will gain him admittance.

"Cleanliness is the key of prayer: the frequent lustration of the hands, the
face, and the body, which was practiced of old by the Arabs, is solemnly
enjoined by the Koran.

"Every spot for the service of God is equally pure: the Mahometans
indifferently pray in their chamber or in the street. As a distinction from the
Jews and christians, the Friday in each week is set apart for the useful
institution of public worship: the people are assembled in the mosch and the
imam: some respectable elder ascends the pulpit, to begin the prayer and
pronounce the sermon. But the Mohammedan religion is destitute of priesthood or
sacrifice; and the independent spirit of fanaticism looks down with contempt on
the ministers and the slaves of superstition. The voluntary penance of the
ascetics, the torment and glory of their lives, was odious to a prophet who
censured in his companions a rash vow of abstaining from flesh, and women, and
sleep; and firmly declared, that he would suffer no monks in his religion.

"The interdiction of wine, peculiar to some orders of priests or hermits, is
converted by Mahomet alone into a positive and general law; and a considerable
portion of the globe has abjured, at his command, the use of that salutary,
though dangerous liquor. These painful restraints are, doubtless, infringed by
the libertine and eluded by the hypocrite; but the legislator, by whom they are
enacted, cannot surely be accused of alluring his proselytes by the indulgence
of their sensual appetites. The charity of the Mahometans descends to the
animal creation; and the Koran repeatedly inculcates, not as a merit, but as a
strict and indispensable duty, the relief of the indigent and unfortunate.
Mahomet, perhaps, is the only lawgiver who has defined the precise measure of
charity: the standard may vary with the degree and nature of property, as it
consists either in money, in corn or cattle, in fruits or merchandise; but the
musulman does not accomplish the law, unless he bestows a tenth of his revenue;
and if his conscience accuses him of fraud or extortion, the tenth, under the
idea of restitution, is enlarged to a fifth. Benevolence is the foundation of
justice, since we are forbid to injure those whom we are bound to assist. A
prophet may reveal the secrets of heaven and of futurity; but in his moral
precepts he can only repeat the lessons of our own hearts."

Many more extracts, to the same purpose, from this author, who refers to the
Koran to show that these excellent precepts are enjoined in that work, and
religiously observed by musulmen, might be made, but we think those already
adduced are amply sufficient to prove to every unbiassed mind, that the
Mohammedan establishment was undoubtedly a very great improvement upon the
Jewish and christian systems. The unity of God is uniformly adhered to, and the
great principles of morality, the soul of all religion, is severely inculcated
in every chapter of the Koran. Even admitting that the Mohammedan religion owed
its establishment, in a great measure, to the sword, that circumstance can by
no means abridge its merits. We expect that the government of the French
republic will be established by the sword, but it cannot from thence be infered
that it will not be equal or superior to any government on earth. The truth is
the Mohammedan and Christian religion owe their existence to persecution.
Mahomet and his followers were persecuted by the surrounding zelots of former
establishments; and, when sufficiently strong, they very wisely, as all other
sects would do, put their confidence in the ultimo ratio regis. Perhaps the
sole reason that the Shaking Quakers have not made more proselytes in this
country, is because no notice has been taken of them, but they have been left
to work out their own salvation.

The writer thinks his remarks, in the preceding parts of this work, will clear
him from the least suspicion of being an advocate for the Mohammedan system,
with all its absurdities. No, he wishes to expunge the superfluities annexed to
all religions, and to establish the pure religion of nature, which alone can
ever become universal, and which would dissolve those national prejudices by
whose influence monarchs have deluged the world in blood. He wishes to convince
christians of the impolicy of fostering prejudices by means of which they have
experienced so much contempt and cruelty, from those of an opposite persuasion.
What but religious bigotry could induce the Algerines to treat christians with
such barbarity? They consider infidels to their religion entitled to no mercy.
The same cause has occasioned the commission of equal or superior cruelties by
christians, particularly under the denomination of Roman Catholics.

Perhaps these acts of inhumanity cannot be fairly justified from either of the
sources on which these respective religions are founded; but as both consider
all, who are not of their way of thinking, as enemies to God, it is a
presumption that man, as his instrument, has a right to avenge his cause.

We will now return to our christian friend the Layman, and resume our subject.

Passing over matters of inferior moment, we come to his commentary on Moses'
account of the fall. Here we think, he has injured his cause by attempting to
elucidate this misterious subject. People were in the habit of reading the
story in the allegorical, bible style, without attending to its absurdities;
but the moment you translate it into plain English, it becomes too trifling,
too insignificant for a schoolboy not to ridicule. It belittles the character
of the Deity, and to credit it is degrading to his creture, man.

That this idea of heriditary original sin was engendered in the flighty
imagination of fanatics, must appear evident, when we reflect on the wisdom and
goodness of God; consequently that man stands in the same situation he ever
did, and will be accountable only for his own actions.

He concludes this article thus, "If the reader continues dissatisfied, let him
try if he can find or invent any more rational hypothesis to account for the
introduction of moral evil into our world."

As this is a subject of the utmost importance, and as we wish not to incur the
imputation of endeavoring to pull down one theory, without substituting
another, we offer the following observations for the consideration of the
reader.

The internal evidence of man's free agency must be clear to all who reflect on
the operation of their own mind: Were this not the case there could be no
accountability on his part for the commission of evil. That man is created with
propensities in favor of virtue universal experience proves; and that he
possesses the capability of doing evil necessarily results from his free
agency. This is undoubtedly a more noble mode of existence than to have been
created mere passive machines. The greatest difficulty, that occurs, is to
reconcile free agency with the pre-science of Deity. Doct. Beattie, in his
essay on truth, is perfectly satisfactory to the writer on this subject. He
observes, it will be universally admitted that there are some things which the
Deity cannot do; He cannot deceive, he cannot commit evil; these actions are
contrary to the nature of a just and holy being, and therefore impossible.

Neither is it more derogatory to the character of the Deity, to say, there are
some things which he cannot know; He has made man a free agent, and therefore
cannot foreknow the actions he will commit, the one is inconsistent with the
other.

It will be objected to this hypothesis, that the Deity, by thus circumscribing
himself, would be liable to have all his plans frustrated by the will of his
creatures. What can man, that insignificant speck in the creation, do toward
frustrating the great plans of the omnipotent! He may, if he happens to be a
monarch, excite wars, and thus occasion the murder of millions of his fellow
men. But can this affect the schemes of the Almighty? certainly not; for these
things take place, and to suppose God the instigator of cruelties, is in the
highest degree impious.

By the doctrine of necessity the great author of nature is disgraced by an
imputed partiality to his children; a partiality which doomed from all
eternity, certain individuals to everlasting happiness, and others to as
durable a punishment. Every action, says the Predestinarian, must have been
just as it was. It was utterly impossible that Nero should not murder his
mother -- that Richard should not massacre his friends and family. -- It was
not the will of the man, but the decree of heaven that directed the blow; and
the pious Samaritan had no more merit from his virtue, than the most rapacious
assassin.

Mr. Pain observes, that "the commandments contain some good moral precepts;
it is however necessary to except the declaration which says, that God visits
the sins of the fathers upon the children. It is contrary to every principle of
moral justice." To which our critic replies, "The innocent never suffer for the
guilty, except in such temporal calamities as necessarily result from their
parents crimes; as when the possigacy of one generation involves the next in
poverty, or the like." What latitude he means to give to this phrase, or the
like, is uncertain. It is clear however that the sin of our first parents can
bear no resemblance to the circumstance he has adduced. Neither can we see any
similitude in the trifling, childish fault of Ham; which, if it can be called a
crime, deserved, and would have received from a sober man of sense, nothing
more than a gentle reprimand.

The inhuman curse pronounced upon Canaan, and his posterity, by his unnatural
grandfather, when in a state of intoxication (by being credited as the word of
God) has perhaps been productive of evil, sufficient to overbalance the good
effects attending the introduction of the christian religion.

It has tended to make a considerable portion of the human species miserable.
Christians have the effrontery to quote this curse, in justification of a
traffic, which the benevolent mind contemplates with abhorrence. Good God, how
is thy name perverted to gratify the most execrable purposes of avarice and
ambition!

"The old testament history," says the Laym^^, "Is unquestionably the most
ancient history in the world; and gives the only account of the earliest ages
which has the least pretensions to probability." It is we believe generally
granted that the Chinese date their history much farther back than the account
of the creation, as recorded in the old testament; but whether the one or the
other have any pretensions to probability is, in our opinion, what the Layman
is incompetent to determine.

"The sacred writers, like other historians, are answerable only for facts, not
for their morality. If the Jewish history is strained with blood and cruelty,
so is that of all other nations." Very true, but other historians do not
pretend that God commanded those cruelties which they relate; this constitutes
a very material difference. It is but of little consequence at this day to know
whether the Jews actually went into the land of Canaan, and committed all the
barbarities upon the innocent inhabitants, which their history relates. But it
is of the utmost importance, in order that we gain just ideas of the Deity, to
know whether he absolutely headed the Jews, as his chosen people, and commanded
them to distress another part of his creation with all the miseries of a most
cruel, vindictive war. The human mind, unprejudiced by education, shrinks with
horror at the idea of calling such histories the word of a just and merciful
God.

We shall now cite a passage from our critic as a proof of his candor and
credibility, "An evil spirit of God came upon Saul, and he prophesied," he
says, "is taken from the book of Thomas Pain, whose and whose only is the text
and comment." If he means that "an evil spirit of God," is found in the Age of
Reason, it is false. And if he intends to say, "An evil spirit from God, etc."
is taken from the book of Thomas Pain, he is so far right; but that it is
found in him only, is not true: for in 1st Samuel, xviii, 10. "And it came to
pass, on the morrow, that the evil spirit from God came upon Saul, and he
prophesied in the midst of the house." See also chap. xvi. ver. 14, 15.

"The old testament was that of God in his ancient character, as God of Israel;
the new is that of Je^^^ Christ, our Redeemer and Mediator." To suppose that
the immutable God, who has existed from all eternity the same, and who
undoubtedly regards with equal care all his creatures, should have two
characters, one his ancient, peculiar to him as God of the Jews, the other his
modern, as God of christians, is supremely ridiculous; and shows to what extent
of folly the human mind may be carried, when reason, that best gift of God to
man, is superseded by blind faith, and fanatic zeal.

Our critic says, that Mr. Pain has committed a mistake in supposing that the
Devil flew away with Jesus Christ. He thinks it most probable that he took him
"by the proper way of the stairs, to the highest part of the temple." The
scripture however says, "The Devil takes him up, and sets him on a pinnacle
of the temple." But we consider it of the most sovereign indifference, by what
way he is supposed to have taken him. The whole story, that a fallen Angel, who
had made a rebellion in heaven, for which he had been confined in hell, should,
after this, tempt the Supreme Being to fall down and worship him, offering, at
the same time, to give him all the kingdoms of the earth, which the Deity
certainly must know he had no just claim to, is too contemptible for ridicule.

Speaking of the Trinity, our critic observes the manner in which the Three are
One, or the One is Three, is still a mystery, for it is not known, and perhaps
never will be. But we "know as much as is necessary for us to know," and have
therefore no business to push our enquiries farther.

This is the dernier resort of the devotees to systems, indefensible by reason
-- They shroud themselves in a cloud of mystery, and exclaim, "Far hence! far
hence ye profane! the ground whereon ye tread is holy -- here lie the secrets
of the trade. -- As the professors of the doctrine of the Trinity acknowledge a
renunciation of reason, it would be in vain to attempt by the force of ^^^^on
to convince them of its absurdity.

The christian mythology, says Mr. P. has five Deities: there is God the
Father, God the Son, God the Holy Ghost, the God Providence and the Goddess
Nature," "O shame on common sense and condour! not only to misrepresent the
doctrine of the Trinity, but to make christians worshippers of the Goddess
Nature! to say nothing of the absurdity of making a God of Providence." We
submit Mr. Paine's defense on this article, to the candor of the reader. Is it
not a common expression, to say, Providence governs the assairs of men? Nature
has made nothing in vain? Whether any thing is meant by these phrases, is best
known to those who use them.

"It is allowed on all hands that Jesus Christ did pretend to work miracles."
This is not granted: for, as Mr. Pain says, Jesus Christ wrote no account of
himself. The proof of his pretending to work miracles rests upon hearsay
evidence only. All the inferences therefore from this position are of no effect.

Our Layman concludes thus "I shall take leave of the reader with observing
from the close of the pamphlet before us, the sum total of all the discoveries
of modern philosophy in religion -- Namely, that by reducing all religion to
one single article, the belief of a God, it cuts off every improvement in
divine knowledge from the days of Adam -- throws us back into the darkest ages
of heathenism, levels us in this respect with the most illiterate barbarians,
and all the comfort it leaves us, as to futurity, is, that "the power that gave
us existence is able to contin^e it."

It would be difficult to calculate all the improvements in divine knowledge
that have been made from the days of Adam to the present time. So various and
contradictory have been the inventions of mankind on this subject. "They have
annihilated the Supreme Being as much as was in their power: they have
sometimes made him a globe of fire; sometimes an ox, sometimes a tree,
sometimes a man, sometimes a king. They have created God in their own image.
They have made him capricious, avaricious, cruel, implacable. They have
confined him in heaven as in a palace, and have only invited him on earth to
solicit in their favor for tithes, riches, honors, pleasures and power. The
real priest of the Supreme Being is nature; his temple the universe, his
worship virtue, his festivals the joy of a great people assembled in his
presence to unite in the mild bonds of universal fraternity, and to present to
him the homage of pure and sensible hearts."

The greatest improvement that now remains to be made in divine knowledge is to
revive again the simple religion of our first parents, the immediate
workmanship of God. An improvement of this kind, as all others have experienced
before, will undoubtedly meet with opposition from the bigoted, the we^k, and
from those whose interest it is to continue the present impositions. "To invite
man to the pure worship of the Supreme Being, is to aim a fatal blow at
fanaticism -- All fictions will disappear before truth, and all follies fall
before reason. Unconstrained, unpersecuted, all sects must unite in the
universal religion of nature."

A GUIDE TO REASON, BY SAMUEL STILLWELL, IS THE FOURTH ASSAULT UPON THE
"FORTRESS OF DEISM."
THIS production may be considered as a genuine sister of the Folly of Reason.
For, as in that work, the beliefs of the author assume the place of argument.
The greatest merit of this pamphlet is the appearance of a good intention in
the writer.

Mr. S. first tells us that "The Age of Reason," is, in his opinion, the
offspring of ignorance concerning the scriptures, though he does not point out
in what particular instance this ignorance appears.

The reading of Mr. S. has been so much confined to Holy Writ, that he supposes
Mr. Pain entirely indebted to that work for these phrases, "doing justice,"
and "loving mercy."

He asserts, "It is not found in all the bible, that God punishes the children
for their father's sins, the children being innocent;" Whereas frequent
instances of this kind are mentioned in that book: for example, in Joshua vii.
24, 26. we find that for the sin of Acham, the son of Zorah, himself, his sons,
daughters, oxen, asses, sheep, tent, and all that he had, were burnt.

Mr. S. says, that within the circle of his acquaintance, he has known an
instance of a Jew's embracing the christian religion, and therefore he " flatly
denies" Mr. Paine's impious assertion that the Jews never credited the story
concerning the birth of Christ.

Our author informs us that the practice of "signing wills in the presence of
two or three witnesse^," is "an example we take from the bible." Which he
thinks ought to establish the authenticity of the scriptures.

He says, "The Lord of the Universe, in order to teach mankind their duty to
God and their fellow creatures, in a way the most easy to their comprehension,
condescends to impregnate the womb of a virgin."

Why there was any necessity of an example of this kind, from the Lord of the
Universe, to teach mankind their duty, is best known to the author of the
"Guide to Reason."

Our knowing one concludes with this wholesome advice "Know thyself. If you
learn this you will see how consistent the bible is with your condition, and
how consistent the laws of our country are to our well-being." -- According to
the good old doctrine of nonresistance and passive obedience.

As these salutary consequences cannot follow to the inhabitants of many parts
of Europe, from knowing themselves, we conclude "The Guide to Reason" was
intended and calculated for the small circle of the author's acquaintance, with
a particular reference to his Jew-Christian.

THE NEW YORK REVIEWER, ALIAS, --, ESQUIRE,
IS the next who inlists under the banners of superstition and folly to combat
"the Age of Reason." -- He observes, "The present period of revolutions has
given birth to a book, called the Age of Reason. However remarkable the age may
be for the reason of nations or individuals, Mr. Paine's head is certainly
turned, and with him the present age is the age of insanity."

In an age, when what has heretofore been considered as the dreams of
philosophers are about to be accomplished, when the establishment of civil and
religious liberty, throughout the European world, wears a pleasing aspect, when
degraded man is reassuming his place in the scale of existence, and prejudices
are vanishing before the eye of reason, to call this the age of insanity,
betrays a want of discernment or a design to mislead.

He observes, that, Mr. Pain has reserved this work for an advanced period of
his life -- or as Lord Kaime says of his sketches, "it is the child of his gray
hairs." As Kaime's sketches of man is a work of very great merit, the
comparison here instituted is highly favorable to our author.

He continues, "However unfortunate it is, the fact is undeniable, that men,
during the decays of old age and the failure of intellectual faculties,
constantly think themselves growing wiser." Upon another occasion, when
descanting upon the French revolution, wishing to depreciate the merits of
those, whose policy and heroism have confounded the combined world, by
representing them as young, inexperienced madmen, he observes, "In all ages of
the world young men have thought old men to be fools: and in all ages, old men
have known young men to be fools." So, we see, this gentleman's sentiments can
vibrate to either side of a question, as best suits the particular point, he
may wish to establish.

"Mr. Pain admits a revelation, a word of God, and this is the creation we
behold. He goes on to describe this word of God; gives a short account of the
solar system, and by the familiar and even vulgar manner of explaining it, it
is evident he wrote his Age of Reason for common readers in France and
America." Certainly; Mr. Pain, that universal friend of mankind, writes for
the world, he does not wish to have his works adapted solely to those who
assume the appellation of learned, and whose knowledge frequently consists in a
long catalogue of hard, tecnical terms. -- None but pedants will condemn his
writings on this account.

As the remaining passages of the Age of Reason, which are noticed by the
Reviewer, have been vindicated in the course of this work, we pass on to his
general remarks upon the effects of this publication. "Certain it is, that the
tendency of such books, which are industriously circulated by certain
democrats, is to level Jesus Christ, as well as the monarchies of the earth. We
trust however that the body of the people in America have too much good sense
to be deceived, and that they will not exchange good laws, freedom and a pure
religion, for the principles of anarchy, and infidelity,"

Passing over this important discovery and the frightful manner in which it is
announced to the public, we notice the base insinuation by which the author
intended to prejudice the minds of the vulgar against democrats; as though they
were the only people in the world who had any thing to do with the Age of
Reason; as though they were all infidels and anarchists. Are religious opinions,
in this, or any other country, a criterion by which to determine political
sentiments? Is infidelity or deism a sure sign of a democrat? Will any man of
character hazard this assertion? On the contrary, it is a notorious fact that
the men of letters and information in France (the clergy not excepted) were
almost universally deists, before the revolution. It is also notorious that the
most strenuous supporters of the British government, are at this moment deists;
notwithstanding their hypocritical pretentions for continuing the present
religious war against the infidels of France. And even the New York Reviewer
himself has been heretofore known to be on the side of natural religion, although
he now so zealously joins chorus with the weak and designing against the Age of
Reason.

In America strong religious prejudices have been cultivated in the minds of
the people; which has rendered circumspection on this point very necessary for
those who were seeking for places of office. These prejudices, although carefully
fostered by certain illiberal writers, are fast wearing away. And the doors to
honor and power will soon be open to all sects alike.

With respect to "good laws" and "freedom," what have they to do with this
subject? Are not deists as peaceable members of society, and have they not as
just ideas of freedom, as any other sect? And as to "pure religion" the deists,
in this point, have certainly the advantage: their religion being perfectly
pure, simple and unmixed, its professors believing in one God only; whereas the
christian religion is very complex, its votaries acknowledging a God,
consisting of three persons, one of whom is part man.

Thus does this soi desant, Esquire, determine the merits of all performances,
by his scale of politics. If they clash in the least with this, they are
immediately declared to be Antifederal, Democratical, Jacobinical, Anarchial,
etc. etc. This kind of abracadabra may have a tendency to amuse the ignorant
and weak, but with the sensible part of the community can have no effect.

This same Reviewer, in his eulogium on a work tending to establish "the
genuineness and authenticity of the new testament," commences with the
following remarks:

"At a time, when a false philosophy and false liberty are attempting to break
down all the barriers which wisdom, divine and human, has raised to guard the
moral and social state of man from the violence of turbulent passions; when
Jacobinism in religion and in politics, is aiming to level all authority, human
and ditine; to place the young and uniformed above the venerable sage, and
raise the throne of a capricious reason on the ruins of christianity; it gives
us peculiar pleasure to find able champions of our faith among the
distinguished leterati of our own country."

He might as well tell us of Jacobinism in husbandry, architecture or
navigation, as in religion, the subjects have no connection. We are furprised
that this critic has not noticed the Telegraphe, late discovered in France, and
condemned it as a Jacobinical invention. We are persuaded that were he
acquainted with the political sentiments of Mr. Herschel, and found them
favorable to the French revolution, he would convert his planet into a member
of the Jacobin club.

Thus are all improvements in moral and natural philosophy, in the arts and
sciences, liable to be arraigned as Jacobinical inovations. Reason, which was
evidently intended by the Creator, as a guide to our actions, is set down as
"capricious" and incompetent to the purpose. We must follow blindly the
systems, which chance or design has adopted, because it is most for the
convenience of the few, who live upon the credulity of the many.

"We trust, however, that the body of people in America, have too much good
sense to be deceived, and that they will not exchange" their reason for
arbitrary systems, contrary to it, and which of course disgrace it.

Our Reviewer, at the close of his observations on the pamphlet under
consideration, introduces a new idea respecting the mode of worship instituted
in France, which he thinks of great importance, and seems much pleased at
having been the first to make the discovery.

"The French have abolished christianity, and renewed the mythology of the
ancient Greeks and Romans, by erecting certain virtues, as justice, truth,
patriotism, etc. into divinities to be worshipped, and actually instituting
festivals and erecting temples in honor of these visionary, metaphysical,
undefined deities. This was the precise origin of the pagan idolatry -- the
foundation on which the whole system of ancient mythology was erected; and out
of which grew all its absurdities and corruptions. This idea seems not to have
been started in America; but it is just.

We are willing to give our critic all the honor of having started this idea,
and are convinced that he is still alone in the (...): For, when we read the
decree of the convention, respecting national festivals, we are persuaded that
no other person has ever entertained so whimsical a notion.

The convention, after hearing a lengthy report on the subject of national
festivals, which particularly enforces the belief of the unity of God, decreed
as follows:

1. "The French people acknowledge the existence of a Supreme Being, and the
immortality of the soul.

2. They acknowledge that a worship worthy of the Supreme Being, is to practice
the duties of men, and they class among these duties, the detestation of
treachery and tyranny; the punishment of tyrants and traitors; the succouring
of the unfortunate; respect for the weakness of men -- the defending the
oppressed; the doing to others all the good we are capable of; and injuring no
one.

3. They will institute festivals to recall men to the remembrance of the
divinity, and to the dignity of their being.

4. The names of the Festivals shall be taken from events the most glorious in
our Revolution, from virtues the most cherished and the most useful to man, and
which have produced the greatest benefits of his nature.

5. The French Republic will celebrate every year, the Festivals of the 14th of
July, 1789; Taking of the Bastile.
10th of August, 1792; Execution of the S^^ss-guards.
21st of January, 1793; Execution of Louis XVI.
and 31st of May, 1793. Meeting of the National Convention, and Decree for the
eternal abolition of monarchy in France.


6. They will celebrate on the days of Decadi, the Festivals which follow:

To the Supreme Being, and to Nature. -- To the Human Race. -- To the French
People. -- To the Benefactors of Mankind. -- To the Martyrs of Liberty. -- To
Liberty and Equality. -- To the Liberty of the world. -- To the love of
Country. -- To the hatred of Tyrants and Traitors. -- To Truth. -- To Justice.
-- To Chastity. -- To Glory and Immortality. -- To Friendship. -- To Frugality.
-- To Courage. -- To Fidelity. -- To Heroism. -- To Disinterestedness. -- To
Stoicism. -- To Conjugal Fait^^ -- To Paternal Love. -- To Maternal Tenderness.
-- To F^^al Piety. -- To Infancy. -- To Youth. -- To Manhood. -- To Old Age. --
To Misfortune. -- To Agriculture. -- To Industry. -- To our Fathers. -- To
Posterity."

According to this new idea of the Reviewer, all these festivals must be
transformed into deities, for each one is as fair a candidate as the others.
That this chimerrical idea should ever be realized, in the present improved
stage of society, is impossible; it must therefore depend upon a second
inundation of Europe, by the Goths and Vandals.

Finally, Does this shortsighted, partial Reviewer, in his zeal for supporting
ancient systems, hope to arrest the investigating spirit of the present age --
does he expect to stop the revolutionary principles, which are pervading almost
all parts of the globe -- and can he wish to continue those religious
prejudices that have already deluged the world in blood? -- Humanity revolts at
the idea! -- and philosophy and reason look down with contempt upon such feeble
essays to check their progress.

VINDICATION OF OUR AUTHOR'S CHARACTER AND WRITINGS, IN ANSWER TO AN ANONYMOUS
PUBLICATION IN A PHILADELPHIA PAPER.
NOTWITHSTANDING the illiberal writer, in your evening paper of Monday, upon
the Age of Reason and Thomas Pain, scarcely deserves notice, he shall not pass
without some observations from one who is intimately acquainted with that
excellent writer, and his works, which will be read and admired when this
defamer, will be consigned to contempt and oblivion: And I am not a little
surprised, that such a jargon of seandal, falsehood and abuse, against one of
our best and most valuable Patriots, should find admittance in an American
paper.

He says "this Pamphlet, the Age of Reason, has been thrown on the public, as a
bastard is laid in the streets, without a typographic dad, or mam, to claim the
brat, with an intention to justify the title;" this is an impudent and a
foolish falsehood, for Mr. Pain avows the brat and has given his name to it.

Mankind have from the first of time been going on in improvement, and of
consequence it is to be supposed, that by "the fag end of the 18th century,"
subjects will be more thoroughly discussed, and better understood, than they
were at the fag end of the 17th.

Instead of then proceeding to make his strictures upon the book, he stops to
give you the history of its author, which is a mixture of misrepresentation,
and falsehood. Mr. Pain was known in England both as a Patriot and a writer,
before he came to America, his publication in behalf of the inferior officers
of the Revenue, gained him great credit, and many friends, though it cost him
his place; This must mean only a News-paper publication, as Mr. Pain expressly
declares that the work entitled, Common Sense, was the first book he ever
published.
it was for that and not for the deficiency in his accounts, for he had none,
being only a surveyor, that a vile and corrupt government displaced him, and it
was Dr. Franklin himself who was the cause of his coming to this country. The
last ten lines of this paragraph contain as audacious an untruth, as ever
insulted the public; The passage alluded to is as follows: "It appears moreover
that the people of England did not relish his opinions, quite as well as he
expected; and that for one of his last pieces, as destructive to the peace and
happiness of their country, they threatened our knight errant with such serious
vengeance that, to avaid a trip to Botany-bay, he fled over to France, as a
less dangerous voyage."
the truth is Mr. Pain published the second part of the Rights of Man in
London, and remained many months after in that city. He was then elected a
member of the National Convention for two places, he chose to represent Calais,
and a deputation was sent to Dover, where he embarked publiely at noon day, and
the same deputation accompanied him to Paris, where he took his seat.

It is true his same went before him; it is true he continued his hatred of
Kings and tyrants, yet he voted against the death of Louis 16th -- but his
intimacy with Brissot who translated and read his speeches, and who has since
been executed for conspiracy, and treason, was the cause of his arrestation,
and of his being confined in the palace of Luxembourgh in Paris, and not in the
Castle of Luxembourgh which I suppose this writer would have us understand; the
remainder of this paragraph is too contemptible for notice.

Upon the whole, these dastardly attacks upon Mr. Paine's political character,
can do him little harm among a people who remember his exertions in the cause
of Liberty, and the good effects they produced.

THE ADDRESS BY THE REVEREND UZAL OGDEN, RECTOR OF TRINITY CHURCH AT NEWARK,
ACCOMPANYING HIS PROPOSALS FOR PRINTING "THE DEIST UNMASKED," "A SHORT METHOD
WITH THE DEISTS," etc. Is the last and most violent invective that has yet been
published against the immortal work, entitled, "THE AGE OF REASON."
OUR Reverend Divine, after quoting several detached passages from Holy Writ,
as a charm against the powers of reason, commences his address as follows:

"Unpleasing is the office to expose an individual to public obloquy on account
of the impropriety of his conduct. The interests, however, of virtue and
religion; the good of human society, and various other particulars, often
render such a measure, not only justifiable but necessary."

Here we observe, this apostle of "virtue and religion," instead of confuting
"the Age of Reason," proposes to traduce the character of its author.

If the advocates of the christian religion are reduced to this expedient, it
is a shrewd sign that they suspect the weakness and fallacy of the arguments
which are adduced in support of it. How can "impropriety of conduct," alter the
eternal principles of truth, established in the "Age of Reason?" The
sentiments, advanced in that work, must stand or fall by their own intrinsic
merits.

"Mr. Pain during the American Revolution, by his patriotic writings and
services, justly obtained our esteem and applause." -- Were we as uncharitable
as our opponent, we might here observe, that this praise comes from a suspected
quarter; as a certain order in America were almost universally opposed to our
Revolution, and of course to the writings of Thomas Pain on that subject.
Indeed many parts of this address tend to confirm our suspicions on this point.

"And it was hoped, he having returned to Europe, that we should ever have had
occasion to have revered his name." Why a person who "by his patriotic writings
and services," had justly merited so much "esteem and applause," in America,
could not have still been "revered," in this country, without returning to
Europe, is best known to the learned gentleman who makes this remark.

-- "to persuade us to renounce the divine system of christianity, which alo^e
can dignify and bless human nature, and to embrace his fallacious, gloomy and
uncomfortable scheme of deism." That the christian religion dignifies human
nature, is an idea that exists only in the flighty imagination of its zealous
votaries. -- It substitutes a man, in the place of the Supreme Being, and
directs us to rest in him all our hope of future (...). -- This, instead of
dig^^fying (...) nature, is to the last degree degrading (...). -- An exception
may be made of a small portion of the human species, who are reputed, by this
religion, to hold a commission, immediately from the Almighty to preach
salvation to mankind, upon this condition, that they acknowledge the founder of
christianity to be the son of God, and that they are his ambassadors, and are
worthy to be reverenced as such: -- These it dignifies at the expense of the
degradation of their followers.

-- "it becomes a duty, that the unwary may be preserved from seduction, to
divest this deistical enthusiast and incendiary of his mask, and to exhibit him
in his genuine character."

It is impossible to apply language more improperly than is expressed in the
passage before us. Where is the man on earth, that has appeared more open, more
candid, more intriped and persevering in the cause of humanity, than Thomas
Pain? We defy this immaculate prelate to name the man. -- Has he not
personally, at the ^^k of his life, led the way to the annihilation of
prejudices and impositions, in church and state, which have disgraced and
afflicted human nature for ages? -- Has he not openly put his name to the
"Rights of Man," and "the Age of Reason?" To accuse him then of wearing a mask
is the height of presumption and folly. Be assured, sir, that it is impossible
to palm upon the Americans, a masked incendiary, as the "genuine character," of
Thomas Pain; and that whoever attempts it, will do it, at the expense of their
veracity and reputation.

Why should deism be the constant theme of abuse for bigots of all other
persuasions? Have not its professors an equal right to the free enjoyment of
their religious principles? Are they not as honest members of society, as any
other sect? And have they not consisted of men of the first respectability for
talents and probity, in every enlightened country? -- Let the opposers of deism
prove that its doctrine tends to destroy the peace and happiness of society. --
Let them prove that the eternal principles of truth can, consistent with the
character of its author, have this effect, then will we renounce our ten^ts,
and subscribe to their "gloomy uncomfortable scheme," of a crucified Savior.

Knowledge is spread abroad; -- the shackles of superstition are broken --
mankind have began to reflect -- the idea of the awfulness of the subject, and
the profanity of doubting the authenticity of the scriptures, will now frighten
none but children and dotards. -- If the truth of christianity cannot be
defended by fair reasoning, it ought not, and cannot be supported in a country,
where freedom of speech and writing is allowed. At least, if it cannot be made
to appear that it has a better effect on society than deism, the system, with
the fables that gave rise to it, must sail, and be no more heard of, except as
we now relate the stories of witches, to show the credulity and ignorance of
former ages.

That a religion, which naturally excites so much enthusiasm -- which has
caused so many cruel wars, and consequent misery to mankind, will not, upon
fair investigation, be thought preferable in effects to the mild, unpassionate
religion of nature, is evident. We therefore expect the gradual rise of deism
upon the ruins of the christian system, and advise all sectaries to prepare
their minds for this event.

Deism will consequently introduce modes of worship consistent with the
character of reasonable beings.

Temples of reason will succeed temples of superstition; lectures on moral
philosophy and other useful subjects will then be delivered from the pulpit.
Mankind will be taught, that to be happy, and to make each other so here, is
their only duty: and that this will insure their eternal happiness hereafter.
This doctrine will take place of faith, mystery, miracle, and prophecy: And
thus a seventh part of the time be profitably, and agrecably spent, which is
now sacrificed at the shrine of bigotry and folly.

Many of the clergy, no doubt, would give their hearty assent for the
introduction of this system; but it would not answer their purpose to propose
it: the reformation must be gradually effected by enlightening the minds of the
people.

We shall omit any farther remarks till the appearance of Mr. Ogden's proposed
publication.

To conclude, the writer solemnly declares, that the happiness of mankind are
his views, in wishing to propagate deism; he has the charity to believe that
christians are in general influenced by the same motives: He wishes not to
persecute, nor wound the feelings of any, but to convince by fair argumentation.

CAIRA.

