AN ORATION, SPOKEN BEFORE

THE CONNECTICUT SOCIETY, FOR THE PROMOTION OF FREEDOM AND THE RELIEF OF
PERSONS UNLAWFULLY HOLDEN IN BONDAGE. CONVENED IN HARTFORD, On the 8th day of
MAY, A. D. 1794.

BY THEODORE DWIGHT, ESQUIRE.

PRINTED AT HARTFORD, BY HUDSON AND GOODWIN.

MDCCXCIV.

AN ORATION.
IF this assembly were convened, for the purpose of listening to a dissertation
on the general subjects of freedom and slavery, the fact would appear singular,
in the view of a stranger. For certainly, a nation, which has led the rest of
the world to the consideration of these most interesting topics, and fully
disclosed the nature of the latter, ought to furnish no employment for the
advocate of the former. And if any thing can sound like a solecism in the ears
of mankind, it will be this story -- That in the United States of America,
societies are formed for the promotion of freedom. Will not the enquiry
instantly be made -- "Are the United States of America not free? Possessed of
the best country, the wisest government, and the most virtuous inhabitants, on
the face of the earth; are they still enslaved?" No -- America is not enslaved;
she is free. Her country is still excellent, her government wife, and her
inhabitants virtuous. But this reply must be mixed with one base ingredient.
The slavery of negroes is still suffered to exist. The answer being given, the
astonishment will immediately cease, and the enquiry become cool and
spiritless. Whether negroes are enslaved, or free; miserable, or happy; are
questions not interesting to their whiter masters. Placed by Providence in a
more fortunate situation, and impelled by that love of domination, which is
inherent in man, they become much more active in securing the subjects of their
tyranny, than in the extension of human happiness. Nor is this all. Such is the
depravity of our nature and the force of habit, that Reason is too often called
in to aid the dictates of Passion, and sanction the cruelties of Tyranny,

THE existence of African slavery then even in the state of Connecticut, being
a fact which admits not of contradiction, the propriety of Institutions like
that, which has brought this audience together, will sufficiently appear. Nor
will the frequent recurrence of this meeting, in the smallest degree lessen the
importance of its duty. For though to the ear of cold and nerveless Apathy, the
frequent detail of iniquities steadily committed, and of duties too often
neglected, may be a tedious and painful talk; yet the benevolent heart can
never be uninterested, when listening to a rehearsal of the wretchedness of
man, or when contemplating the prospect of his increasing felicity.

THERE is not a point of view, in which African slavery has not been considered
by men of the first talents for research, for detail, and for description. The
labors of the poet, the historian, the legislator, and the divine, have often
presented the subject in the strongest, and most odious colors. Still the evil
exists; and Interest alone has been able to withstand the united force of
imagination, of eloquence, of truth, and of religion. I say Interest alone; for
I will venture to assert, that when it shall cease to be for the interest of
mankind, to torture their fellow creatures in this wicked commerce, not one
solitary individual will be found trafficking in human flesh. Those commands of
the Deity, which are now impioussly appealed to, as a sanction for barbarity
and murder, will then be passed by unregarded; and these defenseless objects of
cruelty, will be left in the quiet enjoyment of their native simplicity,
innocence, and happiness. Where is the zealous apostle of truth, who, believing
it to be the will of the compassionate God, that every being, among his
creatures, who wears a fable complexion, should be reduced to the most abject
servitude, would risque his property, his health, and his life, on a tedious
and dangerous voyage, merely to fulfill the decrees of Heaven, It is presumed,
that such an instance cannot be found, among the sons of men. And those persons
who justify slavery by the permission, or command of God, must believe that the
omniscient Jehovah paid but a slender regard to a part of his will, which is
opposed by every emotion of generosity, compassion and sensibility, when he
submitted the chance of its propagation, to the uncertain management of human
interest.

PERSUADED that Interest then is the only support of a practice so wicked, so
detestable, and so destructive in its effects on the human mind, I shall be
pardoned for the manifestation, at least of earnestness, in the following
desultory remarks, on some of the reasons, urged against the total abolition of
slavery, in the state of Connecticut. These remarks may perhaps be
interspersed, or succeeded by others, in some measure descriptive of its
nature, and of its effects on the human mind.

WITHIN a few years past, the subject of slavery has been repeatedly discussed,
in the legislature of this state, with great force of reasoning, and eloquence.
The injustice of it has been generally, if not uniformly acknowledged; and the
practice of it severely reprobated. But when the question of total abolition
has been seriously put, it has met with steady opposition, and has hitherto
miscarried, on the ground of political expediency -- That is, it is confessed
to be morally wrong, to subject any class of our fellowcreatures to the evils
of slavery; but asserted to be politically right, to keep them in such
subjection. Without attending to this strange, and unfounded doctrine, in
itself, I will consider some of the arguments, used in support of that
political rectitude.

IT is said, that the slavery of negroes was introduced by our ancestors --
who, are acknowledged to have been generally humane and pious, and yet never
questioned its rectitude; from them it descended to us; therefore, as we
inherit the evil, we are at liberty to extricate ourselves from it by degrees;
and are not bound to do it immediately. In support of this doctrine, we are
told -- that, though the blacks have a claim to justice, the whites have also a
claim; that by doing strict justice to them, we shall do injustice to
ourselves; and that we ought not to consult the interests of one part of the
community, at the expense of another.

IT being then acknowledged, that the enslaving of Africans was wrong in the
first instance, it must necessarily follow, that the continuance of it is
wrong: for a continued succession of unjust actions, can never gain the pure
character of justice. If it was originally wrong, it has never ceased to be
wrong for a moment since; and length of time, instead of sactioning, aggravates
the transgression. This mode of reasoning is uniformly adopted by courts of
justice, when deciding on questions of property, by the rules of municipal law.
No tribunal ever admitted a plea of injustice on the part of a father, in
vindication of his son, to whom the fruits of his illegal, or wicked conduct
had descended. So far is this from the fact, that every person, found guilty of
withholding strict justice from his neighbor, on such a frivolous pretense, is
forced by the laws of his country to compensate the person injured, for every
moment, during which the claim remains unanswered. And certainly, the moral law
enjoins a very different doctrine from that, against which I am contending. I
the Lord, am a jealous God, visiting the iniquities of the fathers, upon the
children -- is the strong, and unequivocal language of the decalogue. And if
any man should deny substantial right to another, for the reasons which I have
mentioned, the voice of common sense, as well as of law, would justify his
creditor in casting him into prison, until he should pay the uttermost
farthing. And what is the real ground of this difference, in the administration
of justice, between white men, and negroes? Simply this -- the white men can
appeal to the laws of their country, and enforce their rights. The negroes whom
our fathers, and ourselves have enslaved, have no tribunal to listen to their
complaints, or to redress their injuries. Forced from their country, their
friends, and their families, they are dragged to the sufferance of slavery, of
torture, and of death, with no eye, and no arm, but the eye and arm of God, to
pity, and to punish their wrongs. Society recognizes their existence, only for
the purposes of injustice, oppression, and punishment.

BY doing strict justice to the negroes, I presume is meant, totally to abolish
slavery, and place them on the same ground, with free white men. The injustice,
which, it is contended, will proceed from the immediate accomplishment of this
end, in the first place respects the property of the persons, who hold slaves.
It is said, that they were purchased under the sanction of the laws of the
country; and therefore, arbitrarily to deprive the owners of such property,
without any retribution, would be injustice. This is combining two questions,
which have no relation to each other. The right of the slave to liberty, is a
distinct consideration, from the right of the master to a compensation for the
loss of his slave. Nor will the act of government, in granting freedom to the
slave, weaken the master's claim for that compensation; but if it is just, at
the time when the slave is set at liberty, it will forever remain just until it
is satisfied. Emancipating the slave, then, subject the master to no
disadvantage, in obtaining from government the value of the slave; and
therefore holding the slave in bondage, until compensation is made to the
master, is clearly unjust.

BUT this question must be considered on very different ground. "The rights of
persons," says a sensible writer on the laws of England, considered in their
natural capacities, are of two forts, absolute, and relative. By the absolute
rights of mankind, we mean those, which are so in their primary, and strictest
sense; such as would belong to their persons merely in a state of nature, and
which every man is entitled to enjoy, whether out of society, or in it. And
these may be reduced to three principal, or primary articles; the right of
personal security, the right of personal liberty, and the right of private
property. Blackstone's Commentaries.
No person, who hears me, will deny the justice, or reasonableness of this
doctrine. Considering it, then, as acknowledged, it is evident, that the right
of private property, standing in a station, subordinate to the right of
personal security, and the right of personal liberty, merits an inferior
consideration. Therefore, previously to discussing, and establishing the right
of private property, the rights of personal security, and personal liberty,
must be discussed, and established. If this reasoning be just, it is
impossible, in any situation, or under the authority of any laws, to acquire a
property in a human being. For it cannot be acquired, without a violation of
rights, to which he has a prior, and absolute claim; and which are of
inconceivably greater importance. The result, then, must necessarily be, that,
in abolishing African slavery, no injury is done to private property.

BUT granting, for the moment, that property can be gained in the body and mind
of man; a concession which can scarcely be made, for the sake of argument,
without horror; I deny, that any such property ever was gained, in this state,
under the sanction of law. Search the statute books of Connecticut, from the
date of its Charter to the present moment, and tell me where is the law which
establishes such an inhuman privilege? Happily for the honor of the state,
those books were never stained with so black a statute. But it will be replied,
that slavery is sanctioned by Prescription, and implicitly allowed by the laws
of the land. "To make a particular Custom good," says the accomplished
jurisprudent, from whom I have already quoted, the following are necessary
requisites -- That it have been used so long, that the memory of man runs
not to the contrary. So that if any one can show the beginning of it, it is no
good custom. It would not be a difficult task, to discover the beginning of the
Custom under consideration. "It must have been continued. Which must be
understood of the right; for if the right be any how discontinued for a day,
the Custom is quite at an end." -- The right of the Custom of slavery, is given
up by much the greater part of the community. "It must have been peaceable --
It must be reasonable." Surely no man will contend that this Custom is either
peaceable, or reasonable. The reason of man rises in uniform opposition to it;
and it is marked in every stage with war, barbarity, and murder.

BUT if this Prescription, or Custom, when tried by the rules of the English
common law, would stand the test, still I contend, that no prescriptive right,
can infringe the absolute rights of mankind. These, especially personal
security, and personal liberty, cannot be violated but by the positive laws of
society. Such laws, I have already remarked, do not exist, in the code of
Connecticut. But in that code there does exist a law, which speaks emphatically
the opposite language. No man's person shall be arrested, restrained, or any
ways punished -- No man shall be deprived of his wife, or children -- No man's
goods or estate shall be taken away from him, nor any ways indamaged, under
color of the law, or countenance of authority, unless clearly warranted by the
laws of this state. Are not negroes men? Are they not arrested, restrained, and
punished? Are they not deprived of their wives, and children? Are not their
goods and estate taken from them, and endamaged, under color of law, and
countenance of authority alone? For the Custom, so often mentioned, can have no
force, if there is a positive statute authorizing African slavery; and if there
is no such statute, African slavery must owe its existence, solely to the
countenance of authority.

BUT to make a still stronger concession, in favor of the friends of slavery
than those already made, viz. That the absolute rights of individuals are
subject to violation, under the authority of Custom, and that such Custom,
having obtained, is clearly warranted by the laws of this state, yet I venture
to assert, that no Custom and no Law, which a state where slavery is practiced,
either has made, or can make, ought to affect the enslaved negroes at all,
unless designed as a partial compensation for the injuries which they have
suffered -- injuries, for which all the wealth of man can never alone. The
right of society to make laws of any description, depends entirely on the
original compact, which formed the society. This compact, must have the real,
or implied assent of every person, who is to be bound by the regulations of the
society. Every person, then, who is forced to submit to the laws, and
institutions of society, has a right to be heard, either in person, or by his
representative, when those laws and institutions are framed; and every person,
who is forced to submit to such laws and institutions, without the opportunity
of being thus heard, is forced to submit to the hard, and oppressive hand of
Tyranny. Slaves then, having never really, nor impliedly agreed to any social
compact, and never being heard, either personally, or representatively in the
legislature, form no part of the social body; and therefore cannot justly be
the object of laws, except in the case I have already instanced. On the
contrary, so far from uniting voluntarily with societies, in this country, they
are bro't into them by force, and by force subjected to the laws, and
regulations of powers, which they never acknowledged, and to which they owe
neither obedience, nor gratitude. Being thus forced into a state of hostility,
if defensive war is susceptible of justification, in any possible instance,
this is that instance. Their lives, their property, their liberty, their
happiness, are perpetually exposed to the inroads of every merciless invader.
And though, as the finishing stroke to their systems of guilt, societies think
fit to punish those acts in slaves, which indeed in their own members, would be
both civil and moral evils; yet, probably on the strength of reasoning similar
to that which I have adopted, an elegant English writer, pronounces it
"impossible for a slave, to be guilty of a civil crime." The same law,(...)

ANOTHER consequence of slavery, is a spirit of domination. For proof of this,
we may apply to those parts of the United States, where slavery is most
extensively practiced. In the four southern states, there exists the strongest
spirit of aristocracy to be found in the union. This assertion I dare to make,
in defiance of all the clamor, which can be raised to contradict it. Where is
that spirit of republicanism, equality, freedom, and enmity to tyranny, of
which they so arrogantly boast? Believe me, they exist but in found. Domestic
despotism rides triumphantly over the liberties, and happiness of thousands of
our fellow creatures, in each of those pretended republics. In no other country
on earth, is slavery carried to such a length of oppression. Not contented with
the common round of cruelty and wickedness, the masters there mock their slaves
with the name of privileges, which they never enjoy; and thus force them to
contribute to the strengthening of the powers, which hold them in bondage.
Enjoying no rank in the community, and possessing no voice, either in
elections, or legislation, the slaves are bro't into existence, in the
Constitution of the United States, merely to afford opportunity for a few more
of their masters, to tyrannize over their liberties. And no event could fill
these states with such alarming apprehensions, as the erection of the standard
of Freedom among their enslaved subjects. Therefore, before they upbraid the
citizens of the northern states, with an attachment to the principles of
aristocracy, or monarchy, let them begin the equal communication of those
privileges, which in theory, they confess to be the birth right of man. Let
them visit New England, and learn the rudiments of freedom. Here they will
find, at least in some places, and God grant I may spedily say in all, that
instead of the awful distance between the master and the slave, each inhabitant
is as independent as the insolent planter -- That here, Though poor the peasant's
hut, his feast though small,
He sees his little lot the lot of all;
Sees no contiguous palace rear its head,
To shame the meanness of his humble shed;
No costly lord the sumptuous banquet deal,
To make him loath his healthful, homely meal;
But calm, and bred in innocence and toil,
Each wish contracting fits him to the soil.
Cheerful at morn he wakes from short repose,
Breathes the keen air, and carols as he goes.
At night returning, every labor sped,
He fits him down the monarch of a shed,
Smiles by his cheerful fire, and round surveys
His children's looks, which brighten at the blaze. Goldsmith



ON the whole, every species of wickedness results from slavery, wherever it
exists. The inhabitants, in the common course of events, become licentious in
the commission of every immorality. All the honest, and virtuous employments of
life, falling to the share of the slaves, the master naturally avoids them as
unworthy of his dignity, and plunges into habits of indolence, and vice,
equally destructive, and disgraceful to society. Even the females, forgetting
those amiable, and endearing qualities, which bend the fiercer nature of man to
gentleness and love, indulge themselves in paroxisms of rage; and under the
influence of the most ferocious passions, seize the engines of torture, and
with all their feeble force, inflict on their unhappy servants the keenest
misery. See a picture, drawn by one of the most humane and ingenious of her
sex. Lo! where reclined, pale Beauty courts the breeze,
Diffused on sofas voluptuous ease,
With anxious awe, her menial train around,
Catch her faint whispers of unutter'd sound.
See her in monstrous fellowship unite
At once the Scythian, and the Sybarite;
Blending repugnant vices, misallied,
Which frugal nature purposed to divide.
See her with indolence, to fierceness joined,
Of body delicate, infirm of mind,
With languid tones imperious mandates urge,
With arm recumbent wield the household scourge,
And with unruffled mien, and placid sounds,
Contriving torture, and inflicting wounds. Mrs.Barbauld.



AT the present period, when the principles of liberty are so highly revered,
and the practice of them so justly admired, every question, in which they are
involved, ought to be discussed by the soundest reason, and established on the
most substantial justice. For when the persons interested in the event of such
discussion, are of sufficient force to be formidable, those who are hardy
enough to withhold their unalienable rights, will find themselves plunged in a
deluge of calamity. Every instance on historical record, and every example
before our eyes, abundantly teaches this solemn truth. Without wasting time in
multiplying cases, I will only resort to one of the latter description. The
situation of France, and some of her most important colonies, affords a
melancholy proof, that a deviation from the path of reason and justice, in the
pursuit of freedom, is necessarily attended, with the most distressing evils.
When the councils of the nation were guided by discretion and integrity, the
surrounding world beheld with admiration and applause, a stupendous object in
the great system of Providence -- one of the most numerous and mighty nations,
on the earth, led by the hand of Reason alone to the acquisition of freedom and
happiness. But when the government was siezed by a profligate, and bloodthirsty
junto, which, for a period, forced the infatuated republic to assassination and
ruin, Then fell the flower of Gallia, mighty names,
Her hoary senators, and gasping patriots.
The Mountain spoke, and their licentious band
Of blood-train'd ministry were loosed to ruin.
Invention wantoned in the toil of infants
Stabbed on the breast, or reeking on the points
Of sportive javelins. Husbands, sons and sures,
With dying ears drank in the loud despair
Of shrieking Chastity. The waste of war,
Was peace and friendship to their civil massacres. Brook.



FROM France, turn your attention to the island of St. Domingo. A succession of
unjust, and contradictory measures, in both the national and colonial
governments, at length highly exasperated the negroes, and roused their spirits
to unanimity and fanaticism. Seized by the phrenzy of oppressed human nature,
they suddenly awoke from the lethargy of slavery, attacked their tyrannical
masters, spread desolation and blood over the face of the colony, and by a
series of vigorous efforts, established themselves on the firm pillars of
freedom and independence. Driven from their houses and possessions, by new and
exulting masters, the domestic tyrants of that island wander over the face of
the earth, dependent on the uncertain hand of Charity for shelter, and for
bread. To the honor of Americans, it is true, that in this country, they have
realized the most liberal humanity. But by a dispensation of Providence which
Humanity must applaud, they are forced to exhibit, in the most convincing
manner, this important truth -- that despotism and cruelty, whether in the
family, or the nation, can never resist the energy of enraged and oppressed
man, struggling for freedom.

THESE evils may perhaps appear distant from us; yet to some of our sister
states they are probably nigh, even at the doors. Ideas of liberty and slavery,
have taken such strong hold of the negroes, that unless their situation is
suddenly ameliorated, the inhabitants of the southern states, will have the
utmost reason to dread the effects of insurrection. And with the example of the
West Indies before their eyes, they will be worse than mad, if they do not
adopt effectual measures to escape their danger. To oppose the slaves by force
when in a state of rebellion, or to hold them in their present condition, for
any considerable length of time in future, will be beyond their strength.
Courage and discipline, form but a feeble front, to check the onset of freedom.
For what are fifty, what a thousand slaves,
Matched to the sinew of a single arm
That strikes for liberty? Brook.

And when hostilities are commenced, where shall they look for auxiliaries, in
such an iniquitous warfare? Surely, no friend to freedom and justice will dare
to lend them his aid. In a case, not essentially different in principle from
the one under consideration, except its being less aggravated, the God of
Heaven has uttered the following denunciation. Therefore thus says the Lord,
ye have not hearkened unto me, in proclaiming liberty every one to his
neighbor, and every man to his brother: Behold I proclaim a liberty for you,
says the Lord, to the sword, to the pestilence, and to the famine. And I will
make you to be removed into all the face of the earth. And I will give the men
that have transgressed my covenant, into the hand of their enemies, and into
the hand of them, which seek their life. And their dead bodies shall be for
meat unto the fowls of heaven, and to the beasts of the earth. Jeremiah, Chap.
xxxiv.17, 20.
Nor can the threatenings in this passage be avoided, under the idea, that it
is a prophecy, remote, and uninteresting to us. It contains nothing more than
the natural, and necessary consequences of slavery, in every country, where the
slaves are more numerous than their masters. Indeed the prophecy has been most
minutely fulfilled in the island already mentioned.

IN this state indeed, and with the sincerest pleasure I make the remark, in
consequence of the small number of slaves, the advancement of civilization, and
the diffusion of a liberal policy, the situation of the negroes is essentially
different. Exposed to few severe punishments, and indulged in many amusements,
compared with what is found in most other countries, they are here flourishing,
and happy. But even here they are slaves. The very idea embitters every
enjoyment. So necessary is freedom to happiness, that the mind, well informed
of its nature, and acquainted with its blessings, if subjected to the will of
an arbitrary and cruel master, would be wretched and solitary, although
surrounded by all the pleasures of the garden of God. But as slaves do in fact
exist in Connecticut, the inhabitants of the state, as it respects this great
subject, must be divided into two classes -- those, who justify slavery in the
abstract -- and those, who condemn it. And this general division will be found
to comprehend every intermediate stage of character. For though the number of
persons is small, who will avowedly advocate the principles of slavery; yet
such persons do not only exist, but have the hardihood to appeal for arguments
to support their barbarous sentiments, to the fountain of our holy religion,
which breathes naught but peace and good will to man. But there is another more
specious description of persons, which I class among the enemies of the freedom
and happiness of mankind. These persons prosessedly acknowledge the wickedness
of slavery, and still, on the pretense of political expediency, use every
artifice of ingenuity and fraud, to rivet the fetters, which bind their fellow
creatures in bondage. Such persons, deaf to the voice of Reason, and the
supplications of Humanity, bend every object to the advancement of their
wealth, and the gratification of their ambition; while the groans of dying
Innocence, the screams of violated Chastity, and the ravings of tortured
Maniacks, would sleep on their ears like the gentle music of the passing gale.
To such persons, as well as to those of the second class, which I have
mentioned, a few enslaved, wretched beings, appeal for the blessings of
freedom. On the part of the slaves, it is a question of right; and on that of
the state, a question of justice -- a question, which cannot be suppressed by
the strong pleadings of Avarice, nor hidden in the subterfuges of Sophistry.
The first of these spirits is not more opposed to humanity, than the latter is
to integrity. Sophistry may at times assist the advocate at the bar, when
espousing the cause of iniquity; but in a legislator it must ever be infamous,
and the conscience of an honest man will never submit to its imposition. Nor
should motives of ambition be suffered to operate, to the destruction of human
happiness. It is a possession of too much value, to be held by so frail a
tenure. Depraved indeed must be the heart of that man, who will swerve from the
rigid rules of justice and duty, to aid his ambitious projects. Equally
depraved, and if possible more execrable, is the unfeeling favage, who will
lengthen out the misery of a fellow being with a smile of sarcastic pleasure on
his fraudful countenance. In the hour of distress and apprehension, gloomy and
bitter must be the reflections of such a mind. But to the mind animated with a
love of justice, and glowing with the purest benevolence, the valley of the
shadow of death, will open a peaceful passage to the presence of his God.

IF the arguments which I have used, as well as innumerable others which are
constantly urged in opposition to slavery, cannot be fully answered and
refuted, may it not be hoped, that this relic of oppression, so odious and so
wicked, will be speedily extirpated in the state of Connecticut. Why should a
countenance in this happy land, be saddened with the melancholy evil! Can it be
urged as a reason for its continuance, that the slaves, not being numerous
enough to become troublesome, are unworthy of the public attention? A regard to
the happiness of beings, occupying but a point in his dominions, destitute even
of the claim of justice, and dependent on his will for existence, induced the
Son of the living God to exchange the bosom of his Father, for a cruel, and
ignominious death. And shall we refuse so slightly to imitate this illustrious
example? The slaves are sufficiently numerous, and sufficiently important, to
be highly injured, by being stripped of the only blessing, which can render
life worth enjoying. For where is the being, who would not rather yield up his
life a sacrifice, than part with his freedom? The wretch, if such an one can be
found, is unworthy of the name of man.

WHO then can charge the negroes with injustice, or cruelty, when "they rise in
all the vigor of insulted nature," and avenge their wrongs? What American will
not admire their exertions, to accomplish their own deliverance? Every friend
to justice and freedom, while his heart bleeds at the recital of the
devastation and slaughter, which necessarily attend such convulsions of
liberty, must thank his God for the emancipation of every individual from the
miseries of slavery. This is the language of freedom; but it is also the
language of truth -- a language which ever grates on the ears of tyrants,
whether placed at the head of a plantation, or the head of an empire. Every
description of them, sooner than be deprived of domination -- Would rather see
This earth a desert, desolate, and wild,
And like a lion stalk his lonely round,
Famished, and roaring for his prey. Brook.



But this spirit, has neither charms to allure, nor terrors to awe the
inhabitants of America, Having resisted it in the full vigor of manhood, they
will disdain to yield to it in the imbecility of infancy. And indeed,
submission would not only be deeply degrading, but extremely dangerous --
dangerous, not to liberty alone, but to security and peace. Those tender plants
can never flourish, on the bleak and barren soil of Slavery. For the same
principles, which lead nations to the attainment of freedom, urge individuals
to pursue the same important object; and the struggle ^f the latter, are as
often marked with desperat^^^, as the efforts of the former. Indeed, from
individuals, the spirit is generally communicated to states, and from states to
nations. And since the mighty, and majestic course of Freedom has begun,
nothing but the arm of Omnipotence can prevent it from reaching to the
miserable Africans. But let the domestic tyrants of the earth, tremble at the
approaches of such a destructive enemy. For should they even attempt to oppose
it, either by stratagem or force --

Devouring War, shall wake his bloody band
At Freedom's call, and scourge their guilty land.
And while his thundering chariot rolls along,
And scatters discord over the fated throng,
Death in the van, with Anger, Hate, and Fear,
And Desolation stalking in the rear,
Revenge, by Justice guided, with his train,
Shall drive impetuous over the trembling plain. Altered from Churchill.


