

THE HISTORY OF A GREAT MANY Little BOYS and GIRLS, FOR THE Amusement of all
Good Children OF FOUR and FIVE YEARS of AGE.

BOSTON: Printed and sold by SAMUEL HALL, No. 53, Cornhill.

1794.

PREFACE.
I HAVE long la^^^ted, that amongst all the numerous volumes written for the
amusement of children, few that I have ever yet seen have been well adapted to
the puerile comprehensions of Infants of Four or Five Years of Age: they
generally are filled with incidents totally uninteresting to them; such as
gentlemen and ladies meeting with great happiness in the nuptial state, and
arriving at great wealth and riches through their superior wisdom and goodness.
In the opinion of the author, such like histories, so far from being beneficial
to children, are either quite beyond their understanding, and therefore capable
of affording no entertainment to them; or else, tend only to inspire their
tender minds with Pride, Ambition, Vanity, and every passion disgraceful to
human nature.

The following little book was written with a view to amuse and instruct one
particular family, in whose welfare the author is nearly concerned; but if it
should be distributed into the hands of other children, they may, perhaps, be
equally entertained with reading the histories of so many little boys and
girls; who, by boys and girls, will always be thought the most important part
of the species.

The History of Miss BETSY and Miss MARY HIGGINS.
BETSY and Mary Higgins were two little girls. Betsy was six years old, and
Mary a little more than four. In common they were both very good, but sometimes
Mary used to be a little heedless, and not mind when first she was spoken to;
which was very silly, and made people not love her so well as they otherwise
would have done. One day her Mamma lent her a fan, that she might look at the
pictures which were on it; with a caution to take care of, and not break it.
But she did not mind what was said to her, and after she had done looking at
it, began to sweep the room with it, calling it in play, A nice broom. Her
Mamma called to Mary, Do not do so, Mary! do not do so! you will break it, and
if you do I shall be very angry with you! But Mary did not mind, and went on
sweeping the room till she tore the fan all to pieces, and it could be used no
more. So her Mamma was obliged to get up to her, shake her a great deal, and
put her into the corner for being so naughty as not to mind what was said to
her. How silly it was! for if she had minded when her Mamma first bade her
leave off sweeping the room, she would have been a good girl, and not have made
her Mamma angry; and might have seen the fan another time, and all the pretty
pictures which were upon it.

Now you shall hear about Miss Betsy Higgins. She was a very good girl indeed,
and always did as she was desired, and held up her head so very well, and
turned out her toes, and was so clever, and so agreeable, that every body was
fond of her, and liked to have her come to see them, and play with their little
boys and girls; for she never said any bad words, nor did any thing that was
wrong; and when any body spoke to her, she used to answer so prettily, and
speak so plain, and so civilly, that she never forgot to say Madam, if a lady
spoke to her, and Sir, if a gentleman; so that people used to call her the good
Miss Higgins. One day a lady who went to see her Mamma, knowing what a good
girl she was, carried her a new doll, and a little tea-chest, for which she
made a very pretty courtesy, and said, I am much obliged to you, Madam. Then up
stairs she ran to show it to her sister; for she always took great pains to
please her, and let her play with her toys; and if she had any apples or buns,
she gave her sister half of them.

The History of Master TOMMY PIPER.
TOMMY Piper was five years old, very tall, and a fine boy; but he was so
fretful and naughty, that nobody liked to see him. If he wanted a piece of
bread, instead of asking prettily, and saying, Pray be so good as to give me a
bit of bread? he would say, Give me a bit! for I want it! and will have it! And
if it was not given to him directly, he would cry and scream like a pig. One
day as Mr. Makegood was going by Mr. Piper's house, he heard Tommy crying, and
roaring, and making a sad noise; so he stopped at the door, to ask what was the
matter? And when he was told that it was master Tommy crying, because he would
not be dressed; he said, Let me see him, and I will make him good. So Tommy was
fetched to him, and came screaming down stairs, and saying, I will not be
washed! I will not be washed! That I will not! But I will be dirty! I will be
naked! Will you? said Mr. Makegood, Do you talk in that way, Master Tommy? I
shall try whether I can make you be good. Then he took him up in his arms,
carried him into the garden, and threw him into a great tub of water to wash
him. Now, said he, will you ever say you will not be washed again? If you do,
you shall always be thrown into the tub. And then he began to beat him whilst
he was naked, and said, If you will not be dressed, I shall beat you all the
time you are without your clothes; for I do not like to see naked children. He
had a great rod in his hand, which hurt him sadly, so that he was very glad to
stand quietly to be dressed; and took care never to say another time, I will
not be dressed, and I will be naked.

The History of Miss PEGGY BRIGHT.
MISS Peggy Bright was but four years old, and she could spell very well
indeed, and read such little books as this, which she was very fond of doing;
for she liked to know all the pretty histories. As she was such a good girl,
her Mamma was so kind as to take great pains with her to teach her, for which
she was obliged to her: for if she had not, Peggy would always have been a
dunce, and never have known how to read. Her Mamma taught her to work too, and
that she was very fond of, and could hem, and sew, and stitch too, very neatly
indeed. She worked so well that she made her little brother a shirt all
herself. And when she had finished it, her Mamma gave her a little pair of
scissars and a nice flowered work-bag for her own, to keep herself. Little
Peggy could sing a great many songs too; and one of her songs which she used to
sing was this: Hush, my dear, be still, and hark!
For sure I hear my Pompey bark,
And saw my kitten play;
My dog I fancy wants some bread,
My kitten too must now be fed,
Nor any longer stay.
Come Pompey! Pompey! come to me,
For sure I am that I love thee:
Indeed, my dog, I do:
And you, my Puss, I love as well,
Which I love best I cannot tell,
Whether my dog or you.


The History of Master GEORGE TRUEMAN.
MASTER Trueman was only seven years old, but the best boy you ever saw in your
life. He could read like a man, and write very well: so that if he was absent
from any of his friends, he could send letters to them, and read what they
wrote to him. He always did as he was desired; and if he happened to be about
any thing which he ought not to do, as soon as he was told, he left off
directly; so that every body loved him, and tried to please him. He was good,
and spoke so civilly, that all the gentlemen and ladies who lived near his
Papa's house, used to ask him to come and see their children, to teach them to
behave like himself. And when he went out without his Papa or Mamma, he always
was as good as if they had been with him: nor would he eat or drink any thing,
or do what he thought they would not like, for he knew it was very naughty
indeed to do what displeased them, because he was out of their sight. His Papa
and Mamma did not choose that he should eat cakes or butter, because it was not
good for him, and would make him sick, and they loved him too well to like that
he should be sick. One day, when he went to see Master Puny, he found him
eating cakes, and bread and butter. Master Puny asked him if he would not eat
some? but George said, No, I thank you! I never eat cakes or butter. I will
have a bit of dry bread if you please. Mrs. Puny did not know that his Papa and
Mamma did not choose that he should eat them, and so she too asked him to eat
some; and said, Pray, Master George, eat a bit of cake, I got it on purpose for
you; and I am sure a little will not hurt you: It is very good and nice, pray
eat some. But George was too good a boy to do what he knew was wrong. And so he
very civilly thanked her, and said, Indeed, Madam, I cannot eat any, for my
Papa and Mamma desire I will not eat cakes; and I am sure I must do as they bid
me; for they are very kind to me, and take a great deal of care of me, and let
me have every thing that is proper for me; and would let me eat cakes if they
thought they would not hurt me; but they say that cakes will make me sick, and
I am sure Papa and Mamma know much better than I do. Well, said Mrs. Puny, you
are a very good child indeed, and here is an apple and an orange for you; for I
dare say you may eat them. George thanked her, and said, Yes, Madam, I may eat
them, because they are ripe fruit: and so he took them, and gave his
play-fellow, Master Puny, some of each. When he went home, Mrs. Puny sent word
how good he had been. So his Papa and Mamma kissed him, and told him they loved
him dearly; and the next morning his Papa gave him a little horse to ride on,
which George liked better than eating cakes; for he knew they would soon be
gone; and besides, he must have been punished too, for doing what he ought not.
But now this little horse lived with him a great while, and his Papa and Mamma
were much pleased with him.

The History of Miss MARY ANN SELFISH.
MISS Mary Ann Selfish would have been a very good and agreeable little girl,
if she had not been so sadly greedy of every thing, either to eat or to play
with. She had two little sisters, who were very good girls, and she said, that
she loved them dearly: But if you had seen her when she was eating a bun or an
apple, you would have thought she did not love them at all: for she did not
like to give them a bit; but chose to eat all herself; and filled her mouth so
frightfully full, you cannot think how ugly she looked. Her sisters were very
good-humoured, and always liked to give her some of every thing they had: but
Mary Ann was never contented, but after she had eaten a great deal of pudding,
or a whole orange, or apple, she wanted some of her sisters, and used to go and
stand by one of them, and ask for more. Her Mamma and all her friends often
told her not to do so; but she did not mind them, but still wanted every thing
that she saw any body else have, just like a little hog. So her Mamma one day
took hold of her hand, and said, Mary Ann! if you will be so like a hog, you
shall go and live with the pigs, and not with me and your sisters; for you will
teach them to be as bad as yourself. Come, I will carry you to the pigs now,
and then you may eat together as fast and as much as you please. Mary Ann began
to cry! her Mamma did not mind that, but carried her out, and put her to the
pig-sty with the hogs. What a sad thing that was for a little girl to live
among the hogs! But so all greedy children must be treated; and so must you too
if you behave like her; therefore pray remember never to eat all yourself, or
want to have your sister's victuals.

The History of Miss SALLY TRIP.
I AM going to tell you about the naughtiest girl you ever knew in your life;
and I hope no other little girls or boys will be like her, for she used
sometimes to tell stories, and not speak the truth. One day she took some sugar
that stood upon the table, and ate it; and when her Mamma asked her how she got
it, she said, her aunt had given it to her. What a sad thing that was! for she
knew that it was very naughty to say so, because her aunt had not given it to
her. So she was obliged to be whipped a great deal indeed, and have her mouth
tied up that she could not speak at all. For if people tell fibs, they had
better have no tongues than make such use of them. Another time her Papa gave
her a biscuit, and when she was asked who gave it to her? she said, that she
found it in the garden; which was another naughty fib you know. So when her
Mamma heard that she had told such a story about the cake that was given her,
she took it all from her, and whipped her very hard indeed, and turned her out
of the house; for she did not like to have such naughty girls in the room with
her; and she made her stay out in the cold all the day, without any body taking
any notice of her, or giving her any victuals to eat, or any thing to drink.
And so all little boys and girls must be served who tell fibs.

The History of Master HENRY WISE.
MASTER Henry Wise was a good-humoured, merry little boy of five years old, who
never did any thing that was naughty, or what he ought not. He would let any
body play with him, and jump him about as much as they pleased; and if they did
any thing to him, which he did not like, he would say, Pray, Sir, do not do so;
I shall be much obliged to you if you will let me stand down. And then they
would put him down directly when he spoke so prettily. He had a little cousin
who lived at his Papa's, whose name was James Brown: but he was not near so
good, therefore nobody loved him so well as Henry, nor had he half so many
play-things; for Henry was so good that every body used to take pains to please
him; and one person gave to him a horse, another a cart; and he had a pretty
little windmill which was given to him by his Papa, because he took pains with
his reading and spelling, and likewise was a good boy, and never cried for any
thing he wanted; and did not ask for things he saw other people have; and his
uncle gave him a fine watch, with a seal and key to wind it up with, and a nice
little hook to it, that he might hang it up.

The History of Miss POLLY MEEKLY.
MISS Polly Meekly was as good a girl as Master Wise was a boy, and always did
as she was bidden the moment she was spoken to. If any body called her, she
went directly, and did not trouble them to ask her more than once to go. And if
any body said, How do you do, my dear? How does your Mamma do? She answered at
once like a woman, and said, Very well, I thank you, Madam! so plain, that
every body could hear her. Some little girls, when they are spoken to, answer
so low that they cannot be understood; and if you desire them to sing you a
song, they only put up their shoulders, and hang down their heads, and look
silly, Miss Polly behaved much better indeed; and if she was at any time asked
to sing, began directly, and said, I Am sure I Will sing with all my heart,
If me you like to hear;
But for the real singer's part,
It will be bad I fear.
Then to your goodness trust I will,
Hoping you will excuse
My want of better voice or skill,
Since you a song did choose.
And now my song I must conclude,
Having no more to say;
And if you will not think me rude,
I Will sing another day.


Miss Polly used to sing a great many more songs, but I have forgotten all the
rest; though I never shall forget how clean she used to rub her shoes when she
came in doors; and how she folded up her cloak and gloves, and put them away
herself; for she never made a litter, and after she had been at play she always
picked up all her doll's play-things, and put them into a box to keep them all
together; for her Mamma was so kind as to let her have a box to keep all her
treasures in. And she took great pleasure in making dolls' clothes for her
little sisters, who were not old enough to work for themselves. She had a
little dog that she was very fond of, and fed every day when she had her
breakfast; and she took great care of it, and never hurt it; but stroaked and
played with it very prettily. The dog's name was Cato. It was a droll dog, and
had a black face, and a white back, and black feet. Miss Polly took great pains
to learn to read well; and she read better than any little girl I ever knew.
She never fretted and cried; but was always good-humoured; and at dinner she
never asked and teazed for any thing, but ate what was given to her without
wanting any thing else; and never greased her fingers, but used her knife and
fork like a lady. I hope all little boys and girls, who read this pretty book,
will learn to behave like Master Henry Wise and Miss Polly Meekly, and not like
those who were naughty.

THE END.
The following BOOKS, for the Entertainment and Instruction of CHILDREN, are
printed and sold by S. HALL, No. 53, Cornhill, BOSTON.
1. DIVINE SONGS, attempted in easy Language for the Use of Children. -- By I.
WATTS, D. D.

2. Tommy Trip's Pictures of Beasts and Birds, with a familiar Description of
each, in Verse and Prose. -- Published for the Benefit of the little Masters
and Misses of the United States of America.

3. Little Stories for Little Folks, in easy Lessons of one, two, and three
syllables. Embellished with Pictures.

4. Nurse Truelove's New Year's Gift; or, the Book of Books for Children:
Designed for a Present to all little Boys and Girls, who wish to become great
and good.

5. The Holy Bible abridged; or, the History of the Old and New Testament --
illustrated with Notes, and adorned with about 60 Pictures, con^^^ning lively
representations of the most remarkable (...) and transactions recorded in the
sacred Scrip^^^es.

6. The History of the Holy Jesus, containing (...) and plain Account of his
birth, life, death, ^esu^^^ction, and ascension into Heaven; and his ^^mi^g
again at the great and last day of judgment: Being a pleasant and profitable
companion for Children, and composed on purpose for their use.

7. Short Conversations, or an easy Road to the Temple of Fame; which all may
reach who endeavor to be good.

8. The Good Child's Delight, or the Road to Knowledge, in short, entertaining
Lessons of one and two syllables.

9. An approved Collection of Entertaining Stories, calculated for the
Instruction and Amusement of all little Masters and Misses. By Solomon Winlove,
Esquire.

10. Virtue and Vice; or, the History of Charles Careful, and Harry Heedless.
Showing the good Effects of Caution and Prudence, and the many Inconveniences
that Harry Heedless experienced from his Rashness and Disobedience, while
Master Careful became a great Man only by his Merit.

11. Little Truths better than Great Fables; containing Information on diverse
Subjects, for the Instruction of Children. -- In 2 vols. each volum^ sold
separate.

12. The History of a great many little Boys and Girls, for the Amusement of
all good Children of four and five years of age.

13. Familiar Dialogues, for the Instruction and Amusement of Children of four
and five years old.


